Structures, plasmon-enhanced luminescence, and applications of heterostructure phosphors  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP01860D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP01860D
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 20765-20794Structures, plasmon-enhanced luminescence, and applications of heterostructure phosphors

        
          
            Xiangfu 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Min 
            She
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenqin 
            Gu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanyan 
            Bu
          
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Xiaohong 
            Yan
          
          
        
      a
aCollege of Electronic and Optical Engineering & College of Microelectronics, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, 210023, China. E-mail: xfwang@njupt.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Green Building Materials, China Building Materials Academy, No. 1 Guanzhuang Dongli, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100024, China
cCollege of Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, 210023, China. E-mail: buyy@njupt.edu.cn
Received 
      28th April 2021
    , Accepted 19th August 2021First published on 26th August 2021AbstractHeterostructure phosphor composites have been used widely in the fields of targeted bio-probes and bio-imaging, hyperthermia treatment, photocatalysis, solar cells, and fingerprint identification. The structures, plasmon-enhanced luminescence and mechanism of metal/fluorophore heterostructure composites, such as core–shell nanocrystals, multilayers, adhesion, islands, arrays, and composite optical glass, are reviewed in detail. Their extended applications were explored widely since the surface plasmon resonance effect increased the up-conversion efficiency of fluorophores significantly. We summarize their synthesis methods, size and shape control, absorption and excitation spectra, plasmon-enhanced up-conversion luminescence, and specific applications. The most important results acquired in each case are summarized, and the main challenges that need to be overcome are discussed.
Xiangfu Wang
Xiangfu Wang received his PhD degree from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2012. From 2012 to present, he has been working as an associate professor at Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China. His current research concentrates on optoelectronic devices and sensors and photoluminescence of rare-earth ion doped nano-materials and transparent glass ceramics.
Min She
Min She obtained her bachelor's degree from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2019. From 2019 to present, she has been working for her master's degree in Xiangfu Wang's group. Her current research concentrates on the research of gradient refractive index fluorescent glass and LED light transmission efficiency.
Wenqin Gu
Wenqin Gu obtained her bachelor's degree from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. From 2019 to present, she has been working in Xiangfu Wang's group. Her current research concentrates on the plasmon-enhanced luminescence of metal/fluorophore composites.
Yanyan Bu
Yanyan Bu obtained her PhD degree from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2017. From 2017 to present, she has been working as a senior engineer in Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. Her current research concentrates on optical temperature sensing of rare-earth ion doped transparent glass ceramics.
Xiaohong Yan
Xiaohong Yan received his PhD degree from the Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Science, in 1997. From 2010 to present, he has been working as a professor in the College of Electronic Science and Engineering at Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. His current research concentrates on the transport and manipulation of quantum systems and new energy materials.
1. Introduction
In recent years, metal/fluorophore composites have been studied deeply and have a broad application prospect in the fields of biological imaging,1–4 sensors,5–7 photothermal therapy,8–12 targeted drug delivery,13–15 photocatalysis,16,17 solar cells,18–20 fingerprint identification,21,22 composite optical glass23–25 and so on. The composite materials also have some novel applications, such as fingerprint identification, trademark anti-counterfeiting, photocatalytic degradation, and food detection.26 The typical structures of metal/fluorophore up-conversion composites are shown in Fig. 1, including core–shell nanocrystals, multilayers, adhesion, islands, arrays, and composite optical glass. Up-conversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) are nanoparticles that emit high-energy light when excited by low-energy light and can convert near-infrared (NIR) light to visible light. Yb3+ has a large absorption cross section at 980 nm and Nd3+ at 800 nm,10,27–29 which are commonly used as sensitizers, while the activator can be any rare earth ion (RE3+) such as Er3+, Tm3+ and Ho3+. The energy is transferred from sensitizer ions to activator ions in UCNPs and then to metal nanoparticles. RE3+ ions have rich energy levels, meaning that they can both absorb light varying from the infrared to ultraviolet band and emit wide-band fluorescence, which meets the needs of biomedicine, solar cells, catalytic degradation and other extensive applications and is worthy of further study.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of plasmon-enhanced up-conversion luminescence in metal/fluorophore heterostructure composites. 
The compositions of core–shell nanocrystals were the most diverse and are listed as follows. Firstly, RE3+ materials enclosed the metal core, such as the Yb2O3/Au core–shell structure,30 dye sensitized solar cell of Y2O3:Er/Au covered with TiO2,31 Au@NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposite material,32 Au–Ag alloy nanocage enclosed with an UCNP shell,33 and NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/Ho3+ core–Au shell nanostructure.34 Secondly, there existed Au nanoparticles gathering on the surface of UCNPs to form the shell.35–45 Thirdly, it was common to add an oxide barrier between the metal and UCNPs, forming a sandwiched structure of metal-oxide–UCNP composite material,46–51 such as β-NaY/GdF4:Yb,Er,Tm@SiO2–Au nanoparticles for multimodal imaging,52 the NaYF4@SiO2–Au core–shell structure combined with DNA for drug delivery,53 TiO2-based NaYF4:Er/Yb–SiO2–Au solar cells,54 the Au@SiO2–NaYF4:Yb,Er complex for dark field imaging,55 and the Ag@SiO2–NaLuF4:Yb,Gd,Er core–shell complex, in which Ag was doped on the graphene substrate.31 In addition, compositions of metal particles sandwiched between UCNPs and semiconductor CdS to act as the energy transfer station,56 UCNPs combined with methylene blue and folic acid coupling with Au nanorods directly for biological applications,57 and doping RE3+ in tellurite glass with Ag:TeO2–ZnO38 were also reported.
The multilayer structure was generally designed as thin films, of which placing a layer of oxide between the metal and up-conversion nanocrystals was common, such as the Au/Ag–Al2O3–UCNP “sandwiched” composite structure,58 glass/Au/TiO2/NaYF4:Yb,Er,Gd four-layer structure of nanorods and so on.59–61 The noble metal could also be deposited on the surface of UCNPs via sintering at a high temperature to form the double-layer structure.
The conventional process of adhesion structure was making small UCNPs gather into a large one via crystal growth and nucleation, then attaching the metal nanoparticles to the surface of UCNPs’ “naps”.62–67 It was easy to add extra materials to the adhesion structure. For instance, NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+,Tm3+@TiO2–Au nanocomposite reported by Xu showed superior photocatalytic performance than the standard catalyst TiO2, and the complex added the reporter label 4MBA of Raman scattering could be used as biological detection, imaging and sensing probes. There were also structures that allowed metal particles to attach to the interstitials between [MoO4]2− tetrahedral or octahedral microcrystals with high chemical stability and low phonon energy.68–70
The metal–UCNP island film was also a common composite structure of enhancing the up-conversion luminescence, in which the metal may be an Au–Ag alloy. Here, Er3+ doped Al2O3 island film and Ag island film were put together to achieve an ideal luminescence;71 besides, the Au–Ag alloy island film was immersed into the UCNP solution so that the UCNP particles were deposited on the islands to form Au–Ag/NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+.72 These kinds of composite island films could emit bright light for high resolution imaging such as fingerprint recognition.
The up-conversion luminescence enhancement could also be obtained by loading UCNP particles into metal arrays compared with glass arrays. The arrays need to be an array of accurate nanopores over a large range and made to accommodate only a single UCNP particle. The loading method of using a scraper to transfer the concentrated UCNP solution into the array73 was simple, and achieved a 35-fold luminescence enhancement and usually required Cr as a protective layer for Au. In addition, Lu obtained a 5.5-fold luminescence enhancement by putting UCNPs in the Au nanoarrays made by photoetching.74
The UCNP-doped composite glass had excellent nonlinear optical properties, up-conversion properties and laser amplification properties. Based on this, the up-conversion luminescence intensity could be obviously enhanced by doping with Au, Ag and other precious metals. The materials involved here were as follows: Nd3+:Au–K2O–B2O3–Sb2O3 (KBS),75 Sm3+:Au–Sb,76 Er3+:Au–Sb,77 Er3+:Ag–Sb,78 TEO2–ZnO–YF3–NaF glass doped with Ag NPs and Er3+/Yb3+,79 Ag:TeO2–ZnO,80 Ag–Er3+ co-doped tellurite composite glass,81 and PBO–GeO2 composite glass containing Ag NPs doped with Er3+.82 Among them, fluorite glass had low phonon energy and excellent mechanical properties and it was easy to produce oxide glass, KBS glass had high transparency, high chemical stability and high mechanical strength, and heavy metal oxide glass had a high refractive index, a wide transmission range and low phonon energy. The composite optical glass could be applied to optical fibers, color displays and other optical devices, which was of great significance.
All of these composites summarized above achieved an extraordinarily enhanced up-conversion of the RE3+ ions, which was attributed to the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect of the metal and up-conversion fluorophores. Incident light waves caused collective oscillation of free electrons on the metal surface, forming a near-field electromagnetic wave propagating along the metal surface. When the electrons resonated with the incident light wave, the electromagnetic field was strengthened in a small range on the metal surface, which gave rise to the remarkable enhancement of fluorescence emission after adding noble metals to the UCNPs.
2. Fundamental principles of plasmon enhanced up-conversion
2.1 Basic theory of SPR
In 1902, when Wood applied polarized light of the continuous spectrum to a metal grating, he observed an abnormal diffraction phenomenon of a series of dark fringes on the reflected spectrum, which was called “Wood Anomalies”.83 Afterwards, Kretschmann84 and Otto85 reported the light excitation of surface plasmon of the attenuated total reflection via prism coupling. When the light incident on the metal-coated prism is completely reflected, the evanescent wave satisfying the wave-vector matching condition will be generated, and consequently the plasmon wave will be excited at the interface between the metal and medium. Since then, surface plasmon has aroused wide interest and been intensively studied. As we all know, SPR has an apparent field enhancement effect, which is of great significance in applications such as material detection, biomedicine, luminescent devices and molecular sensors.39 In the Drude–Lorentz model, the valence electrons of a metal can be regarded as free electrons with positive ions as the background. Driven by the external electric field with simple harmonic vibration, (t) = 0e−iωt, the motion of electrons can be written as , so that (1)and the vibration damping mainly comes from the collision between them. Because the intensity of polarization is  = −ne, one can get  and . The function of a metal dielectric is as follows: (2)among which the plasmon frequency of a metal is ωp, , and thus ε(ωp) = 0. For TM polarization, the electromagnetic field distribution in space is (3)
On the basis of Maxwell's equations, the electric field components on both sides of the interface can be expressed as (4)where αd and αm satisfy the relations k2 − αd2 = k02εd and k2 − αm2 = k02εm, respectively. According to the boundary conditions of the electromagnetic field, one can get αd/αm = −εd/εm, and the dispersion relation of surface plasmon polaritons (SPR) is (5)in which εd and εm have different signs and εd + εm < 0.83
Taking the interaction between metal nanoparticles (m) and fluorescent molecules (d) as an example, based on Fermi's golden rule and the dyadic Green's function, the spontaneous decay rate of molecules can be expressed as , where ω is the transition frequency and ρ is the electromagnetic density of states. Assuming that the environment does not affect the polarization of the molecule, the normalized excitation rate can be expressed as γexc/γ0exc = |[p·(m)]/[p·0(m)]|2(6)
All the factors affecting the fluorescence efficiency are 0 of incident light, the direction of molecular dipole p, dyadic Green's function (, m) related to the environment and the dielectric constant ε(). The local electric field of the molecule can be expressed in the form of Green's function in free space as shown in eqn (7), in whichis the Green's dyad of free space, m is the position of metal particles, and  is the effective polarizability, and then the excitation enhancement factor can be calculated as (7)
SPR is a coupling mode between electromagnetic waves and free electrons on the metal surface. The electrons oscillate collectively on the metal/dielectric interface, forming a plasmon wave propagating along the metal surface. The energy decays exponentially in the direction perpendicular to the metal surface, so it is a decaying wave, and the attenuation lengths of both sides are very short. In other words, SPR is strongly bound to a small range near the metal surface, which is convenient for controlling the propagation of light. Provided that the oscillation frequency of the electron is consistent with the frequency of the incident light wave, resonance will be generated and field enhanced effect will be shown on the metal surface, contributing to the enhancement of UCL intensity.
2.2 The interaction between RE3+ and plasmon
RE3+ doped UCNPs have many merits like low self-fluorescence interference, a large Stokes shift, a narrow emission band and high chemical stability, while its deep penetration depth and good biocompatibility have made it gradually replace organic fluorescent molecules, quantum dots and other luminescent nanomaterials, and been widely used in biosensing, imaging, markers, photodynamic therapy, Raman detection and other fields, thus enabling further research.28,86 It is demonstrated that, by combining precious metal particles with UCNPs, the SPR effect of precious metals can greatly enhance the up-conversion luminescence intensity, and the maximum enhancement is up to 1198 times at present.87 Hexagonal phase β-NaYF4 nanocrystals doped with RE3+ is a common UCNP.88 Taking the two-photon absorption process of β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ as an example, Yb3+ absorbs the incident light and then transfers energy to Er3+, and UCNPs emit visible light after radiation relaxation and consequently complete the transition of NIR light to visible light, that is, the conversion of low energy photons to high-energy photons, the efficiency of which depends on the substrate and the excitation power. In addition, organic molecular pairs can also act as UCNPs, such as combinations of dyes and polymers. Firstly, the combination materials absorbs NIR light to the single excited state, and then from the triplet excited to the lower triplet state, bringing about a long-life intermediate state. Eventually, when two excited emitter molecules meet, the energy transfer of triplet–triplet annihilation occurs, and visible light is emitted by radioactive decay.89
Increasing incident flux and radiation attenuation rate are two effective ways to promote the UCL intensity. This can be achieved by coupling with the SPR effect of the noble metal. The absorption cross section of the incident light near the interface between the metal and dielectric increases, and the electromagnetic field is enhanced. Meanwhile, the enhanced field can achieve a higher radiation attenuation rate by changing the local density of the optical state. In practice, the surface plasmon functions as an optical nano-antenna, effectively enhancing the reception and transmission of the electromagnetic field.89
The enhanced fluorescence of metal nanoparticles is distinct because the strong local field near the metal nanostructure changes the field distribution around the UCNPs, enhances the excitation and coupling effects, and increases the radiation rate, which leads to an increase in UCL intensity and a decrease in fluorescence lifetime. Ag and Au are the most frequently-used plasmon materials for research on UC enhancement, and luminescence enhancement of up to 1198 times has been reported in metal–insulator–metal multilayer nanocomposites.87 Compared with Au, the attenuation of plasmon waves on the surface propagating along the Ag surface is smaller, and the degree of localization of the electromagnetic field in the medium is higher. However, due to the influence of other factors, the UCL of Ag-doped composite particles is not necessarily greater.6 Moreover, the local surface resonance frequency of the metal particles and the distribution of the electric field around them are closely related to the shape, size, composition, and overall composite structure of the metal particles and the distance between metal particles and RE3+.90 The anisotropic luminescent nanoparticles with sharp edges such as hexagons, ellipsoids and rods are usually selected. Similar to the “lightning rod effect”, the local surface charge density at the edge of the anisotropic nanostructure increases sharply under electromagnetic excitation. Up-conversion luminescent nanoparticles act as light-capture optical nano-antennas and can greatly increase the excitation rate of RE3+.77 Therefore, this paper expounds, respectively, in the light of the difference in structure between metal particles and UCNPs. In particular, the structure of particles doped in composite optical glass is generally different from other types, so it is discussed separately in Section 3.6.
This schematic diagram mainly describes the process of energy transfer in the up-conversion system and electron–hole pair excitation, which accelerated the catalysis under photon excitation. Since most semiconductor optoelectronic electrodes have weaknesses such as a narrow light absorption wavelength range and a low charge separation rate,91 the light band gap of the benchmark electrode material TiO2 is 3.0 to 3.2 eV, absorbing ultraviolet light, which only accounts for about 5% of sunlight, and the photons with energy lower than the band gap energy of TiO2 cannot be caught, so that the utilization rate of solar energy in the photocatalytic process is very low.62 In order to increase light absorption, Xu reported the NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+,Tm3+@TiO2–Au composite, as shown in Fig. 2. Compared with quantum dots and organic dyes, the tervalent RE3+ such as Er3+ and Tm3+ has the advantages of a clear emission spectrum, a long lifetime and distinguished optical stability.41 The composite exhibited a much higher activity than the typical photocatalyst TiO2. Under UV excitation, the photocatalytic activity ability increased obviously, since the excited electrons were transferred from TiO2 CB to Au NPs as shown in Fig. 2(a). Under visible excitation, the visible light was absorbed by Au NPs and then the energy was transferred to TiO2 by stimulated SPR as shown in Fig. 2(b). Under NIR excitation, the Yb3+ ions absorbed 980 nm NIR light effectively due to the large absorption cross section of NIR illumination. The energy was transferred from Yb3+ to Tm3+ and Er3+ ions, emitting UV and visible luminescence. The TiO2 was excited again and the electron–hole pairs in TiO2 were produced again, which induced the photocatalytic activity ability.
 Fig. 2  Plasmon enhanced photocatalytic mechanism under (a) UV, (b) visible, and (c) NIR excitation. 
Song32 reported the mechanism of energy transfer between Au NRs and Yb3+, Er3+ ions, as shown in Fig. 3. Yb3+ ions were excited by continuous 980 nm laser absorption, and the energy was transferred to Er3+ ions. Subsequently, green and red emissions occurred via a two-photon absorption process. Since there existed an effective spectral overlap between Au NRs and NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposites, it caused luminescence quenching sometimes, so that the green luminescence emission of Er3+ ions in the nanocrystals decreased to some extent. The SPR effect of Au NRs combined with the up-conversion process, and the energy was transferred from NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UCNPs to Au NRs, which could convert light into heat. It will be further discussed that the heat energy produced by the nanocomposite has prominent application value in photothermal treatment of cancer.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of energy transfer between Au nanorods (NRs) and NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposites. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
In addition, Song34 synthesized NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/Ho3+ nanocrystals, which also had efficient UCL and photothermal transduction, and the energy transfer process is shown in Fig. 4. The luminescence resonance energy transfer (LRET) system was similar to that between NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposites and Au NRs in Fig. 3.32 Au NPs as energy acceptors converted optical energy to heat effectively under the irradiation of a NIR laser. Unfortunately, it did not avoid the emission quenching of the Er3+/Ho3+ ions due to the close distance and the spectral overlap between RE3+ and noble metal particles. Maurya66 investigated the UCL of Ag NP coated NaYF4:Er3+/Yb3+ composite nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 5. The energy was transferred from Yb3+ ions to Er3+ ions at an excitation wavelength of 976 nm. In the excitation process of Er3+ ions, mechanisms of energy transfer (ET) and excitation absorption (ESA) were involved, and the latter included the process of ground state absorption (GSA). ESA is a process of ions transitioning from the ground state to a higher excited state through multi-photon absorption, and can realize up-conversion luminescence. In detail, the ion in ground state E1 absorbs a pump photon and transitions to the long-lived intermediate metastable level E2, a process known as GSA. If the vibrational energy of the photon matches the energy interval between the E2 level and the higher excited level E3, then the ion will absorb another pumped photon and transition to the E3 level. If it continues to meet the requirements of energy matching, it is possible for the ion to transition to a higher excited state energy level, thus forming the absorption of three, four or even five photons. If the particle number of high energy level is more than that of low energy level, that is, a population inversion is formed, and strong up-conversion luminescence can be achieved. Furthermore, the energy transfer between Yb3+, Er3+ ions and Au NPs also contributed to the significant luminescence enhancement of the composite. When the Ag NPs reached a certain concentration, the excitation energy of Er3+ migrated to nearby atoms or ions through the Ag NPs. Ag NPs partially absorbed the emission of Er3+ ions and excited the plasmon, thereby enhancing the UCL intensity and obtaining the maximum enhancement of 12- and 9-fold for green and red emissions, respectively.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the luminescence resonance energy transfer process between NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/Ho3+ and Au nanoparticles. 
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of enhanced UCL intensity counting on the SPR effect of Ag NPs. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
3. The UCL of materials of different structures doped with noble metals
According to the structure of composite materials, this review is primarily classified into six categories: core–shell nanocrystals, multilayers, adhesion, islands, arrays, and composite optical glass. Among them, the core–shell structure takes up the majority and is a relatively mature structural system, no matter which part of the core-shell is composed of metal, and there often exists a SiO2 layer between the metal and UCNPs to control the distance. Besides, the multilayer structure has a similar mechanism of enhancing UCL, it resembles the upward-folding core–shell structure in some way, and the maximum UCL enhancement is from the metal–insulator–metal multilayer nanocomposite reported by Das,87 and was up to 1198 times higher. Adhesion is also common, with metal particles adhered to the UCNPs in the majority, in that the metal particles are usually tinier than the UCNPs, despite that it is not absolute. In particular, when using crystals that contain the element Mo, the composition will show a tetrahedral or an octahedral appearance. Additionally, the structure of coating UCNPs on a Ag-doped inverse opal substrate in Shao's report92 is listed as a special kind of adhesion. The island structure is often applied in films, having a more efficient effect compared with ordinary films. The array structure is employed sometimes, and what is worth noting is Verhagen's93 report, in the sub-wavelength aperture Au array doped with Er3+ ions on a sapphire substrate, the incident laser at 1480 nm was converted into emission light at 980 nm, and the UCL was enhanced 450 times that of the original one. In recent years, the doping of metal particles and RE3+ into composite glass has been studied extensively, among which the commonly used is heavy metal oxide glass, such as antimonate glass, tellurium glass and so on.
3.1 Core–shell
UCNPs had become ideal fluorescent biomaterials in that they had the advantages of weak self-fluorescence, low toxicity, prominent biocompatibility,34 sharp emission lines, long lifetimes, and superior photostability39 compared with traditional markers such as organic dyes and quantum dots. Furthermore, they had a high penetration depth under NIR irradiation and roughly accompanied by low efficiency. Therefore, how to step up the emission efficiency of UCNPs was one of the important problems in their biological applications.94 Song34 investigated the biocompatibility and photothermal conductivity of the Au@NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/Ho3+ composites. Under 980 nm laser irradiation, the temperature of the solution increased significantly and could be easily controlled by adjusting the concentration which indicated that Au@NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/Ho3+ nanocomposites had an efficient photothermal conversion ability. In addition, even if the concentration of nanocomposites was high, it had little effect on cell activity. The experiments showed that the nanocomposites had low toxicity and good biocompatibility, which would have a prominent biomedical application. Luo56 reported a novel photoelectrochemistry (PEC) enzyme immunoassay based on NIR light-triggered nucleocapsid core–core–shell NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+(UCNP)@Au@CdS UC nanospheres for the effectively hypersensitive detection of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP).
In a typical PEC process, the photoactive material went through electron–hole pair separation and charge transfer, resulting in photoelectric signal conversion under light irradiation. After the target was recognized, the electron donor/receptor was generated by a biological reaction, by which the photocurrent was prominently affected. In the anti-AFP antibody-coated microplate, the antibody functionalized Au NPs were used as the secondary antibody for the sandwiched immunoreaction. Glucose oxidase (GOx) carried by the Au NPs oxidized the glucose in H2O2, accordingly enhancing the photocurrent by capturing the holes in the CdS valence band, facilitating the separation of electron–hole pairs as shown in Fig. 6(a). Au between the interlayer was not only an energy harvester for incident light collection, but also an energy conveyor to transfer the upconversion energy from UCNPs to CdS. Under the irradiation of a 980 nm laser, the enzymatic immune reaction generated H2O2, which stimulated the separation of electron–hole pairs efficiently as shown in Fig. 6(b). The PEC immune sensing system showed a great photocurrent response to the target AFP. As shown in the transmission electron microscope (TEM) images in Fig. 6(c), the core–core–shell nanospheres had a distinct raised structure. Fig. 6(d) reveals that the single emission peak was at 660 nm and the double peaks were at 530 and 550 nm and there existed great enhancement for UCNP@Au and UCNP@Au@CdS. The amplification of the detectable signal denoted that core–core–shell UCNP@Au@CdS UC nanospheres could be used as the signal-generation tags to develop a sandwiched enzyme immunoassay based on GOx.
 Fig. 6  (a) Sketch of the PEC immunoreaction process for AFP based on UCNP@Au@CdS nanospheres; (b) energy transfer; (c) TEM images; (d) UCL spectra of UCNP@Au@CdS. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
Furthermore, metal-coupled UCNPs could also be used to detect thrombin concentrations in the blood. The key role of thrombin in wound healing determined the importance of identifying thrombin and detecting its concentration in order to determine which stage it was at in blood coagulation, clot dissolution and tissue repair. Aptamers were often employed as the recognition components of thrombin biosensors in that they could be produced and stored easily, completely engineered in vitro and had good resistance to degeneration. Chen95 prepared the NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNP/Au NPs composite modified by thrombin-binding aptamers (TBAs) and measured thrombin concentration by detecting its red emission at 661 nm. Since fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) between UCNPs and Au NPs led to a linear relationship between the fluorescence quenching efficiency of the composite structure and thrombin concentration, quantitative measurement of thrombin content in blood samples could be achieved.
Wang96 reported that UCNPs could be applied to biological detection and medical diagnosis. Since the emission spectrum of Na(Y1.5Na0.5)-F6:Yb3+,Er3+ was symmetrical and narrow and had only one main peak at 540 nm so that it met the requirement of emitting strong pure green fluorescence under single-wavelength excitation, making it more suitable as a multi-color biological detection probe. They prepared gold–biotin conjugated nanoparticles and applied the probe to the detection of trace avidins. The plasmon luminescence spectrum was measured as a function of avidin concentration. The fluorescence resonance energy transfer system was established by applying UCNPs as energy donors and Au NPs as energy receptors. As shown in Fig. 6(b) of the paper,96 the UCL intensity varied linearly with the affinity concentration from 0.5 nm to 370 nm. The consequences showed that the system had high sensitivity and simple operation, so the fluorescence energy transfer system based on nanoparticles was feasible as a biosensor.
Furthermore, Feng92 reported the mechanism of the noble metals enhancing UC emissions. The Ag nanowire solution was deposited and partially coated on the surface of the NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocrystalline layer. As a consequence, both the green emission and red emission were dramatically enhanced in the areas covered with Ag nanowires. The red emission at 650 nm had an enhancement factor of 3.7. The UC enhancement in areas with Ag nanowires was related to the spectral overlap between the emission or absorption band of the luminescent group and the surface plasmon band of the noble metals. Chen57 reported the use of UCNPs NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ combined with methylene blue (MB) and Au NRs for photodynamic therapy (PDT) of cancer. PDT mainly relied on active photosensitizers to react with surrounding oxygen molecules to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS), which had a high capacity of cell destruction. The plentiful free conducting electrons on the surface of noble metal nanomaterials such as Au and Ag could easily interact with incident light and caused collective oscillation at a specific frequency. The resulting plasmon field enhanced the production of ROS. As shown in Fig. 7(a), the NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UCNP was coated with a silicon shell embedded with MB and then coupled with Au nanorods. The silicon shell could improve light stability, prevent drug leakage and control the optimal effective distance between the Au NRs and UCNPs, hence enhancing the plasmon field. Finally, the UCNP@SiO2–MB–NRs nanocomposite was modified with folic acid (FA) to actively target OECM-1 oral cancer cells and obtain a high PDT efficacy. The mechanism of PDT treatment and ROS production enhanced by UCNP@SiO2–MB–NRs–FA plasmons is shown in Fig. 7(b). Under irradiation of a 980 nm laser, UCNP@SiO2–MB–NRs–FA produced abundant ROS by means of plasmon enhancement, which were toxic to mitochondria and released cytochrome C to induce apoptosis of cancer cells. Fig. 7(c and d) show the actual apparatus and schematic for in vivo PDT therapy, respectively. UCNP@SiO2 and UCNP@SiO2–MB–NRs–FA were injected into the tumor of the same mouse. A single tumor was exposed to CW 980 nm laser irradiation, and the mice were divided into the irradiated group and non-irradiated group. As shown in Fig. 7(e), UCNP@SiO2–MB–NRs–FA was stained by jc-1 and the nucleus was stained by DAPI to detect mitochondrial membrane potential, which demonstrated the health condition of the cell. The strong red fluorescence signal indicated that the high membrane potential led to the accumulation of jc-1 in the membrane and the mitochondrion was healthy, while the strong green fluorescence signal manifested that the low membrane potential causes jc-1 to be monodisperse in the membrane and the mitochondrion was damaged. Compared with the control group, UCNP@SiO2–MB–NRs–FA exhibited stronger green fluorescence emission and weaker red fluorescence emission under 980 nm laser irradiation, which suggested that mitochondria may be damaged by the toxicity of ROS in nanocomposites. In Fig. 7(f), the tumors in the lower three panels were obviously smaller than those in the above control group. This evidence suggested that the UCNP@SiO2–MB–NRs–FA injection and 980 nm laser irradiation notably reduced the tumor size. It was worth noting that UCNP@SiO2–MB–NRs–FA could inhibit tumor growth in real tumor treatment, which may be attributed to the enhancement of UCL and the good overlapping of the absorption profile of MB and SPR bands of Au NRs. Fig. 7(g) shows the UCL spectra of the composites with and without Au NRs. The luminescence enhancement factor reached its maximum, i.e., 2.15 when the thickness of the silicon shell is 1.5 nm. As shown in Fig. 7(h), the tumor weight and size with UCNP@SiO2: MB–NRs–FA after laser treatment were reduced by almost 50%. From the abovementioned aspects, the high efficiency of PDT in vivo was very leading and beneficial to oral cancer treatment.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of UCNP@SiO2:MB–NRs–FA; (b) PDT process of generating ROS; (c and d) experimental apparatus; (e) luminescence of cancer cells and (f) tumor volume; (g) weight comparison after staining; (h) UCL spectra of the composites. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
Dong41 reported an ideal tumor ablation drug with real-time detection of biological imaging and thermal imaging functions. Biological imaging of tumor cells was used for real-time location and monitoring of cells to realize remote detection of temperature changes of deep tissue malignant tumors, so as to control laser irradiation better. The multifunctional core–shell structure NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@Ag NPs were used as photothermal therapeutic agents and UC labels. Compared with NaYF4 NPs alone, the cytotoxicity decreased dramatically after Ag coating. Although the Ag shell absorbing excitation energy reduced the UCL intensity to some extent, the amount of UCNPs increased due to the low toxicity of the Ag shell. Since the nanocomposites used for living cell biological applications are used in solution, the thermal effect in water is of great importance. From the experiment, it can be observed that the temperature could rise from 293 K to 303 K and, provided that human body temperature (37 °C) rose to 43 °C, cancer cells would be killed. The temperature rise was put down to the photothermal effect of the Ag shell. The nanocomposite had a low NIR laser power density threshold, and could be used for cell destruction and had a broad application prospect in the treatment of cancer. Similarly, in Song's32 work, the temperature of the Au NRs@NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ solution observably increased to 48 °C after being irradiated by a NIR laser and the temperature could also be easily controlled by adjusting the concentration of the nanocomposite.
Song32 reported a new type of multifunctional core–shell nanocomposite with the NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocrystal as the shell and gold nanorods (Au NRs) as the core with the functions of up-conversion luminescence, magnetism and photothermal conversion. As shown in Fig. 8(a), Au NRs had two different plasmon modes, namely the longitudinal LSPR mode and the transverse LSPR mode compared with spherical Au NPs. The UCL, magnetism and photothermal properties are shown in Fig. 8(b), in which the energy transformed from light to heat, and the nanocomposites exhibited an enhanced UCL intensity under excitation at 980 nm as shown in Fig. 8(c) because non-radiative luminescence resonance energy transfer occurred between NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ and Au NRs. The clear and bright image of HeLa cells in Fig. 8(d) confirmed that the composite material had prominent biocompatibility, which was of great significance in biological imaging and photothermal treatment. Qin43 synthesized a core–double shell nanocomposite with good hydrophilic properties, β-NaYF4:Nd/Yb/Ho@SiO2@Ag NPs, and studied its biological properties. The overheating caused by excess absorption of incident light of water molecules in biological samples can damage cells and tissues. The absorption of water at 808 nm was 18 times less than that at 980 nm, and Nd3+ had a sharp absorption band near 800 nm, and hence Qin's work was carried out under 808 nm laser irradiation using Nd3+ as a sensitizer, Ho3+ as an activator, and Yb3+ as a bridge between them to induce the energy transfer. The distance between UCNPs and Ag NPs was controlled by the thickness of the SiO2 layer and the maximum luminescence enhancement was obtained when the distance was 10 nm, with 15 times for green light and 7.5 times for red light, respectively. The high luminescence at 808 nm of the nanocomposite made it probable to be widely used in biological fields.
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of (a) the structure and (b) resonance energy transfer in Au NRs@NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+; (c) UCL spectra of NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+; (d) image of HeLa cells incubated with Au NRs@NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
Xing52 reported a PEGylated β-NaY/GdF4:Yb,Er,Tm@SiO2–NH2Au@PEG5000 nanoparticle trimodal imaging probe that combined fluorescence, X-ray computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, which is promising to provide high-resolution and highly sensitive 3D details of tissues and cells with uniform size less than 50 nm. The synthesis process of the multifunctional probe β-NaY/GdF4:Yb,Er,Tm@SiO2–NH2–Au@PEG5000 is shown in Fig. 9(a). The hydrophobic UCNPs were coated with the silica shell and modified with amino groups to obtain positively charged UCNP–SiO2–NH2, then negatively charged Au NPs adhered to the surface. Finally, PEG5000–SH was grafted onto the probe surface to ensure the high stability in biological media. The structure looked like a sesame ball and was named up-conversion sesame ball (UCS-Ball). CT was one of the most common tools for cancer diagnosis, and could provide high-resolution 3D structural details of tissues, yet limited by its low sensitivity. The resolution of MR imaging was lower, whereas the sensitivity of soft tissue was higher than that of CT. Therefore, the combination of CT and MR imaging could improve the quality of tissue imaging. Fig. 9(b) shows that the tumor emitted strong light under excitation at 980 nm and no spontaneous fluorescence of the tissue was observed after the injection of UCS-Ball, indicating that UCS-Ball could be used as an optical imaging probe in vivo. As well, both the SNR of the tumor in MR imaging and the HU (Hounsfield unit) value in CT imaging increased prominently, which demonstrated the feasibility of UCS-Ball as a contrast agent for MR and CT imaging in vivo. In the confocal fluorescence imaging of cells incubated by UCS-Ball in Fig. 9(c), the fluorescence emission was very strong; nevertheless there was strong fluorescence emission and no self-fluorescence of cells, indicating that UCS-Ball was a promising cell marker and imaging probe. The emission spectra of UCS-Ball in Fig. 9(d) showed that UCNPs and Au NPs exerted the best SPR enhancement effect and the UCL reached the maximum of 3–4 times when the thickness of the silicon shell was 10–15 nm. The illustration shows the photo of UCL, which could be distinguished by the naked eye. In summary, the diagnostic potential of trimodal imaging for cancer cells and lesions had been further demonstrated in vivo and in vitro.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of UCS-Ball; (b) trimodal images of tumor-bearing mice; (c) confocal fluorescence imaging of cells; (d) UCL spectra with different silica thicknesses. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2012. 
Homoplastically, Wang39 also reported the water-soluble NaYF4:Yb3+/Ho3+@SiO2/Au nanocomposite with UCL and high X-ray attenuation characteristics, as well as leading biocompatibility, which offered great application potential as a multimodal contrast agent for fluorescence imaging and CT scanning. Additionally, Au NPs attached to the surface could easily combine with targeted molecules and drug molecules, which would both improve the efficiency of molecular imaging and treat diseases in situ. Priyam55 reported that a kind of multifunctional biological imaging tool, Au@SiO2–NaYF4:Yb,Er composite material based on the amino acid template, and the light scattering caused by the Au nanoshell could be employed for dark field light scattering imaging. By tuning the SPR peak of the Au shell to the NIR region and resonating with the absorption band of UCNPs, the UCL achieved an enhancement factor of 50. Therefore, the composite material became a new-style multifunctional imaging tool combining up-conversion fluorescence imaging and dark field light scattering imaging.
We knew that the UCL intensity of UCNPs decreased with the increase of external magnetic field, which made it difficult to achieve high-resolution fluorescence and magnetic resonance imaging simultaneously. Dai97 successfully obtained Au/NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+ composite materials for up-conversion fluorescence and magnetic resonance dual mode imaging depending on the UCL compensation of up-conversion enhancement by plasmon resonance for the loss caused by an external magnetic field. When the magnetic field was lower than 6 T, the composite had good magnetic tuning and the total fluorescence intensity did not decrease, in which case the composite could be a fluorescence and MR dual-mode imaging probe under a magnetic field lower than 6 T, having a good prospect in biological imaging. Zhang98 prepared a hollow core–shell UC nanocomposite. The hollow structure could reflect light repeatedly so as to improve the utilization rate of light and realize the redistribution of electric field density, and it also had the advantages of low density, large load and adjustable shell spacing. The UC enhancement of the surface plasmon effect was closely related to the distance between the metal and Ag@SiO2@Y2O3:Er UCNPs. The luminescence quenching occurred when the SiO2 interval layer was relatively thin and the UCL intensity increased up to 4 times when it was 30 nm. After determining the optimal distance, the hollow Ag@Y2O3:Er nanosphere was obtained by leaching SiO2, which had potential application value as a fluorescent probe for biological imaging. Ge46 prepared Au/SiO2/Y2O3:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles with a hollow core–shell structure as biological labels. When the distance between Au and UCNPs was roughly 40 nm, the Au/SiO2 nucleus became more uniform and monodisperse, green emission with a wavelength of 527 nm increased and the enhancement factor reached the maximum of 9.59.
Meng31 reported the plasmon-enhanced UC composite Y2O3:Er/Au@TiO2 (SYE/A@T), which formed a multifunctional scattering layer in TiO2-based dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) to enhance the photon capture. The preparation process and structure diagram of the photoanode film are shown in Fig. 10(a). With the addition of Au NPs, NIR light can be converted to visible light by plasmon-enhanced UC and eventually absorbed by dye sensitizers more efficiently, as shown in Fig. 10(b). Fig. 10(c) shows the scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of starlike SYE/A@T. The luminescence spectrum excited by a 980 nm laser in Fig. 10(d) displayed the influence of the Au NPs and TiO2 shell on SYE/A@T luminescence. When SYE was introduced with Au NPs, the emission intensity of SYE/A enhanced markedly. The TiO2 shell significantly reduced the charge recombination on the surface of SYE and increased the dye carrier capacity. Enhanced UC emission from Au NPs was due to the surface plasmon-coupled emission (SPCE) between SYE and Au NPs. The metal nanostructures with fluorophores and plasmon resonance frequencies overlapping in the UCL spectra could improve the emissivity due to the coupled UC emission plasmon resonance. The composites significantly promoted the conversion efficiency and photovoltaic performance of DSSC systems.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of SYE/A@T preparation and photoanode configuration of DSSC; (b) UC process of SYE/A@T; (c) SEM image of SYE/A@T; (d) UCL spectra of various samples. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2016. 
Photoluminescence UC was a good way to capture NIR sunlight and step up the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of solar cells. However, effective UCNPs were generally based on the transition of RE3+, with only a narrow excitation band matching the solar spectrum. To solve this serious problem, Liu manufactured an effective UC nanocomposite, Yb2O3/Au, with which the NIR photovoltaic response was successfully verified.30 This kind of UCNP composite provided a new way to extend the spectrum matching of the up-converter and could be applied in concentrated solar cells. Analogously, Luo38 prepared a new hexagon submicron NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@SiO2@Au@TiO2 (NSAT) prism and combined it with the photoanode of DSSCs. Studies showed that coated multi-shell layers and embedded Au NPs had a great impact on the UC and performance of DSSCs. This huge boost was mainly due to the enhanced UCL of the NSAT submicron prism, which was caused by the SPR effect of embedded Au NPs and possible enhanced scattering of the submicron prism. Luo's research showed the potential of SPR enhanced UC in DSSCs. Liu synthesized an Au-decorated core–shell β-NaYF4:Er/Yb@SiO2 microprism and studied its coupling effect on the performance of DSSCs.54 LSPR for UCNPs and Au NPs was beneficial to promote the photocurrent and power conversion efficiency. The presence of Au NPs increased the light absorption of dye molecules in the visible region, but reduced the UCNP emission between UCNPs and Au NPs. These results validated the advantages of the combination of UC and LSPR in DSSC applications and provided guidance for achieving a more efficient combination of UCNPs and metal particles.
UC materials have attracted wide interest in solar applications, and could markedly promote the conversion efficiency of solar cells by reducing the transmission losses of solar cells. Ding prepared β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+, Ag@SiO2 microcrystals, wherein the luminous intensity increased 3.5 times.47 Due to localized SPR, metal nanoparticles had the unique advantages of luminescence enhancement. This work provided a way for solar applications to increase the luminescence intensity. Zhao synthesized double-shell CeO2:Yb,Er@SiO2@Ag UC nanofibers, which showed remarkable UC luminescence performance due to the coating of SiO2 and the SPR effect, in which case the luminescence intensity enhanced 19 times.51 As an auxiliary layer of DSSC, the introduction of UC nanomaterials broadened the light absorption range, improved the utilization rate of sunlight, and enhanced the photoelectric conversion efficiency by 8.17%.
Han53 synthesized a nanometer coupling of Au NPs modified with hairpin-DNA (hpDNA) and proposed a method to convert the nanometer probe on the stable dispersion in physiological buffer solution, so as to conduct deep tissue imaging and targeted release of anticancer drugs. The successful drug delivery in vivo depends on the stability of the nanoconjugates to a large extent. Since the short synthetic DNA sequence can stabilize the gold colloids, we used the thiol-modified hpDNA to functionalize the surface of the prepared NaYF4@SiO2–Au nanoparticles. DNA surface functionalization enabled nanoparticles to have splendid biocompatibility and high stability and stabilized DNA-modified UCNPs in physiological buffer while maintaining biological functions. Fig. 11(a) shows the schematic diagram of the photothermal drug Dox released by the hpDNA functionalized NaYF4@SiO2–Au nano-coupling triggered by the UC process.53
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the drug release by hpDNA-modified NaYF4@SiO2–Au; (b) CCD imaging of the composite; (c) volume change of HeLa tumors; (d) UCL spectra; (e) UC imaging of tumor-bearing mice; (f) photos of mice after treatment. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission of Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2017. 
We used thiol to fix the hpDNA chain on the Au NPs. The coupling of Au and UCNPs could modulate NIR luminescence to minimize attenuation in the tissue and the silicon shell could prevent direct interaction between the hpDNA strands and nanoparticles. One important aspect of hpDNA was its high heat sensitivity and ability to encapsulate small drug molecules into its double helix structure, so the hpDNA strand allowed high drug loading and precise control of drug delivery through its temperature sensing capability. As shown in Fig. 11(b), the penetration depths of green and red emissions are approximately 2 mm and 5 mm, respectively. In contrast, the NIR emission of the nano-conjugate could penetrate tissue of up to 8 mm. We injected the Dox-loaded nano-conjugate into the tumor and irradiated it with a 980 nm laser. It can be seen from Fig. 11(c and f) that the tumor volume gradually decreased after treatment, while it notably increased in the three control groups (Control 1: only laser irradiation; Control 2: no laser irradiation and nano-conjugate were used; Control 3: without laser irradiation), which confirmed that the drug molecules released by the nanometer coupling were successfully released into the tumor site and had a distinguished therapeutic effect. Fig. 11(d) shows the UCL spectra, wherein an intense wideband emission was observed under 980 nm laser irradiation and the fluorescence intensity of cells irradiated by the laser was 2.3 times higher than that of unirradiated cells. The drug release was induced by highly localized heating for the photothermal effect, thereby effectively releasing Dox molecules. The unmodified NaYF4@SiO2–Au nanocomplex precipitates out of the solution a few minutes later in the illustration, showing that hpDNA made the nanoparticles highly stable. They injected the prepared nano-conjugate solution into the left tumor of the tumor-bearing mice, and light emission could be detected from the injection site, as shown in Fig. 11(e), indicating the effectiveness of the nano-conjugate as a luminescent probe for imaging in tumor-bearing mice.
Yuan40 synthesized a NaYF4:Yb,Er@SiO2@Ag core–shell nanocomposite and studied its effect as an imaging agent in B16F0 cells. The surface plasmon effect of Ag NPs impressively enhanced the UCL intensity, and the luminescence was enhanced 14.4 times when the distance between the UCNP core and Ag NPs was 10 nm. The dependence of luminescence intensity on distance was due to the competition between energy transfer and enhanced radiation attenuation rate, and the small size of Ag NPs tended to be more distance-dependent. DNA modified on the surface of Ag NPs significantly reduced its cytotoxicity and the imaging after cell staining showed that most nanoprobes had entered the cell. This nanocomposite had a good application prospect in the field of cell imaging due to the clear cell images, high cell activity, and long luminescence lifetime.
As shown in Fig. 12(a),99 the Ag shell was prepared by the uniform deposition method until the thickness of silver reached 60 nm, and the Ag half shell was transformed into a continuous Ag superlayer. In order to track the optical properties of individual nanoparticles as they formed a Ag half shell, UCNPs were placed on a silicon dioxide substrate, in which case Y2O3:Yb,Er nanoparticles with a Ag half shell could be easily removed from the substrate and dispersed in solution. Fig. 12(b) reveals the relationship between the UCL intensity and the thickness of the Ag layer. With the increase of Ag layer thickness, UCL also increased observably. When the thickness of Ag was 30 nm, the maximum enhancement factor was about 50 and the enhancement factor decreased as the Ag layer thickness continued to increase. Fig. 12(c) shows the UCL spectra of Y2O3:Yb,Er nanoparticles excited by a 975 nm laser. The green emission was around 524 and 560 nm and the red emission was around 660 nm. The reason for UCL enhancement was the enhanced incident electric field and radiation attenuation rate, the latter being manifested in the shortened life of UCL.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental device and preparation; (b) green and red UCL images of UCNPs with Ag of different thicknesses; (c) UCL spectra of Y2O3:Yb,Er nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2013. 
Wang44 prepared the NaYF4:Yb,Er@SiO2@Ag core–shell composite nanostructure and studied the metal-enhanced UCL for single nanoparticles with different SiO2 layer thicknesses. Different from general luminescence measurements in solution or powder samples, Wang took a single metal/fluorophore composite particle as the research object, which eliminated the interference of the aggregation effect, mutual reflection and coupling between sample particles. When the SiO2 layer thickness was 12 nm, UCL enhancement reached the maximum, 1.28 times, and the UCL decreased as the SiO2 layer thickness continued to increase. Because of the stronger absorption of red light, the SPR effect of Ag generated a larger local electric field in the red range, and thus the UCL enhancement of red light at 653 nm was more obvious than green light at 545 nm.
Yin100 prepared Ag/graphene (GN)@SiO2–NaLuF4:Yb,Gd,Er core–shell UC nanocomposites and obtained 52-fold UCL enhancement. The emission intensity of the prepared nanocomposites was 3-fold higher than that of the control material without GN, indicating that GN was beneficial to metal-enhanced UCL. Small-size Ag NPs were anchored to the GN sheet and could enhance the polarizability and surface phase resonance of each other to form large metal-enhanced UCL. Fig. 13 shows the synthesis process of nanocomposites.100 First and foremost, Ag+ and GO were reduced and Ag nanoparticles were loaded onto GN and coated with silica. In the end, β-NaLuF4:Yb,Gd,Er UCNCs were covalently connected with Ag/GN@SiO2 and thus attached to the surface of the composite nanoparticles. Ag@SiO2–NaLuF4:Yb,Gd,Er and Ag/GN@SiO2–NaLuF4:Yb,Gd,Er nanocomposites exhibited evident SPR bands at 350–550 nm. Under 980 nm excitation, green and red emissions were observed at 520 and 550 nm, and 662 nm, respectively, and the luminous intensity was greatly enhanced. In the illustration, the strong fluorescence of nanocomposites could be clearly observed, which was 52 times higher than that of nanocomposites without Ag, and the significant enhancement greatly improved the detectability of UCNCs for application in highly sensitive biological, medical, and optical detection. Additionally, Yin48 synthesized a novel Ag@SiO2@Lu2O3:Gd/Yb/Er core–shell nanocomposite and studied its optical properties and cell imaging applications. The red emission peak was located at 662 nm and the maximum enhancement of UCL was up to 30 times, which was attributed to the SPR effect increasing the radiation attenuation rate and emission efficiency. In the HeLa cell imaging experiment, the nanoscale fluorescent probe entered the cell interior through cell phagocytosis and showed bright UCL, realizing high-sensitivity biological imaging and optical detection.
 Fig. 13  Synthesis process diagram of Ag/GN@SiO2–NaLuF4:Yb,Gd,Er nanocomposites. 
Sun45 prepared a NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@Ag core–shell nanocomposite, and the three-photon absorption process of green energy level modified the UC population path. Due to the surface effect of nanoparticles, the local thermal effect of light absorption and the SPR effect of Ag NPs, the composite structure obtained significant UCL enhancement. Moreover, the enhancement of green luminescence was more apparent than that of red luminescence after being coated with the Ag shell, as shown in Fig. 14. Detection of Cu2+ ions and their subcellular distribution in physiological processes are of great significance. Li reported an organic fluorescent probe for selective detection of Cu2+ ions.101 The mesoporous silica shell was coated on UCNPs and added with rhodamine B hydrazine (RBH), which was sensitive to Cu2+ ions. Stimulated by NIR light, UCNPs emitted visible light to excite the fluorescent probes. The high ratio of green emission to red emission denoted that silica gel shells could avoid the invasion of water molecules to nanocrystalline nuclei and the HRTEM results showed the existence of interconnected wormhole pores in the silica shell. After the transfer from oleic acid to water, the fluorescence intensity of the nanocrystals was reduced nearly 3 times because the high-energy vibration of the water molecule gave rise to an increase in the multi-phonon relaxation. The solution turned from colorless to pink after adding Cu2+ ions, and a wide emission band corresponding to the emission of RBH–Cu2+ appeared at about 580 nm. With the increase of Cu2+ concentration, the green emission intensity decreased significantly, while the red emission intensity hardly changed, indicating that the energy transferred from UCNPs to the RBH–Cu2+ complex.
 Fig. 14  SEM images of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ NPs (a), TEM images of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@Ag (b) and the corresponding high magnification images (inset of b). XRD patterns of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ and NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@Ag NPs (c) and FTIR spectra of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ NPs and NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@Ag NPs (d). Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission of Materials Chemistry and Physics, copyright 2013. 
There are many other composites with the core–shell structure, which enhanced the luminous performance to a certain degree. Chen33 prepared Nd2O3/Au nanocomposites by the co-precipitation method, and the UCL was the broadband white emission of 400–800 nm due to the combination of electrons and holes, which was different from common UCNPs. The thermal effect of Nd2O3/Au composites could increase the hole density in the valence band, thus enhancing the UCL intensity. When the doping concentration of Au NRs was 6 μmol, the UCL enhancement reached the maximum, 11 and 9 times under 980 nm and 808 nm excitation, respectively. This novel and efficient up-conversion composite had promising applications in biological and photoelectric devices. Liu35 prepared an Au@β-NaYF4:Yb,Tm core–shell composite material to enhance red, green and purple emissions. UC often requires a high pump power density, which may damage biological tissue in biological applications. Nevertheless, the enhancement factor of 5-photon absorption emission at 345 nm was 109 at a low pump power density of 5 W cm−2, indicating that the composite material has a superior enhancement effect on the multi-photon absorption emission. Zhang36 prepared an Au@NaYF4:Yb,Tm core–shell composite by using UC nanorods as nuclear seeds for Au NPs. The luminescence enhancement was more than 1.5 times and obviously near the plasmon resonance frequency, which confirmed that surface plasmon coupling of metal particles played an important role in UCL enhancement. Li37 synthesized nanocomposites to improve the UCL intensity by coating the hexagonal phase NaYF4:Yb/Er/Gd nanorods with Au NPs. Under the irradiation of NIR light, the intensities of the green emission at 540 nm and the red emission at 660 nm were enhanced 3.8 and 4 times, respectively. The good luminescence performance made it have a promising prospect in the biological and photovoltaic fields.
Xu49 prepared a Ag–SiO2–Er2O3 core–shell nanocomposite with good tolerance to high pump powers and temperatures by the wet chemical method. It had strong surface plasmon absorption in the range of 400–1100 nm and could emit white UCL of wide band because of the electron–hole binding in Er2O3. Compared with NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ powder, the nanocomposites obtained a 40-fold enhancement of UCL under the irradiation of a 980 nm laser, which was due to the thermal effect significantly increasing the hole density in the valence band. Apart from this, Xu102 prepared NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/Nd3+ core–shell carbon nanotubes and assembled them on Ag gratings and glass substrates to study the relationship between the UC enhancement of Ag gratings and the angle of incident light. The UCL was enhanced by a maximum of 20 times with a 980 nm laser incident at 60° and 17 times with a 810 nm laser. When the incident angle was further increased to 70°, the enhancement declined 11 times. As a consequence of the close maximum enhancement of 980 nm and 810 nm and the low thermal effect of an 810 nm laser, which made it more suitable for biological applications, the 810 nm laser was chosen for in vivo imaging and detection.
3.2 Multilayer
Saboktakin58 proposed a structure that separated the tightly packed monolayer UCNPs from the dense multilayer metal NPs by an Al2O3 spacer layer, with UCL enhancement of up to 45 times. The manufacturing process of the multilayer composite is shown in Fig. 15(a), where a dense Au or Ag NP film was formed on the glass substrate through spin coating, and an Al2O3 thin layer was deposited by atomic layer deposition. The thickness of the dielectric spacer layer was controlled precisely, enabling us to maximize the metal-induced UCL enhancement. The luminescence measurement in Fig. 15(b) showed a 3-fold increase in UC at the bottom of the UCNP monolayer near Au NPs due to enhanced plasmon emission from UCNPs and enhanced metal-induced absorption at 980 nm. As shown in Fig. 15(c) and the atomic force microscope (AFM) image in Fig. 15(d), they used nano-imprinting lithography to make the metal NP layer stripe and then deposited the Al2O3 and UCNP layer on the surface of the spacer layer. Fig. 15(e and f) show that the distances between UCNPs and Au NPs, and UCNPs and Ag NPs were 5 and 10 nm when the luminescence enhancement was the maximum, and the maximum enhancements of Au and Ag NPs were 5.2 and 45 times, respectively.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of a multilayer structure; (b) UCL mapping of the Au–Al2O3–UCNPs membrane; (c) lithographic process of nano-imprinting; (d) AFM image of the Au NP stripe pattern; UCL spectra of (e) Ag–Al2O3–UCNPs and (f) Au–Al2O3–UCNPs. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. 
Analogously, Luo59 prepared glass/Au/TiO2/NaYF4:Yb,Er,Gd four-layer plasmon-structured nanorods, as shown in Fig. 16. TiO2 films were used as oxide isolators, and the distance between the Au layer and UC nanorods, namely the thickness of the TiO2 layer, strongly affected the UCL intensity. In the UCL spectra, the maximum enhancement of UCL was 192 times under 980 nm laser irradiation when the TiO2 film was 10 nm thick. The multiple scattering, constructive interference and strong coupling between the Au layer and UC nanorods made the electric field have strong localization and enhancement. Luo studied the local electric field enhancement generated by a four-layer plasmon sample.
 Fig. 16  Schematic diagram of the four-layer structure. 
Wang29 reported a multilayer UCL structure at 808 nm, which was more suitable for biological applications. Fig. 17 shows the preparation process and structure of Au–NaYF4:Yb3+,Nd3+,Er3+ composites. The Au film was obtained by sintering HAuCl4 acid solution at a high temperature, and then NaYF4:Yb3+,Nd3+,Er3+ nanoparticles were deposited on the Au film by spin coating. The samples were excited at 808 nm where the luminescence enhancement was most obvious in the sample with a penetration of 0.5 m. NaYF4:Yb3+,Nd3+,Er3+ nanoparticles exhibited typical green and red emissions with maximum enhancement factors of 6 and 5.8, respectively.
 Fig. 17  Preparation process of the composite of Au film and NaYF4:Yb3+,Nd3+,Er3+ nanoparticles. 
Das87 reported that a metal–insulator–metal multilayer nanocomposite like “sandwich” structure fabricated by photolithography was significantly enhanced up to 1198-fold. Firstly, an anticorrosive photoetching patterned hole array template was prepared, then an Au layer was thermally evaporated, with a NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UCNP monolayer as the middle insulator, and finally the anticorrosive template was removed after another Au layer evaporation. The production process was so simple that it was easy to mass-produce. The two-sided Au layer compacted the incident light into the UCNP insulating layer, and the SPR effect of the metal made the field in the UCNP layer highly localized, thus enhancing the absorption and up-conversion luminescence, and obtaining an UCL enhancement factor of 1198 at weak excitation state.
Shen60 reported the effect of the thickness of the SiO2 spacer on the UCL enhancement of the Ag/SiO2/NaYF4:Yb,Er,Gd sandwich structure, which is shown in Fig. 18(a). The UC nanorod was spin-coated on a glass substrate, then SiO2 layers of different thicknesses were deposited on the UC nanorod and Ag islands were formed via sputtering on the SiO2 layer. Sputtering technology can accurately control the thickness of the SiO2 or Ag layer, which is conducive to the analysis of the influence of SiO2 thickness on UCL. With the SiO2 layer thickness increasing from 0 to 15 nm, the luminescence intensity of the Ag NPs/SiO2/NaYF4:Yb,Er,Gd complex increased significantly and reached the maximum, 3.4, which was caused by the surface plasmons between the Ag NPs and UC nanorods. Then it decreased sharply as the SiO2 layer thickness continued to increase. Therefore, the emission enhancement was related to the SiO2 layer thickness. As shown in Fig. 18(c), due to the SPR of Ag NPs, the nanorods covered by SiO2/Ag NPs had strong absorption at 400–500 nm. The SPR peak was located at 430 nm with 15 nm SiO2 layer and showed a red shift with 20 nm SiO2 layer.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic diagram of the Ag NPs/SiO2/NaYF4:Yb,Er,Gd sample sandwich structure; (b) UCL spectra with SiO2 layers of different thicknesses; (c) UV-Vis absorption spectra with SiO2/Ag NPs of different thicknesses. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2013. 
Wang61 reported a multilayer composite structure that significantly enhanced the luminescence evidently and combined with colorful nano-printing for trademark anti-counterfeiting. As shown in Fig. 19(a)61 the multilayer polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) PCs/Ag/Ta2O5/NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ (PMIU) composite film was composed of a PMMA opal photonic crystal, a Ag layer, a Ta2O5 spacer-layer and a NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UCNP layer, employing a periodic OPC structure as the base support, and they were prepared by PMMA PC deposition, vacuum evaporation, sputtering technology and solution deposition successively, as shown in Fig. 19(b). The UCL of PMIU was measured by the reflector in Fig. 19(c). Fig. 19(d)–(f) show the SEM images of PCs/Ag with thicknesses of 2 and 55 nm and the cross section of the 3D model shown in Fig. 19(g), respectively. When the Ag layer was 20 nm, the electromagnetic field of PCs/Ag increased 13.71 times. They used diluted black ink to print mosaics on the logo, which appeared colorful when bent, with red, blue and green lights enhanced more than 100 times. Because the pattern can be clearly observed from different angles, it could be used for trademark security as shown in Fig. 19(h). An enormous enhancement could been seen from the contrast of UCL spectra in Fig. 19(i), the maximum of which was 145 times.
 Fig. 19  (a) Structure diagram of multilayer PMIU; (b) preparation of the PMIU composite film; (c) equipment for UCL measurement; SEM images of PCs/Cap-Ag of (d) 2 nm and (e) 55 nm; (f) cross-section image of the 3D model; (g) 3D model for local electromagnetic field distribution simulation; (h) trademark covered with the PMIU film; (i) UCL spectra. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
3.3 Adhesion
Xu62 synthesized a highly efficient catalyst combining plasmon, up-conversion and photocatalysis, NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+,Tm3+@TiO2–Au core–shell porous nano-microsphere. Because the synergistic effect of the components effectively improved the charge and energy transfer, and greatly reduced the charge composition, the hybrid catalyst is obviously better than P25 TiO2 in terms of stability, catalytic activity and reusability. Furthermore, it can capture photons in the UV-vis-NIR range, the absorption bandwidth of which is ultrabroad. Au NPs, NYF and TiO2 microspheres were prepared by laser ablation, porous TiO2 was deposited on NYF primarily, and then Au NPs were attached to the porous microspheres, as shown in Fig. 20(a).62Fig. 20(b) shows the photocatalytic mechanism of the complex under NIR light. The UCL of the NYF core was absorbed by Au NPs, which stimulated the surface plasmon resonance. Charge separation of Au NPs was realized by injecting the hot electrons of Au NPs into the conduction band of TiO2, generating electron/hole pairs in TiO2 to take part in catalytic reactions, therefore improving the photocatalytic activity. In Fig. 20(c), after Au NPs attached to the TiO2 shell, with the SPR of Au NPs occurring, an apparent absorption band appeared between 500 and 600 nm. The TEM image is illustrated in Fig. 20(d), which was consistent with the schematic diagram. The UCL of the composite structure was significantly enhanced and the highest photocatalytic activity reached 4.5 times that of the benchmark P25 TiO2. Duo21 studied the effects of NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ UCNPs with or without an Au shell on the photocatalytic activity of TiO2. The results showed that the NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+@TiO2 nanocomposite had the highest degradation efficiency, which degraded about 73% MB and 80% RhB within 4.5 h, indicating that the photocatalytic activity could be significantly improved by the UC process. In addition, there existed three-, four- and five-photon processes in the composite, and the photocatalysis driven by UC was more than that driven by UV radiation.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of the composite microspheres; (b) photocatalysis under NIR irradiation; (c) UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectra; (d) UCL spectra of different samples. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission of Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2015. 
Jiang63 synthesized nanocrystals of β-NaYF4,Gd3+,Yb3+,Tm3+ (NNCs) attached with Au NPs and obtained UCL enhancement of 76 times, which was due to the local field enhancement induced by Au NPs. Trisodium citrate used as the coupling agent and reducing agent was added to reduce hydrochloroauric acid (HCAA) into Au NPs and then attached to the surface of NNCs prepared by the surface hydrothermal method to obtain Au NPs-NNCs (ANNCs), as shown in Fig. 21(a). The absorption spectra in Fig. 21(b) showed that both ANNC and NNC had an absorption peak at 978 nm, which could be ascribed to Yb3+ ions. The wide absorption band of ANNC at 550 nm confirmed the existence of Au NPs. Fig. 21(b) shows the TEM images of ANNC, which took on a hexagonal form, and Au NPs were almost all attached to NNCs, proving the existence of both Au NPs and NNCs. As shown in Fig. 21(c), the UCL of the composite structure was enhanced by a maximum of 76 times. Experiments showed that the luminescence effect was due to excitation enhancement caused by local field enhancement and surface plasmon coupling emission between NNCs and the noble metal. Proper paramagnetism of the composite nanostructure made it have potential application prospects in magnetic resonance imaging. Wang42 studied the size effect of metal-enhanced UCL by binding Ag NPs of different sizes to the NaYF4 nanoplate doped with RE3+. The UCL intensity of the large Ag NPs was enhanced more than 2 times, whereas the small Ag NPs exhibited light quenching. The results showed that in the excitation enhancement and emission enhancement the former was the main reason for UCL enhancement of all wavelengths.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process of ANNC nanostructures; (b) UV-Vis absorption spectra before and after Au NP attachment; (c) UCL spectra of the composite with different HCAA concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2012. 
Moreover, Jiang64 reported a dual-mode probe combining UCL and surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), and the preparation method and TEM image were similar to those in Fig. 21,63 as shown in Fig. 22(a) and the inset of Fig. 22(b). Au NPs attached to the surface of NaYF4:Gd3+,Yb3+,Tm3+ UCNPs could generate the SERS signal and UCL at different excitation wavelengths, among which SERS had high sensitivity and specificity at extremely low concentrations and even at the single molecule level. SERS enhancement of the nanocomposite was investigated by applying 4-mercaptobenzoic acid (4MBA) as the reporting molecule stimulated by a 785 nm laser. According to the Raman spectra in Fig. 22(b), the maximum SERS enhancement factor of the nanocomposite was 8.17 × 107 at 1078 cm−1. As shown in Fig. 22(c), UCL of the Au–UCNP nanocomposite was greatly enhanced 76 times compared with the UCNP nanocomposite, with 2.42 mmol HAuCl4. Highly enhanced Raman scattering and UCL made the nanocomposite have distinguished prospects of being a dual mode probe in the fields of biological detection, imaging and sensing.
 Fig. 22  (a) Preparation process of the Au–UCNPs nanocomposite; (b) comparison of the Raman spectra of 4MBA; (c) UCL spectra of nanocomposites with the increase of Au NPs. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2014. 
Yin65 reported an Au–Ag alloy nanofilm with an adjustable SPR peak, having important potential in biological applications and photoelectric sensors. Compared with pure Au or pure Ag, the Au–Ag alloy structure could achieve higher near-field amplification due to the electric field coupling between Au and Ag, and the alloy can achieve more significant and stable UCL enhancement by combining the high stability of Au with the high extinction cross section of Ag.85 The hollow Au–Ag nanocages with wall holes were formed by adding HAuCl4 solution to Ag nanocubes for the galvanic replacement reaction. In Fig. 23(a),65 the Au–Ag nanocages were first dropped on a glass substrate, and then NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UCNPs were attached to the wall holes of Au–Ag nanocages by vertical deposition, eventually forming a flat composite film. By changing the amount of HAuCl4 solution, the SPR peak could be adjusted in the visible light and near infrared region. The light path of UCL is shown in Fig. 23(b), in which the light was vertically incident and reflected on the surface. It was known that metal scattering contributed to the luminescence enhancement, while absorption brought about the quenching in the metal/UCNPs composite structure. Au–Ag alloy nanofilms showed stronger scattering than the single metal, beneficial to the UCL enhancement. The luminescence of UCNPs on the Au–Ag alloy substrate was over 15 times stronger than that on the glass substrate under excitation of a 980 nm laser, which was mainly due to the strong coupling of SPR of Au–Ag nanocages and excitation field of UCNPs.
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of the UCNPs/Au–Ag composite film; (b) optical path of UCL measurement. 
Maurya66 prepared Ag@NaYF4:Er3+/Yb3+ UCNPs and studied the specific mechanism of SPR effect enhancing upconversion emission. Firstly, the enhancement effect of local field led to the enhancement of the absorption of the launch center. Secondly, SPR of metal particles increased the radiation attenuation rate of the emission center. The corresponding ion transition during SPR of Ag NPs is shown in Fig. 24(a);66 AgNO3 was reduced to Ag NPs and then attached to NaYF4:Er3+/Yb3+ by the ultrasonic co-precipitation method to obtain Ag@NaYF4:Er3+/Yb3+ UCNPs. As the excitation wavelength of 976 nm excited Er3+ ions, Ag NPs partially absorbed the emission of Er3+ ions and thus excited the plasmon, and the luminescence intensity was greatly enhanced as shown in Fig. 24(b). It was verified that 1 mmol of Ag NPs was the most appropriate concentration, in that the complex containing 1 mmol Ag NPs had the highest emission intensity, the green and red light emission intensities of which were enhanced 12 and 9 times, respectively. In the TEM image shown in Fig. 24(c), there existed some small spherical black dots. Moreover, the lattice constant calculated from the ring diameter in the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) image corresponded to the crystal surface of Ag NPs, which confirmed the existence of Ag NPs in the composite nanoparticles. Experiments showed that Ag NPs shortened the attenuation time of green and red emissions, indicating that SPR was the main mechanism relative to the local field effect.
 Fig. 24  (a) Diagram of the SPR model of Ag@UCNPs; (b) comparison of UCL spectra at different concentrations of Ag NPs; (c) TEM image of Ag@UCNPs (inset: SAED pattern). Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Xiao67 reported a probe with Ag clusters stabilized with dithiol as an energy receptor to absorb the luminescence of UCNPs, which could be applied for high-resolution intracellular biothiol-detection and in vivo tissue imaging. As shown in Fig. 25(a),40 they first synthesized oleic acid-coated UCNPs and dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) protected ultra-small Ag clusters, and the nanoprobe was a core–satellite structure, with positively charged polyethylenimine (PEI)–UCNP nanospheres and negatively charged Ag clusters attached to each other via electrostatic interactions. Ultra-small Ag clusters had excellent water solubility, thermodynamic stability and biocompatibility, which made the composite probe have better biological applications. Due to the importance of biothiol in maintaining the redox state of cells, it was of great significance to detect biothiol concentration by detecting UCL of UCNPs. The chemical reaction between Ag NCs and biothiol would change light absorption of Ag clusters and inhibit energy transfer from UCNPs to Ag clusters, thus affecting the UCL. Fig. 25(b) shows the schematic diagram of the biothiol-detection probe in mice. Under the irradiation of a 980 nm laser, the probe passed through the cell membrane and reacted with biothiol, leading to the decrease of UCL. As shown in Fig. 25(c), with the increase of Ag cluster concentration, the UCL of UCNPs gradually decreased because the energy was transferred from UCNPs to Ag clusters, indicating that Ag clusters had remarkable luminescence quenching capability. Excessive use of the painkiller acetaminophen (APAP) could cause depletion of glutathione (GSH) in liver cells, leading to liver damage. The inset shows the UCL image of liver tissue sections of mice injected with nanoprobes, without APAP, in which intravenous APAP signally reduced the luminescence intensity of mice with increasing dose. Because metal nanoclusters are easy to grow on various templates, this composite structure could be extended to the preparation of other nanoprobes.
 Fig. 25  (a) Structure and mechanism diagram of the Ag@NaYF4:Yb,Tm nanoprobe; (b) process of biothiol-detection in mice; (c) UCL spectra of UCNPs at different Ag nanocluster concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission of Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2015. 
Shao92 prepared a novel anti-opal photonic substrate doped with Ag NPs and obtained a luminescence enhancement of 6.3 times for NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+. Compared with a pure opal or Ag substrate, an inverse opal photonic substrate doped with Ag NPs avoided the luminescence quenching caused by direct contact between Ag NPs and UCNPs, and combined the SPR effect of Ag NPs and the photonic band gap effect to improve the luminescence performance of UCNPs. The opal template was infiltrated with SiO2:Ag sol and sintered at a high temperature to obtain a SiO2 inverse opal substrate doped with Ag NPs, and then UCNPs were spin-coated on the substrate, as shown in Fig. 26(a).92 The substrates prepared by 335, 410 and 500 nm opal templates were named Ag-IPO-I, Ag-IPO-II and Ag-IPO-III, respectively. As shown in the SEM image in Fig. 26(b), dense NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+ UCNPs were formed on the composite substrate surface. The optical path measured by UCL is shown in Fig. 26(c), in which the laser at 980 nm was irradiated along a 45° angle, and the spectrometer was perpendicular to the composite material to collect UC emission. As shown in Fig. 26(d), the electric field intensity of Ag NPs in the ring simulated by the Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) method was greatly enhanced, and then UC emission was further enhanced. This was attributed to the SPR effect of Ag NPs generating a high local electric field and enhancing the excitation electric field. In addition, the band gap of photonic crystals overlapped the UC emission band and Bragg diffraction could inhibit light transmission, which accordingly improved the luminescence performance of composite materials. As shown in the UCL spectra in Fig. 26(e), the luminescence intensity of UCNPs doped with Ag NPs was clearly higher than that of the pure opal substrate, and the enhancement factor was increased up to 6.3 times, which was of great significance.
 Fig. 26  (a) The preparation process of the SiO2:Ag inverse opal photonic crystal/UCNPs composite; (b) SEM images of the structure; (c) optical path of UCL measurement; (d) the electric field simulated by FDTD; (e) UCL spectra of UCNPs on different substrates. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
Cheng68 prepared LixAg1−xYb0.99(MoO4)2:0.01Er3+ phosphors by the solid-state reaction method, and the structure is shown in Fig. 27. Cations such as Li+, Ag+, Yb3+ and Er3+ adhered to the [MoO4]2− tetrahedrons, which were composed of Mo6+ ions and 4 oxygen atoms. Under the excitation of a 980 nm laser, the mechanism of ESA, ET, and cross relaxation (CR) between Er3+ and Yb3+ generated a strong green emission band at 530 and 553 nm and a weak red emission band at 656 nm. Ag+ had a stronger deformation capacity than Li+, so the electron cloud of Ag+ fed back to the Mo–O bond was more significant than Li+. The high polarization capacity and deformation capacity of Ag+ determined that the band gap in the Ag system was narrower, in which case the excited state of Er3+ was closer to the conduction band of Ag+, and thus non-radiative transition may occur, leading to a lower UCL intensity in the Ag system. The introduction of Li+ weakened the energy coupling between AgYb(MoO4)2 and Er3+ and thus enhanced the UCL intensity of phosphors.
 Fig. 27  Schematic diagram of the composite structure; UCL spectra of LixAg1−xYb0.99(MoO4)2:0.01Er3+. 
Ray69 prepared a BaMoO4 plasmon photocatalyst adhered with noble metals and RE3+, Ag–BaMoO4:Er3+/Yb3+/K+ octahedron microcrystals, by the microwave hydrothermal method and studied the photocatalytic degradation activities of the rhodamine B (Rh B) dye and ibuprofen (IBP) drugs under sunlight. Based on local SPR, electron transition increased light absorption and surface barrier. Yb3+ absorbed NIR light at 980 nm and transferred energy to Er3+, achieving the up-conversion from NIR to visible light. Er3+ then transferred energy to BaMoO4 for effective catalytic and degradation activities, as shown in Fig. 28(a).69 Ag and BaMoO4 could both be excited by sunlight to create electron–hole pairs, and electrons from the conduction band of BaMoO4 were transferred to Ag, and therefore electrons and holes were effectively separated, which gave rise to the oxidation reaction of Rh B and IBP with the holes in the valence band and the reduction reaction with the electrons in the conduction band. The Rh B and IBP degradation rates of samples within 90 min were 99.60% and 41.49%, respectively, which were approximately 30 times higher compared to BaMoO4. Abbreviations for the samples are B (BaMoO4), B1 (BaMoO4:Er3+/Yb3+), BS (Ag–BaMoO4:Er3+/Yb3+), BK (BaMoO4:Er3+/Yb3+/K+) and BSK (Ag–BaMoO4:Er3+/Yb3+/K+). From the UCL spectra in Fig. 28(b), the intensity of the samples containing K+ was 2-fold higher than that without K+ in that the introduction of K+ reduced the local symmetry of RE3+ doping, shortened the distance between Er3+ and Yb3+, and hence increased the probability of radiation transition, absorption transition and energy transfer between Er3+ and Yb3+, which was conducive to the enhancement of UCL. Besides, the octahedron morphology was clear in the TEM images of the inset. In the Raman spectra in Fig. 28(c), the sharp and strong Raman active mode represented the stretching and bending vibrations of metal–oxygen bonds in anion groups, and the extra Raman peaks of B1 and BK samples were due to doping ions and volume vibration modes. In the CIE chromaticity diagram in Fig. 28(d), B1, BS and BK were located in the green region, and BSK was located in the green and yellow regions owing to the enhancement of red emission and the reduction of green emission. The inset showed luminescence of BK and BS excited at 980 nm. In the absorption spectra in Fig. 28(e), the absorption band at 200–320 nm and 325–600 nm was due to the charge transfer transition in the [MoO4]2− group and the SPR effect caused by Ag NPs, respectively, which could promote energy transfer, radiation attenuation rate and emission intensity. The composite microcrystal could degrade organic pollutants like IBP and Rh B, produce efficient UCL simultaneously and hence treat water pollution, which had a broad application prospect. Similarly, Ray70 used the same method to synthesize Er3+/Yb3+ co-doped Ag–BaMoO4 octahedral microcrystals, which could capture photons in the UV and visible light range. Scheelite structured BaMoO4 is a common UC material with high chemical stability and low phonon energy. Under 980 nm laser irradiation, the microcrystalline compound produced intense green and poor red emissions, and UCL intensity decreased with increasing concentration of Ag NPs, which was because the SPR effect of Ag NPs changed the energy gap of Er3+, making its population level of excited state redistribute; in addition, it may also be related to the plasmon absorption competition between agminated Ag NPs.
 Fig. 28  (a) Photocatalytic schematic diagram; (b) UCL spectra; (c) Raman spectra; (d) CIE chroma map; and (e) UV-Vis absorption spectra of different samples. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2017. 
3.4 Islands
Chen72 prepared the Au–Ag alloy “island” film and obtained the maximum luminescence enhancement of 180 times, which had efficient applications in fingerprint identification. Firstly, the heterogeneous structure of the Au–Ag alloy prevented agglomeration of particles, making it easier to form isolated islands. Secondly, the electric field coupling between Au and Ag caused a more significant and stable UCL enhancement. As shown in Fig. 29(a),72 Au–Ag alloy films and Au–Ag/NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ composites were prepared by removing the PMMA opal template. The PMMA organic template was first formed on the glass, then the template was removed by heat treatment to form a pure Au film, followed by the addition of AgNO3, obtaining an Au–Ag alloy film made up of randomly distributed irregular Au–Ag “islands”, and then immersion in NaYF4 solution to form the final composite film. Employing UCNPs only presented a fingerprint of weak brightness, blurred images and poor accuracy, while the fingerprints obtained with the Au–Ag/NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ composite film in Fig. 29(b) showed bright, high resolution ridges, indicating that the composite film had strong ability of high resolution imaging and outstanding application prospects in fields requiring high precision imaging, such as fingerprint identification. As well, the light path is very important to UCL measurement, which is shown in Fig. 29(c), and all UCL was measured and compared by reflection in the experiment. The UCL spectra in Fig. 29(d) demonstrated that the enhancement factor reached the maximum with a wavelength of 475 nm when the molar ratio of Au–Ag was Au1.25–Ag0.625, and the size of UCNPs and that of the total film were roughly 7 nm and 100 nm, respectively. Experiments showed that the UCL enhancement was mainly due to the coupling of surface plasmon exciton and excitation of electromagnetic field, the factor of which increased with the increase of metal nanoparticle size, diffuse reflection, the advance of multi-photon filling sequence, the decrease of NaYF4 nanoparticle size and the power density of excitation light.
 Fig. 29  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of the Au–Ag/NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ porous composite membrane; (b) fingerprint image formed on the composite film; (c) UCL reflection measurement; (d) UCL spectra of the composite films. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission of Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2015. 
Aisaka71 significantly enhanced the UCL 2.2 times by placing the Al2O3 film doped with Er3+ on the Ag island film. In addition, he also explained the principle of photoluminescence enhancement, namely, the enhancement of the electric field of incident light and radiation attenuation rate. Firstly, the Al2O3 film doped with Er3+ was deposited on a quartz substrate, and Ag island films with different thicknesses were prepared by the vacuum evaporation method after annealing. In the AFM image of the sample surface in Fig. 30(a–d),71 the size of Ag particles and the distance between them increased as the thickness of the Ag island film increased from 7 nm to 16 nm. As shown in the UCL spectra in Fig. 30(e), after the Er3+-doped Al2O3 film was placed on the Ag island film, UCL intensity was strongly enhanced and reached its maximum, 2.2 times, when the Ag island film thickness was 13 nm. Furthermore, owing to the hysteresis effect, the SPR moved and broadened to longer wavelengths as the Ag island film thickened. Homoplastically, Managaki103 reported an effective UCL enhancement method by placing an Au film on an Er and Yb co-doped Al2O3 composite film. The rough Au surface made the surface plasmon couple with incident light, enhancing the local electric field of the incident light. In addition, enhanced polarization mode dispersion near Au films increased the radiation rate proportional to it, thus accelerating the energy transfer rate between Yb3+ and Er3+.
 Fig. 30  AFM image of Ag island films with thicknesses of (a) 7, (b) 10, (c) 13, and (d) 16 nm, respectively; (e) UCL spectra of Er3+ doped Al2O3 films with different thicknesses of Ag island films under 978 nm laser irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission of American Institute of Physics, copyright 2008. 
3.5 Array
Saboktakin73 filled NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UCNPs into the nanopore array of Au films and obtained a luminescence enhancement factor of 35 times. The preparation process of the Au nanopore array is shown in Fig. 31, wherein the negative resist was placed on the glass substrate, then the Au and Cr layers were evaporated by an electron beam, the latter as a protective layer, and then the hole was deepened to 90 nm by dry etching. After the concentrated UCNP solution was assembled into the Au nanopore array using a scraper, the residual particles were removed to ensure the same number of particles in glass and Au templates. The diameter of UCNPs was 70 nm, the thickness of the Au layer was 30 nm, and the aperture was designed as 110 nm, so that it could only accommodate a single UCNP. UCNPs in Au nanopore arrays obtained a luminescence enhancement factor of up to 35-fold at the emission peak of 540 nm compared with glass nanopore arrays. We could see from the inset that the electric field in the center of each aperture was enhanced almost 6 times when the nanopore array resonated with UCNPs, and thus the luminescence intensity was enhanced by all but 36 times, which was on account of the enhancement of sensitizer excitation and the emitter radiation attenuation rate.
 Fig. 31  Schematic diagram of the preparation process of the Au nanopore array. 
Zhang104 used a 3D plasmon nanoantenna structure and enhanced the UCL of NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs up to 310-fold, which was a disk-coupled dots-on-pillar antenna array (D2PA), composed of a periodic dielectric column, Au nano-disks at its top and bottom, and dense Au nanometer points on its sidewalls. When the column height was 75 nm, the UCL enhancement factor reached its maximum at 660 nm, which was two orders of magnitude larger than the UCL enhancement of NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ ever reported. The vertically designed D2PA structure encapsulated a large number of “hot” nanogaps, with a high surface density, and could significantly enhance the local intensity of excitation light. It is worth noting that the preparation of a large, accurate and uniform 3D plasmon nanostructure involved nano-indentation, self-assembly and self-alignment techniques. The strong resonance coupling between Au nanorods and D2PA contributed to the significant UCL enhancement effect. This method provides a new way for the preparation of thin films for efficient UCL enhancement and has great significance for applications in lasers, optical devices and other fields. Unfortunately, the preparation equipment of this structure was expensive, complex and difficult to universalize at present.
Lu74 prepared the nanocomposites of NaYF4:Yb,Tm UCNPs in a PMMA film with Au nanopillar arrays, obtaining a luminescence enhancement of 5.5 and studied the mechanism of UCL enhancement by spectral imaging and time-resolved spectroscopy. The structure of the Au nanopillar array is shown in Fig. 32(a). First, Cr and Au were deposited on a silicon substrate via radiofrequency sputtering, the former being used as the adhesion layer. Then, the inhibitor PMMA was spin-coated onto the Au surface and the photoresist was illuminated by an electron beam to form a 100 × 100 μm2 nanopillar array pattern. Finally, a 70 nm Au layer was deposited on the surface of the pattern and the mask was removed to show the Au nanopillar array pattern. Fig. 32(b) shows the TEM image of UCNPs embedded in a PMMA film with a diameter of 60–80 nm. From the two-dimensional luminescence confocal image in the inset of Fig. 32(c), the luminescence of Au nanopillar arrays was notably brighter than that on the smooth Au surface. Compared with visible light emission, the enhancement of the NIR emission band was more distinct. At length, blue and red luminescence was enhanced by about 1.5 and 2.4 times in the visible band, respectively, and by about 5.5 times in the NIR band. Table 1 in Fig. 32 shows the luminescence intensity ratio of the Au nanopillar array to smooth the Au surface at different transitions, and Table 2 in Fig. 32 shows the rise and decay rate constants of UCNPs at 647 nm and 800 nm of the smooth Au surface and Au nanopillar array, respectively, representing the excitation and emission of UCNPs. The rate constant of the Au nanopillar array was approximately 1.5 times that of the smooth Au surface and the decay rate only changed prominently at the 800 nm transition, which also confirmed the significant enhancement of UCNP luminescence in the NIR band. Analogously, Paudel105 used an engineered plasmonic Au substrate to enhance the UCL of NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+ nanocrystalline PMMA films and obtained an enhancement factor of 3.4. In comparison with the colloidal structure of the metal–UC composite materials, the engineered surface could control the region and distribution of the enhanced local field more precisely.
 Fig. 32  (a) AFM images and structure diagrams of Au nanopillar arrays; (b) TEM images of the UCNPs; (c) UCL spectra of Tm3+ on and off Au pattern. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 
3.6 Composite optical glass
Glass encapsulated with UC materials has been widely studied in recent years due to its nonlinear optics, up-conversion and laser amplification. Som75 prepared a dichromatic Nd3+: Au–K2O–B2O3–Sb2O3 (KBS) composite glass by the melt quenching-thermochemical reduction method and improved the luminescence performance by coupling with Au nanoclusters. The dichroism was due to the different polarization of Au NPs along the long and short axes of the elliptic Au NPs under the action of electromagnetic waves, behaving as transmitting green or blue light and reflecting brown light. The advantages such as high transparency, chemical stability and mechanical strength of KBS glass made it a suitable packaging matrix material for nano-metals and RE3+. Sb2O3 could reduce Au3+ into Au in a single step, and Nd3+ had a good energy level structure, so they were used in the preparation of nanocomposite glass. The lattice constants calculated from ring diameters were consistent with the Au NPs’ crystal plane, of which the plane (200) was the most obvious, indicating that Au NPs mainly grew on the plane (200).75 The absorption spectra showed the SPR band of ellipsoid Au NPs, which exhibited a red shift from 610 nm to 681 nm with the increase of Au concentration, indicating the enhancement of the local electric field. After the addition of Au NPs, the UCL intensity of Nd3+ was significantly enhanced and reached the maximum, 11-fold, when the concentration of Au NPs was 0.03 wt%, as shown by the curve a–c. As the concentration continued to increase, the luminescence intensity weakened, as shown by the curve d–f. The composite KBS glass had a high molar polarization rate of 9.598, so it had outstanding nonlinear optical properties and could emit visible light under the excitation of NIR light, having a broad application prospect in optical devices such as lasers, optical displays and optical storage devices.
Besides, Som76 prepared dichromatic Sm3+:Au–Sb glass nanocomposites on a KBS glass matrix by the one-step melt quenching method, the dichromatic property of which was due to Au NPs being elliptic. Under the excitation of 949 nm light, the three emission bands of Sm3+ ions were located at 566 nm (green), 602 nm (orange) and 636 nm (red), respectively. The introduction of Au NPs increased the intensity of red emission of Sm3+ ions 7 times, which was mainly due to the enhancement of the local field caused by the SPR effect and the energy transfer from Au NPs to Sm3+ ions, as shown in Fig. 33. Analogously, Som77 prepared dichroic Er3+:Au–Sb nanocomposite glass by the same method, in which Au NPs grew along the (200) surface. Dichroism was due to the fact that Au NPs were hexagonal with an aspect ratio of about 1.3. Under 798 nm light excitation, the green and red emission bands of Er3+ ions were located at 536 nm and 645 nm, respectively. When the concentration of Au NPs was 0.03 wt%, the luminescence enhancement reached the maximum, 5 times, and luminescence quenching occurred when increasing the concentration of Au NPs to a high level because of the reabsorption of Au NPs. Additionally, Som78 prepared Er3+:Ag–Sb nanocomposite glass and obtained an UCL enhancement of 8 times under the excitation of a 798 nm laser when the Ag NP concentration was 0.007 wt%. Ag NPs were spherical, fractal and rod-shaped, among which the rod-shaped Ag NPs had an aspect ratio of about 2.4 and was dichromatic. The method of selective thermochemical reduction in situ used for the above several kinds of composite glass materials prepared by Som was simple and rapid, which could be extended to the preparation of a relatively large number of bulk composite materials.
 Fig. 33  (a) SAED image of the nanocomposite SG2; (b) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra and (c) UCL spectra of different samples at an excitation wavelength of 949 nm. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2010. 
It is known that optical glass with low phonon energy can improve the up-conversion efficiency and reduce the non-radiative loss of the crystal lattice. Among them, fluorotellurite glass has been widely employed due to its combination of the low phonon energy of fluoride glass and the excellent mechanical properties and ease of production of oxide glass. Rajesh79 reported the preparation of TEO2–ZnO–YF3–NaF (TZYN) glass doped with Ag NPs and Er3+/Yb3+, and studied the effects of Ag concentration and heat treatment time on the luminescence performance. TZYN glass was a popular UC glass host material on account of the advantages of remarkable chemical stability, high refractive index, low phonon energy and high rare earth solubility. Similar to Tirtha,75 Rajesh also used the single-step melting quenching method to prepare composite UL glass. x and y in the label EYxAgy-6h represent the mole numbers of Er3+/Yb3+ and Ag NPs, respectively, and 6h denotes the heat treatment time. Fig. 34(a) shows the HR-TEM image of a single EY10Ag10-6h with a distance of 2.38 Å between each other, which meant that there may be particles that are too small to be detected.79 In the absorption spectra of different glass samples in Fig. 34(b), no absorption bands associated with Ag NPs’ SPR were observed in Ag-doped glass, possibly because Ag rarely existed in the form of nanoparticles. The inset of Fig. 34(b) shows the absorption spectra of Ag after different heat treatment times. With the increase of heat treatment time, the number of Ag NPs increased and the amplitude of the SPR band also increased. As shown in the UCL spectra in Fig. 34(c), the luminescence intensity of the Ag-doped glass sample was markedly enhanced and the maximum enhancement reached 3.7 times that of EY10Ag10-3h, which was ascribed to the increase of the local electric field caused by Ag NPs. The luminescence intensity of the sample decreased by due to the quenching occurred when the heat treatment time was prolonged to 6–9 h. The composite UC glass had great application value in solar cells, amplifiers and optical waveguides. Homoplastically, Kassab80 synthesized Ag:TeO2–ZnO tellurite glass doped with Yb3+, Tm3+, inducing the formation of a Ag core by heat treatment. It was verified that there existed triplet and quadruple luminescence intensification of RE3+ in the composite glass, and the UCL enhancement of approximately 3 times was finally obtained, making it probable to be applied in color display, viewer and other devices. It was all known that Tellurite glass had been widely used in optical devices such as optical fibers due to its high refractive index, low phonon energy, wide transparency range, high chemical stability and thermal stability. Dousti81 synthesized Ag–Er3+ co-doped tellurite composite glass by one-step melt quenching. The asymmetric luminescence of ellipsoidal Ag NPs increased the photon density around Er3+ and the excitation rate to some extent. The novel optical properties of the composite glass had promising prospects for applications in lasers, color displays and other fields. Silva82 reported the PBO–GeO2 composite glass containing Ag NPs doped with Er3+ and studied the UC enhancement of Ag NPs in the composite glass with 980 nm laser irradiation. There was a two-photon absorption process in the composite structure, and doping of Ag NPs increased the local field near Er3+, thus greatly enhancing UCL. This composite glass combined the high refractive index, large transmission range and low phonon energy of heavy metal oxide glass and the SPR effect of the metal to enhance the UCL performance of RE3+, which could be applied probably in optical devices.
 Fig. 34  (a) HR-TEM image of a single EY10Ag10-6h particle; (b) absorption spectra of different glass samples; (c) UCL spectra of Ag NPs, Er3+/Yb3+ co-doped TZYN glass. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission of American Institute of Physics, copyright 2017. 
4. Conclusion and challenges
In this review, the principle of the surface plasmon resonance effect of noble metals enhancing the up-conversion luminescence of rare earth ions is systematically discussed. In the up-conversion process, UCNPs absorb the incident light energy and complete the conversion from near-infrared light to visible light and even ultraviolet light through excited state absorption, energy transfer, photon avalanche, etc. Generally there exists two-photon excited state absorption, and many include three-, four-, and even five-photon up-conversion processes. Due to the various kinds of composite structures and because they have a crucial influence on the enhancement of luminescence performance, in this review composite structures were divided into 6 categories: core–shell, multilayer, adhesion, islands, array, and composite optical glass, and the research achievements in up-conversion luminescence enhancement and application development in recent years were also discussed. The rare earth ions primarily involved are the commonly used Nd3+, Sm3+, Gd3+, Ho3+, Er3+, Tm3+, Yb3+, Lu3+, and Y3+, and the metals involved are Au, Ag, and Cu, with Au and Ag in the majority and a small part of the alloy, respectively.
There are many factors affecting the luminescence enhancement, such as the wavelength and excitation power of incident light, the composite structure and distance between the metal and UCNPs, and their respective doping concentration, etc., which lead to a large gap in the enhancement factor. It is worth noting that the maximum UCL enhancement of metal/up-conversion fluorophore composites reported hitherto has reached 1198 times, principally owing to the special Au–UCNPs–Au “sandwich” multilayer structure on the substrate of a photolithographic hole array. Also there are many other nanocomposite structures, the up-conversion luminescence enhancement of which has reached several hundred times more than that of UCNPs alone, which is of great significance.
These kinds of composite materials with distinguished up-conversion luminescence performance have many topical applications, such as imaging and biosensing probes, targeted drug delivery, and photothermal and photodynamic therapy in the biomedical field. There are many other applications like photocatalysis acceleration, solar cells, and synthesis of composite optical glass with excellent luminescence properties and optical devices. Due to the high-resolution imaging and intense up-conversion luminescence of metal/up-conversion fluorophore composite films, they were applied in fingerprint identification and trademark anti-counterfeiting, which was relatively novel. In biological imaging, on the basis of effective UCL enhancement, the research of multi-modal imaging probes combining up-conversion luminescence, magnetic resonance, and CT imaging methods has attracted much attention currently. It has been verified that some composite materials showed good recognition for specific proteins related to cancer and could bind with DNA for precise drug delivery. Furthermore, in photodynamic therapy the metal particles can effectively increase the reactive oxygen species generated by active photosensitizers and oxygen molecules, thereby destroying the physiological function of cancer cells, which has promising prospects. In addition, catalysts modified by metal/up-conversion fluorophore composites are significantly better than the pure ones in terms of catalytic activity, stability and reusability and have high degradation efficiency for both dyes and drugs. Moreover, the multifunctional TiO2 scattering layer modified by them can exceedingly improve the photovoltaic performance and up-conversion efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells.
Nevertheless, metal/fluorophore composites still have some challenges to be overcome, such as the lack of understanding of the concrete physical mechanism that determines the surface plasmon resonance effect of the metal to enhance the up-conversion luminescence, which needs further study. What we know is that the SPR effect of the metal can enhance the electric field around the up-conversion nanoparticles; however, there is no specific physical formula for the process of up-converting fluorescence-enhanced electric fields. In addition, such metal/fluorophore composites are often prepared in a complicated and expensive way on account of the fact that there are so many procedures in the preparation processes and each procedure needs precise manipulation, in which case they are hard to be put into mass production. Therefore, future efforts should mainly focus on clarifying its specific physical mechanism. Also it is of great significance to select metal/fluorophore composites with excellent luminescence properties, simplifying their preparation processes and reducing the cost of production, so that the metal/fluorophore composites can be promoted and applied more widely.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Jiangsu Natural Science Foundation for Excellent Young Scholars (BK20170101), the Scientific Research Foundation of Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications (NY220011, NY220034), and the Opening Project of the State Key Laboratory of Green Building Materials.
References
F. Wang, D. Banerjee, Y. S. Liu, X. Y. Chen and X. G. Liu, Analyst, 2010, 135, 1839–1854 RSC .
Y. L. Dai, P. A. Ma, Z. Y. Cheng, X. J. Kang, X. Zhang, Z. Y. Hou, C. X. Li, D. M. Yang, X. F. Zhai and J. Lin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3327–3338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. X. Yu, F. Y. Li, Z. G. Chen, H. Hu, C. Zhan, H. Yang and C. H. Huang, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 930–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, W. Feng, T. S. Yang, T. Yi and F. Y. Li, Nat. Protoc., 2013, 8, 2033–2044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liedberg, C. Nylander and I. Lundstrom, Sens. Actuators, 1983, 4, 299–304 CrossRef CAS .
J. Homola, S. S. Yee and G. Gauglitz, Sens. Actuators, B, 1999, 54, 3–15 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hutter and J. H. Fendler, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1685–1706 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, K. Yang, Y. G. Li, J. H. Chen, C. Wang, M. W. Shao, S. Lee and Z. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7385–7390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lv, P. P. Yang, B. Hu, J. T. Xu, W. T. Shang and J. Tian, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1064–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Lin, Z. R. Chen and C. A. Chang, Nanotheranostics, 2018, 2, 243–257 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 317–330 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, H. J. Chen, X. Z. Du and D. S. Wen, Sol. Energy, 2014, 100, 141–147 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Deng, Z. Y. Hou, X. J. Li, C. X. Li, Y. X. Zhang, X. R. Deng, Z. Y. Cheng and J. Lin, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Hou, C. X. Li, P. A. Ma, Z. Y. Cheng, X. J. Li, X. Zhang, Y. L. Dai, D. M. Yang, H. Z. Lian and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2713–2722 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Liu, C. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. B. Li, Z. S. Xu, L. Li and A. Whittaker, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 749, 939–947 CrossRef CAS .
P. Acostamora, K. Domen, T. Hisatomi, H. Lyu, J. Mendezramos, J. C. Ruizmorales and N. M. Khaidukov, Opt. Mater., 2018, 83, 315–320 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Su, G. Q. Tan, C. Xu, T. Liu, Y. Wang, H. J. Ren and A. Xia, Mater. Lett., 2018, 211, 175–178 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. V. Sark, J. D. Wild, J. K. Rath, A. Meijerink and R. E. Schropp, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 81 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Dilbeck and K. Hanson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5810–5821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ramasamy, P. Manivasakan and J. Kim, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 34873–34895 RSC .
J. K. Wang, N. H. Yanli Zhu, Z. B. An, P. Chen, C. A. Grimes, Z. Nie and Q. Y. Cai, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 591–594 RSC .
S. H. Wen, J. J. Zhou, K. Z. Zheng, A. Bednarkiewicz, X. G. Liu and D. Y. Jin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2415 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ledemi, D. Manzani, S. J. Ribeiro and Y. Messaddeq, Opt. Mater., 2011, 33, 1916–1920 CrossRef CAS .
P. Loiko, G. E. Rachkovskaya, G. B. Zakharevich, N. A. Skoptsov and K. V. Yumashev, Glass Ceram., 2016, 73, 9–13 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Yanes, J. D. Castillo, D. Luis and J. Puentes, J. Lumin., 2016, 170, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhao, B. A. Ning, N. Zhang, A. J. Fan, S. Y. Jiang, J. H. Tian and Z. X. Gao, Food R&D, 2014, 18, 68–72 Search PubMed .
C. W. Chen, Y. C. Chan, M. Hsiao and R. S. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 8, 32108–32119 CAS .
C. L. Chen, C. G. Li and Z. Shi, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600029 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. D. Wang, Z. W. Yang, Y. J. Ma, Z. Z. Chai, J. B. Qiu and Z. G. Song, J. Mater. Chem., 2017, 5, 8535–8544 CAS .
T. Liu, X. Bai, C. Miao, Q. L. Dai, W. Xu, Y. H. Yu, Q. D. Chen and H. W. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3258–3265 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Meng, Y. Luo, Y. L. Zhou, J. W. Zhang, Y. Z. Zheng, G. Z. Cao and X. Tao, J. Power Sources, 2106, 316, 207–214 CrossRef .
Y. Song, G. X. Liu, X. T. Dong, J. X. Wang, W. S. Yu and J. M. Li, J. Phys. Chem., 2015, 119, 18527–18536 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, D. L. Zhou, W. Xu, J. Y. Zhu, G. C. Pan, Z. Yin, H. Wang, Y. S. Zhu, S. B. Cui and H. W. Song, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, G. X. Liu, X. T. Dong, J. X. Wang, W. S. Yu and J. M. Li, R. Soc. Chem., 2014, 4, 62802–62808 CAS .
N. Liu, W. P. Qin, G. S. Qin, T. Jiang and D. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7671–7673 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. J. Li, I. A. Ivanov, Y. Q. Qu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2865–2868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Li, S. Chen, J. J. Li, Q. Q. Liu, Z. Sun, Z. B. Wang and S. M. Huang, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 014310 CrossRef .
M. Dai, L. Shan, L. H. Bai, C. H. Bu, X. L. Liu, Y. D. Zhu, K. M. Guo, R. H. Jiang, M. Y. Li and X. Z. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 468–473 CrossRef .
Z. J. Wang, L. N. Wu, H. J. Liang, W. Cai, Z. G. Zhangv and Z. H. Jiang, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 9144–9149 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Yuan, Y. H. Lee, M. K. Gnanasammandhan, Z. P. Guan, Y. Zhang and Q. H. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5132–5137 RSC .
B. Dong, S. Xu, J. Sun, S. Bi, D. Li, X. Bai, Y. Wang, L. P. Wang and H. W. Song, R. Soc. Chem., 2011, 5, 6193–6200 Search PubMed .
Z. J. Wang, C. Wang, Q. Y. Han, G. Wang, M. D. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. Gao and H. R. Zheng, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 88, 182–187 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, Z. L. Dong, D. C. Zhou, Y. Yang, X. H. Xu and J. B. Qiu, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 1942–1955 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Wang, W. Gao, R. B. Wang, J. Shao, Q. Y. Han, C. Wang, J. Zhang, T. T. Zhang, J. Dong and H. R. Zheng, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 83, 515–521 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, H. P. Liu, D. Wu, B. Dong and L. K. Sun, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 137, 1021–1024 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ge, X. R. Zhang, M. Liu, Z. W. Lei, R. J. Knize and Y. L. Lu, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 282–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Ding, X. D. Zhang, H. B. Gao, S. Z. Xu, C. C. Wei and Y. Zhao, J. Lumin., 2014, 147, 72–76 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Yin, C. C. Wang, J. O. Yang, X. Y. Zhang, Z. Jiao, Y. Feng, K. L. Song, B. Liu, X. Z. Cao, L. Zhang, Y. L. Han and M. H. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18480–18488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, X. L. Min, X. Chen, Y. S. Zhu, P. W. Zhou, S. B. Cui, S. Xu, L. Tao and H. W. Song, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5087 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Y. Tian, W. J. Yao, W. Wu, J. Liu, Z. H. Wu, L. Liu, Z. G. Dai and C. Z. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10889–10899 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Zhao, Q. H. Wu, D. M. Tang, W. L. Li, X. Zhang, M. Chen, R. Guo and G. Diao, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 769, 92–95 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Xing, W. B. Bu, S. J. Zhang, X. P. Zheng, M. Li, F. Chen, Q. J. He, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng, Y. Q. Hua and J. L. Shi, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 1079–1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Han, A. Samanta, X. J. Xie, L. Huang, J. J. Peng, S. J. Park, D. B. L. Teh, Y. Choi, Y. T. Chang, A. H. All, Y. M. Yang, B. G. Xing and X. G. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700244 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. M. Liu, Y. Xia, Y. Jiang, M. L. Zhang, W. W. Sun and X. Z. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 180, 394–400 CrossRef CAS .
A. Priyam, N. M. Idris and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 960–965 RSC .
Z. B. Luo, L. J. Zhang, R. J. Zeng, L. S. Su and D. P. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 90, 9568–9575 CAS .
C. W. Chen, Y. C. Chan, M. Hsiao and R. S. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 8, 32108–32119 CAS .
M. Saboktakin, X. C. Ye, S. J. Oh, S. H. Hong, A. T. Fafarman, U. K. Chettiar, N. Engheta, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 6, 8758–8766 CAS .
Q. Luo, Y. R. Chen, Z. Q. Li, F. Zhu, X. H. Chen, Z. Sun, Y. L. Wei, H. Guo, Z. B. Wang and S. M. Huang, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 185401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shen, Z. Q. Li, Y. R. Chen, X. H. Chen, Y. W. Chen, Z. Sun and S. M. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 270, 712–717 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, M. C. Li, Z. Yin, T. X. Zhang, X. Chen, D. L. Zhou, J. Y. Zhu, W. Xu, H. N. Cui and H. W. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37128–37135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Xu, M. Quintanilla, F. Vetrone, A. O. Govorov, M. Chaker and D. L. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2950–2960 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jiang, Y. Liu, S. S. Liu, N. Liu and W. P. Qin, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 377, 81–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jiang, J. P. Li, W. P. Qin and J. Zhou, J. Lumin., 2014, 156, 164–169 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, X. R. Zhang, D. L. Zhou, H. Wang, W. Xu, X. Chen, T. X. Zhang and H. W. Song, RSC Adv., 2013, 6, 86297–86300 RSC .
S. K. Maurya, S. P. Tiwari, A. Kumar and K. Kumar, J. Rare Earths, 2018, 36, 903–910 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, L. Y. Zeng, T. Xia, Z. J. Wu and Z. H. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1–6 CrossRef .
F. R. Cheng, Z. G. Xia, X. P. Jing and Z. Y. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 3689–3696 RSC .
S. K. Ray, Y. K. Kshetri, D. Dhakal, C. Regmi and S. W. Lee, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 339, 36–48 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ray, R. Adhikari, G. Gyawali, B. Joshi, Y. K. Kshetri, C. Regmi, K. Tripathi and S. W. Lee, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 11645–11651 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aisaka, M. Fujii and S. Hayashi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 132105 CrossRef .
X. Chen, W. Xu, L. H. Zhang, X. Bai, S. B. Cui, D. L. Zhou, Z. Yin, H. W. Song and D. H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5462–5471 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saboktakin, X. C. Ye, U. K. Chettiar, N. Engheta, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7186–7192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Luu, A. Hor, J. Fisher, R. B. Anderson, S. Liu, T. S. Luk, H. P. Paudel, M. F. Baroughi, P. S. May and S. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3251–3257 CrossRef CAS .
T. Som and B. Karmakar, Solid State Sci., 2009, 11, 1044–1051 CrossRef .
T. Som and B. Karmakar, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2010, 75, 640–646 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Som and B. Karmakar, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2009, 26, 21–27 CrossRef .
T. Som and B. Karmakar, Solid State Sci., 2009, 105, 013102 Search PubMed .
D. Rajesh, M. R. Dousti, R. J. Amjad and A. S. S. de Camargo, J. Lumin., 2017, 192, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. P. Kassab, L. F. Freitas, T. A. A. Assumpção, D. M. da Silva and C. B. de Araújo, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2011, 104, 1029–1034 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Dousti, M. R. Sahar, R. J. Amjad, S. K. Ghoshal, A. Khorramnazari, A. D. Basirabad and A. Samavati, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2012, 66, 237–664 CrossRef .
D. M. da Silva, L. R. P. Kassab, S. R. Lüthi, C. B. de Araújo, A. S. L. Gomes and M. J. V. Bell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 081913 CrossRef .
R. W. Wood, Philos. Mag. Ser., 1902, 6, 396–402 Search PubMed .
E. Kretschmann and H. Raether, Z. Naturforsch., 1968, 23, 2135–2136 CrossRef CAS .
A. Otto, S. P. U. Munchen and L. P. Rollwagen, Z. Phys., 1968, 216, 398–410 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, C. Huang, C. H. Liu and M. Yang, Talanta, 2020, 208, 120157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Das, C. C. Mao, S. Cho, K. Kim and W. Park, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4828 CrossRef PubMed .
L. E. Mackenzie, J. A. Goode, A. Vakurov, P. P. Nampi, S. Saha, G. Jose and P. A. Millner, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1106 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Wu, A. G. Etxarri, A. Salleo and J. A. Dionne, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 4020–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. G. Rivera, F. A. Ferri and E. Marega Jr, Plasmonics: Princ. Appl., 2012, 11, 283–312 Search PubMed .
J. T. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, F. Meng, D. Chu and N. Q. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2651 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Shao, Z. W. Yang, Y. D. Wang, J. Li, J. Z. Yang, J. B. Qiu and Z. G. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25211–25218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Verhagen, L. Kuipers and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 14586–14598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, R. Soc. Chem., 2009, 29, 4393–4395 Search PubMed .
H. Q. Chen, F. Yuan, S. Z. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Y. Zhang and L. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 48, 19–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Wang, R. X. Yan, Z. Y. Huo, L. Wang, J. H. Zeng, J. Bao, X. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6054–6057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. T. Dai, Z. Q. Zhong, X. F. Wu, S. P. Zhan, S. G. Hu, P. Hu, J. S. Hu, S. B. Wu, J. B. Han and Y. X. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 155702 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, G. B. Braun, Y. F. Shi, Y. C. Zhang, X. H. Sun, N. O. Reich, D. Y. Zhao and G. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2850–2851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kodama, M. Fujii, T. Nakano, K. Imakita and S. Hayashi, Opt. Mater., 2013, 35, 2394–2399 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Yin, X. Z. Cao, L. Zhang, J. X. Tang, W. F. Huang, Y. L. Han and M. H. Wu, R. Soc. Chem., 2015, 44, 11147–11154 CAS .
C. X. Li, J. L. Liu, S. Alonso, F. Y. Li and Y. Zhang, R. Soc. Chem., 2012, 4, 6065–6071 CAS .
W. Xu, H. W. Song, X. Chen, H. Y. Wang, S. B. Cui, D. L. Zhou, P. W. Zhoua and S. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1502–1505 RSC .
N. Managaki, M. Fujii, T. Nakamura, Y. Usui and S. Hayashi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 042101 CrossRef .
W. H. Zhang, F. Ding and S. Y. Chou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 236–241 Search PubMed .
H. P. Paudel, L. L. Zhong, K. Bayat, M. F. Baroughi, S. Smith, C. K. Lin, C. Y. Jiang, M. T. Berry and P. S. May, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 15, 19028–19036 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:

Xiangfu Wang
	Xiangfu Wang received his PhD degree from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2012. From 2012 to present, he has been working as an associate professor at Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China. His current research concentrates on optoelectronic devices and sensors and photoluminescence of rare-earth ion doped nano-materials and transparent glass ceramics.

Min She
	Min She obtained her bachelor's degree from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2019. From 2019 to present, she has been working for her master's degree in Xiangfu Wang's group. Her current research concentrates on the research of gradient refractive index fluorescent glass and LED light transmission efficiency.

Wenqin Gu
	Wenqin Gu obtained her bachelor's degree from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. From 2019 to present, she has been working in Xiangfu Wang's group. Her current research concentrates on the plasmon-enhanced luminescence of metal/fluorophore composites.

Yanyan Bu
	Yanyan Bu obtained her PhD degree from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2017. From 2017 to present, she has been working as a senior engineer in Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. Her current research concentrates on optical temperature sensing of rare-earth ion doped transparent glass ceramics.

Xiaohong Yan
	Xiaohong Yan received his PhD degree from the Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Science, in 1997. From 2010 to present, he has been working as a professor in the College of Electronic Science and Engineering at Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. His current research concentrates on the transport and manipulation of quantum systems and new energy materials.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of plasmon-enhanced up-conversion luminescence in metal/fluorophore heterostructure composites.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
γexc/γ0exc = |[p·(m)]/[p·0(m)]|2	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  Plasmon enhanced photocatalytic mechanism under (a) UV, (b) visible, and (c) NIR excitation.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of energy transfer between Au nanorods (NRs) and NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposites. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the luminescence resonance energy transfer process between NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/Ho3+ and Au nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of enhanced UCL intensity counting on the SPR effect of Ag NPs. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Sketch of the PEC immunoreaction process for AFP based on UCNP@Au@CdS nanospheres; (b) energy transfer; (c) TEM images; (d) UCL spectra of UCNP@Au@CdS. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of UCNP@SiO2:MB–NRs–FA; (b) PDT process of generating ROS; (c and d) experimental apparatus; (e) luminescence of cancer cells and (f) tumor volume; (g) weight comparison after staining; (h) UCL spectra of the composites. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of (a) the structure and (b) resonance energy transfer in Au NRs@NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+; (c) UCL spectra of NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+; (d) image of HeLa cells incubated with Au NRs@NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of UCS-Ball; (b) trimodal images of tumor-bearing mice; (c) confocal fluorescence imaging of cells; (d) UCL spectra with different silica thicknesses. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of SYE/A@T preparation and photoanode configuration of DSSC; (b) UC process of SYE/A@T; (c) SEM image of SYE/A@T; (d) UCL spectra of various samples. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the drug release by hpDNA-modified NaYF4@SiO2–Au; (b) CCD imaging of the composite; (c) volume change of HeLa tumors; (d) UCL spectra; (e) UC imaging of tumor-bearing mice; (f) photos of mice after treatment. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission of Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental device and preparation; (b) green and red UCL images of UCNPs with Ag of different thicknesses; (c) UCL spectra of Y2O3:Yb,Er nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 13  Synthesis process diagram of Ag/GN@SiO2–NaLuF4:Yb,Gd,Er nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 14  SEM images of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ NPs (a), TEM images of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@Ag (b) and the corresponding high magnification images (inset of b). XRD patterns of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ and NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@Ag NPs (c) and FTIR spectra of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ NPs and NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@Ag NPs (d). Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission of Materials Chemistry and Physics, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of a multilayer structure; (b) UCL mapping of the Au–Al2O3–UCNPs membrane; (c) lithographic process of nano-imprinting; (d) AFM image of the Au NP stripe pattern; UCL spectra of (e) Ag–Al2O3–UCNPs and (f) Au–Al2O3–UCNPs. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic diagram of the four-layer structure.	 

 	Fig. 17  Preparation process of the composite of Au film and NaYF4:Yb3+,Nd3+,Er3+ nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic diagram of the Ag NPs/SiO2/NaYF4:Yb,Er,Gd sample sandwich structure; (b) UCL spectra with SiO2 layers of different thicknesses; (c) UV-Vis absorption spectra with SiO2/Ag NPs of different thicknesses. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Structure diagram of multilayer PMIU; (b) preparation of the PMIU composite film; (c) equipment for UCL measurement; SEM images of PCs/Cap-Ag of (d) 2 nm and (e) 55 nm; (f) cross-section image of the 3D model; (g) 3D model for local electromagnetic field distribution simulation; (h) trademark covered with the PMIU film; (i) UCL spectra. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of the composite microspheres; (b) photocatalysis under NIR irradiation; (c) UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectra; (d) UCL spectra of different samples. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission of Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process of ANNC nanostructures; (b) UV-Vis absorption spectra before and after Au NP attachment; (c) UCL spectra of the composite with different HCAA concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Preparation process of the Au–UCNPs nanocomposite; (b) comparison of the Raman spectra of 4MBA; (c) UCL spectra of nanocomposites with the increase of Au NPs. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of the UCNPs/Au–Ag composite film; (b) optical path of UCL measurement.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Diagram of the SPR model of Ag@UCNPs; (b) comparison of UCL spectra at different concentrations of Ag NPs; (c) TEM image of Ag@UCNPs (inset: SAED pattern). Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Structure and mechanism diagram of the Ag@NaYF4:Yb,Tm nanoprobe; (b) process of biothiol-detection in mice; (c) UCL spectra of UCNPs at different Ag nanocluster concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission of Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) The preparation process of the SiO2:Ag inverse opal photonic crystal/UCNPs composite; (b) SEM images of the structure; (c) optical path of UCL measurement; (d) the electric field simulated by FDTD; (e) UCL spectra of UCNPs on different substrates. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic diagram of the composite structure; UCL spectra of LixAg1−xYb0.99(MoO4)2:0.01Er3+.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Photocatalytic schematic diagram; (b) UCL spectra; (c) Raman spectra; (d) CIE chroma map; and (e) UV-Vis absorption spectra of different samples. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of the Au–Ag/NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ porous composite membrane; (b) fingerprint image formed on the composite film; (c) UCL reflection measurement; (d) UCL spectra of the composite films. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission of Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 30  AFM image of Ag island films with thicknesses of (a) 7, (b) 10, (c) 13, and (d) 16 nm, respectively; (e) UCL spectra of Er3+ doped Al2O3 films with different thicknesses of Ag island films under 978 nm laser irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission of American Institute of Physics, copyright 2008.	 

 	Fig. 31  Schematic diagram of the preparation process of the Au nanopore array.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) AFM images and structure diagrams of Au nanopillar arrays; (b) TEM images of the UCNPs; (c) UCL spectra of Tm3+ on and off Au pattern. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission of American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) SAED image of the nanocomposite SG2; (b) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra and (c) UCL spectra of different samples at an excitation wavelength of 949 nm. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) HR-TEM image of a single EY10Ag10-6h particle; (b) absorption spectra of different glass samples; (c) UCL spectra of Ag NPs, Er3+/Yb3+ co-doped TZYN glass. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission of American Institute of Physics, copyright 2017.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
