Laser-induced graphene for environmental applications: progress and opportunities  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1QM00437A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1QM00437A
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4874-4891Laser-induced graphene for environmental applications: progress and opportunities

        
          
            Le 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weihua 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaohu 
            Cao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yubing 
            Dou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Libei 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yun 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianjun 
            Su
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiyuan 
            Zeng
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Ruquan 
            Ye
          
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077, China
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077, China
cState Key Lab of Marine Pollution, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077, China. E-mail: ruquanye@cityu.edu.hk
Received 
      20th March 2021
    , Accepted 24th April 2021First published on 26th April 2021AbstractThe successful exfoliation of few-layer graphene from monolith graphite in 2004 has stimulated an exponential growth in graphene research. Ten years later, a facile and cost-effective method was discovered to synthesize high-quality graphene by directly scribing commercially available polymer using a CO2 laser under ambient conditions. The product, denoted as laser-induced graphene (LIG), featured high porosity, excellent electron conductivity, intrinsic photothermal effects and tunable surface properties. Since the discovery, LIG has attracted intense attention from both academia and industry and found broad applications in areas such as energy conversion and storage, sensors, antibacterials and desalination. In this review, we focus on the recent advances of LIG in environmental applications. We start with the development of synthetic techniques, including the precise engineering of LIG properties and the transfer strategies towards functional LIG composites. The achievement in synthesis enables the environmental applications of LIG in a broad context. Finally, the challenges and opportunities in solving different environmental issues using LIG are discussed.
Le Cheng
Le Cheng received her Bachelor's degree from East China University of Science and Technology in 2017 and Master's degree from Fudan University in 2020. She is currently pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Ruquan Ye in the Department of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong. Her research interests include the synthesis, structure regulation and application of laser-induced graphene (LIG).
Ruquan Ye
Ruquan Ye is an assistant professor in Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong. He received his BS (Chemistry) in 2012 from Hong Kong University of Science and Technology under the supervision of Prof. Ben Zhong Tang, and his PhD (chemistry) in 2017 from Rice University mentored by Prof. James M. Tour. He was a postdoctoral associate in Chemical Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2017–2018). His research interests include the development of cost-effective methods for materials manufacturing and the investigation of their applications.
Introduction
Graphene is a versatile two-dimensional (2D) carbon nanomaterial due to its exceptional mechanical, electrical, thermal and optical performance.1,2 This atom-thin material composed of a hexagonal carbon lattice was first reported to be stable and show high electron mobility from mechanical exfoliation of natural graphite in 2004.3 Since then, various synthetic methods including chemical vapor deposition (CVD)4–6 and chemical or thermal reduction of graphene oxide (GO)7–9 have been developed to produce graphene of different grades. However, these conventional strategies are usually accompanied by drawbacks such as complex manufacturing processes, harsh preparation conditions and poor control over the shape. Subsequent procedures for electrode or membrane fabrication are often needed for practical applications. In 2014, direct CO2 laser (10.64 μm) writing was accidentally found to convert commercial polyimide (PI) film into graphene with a porous structure.10 This discovery was coined as laser-induced graphene (LIG) and has triggered numerous emerging research studies, including the mechanism studies of the laser-induced transformation process, the regulation of compositions and properties of LIG, and the exploration of applications. In comparison to the graphene synthesized through traditional methods, LIG could achieve comparable properties including high specific surface areas (∼340 m2 g−1), electrical conductivity (5–25 S cm−1) and thermal stability (>900 °C).10,11 Yet there is no need for high-temperature heating, massive consumption of chemicals and tedious post treatment for LIG synthesis. In addition, it is convenient to realize roll-to-roll manufacturing and mask-free patterning, which makes LIG very promising for industrial applications.11–13
Owing to the advantages in synthesis and its excellent properties, LIG has been successfully applied in various fields. For example, interdigitated electrodes composed of LIG could be directly patterned on commercial PI sheets by using a computer-controlled CO2 laser and assembled into high-performance microsupercapacitors (MSCs) for energy storage.10 Similarly, various kinds of chemical and mechanical sensors with desired patterns and suitable substrates have been designed and fabricated via the direct laser induction technique.14–16 Excellent electrochemical catalytic performance for different reactions such as the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR),17–20 oxygen evolution reaction (OER)17–19,21 and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)21,22 have been demonstrated for LIG and its derivatives. In addition, other functions including Joule heating, electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding and photothermal effect have made LIG a promising candidate for multifunctional devices.23,24
Among the different fields, the exploration of LIG for environmental applications is one of the widely studied topics when confronting the rising environmental crisis. So far, there have been a few recent reviews covering the progress of LIG for water treatment applications.25,26 However, with the emerging environmental crisis, for example, the outbreak and worldwide spread of the pandemic caused by novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), LIG-based materials have been further investigated to serve in the detection, prevention and treatment of a wide variety of environmental issues. Therefore, here we aim to provide a comprehensive review of the recent advances of LIG in a broader context of environment-related applications. The schematic illustration of the main content of this review is shown in Fig. 1. Firstly, the development of the synthetic strategies of LIG and LIG-based composites will be introduced, from the aspects of structure and property regulation, doping and composite preparation, as well as transfer techniques. Then we will mainly focus on the achievements of LIG in several environment-related fields, including air filters, pollutants sensors, antibacterial/antiviral surfaces and water treatment. Finally, we will discuss the prospects and challenges of using LIG in building a green and healthy world.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of LIG synthesis and environmental applications. From left to right and top to bottom: Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2020 Elsevier; Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Fabrication techniques of LIG-based materials
In this section, we will give a brief description of the progress that has been made about the synthesis, modification and fabrication techniques of LIG, LIG derivatives and LIG-based composites. These developments warrant the applications of LIG in broad fields.
Synthesis and Modification of LIG
By taking advantage of the photothermal and photochemical effects, lasers have become a powerful tool in processing different sorts of materials for a few decades. As for graphene-based materials, the direct laser writing (DLW) technique was first used in the patterning and reduction of GO films to fabricate flexible reduced graphene oxide (RGO)-based electronic devices with high-resolution micro/nano patterns.31,32 Later, it was discovered that graphene could be directly synthesized from non-graphene structured polymers under the irradiation of a pulsed CO2 laser under ambient conditions.10 The conversion mechanism was deemed to correlate with a series of photothermal reactions.11,33 As demonstrated in Fig. 2a and b, both the color change of the PI film from brown to black after the laser ablation and the appearance of typical 2D peaks in the Raman spectrum indicated the formation of graphene. In this process, the energy of laser light of a certain wavelength was absorbed by the precursor and the resulting extremely high localized temperature (>2500 °C) led to the breakdown of covalent bonds in PI (CO, C–O and C–N), followed by the release of small-molecule gases and the rearrangement of aromatic structures.10 Consequently, LIG with three-dimensional and porous structures was formed (Fig. 2c). The LIG possessed a polycrystalline nature with abundant pentagon–heptagon carbon rings (Fig. 2d), which was attributed to the rapid heating and cooling process. In addition to the most commonly used infrared (IR) CO2 laser, visible laser34,35 and ultraviolet (UV) laser15,36–39 irradiation, which likely induced photochemical reactions, were also demonstrated to be feasible for LIG generation on PI or phenolic resin.
 Fig. 2  Synthesis and structure of LIG. (a) A digital photograph of an LIG pattern in the shape of interdigital electrodes on a PI film; scale bar is 1 mm. (b) Representative Raman spectrum of a LIG film and the starting PI film. (c) SEM image of LIG film, scale bar is 10 μm. (d) TEM image of the LIG film. It shows a heptagon with two pentagons, as well as a hexagon, scale bar is 5 Å. Reproduced with permission.10 Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (e) SEM image of LIG fibers with thickness of ∼1 mm, scale bar is 500 μm. Adapted with permission.41 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (f) Contact angles of LIG samples prepared under different gas atmospheres with different laser duty cycles. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. 
To improve the crystalline quality and tune the morphology of LIG, both theoretical and experimental approaches have been adopted to delve into the laser induction process. A molecular dynamics (MD) simulation study by Chen et al.40 revealed the critical parameters during the UV-LIG formation process, including heating target temperature, duration of heat preservation and processing cycles. Correspondingly, in terms of experiments, the crystalline sizes and defect densities of LIG could be effectively manipulated by altering the power, defocused distance, scanning speed and irradiation energy density of the laser source. At the time LIG was discovered, it was found that laser power played an essential role in controlling the properties, such as carbon atom percentage, electrical resistance and porosity.10 Afterwards, Duy et al. reported that regardless of laser power, there existed a critical radiation energy of ∼5 J cm−2, upon which the graphitization could be initiated.41 Also by altering the radiation energy and pulse densities, LIG with diverse microscopic morphologies such as sheets, droplets, fibers (Fig. 2e) and channels42 could be fabricated. In addition to laser parameters, the lasing atmosphere43 was useful for tuning the LIG's surface morphology and surface compositions. As a result, distinct surface wettability from superhydrophilic (water contact angle = 0°) to superhydrophobic (water contact angle > 150°) was realized by applying reactive gases (air, O2) or reducing/inert gases (Ar, H2) when lasing (Fig. 2f). In fact, besides PI, the DLW technique was proved to be generally applicable to a vast variety of substrates including polymers with different chain structures (e.g., polyetherimide, polysulfones, polytetrafluoroethylene, sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone), phenolic resin),10,35,44–46 cloth, paper, and natural biomass materials (e.g., lignin, wood, cork, coconuts and potatoes)21,27,47 by using an inert atmosphere, multiple laser scribing and fire-retardant pretreatment.
Heteroatom doping and composites of LIG
Heteroatomic doping is considered as a powerful method to regulate the wetting properties and tune the electronic structure of graphene.48–50 To achieve this goal, many methods have been developed including implanting heteroatom-containing dopants into precursors, using special atmospheres or lasing heteroatom-containing substrates directly. For examples, by adding boric acid to poly(amic acid) (PAA) solution (the precursor of PI) followed by condensation to form nitrogenous PI films and laser patterning in an ambient environment, B-doped LIG with enhanced electrochemical performance was prepared.49 With the aid of a homemade chamber, lasing in an atmosphere of SF6 was applied to introduce F atoms into the network of LIG and the obtained surface possessed a ultrahigh water contact angle (>160°) because of the low surface energy of C–F bonds.43 Except for an exogenous heteroatom source, polymers that contain heteroatoms in their own molecular chains such as polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and polysulfone–class polymers are also frequently used to produce F-doped or S-doped LIG under suitable conditions.44,45
For the preparation of LIG-based composites, hybridization of LIG with metal or metal oxide nanoparticles are desired for many applications, especially in electrocatalysis fields. Ye et al. provided a universal strategy for the in situ synthesis of LIG embedded with various metal oxide nanocrystals (Co3O4, MoO2 and Fe3O4) by laser scribing metal-complexes-containing PI sheets in air.20 Using a similar method, through changing the substrate or the laser processing atmosphere or directly laying the metal source on PI film, metal sulfide,51 metal nanocrystals24 and metal oxide52 decorated LIG were obtained successfully. Instead of in situ synthesis, a second laser scribing method was also widely used to fabricate LIG composites, such as Co3O417 and NiFe53 modified LIG. In this method, metal-ion-containing precursors were added to preformed LIG followed by re-lasing. In order to facilitate the uniform distribution of precursor solutions, treatments such as O2 plasma or UV-ozone are often needed to increase the hydrophilicity of pre-acquired LIG. Because of the high electron mobility, LIG can be directly used as the electrode for electrodeposition of functional materials. Li et al. demonstrated the electrochemical deposition of both transition metal oxides and conductive polymers on LIG electrodes, through which pseudocapacitive MSCs with exceptional electrochemical performance and mechanical flexibility were fabricated.54
Transferring LIG to different substrates
Transferring LIG to other substrates can further extend its applications, especially when the receiving substrates are vulnerable to thermal degradation or do not contain carbon. For applications such as wearable electronics that require mechanical robustness, flexibility and stretchability, transparent and elastomeric materials have always been the ideal substrates for the fabrication of devices. For example, the fabrication process of a highly stretchable LIG-based strain sensor is illustrated in Fig. 3a. First, LIG with a designed pattern was obtained by direct laser writing and then uncured polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) was cast onto the patterned PI film. After the vacuum-assisted infiltration and subsequent cross-linking, LIG-PDMS could be peeled off manually (Fig. 3b and c).55 In the same way, LIG was also reported to be transferred onto other elastomers such as silicon rubber56,57 and waterborne polyurethane (WPU)58 or construction materials such as cement,14 for application in stretchable MSCs and refractory gas sensors, respectively. Recently, a series of compatible composites consisting of LIG and various substrate materials including construction materials and commercial thermoplastic or thermoset polymers were demonstrated by Luong et al.23 The fillers used were all fluxible before cross-linking or at high temperatures, so that they could infiltrate into the pores of LIG scaffolds by gravity or through hot pressing. The author used two major groups of filling materials and found that liquids such as PDMS, wax, epoxy and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) penetrated into LIG more easily and better than slurries such as latex paint (LP), Portland cement (PC) and alkaline activated geopolymer (AAG). In this work, the tuning of laser parameters was capable of regulating not only the roughness of LIG, but also the infiltration degree of fillers and the consequent surface characteristics of composites. Finally, properties such as superhydrophilicity or superhydrophobicity, antibacterial activity and high conductivity could be achieved, making the LIG composites promising candidates in multiple fields such as deicing, wearable thermal therapy films and resistive memory devices.
 Fig. 3  Transferring LIG to different substrates. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process for a stretchable strain sensor based on LIG. (b) Patterned LIG before and after transferring to the PDMS. (c) Twisted LIG-PDMS composite. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the fabrication of LIG composites. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Applications of LIG-based materials in the environmental area
Air filters
With the aggravation of air pollution and the emergence of airborne infectious diseases, urgent requirements have been put forward for air filtration and purification. Currently, commercial air filtration systems just serve the purpose of capturing infective particles or agents in circulation by electrostatic attraction and size-exclusion sieving. Therefore, regular replacement or maintenance of the filtration medium are needed to maintain the filtration efficiency, which inevitably results in increased costs of raw materials and labor.59 Recently, LIG was considered as a promising candidate for air filters capitalizing on its well-designed porous structures on the microscale and strong absorbability of graphene for organic molecules.60 In comparison with traditional filters made up of plastic or cellulose fibers, air filters based on LIG demonstrated great advantages in disinfection because of the unique properties of high electrical conductivity and excellent photothermal effects. Through Joule-heating or exposure under light, nearly all the captured microorganisms could be killed or decomposed, which offered a potent way for the continuous air filtration and surface sterilization.
In the work done by Stanford et al.,61 a bacterial air filter was fabricated by laser scribing both sides of PI film in the form of an alternating AB-stacked hexagonal pattern (Fig. 4a). In this design, the unlased hollow hexagonal PI (Fig. 4b) acted as the supporting skeleton to form a freestanding filter. As shown in the cross-sectional images of the filter (Fig. 4c), two LIG layers generated from the double sides connected at the center of the film, ensuring the continuity along the vertical direction of the membrane, thus offering high electrical conductivity (sheet resistance = 5–20 Ωsq−1) and iteral paths for air flow. The LIG membrane exhibited gradient morphologies composed of fibrous structures (denoted as LIG fiber (LIGF) in Fig. 4d) in the outer surface and porous structures (Fig. 4e) inner, which aimed at filtering contaminants and microorganisms with larger and smaller size, respectively. It was demonstrated that when used as an air filter (see Fig. 4f and h for a schematic diagram), the filtration effect of LIG was comparable to high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters, with a particle matter capture rate of over 86% and a wide particle size ranging from <10 to 620 nm, readily meeting the requirement for intercepting pathogens carriers that are mostly micron scaled. The minimum efficiency reporting value (MERV) of a single layer of the LIG filter could reach 15–16, which was much higher than the standard set for hospital ventilation and also qualified for the requirement of Class C surgery. In addition to the excellent filtration performance, the intrinsic electrical conductivity further enabled LIG filter potent self-sterilization ability. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 4g, only by applying a simple DC power, high temperatures (>380 °C) could be rapidly achieved and steadily maintained by a Joule-heating mechanism even at relatively high flow rates (Fig. 4j). Such temperature was thought to be sufficient to decompose almost all microorganisms and biologically harmful molecules including pyrogens, allergens, exotoxins, endotoxins, mycotoxins, nucleic acids, and prions (Fig. 4i). At the same time, the structure and functionality of the filter were well maintained because of the high thermal stability of both LIG and PI. The merits such as effective filtration of contaminants, antimicrobial capacity, mechanical robustness and potential for mass production made the LIG air filter suitable and designable for practical applications such as heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems.
 Fig. 4  Fabrication, characterization and working process of an LIG air filter. Schematic of (a) the double-sided lasing process, and (b) the PI lattice that remains after lasing. The red portions represent the PI pattern that is not lased from above, and the blue portions represent the PI pattern that is not lased from below; scale bar is 2.5 mm. (c) Cross-sectioned image that shows the entire thickness of the filter; scale bar is 500 μm. SEM images of the (d) outer and (e) inner portion of the LIG filter; scale bars are 20 μm. (f) Schematic of air filtration with the LIG filter mounted on a vacuum filtration system with a backing polyethersulfone (PES) test filter. (g) Schematic of the Joule-heating setup in which a potential is applied across the filter. Schematic of (h) filtration followed by (i) sterilization and depyrogenation through Joule-heating. (j) Infrared image of a LIG filter that is Joule-heated to 380 °C, scale bar is 2 cm. The shape of the LIG filter is denoted by black dotted lines. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
A second example of LIG for air purification is to use the broadband absorption of graphene. Taking a recent example, the year 2020 witnessed the sudden outbreak and rampant spread of COVID-19, which posed serious threats to human health and thus brought great challenges to the economy throughout the world.62 In such special circumstances, surgical masks have been playing a crucial role in controlling the pandemic by working as a filter for air inhaled and exhaled. However, there are concerns about the disposable surgical mask, which include the decrease in filtration efficiency with continuous use, massive consumption amid the pandemic and risks of secondary transmission due to improper disposal. To work around these problems, a concept of self-reporting face mask with outstanding antibacterial activity was proposed by the Ye group by utilizing LIG as the working material.28 Taking Escherichia coli (E. coli) as the model and activated carbon fiber (ACF) and melt-blown fabrics (MBF) as the reference, LIG was proved to be highly antimicrobial with a bacteria inhibition rate of 81.57%, much higher than the other two (2.00% for ACF and 9.13% for MBF) (Fig. 5a, light exposure time = 0 min). The intrinsic superior antibacterial activity of LIG over the key materials of commercial masks could be attributed to several aspects, including the rough surfaces and sharp edge of graphene,63 as well as the charge transfer between LIG and bacterial cell membranes.64 These interactions could damage microbes physically or chemically. With the advantage of the photothermal effect, the bacteria inhibition rate of LIG was further improved to 99.998% after 10 minute irradiation of 0.75 kW m−2 sunlight (Fig. 5a). Under solar irradiation, the temperature rose from 25 to 52 °C within 30 s and was further maintained at 62 °C (Fig. 5b, black line), which was considered effective to deactivate most viruses such as SARS or SARS-CoV. In addition, the filtering and sterilization effects for aerosolized bacteria were also demonstrated to be relatively high, with a capture rate of 90.5% and antibacterial efficiency of ∼100%, which endowed LIG with high practical value as face masks. As mentioned earlier, the surface property engineering of LIG could be carried out by a simple control of laser parameters. In this work, through a facile secondary laser irradiation method and changing the pulses per dot by a gradient, oxidation degrees varied gradually and thereby forming a gradient of hydrophilicity. Thus, a LIG device with hygroelectric capability could be obtained and this special feature was exploited for the self-reporting of the mask conditions. When integrated into a face mask, the breaths from the wearer would vary the environmental humidity around the LIG device. This would induce inhomogeneous distribution of protons on gradient LIG (Fig. 5c and d) and generate a detectable electric potential difference or current. As bacteria and atmospheric particles accumulated and covered the LIG surface, the gradient surface properties would be destroyed, which weakened the moisture-induced potentials (Fig. 5e–g). Therefore, the condition of the LIG masks could be self-reported in terms of the amount of accumulated harmful matter, which could provide useful guidance for the rational reuse of masks.
 Fig. 5  Self-sterilizing and self-reporting LIG mask. (a) Antibacterial efficiency of LIG, ACF and MBF under different light exposure time. (b) Time course of surface temperature under 0.75 kW m−2 sunlight. (c) Diagram of an LIG mask and the working mechanism of moisture-induced electricity. (d) Voltage against time under intervals of exhalation. Correlation between induced voltage and (e) E. coli, (f) Staphylococcus epidermidis, and (g) simulated PM 2.5 loading. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Apart from LIG, GO-containing non-woven fabric was also reported to be utilized in face masks to realize antibacterial and antiviral activities.65 Compared with these nonwoven textiles, LIG possesses several advantages in terms of its application as an air filter. First, the synthesis of LIG is fast and cost-effective, with a vast range of precursors available. Nonwoven fabric is usually fabricated through electrospinning, melt blowing and so on.66 Beforehand, fillers like graphene need to be pre-synthesized and thoroughly mixed with the polymer matrix, which hugely increases the time consumed and operational complexity. Second, the high specific surface area enables LIG to have strong particle capture capability and large effective sterilization area. Yet graphene sheets in nonwoven textiles are likely to be wrapped by the matrix, which will weaken the antibacterial effect. Third, though both these two materials are promising for mass production, the desired patterns can be directly obtained for LIG while further tailoring is necessary for nonwoven textiles. Overall, owing to the facile fabrication, peculiar properties and programmable patterning, LIG displays immense superiority and potential in the air filter applications.
Sensors for environmental pollutants and infective agents
With the complexification of environmental problems, increasing demand has been put forward for the development of pollutant detection technologies. In recent years, there have emerged numerous research studies devoted to constructing electrochemical sensors based on LIG for a variety of pollutants or hazardous matter in air, water and soil.
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) is one of the criteria pollutants that can induce and aggravate many kinds of respiratory diseases.67 For the monitoring of NO2, interdigitated LIG electrodes prepared by direct laser patterning on PI substrates were firstly integrated with molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), a 2D material possessing high selectivity to NO2, by Yan et al. to form a flexible room-temperature gas sensor (Fig. 6a).68 MoS2 with diverse morphologies from flowerlike nanospheres (denoted as MCM-1) to nanoplates (denoted as MCM-5) were successfully synthesized and the morphological effect on the NO2 sensing performance was systematically investigated. The gas sensing mechanism was based on the p-type response behavior. Although both NO2 and O2 are electron acceptors that would induce electron extraction and leave holes on MoS2 surfaces, significant differences in binding energies between NO2–MoS2 (220 kJ mol−1) and O2–MoS2 (42 kJ mol−1) would induce different hole concentrations under NO2 and air atmospheres.69,70 As shown in Fig. 6b, fast resistance decline and recovery could be observed when the sensor was exposed to NO2 and synthetic air, respectively, and the response time was around 3 min under 10 ppm NO2. As the NO2 concentration varied, the resistance changed quantitatively with a detection limit down to 2 ppm (Fig. 6c). By testing with the interference gases including CO, HCHO, C2H5OH, and H2, high selectivity for NO2 was also demonstrated (Fig. 6d). Similar approaches that combine porous LIG with specific gas-sensitive nanomaterials were also applied to fabricate novel gas sensing platforms in the work done by Yang et al.71 By loading different gas sensitive nanomaterials (e.g., MoS2 and rGO/MoS2 for NO2, ZnO/CuO for VOC) to each sensing platform, a sensing array for various gases could be obtained and exhibited significant response signals and fast response/recovery processes. Furthermore, with the optimization of the geometric parameters of sensing region and the facilitation of LIG's Joule heating capability, the NO2 detection limit of the rGO/MoS2-LIG gas sensor could be improved to 1.5 parts per billion (ppb), demonstrating extremely high sensitivity.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of morphology-controlled MoS2 (MCM)-based NO2 sensor with LIG electrodes. (b) Dynamic response curves to 10 ppm of NO2. Inset: Enlarged curves. (c) Dynamic response across NO2 concentrations. (d) Responses to different gases (1000 ppm of H2, 1000 ppm of C2H5OH, 10 ppm of HCHO, and 1000 ppm of CO). Inset: Enlarged view of responses to CO, HCHO, C2H5OH, and H2. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
The detection of other air pollutants such as the typical greenhouse gas methane was also successfully implemented by electrochemical sensors made of LIG electrodes decorated with palladium nanoparticles (PdNPs).72 The porous structure of LIG and solid polymer–electrolyte both contributed to the high sensitivity (0.55 μA ppm cm−2), rapid response (within 40 s) and ultralow detection limit (9 ppm). The detection mechanism was based on the current densities corresponding to the methane oxidation catalyzed by the PdNPs. For contaminants that largely exist in water and soil such as heavy metal and nitrite ions, corresponding electrochemical sensors based on N-doped laser-engraved graphene (LEG)73 and LIG with the bi-functionalization of multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) and gold nanoparticles (AuNPs)74 have been developed as well. Because of the adsorption of heavy metal ions and electrochemical oxidation of nitrite, distinguishable current peaks could be generated and ascend linearly with the concentration of the target ions in the square wave voltammetry (SWV) curves.
In addition to abiotic pollutants, developing detection techniques for pathogens such as bacteria, viruses and biomarkers related to specific diseases also plays an essential role in improving environmental quality and safeguarding public health. The mechanism of biosensors is often based on the specific chemical recognition and binding. For example, through the modification of AuNP decorated LIG using antibodies as capture receptors and bovine serum albumin (BSA) as blockers (Fig. 7a), an immunosensor for the detection of E. coli O157:H7 was reported by You et al.75 Because of the resistance of the bacterial membrane, the adsorption of pathogen on antibodies would block the redox probe transfer on the AuNPs/LIG surface, which consequently resulted in an electrode impedance response. By fitting the tested impedance spectra, electron transfer resistance (Ret), i.e., the semicircle diameter of Nyquist plots, was verified to be the most effective sensing indicator. As shown in Fig. 7b and c, the Ret exhibited an upward trend and a linear relationship with the E. coli concentrations in the range of 1 × 10−2–1 × 10−8 CFU mL−1. Furthermore, good specificity and mechanical flexibility of the developed sensor enabled the high effectiveness of pathogen monitoring to be independent from the interference of non-target microorganisms (S. aureus, V. parahaemolyticus and L. monocytogenes) (Fig. 7d) and external stress.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the AuNPs-LIG electrode-based immunosensor for the detection of E. coli O157:H7. (b) Nyquist plots and (c) calibration curve of the impedance response and the concentrations of E. coli O157:H7 (1 × 10−2–1 × 10−8 CFU mL−1). (d) Specificity of the AuNPs-LIG electrode-based impedimetric immunosensor. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
In terms of disease diagnosis, developing rapid, accurate and cost-effective detecting techniques are highly demanded to prevent viruses from uncontrolled spread. For example, the highly contagious infectious disease COVID-19 has caused a pandemic since 2019. Since the typical symptoms of COVID-19 are similar to those of flu and there exist presymptomatic and asymptomatic individuals in vast numbers,76 the determination of the nucleic acid of the pathogen SARS-CoV-2 was recognized as the most persuasive way for diagnosis. At present the gold standard testing approach is real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which relies on the rational design of primer and probes and effective PCR reaction of specific nucleic acids.77,78 Hence, this method can only give qualitative results and requires expensive equipment and professional medical staff. In a recent work done by the Gao group,29 a multiplexed, portable, wireless immunosensor platform named SARS-CoV-2 RapidPlex was demonstrated. As illustrated in Fig. 8a, for multiplex sensing, four LEG working electrodes (WEs) were designed with a Ag/AgCl reference electrode (RE) and a graphene counter electrode (CE). The whole structure of this novel electrochemical platform was patterned on a flexible PI membrane by direct CO2 laser writing, which enabled mass production and great flexibility. For the purpose of specific modification, 1-pyrenebutyric acid (PBA) was used as a linker, which could attach to the graphene layer via π-stacking and hydrophobic interactions while coupling with specific capture antigens and antibodies via covalent bonding. Through this method, four kinds of capture receptors were successfully immobilized on WEs while maintaining the integrity of graphene layers. It was verified that choosing PBA as the joint molecule together with the blocking effect of BSA could contribute to a better signal-to-blank (S/B) ratio (Fig. 8b) because of the reduction of non-specific adsorption. The detection targets of the anchored specific biomolecular probes were viral antigen nucleocapsid protein (NP), specific immunoglobulins (Igs) against SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (S1) (S1-IgM and S1-IgG), and the inflammatory biomarker C-reactive protein (CRP), respectively. As a result, SARS-CoV-2 RapidPlex could provide information on diagnosis, immunization as well as severity of the infection. By incubating sensing units with the target biomarkers, i.e., NP (500 pg mL−1), SARS-CoV-2 specific IgG and IgM isotypes (250 ng mL−1), and CRP (50 ng mL−1), significant amperometric signals over the blank group could be read out after 1 min (Fig. 8c). Prolonging the incubation time to 10 min could improve the detection sensitivity in the case of ultra-low concentrations of target molecules. The sensing platform showed good reproducibility for multiple times of preparation and detection, as well as good stability after 5 day storage at 4 °C. This storage condition is comparable and even more moderate compared with commercial RT-PCR diagnostic kits for COVID-19 (mostly −20 °C).79 The consistency of the sensing results for phosphate buffer solutions (PBS) samples and serum samples was also verified, which enabled the accurate quantification by means of interpolation in the calibration curves and the data obtained were highly correlated with those obtained via the traditional ELISA method (r = 0.955). In addition, it was proved that the sensing platform possessed high selectivity for the specific SARS-CoV-2 biomarkers even over similar coronaviruses including SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. Hence, as expected, accurate and identifiable amperometric signals were seen in the test case of RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19-positive and COVID-19-negative blood and saliva samples (Fig. 8d and e). Overall, the SARS-CoV-2 RapidPlex platform demonstrated great potential for routine diagnostics of COVID-19, yet further clinical tests are still needed before its real implementation.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the LEG sensor array layout. (b) Comparison of amperometric responses and overlaid S/B ratio (black lines) for SARS-CoV-2 specific IgG and CRP detection using PBA and 1H-pyrrole-1-propionic acid (PPA) as linkers for the attachment of the corresponding capture bioreceptors. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 3). (c) Amperometric responses and overlaid S/B ratio (black lines) observed for 0.0 and 500 pg mL−1 NP, 0.0 and 250 ng mL−1 SARS-CoV-2 specific IgG and IgM, and 0.0 and 50 ng mL−1 CRP, with 10, 5 and 1 minute incubation. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 3). A box-and-whisker plot of measured S/B ratio for NP, S1-IgG, S1-IgM, and CRP in (f) RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 positive (n = 5) and negative (n = 6) serum samples, and (g) RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 positive (n = 5) and negative (n = 3) saliva samples. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
Antibacterial and antiviral
For most environment-related applications, such as the air filters mentioned earlier, and water treatment which will be covered in the next section, antibacterial activity is usually desired. The antibacterial and antibiofouling properties of LIG derived from PI were firstly studied by Singh et al.80 to explore its application in circumstances where biofilms tend to form. As shown in Fig. 9a, when incubated with Pseudomonas aeruginosa at the open-circuit potential, large amounts of live/dead bacteria and extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) were deposited on unmodified PI and graphite surfaces, while an obvious inhibition on the LIG surface was observed. The intrinsic antibacterial activity of LIG was suspected to be related to both physical and chemical properties. For physical reasons, LIG was not so highly negatively charged as PI and graphite, but it was more hydrophilic. Hence, it was more difficult for organic matter adsorption and biofilm growth. For chemical reasons, nano-scaled sharp edges of graphene sheets are considered to be able to puncture cell walls and cause oxidative stress of bacteria.81 It should be noted that the antimicrobial activity could be further amplified under the stimuli of voltages. As shown in Fig. 9b, after applying a voltage of 2.5 V, nearly complete sterilization (bacteria killing rate more than 99%) was realized in 4 hours. Statistically, ∼4 and ∼3.5 log reduction after 9 hours was observed in dilute and concentrated bacterial solutions, respectively. It was proposed by the authors that the electrical effects, physical contact with LIG and electrochemical generation of H2O2 contributed synergistically to the voltage-assisted enhancement of the sterilization effect. The antifouling mechanism of LIG surfaces was later clarified to be that the surface nanostructure (nanofibers and micropores) would reduce the contact areas with bacteria cells, thus preventing the attachment and proliferation of biofilms.82 Compared with LIG converted from PI, superior intrinsic and voltage-enhanced antimicrobial effects of sulfur-doped LIG derived from polysulfone-class polymers were reported by the same research group.44 In other examples, similar excellent antifouling properties were also demonstrated for freestanding LIG paper,83 LIG–PVA84 and LIG–GO85 composite membranes. Besides voltage-enhanced antibacterial ability, electrothermal or photothermal antibacterial effects of an LIG filter61 and mask28 and LIG-based composites23 were fully explored. In the work done by Gupta et al.,86 by lasing AgNO3 containing PES substrates, LIG was further modified with silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), whose antibacterial activity has been widely reported. The resulting Ag@LIG surfaces were shown to possess better sterilization performance than single LIG and Ag-PES (Fig. 9c) because of the cooperative effect of LIG's bacteriostatic action as well as the toxicity from both AgNPs and leached Ag+ ions. In our recent work,30 hydrophilic and hydrophobic LIG layers were induced on the top and bottom surface of wood bricks. Using E. coli as model bacteria, potent antibacterial capacity of this composite structure was demonstrated by laser confocal microscope and colony assay (Fig. 9d–f). The antibacterial efficiency of LIG-wood was calculated to be 72.9%, which provided a precondition for further applications in sustainable seawater desalination and wastewater purification. In addition to antibacterial activity, the antiviral efficiency of LIG was also verified by our group.87 Two kinds of human coronaviruses (HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-229E) were used as surrogates for SARS-CoV-2 and the antiviral effect was comprehensively evaluated by the level of viral RNA, protein expression in cells and viral titers. Without any metal additives or high temperatures, an inhibition rate of ≥95% for these two coronaviruses could be reached by hydrophobic LIG (HLIG, lased in N2, contact angle ≈140°) by exposure to sunlight for 15 min (Fig. 9g and h). This phenomenon was attributed to the concerted action of the photothermal effect and the hydrophobicity of HLIG. The low temperature (≈46 °C) for effective sterilization could be easily achieved by sunlight (≈0.5 kW m−2) or low-power Joule heating (≈20 mW cm−2). Because of the extraordinary and stable antiviral activity, mild sterilizing conditions and negligible cytotoxicity, HLIG showed huge potential in antiviral-related practice, for example, being used in daily protective equipment to help impede the pandemic spread.
 Fig. 9  (a) Biofilm growth on the PI, graphite, and LIG surfaces with P. aeruginosa showing biomass and average thickness. (b) Inhibition of P. aeruginosa in the solution at different voltages (2.5, 2.0, and 1.5 V) with bacteria loading of ∼1 × 104 CFU mL−1. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Biofilm growth assay on the sample of control (PES), PES-LIG, Ag-PES and Ag@LIG after 48 h incubation. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Colony assay of wood and hydrophilic LIG. Laser confocal microscope image of (e) wood and (f) LIG-wood, scale bars are 10 μm. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (g) Anti-HCoV-OC43 and (h) anti-HCoV-229E effect with different materials (LIG, HLIG, Ag NPs/LIG, and MBF) in MRC-5 cell line. Cell only and cell + virus were the negative control (NC) and positive control (PC), respectively. Data were expressed as mean ± SE, n = 3, *p < 0.05. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2021 John Wiley and Sons. 
Water treatment
Thanks to the large specific surface areas, tunable surface properties, excellent antifouling activity and the high photothermal conversion efficiency, LIG has shown enormous capacity in several categories of water treatment applications, including desalination, water filtration membranes and water–oil separation.
For seawater desalination, solar steam generation is considered as one of the most promising routes on account of the utilization of clean solar energy and the off-grid decentralized nature.88,89 A Janus superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic LIG membrane was reported by Li et al.12 with excellent solar steam generation efficiency. The membrane was fabricated by one-step laser scribing with a wavelength of 1064 nm, which possessed stronger penetrability into PI. Since there was a decay of intensity as the laser penetrated the films, distinct carbonization degrees and superwetting properties were obtained on the opposite sides of the prepared LIG membrane. With the well-designed Janus superwetting properties and porous structures, excellent floating stability together with high solar energy conversion efficiency (∼90%) and evaporation efficiency (1.37 kg m−2 h−1) under one-sun illumination were achieved. Another example is by using wood (balsa wood and pine wood) as the raw material as reported by our group.30 As illustrated in Fig. 10a and b, a hierarchical structure composed of two porous LIG layers with distinct wetting properties (see SEM images and inset of the water contact angle in Fig. 10c and d) and in-between intact wood microchannels was constructed by lasing two opposite sides of wood in air and N2, respectively. The tubular structure of wood served as both an insulating layer and a water transport pathway, which prevented heat dissipation into bulk water and ensured a high evaporation rate at the same time. Excellent antibiofouling and lipophilic matter rejection effects were simultaneously provided by the hydrophilic LIG at the bottom surface. For the hydrophobic LIG at the top surface, it contributed to the undamped solar absorption and anti-salt-fouling capability even for oversaturated brine. Additionally, by virtue of the laser engraving technique, a pillar structure could be obtained as a substitute for the planar structure, which could further improve the solar evaporation performance of the device. The maximum evaporation rate and solar-thermal conversion efficiency reached up to 1.6 ± 0.06 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 Sun and slightly over 100%, respectively. As shown in Fig. 10e and f, after desalination by the hierarchical wood device (referred to as W-2side and W-1side was the control sample with only a hydrophobic top layer), there was a significant decline in the concentrations of metal ions and lipophilic compounds in the collected water. The ion concentration in the collected water readily met the standard of potable water suggested by World Health Organization (WHO).90 The rejection rate was calculated to be ≥99.9 and ≥90% for metal ions and lipophilic pollutants, respectively. Besides, as reported by Tittle et al.,91 by the simple regulation of laser parameters including lattice spacing and laser power, superhydrophobic LIG with superior durability was applied as an air-gap membrane for seawater distillation.
 Fig. 10  Schematic of (a) LIG fabrication on wood and (b) hierarchically structured wood-based solar-driven interfacial evaporation system. SEM images of (c) top LIG and (d) bottom LIG, scale bars are 100 μm. The insets are the contact angle of top and bottom surfaces, respectively. Concentrations of (e) metal ions and (f) cyclohexanol, benzoic acid, 2-ethyl-1-hexanol, and 1-octanol in the collected clean water compared with those before desalination. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
In a series of studies done by the Arnusch group (mentioned in the last section), exceptional biofilm resistance ability was investigated for S-doped LIG,44 and LIG membranes with an optimized PVA or GO coating followed by cross-linking,84,85 which showed promise for secondary wastewater treatment. These water filtration membranes could be operated under a high water flux with satisfactory separation properties and excellent biofouling inhibition. The water treatment ability of LIG was further elucidated by showing its strong adsorption capacity for water pollutants by Rathinam et al.92 The maximum adsorption capacities of LIG for methylene blue (MB) (926 mg g−1) and methyl orange (MO) (132 mg g−1), representative of cationic and anionic dyes, were verified to be relatively higher in comparison to other carbon-based materials such as graphene, activated carbon and carbon nanotubes. The adsorption process was suggested to conform to the pseudo-second-order model, with a nature of spontaneity and exothermicity, which could be attributed to the multiple interactions including hydrophobic force, π–π interaction and electrostatic force between LIG and dye molecules (Fig. 11a). Similarly, for LIG films43,83 with porous structure and surface hydrophobicity, applications in water/oil separation and oil absorption (Fig. 11b) could also be attained.
 Fig. 11  (a) Possible interactions of MB and MO dye molecules with the LIG surface. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (b) Superhydrophobic freestanding LIG paper (GP) for water/oil separation and oil absorption. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. 
Summary and perspective
In this review, we focus on the introduction of LIG as an emerging material for environmental applications. LIG exhibits the intrinsic excellent properties of graphene, but its advantages in the synthesis of porous structures with tailored properties have stimulated its translation into widespread applications since its discovery. The ease of tuning the properties of LIG and device fabrication also make LIG a potent tool in solving various environmental problems, ranging from traditional water treatment to the emerging COVID-19 pandemic. With the development of synthetic techniques, nowadays LIG could be prepared from various carbon precursors with the desired physical textures, chemical compositions and surface properties. Specifically, on account of its tunable super-wetting properties, outstanding electrical conductivity, high specific surface area, satisfactory photothermal effect and intrinsic microbe inhibition capability, LIG has been successfully applied in a high-efficiency self-sterilizing air filter, and in sensors for pollutants and pathogens, antibacterial surfaces and water treatment membranes and devices, providing smart and efficient detection, prevention and treatment techniques for various environmental issues. Notably, these studies have contributed to the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, there still exist some limitations of the current research. For example, for solar desalination, although high solar-to-thermal efficiency has been reported, there is a lack of study on integrated systems, underscoring the thermal management, solar reflectance and solar irradiance. Besides, long-term operations and performance in the outdoors rather than laboratories are needed to demonstrate their practical use. For air filters, many studies investigate the performance of antimicrobial efficiency but research on the antiviral activity is less reported. This, however, is important as it correlates more closely with the transmission of various infectious diseases. In addition, safety is a major concern when LIG is used in air filters and face masks. Recently, an agency in Canada has announced that face masks containing graphene or biographene may pose health risks to wearers due to the possible inhalation of graphene particles.93 Actually, both in vivo and in vitro toxicity assessments regarding graphene-family nanomaterials (GFNs) including pristine graphene, carbon quantum dots, MWCNT, GO and RGO have been conducted in several studies.94–98 It was generally reported that varying degrees of toxicity in animals could be caused by most GFNs, for example, growth inhibition and morphological abnormalities in zebrafish and inflammation responses in mice and rats.94,99,100 In comparison, a toxicological study of LIG to zebrafish by d’Amora et al. provided a new insight that LIG showed no toxic effects even at high concentrations.101 However, the toxic mechanism of GFNs in human cells or tissues is currently unknown and their potential in vivo toxicity particularly towards lungs102 even questions the safety when used in a mask. Besides, the possibility of inhaling graphene particles from masks and the associated health risks are not clear and may vary depending on the type and properties of the graphene material used and the mask design (e.g., whether the graphene-containing layer is placed in the center of the mask or in direct contact with the human body). Based on the above considerations, in order to ensure the necessary safety, further studies on the toxicity of LIG and other GFNs, preventive measures for leakage and standardization of graphene masks are needed.
From the perspective of synthesis and fabrication, more precise control over the structures including the proportion of hexagonal carbon lattice, the lateral size distribution of LIG sheets and so on should be priorities in the future study. The potential safety concerns of LIG-based face masks may be settled by combining nano-coating or cross-linking techniques with LIG to prevent graphene particles from falling off the LIG monolith while maintaining its porous structure. Apart from the existing applications which mainly offer detection and separation methods for contamination, advanced pollutant transformation techniques are also in great demand. For example, further exploration of LIG's catalytic activities in some emerging electrochemical reactions such as nitrate reduction and CO2 reduction will contribute to the conversion of nitrate contamination and greenhouse gas into harmless matter and even useful energy sources and industrial chemicals. In summary, the achievement of LIG research and its prospective further development are envisioned to pave the way to a healthy and sustainable environment.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are thankful for the support from the CityU Applied Research Grant (9667224) and the Chow Sang Sang Group Research Fund (9229060).
Notes and references
A. K. Geim, Graphene: Status and prospects, Science, 2009, 324, 1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ye and J. M. Tour, Graphene at fifteen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 10872–10878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, C. W. Magnuson, A. Venugopal, R. M. Tromp, J. B. Hannon, E. M. Vogel, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Large-area graphene single crystals grown by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition of methane on copper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2816–2819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Large-area synthesis of high-quality and uniform graphene films on copper foils, Science, 2009, 324, 1312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Somani, S. P. Somani and M. Umeno, Planer nano-graphenes from camphor by CVD, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 430, 56–59 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, The reduction of graphene oxide, Carbon, 2012, 50, 3210–3228 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Moon, J. Lee, R. S. Ruoff and H. Lee, Reduced graphene oxide by chemical graphitization, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 73 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, B. Liu, D. Tang, B. Yu, C. Jiang and H.-M. Cheng, Synthesis of graphene sheets with high electrical conductivity and good thermal stability by hydrogen arc discharge exfoliation, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 411–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, Z. Peng, Y. Liu, F. Ruiz-Zepeda, R. Ye, E. L. G. Samuel, M. J. Yacaman, B. I. Yakobson and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced porous graphene films from commercial polymers, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ye, D. K. James and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced graphene: From discovery to translation, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803621 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, W.-C. Law and K. C. Chan, Floating, highly efficient, and scalable graphene membranes for seawater desalination using solar energy, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 3689–3695 RSC .
R. Ye, D. K. James and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced graphene, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1609–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Stanford, K. Yang, Y. Chyan, C. Kittrell and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced graphene for flexible and embeddable gas sensors, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3474–3482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Carvalho, A. J. S. Fernandes, C. Leitão, J. Deuermeier, A. C. Marques, R. Martins, E. Fortunato and F. M. Costa, Laser-induced graphene strain sensors produced by ultraviolet irradiation of polyimide, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805271 CrossRef .
N. T. Garland, E. S. McLamore, N. D. Cavallaro, D. Mendivelso-Perez, E. A. Smith, D. Jing and J. C. Claussen, Flexible laser-induced graphene for nitrogen sensing in soil, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39124–39133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ren, J. Zhang and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced graphene synthesis of Co3O4 in graphene for oxygen electrocatalysis and metal–air batteries, Carbon, 2018, 139, 880–887 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ren, J. Zhang, M. Fan, P. M. Ajayan and J. M. Tour, Li-Breathing air batteries catalyzed by MnNiFe/laser-induced graphene catalysts, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901035 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ren, J. Zhang and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced graphene hybrid catalysts for rechargeable Zn–air batteries, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1460–1468 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ye, Z. Peng, T. Wang, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, Y. Li, L. G. Nilewski, J. Lin and J. M. Tour, 
            In situ formation of metal oxide nanocrystals embedded in laser-induced graphene, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9244–9251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ye, Y. Chyan, J. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Han, C. Kittrell and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced graphene formation on wood, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702211 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, C. Zhang, J. Sha, H. Fei, Y. Li and J. M. Tour, Efficient water-splitting electrodes based on laser-induced graphene, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26840–26847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. X. Luong, K. Yang, J. Yoon, S. P. Singh, T. Wang, C. J. Arnusch and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced graphene composites as multifunctional surfaces, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2579–2586 CAS .
X. Han, R. Ye, Y. Chyan, T. Wang, C. Zhang, L. Shi, T. Zhang, Y. Zhao and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced graphene from wood impregnated with metal salts and use in electrocatalysis, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 5053–5061 CrossRef CAS .
C. Thamaraiselvan, J. Wang, D. K. James, P. Narkhede, S. P. Singh, D. Jassby, J. M. Tour and C. J. Arnusch, Laser-induced graphene and carbon nanotubes as conductive carbon-based materials in environmental technology, Mater. Today, 2020, 34, 115–131 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Barbhuiya, A. Kumar and S. P. Singh, A journey of laser-induced graphene in water treatment, Trans. Ind. Natl. Acad. Eng., 2021, 6, 159–171 CrossRef .
Y. Chyan, R. Ye, Y. Li, S. P. Singh, C. J. Arnusch and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced graphene by multiple lasing: Toward electronics on cloth, paper, and food, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2176–2183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, S. Xu, Z. Wang, K. Xue, J. Su, Y. Song, S. Chen, C. Zhu, B. Z. Tang and R. Ye, Self-reporting and photothermally enhanced rapid bacterial killing on a laser-induced graphene mask, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 12045–12053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Torrente-Rodríguez, H. Lukas, J. Tu, J. Min, Y. Yang, C. Xu, H. B. Rossiter and W. Gao, SARS-CoV-2 RapidPlex: A graphene-based multiplexed telemedicine platform for rapid and low-cost COVID-19 diagnosis and monitoring, Matter, 2020, 3, 1981–1998 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Huang, L. Ling, J. Su, Y. Song, Z. Wang, B. Z. Tang, P. Westerhoff and R. Ye, Laser-engineered graphene on wood enables efficient antibacterial, anti-salt-fouling, and lipophilic-matter-rejection solar evaporation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 51864–51872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Laser scribing of high-performance and flexible graphene-based electrochemical capacitors, Science, 2012, 335, 1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Strong, S. Dubin, M. F. El-Kady, A. Lech, Y. Wang, B. H. Weiller and R. B. Kaner, Patterning and electronic tuning of laser scribed graphene for flexible all-carbon devices, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1395–1403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, S. C. Rismiller and J. Lin, Molecular dynamic simulation of layered graphene clusters formation from polyimides under extreme conditions, Carbon, 2016, 104, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Stanford, C. Zhang, J. D. Fowlkes, A. Hoffman, I. N. Ivanov, P. D. Rack and J. M. Tour, High-resolution laser-induced graphene. flexible electronics beyond the visible limit, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10902–10907 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, M. Song, J. Hao, K. Wu, C. Li and C. Hu, Visible light laser-induced graphene from phenolic resin: A new approach for directly writing graphene-based electrochemical devices on various substrates, Carbon, 2018, 127, 287–296 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Q. Tao, H. Tian, Y. Liu, Z.-Y. Ju, Y. Pang, Y.-Q. Chen, D.-Y. Wang, X.-G. Tian, J.-C. Yan, N.-Q. Deng, Y. Yang and T.-L. Ren, An intelligent artificial throat with sound-sensing ability based on laser induced graphene, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Bobinger, F. J. Romero, A. Salinas-Castillo, M. Becherer, P. Lugli, D. P. Morales, N. Rodríguez and A. Rivadeneyra, Flexible and robust laser-induced graphene heaters photothermally scribed on bare polyimide substrates, Carbon, 2019, 144, 116–126 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai, C. Lv and A. Watanabe, Cost-effective fabrication of high-performance flexible all-solid-state carbon micro-supercapacitors by blue-violet laser direct writing and further surface treatment, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1671–1679 RSC .
F. J. Romero, A. Salinas-Castillo, A. Rivadeneyra, A. Albrecht, A. Godoy, D. P. Morales and N. Rodriguez, In-depth study of laser diode ablation of Kapton polyimide for flexible conductive substrates, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 517 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Long, S. Zhou, D. Shi, Y. Huang, X. Chen, J. Gao, N. Zhao and C.-P. Wong, UV Laser-induced polyimide-to-graphene conversion: Modeling, fabrication, and application, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900208 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Duy, Z. Peng, Y. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Ji and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced graphene fibers, Carbon, 2018, 126, 472–479 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tiliakos, C. Ceaus, S. M. Iordache, E. Vasile and I. Stamatin, Morphic transitions of nanocarbons via laser pyrolysis of polyimide films, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrol., 2016, 121, 275–286 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, D. X. Luong, J. Zhang, Y. R. Tarkunde, C. Kittrell, F. Sargunaraj, Y. Ji, C. J. Arnusch and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced graphene in controlled atmospheres: From superhydrophilic to superhydrophobic surfaces, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700496 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Singh, Y. Li, J. Zhang, J. M. Tour and C. J. Arnusch, Sulfur-doped laser-induced porous graphene derived from polysulfone-class polymers and membranes, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 289–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ye, X. Han, D. V. Kosynkin, Y. Li, C. Zhang, B. Jiang, A. A. Martí and J. M. Tour, Laser-induced conversion of Teflon into fluorinated nanodiamonds or fluorinated graphene, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1083–1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lamberti, M. Serrapede, G. Ferraro, M. Fontana, F. Perrucci, S. Bianco, A. Chiolerio and S. Bocchini, All-SPEEK flexible supercapacitor exploiting laser-induced graphenization, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 035012 CrossRef .
F. Mahmood, C. Zhang, Y. Xie, D. Stalla, J. Lin and C. Wan, Transforming lignin into porous graphene via direct laser writing for solid-state supercapacitors, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 22713–22720 RSC .
F. Wang, X. Dong, K. Wang, W. Duan, M. Gao, Z. Zhai, C. Zhu and W. Wang, Laser-induced nitrogen-doped hierarchically porous graphene for advanced electrochemical energy storage, Carbon, 2019, 150, 396–407 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, R. Ye, J. A. Mann, D. Zakhidov, Y. Li, P. R. Smalley, J. Lin and J. M. Tour, Flexible boron-doped laser-induced graphene microsupercapacitors, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5868–5875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, L. Zeng, C. Liu, D. Zeng, Z. Liu, X. Liu, X. Zhong, W. Guo and L. Li, Laser direct writing of heteroatom (N and S)-doped graphene from a polybenzimidazole ink donor on polyethylene terephthalate polymer and glass substrates, Small, 2018, 14, 1803143 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ge, Q. Hong, H. Li, C. Liu and F. Li, Direct-laser-writing of metal sulfide–graphene nanocomposite photoelectrode toward sensitive photoelectrochemical sensing, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904000 CrossRef .
J. Rodrigues, J. Zanoni, G. Gaspar, A. J. S. Fernandes, A. F. Carvalho, N. F. Santos, T. Monteiro and F. M. Costa, ZnO decorated laser-induced graphene produced by direct laser scribing, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 3252–3268 RSC .
J. Zhang, M. Ren, Y. Li and J. M. Tour, In situ synthesis of efficient water oxidation catalysts in laser-induced graphene, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 677–683 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. Zhang, Z. Peng, Y. Li, C. Gao, Y. Ji, R. Ye, N. D. Kim, Q. Zhong, Y. Yang, H. Fei, G. Ruan and J. M. Tour, High-performance pseudocapacitive microsupercapacitors from laser-induced graphene, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 838–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rahimi, M. Ochoa, W. Yu and B. Ziaie, Highly stretchable and sensitive unidirectional strain sensor via laser carbonization, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4463–4470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lamberti, F. Clerici, M. Fontana and L. Scaltrito, A highly stretchable supercapacitor using laser-induced graphene electrodes onto elastomeric substrate, Advanced Energy, Materials, 2016, 6, 1600050 Search PubMed .
W. Song, J. Zhu, B. Gan, S. Zhao, H. Wang, C. Li and J. Wang, Flexible, stretchable, and transparent planar microsupercapacitors based on 3D porous laser-induced graphene, Small, 2018, 14, 1702249 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wang, L. Lu, Y. Xie, X. Mei, Y. Tang, W. Wu and R. Liang, Tailoring the surface morphology and nanoparticle distribution of laser-induced graphene/Co3O4 for high-performance flexible microsupercapacitors, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 504, 144487 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Joe, K. Y. Yoon and J. Hwang, Methodology for modeling the microbial contamination of air filters, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e88514 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sinitskii, A. Dimiev, D. A. Corley, A. A. Fursina, D. V. Kosynkin and J. M. Tour, Kinetics of diazonium functionalization of chemically converted graphene nanoribbons, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1949–1954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Stanford, J. T. Li, Y. Chen, E. A. McHugh, A. Liopo, H. Xiao and J. M. Tour, Self-sterilizing laser-induced graphene bacterial air filter, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11912–11920 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sohrabi, Z. Alsafi, N. O'Neill, M. Khan, A. Kerwan, A. Al-Jabir, C. Iosifidis and R. Agha, World Health Organization declares global emergency: A review of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19), Int. J. Surg., 2020, 76, 71–76 CrossRef PubMed .
M. U. Farid, S. Jeong, D. H. Seo, R. Ahmed, C. Lau, N. K. Gali, Z. Ning and A. K. An, Mechanistic insight into the in vitro toxicity of graphene oxide against biofilm forming bacteria using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4475–4487 RSC .
J. Li, G. Wang, H. Zhu, M. Zhang, X. Zheng, Z. Di, X. Liu and X. Wang, Antibacterial activity of large-area monolayer graphene film manipulated by charge transfer, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4359 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Ahmed, M. Afifi and V. Uskoković, Protecting healthcare workers during COVID-19 pandemic with nanotechnology: A protocol for a new device from Egypt, J. Infect. Publ. Health, 2020, 13, 1243–1246 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liu, K. Yan, J. Chen, M. Xia, M. Li, K. Liu, D. Wang, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Recent advances in novel aerogels through the hybrid aggregation of inorganic nanomaterials and polymeric fibers for thermal insulation, Aggregate, 2021, e30 Search PubMed .
M. Guarnieri and J. R. Balmes, Outdoor air pollution and asthma, Lancet, 2014, 383, 1581–1592 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, W. Yan, T. Chen, J. Xu, Q. Tian and D. Ho, Size-tunable flowerlike MoS2 nanospheres combined with laser-induced graphene electrodes for NO2 sensing, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 2545–2553 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, C. Zou, Y. Su, M. Li, Y. Han, E. S.-W. Kong, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, An ultrasensitive NO2 gas sensor based on a hierarchical Cu2O/CuO mesocrystal nanoflower, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17120–17131 RSC .
H. Long, A. Harley-Trochimczyk, T. Pham, Z. Tang, T. Shi, A. Zettl, C. Carraro, M. A. Worsley and R. Maboudian, High surface area MoS2/graphene hybrid aerogel for ultrasensitive NO2 detection, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5158–5165 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, N. Yi, J. Zhu, Z. Cheng, X. Yin, X. Zhang, H. Zhu and H. Cheng, Novel gas sensing platform based on a stretchable laser-induced graphene pattern with self-heating capabilities, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6487–6500 RSC .
M. Dosi, I. Lau, Y. Zhuang, D. S. A. Simakov, M. W. Fowler and M. A. Pope, Ultrasensitive electrochemical methane sensors based on solid polymer electrolyte-infused laser-induced graphene, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6166–6173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, Z. Lu, W. Dai, B. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. Li and J. Ye, Laser engraved nitrogen-doped graphene sensor for the simultaneous determination of Cd(II) and Pb(II), J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 828, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nasraoui, A. Al-Hamry, P. R. Teixeira, S. Ameur, L. G. Paterno, M. Ben Ali and O. Kanoun, Electrochemical sensor for nitrite detection in water samples using flexible laser-induced graphene electrodes functionalized by CNT decorated by Au nanoparticles, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2021, 880, 114893 CrossRef CAS .
Z. You, Q. Qiu, H. Chen, Y. Feng, X. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Ying, Laser-induced noble metal nanoparticle–graphene composites enabled flexible biosensor for pathogen detection, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 150, 111896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Struyf, J. J. Deeks, J. Dinnes, Y. Takwoingi, C. Davenport, M. M. G. Leeflang, R. Spijker, L. Hooft, D. Emperador and S. Dittrich, 
            et al., Signs and symptoms to determine if a patient presenting in primary care or hospital outpatient settings has COVID-19 disease, Cochrane Database Syst. Rev., 2020, 7, CD013665 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Yi, X. Luo, N. Xiong, Y. Liu, S. Li, R. Sun, Y. Wang, B. Hu, W. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, B. Huang, Y. Lin, J. Yang, W. Cai, X. Wang, J. Cheng, Z. Chen, K. Sun, W. Pan, Z. Zhan, L. Chen and F. Ye, Development and clinical application of a rapid IgM-IgG combined antibody test for SARS-CoV-2 infection diagnosis, J. Med. Virol., 2020, 92, 1518–1524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Fraga, T. Meulia and S. Fenster, Real-time PCR, current protocols essential laboratory techniques, 2008, 10 Search PubMed .
P. B. van Kasteren, B. van der Veer, S. van den Brink, L. Wijsman, J. de Jonge, A. van den Brandt, R. Molenkamp, C. B. E. M. Reusken and A. Meijer, Comparison of seven commercial RT-PCR diagnostic kits for COVID-19, J. Clin. Virol., 2020, 128, 104412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Singh, Y. Li, A. Be’er, Y. Oren, J. M. Tour and C. J. Arnusch, Laser-induced graphene layers and electrodes prevents microbial fouling and exerts antimicrobial action, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18238–18247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, T. H. Zeng, M. Hofmann, E. Burcombe, J. Wei, R. Jiang, J. Kong and Y. Chen, Antibacterial activity of graphite, graphite oxide, graphene oxide, and reduced graphene oxide: Membrane and oxidative stress, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6971–6980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Singh, S. Ramanan, Y. Kaufman and C. J. Arnusch, Laser-induced graphene biofilm inhibition: Texture does matter, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 1713–1720 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Zhang, F. Liu and S. Luo, Laser-induced freestanding graphene papers: A new route of scalable fabrication with tunable morphologies and properties for multifunctional devices and structures, Small, 2018, 14, 1802350 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Thakur, S. P. Singh, M. N. Kleinberg, A. Gupta and C. J. Arnusch, Laser-induced graphene–PVA composites as robust electrically conductive water treatment membranes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10914–10921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Thakur, S. P. Singh, C. Thamaraiselvan, M. N. Kleinberg and C. J. Arnusch, Graphene oxide on laser-induced graphene filters for antifouling, electrically conductive ultrafiltration membranes, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 591, 117322 CrossRef .
A. Gupta, L. Holoidovsky, C. Thamaraiselvan, A. K. Thakur, S. P. Singh, M. M. Meijler and C. J. Arnusch, Silver-doped laser-induced graphene for potent surface antibacterial activity and anti-biofilm action, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 6890–6893 RSC .
L. Huang, M. Gu, Z. Wang, T. W. Tang, Z. Zhu, Y. Yuan, D. Wang, C. Shen, B. Z. Tang and R. Ye, Highly efficient and rapid inactivation of coronavirus on non-metal hydrophobic laser-induced graphene in mild conditions, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2101195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ma, P. Yin, M. Zhao, Z. Luo, Y. Huang, Q. He, Y. Yu, Z. Liu, Z. Hu, B. Chen and H. Zhang, MOF-based hierarchical structures for solar-thermal clean water production, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808249 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Li, J. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Kuang, E. Hitz, C. Jia, A. Gong, F. Jiang, J. Y. Zhu, B. Yang, J. Xie and L. Hu, Highly flexible and efficient solar steam generation device, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701756 CrossRef .
M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, Four billion people facing severe water scarcity, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1500323 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Tittle, D. Yilman, M. A. Pope and C. J. Backhouse, Robust superhydrophobic laser-induced graphene for desalination applications, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1700207 CrossRef .
K. Rathinam, S. P. Singh, Y. Li, R. Kasher, J. M. Tour and C. J. Arnusch, Polyimide derived laser-induced graphene as adsorbent for cationic and anionic dyes, Carbon, 2017, 124, 515–524 CrossRef CAS .
Health Canada, Face masks that contain graphene may pose health risks, 2021, https://healthycanadians.gc.ca/recall-alert-rappel-avis/hc-sc/2021/75309a-eng.php#you-vous.
M. d’Amora, A. Camisasca, S. Lettieri and S. Giordani, Toxicity assessment of carbon nanomaterials in zebrafish during development, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 414 CrossRef PubMed .
X. T. Liu, X. Y. Mu, X. L. Wu, L. X. Meng, W. B. Guan, Y. Q. Ma, H. Sun, C. J. Wang and X. F. Li, Toxicity of multi-walled carbon nanotubes, graphene oxide, and reduced graphene oxide to zebrafish embryos, Biomed. Environ. Sci., 2014, 27, 676–683 CAS .
Z. G. Wang, R. Zhou, D. Jiang, J. E. Song, Q. Xu, J. Si, Y. P. Chen, X. Zhou, L. Gan, J. Z. Li, H. Zhang and B. Liu, Toxicity of graphene quantum dots in zebrafish embryo, Biomed. Environ. Sci., 2015, 28, 341–351 Search PubMed .
K.-H. Liao, Y.-S. Lin, C. W. Macosko and C. L. Haynes, Cytotoxicity of graphene oxide and graphene in human erythrocytes and skin fibroblasts, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2607–2615 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. P. Tonelli, V. A. M. Goulart, K. N. Gomes, M. S. Ladeira, A. K. Santos, E. Lorençon, L. O. Ladeira and R. R. Resende, Graphene-based nanomaterials: biological and medical applications and toxicity, Nanomedicine, 2015, 10, 2423–2450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chong, Y. Ma, H. Shen, X. Tu, X. Zhou, J. Xu, J. Dai, S. Fan and Z. Zhang, The in vitro and in vivo toxicity of graphene quantum dots, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 5041–5048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, R. Liu, X. Wang, Q. Liu, Y. Chen, R. P. Valle, Y. Y. Zuo, T. Xia and S. Liu, Crucial role of lateral size for graphene oxide in activating macrophages and stimulating pro-inflammatory responses in cells and animals, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10498–10515 CrossRef CAS .
M. d’Amora, A. Lamberti, M. Fontana and S. Giordani, Toxicity assessment of laser-induced graphene by zebrafish during development, J. Phys.: Mater., 2020, 3, 034008 Search PubMed .
L. Ou, B. Song, H. Liang, J. Liu, X. Feng, B. Deng, T. Sun and L. Shao, Toxicity of graphene-family nanoparticles: A general review of the origins and mechanisms, Part. Fibre Toxicol., 2016, 13, 57 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Le Cheng
	Le Cheng received her Bachelor's degree from East China University of Science and Technology in 2017 and Master's degree from Fudan University in 2020. She is currently pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Ruquan Ye in the Department of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong. Her research interests include the synthesis, structure regulation and application of laser-induced graphene (LIG).

Ruquan Ye
	Ruquan Ye is an assistant professor in Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong. He received his BS (Chemistry) in 2012 from Hong Kong University of Science and Technology under the supervision of Prof. Ben Zhong Tang, and his PhD (chemistry) in 2017 from Rice University mentored by Prof. James M. Tour. He was a postdoctoral associate in Chemical Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2017–2018). His research interests include the development of cost-effective methods for materials manufacturing and the investigation of their applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of LIG synthesis and environmental applications. From left to right and top to bottom: Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2020 Elsevier; Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society; Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Synthesis and structure of LIG. (a) A digital photograph of an LIG pattern in the shape of interdigital electrodes on a PI film; scale bar is 1 mm. (b) Representative Raman spectrum of a LIG film and the starting PI film. (c) SEM image of LIG film, scale bar is 10 μm. (d) TEM image of the LIG film. It shows a heptagon with two pentagons, as well as a hexagon, scale bar is 5 Å. Reproduced with permission.10 Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (e) SEM image of LIG fibers with thickness of ∼1 mm, scale bar is 500 μm. Adapted with permission.41 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (f) Contact angles of LIG samples prepared under different gas atmospheres with different laser duty cycles. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 3  Transferring LIG to different substrates. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process for a stretchable strain sensor based on LIG. (b) Patterned LIG before and after transferring to the PDMS. (c) Twisted LIG-PDMS composite. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the fabrication of LIG composites. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Fabrication, characterization and working process of an LIG air filter. Schematic of (a) the double-sided lasing process, and (b) the PI lattice that remains after lasing. The red portions represent the PI pattern that is not lased from above, and the blue portions represent the PI pattern that is not lased from below; scale bar is 2.5 mm. (c) Cross-sectioned image that shows the entire thickness of the filter; scale bar is 500 μm. SEM images of the (d) outer and (e) inner portion of the LIG filter; scale bars are 20 μm. (f) Schematic of air filtration with the LIG filter mounted on a vacuum filtration system with a backing polyethersulfone (PES) test filter. (g) Schematic of the Joule-heating setup in which a potential is applied across the filter. Schematic of (h) filtration followed by (i) sterilization and depyrogenation through Joule-heating. (j) Infrared image of a LIG filter that is Joule-heated to 380 °C, scale bar is 2 cm. The shape of the LIG filter is denoted by black dotted lines. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Self-sterilizing and self-reporting LIG mask. (a) Antibacterial efficiency of LIG, ACF and MBF under different light exposure time. (b) Time course of surface temperature under 0.75 kW m−2 sunlight. (c) Diagram of an LIG mask and the working mechanism of moisture-induced electricity. (d) Voltage against time under intervals of exhalation. Correlation between induced voltage and (e) E. coli, (f) Staphylococcus epidermidis, and (g) simulated PM 2.5 loading. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of morphology-controlled MoS2 (MCM)-based NO2 sensor with LIG electrodes. (b) Dynamic response curves to 10 ppm of NO2. Inset: Enlarged curves. (c) Dynamic response across NO2 concentrations. (d) Responses to different gases (1000 ppm of H2, 1000 ppm of C2H5OH, 10 ppm of HCHO, and 1000 ppm of CO). Inset: Enlarged view of responses to CO, HCHO, C2H5OH, and H2. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the AuNPs-LIG electrode-based immunosensor for the detection of E. coli O157:H7. (b) Nyquist plots and (c) calibration curve of the impedance response and the concentrations of E. coli O157:H7 (1 × 10−2–1 × 10−8 CFU mL−1). (d) Specificity of the AuNPs-LIG electrode-based impedimetric immunosensor. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the LEG sensor array layout. (b) Comparison of amperometric responses and overlaid S/B ratio (black lines) for SARS-CoV-2 specific IgG and CRP detection using PBA and 1H-pyrrole-1-propionic acid (PPA) as linkers for the attachment of the corresponding capture bioreceptors. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 3). (c) Amperometric responses and overlaid S/B ratio (black lines) observed for 0.0 and 500 pg mL−1 NP, 0.0 and 250 ng mL−1 SARS-CoV-2 specific IgG and IgM, and 0.0 and 50 ng mL−1 CRP, with 10, 5 and 1 minute incubation. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 3). A box-and-whisker plot of measured S/B ratio for NP, S1-IgG, S1-IgM, and CRP in (f) RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 positive (n = 5) and negative (n = 6) serum samples, and (g) RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 positive (n = 5) and negative (n = 3) saliva samples. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Biofilm growth on the PI, graphite, and LIG surfaces with P. aeruginosa showing biomass and average thickness. (b) Inhibition of P. aeruginosa in the solution at different voltages (2.5, 2.0, and 1.5 V) with bacteria loading of ∼1 × 104 CFU mL−1. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Biofilm growth assay on the sample of control (PES), PES-LIG, Ag-PES and Ag@LIG after 48 h incubation. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Colony assay of wood and hydrophilic LIG. Laser confocal microscope image of (e) wood and (f) LIG-wood, scale bars are 10 μm. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (g) Anti-HCoV-OC43 and (h) anti-HCoV-229E effect with different materials (LIG, HLIG, Ag NPs/LIG, and MBF) in MRC-5 cell line. Cell only and cell + virus were the negative control (NC) and positive control (PC), respectively. Data were expressed as mean ± SE, n = 3, *p < 0.05. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2021 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic of (a) LIG fabrication on wood and (b) hierarchically structured wood-based solar-driven interfacial evaporation system. SEM images of (c) top LIG and (d) bottom LIG, scale bars are 100 μm. The insets are the contact angle of top and bottom surfaces, respectively. Concentrations of (e) metal ions and (f) cyclohexanol, benzoic acid, 2-ethyl-1-hexanol, and 1-octanol in the collected clean water compared with those before desalination. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Possible interactions of MB and MO dye molecules with the LIG surface. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (b) Superhydrophobic freestanding LIG paper (GP) for water/oil separation and oil absorption. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
