Two-dimensional materials as catalysts for solar fuels: hydrogen evolution reaction and CO 2 reduction  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA09496A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA09496A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 430-454Two-dimensional materials as catalysts for solar fuels: hydrogen evolution reaction and CO2 reduction

        
          
            Amirhossein 
            Hasani†
a, 
      
        
          
            Mahider 
            Tekalgne†
a, 
      
        
          
            Quyet Van 
            Le
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ho Won 
            Jang
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Soo Young 
            Kim
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Integrative Research Center for Two-Dimensional Functional Materials, Institute of Interdisciplinary Convergence Research, Chung-Ang University, 84 Heukseok-ro, Dongjak-gu, Seoul 06974, Republic of Korea. E-mail: sooyoungkim@cau.ac.kr
bInstitute of Research and Development, Duy Tan University, Da Nang 550000, Vietnam
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Research Institute of Advanced Materials, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hwjang@snu.ac.kr
Received 
      1st October 2018
    , Accepted 6th December 2018First published on 6th December 2018AbstractThe issues of global warming and fossil fuel shortage have increased the demand for clean and renewable energy. Many researchers are investigating strategies to produce hydrogen and reduce CO2 by using solar power. Two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene, graphene derivatives, and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), have been extensively used owing to their extraordinary electronic and optical properties. In this review, we investigate the recent developments in 2D materials for photocatalytic applications involving the hydrogen evolution reaction and CO2 reduction. The synthesis methods and the photocatalytic properties of TMDs and graphene-based 2D materials are thoroughly discussed. Moreover, a summary of the recently developed 2D nanostructures and devices for solar hydrogen production and CO2 reduction is presented, and it is revealed that the use of 2D catalyst materials has great potential for commercialization in the near future to help overcome the energy crisis.
Introduction
Recently, energy conservation and global warming have attracted attention as two challenging issues owing to the emission of carbon into the atmosphere and environmental degradation.1,2 Increasing concerns about fossil fuel shortage and the increasing rate of CO2 emission to the environment have increased the demand for research to overcome these challenges. Statistically, world population has been growing at a significant rate, resulting in high energy consumption, which may lead to environmental devastations in the near future. Nature is an excellent inspiration for energy conversion to help overcome these issues. Hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) can be separated via water splitting, which releases O2 into the atmosphere. In addition, CO2 can be transformed to organic materials by nature. Therefore, energy conservation and storage strategies might be inspired by the environment.2,3 The development of electronic devices provides an opportunity to convert solar energy to other forms such as electricity. Photovoltaic cells have been introduced to produce electricity from light, in which, to the best of our knowledge, the maximum achievable efficiency is 46%.4 However, photovoltaic cells have drawbacks, including high costs of fabrication and long times required to generate electricity.5,6 One of the cleanest fuels for energy production that comprises an easily accessible element is H2, which can be produced easily via water splitting under solar light irradiation. In addition, the CO2 that is otherwise emitted to the environment can be reduced using solar power to purify the atmosphere and conserve energy. Therefore, solar power is the cleanest way to efficiently produce H2 and reduce CO2.7–9
The discovery of materials with two-dimensional (2D) structures was a significant achievement in the development and expansion of the energy industry.10 2D materials are composed of a single layer or a few layers of a bulk structure such as graphite. The first invented 2D material was graphene, which was established theoretically in 1940.11 However, fabrication of graphene and its characterization began only in 2004.12 Graphene has been employed in various applications such as solar cells, light emitting diodes (LEDs), transistors, photodetectors, gas and strain sensors, and in particular energy-harvesting devices, owing to its unique electronic, optical, and mechanical properties.13–19 In addition, as a 2D material, graphene has attracted attention for use in various energy conversion studies owing to its unique catalytic properties such as its electrophotocatalytic activity. Graphene provides an extraordinary surface with a large specific area that can act as a catalyst.7,9,20 However, the lack of a bandgap in graphene limits its use in photocatalytic applications because of its poor optical absorbance. On the other hand, combining graphene with a nanoparticulate semiconductor can compensate for the lack of a bandgap and enhance the photocatalytic performance.21–23 In addition, the derivatives of graphene, such as graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide, as alternative forms of graphene have been used frequently in catalytic applications owing to their tunable electron properties and easily functionalized hydrophilic surfaces.24,25 Furthermore, graphene quantum dots (GQDs) as zero-dimensional (0D) materials are another graphene derivative with specific properties such as high chemical stabilities, non-toxicities, and tunable optical properties, which make them suitable for various applications such as LEDs, solar cells, gas sensors, and photocatalysts.5,13,15,26–28 GQDs and doped GQDs (e.g., nitrogen–GQDs and sulfur, nitrogen–GQDs) exhibit better visible light absorptions with high exciton yields and display bandgaps that can be easily tuned by modification and doping, which suggest their suitability for high-efficiency photocatalytic applications.29–32 Therefore, graphene and its derivatives can be promising candidates for future energy harvesting devices and efficient photocatalytic applications.
Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) were introduced as another class of 2D materials with exceptional properties that could replace noble metals in catalytic applications. TMDs have the general formula of MX2 (where M represents a transition-metal and X represents a chalcogen), and there exist planar layers of X–M–X that are stacked together only by van der Waals (vdW) interactions.33 TMDs include molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and molybdenum diselenide (MoSe2),34 tungsten disulfide (WS2) and tungsten diselenide (WSe2),35 hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN),36,37 borophene (2D boron),38 silicene (2D silicon),39 and germanene (2D germanium).40 Their properties are of utmost importance in electronic applications, for example, field effect transistors, photovoltaic devices, and biosensors. When compared to graphene, which is a zero-gap semiconductor, i.e., a semimetal, especially in electronics applications like field effect transistors, most TMDs are preferable owing to their sizable bandgaps. Many 2D TMDs are semiconductors and have a huge advantage over silicon in that energy can be stored capacitively. TMDs can be deposited onto flexible substrates and used in different applications.41 In addition, the vdW gaps between the layers of TMDs and their large specific areas make them highly attractive in the field of capacitive energy storage involving supercapacitors and batteries.42,43 The other unique property of TMDs is that they exhibit transformation of the indirect bandgap to a direct bandgap when bulk materials are converted to monolayers. Bulk crystals of TMDs that are built up of layers that are vdW bonded can be separated by mechanical exfoliation into bilayers or monolayers. Such unique electrical and optical properties give rise to quantum confinement and surface effects, which can be used widely. In addition, these properties allow them to exhibit strong photoluminescence (PL) and large binding energies, which suggest that they are promising candidates for a wide range of optical applications.44 including solar cells,45 photodetectors,46 LEDs,47 and phototransistors.48 Moreover, engineering their structures is an efficient strategy to ensure their widespread application by altering their physical and chemical properties.49 Furthermore, their superconductivity properties, which are a result of the low-resistance metallic behavior of TMDs, make them suitable for field-effect transistors (FETs) and supercapacitors.50 Moreover, TMDs can be used in spintronic applications owing to their spin splitting property. However, the poor nonmagnetic properties of layered TMDs hinder their wide application.51 In TMDs, the spin–orbit coupling is large, which results in spin–split bands and the possibility of electrically manipulating the spins of the electrons; this renders TMDs desirable for use in related fields. Importantly, TMDs have gained huge attention in the field of catalysis. Owing to their layered structures, TMDs allow modification of their crystal structures and strains, which can be used to enhance the catalytic performances of TMD-based catalysts.52,53 Furthermore, the very thin nature of TMD nanosheets allows them to easily expose their active sites for catalytic action. In electro and heterocatalysis, reactivity is a very important parameter that is related to the adsorption energy. A high efficiency is achieved when the interaction between the catalyst and the reactants is neither too strong nor too weak. According to a study carried out by Hinnemann et al. in 2005,54 MoS2, a representative of TMDs, showed a ΔGH* value that was close to thermoneutrality, thus rendering it a potentially promising catalyst candidate. Studies have also shown that other TMDs exhibit similar behavior as MoS2.55 Furthermore, the large surface of exfoliated TMD nanosheets reveals high-density edges, which can provide active sites for the catalytic reactions such as water splitting and CO2 reduction. Such excellent features of TMDs led to researchers developing and further studying the large-scale synthesis of TMDs in order to realize high efficiencies and better catalytic activities. TMD nanostructures of MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, WSe2, and MoTe2 have been utilized frequently in catalytic applications owing to their high surface areas, large numbers of active sites, and excellent electronic properties, along with high chemical stabilities.56–61 Many researchers have reported the use of TMDs in the production of H2 by water splitting and in CO2 reduction. The tunable properties of TMDs, such as transition from the indirect-gap 2H phase to the direct-bandgap 1T phase, provide superior activities towards H2 production and CO2 reduction.62 In addition, their morphologies can be controlled to increase the number of active sites of the nanosheet. Since the edge sites are catalytically more active than the basal plane, having a large number of active sites provides a larger surface area for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and CO2 reduction.63
In this review, we investigate the recent developments in 2D materials as catalysts for the production of solar fuels, especially for the HER and CO2 reduction. 2D materials, including graphene and its derivatives, and TMDs such as MoS2 and WS2 are discussed, along with their synthesis methods, properties, and applications as photocatalysts for the HER and CO2 reduction. The advances in the engineering of 2D materials for use as photocatalysts open up opportunities for the fabrication of new energy-harvesting devices that can offer efficient energy conversion and protect the environment.
Graphene-based materials as catalysts for the HER and CO2 reduction
Preparation and properties of graphene
The discovery of graphene as a 2D carbon-based nanomaterial in 2004 was a bright spot in the history of science and technology as it allowed for the development of nanoelectronic devices owing to its unique mechanical, optoelectronic, and thermal properties.64,65 Generally, graphene, as a single layer of graphite, provides a non-bandgap semiconductor material that has high mobility and conductivity. In addition, the large surface area and the 2D structure of graphene together act as an excellent platform for application in electrophotocatalysis.66,67 The high conductivity of graphene facilitates charge transfer during the reduction process, suggesting that it can be used in photocatalytic CO2 reduction and HER applications.68 The enhanced durability and stability of graphene are attributed to its large surface area (with increased number of active sites) and outstanding mechanical properties, which suggest the possibility of a promising nanostructure that can used in catalysis.69,70 Additionally, the high thermal conductivity provides enhanced heat generation and diffusion during exothermic processes, resulting in increased electrophotocatalytic activity. However, graphene as a zero-bandgap semiconductor has been a challenge to use in catalytic applications. Therefore, efforts are being made to overcome this issue by tuning and manipulating graphene to activate its surface for such applications. Moreover, derivatives of graphene, such as graphene oxide, which are semiconductors whose bandgaps can be tuned according to the degree of oxidation, can be used in photocatalytic applications owing to their absorption of light in the extended wavelength region.9,20,69 Most studies on graphene related to photocatalysis and solar fuel production have focused on the design of graphene-based catalysts and their potential use in various energy-saving areas, such as solar H2 production, photocatalytic CO2 reduction, and pollutant degradation.71–74 Graphene was first prepared via mechanical exfoliation method with a scotch tape by Geim and Novoselov in 2004, who were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2010.75 Since then, various approaches have been introduced to synthesize graphene, including chemical vapor deposition (CVD), chemical oxidation and reduction, and epitaxial growth.76,77 CVD produces higher quality graphene compared to the other methods.78 In addition, the chemical oxidation–reduction process is utilized as a facile method to prepare graphene.79 However, the obtained graphene is not as pure as the graphene obtained through CVD, owing to the presence of defects and functional groups during oxidation.80,81 One of the methods used to synthesize a-few-layer graphene is exfoliation and cleavage. Graphene is a single layer of graphite that is held together by weak vdW forces.82 Therefore, if the bonds that hold graphite together are broken, single- to a-few-layer graphene with high purities can be obtained. Therefore, exfoliation and cleavage methods that use mechanical (Fig. 1(a)) or chemical energy can be employed to obtain individual graphene sheets. Viculis et al. were the first to report this method; they used potassium metal to intercalate a graphite sheet, which was followed by exfoliation to form a a-few-layer carbon sheet.83 The process of exfoliation-based modification involving a liquid phase (Fig. 1(b)) has made it possible to produce large-scale graphene. CVD is a well-known method for synthesizing high-quality low-defect graphene. The graphene obtained by CVD can be easily transferred to other substrates and used in various applications.65 In 2006, the first planar a-few-layer graphene that was synthesized by CVD was reported.84 Camphor was used as the precursor to synthesize graphene on nickel foils. Camphor was first evaporated at 1800 °C and pyrolyzed in a CVD furnace (Fig. 1(c)) at 700–8000 °C by using argon as the carrier gas. The synthesized graphene was estimated to contain 35 layers of sheets. In another report, single- to a-few-layer graphene were grown on polycrystalline nickel by thermal CVD.85 A SiO2/Si substrate was used to evaporate a nickel film (500 nm thick), which was followed by annealing in argon and H2 atmospheres. Graphene was found to form on the nickel after the CVD furnace temperature was increased to 900–1000 °C for 5 to 10 min and upon using 25 and 1500 sccm of CH4 and H2 gases, respectively. The synthesized graphene could be transferred to any substrate, while retaining its electrical and optical properties. In addition, An et al. synthesized graphene on iron foils by using thermal CVD.78 A 100 μm thick iron foil (as the catalyst) and acetylene (as the hydrocarbon source) were employed to grow graphene. When a low acetylene flow rate (5 sccm) and a short growth time (5 min) were used, the iron substrate was covered by single- to a-few-layer graphene sheets. The synthesis time and the flow rate of acetylene were controlled to obtain continuous graphene layers at temperatures of 600–800 °C. Moreover, a 1 cm2 area of a copper foil substrate was used to synthesize graphene by thermal CVD.86 The produced graphene exhibited high quality and uniformity. Another method to synthesize graphene is plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), which is typically used for the fabrication of carbon nanotubes87 and carbon nanowalls.88 Single- to a-few-layer graphene were prepared by PECVD, as first reported in 2004.89 Compared with the growth by thermal CVD, PECVD has many advantages, including a lower substrate temperature, higher growth selectivity, and providing better control of nanostructure ordering and patterning.90 For example, Terasawa et al. reported the growth of graphene on a copper substrate by PECVD.91 Various parameters such as different plasma powers, gas pressures, and substrate temperatures were used to obtain graphene. The growth of monolayer graphene was affected by the catalytic nature of copper at high substrate temperatures, and the growth of multilayer graphene at low temperatures was affected by the radicals generated in the plasma.
 Fig. 1  Schematics of different graphene synthesis techniques: (a) micromechanical cleavage, (b) liquid-phase exfoliation, (c) chemical vapor deposition (reproduced with permission from ref. 82, copyright 2012, Elsevier), and (d) chemically converted graphene (reproduced with permission from ref. 94 copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH). 
Moreover, graphene can also be obtained through chemical-based techniques.64 Different types of graphite, such as graphite oxide (GO) or other derivatives, can be used to synthesize high-purity graphene-based composites with new functions.92 Chemically converted graphene (CCG) (Fig. 1(d)) can be prepared by wet approaches such as chemical exfoliation of graphite in solvents or chemical reduction of colloidal dispersions of graphene oxide, which is a single layer of GO.92,93 In 2006, for the first time, Ruoff's group investigated the use of a solution-based process for the production of single-layer graphene.80 Bai et al. also investigated the chemical reduction of graphene oxide to obtain CCG.94 In this case, graphite was first oxidized in the presence of KMnO4, NaNO3, and concentrated H2SO4 to produce GO. The GO was then exfoliated into graphene oxide sheets in water by using ultrasonication to form a stable aqueous dispersion.
Modification of pristine graphene surfaces may improve its mechanical strain and defect properties.95,96 Metal nanoparticles (NPs) are used to improve the electronic properties, resulting in enhanced catalyst activity and stability.97 Therefore, the functionalization and modification of graphene surfaces is an appropriate method of modifying graphene. Graphene oxide (GO), as a derivative of graphene, is a promising candidate for use as a catalyst owing to its functional groups and defects, and provides a proper platform with a high number of active sites that can improve the catalyst performance. Hummers' method is a popular technique for preparing GO, and involves a two-step graphite oxidation procedure in strong H2SO4 and H2O2 at room temperature.98 However, the electron mobility and conductivity of GO are much lower than those of bare graphene, owing to the existence of oxygen-containing functional groups on the GO surface. On the other hand, GO has unique properties such as low production costs and hydrophobicity, and is easy to functionalize or make surface modifications; it is also a suitable platform for supporting metal NPs.99 In addition, GO can be easily doped by atoms of sulfur, phosphorous, nitrogen, and boron, which makes it an efficient catalyst.100
Graphene-based catalyst for solar fuels: HER and CO2 reduction
Graphene has attracted much attention as an excellent support in photocatalytic applications owing to its unique properties.2,71,101 Graphene can transport electrons easily and increase the number of photogenerated carriers and their lifetimes.69,70,99 For instance, Li et al. investigated graphene nanosheets decorated with CdS for solar H2 production via water splitting.70 The solvothermal method was employed to synthesize the materials. GO was prepared by Hummers' method and placed in a Teflon-lined autoclave, before mixing with CdS. They compared different concentrations of GO in CdS to optimize the sample. Quantum efficiency (QE) is one the most important parameters determining photocatalytic performance, and can be expressed by the following equation:70,102  
GO improves the crystallinity of CdS particles, which was confirmed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) results shown in Fig. 2(a). This phenomenon was attributed to the GO platform, which provided nucleation sites for the CdS particles on the surface, thus promoting the crystallization of CdS NPs. In addition, the high porosity of a surface can increase the surface area and the number of active sites, facilitating charge transfer, and thereby, increasing the photocatalytic activity.103–105 Furthermore, graphene can increase the absorption of visible light, which was examined by UV-vis spectroscopy; the absorbance spectra are shown in Fig. 2(b). As can be seen in Fig. 2(b), the highest absorbance of visible light is obtained at 40% graphene content, suggesting that solar radiation can be more efficiently absorbed. In this work, they investigated the photocatalytic activity of graphene–CdS. The performance was evaluated under visible-light illumination with an acidic solution as the reagent and platinum as a cocatalyst. The role of platinum is to decrease the overpotential in H2 evolution during water splitting. As can be seen in Fig. 2(c), graphene plays a vital role in the performance of the photocatalyst, in which the presence of a small amount of graphene (1%) enhances the photocatalytic activity to 1.12 mmol h−1.
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of sample GCx solid powders (where x = 0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.5, 5.0, and 40), (b) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of GCx solid powders, (c) comparison of the visible-light photocatalytic activities of samples GC0, GC0.5, GC1.0, GC2.5, GC5.0, GC40, and G for H2 production, and (d) schematic of the charge separation and transfer occuring in the graphene–CdS system under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2011 American Institute of Physics. 
Two factors contribute to this improvement: (1) graphene increases the porosity, resulting in enhancements in the surface area and the number of active sites, and (2) graphene is likely an electron acceptor that absorbed the electrons generated in CdS. Furthermore, graphene can significantly decrease the recombination of the photoexcited electron–hole pairs.70,103 To clarify the results and understand the photocatalytic performance, a schematic is shown in Fig. 2(d) to illustrate the photocatalytic reaction. Fig. 2(d) indicates the fundamental phenomenon of the production of photogenerated carriers, which is based the ability to excite electrons from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB) of CdS. This phenomenon is possible through three routes: (1) the carbon atoms on the graphene surface, (2) the platinum deposited on CdS, and (3) the placement of platinum on the graphene surface. The formation of H2 is ascribed to the reaction of electrons and the adsorbed H+ ions. Graphene also increases the lifetimes of the charge carriers, which facilitates the efficient separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs.70,104 Therefore, graphene is a superior supporting material for semiconducting NPs for photocatalysis and energy conversion applications. Another study was carried out to demonstrate the role of graphene oxide in photocatalytic water splitting for the HER, as reported by Yang et al.99 Yang et al. reported a method to achieve H2 evolution with GO by using a GO/SiC structure under visible-light illumination. They found that the H2 production was 95 μl h−1 when using 1% of GO in a GO/SiC composite, which is higher than that obtained with bare SiC. Similarly, the improvement in the photocatalytic activity of GO/SiC is attributed to three factors: (1) electrons reacting with the adsorbed H+ to form H2, (2) electrons reacting with the oxygen-containing functional groups present on the GO surface, and (3) facilitation of electron transfer for their reaction with H+ to form H2. These results confirmed that the role of graphene as a commendable support is persistent in different graphene-based photocatalyst nanocomposites.69,99
Recently, other forms of graphene, such as GQDs, have been introduced to obtain promising graphene-based nanostructures with high chemical stabilities and solubilities, and excellent optoelectronic properties, compared to those of other semiconductor QDs such as CdS and ZnO.13 GQDs and doped GQDs, such as nitrogen–GQDs and sulfur, nitrogen–GQDs, can be used in various applications such as solar cells, gas sensors, organic LEDs (OLEDs), energy harvesting devices, and photocatalysts.16,105–108 GQDs as tunable nanomaterials have shown great potential for use in energy harvesting and, in particular, as photocatalysts for HER applications. For example, sulfur, nitrogen, cobalt-doped GQDs/TiO2 were used as photocatalysts for solar H2 production, as reported by Xie et al.109 Nitrogen, cobalt-doped GQDs/TiO2 nanocomposites were prepared by the hydrothermal method. In addition, different ratios of sulfur, nitrogen-doped GQDs (0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, and 10 wt%) were examined to optimize the photocatalytic performance. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) were employed to reveal the successful synthesis of the nanocomposites. From the TEM results, the particle sizes of the sulfur, nitrogen-doped GQDs were found to be between 0.8 and 1.2 nm, and FTIR showed that the QDs were well-loaded into the TiO2 clusters. However, there was a redshift in the FTIR spectra, caused by the incorporation of sulfur, nitrogen-doped GQDs into TiO2, which changed the stretching vibrations and the coordination of the QDs with TiO2 (Fig. 3(a)). Studying the visible absorbance spectrum is vital for evaluating the photocatalytic properties of nanomaterials and their capabilities. Fig. 3(b) indicates that there are peaks located at 345 and 462 nm for the sulfur, nitrogen-doped GQDs, indicating that the optical bandgap can be tuned by doping these two elements into GQDs. The optical bandgaps were obtained as 2.5 and 3.2 eV for sulfur, nitrogen-doped GQDs and TiO2, respectively, suggesting that the doped GQD/TiO2 nanocomposite could absorb a wide range of the visible light spectrum, and thereby, enhance the photocatalytic activity efficiently. Fig. 3(c) shows the photocatalytic properties of the nanocomposites containing different proportions of sulfur, nitrogen-doped GQDs in TiO2 and the H2 generation rate measured under visible-light irradiation. Bare TiO2 exhibited a rate of only 1.7 μmol h−1 owing to the absorbance of incident light in the UV range and quick recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. The highest H2 production rate was obtained when using the sulfur, nitrogen-doped GQD (3 wt%)/TiO2 nanocomposite as the catalyst, which was significantly higher than that of bare TiO2. The enhancement in the photocatalytic activity is ascribed to the well-matched energy levels at the sulfur, nitrogen-doped GQD/TiO2 heterojunction and to the efficient electron–hole separation in the interface.110 However, the photocatalytic activity deteriorates when the content of sulfur, nitrogen-doped GQD is more than 3 wt%, due to increased scattering of the incident light and a reduction in the number of light-active sites.109,111 The schematic of Fig. 3(d) shows the mechanism proposed for explaining the catalytic behavior of the sulfur, nitrogen-doped GQD/TiO2 nanocomposite. First, these GQDs act as an electron acceptor to trap the electrons generated and transported from TiO2, and then, donate electrons to the CB by sensitizing TiO2, which result in photocatalytic activation for H2 production upon illumination.112 Moreover, the narrow bandgap of these GQDs facilitates the conversion of light to electron–hole pairs, which eventually leads to efficient H2 evolution. The photocatalytic mechanism can be expressed by the following equations:109,112 photocatalyst + hv → e− + h+(1) h+ + H2O → ˙OH + H+(2) CH3OH + ˙OH→ ˙CH2OH + H2O(3) CH2OH → HCHO + H+ + e−(4) 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−(5) overall reaction: CH3OH → HCHO + H2(6)
 Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra of P25, sulfur, nitrogen–GQDs, and sulfur, nitrogen–GQD/P25, (b) the UV-vis absorption spectrum of the GQDs, (c) photocatalytic H2 generation rates of pure P25 and sulfur, nitrogen–GQD/P25 composites with different concentrations of sulfur, nitrogen–GQDs under UV-vis light, and (d) schematic of the photocatalytic H2 evolution involving sulfur, nitrogen–GQD/P25 composites under UV-vis light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2017 Springer. 
Therefore, graphene and its derivatives, such as GQDs and GO, have shown great potential for use in photocatalytic applications and solar fuels owing to their excellent performances, and are promising candidate materials for energy harvesting and conversion.
Graphene-based catalysts for CO2 reduction
Owing to the unique properties of graphene, diverse graphene-based composite materials can be prepared with extraordinary properties for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Their ability to increase the specific surface area to provide high surface reactive sites makes them a top priority for use as supports for photocatalysts.113,114 Therefore, the surface reaction of the reduction of CO2 can be carried out easily. Recently, further enhancements to graphene for application in photocatalytic CO2 reduction have been demonstrated.115 Various methods of graphene functionalization, such as doping and coupling with a semiconductor, were found to enhance the photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance. Graphene oxide is a well-known material that is composed of 2D carbon sheets produced by acid exfoliation of graphite.116–118 Owing to the presence of oxygenated functional groups, the finite bandgap of graphene oxide creates possibilities for photocatalytic applications such as CO2 to methanol conversion, which involves simultaneous solar energy harvesting and CO2 reduction.119 For example, Hsu et al. reported GO as an effective photocatalyst for CO2 reduction.118 The GO-based photocatalyst was synthesized by a modified Hummers' method for enhancing the catalytic activity. Given the large specific area of graphene oxide, the prepared GO composite exhibited a high photocatalytic activity that was 6 times higher than that of bare TiO2, in which the rate obtained was 0.172 μmmol gcat−1 h−1 under visible light irradiation. Studies have shown that the optical, physical, and electronic properties of 2D materials can be altered by doping. Therefore, doping is employed to modify the properties of graphene. For example, Xing et al. revealed that the doping of graphene with boron (BG) can effectively enhance the electronic conductivity of graphene, which is beneficial for improving its photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity.120 Doping with boron effectively reduced the size of the graphene nanosheet by virtue of the macroresidual stress induced by boron. In addition, the edges on the BG nanoribbons exhibited a semimetallic property with good electron conductivity. Moreover, coupling BG with commercial TiO2 (P25) to further reduce the size of the graphene nanosheet resulted in a well-defined composite for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Compared to the bare BGs, the improvements in the conductivity and defects of TiO2/BG are attributed to the nanoscale structure. As a result, TiO2/BG shows a higher rate of photocatalytic CO2 conversion to CH4 than pure TiO2 and G–TiO2 composite. In addition, Tan et al. investigated a graphene oxide-doped oxygen-rich TiO2 (5GO–OTiO2) photocatalyst for CO2 reduction that was prepared by the modified Hummers' and ultrasonication method.119 Based on the results obtained from the CO2 photoreduction experiments, the total CH4 yield of 3.450 μmol gcat−1 was successfully attained over 5GO–OTiO2 after 8 h of reaction under visible-light irradiation. It was observed that GO–OTiO2 with 5 wt% GO incorporation (5GO–OTiO2) afforded the optimum performance for CO2 photoreduction.
In another case, the combination of graphene with a photocatalyst also yielded a photocatalyst that exhibited advantages such as a sufficient number of active sites, large specific surface area, and high number of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.121–124 In 2010, for the first time, Kamat and coworkers studied graphene-based semiconductor–metal composites.123 In this system, owing to its very high conductivity and Fermi level, which is less negative than those of most photocatalysts, graphene has been used as an electron sink in the photocatalytic reaction to enhance the electron–hole separation and increase the photocatalytic activity.125 The proper band alignment and the band structure produce rapid electron transfer from the photocatalyst to graphene, resulting in highly efficient CO2 reduction. The design of the graphene-based photocatalyst has also been shown to have a big effect in enhancing the CO2 reduction activity. Graphene is a 2D nanosheet having a layered structure. Graphene-based photocatalysts composed of two components or more can be classified into representative categories for photocatalytic CO2 reduction, namely: 0D/2D graphene-based photocatalysts, 1D/2D graphene-based photocatalysts, and 2D/2D graphene-based photocatalysts. When graphene is coupled with NPs, which are 0D materials, a small fraction of the NPs will be connected to it, as their size is very small; this reduces the electron transfer from the NPs to graphene.126 In the case of 1D/2D graphene-based photocatalysts, the photocatalytic activity is apparently higher than that of the 0D/2D photocatalysts. Compared to their 0D counterparts, the 1D nanostructures having tube, rod, wire, or belt shape display some advantages, such as high aspect ratios, large specific surface areas, and excellent electronic or ionic charge transport properties.127 For example, Yu et al. synthesized rGO–CdS nanorod composite by the microwave-assisted hydrothermal method for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH4,121 in which the composite nanorods (NRs) exhibited a much better performance than pure CdS NRs. It was found out that rGO enhanced the adsorption and activation of CO2 molecules and also acted as an electron acceptor to efficiently separate the photogenerated charge carriers. Further, the π–π surface interactions between graphene and CO2 molecules play an important role in improving the performance, as CO2 can be easily absorbed on the surface. The destabilization and activation of CO2 molecules facilitates their reduction during the photocatalytic reaction. However, to fully utilize the 2D properties of graphene, a graphene-based 2D–2D composite photocatalyst must be fabricated to enhance the CO2 reduction efficiency. Given the large contact area of the 2D–2D composite, the interaction between graphene and the photocatalyst is expected to be improved, which accelerates the transfer and separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, thus enhancing their photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity.10,128,129 In support of the phenomena discussed above, Sun et al. fabricated three categories of 2D/0D, 2D/1D, and 2D/2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructures by the solvothermal process. Their results indicated that the 2D/2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure exhibited the highest photocatalytic efficiency in comparison to the 0D/2D and 1D/2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructures and pure TiO2 nanosheets.130 This behavior was attributed to a stronger electronic and physical coupling in the 2D/2D structure, which rendered electron transport more efficient (Fig. 4(a)–(c)). In addition, Ong et al. showed that the 2D/2D sandwich-like graphene–g-C3N4 (GCN) composite synthesized by the facile one-pot impregnation thermal reduction method also displays a high photocatalytic activity for reducing CO2 to produce CH4.131 The large contact interface between graphene and g-C3N4 plays an important role in improving the photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity by increasing the electron migration (Fig. 4(d)–(f)). Moreover, Ong et al. synthesized a 2D/2D layered nanostructure of reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/g-C3N4 by surface charge modification and protonation for enhanced photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH4.132 The synthesis involved ultrasonic dispersion followed by a NaBH4-reduction process (Fig. 5(a)). Compared with pure g-C3N4 and rGO/CN, the optimized composite 15 wt% rGO/pCN (15rGO/pCN) exhibited the highest CH4 evolution of 13.93 μmol g−1cat with a photochemical quantum yield of 0.560%, which were 5.4 and 1.7 times higher than those of pure pCN and 15rGO/CN samples, respectively, for CO2 reduction in the presence of water vapor (Fig. 5(b) and (c)). Since g-C3N4 also shows a 2D π-conjugated structure, this feature helps in improving the ability of the catalyst to adsorb CO2 molecules. When electrostatically combined with the 2D conducting material rGO, pCN and rGO formed an effective interface that resulted in a better performance for the reduction of CO2 (Fig. 5(d)). Furthermore, the process of fabrication of this 2D/2D structure may affect the photocatalytic activity. For example, exfoliation synthesis of graphene and g-C3N4 will expose the defects present on the surface, which is beneficial for the CO2 reduction, but excess functional groups on the surface of the catalyst will reduce the conductivity and the number of active sites, thus degrading the performance. To solve this problem, Liang et al. synthesized smaller amounts of surface defects, which resulted in a higher photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity toward CH4 production than their counterparts with high amounts of surface defects.142 In this process, graphene was prepared by two different methods, which involved rGO and the solvent-exfoliated graphene (SEG) method, and coupled with TiO2 to form rGO–TiO2 and SEG–TiO2, respectively. On account of its outstanding electron conductivity, SEG–TiO2 exhibited a higher photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity than rGO–TiO2.
 Fig. 4  (a) Crystal structures of TiO2 and graphene nanosheets; (b) TEM and elemental mapping images of 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure; (c) photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB) over various photocatalysts under the irradiation of UV light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Synthesis of GCN samples via the one-pot impregnation-thermal reduction strategy; (e) total CH4 yield over the as-prepared photocatalysts; and (f) photogenerated charge transfer in the GCN system for the reduction of CO2 with H2O to form CH4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Synthesis process of rGO/pCN samples involving combined ultrasonic dispersion and electrostatic self-assembly followed by a NaBH4-reduction process; (b) total evolution of CH4 over pure g-C3N4 and a series of rGO/pCN photocatalysts with different rGO contents under visible light irradiation for 10 h; (c) total evolution of CH4 after 10 h over rGO, pure g-C3N4, pCN, and 15rGO/CN, which were compared with 15rGO/pCN nanocomposite; (d) the charge transfer and separation process occurring in the rGO/pCN nanocomposite for the reduction of CO2 to CH4 in the presence of H2O under visible light illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
In addition, Ali et al. investigated the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 on Cu2Se/graphene binary nanocomposites.124 The nanocomposite material was prepared via a modified hydrothermal method. The Cu2Se NPs were nearly spherical in morphology and uniformly distributed on the graphene sheet. The average size of the Cu2Se NPs was approximately 0.27 to 0.35 mm.
Owing to the synergetic effect of Cu2Se and graphene, the structure was able to suppress charge recombination, improve interfacial charge transfer, and provide active adsorption sites for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. The methanol yields for Cu2Se under visible and UV light irradiation were measured, and the results showed that the yield for Cu2Se–graphene under UV illumination was significantly better. Moreover, studies showed that the morphology and the size of the photocatalyst can be altered by using graphene. For example, Tan et al. fabricated reduced graphene oxide–TiO2 hybrid nanocrystals through a novel and simple solvothermal synthetic route (Fig. 6(a)).133 The incorporation of rGO into the composite reduced the bandgap of the rGO–TiO2 hybrid material to the visible-light wavelength range (λ > 400 nm). As a result, the prepared rGO–TiO2 nanocomposites exhibited a high CH4 product yield of 0.135 μmol gcat−1 h−1 (Fig. 6(b)). The synergetic effect in rGO–TiO2 decreases charge recombination by accelerating the transfer of the photogenerated electrons from TiO2 to rGO, leading to a superior photocatalytic activity (Fig. 6(c)). In the case of rGO, graphene oxide is usually conjugated with the photocatalyst first, as it has a huge amount of functional groups (carboxyl and hydroxyl) on its surface. Simultaneously, by the transformation of GO to rGO, a direct link between graphene and the photocatalyst is formed. The rGO can also serve as a capping agent on the photocatalyst and inhibit the growth of the photocatalyst nanocrystals, thereby improving the specific surface area.134
 Fig. 6  (a) Procedure for the synthesis of rGO–TiO2 nanocomposites, (b) time dependence of the photocatalytic formation rate of CH4, and (c) charge transfer and separation in rGO–TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. 
Owing to its unique features, graphene and its derivatives can wrap the particles of photocatalysts having low photostabilities, such as Cu2O and CdS, thereby improving their stability. Therefore, photocorrosion, which can result from the movement of the photocatalyst by the OH− groups of these less photostable catalysts, can be prevented by graphene. In 2014, An et al. reported a facile one-step microwave-assisted chemical method for the preparation of a rGO-supported Cu2O hybrid for photocatalytic CO2 reduction.135 As a result, the prepared Cu2O/rGO showed a higher photocatalytic activity towards CO2 reduction than optimized Cu2O. Additionally, the presence of rGO decreased the photocorrosion property of Cu2O by preventing the direct contact of Cu2O with water. Furthermore, owing to the high conductivity and large surface area of rGO, the composite exhibited low electron–hole recombination, leading to excellent photocatalytic activity and photostability. As a result, the Cu2O/rGO junction provided an initial quantum yield of 0.34% at 400 nm for CO2 photoreduction. Furthermore, Li et al. prepared a ZnO–rGO composite by using a facile hydrothermal reaction.136 Owing to the functional groups present on rGO, its surface can significantly reduce the size of ZnO particles and prevent the self-aggregation of ZnO. As a result, a uniform distribution of ZnO on rGO is achieved, which affords a higher specific surface area than pure ZnO; this ensures that there are more active surface sites available for the photocatalytic CO2 reactions. As a result, the prepared ZnO–rGO composite exhibits a better photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity than pure ZnO for the production of CH3OH. Therefore, graphene can enhance the photocatalytic activity and the photostability of photocatalysts. Given the good electron conductivity and large specific surface area of rGO, Cu2O/rGO exhibits a low electron–hole recombination rate and a large number of active surface sites.88 In another interesting case, the use of perovskite quantum dots (QDs) for CO2 reduction was reported. Halide perovskite QDs are optoelectronic materials used in LEDs, solar cells, and photovoltaic devices, which have not been studied for photochemical conversion applications such as water splitting and CO2 reduction.137–139 Xu et al. investigated a simple anti-solvent precipitation method to synthesize CsPbBr3 QDs and CsPbBr3 QD/GO composite.140 Both the as-prepared samples showed excellent visible-light absorption and strong photoinduced luminescence under UV-light irradiation. As a result, CsPbBr3 QDs/GO showed a CO2 evolution rate of 23.7 μmol g−1 h−1, with the selectivity being over 99.3% for CO2 reduction. Additionally, the rate of electron consumption in CsPbBr3 QD/graphene oxide (CsPbBr3 QD/GO) was increased by 25.5%, which was due to the improvement of electron extraction and transport in the composite. It is anticipated that the results of this study will provide new opportunities for the use of halide perovskite QD materials in photocatalytic applications. For example, Kuai et al. synthesized a Z-scheme consisting of CdS nanospheres (CdS NSs) and TiO2 NPs as photocatalysts and rGO as a solid electron mediator.141 In this Z-scheme system, the electrons from the CB of TiO2 transferred to rGO and then recombined with the existing holes of CdS NSs, allowing the photogenerated electrons to enrich the CdS semiconductor, with holes enriching the TiO2.
Compared to other meditators, such as gold, the inexpensive rGO provides a high conductivity that facilitates the transfer of charge carriers and provides a large surface area for TiO2–CdS interfacial contact. Furthermore, Liang et al. demonstrated a technique for producing a graphene–TiO2 nanocomposite with low-defect graphene.142 The solvent exfoliation (SE) method was used to prepare the nanocomposite, which was then compared to the previously reported rGO–TiO2 to explain the role of graphene and its defects. As a result, the solvent-exfoliated graphene showed fewer defects, which improved the electrical mobility and the photoreduction ability by allowing the photoexcited electrons to effectively diffuse to the reactive sites. rGO–TiO2 showed a higher photocatalytic activity for the reduction of CO2 to CH4 than TiO2 under visible-light illumination. This work established a methodology for further study of graphene-based materials for the production of solar fuels. Further, recent studies have shown that the addition of noble metals such as platinum, palladium, gold, and silver as cocatalysts can improve the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 into hydrocarbon fuels.143,144 Noble metals improve the efficiency of CO2 reduction by suppressing electron–hole recombination145 and providing more catalytically active sites for the adsorbed species.146 For example, Tan et al. synthesized a noble-metal-modified reduced graphene oxide/TiO2 ternary nanostructure for the photoreduction of CO2 to CH4.147 A two-step synthesis procedure was employed, with graphene oxide/TiO2 (GT) being prepared by the solvothermal method, and the as-prepared nanocomposites were used as supporting materials for the dispersion of metal NPs (Fig. 7(a)). The ternary nanostructure showed excellent photocatalytic activity towards the reduction of CO2 to CH4 gas. Specifically, the platinum-doped GT nanocomposites showed better results, with a yield of 1.70 μmol gcat−1, which was 13.2 and 2.6 times higher than those of commercial P25 and bare GT (Fig. 7(b)).
 Fig. 7  (a) Synthesis of NM–GT ternary composites by a two-step routine; (b) total yield of CH4 over pure anatase TiO2, the commercial Degussa P25, GT, and a series of NM–GT nanocomposites obtained after 6 h of reaction, and (c) mechanism of the photoreduction of CO2 to CH4 over platinum–GT composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
The synergetic effects of the catalysts are as follows: (1) the Π–Π conjugation of rGO provides a good electron conductivity, and (2) the Schottky barrier formed on the surface of the metal in contact with the semiconductor as a result of the addition of noble metals, which promotes effective charge separation and transfer; these effects play an important role in improving the performance of the nanostructure. The CO2 photoreduction process was investigated under visible light irradiation. The photoreduction mechanism of the as-prepared catalyst is presented in Fig. 7(c).
Transition metal dichalcogenides
Properties and synthesis
Recently, 2D TMDs have attracted attention in photocatalytic HER applications owing to their remarkable electronic, optical, chemical, and mechanical properties.50 In general, the stoichiometry of TMDs can be expressed by the formula MX2, where M and X represent a transition metal and a chalcogen, respectively. The monolayer of a TMD includes three atoms, in which the transition metal M is located between the two chalcogens (X) (Fig. 8(a) and (b)).52,148 A vdW force exists between the layers, which are stacked together. The properties of TMDs can be tuned based on their composition. In addition, a-few-layer TMDs display outstanding properties owing to their own surface effects and quantum-confinement states, while bulk TMDs do not exhibit such special properties.7 For instance, TMDs exhibit indirect bandgaps in bulk semiconducting hexagonal structures. On the other hand, single-layer TMDs exhibit direct bandgaps, suggesting that they can be used as efficient photocatalysts with enhanced PL. MoS2 and WS2 as p-type semiconductors have been frequently utilized in various applications such as solar cells, LEDs, gas sensors, photodetectors, transistors, and photoelectrocatalysts.149–156 WS2 and MoS2 contain two fundamental phases, 1T (metallic) and 2H (semiconducting), which have different properties. However, there are techniques to convert to each phase, depending on the design, structure, and special states.157 The crystal structures of the 1T and 2H phases of MoS2 are illustrated in Fig. 8(c). For example, lithium intercalation and an infrared laser were used to convert the 2H-phase to 1T-phase, and vice versa.158 Therefore, the preparation method and control of the process play a vital role in studying and improving the optical, chemical, electronic, mechanical, and catalytic properties of TMDs. In general, the methods for TMD preparation are classified into two main categories: bottom-up (e.g., CVD) and top-down (e.g., mechanical exfoliation).159,160 Nonetheless, through a combination of these processes, we can engineer the edges, crystallinity, and number of layers for using TMDs as highly efficient catalysts. MoS2 and WS2 are typical examples of layered TMDs, and are similar to graphite; the layers are vertically stacked and held by weak vdW forces.148,161 Mechanical exfoliation with a scotch tape and chemical exfoliation methods can be used to obtain single- and a-few-layer TMDs. This process has been employed to obtain MoS2 and WS2.148 Although these processes are relatively simple, the yield is very low, and they cannot be used for large-scale production, which limits their widespread employment. Another method used to prepare TMDs with single- and a-few-layer 2D sheets on the bulk scale is liquid exfoliation, which is a chemical exfoliation method. Lithium intercalation with n-BuLi or lithiation by an electrochemical reaction and ultrasonication are used.148 Studies have shown that materials such as MoS2 can be exfoliated by lithium intercalation.162 In this case, the intercalated ions weaken the interlayer bond in the basal plane by charge transfer. In lithium-intercalation, the semiconducting 2H phase of MoS2 can be changed to the metallic 1T phase. The simplest route to single- and a-few-layer nanosheets of layered compounds is sonication-assisted exfoliation in solvents or aqueous surfactant solutions.163 Ultrasonication followed by for 1–3 produces a bubble49 owing to the high energy of the ultrasonic wave, which exfoliates the layers of TMDs in the presence of suitable solvents.164 The exfoliation of single- and a-few-layer crystals can be alleviated by the interaction of the surfactants or solvents. SE is the simplest method owing to its lack of a third-phase dispersant or surfactant.165 CVD is used to prepare inorganic nanomaterials and 2D materials with large areas and uniform thicknesses for large-scale production for different applications.166,167 Typically, a thin layer of a transition metal oxide, such as MoO3, or WO3, is coated on the surface of a substrate, which is typically SiO2/Si and has a lower melting point than the corresponding metal. Then, the surface is exposed to chalcogens, like sulfur or selenium powder. For example, Tan et al. successfully deposited large-scale monolayer MoS2 on nanoporous gold.167 It was proven that the catalytic activity of MoS2 could be improved by introducing an out-of-plane strain from the porous gold substrate. The other method used to obtain TMDs is hydrothermal synthesis. This method is used for the preparation of TMDs with precursors that permit highly stable growth at high temperatures. For example, the chemical reaction between ammonium molybdate [(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O] and sulfur and/or selenium in a hydrazine monohydrate solution at 150–180 °C for 48 h results in the synthesis of monolayer MoS2 and MoSe2.168 The hydro (solvo) thermal method has also been widely used in the preparation of two-component or multicomponent TMD-based composites by using different sources such as ligands, surfactants, and solvents.169 Thermal annealing is also a method used to prepare TMD-based composites. The Li group synthesized TMD-based composites by using thermal annealing followed by high-temperature calcination by combining TMD precursors such as (NH4)2MoS4 and (NH4)2WS4. Among them, MoS2/CdS,170,171 WS2/CdS,172 and MoS2/g-C3N4 (ref. 173) show high photocatalytic activities. However, with thermal annealing, it is very difficult to control the number of layers and determine the precise morphology of the composite.174 In addition, the specific surface area and the number of catalytically active sites are very low, due to the aggregation of the material during the high-temperature synthesis, which affect the photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 8  (a) Transition metals and the three chalcogen elements (shown in yellow) that constitute TMD layered structures, reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2013 Springer Nature, (b) structure of a TMD, and (c) structures of the two phases (1T, 2H) of MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. 
TMDs as catalysts for the HER and CO2 reduction
Recently, TMDs have been intensively studied for photocatalytic applications owing to their unique properties such as high chemical stabilities, large active surface areas, and excellent photostabilities.7,175–177 The role of TMDs as catalysts for the production of solar fuels can be investigated in three ways: (1) the 2D-structured TMDs can provide supports for semiconductors, NPs, and active sites, resulting in high stabilities in photocatalytic applications; (2) a perfect interface can be fabricated between TMDs and traditional semiconductors, such as silicon, GaAs, and GaN, suggesting a high rate of electron–hole separation and enhanced photocatalytic activity; and (3) various shapes of TMDs have been employed in electrocatalytic HER applications. The activation energy at the edge sites is lower for HER photocatalysis, suggesting their high performance in the solar-driven HER.
Kwon et al. demonstrated a method to fabricate a transferable and wafer-scale MoS2 catalyst by using a solution and CVD process.178 In their work, the n-MoS2/p-Si heterojunction was fabricated as a photocathode for use in solar H2 production. The role of p-type silicon as a narrow-bandgap semiconductor is to generate electron–hole pairs and facilitate charge transport near the H2 reduction potential. However, p-type silicon cannot adsorb H+, owing to its poor kinetics. Therefore, a catalyst is needed to enhance the adsorption of H+. Despite the high efficiencies and stabilities of noble metals such as platinum and palladium, they are not abundantly available and are expensive. Therefore, there have been many efforts to substitute them with other catalysts, in particular, TMDs such as MoS2 and WS2. For example, MoS2 deposited on p-type silicon can significantly enhance the efficiency of solar H2 production by generating a very large electric field and producing a large difference in the work function between MoS2 and p-type silicon, thus enabling charge transport through the film and enhancing the separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs via the electrolyte interface. The MoS2 layer can be obtained by different methods, including chemical exfoliation, CVD, and hydrothermal and solution processes.179 However, providing a large-area, uniform, and dense MoS2 is arduous. Kwon et al. proposed a method to prepare high-efficiency MoS2 that involved thermolysis and CVD.178 A 2H-phase of MoS2 with vertical alignment can be obtained via this process. Fig. 9(a) illustrates the synthesis process of MoS2. An ammonium tetrathiomolybdate ((NH4)2MoS4) precursor was used as the source of molybdenum and sulfur and then spin-coated on a SiO2/Si substrate. After that, the sample was placed in a CVD furnace in the presence of H2 and N2. The reaction mechanism can be expressed as follows: (NH4)2MoS4 → 2 NH3 + H2S + MoS3(7) MoS3 → MoS2 + H2S (under H2 flow)(8)
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of MoS2 thin films, (b) thin films transferred to a 4-inch p-Si wafer and photographs of the transferred films with different thicknesses of MoS2 on glass substrates, (c) PEC performances shown as J–V polarization curves for the MoS2 films of different thicknesses, (d) Tafel slopes of the MoS2 layers obtained from plotting log(j) against potential (vs. RHE), (e) results of the tests performed over 15 cycles to compare the stabilities of bare p-Si and MoS2/p-Si photocathodes, (f) schematic of the energy band diagram of the MoS2/p-Si heterojunction photocathode, and (g) high-resolution TEM images of vertically grown MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Subsequently, the as-prepared MoS2 can be transferred to an arbitrary substrate via a PMMA coating and HF-buffered oxide etchant. The most important feature is to control the thickness of the MoS2 layer by changing the concentration of the (NH4)2MoS4 precursor. Fig. 9(b) shows the wafer-scale MoS2 on a p-Si wafer and the different thicknesses of the MoS2 layers deposited on glass, which can be adjusted by the concentration of the (NH4)2MoS4 precursor. Fig. 9(c) exhibits the current–voltage curves (relative to the reversible hydrogen electrode) that reveal the photoelectrochemical (PEC) performance of MoS2/p-Si. A high current density of −24.6 mA cm−2 at 0 V was obtained by using 13 nm MoS2/p-Si as the photocathode, and the Tafel slope was found to be around 60 mV dec−1 (Fig. 9(d)). The optimized photocathode (13 nm MoS2/p-Si) shown in Fig. 9(e) was observed to be more stable after 15 cycles, compared with bare p-Si. This improvement can be attributed to three main phenomena: (1) the CB energy level (Ec) of MoS2/p-Si is close to the H+/H2 reduction potential, which allows the carriers to easily transfer to the electrolyte without any electronic obstacles (Fig. 9(f)), (2) MoS2 can provide an excellent platform with a high surface area and active edge sites, and (3) the vertical structure of the as-prepared MoS2 enhances the edges and active areas for HER catalysis (Fig. 9(g)). Therefore, MoS2 can be a promising candidate for solar H2 production through a high HER performance and photostability. Moreover, WS2 can be used as a catalyst in WS2/p-type Si photocathode heterojunctions. Kwon et al.180 also investigated the WS2/p-Si photocathode for photocatalytic HER, in which WS2 was prepared by the sulfurization of vacuum-deposited WO3 thin films and CVD. As can be seen in Fig. 10(a), the color of the as-prepared WS2 thin film changes from yellow to brown as the thickness increases, while the absorbance of the film gradually increases. However, the position of the absorption peak approximately remains constant (Fig. 10(b)). PEC measurements were performed to demonstrate the photocatalytic HER performance. As a result, it was found that 23 nm WS2/p-Si exhibited the highest current density of 8.375 mA cm−2 at 0 V and 72% incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE), as shown in Fig. 10(c) and (d). Therefore, it was proved that the incorporation of TMD materials, such as WS2 and MoS2, along with traditional semiconductors such as Si, is promising for efficient PEC water splitting. TMDs such as MoS2 and WS2 can undergo phototransitions without experiencing any photodecomposition and absorb up to 5–10% of visible light within a thickness of 1 nm, thereby showing benefits for the conversion of solar energy. Although there have been numerous reports on 2D metal chalcogenide nanosheets for the production of H2, only a few studies have focused on the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by using 2D metal chalcogenides.181 For instance, Chen et al. synthesized a single-crystal WO3 thin film (Fig. 11(a)) with laterally oriented attachments of tiny WO3 nanocrystals, in which a solid–liquid phase arc discharge in an aqueous solution was used to produce the WO3.182 The altered bandgap of WO3 (Fig. 11(b)) enabled the nanosheet to display enhanced performance for photocatalytic CO2 reduction in water, with the molar rate being 16 μmol g−1 (14 h).
 Fig. 10  (a) Photographs of different thicknesses of WS2 thin films on glass, (b) comparison of the UV-vis absorbances of WS2 thin films of different thicknesses, (c) PEC performances shown as J–V polarization curves for the WS2 films of different thicknesses, and (d) IPCE measurements of the WS2 thin films of different thicknesses on p-Si photocathodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2017 Materials Research Society. 
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the formation of WO3 nanosheets from small nanocrystals, (b) band positions of the WO3 nanosheet and commercial WO3 relative to the redox potential of CO2/CH4 in the presence of water (reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). 
Surface modification of TMDs for the HER and CO2 reduction
Experimental and theoretical studies on TMDs and their application in PEC water splitting have demonstrated the need for improving their performance owing to their poor conductivity and restricted active edge sites. Many efforts have been made to enhance the performance of TMDs. There are some strategies that are used to enhance the photoelectrocatalytic performance, including phase and shape engineering and doping of TMDs.183–187
For example, Zhao et al. prepared a p-type cuprous oxide (Cu2O) NP semiconductor decorated with MoS2 nanosheets for solar H2 production.188 Cu2O has been widely used for solar-driven H2 production because of its small bandgap (2 eV), which permits efficient absorption of visible light and a proper CB energy level that is suitable for photocatalytic applications.189,190 A combination of TMDs, such as MoS2 and Cu2O, can significantly boost the PEC performance. MoS2 can provide active edge sites to separate H+ and H2 in an electrolyte, while Cu2O can help absorb the visible light to generate electron–hole pairs. As a result, Cu2O decorated with 1 wt% of MoS2 nanosheets exhibits a current density of 0.17 mA cm−2, which is 7 times higher than that of bare Cu2O. Therefore, the incorporation of a TMD with noble-metal-free semiconductor NPs yields inexpensive and highly efficient catalysts for PEC H2 evolution.
Another technique is to design a new structure of TMDs in order to increase the number of active sites and surface area. Andoshe and coworkers prepared a three-dimensional (3D) vertically grown structure of MoS2 for enhancing the solar H2 production.191 In their work, TiO2 was utilized as an oxide layer to form the p–n junction with Si and MoS2 and facilitate the nucleation of 3D MoS2 on a substrate. The 3D morphology of MoS2 and a vertical alignment with small grains can be obtained by metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD; Fig. 12(a)). Flow of the precursor enhances the nucleation sites, leading to vertical growth and small grain sizes, as shown in Fig. 12(b) and (c), which result in a high short-circuit current density of 28 mA cm−2 and 85% IPCE for 3D MoS2/TiO2/p-Si sample; the high efficiency was attributed to the increased number of active edge sites and grain boundaries (Fig. 12(d) and (e)).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the direct growth of a 3D MoS2 film on TiO2/p-Si wafer by MOCVD, (b) schematic of vertically aligned MoS2, (c) PEC performances shown as J–V polarization curves, (d) IPCE measurements of the obtained photocathodes, and (e) IPCE curves of 3D MoS2/TiO2/p-Si and TiO2/p-Si, Reproduced with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
More recently, Dai et al. prepared multilayers of MoS2 by incorporating hierarchical flower-like Bi2WO6 (MoS2/Bi2WO6) nanocomposites via a facile two-step approach.192 The as-synthesized MoS2/Bi2WO6 nanocomposites exhibited considerable activity enhancement for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbons, namely methanol and ethanol, under visible light illumination, compared to pure Bi2WO6. This was because a-few-layer MoS2, as a cocatalyst, was in strong interfacial contact with Bi2WO6, which enhanced the visible-light absorption, charge transfer, and separation, thus boosting the photocatalytic activity. For the optimal content of MoS2 (0.4 wt%), 36.7 and 36.6 μmol gcat−1 of methanol and ethanol, respectively, were obtained over the composite after 4 h of visible-light irradiation. These yields were 1.94 times higher than those obtained over pure Bi2WO6. Furthermore, Tu et al. fabricated 2D MoS2 nanosheets grown in situ on TiO2 nanosheets to form 2D hybrid nanojunctions, in which the MoS2 nanosheets compactly contacted with the TiO2 to increase the interfacial area.193 The MoS2–TiO2 hybrid nanojunctions exhibited superior activities and selectivities for the reduction of CO2 to CH3OH in an aqueous solution under UV-vis light irradiation. Different MoS2 contents, 0.5, 1, 2, and 3 wt%, were investigated. The CH3OH production rate for 0.5 wt% MoS2/TiO2 (10.6 μmol g−1 h−1) was about 2.9 times higher than that for pure TiO2 (3.7 μmol g−1 h−1), indicating that MoS2 acted as an efficient cocatalyst. However, a further increase in the MoS2 content (from 1 to 3 wt%) led to a gradual decrease in the photocatalytic activity due to a shielding effect of MoS2 on the TiO2 surface. Moreover, Jiao et al. investigated the role of surface oxides on native metal disulfides in promoting the photoactivities and photostabilities of metal sulfides for CO2 photoreduction.194 SnS2 atomic layers with different degrees of oxidation were successfully synthesized. In situ FTIR spectroscopy fully revealed that COOH* radical was the main intermediate during CO2 photoreduction. Density functional theory calculations revealed that the formation of COOH* is the rate-limiting step, while electron localization on the tin atoms, resulting from local oxidation, lowers the CO2 activation energy barrier. As a result, the mildly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers exhibited a carbon monoxide formation rate of 12.28 μmol g−1 h−1, which was roughly 2.3 and 2.6 times higher than those of the poorly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers and the SnS2 atomic layers, respectively, under visible-light illumination.
Furthermore, Xu et al. investigated the facet engineering of semiconductors for advanced solar energy conversion. They succeeded in preparing anatase TiO2 single crystals with enhanced photocatalytic activity via a facile method (Fig. 13(a)).195 This TiO2 was composed of TiO2 ultrathin nanosheets that were 2 nm thick (Fig. 13(b)), which provide more active surface sites with a specific surface area of 57.1 m2 g−1 and a remarkable electronic band structure for the photocatalytic reaction. As a result, the developed TiO2 nanosheets exhibited high photocatalytic activities, about 5 times greater than that of the reference sample for H2 evolution and CO2 reduction (Fig. 13(c) and (d)).
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the different crystal facets of anatase TiO2 single-crystals, (b) crystal structures of two different facet surfaces of anatase TiO2, (c) CO2 photoreduction analysis of the bare TiO2 samples under UV-visible light illumination, and (d) comparison of the photocatalytic performance between TSheets and TCuboids with the same specific surface area under the illumination of UV-visible light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
The design of the device structure plays an important role in realizing a high performance in solar H2 production. To be precise, the catalyst utilized in solar H2 production must be incorporated in an appropriate semiconductor device structure. In this regard, Zhou et al. fabricated a unique electronic structure for photoelectrocatalytic water splitting.196 Incorporation of TMDs such as MoS2 and WS2 with silicon to form a p–n junction has been studied and efficient performances have been revealed.178,180 However, it has been proved that not only the material design enhances the photocatalytic performance, but also the device structure plays a vital role in the improvement of catalytic properties. As can be seen in Fig. 14, GaN nanowires (NWs), a planar silicon wafer, and a catalyst (MoSx) were used to produce the H2 under solar light irradiation.196 The proposed structure yields the superhigh photocurrent density of 40 mA cm−2 at 0 V and a large onset potential of +0.4 V. The combination of 2D materials (such as MoSx) that exhibit traditional performances can improve the results owing to the migration of electrons and enhanced carrier extraction. Silicon-based p–n junctions have been frequently utilized to generate electron–hole pairs under illumination for different optoelectronic applications that provide a great platform for the absorption of a wide range of the light spectrum to efficiently produce electron–hole pairs.197–199 In addition, to enhance the optical absorbance of silicon-based p–n junctions, a n+ or p+ layer can be used as a heavily doped semiconductor for tuning the bandgap and increasing the solar absorption. Semiconductors (e.g., silicon, GaN) can significantly increase the HER activity. Fig. 14(a) and (b) shows the new design of a photocathode containing p+, n, n+ silicon, and vertically aligned NWs of GaN. The excellent geometrical matching of TMDs and a traditional semiconductor such as GaN leads to an increase in the performance. In fact, incorporation of MoSx as a catalyst and GaN NWs/Si heterojunction formation comprise one of the best device structures for obtaining an extremely high performance of the photocathode. The SEM images shown in Fig. 14(c) confirm the good formation of GaN NWs through electrodeposition method, which is inspired by the core–shell structures reported in the literature.200–202 The absence of defects is the most important parameter in semiconductor technology for obtaining high-quality p–n junctions, as the existence of defects can decrease the performance.203 The TEM images shown in Fig. 14(c) confirm the defect-free structure of GaN, which permits ultrahigh photocurrents and HER performance. Fig. 14(d) displays the performances of the devices, where it is observed that using GaN NWs improved the performance significantly. The improvement can be attributed to the excellent link formation between MoSx and planar silicon and the great electron migration between the channels. Therefore, the design and, importantly, the link formed between the 2D catalyst and the p–n junction would be the important criteria determining the high efficiencies of solar H2 production devices. However, the fabrication of multijunction semiconductors with 2D materials requires complicated equipment for electrodeposition and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), which is a drawback of this typical design, despite its ultrahigh HER performance. Identification of the active sites in TMDs such as MoS2 is crucial to realizing high performances in photocatalytic applications, in particular, solar H2 production. The overpotential in the HER is directly affected by the edge sites in TMDs, especially MoS2. The powerful link to the H+ in the electrolyte is related to the chalcogen atoms such as sulfur and selenium, which are placed on the edges of the TMDs; this facilitates charge transfer in the vicinity of the edges and thereby enhances the HER performance. Therefore, the engineering of edge sites in TMDs is the most important issue in TMD design and utilization for solar H2 production.204 For instance, incorporation of graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and MoS2 can be an appropriate example for the interfacial engineering of active sites.205–207 As an example, Wang et al. investigated the photocatalytic activity of MoS2/g-C3N4 by using density functional theory.208Fig. 15(a) shows the structure of the MoS2/g-C3N4 composite. Defects and distortion were observed on the g-C3N4 surface, due to the MoS2 nanosheets. In addition, the direct bandgap of 1.89 eV (Fig. 15(b) and (c)) confirms efficient electron transfer within the MoS2 and g-C3N4 layers. Consequently, these photoexcited electrons can provide energy close to the H+/H2 reduction potential and are located in the active sites. Moreover, the combination of g-C3N4 and MoS2 can increase the optical absorption range in the visible region, which in turn increases the number of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and thereby enhances the photocatalytic performance.209,210Fig. 15(d) schematically illustrates the electron transfer between MoS2 and g-C3N4 and the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Additionally, the electron transfer from g-C3N4 to MoS2 occurs owing to the higher (negative) energy levels of the CB and VB of g-C3N4.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of MoSx@GaN NWs/Si heterostructure. (b) Electronic interactions of MoS2/GaN, with the right side presenting the outstanding geometric matching between MoS2 and GaN, (c) 45 degrees tilted SEM image of MoSx@GaN NWs/Si and TEM image of MoSx@GaN NWs, and (d) J–E curves of MoSx/Si and MoSx@GaN NWs/Si in 0.5 M H2SO4 under standard one-sun illumination 
 Fig. 15  (a) Top view of the proposed g-C3N4/MoS2 nanocomposite; (b) calculated band structure; (c) TDOS and PDOS of g-C3N4/MoS2 nanocomposite; (d) schematic illustration of the charge transfer and separation in the proposed g-C3N4/MoS2 nanocomposite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The catalyst surface can be engineered based on three aspects: (1) generating defects and distortion in the crystal structure of the catalyst by using another material, (2) tuning the bandgap by combining two different catalysts, which leads to better UV-visible light absorption and higher number of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and efficiency, and (3) approaching the CB near to the reduction potential of H+/H2 and facilitating the electron transfer between the catalyst and the solution to produce H2.
Efforts have been taken to fabricate 2D material heterojunctions that provide excellent properties in optoelectronic devices.180,191,196 In fact, researchers are trying to find an alternative to the traditional semiconductors (Si, GaAs, GaN, and InP) for the fabrication of p–n junctions. A 2D-based heterojunction would be an excellent candidate for this purpose owing to its unique optoelectronic and photocatalytic properties, especially its low cost and earth abundance compared to those of the traditional semiconductors. For instance, the formation of MoS2 and rGO through vdW forces was studied by Meng et al. A p–n heterojunction was fabricated by depositing p-MoS2 on n-doped rGO (n-type semiconductor) that was utilized in solar H2 production.71,211 Importantly, both MoS2 and rGO are earth-abundant, and the heterojunction displays efficient performance in photocatalytic applications.23,212Fig. 16(a) shows the HR-TEM images of MoS2–rGO that was synthesized by hydrothermal method. The H2 produced under solar illumination was examined in a water/ethanol solution, as shown in Fig. 16(b). It confirms the good formation of the p-MoS2/n-rGO heterojunction, which yielded a high H2 production (24.8 μM g−1 h−1). The most significant reason for the enhancement in the HER properties is the nanoscale size of MoS2 in the heterojunction formed with rGO. This phenomenon is observed as quantum-confinement in electrochromic devices.213 In fact, the size of MoS2 can increase the quantum effect, resulting in the reduction of the solution to H2. Another reason for the improvement in the HER performance is the generation of an internal electric field during photocatalytic action. Fig. 16(c) shows the photocurrent density as a function of potential, which reveals the efficient operation of the p–n heterojunction device due to electron migration and lower recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. The mechanism is schematically shown in Fig. 16(d). The nanoscale size of MoS2 implies it can absorb light easily and generate charges on the rGO surface. In addition, the rGO sheet provides a great platform and pathway for electron transfer. The high efficiency of the p–n nanoscale heterojunction can be attributed to three reasons: efficient electron–hole pair generation, low recombination of the charge carriers, and easy movement of charges on the rGO surface.211 Therefore, this structure would be promising for solar H2 production, and can be generalized for other types of TMDs and graphene-based nanostructures. Table 1 and 2 summarize the different 2D materials utilized in the production of solar fuel cells (for the HER and CO2 reduction), along with the synthesis methods and photocatalytic parameters for the HER and CO2 reduction.
 Fig. 16  (a) HRTEM image of p-MoS2/n-rGO, (b) H2 generation by MoS2, MoS2/rGO, and p-MoS2/n-rGO photocatalysts. (c) J–V curves of the various catalysts and bare rGO in the dark. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer and separation in p-MoS2/n-rGO 2D-2D van der Waals heterostructures under simulated solar-light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
Table 1 Comparison of the recent developments in 2D materials for solar H2 production devices




Catalyst
Preparation method
Current density at 0 V
Rate of H2 production
Ref.




CdS–graphene
Solvothermal
—
1.12 mmol h−1

70



GO/SiC
Solution process
—
94 μl h−1

99



S, N-GQD/P25
Hydrothermal
−0.35 μA cm−2
5.7 μmol h−1

109



13 nm MoS2/p-Si
Thermolysis
−24.6 mA cm−2
—

178



23 nm WS2/p-Si
Vacuum PVD
−8.3 mA cm−2
∼8 μmol h−1

180



3D MoS2/TiO2/p-Si
MOCVD
−28 mA cm−2
∼34 μmol h−1

191



S:MoP
Thermolysis
−33 mA cm−2
∼72 μmol h−1

187



MoSx@GaN NWs/Si
MBE-electrodeposition
−40 mA cm−2
—

196



p-MoS2/n-rGO
Hydrothermal
∼−1.9 mA cm−2
∼24.8 μmol h−1

211





Table 2 Comparison of the recent developments in 2D materials for solar CO2 reduction devices




Catalyst
Preparation method
Production
Activity [μmol g−1 h−1]
Ref.




GO
Modified Hummers'
CH3OH
0.172

118



Boron-doped graphene (P25/B–GR)
CVD
CH4
2.5

120



Oxygen-rich TiO2-doped graphene oxide (5GO–OTiO2)
Modified Hummers'
CH4
3.450

119



Cu2Se/graphene
Hydrothermal
CH3OH
2.63

214



rGO–TiO2
Simple solvothermal
CH4
0.135

133



Cu2O/rGO
Microwave-assisted chemical method
CH3OH
41.5

215



CsPbBr3 QDs/GO
Anti-solvent precipitation
CH4
29.6

140



TiO2–CdS/rGO
SE
CH4
0.115

141



WO3 nanosheet
Formation from small nanocrystals
CH4
16

216



MoS2/Bi2WO6
Facile two-step
CH3OH
36.7

192



MoS2–TiO2

In situ growth
CH4
10.6

193



SnS2
Hydrothermal
CO
12.28

194





Conclusion and outlook
The need for a green environment requires the development of energy-harvesting devices. Sunlight as an unlimited natural energy resource can meet our requirements for alternative energy sources. In this context, 2D materials as the most brilliant catalysts can help overcome the issue and are promising alternatives to platinum-based catalysts owing to their excellent properties in photocatalytic applications. In this review, we investigated the two strategies for energy conversion, namely solar H2 production and CO2 reduction, by utilizing 2D material photocatalysts. It is noted that the 2D materials should meet some requirements such as exhibiting high performances and functioning as stable catalysts. In fact, in the design of an efficient photocatalyst for the HER and CO2 reduction, various factors should be considered: large surface area and number of active sites, a suitable bandgap to absorb light across the wide solar spectrum, low costs of materials, simple equipment for synthesis, capability of engineering the materials in a highly stable manner, and the possibility of using environment-friendly methods to produce the catalyst.
Graphene-based catalysts were investigated in this review, because graphene is a promising candidate as a support for photocatalysts. A graphene sheet as a photocatalyst support provides a high surface area and forms great pathways for electron transfer. However, graphene by itself cannot be used as a photocatalyst. The derivative of graphene GQDs is one of the best photocatalysts, exhibiting a high yield of excited photogenerated charge carriers. Despite the excellent properties of graphene-based photocatalysts, uniform synthesis of graphene on a large scale is a challenge. In addition, graphene should be incorporated with other catalysts as graphene sheet is only a support in photocatalytic applications. Therefore, development of the graphene-based photocatalyst industry is required in order to address some of the drawbacks and limitations of utilizing graphene in practical applications.
On the other hand, TMDs have emerged as photocatalysts for the HER and CO2 reduction. TMDs and their properties were investigated in this review. Unlike graphene, TMDs can be utilized as photocatalysts themselves. However, there are some challenges in increasing their stability and efficiency for the HER and CO2 reduction. Phase-engineering in TMDs is one of the most important issues in the production of this type of material for use in photocatalytic applications. To be precise, tradeoff and optimization should be considered between the 2H and 1T phases in TMDs. The stable phase of TMDs is the semiconducting part (2H), whereas the metallic phase (1T) is the conductive part. Therefore, phase-engineering would involve the optimization of TMDs for photocatalytic application. Recently, Yin et al. demonstrated a method to synthesize MoSe2 and engineered its phases.217 They proposed a controllable method to modulate the 1T and 2H phases for the preparation of MoSe2 so that it can be used in the HER; the highest performance was obtained by using 45% 2H and 55% 1T. Therefore, phase modulation is a significant aspect of the design of TMDs for photocatalytic applications. However, research on the phase-engineering of TMDs for photocatalytic HER and CO2 reduction has not gained momentum and significant work is still needed in this regard. Another issue is to understand the active sites in TMDs. The active sites in the stable part of TMDs are the edge sites, which should be considered as an important factor while designing an efficient TMD-based catalyst. As we discussed in this review, there are some methods available to engineer the defects and disorders in order to increase the edge sites in TMDs, including porous and vertically aligned structures.218,219 Activating the basal plane of TMDs is another interesting arc of research that enables the surface to produce H2. For example, Li et al. proposed a method to activate the basal planes of MoS2 for the HER via sulfur vacancies.220 Importantly, modulation of the bandgap is another factor that can increase the efficiency of the TMDs for use in photocatalytic applications. Fabrication of heterostructures, alloying, and doping are three efficient ways to modulate the bandgaps of TMDs; tuning the bandgaps of TMDs can increase the optical absorption range and help generate more electron–hole pairs.142,221–223 In summary, Fig. 17 schematically represents the strategies used for efficient design of TMDs for photocatalytic application.
 Fig. 17  Strategies for improving the performances of TMDs for use as photocatalysts. 
In conclusion, many energy-related issues can be solved by using 2D materials for the HER and CO2 reduction under solar light irradiation owing to their excellent photocatalytic properties such as high surface areas and numbers of active sites, good stabilities, low costs (because they are fabricated with earth-abundant materials), and excellent light absorption. However, the fabrication of 2D materials with low costs, high stabilities, and appropriate photocatalytic performances remains a significant challenge. Nevertheless, we can achieve highly efficient photocatalytic 2D materials by modifying material surfaces and device structures. Herein, we demonstrated the new developments in 2D material-based catalysts for the production of solar fuels via the HER and CO2 reduction. Despite the high photocatalytic performances of graphene and TMDs, further research is needed in this field to obtain better and more efficient devices for commercialization.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by the Creative Materials Discovery Program of the NRF, funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (NRF-2017M3D1A1039379), and in part by the Basic Research Laboratory of the NRF, funded by the Korean government through MSIT (2018R1A4A1022647).
References
D. Y. Leung, G. Caramanna and M. M. Maroto-Valer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 39, 426–443 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar, R. Boukherroub and K. Shankar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12876–12931 RSC .
P. O. Akadiri, E. A. Chinyio and P. O. Olomolaiye, Buildings, 2012, 2, 126–152 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, Y. Hishikawa, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi, J. Hohl-Ebinger and A. W. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2018, 26, 427–436 Search PubMed .
A. Hasani, J. N. Gavgani, R. M. Pashaki, S. Baseghi, A. Salehi, D. Heo, S. Y. Kim and M. Mahyari, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2017, 9, 1616–1625 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Van Le, J.-Y. Choi and S. Y. Kim, FlatChem, 2017, 2, 54–66 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar and Q. Xu, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 28–40 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, K. Novoselov, Q. Fu, N. Zheng, Z. Tian and X. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11350–11366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Low, S. Cao, J. Yu and S. Wageh, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10768–10777 RSC .
J. Burgers, Proc. Phys. Soc., 1940, 52, 23 CrossRef .
E. J. Duplock, M. Scheffler and P. J. Lindan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 225502 CrossRef PubMed .
J. N. Gavgani, A. Hasani, M. Nouri, M. Mahyari and A. Salehi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 229, 239–248 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hasani, H. S. Dehsari, A. A. Zarandi, A. Salehi, F. A. Taromi and H. Kazeroni, J. Nanomater., 2015, 16, 71 Search PubMed .
J. N. Gavgani, H. S. Dehsari, A. Hasani, M. Mahyari, E. K. Shalamzari, A. Salehi and F. A. Taromi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 57559–57567 RSC .
A. Hasani, H. Sharifi Dehsari, M. Asghari Lafmejani, A. Salehi, F. Afshar Taromi, K. Asadi and S. Y. Kim, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2018, 12, 1870317 CrossRef .
Q. Zheng, X. Liu, H. Xu, M.-S. Cheung, Y.-W. Choi, H.-C. Huang, H.-Y. Lei, X. Shen, Z. Wang and Y. Wu, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 35–44 RSC .
Y. R. Park, K. S. Choi, J. C. Kim, Y. S. Seo, S. Y. Kim, Y. J. Kim, W. K. Choi, H. Y. Jeong, W. S. Yang and Y. J. Hong, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700476 CrossRef .
S. Kim, K. C. Kwon, J. Y. Park, H. W. Cho, I. Lee, S. Y. Kim and J.-L. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12932–12939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, X. Sun and X. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 131, 325–330 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, C.-y. Liu and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8426–8430 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hasani, H. S. Dehsari, J. N. Gavgani, E. K. Shalamzari, A. Salehi, F. A. Taromi and M. Mahyari, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 182, 1551–1559 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Choi, Y.-G. Yoon, K. S. Choi, J. H. Kang, Y.-S. Shim, Y. H. Kim, H. J. Chang, J.-H. Lee, C. R. Park and S. Y. Kim, Carbon, 2015, 91, 178–187 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim and T. W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 441–447 CrossRef CAS .
S. Diao, X. Zhang, Z. Shao, K. Ding, J. Jie and X. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 359–366 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, H. Su, J. Zhang, L. S. Walekar, H. V. Molamahmood, B. Zhou, M. Long and Y. H. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 475–484 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bacon, S. J. Bradley and T. Nann, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 415–428 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu, M. Zheng, P. Du, Y. Zhou, L. Zhang, D. Li, H. Tan, Z. Zhao, Z. Xie and Z. Sun, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12272–12277 RSC .
C. Luk, L. Tang, W. Zhang, S. Yu, K. Teng and S. Lau, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22378–22381 RSC .
Z. Liu, J. Xiao, X. Wu, L. Lin, S. Weng, M. Chen, X. Cai and X. Lin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 229, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rao, H. Ramakrishna Matte and U. Maitra, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13162–13185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mahatha, K. Patel and K. S. Menon, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2012, 24, 475504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sik Hwang, M. Remskar, R. Yan, V. Protasenko, K. Tahy, S. Doo Chae, P. Zhao, A. Konar, H. Xing and A. Seabaugh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 013107 CrossRef .
A. Pakdel, C. Zhi, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 256–265 CrossRef CAS .
L. Song, L. Balicas, D. J. Mowbray, R. B. Capaz, K. Storr, L. Ci, D. Jariwala, S. Kurth, S. G. Louie and A. Rubio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 075429 CrossRef .
L. Ci, L. Song, C. Jin, D. Jariwala, D. Wu, Y. Li, A. Srivastava, Z. Wang, K. Storr and L. Balicas, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vogt, P. De Padova, C. Quaresima, J. Avila, E. Frantzeskakis, M. C. Asensio, A. Resta, B. Ealet and G. Le Lay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 155501 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ni, Q. Liu, K. Tang, J. Zheng, J. Zhou, R. Qin, Z. Gao, D. Yu and J. Lu, Nano Lett., 2011, 12, 113–118 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Akinwande, N. Petrone and J. Hone, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Choudhary, M. D. Patel, J. Park, B. Sirota and W. Choi, J. Mater. Res., 2016, 31, 824–831 CrossRef CAS .
W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande and Y. H. Lee, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 116–130 CrossRef CAS .
G. Frey, S. Elani, M. Homyonfer, Y. Feldman and R. Tenne, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 6666 CrossRef CAS .
N. Choudhary, M. R. Islam, N. Kang, L. Tetard, Y. Jung and S. I. Khondaker, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2016, 28, 364002 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Islam, N. Kang, U. Bhanu, H. P. Paudel, M. Erementchouk, L. Tetard, M. N. Leuenberger and S. I. Khondaker, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10033–10039 RSC .
G. J. Choi, Q. Van Le, K. S. Choi, K. C. Kwon, H. W. Jang, J. S. Gwag and S. Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702598 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Bao, X. Cai, D. Kim, K. Sridhara and M. S. Fuhrer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 042104 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, J. Xi, D. O. Dumcenco, Z. Liu, K. Suenaga, D. Wang, Z. Shuai, Y.-S. Huang and L. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4610–4616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17033 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, C. Xie, J. Jin, R. Ali, C. Feng, P. Liu and B. Xiang, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 463 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kappera, D. Voiry, S. E. Yalcin, B. Branch, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cho, S. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. Zhao, J. Seok, D. H. Keum, J. Baik, D.-H. Choe, K. J. Chang and K. Suenaga, Science, 2015, 349, 625–628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tsai, K. Chan, F. Abild-Pedersen and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13156–13164 RSC .
A. Hasani, T. P. Nguyen, M. Tekalgne, Q. Van Le, K. S. Choi, T. H. Lee, T. J. Park, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 567, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Nguyen, Q. Van Le, S. Choi, T. H. Lee, S.-P. Hong, K. S. Choi, H. W. Jang, M. H. Lee, T. J. Park and S. Y. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 292, 136–141 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Henckel, O. M. Lenz, K. M. Krishnan and B. M. Cossairt, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2329–2335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. He, Z. He and Q. Shen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 522, 136–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Chen, B. Zheng, F. Qi, J. He, Q. Li, P. Li and W. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 691, 698–704 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, H. Yang, J. He, H. Liu, L. Song, L. Li and J. Luo, Small, 2018, 14, 1704049 CrossRef PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Tedstone, D. J. Lewis and P. O'Brien, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1965–1974 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2009, 110, 132–145 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Choi, I. Lahiri, R. Seelaboyina and Y. S. Kang, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2010, 35, 52–71 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, J. Guo, S. Zhu, L. Mao, J. Ma and D. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2186–2193 RSC .
K. M. Cho, K. H. Kim, H. O. Choi and H.-T. Jung, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 3972–3978 RSC .
K. Chang, Z. Mei, T. Wang, Q. Kang, S. Ouyang and J. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7078–7087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-F. Yeh, J. Cihlář, C.-Y. Chang, C. Cheng and H. Teng, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 78–84 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, B. Guo, J. Yu, J. Ran, B. Zhang, H. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878–10884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, R. Shen, S. Ma, X. Chen and J. Xie, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 430, 53–107 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faraji, M. Yousefi, S. Yousefzadeh, M. Zirak, N. Naseri, T. H. Jeon, W. Choi and A. Z. Moshfegh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019 10.1039/c8ee00886h .
J. Low, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 658–686 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, T. Maiyalagan and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 781–794 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Sutter, J.-I. Flege and E. A. Sutter, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. An, W.-J. Lee and J. Jung, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, S81–S85 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Gao, in Graphene oxide, Springer,  2015, pp. 61–95 Search PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, A. Lombardo, T. Hasan, Z. Sun, L. Colombo and A. C. Ferrari, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 564–589 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Viculis, J. J. Mack and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2003, 299, 1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Somani, S. P. Somani and M. Umeno, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 430, 56–59 CrossRef CAS .
A. Reina, S. Thiele, X. Jia, S. Bhaviripudi, M. S. Dresselhaus, J. A. Schaefer and J. Kong, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 509–516 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung and E. Tutuc, science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Gupta and R. Nemanich, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 2601–2603 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, P. Qiao, T. Chong and Z. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 64–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. Zhu, R. Outlaw, X. Zhao, D. Manos, B. Holloway and V. Mammana, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 1265–1267 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cappelli, S. Orlando, G. Mattei, C. Scilletta, F. Corticelli and P. Ascarelli, Appl. Phys. A, 2004, 79, 2063–2068 CrossRef CAS .
T.-o. Terasawa and K. Saiki, Carbon, 2012, 50, 869–874 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne and Y. K. Gun'Ko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3680–3695 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1089–1115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Goncalves, P. A. Marques, C. M. Granadeiro, H. I. Nogueira, M. Singh and J. Gracio, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4796–4802 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis, P. Ramesh, C. Berger, M. Sprinkle, W. A. de Heer and R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1336–1337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Crooks, M. Zhao, L. Sun, V. Chechik and L. K. Yeung, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 181–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shahriary and A. A. Athawale, Int. J. Renew. Energy Environ. Eng., 2014, 2, 58–63 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, X. Zeng, L. Chen and W. Yuan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 083101 CrossRef .
S. Yang, L. Zhi, K. Tang, X. Feng, J. Maier and K. Müllen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3634–3640 CrossRef CAS .
J. Azadmanjiri, V. K. Srivastava, P. Kumar, J. Wang and A. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13509–13537 RSC .
J. Yu, J. Zhang and M. Jaroniec, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1611–1614 RSC .
A. Hoffman, G. Mills, H. Yee and M. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1992, 96, 5546–5552 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jafari, E. Moharreri, A. S. Amin, R. Miao, W. Song and S. L. Suib, Molecules, 2016, 21, 900 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Dehsari, J. N. Gavgani, A. Hasani, M. Mahyari, E. K. Shalamzari, A. Salehi and F. A. Taromi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 79729–79737 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Deng, Y. Hou and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Song, M.-H. Jang, J. Chung, S. H. Jin, B. H. Kim, S.-H. Hur, S. Yoo, Y.-H. Cho and S. Jeon, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 1016–1023 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, F. Hou, S. Hu, B. Wu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, B. Jiang and H. Fu, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 1330–1335 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, C. Hou, H. Wang, Q. Zhang and Y. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 400 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Nikokavoura and C. Trapalis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 149–174 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, J. Jiao, Z. Li, Y. Guo, C. Feng, Y. Liu, L. Wang and M. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2405–2413 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-Q. Wang, Y. Bai, P.-Y. Luo and J.-Y. Liu, Catal. Commun., 2013, 38, 82–85 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, L. Zou, D. Han, F. Li, Q. Zhang and L. Niu, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2142–2146 RSC .
J. Low, J. Yu and W. Ho, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4244–4251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2392–2415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Hsu, I. Shown, H.-Y. Wei, Y.-C. Chang, H.-Y. Du, Y.-G. Lin, C.-A. Tseng, C.-H. Wang, L.-C. Chen and Y.-C. Lin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 262–268 RSC .
L.-L. Tan, W.-J. Ong, S.-P. Chai, B. T. Goh and A. R. Mohamed, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 160–170 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xing, F. Shen, B. Qiu and J. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, J. Jin, B. Cheng and M. Jaroniec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3407–3416 RSC .
H. Chen, S. Xu, J. Cui and L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 94375–94379 RSC .
I. V. Lightcap, T. H. Kosel and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 577–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ali and W.-C. Oh, Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Carbon Nanostruct., 2016, 24, 555–563 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
M. Li, J. Wang, P. Zhang, Q. Deng, J. Zhang, K. Jiang, Z. Hu and J. Chu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ge, C. Cao, J. Huang, S. Li, Z. Chen, K.-Q. Zhang, S. Al-Deyab and Y. Lai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6772–6801 RSC .
B. Luo, G. Liu and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6904–6920 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, Frontiers in Materials, 2017, 4, 11 CrossRef .
J. Sun, H. Zhang, L.-H. Guo and L. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13035–13041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, ChemComm, 2015, 51, 858–861 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai, S.-T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 757–770 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Tan, W.-J. Ong, S.-P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 465 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Lv, Y. Li, Y. Wang and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 380–386 CrossRef PubMed .
X. An, K. Li and J. Tang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1086–1093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Q. Wang, Y. Zhao, W. Wu, J. Chen and H. Meng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 411, 69–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2812–2824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, D. Zheng, M. Wang, C. Lin and Z. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5994–6003 RSC .
M. He, X. Pang, X. Liu, B. Jiang, Y. He, H. Snaith and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 4352–4356 CrossRef .
Y.-F. Xu, M.-Z. Yang, B.-X. Chen, X.-D. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5660–5663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kuai, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, P. Li, H. Li, Q. Xu, L. Tang, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 88409–88413 RSC .
Y. T. Liang, B. K. Vijayan, K. A. Gray and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2865–2870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3644–3653 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Vijayan, N. M. Dimitrijevic, J. Wu and K. A. Gray, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21262–21269 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, C. Chen, X. Li, J. Zhao, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5022–5028 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Ismail, A. Hakki and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2012, 358, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Tan, W.-J. Ong, S.-P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166, 251–259 CrossRef .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263 CrossRef PubMed .
T. P. Nguyen, Q. Van Le, K. S. Choi, J. H. Oh, Y. G. Kim, S. M. Lee, S. T. Chang, Y.-H. Cho, S. Choi and T.-Y. Kim, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2015, 7, 700–705 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Van Le, T. P. Nguyen, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13123–13128 RSC .
Y.-S. Shim, K. C. Kwon, J. M. Suh, K. S. Choi, Y. G. Song, W. Sohn, S. Choi, K. T. Hong, J.-M. Jeon, S.-P. Hong, S. Kim, S. Y. Kim, C.-H. Kang and H. W. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31594–31602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Choi, Y. J. Park, B. K. Sharma, S.-R. Bae, S. Y. Kim and J.-H. Ahn, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas8721 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Park, J. E. Lee, Y. H. Kim, J. J. Kim, Y.-S. Shim, S. Y. Kim, M. H. Lee and H. W. Jang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 258, 775–782 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kufer and G. Konstantatos, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7307–7313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Nguyen, W. Sohn, J. H. Oh, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 10078–10085 CrossRef CAS .
Q. V. Le, T. P. Nguyen and S. Y. Kim, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8, 390–394 CrossRef CAS .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C.-Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, P. Xu, D. Zhou, Y. Sun, Y. C. Li, M.
A. T. Nguyen, M. Terrones and T. E. Mallouk, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5956–5960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Chou, B. Kaehr, J. Kim, B. M. Foley, M. De, P. E. Hopkins, J. Huang, C. J. Brinker and V. P. Dravid, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 4254–4258 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, J. K. Huang, C. H. Chen, Y. H. Chang, Y. J. Cheng and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3456–3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, i. V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Smith, P. J. King, M. Lotya, C. Wirtz, U. Khan, S. De, A. O'Neill, G. S. Duesberg, J. C. Grunlan and G. Moriarty, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3944–3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
G. Cunningham, U. Khan, C. Backes, D. Hanlon, D. McCloskey, J. F. Donegan and J. N. Coleman, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6899–6904 RSC .
R. Lv, J. A. Robinson, R. E. Schaak, D. Sun, Y. Sun, T. E. Mallouk and M. Terrones, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 48, 56–64 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tan, P. Liu, L. Chen, W. Cong, Y. Ito, J. Han, X. Guo, Z. Tang, T. Fujita and A. Hirata, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8023–8028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng, Z. Meng, C. Zhong, J. Lu, W. Yu, Y. Jia and Y. Qian, Chem. Lett., 2001, 30, 772–773 CrossRef .
M.-R. Gao, Y.-F. Xu, J. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2986–3017 RSC .
X. Zong, H. Yan, G. Wu, G. Ma, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176–7177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zong, G. Wu, H. Yan, G. Ma, J. Shi, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1963–1968 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zong, J. Han, G. Ma, H. Yan, G. Wu and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12202–12208 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, L. Ge, K. Wang and Y. Chai, Mater. Charact., 2014, 87, 70–73 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, Y. Yu, Q. Ma, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1917–1933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, J. Yang and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6197–6206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fujita, Y. Ito, Y. Tan, H. Yamaguchi, D. Hojo, A. Hirata, D. Voiry, M. Chhowalla and M. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12458–12462 RSC .
J. He, L. Chen, Z.-Q. Yi, C.-T. Au and S.-F. Yin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 8327–8333 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Kwon, S. Choi, K. Hong, C. W. Moon, Y.-S. Shim, D. H. Kim, T. Kim, W. Sohn, J.-M. Jeon and C.-H. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2240–2248 RSC .
N. Perea-López, Z. Lin, N. R. Pradhan, A. Iñiguez-Rábago, A. L. Elías, A. McCreary, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, H. Terrones and L. Balicas, 2D Materials, 2014, 1, 011004 CrossRef .
K. C. Kwon, S. Choi, K. Hong, D. M. Andoshe, J. M. Suh, C. Kim, K. S. Choi, J. H. Oh, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, MRS Commun., 2017, 7, 272–279 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, G. Jia, Y. Hu, G. Fan, Y. H. Tsang, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1875–1898 RSC .
X. Chen, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Li, J. Liu and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3372–3377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, L. Wang, K. Zhang, J. Wang, F. Cheng, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12794–12798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 1962–1964 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, K. Yu, X. Lei, B. Guo, H. Fu and Z. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 22681–22689 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Ye, J. Ma and D. Gao, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 225403 CrossRef PubMed .
K. C. Kwon, S. Choi, J. Lee, K. Hong, W. Sohn, D. M. Andoshe, K. S. Choi, Y. Kim, S. Han and S. Y. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15534–15542 RSC .
Y.-F. Zhao, Z.-Y. Yang, Y.-X. Zhang, L. Jing, X. Guo, Z. Ke, P. Hu, G. Wang, Y.-M. Yan and K.-N. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14238–14245 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kondo, Chem. Commun., 1998, 357–358 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, S. Luo, Y. Li, Y. Xiao, Q. Kang and Q. Cai, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 7641–7646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Andoshe, G. Jin, C. S. Lee, C. Kim, K. C. Kwon, S. Choi, W. Sohn, C. W. Moon, S. H. Lee and J. M. Suh, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1700142 CrossRef .
W. Dai, J. Yu, Y. Deng, X. Hu, T. Wang and X. Luo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 403, 230–239 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tu, Y. Li, L. Kuai, Y. Zhou, Q. Xu, H. Li, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9065–9070 RSC .
X. Jiao, X. Li, X. Jin, Y. Sun, J. Xu, L. Liang, H. Ju, J. Zhu, Y. Pan and W. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18044–18051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, S. Ouyang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1348–1354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou, X. Kong, S. Vanka, S. Chu, P. Ghamari, Y. Wang, N. Pant, I. Shih, H. Guo and Z. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3856 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hao, Y. Liu, W. Gao, Z. Han, Q. Xue, H. Zeng, Z. Wu, J. Zhu and W. Zhang, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 114502 CrossRef .
Q. Ding, F. Meng, C. R. English, M. Cabán-Acevedo, M. J. Shearer, D. Liang, A. S. Daniel, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8504–8507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-L. Tsai, S.-H. Su, J.-K. Chang, D.-S. Tsai, C.-H. Chen, C.-I. Wu, L.-J. Li, L.-J. Chen and J.-H. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8317–8322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, T. Hisatomi, T. Takata, C. Pan, M. Katayama, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11252–11256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., 2006, 118, 7970–7973 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Lin, F. Huang and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10317–10324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kimoto, N. Miyamoto and H. Matsunami, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1999, 46, 471–477 CrossRef CAS .
A. Naseri, M. Samadi, A. Pourjavadi, A. Z. Moshfegh and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23406–23433 RSC .
J. Wen, J. Xie, X. Chen and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 72–123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, S. Cao, C. Hu and C. Chen, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1981–1989 CrossRef CAS .
T. Song, P. Zhang, J. Zeng, T. Wang, A. Ali and H. Zeng, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 4035–4042 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Guan, J. Huang, Q. Li and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7960–7966 RSC .
F. Chen, H. Yang, W. Luo, P. Wang and H. Yu, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1990–1998 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xia, B. Zhu, J. Yu, S. Cao and M. Jaroniec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3230–3238 RSC .
F. Meng, J. Li, S. K. Cushing, M. Zhi and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10286–10289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Du, X. Cai, X. Yu, D. Zhang, L. Liang, P. Yang, X. Xing, W. Mai and S. Tan, Phys. E, 2013, 47, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hasani, Q. Van Le, T. P. Nguyen, K. S. Choi, W. Sohn, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 1195–1202 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ali and W.-C. Oh, Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Carbon Nanostruct., 2017, 25, 449–458 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, X. Li, Y. Zhao, W. Wu, J. Chen and H. Meng, Powder Technol., 2014, 261, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Li and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3372–3377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin, Y. Zhang, T. Gao, T. Yao, X. Zhang, J. Han, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, P. Xu and P. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700311 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Tang, S. Luo, Y. Liu, S. Zhang, Y. Zeng and Y. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, Y. Lin, P. Zhang, E. Ashalley, M. Shafa, H. Li, J. Wu and Z. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2014, 131, 122–124 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan and F. Abild-Pedersen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, D. Li and P. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1127–1136 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gong, L. Cheng, C. Liu, M. Zhang, Q. Feng, H. Ye, M. Zeng, L. Xie, Z. Liu and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2213–2219 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mouri, Y. Miyauchi and K. Matsuda, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5944–5948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† A. Hasani and M. Tekalgne contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematics of different graphene synthesis techniques: (a) micromechanical cleavage, (b) liquid-phase exfoliation, (c) chemical vapor deposition (reproduced with permission from ref. 82, copyright 2012, Elsevier), and (d) chemically converted graphene (reproduced with permission from ref. 94 copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH).	 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of sample GCx solid powders (where x = 0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.5, 5.0, and 40), (b) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of GCx solid powders, (c) comparison of the visible-light photocatalytic activities of samples GC0, GC0.5, GC1.0, GC2.5, GC5.0, GC40, and G for H2 production, and (d) schematic of the charge separation and transfer occuring in the graphene–CdS system under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2011 American Institute of Physics.	 
photocatalyst + hv → e− + h+	(1)
h+ + H2O → ˙OH + H+	(2)
CH3OH + ˙OH→ ˙CH2OH + H2O	(3)
CH2OH → HCHO + H+ + e−	(4)
2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−	(5)
overall reaction: CH3OH → HCHO + H2	(6)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra of P25, sulfur, nitrogen–GQDs, and sulfur, nitrogen–GQD/P25, (b) the UV-vis absorption spectrum of the GQDs, (c) photocatalytic H2 generation rates of pure P25 and sulfur, nitrogen–GQD/P25 composites with different concentrations of sulfur, nitrogen–GQDs under UV-vis light, and (d) schematic of the photocatalytic H2 evolution involving sulfur, nitrogen–GQD/P25 composites under UV-vis light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2017 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Crystal structures of TiO2 and graphene nanosheets; (b) TEM and elemental mapping images of 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure; (c) photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB) over various photocatalysts under the irradiation of UV light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Synthesis of GCN samples via the one-pot impregnation-thermal reduction strategy; (e) total CH4 yield over the as-prepared photocatalysts; and (f) photogenerated charge transfer in the GCN system for the reduction of CO2 with H2O to form CH4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Synthesis process of rGO/pCN samples involving combined ultrasonic dispersion and electrostatic self-assembly followed by a NaBH4-reduction process; (b) total evolution of CH4 over pure g-C3N4 and a series of rGO/pCN photocatalysts with different rGO contents under visible light irradiation for 10 h; (c) total evolution of CH4 after 10 h over rGO, pure g-C3N4, pCN, and 15rGO/CN, which were compared with 15rGO/pCN nanocomposite; (d) the charge transfer and separation process occurring in the rGO/pCN nanocomposite for the reduction of CO2 to CH4 in the presence of H2O under visible light illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Procedure for the synthesis of rGO–TiO2 nanocomposites, (b) time dependence of the photocatalytic formation rate of CH4, and (c) charge transfer and separation in rGO–TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2013, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Synthesis of NM–GT ternary composites by a two-step routine; (b) total yield of CH4 over pure anatase TiO2, the commercial Degussa P25, GT, and a series of NM–GT nanocomposites obtained after 6 h of reaction, and (c) mechanism of the photoreduction of CO2 to CH4 over platinum–GT composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Transition metals and the three chalcogen elements (shown in yellow) that constitute TMD layered structures, reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2013 Springer Nature, (b) structure of a TMD, and (c) structures of the two phases (1T, 2H) of MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.	 
(NH4)2MoS4 → 2 NH3 + H2S + MoS3	(7)
MoS3 → MoS2 + H2S (under H2 flow)	(8)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of MoS2 thin films, (b) thin films transferred to a 4-inch p-Si wafer and photographs of the transferred films with different thicknesses of MoS2 on glass substrates, (c) PEC performances shown as J–V polarization curves for the MoS2 films of different thicknesses, (d) Tafel slopes of the MoS2 layers obtained from plotting log(j) against potential (vs. RHE), (e) results of the tests performed over 15 cycles to compare the stabilities of bare p-Si and MoS2/p-Si photocathodes, (f) schematic of the energy band diagram of the MoS2/p-Si heterojunction photocathode, and (g) high-resolution TEM images of vertically grown MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photographs of different thicknesses of WS2 thin films on glass, (b) comparison of the UV-vis absorbances of WS2 thin films of different thicknesses, (c) PEC performances shown as J–V polarization curves for the WS2 films of different thicknesses, and (d) IPCE measurements of the WS2 thin films of different thicknesses on p-Si photocathodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2017 Materials Research Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the formation of WO3 nanosheets from small nanocrystals, (b) band positions of the WO3 nanosheet and commercial WO3 relative to the redox potential of CO2/CH4 in the presence of water (reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the direct growth of a 3D MoS2 film on TiO2/p-Si wafer by MOCVD, (b) schematic of vertically aligned MoS2, (c) PEC performances shown as J–V polarization curves, (d) IPCE measurements of the obtained photocathodes, and (e) IPCE curves of 3D MoS2/TiO2/p-Si and TiO2/p-Si, Reproduced with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the different crystal facets of anatase TiO2 single-crystals, (b) crystal structures of two different facet surfaces of anatase TiO2, (c) CO2 photoreduction analysis of the bare TiO2 samples under UV-visible light illumination, and (d) comparison of the photocatalytic performance between TSheets and TCuboids with the same specific surface area under the illumination of UV-visible light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of MoSx@GaN NWs/Si heterostructure. (b) Electronic interactions of MoS2/GaN, with the right side presenting the outstanding geometric matching between MoS2 and GaN, (c) 45 degrees tilted SEM image of MoSx@GaN NWs/Si and TEM image of MoSx@GaN NWs, and (d) J–E curves of MoSx/Si and MoSx@GaN NWs/Si in 0.5 M H2SO4 under standard one-sun illumination	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Top view of the proposed g-C3N4/MoS2 nanocomposite; (b) calculated band structure; (c) TDOS and PDOS of g-C3N4/MoS2 nanocomposite; (d) schematic illustration of the charge transfer and separation in the proposed g-C3N4/MoS2 nanocomposite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) HRTEM image of p-MoS2/n-rGO, (b) H2 generation by MoS2, MoS2/rGO, and p-MoS2/n-rGO photocatalysts. (c) J–V curves of the various catalysts and bare rGO in the dark. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer and separation in p-MoS2/n-rGO 2D-2D van der Waals heterostructures under simulated solar-light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

CdS–graphene	Solvothermal	—	1.12 mmol h−1	
70

GO/SiC	Solution process	—	94 μl h−1	
99

S, N-GQD/P25	Hydrothermal	−0.35 μA cm−2	5.7 μmol h−1	
109

13 nm MoS2/p-Si	Thermolysis	−24.6 mA cm−2	—	
178

23 nm WS2/p-Si	Vacuum PVD	−8.3 mA cm−2	∼8 μmol h−1	
180

3D MoS2/TiO2/p-Si	MOCVD	−28 mA cm−2	∼34 μmol h−1	
191

S:MoP	Thermolysis	−33 mA cm−2	∼72 μmol h−1	
187

MoSx@GaN NWs/Si	MBE-electrodeposition	−40 mA cm−2	—	
196

p-MoS2/n-rGO	Hydrothermal	∼−1.9 mA cm−2	∼24.8 μmol h−1	
211


GO	Modified Hummers'	CH3OH	0.172	
118

Boron-doped graphene (P25/B–GR)	CVD	CH4	2.5	
120

Oxygen-rich TiO2-doped graphene oxide (5GO–OTiO2)	Modified Hummers'	CH4	3.450	
119

Cu2Se/graphene	Hydrothermal	CH3OH	2.63	
214

rGO–TiO2	Simple solvothermal	CH4	0.135	
133

Cu2O/rGO	Microwave-assisted chemical method	CH3OH	41.5	
215

CsPbBr3 QDs/GO	Anti-solvent precipitation	CH4	29.6	
140

TiO2–CdS/rGO	SE	CH4	0.115	
141

WO3 nanosheet	Formation from small nanocrystals	CH4	16	
216

MoS2/Bi2WO6	Facile two-step	CH3OH	36.7	
192

MoS2–TiO2	
In situ growth	CH4	10.6	
193

SnS2	Hydrothermal	CO	12.28	
194


 	Fig. 17  Strategies for improving the performances of TMDs for use as photocatalysts.	 
Footnote
† A. Hasani and M. Tekalgne contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
