Excitons in semiconducting carbon nanotubes : diameter-dependent photoluminescence spectra  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CP21235D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CP21235D
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 14879-14888Show Chemical TermsExcitons in semiconducting carbon nanotubes: diameter-dependent photoluminescence spectra

        
          
            Yoshihiko 
            Kanemitsu
          
          
        
      *
      Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan. E-mail: kanemitu@scl.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Received 
      19th April 2011
    , Accepted 15th June 2011First published on 7th July 2011Abstract
Semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes are one-dimensional (1D) quantum nanostructures and their unique optical responses arise from stable 1D excitons with huge binding energies. Here we review recent studies on optical properties of semiconducting carbon nanotubes. The diameter dependence of luminescence spectra and dynamics are revealed by single-nanotube spectroscopy and time-resolved optical spectroscopy. Short-range Coulomb interactions play a crucial role in energy structures of dark, triplet, and charged excitons. Enhanced exciton–exciton interactions in 1D semiconductor nanostructures determine nonlinear optical responses. We present generic configurations of neutral and charged excitons and discuss exciton optics of single-walled carbon nanotubes.
Yoshihiko Kanemitsu
Yoshihiko Kanemitsu received his PhD at The University of Tokyo in 1986. He became a Research Associate of Chiba University, a Lecturer of Physics at University of Tsukuba, and a Professor of Nara Institute of Science and Technology. Since 2004, he is a Professor at Kyoto University. His research interests are nanomaterials science and optical properties of condensed matter. Currently, his interest is focused on optical properties and functionalities of exciton complexes and high-density electron–hole pairs in nanomaterials.
1. Introduction
Since the first proposal of semiconductor superlattices by Esaki and Tsu in 1969,1 a large number of new tailor-made materials and quantum structures have been fabricated and studied. These newly designed and tailored nanostructures have provided deep understanding of quantum physics and discovery of new quantum phenomena, leading to new technologies. In low-dimensional semiconducting nanostructures such as two-dimensional (2D) quantum wells, one-dimensional (1D) quantum wires, and zero-dimensional (0D) quantum dots, quantum confinement effects of electrons and excitons mainly determine their electronic and optical properties.2 Remarkable progress in semiconductor crystal growth has enabled us to study intrinsic optical processes in these quantum nanostructures. Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) produce high-quality 2D quantum wells and superlattices. High-quality 0D quantum dots and nanocrystals are also fabricated by MBE, MOCVD and colloidal chemistry synthesis methods. So far, there have been extensive studies on the fundamental physics and high-performance device applications of 2D quantum wells and 0D quantum dots. However, the fabrication of high-quality 1D quantum wires by MBE, MOCVD, and chemical methods is very difficult, compared with 2D and 0D quantum structures. Thus, optical properties of 1D quantum wires remain unclear, although the merit of 1D quantum wires has been early discussed in 1980.3 Recently, T-shaped GaAs 1D quantum wires with atomically smooth interfaces were fabricated using sophisticated techniques and detailed experimental studies on their optical properties were restarted.4 Moreover, carbon nanotubes can be easily fabricated by simple chemical synthesis techniques. In 2002, O'Connell et al. found efficient photoluminescence (PL) from isolated carbon nanotubes5 and Bachilo et al. reported the correlation between the PL peak energy and the chiral index of carbon nanotubes.6 These findings show that certain species of carbon nanotubes are high-quality 1D semiconductors. Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) of about 1 nm diameter with a length greater than several hundred nanometres are a prototype of 1D quantum wires.
In photoexcited semiconductors, an attractive Coulomb interaction between conduction-band electrons and valence-band holes causes excitons to form. Because the spatial extent of the Wannier exciton is much larger than a lattice constant, its wavefunction is strongly affected by the spatial geometry.2 Thus, exciton responses are very sensitive to the size and shape of semiconductor nanostructures. Theoretical considerations show that in 1D semiconducting wires, optical transitions are concentrated on the lowest exciton, and the band-to-band absorption is very weak or almost hidden in the linear absorption spectra.7–11 The stable excitons determine optical properties of 1D quantum wires. Historically, the nature of 1D excitons has been experimentally studied using quasi-1D organic polymers, for example, polysilanes.12–14 However, these polymer wires have local structural disorders and are very weak against light illumination in air. Thus, we anticipate that high-quality SWNTs fabricated by simple methods provide an excellent stage for the study of 1D exciton physics, because of their rigid and robust structures. Many different fabrication methods of isolated carbon nanotubes have been developed to obtain sharp optical spectra with very low background signals; e.g., suspended isolated SWNTs, polymer-wrapped SWNTs, and so on.5,6,15–18 Experimental and theoretical studies have revealed that the electronic structure and the PL energy of SWNTs depend strongly on their diameter, chiral index, and dielectric constant. Huge binding energies of excitons in SWNTs, one of the 1D characteristics, are revealed by two-phonon absorption techniques.19,20 Because of extremely strong excitonic effects, unique optical properties of SWNTs are determined by dynamics of 1D excitons.21–28 In this Perspective, we summarize our recent studies on optical properties of semiconducting SWNTs revealed by frequency-domain single-nanotube spectroscopy and time-domain ensemble spectroscopy and discuss their fundamental exciton properties. Short-range Coulomb interactions and enhanced exciton–exciton interactions play essential roles in unique optical responses of SWNTs.
2. Luminescence spectra of single-walled carbon nanotubes
Luminescence properties of SWNTs are sensitive to their chirality and are strongly affected by extrinsic effects such as bundling and surrounding environments. In ensemble samples, many different species of nanotubes exist in the sample. The inhomogeneous broadening and the overlapping of optical spectra cause the complicated PL properties of nanotubes. Optical studies on individual SWNTs are important and essential for understanding of intrinsic and fundamental properties of SWNTs.16,29–31 We expect that single nanotube spectroscopy can reveal the intrinsic excitonic properties of SWNTs, such as exciton energies, bright and dark exciton structures, exciton–phonon interactions, and so on. For single nanotube spectroscopy, we fabricated Si substrates patterned with parallel grooves, typically 1–10 μm in width and depth, using an electron-beam lithography technique, and synthesized spatially isolated SWNTs on patterned Si substrates using an alcohol catalytic chemical vapor deposition method.31,32 The isolated SWNTs grew from one side toward the opposite side of the groove.

Fig. 1(a) shows a typical PL spectrum of a single SWNT suspended on the groove [assigned chiral index: (7,6)] under 1.96 eV laser excitation at about 40 K.32 The spectral width of a single SWNT is much narrower than that of micelle-wrapped SWNTs dispersed in gelatin. The PL spectral shape of a single SWNT is given by a Lorentzian function and its linewidth is about a few millielectron volts, indicating homogeneous broadening. Fig. 1(b) shows a polar plot of the PL intensity of a SWNT versus the polarization direction of the excitation laser light.32 Strong optical absorption occurs when the polarization of the laser parallels the nanotube axis, and this finding shows that a 1D dipole moment exists in SWNTs. In addition, we observed the inhomogeneous spatial profile of PL images in our SWNTs. These results clearly indicate the fabrication of high quality samples. To reduce the surrounding environmental effects, we use suspended SWNTs for single nanotube spectroscopy. In Section 2, we discuss diameter-dependent exciton PL in individual SWNTs.
 Fig. 1  (a) PL spectra of a single SWNT suspended on the patterned substrate and micelle-wrapped SWNTs dispersed in gelatin (ensemble). (b) Polar plot of the PL intensity of a typical single SWNT versus the polarized direction of the excitation laser. The PL data (circles) were fitted using cos2θ (solid line). [Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 32.] 
2.1 Exciton fine structures: bright and dark excitons
Theoretical studies have predicted that the degenerated two valleys create multiple exciton states. Only the odd-parity exciton, with spin singlet and zero angular momentum, called the bright exciton, can recombine radiatively; the other exciton states are all dipole-forbidden dark ones.33 Thus, the experimental observation of dark excitons is very important in understanding the exciton structure of SWNTs. Optical spectra under magnetic fields can reveal the existence of dark excitons. The Aharonov–Bohm (AB) effect induced by the magnetic field threading the tube axis makes even parity singlet dark exciton partially dipole allowed.33 In ensemble samples, high magnetic fields are needed for observation of PL and absorption spectral changes,34–37 because of inhomogeneous broadening of optical spectra, as discussed with respect to Fig. 1(a). In single nanotube experiments, very sharp PL spectra provide detailed information on the exciton fine structures even under relatively weak magnetic fields. Recently, direct evidence for the singlet dark exciton state several millielectron volts below the bright exciton state has been reported by magneto-PL spectroscopy for single SWNTs.32,38 Here, we describe the PL fine structures of single SWNTs under magnetic fields at low temperatures.
The PL spectral shape depends on the configuration between the magnetic field and the nanotube axis. When the magnetic field is parallel to the nanotube axis, a new peak appears below the bright exciton peak. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the PL anisotropy is used for determining the angle between the SWNT axis and the magnetic field. Then, the effective magnetic flux threading the nanotube can be experimentally evaluated using the angle, the nanotube diameter, and the strength of the magnetic field. Fig. 2(a) shows PL spectra of a single (9,4) SWNT under 1.96 eV excitation at 20 K in the Voigt-geometry magnetic fields.32 These PL spectra can be fit by two Lorentzian functions to evaluate the energy positions of the two peaks. With an increase of the magnetic field, the lower energy peak shows a redshift and the low-energy peak intensity increases. Fig. 2(b) shows PL spectra of a single (9,5) SWNT at 20 K in the Faraday geometry, where the magnetic flux is perpendicular to the nanotube axis.32 No significant changes in PL spectra are observed in this geometry. We found that the dark exciton PL appears, and the splitting of the PL peak occurs due to the magnetic flux parallel to the nanotube axis.
 Fig. 2  (a) Normalized PL spectra of a single (9,4) SWNT at 20 K under different magnetic fields in the Voigt geometry. The split PL spectra are fit by two Lorentzian functions. (b) Normalized PL spectra of a single (9,5) SWNT at 20 K under different magnetic fields in the Faraday geometry. [Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 32.] 
The magnetic field dependence of the PL spectrum can be explained by the Aharonov–Bohm splitting of excitons based on the Ajiki and Ando model.33,39 The short-range Coulomb interactions cause the splitting of the singlet exciton (KK and K′K′ excitons) with zero momentum to the bright and dark excitons. When the magnetic flux threads the nanotube axis, the exciton states at the K and K′ valleys become independent of each other, and the singlet dark state becomes gradually an optically-allowed one with an increase of the magnetic field. The bright–dark exciton splitting Δbd at zero field can be evaluated from the field dependence of the bright and dark exciton PL peaks. In our SWNTs, the dark exciton state exists below the E11 bright exciton state. In Fig. 3, we summarize the diameter dependence of the bright–dark exciton splitting energy in SWNTs.40 The splitting energy is about several millielectron volts and increases with a decrease of the nanotube diameter. The solid line corresponds to the theoretically predicted diameter dependence (Δbd ∝ 1/d2),33 and this is due to the short-range Coulomb interaction between the excitons at the K and K′ valleys. However, note that there is a large difference in the magnitude of calculated values of Δbd in theoretical studies. Then, the experimental evaluation of parameters determining the inter-valley and intra-valley terms in the short-range Coulomb interaction is very important in discussions on exciton fine structures in SWNTs.
 Fig. 3  Tube diameter dependence of the splitting energy between the dark and bright excitons at zero field. The solid curve corresponds to the theoretically predicted d−2 dependence. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 40.] 
Although the bright–dark splitting energy is several millielectron volts, the underlying dark exciton state strongly affects optical properties of SWNTs. The small bright–dark splitting causes the non-thermal exciton distribution. Fig. 4(a) shows the three-level model consisting of the bright and dark exciton states with a splitting energy Δbd and the ground state.41 The decay rates of the bright and dark excitons, Γb and Γd, include the radiative and nonradiative decay rates. The downward and upward scattering rates between the bright and dark states, γ↓ and γ↑, are due to the one-phonon emission and absorption processes: these scattering rates are determined by the temperature-independent scattering rate γ0 and the phonon occupation number. The population ratio of the dark to the bright excitons depends on the ratio of the dark exciton lifetime to the thermalization time between the two exciton states, Γd/γ0. We experimentally found that the values of Γd/γ0 increase with temperature and decrease with the magnetic field.41 The non-Boltzmann exciton distribution under no magnetic field affects the PL intensity and optical processes of SWNTs at low temperatures.
 Fig. 4  (a) Three-level model consisting of the bright- and dark-exciton states and the ground state. (b) Temperature dependence of ensemble-averaged PL intensity for (7,6) SWNTs dispersed in PFO. Using the three-level model, we calculate the temperature dependence of the PL intensity: the dotted curve (the Boltzmann exciton distribution) and the solid curve (the non-Boltzmann exciton distribution). [Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 41.] 
In Fig. 4(b), we show the temperature dependence of ensemble-averaged PL intensity for (7,6) SWNTs dispersed in PFO under 1.96 eV excitation,41 where PFO is poly(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl). The PL intensity has a maximum at an intermediate temperature and does not drop to zero at low temperatures. This temperature dependence of the PL intensity is well explained by the non-equilibrium distribution model (red solid line: Δbd = 5.6 meV and Γd/γ0 = 0.08), but not by the full thermalization model between the bright and dark states (blue dotted line). The PL intensities at low temperatures are determined by the slow exciton scattering between the bright and dark states due to the difference of the parity. Even at very low temperatures, the concentration of exciton population in the low-energy dark state does not occur. Under high magnetic fields, the exciton distribution comes closer to a Boltzmann distribution because of the symmetry breaking between the bright and dark excitons.42 The dark exciton plays an important role in the optical responses at low temperatures.
2.2 Triplet excitons
In the previous section, we showed that the splitting between the lowest E11 bright and the even-parity dark exciton states is only several millielectron volts, but the underlying dark exciton state affect the bright-exciton PL intensity. Exciton structures in SWNTs are complicated, and other PL peaks have been observed in the very lower energy region below the E11 bright exciton peak. The phonon sideband of the K-momentum dark exciton above the lowest E11 bright exciton and the triplet dark exciton are considered as origins of the low-energy PL bands.43–45 The low-energy exciton states critically influence the PL efficiencies of SWNTs. Here, we focus on the diameter dependence of the triplet dark exciton PL revealed by single nanotube spectroscopy.
It has been reported that strong pulsed-laser irradiation causes the enhancement of a low-energy PL peak46 and that a low-energy photocurrent band below the E11 bright exciton appears for SWNTs coated by EuS.47 We consider that the origin of these PL peaks is closely related to each other. In our experiments, we irradiated the strong pulsed-laser with 735 nm wavelength and ∼2 mW for ∼5–60 s to single SWNTs suspended over patterned grooves. An additional PL spectrum appears 50–100 meV below the bright exciton peak after pulsed laser irradiation. This low-energy PL intensity increases with a decrease of temperature. It is concluded that this low-energy PL peak comes from the triplet exciton due to the increase in the spin–orbit coupling caused by defects, leading to the spin-flip and PL processes.
In Fig. 5, we summarize the separation energy between the lowest E11 bright exciton and the triplet exciton states in SWNTs at room temperature.48 The separation energy depends strongly on the tube diameter, and is approximately given by A/d2, where A is a coefficient of 70 meV nm2 and d is the tube diameter (nm). The diameter dependence of the splitting energy between the singlet and triplet excitons is proportional to 1/d2, because of the diameter-dependent exchange interaction.33,49 The observed singlet–triplet splitting coefficient is consistent with the theoretical calculation.50 Although the spin–orbit interaction is small in SWNTs and graphene due to a small mass of the carbon atoms, impurities on graphene would lead to a large increase of the spin–orbit coupling.51 In fact, a recent study reported the brightening of triplet dark excitons by atomic hydrogen adsorption in SWNTs because of enhanced spin–orbit interactions.52 Understanding of the mechanism of spin flipping and development of spin-controlling techniques in carbon nanotubes are very important for future applications of spin-electronic devices.
 Fig. 5  Tube-diameter dependence of the energy separation between the bright exciton and the triplet exciton. The curve shows a fit with the splitting energy proportional to 1/d2. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 48.] 
2.3 
          PL linewidth and exciton dephasing time
Using single nanotube spectroscopy, we determined the diameter dependence of energy differences between the bright and the even-parity dark excitons and between the bright and the triplet excitons in SWNTs. Next, we discuss the exciton relaxation time in SWNTs. We obtained PL spectra from isolated SWNTs with a variety of chiral indices at room temperature. The spectral linewidth of a single SWNT contains essential information on exciton dephasing processes. PL spectra of single SWNTs show narrow linewidths and Lorentzian shapes at room temperature. In this section, we discuss the diameter dependence of the PL linewidth in single SWNTs.
In Fig. 6(a), we show some of the PL spectra from isolated SWNTs with various emission energies under 1.96 eV excitation at room temperature.31 The chiral index assignment for each PL spectrum is shown in the figure. A single sharp peak due to a free bright exciton is observed in each SWNT, and the observed PL spectrum can be approximately described by a single Lorentzian function. The spectral linewidth of the Lorentzian PL spectrum indicates the homogeneous linewidth. In Fig. 6(b), we summarize the PL linewidth as a function of the SWNT diameter.53 We measured PL spectra of more than 200 different SWNTs. We plot the smallest values as the intrinsic linewidth for SWNTs with the same chiral index, because the linewidth broadening is usually caused by the extrinsic factors such as defects, impurities, and so on. The PL linewidth clearly becomes broader as the diameter decreases. In addition, the PL linewidth increases linearly with temperature.53,54 The linear temperature dependence indicates that the exciton–acoustic-phonon scattering determines the linewidth. These findings show that the exciton–phonon interaction is stronger and the exciton dephasing time is shorter in tubes of smaller diameter.
 Fig. 6  (a) PL spectra for several species of single SWNTs at room temperature. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 31.] (b) Diameter dependence of the PL linewidth for single SWNTs. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 53.] 
The PL linewidth also depends on the excitation laser intensity. Single SWNTs suspended over patterned grooves were excited by 1.72 eV and 150 fs laser pulses. Fig. 7(a) shows the homogeneous linewidth as a function of the excitation intensity at 30 K.55 The spectral linewidth increases with increasing excitation intensity. This excitation intensity-dependent linewidth broadening indicates that the exciton dynamics are strongly affected by the multiexciton interactions and many body effects in a SWNT. Simultaneously, the saturation of the PL intensity occurs at high-intensity excitation, as shown in Fig. 7(b).55 Under strong photoexcitation, the broadening of the homogeneous linewidth and the saturation of the PL intensity occur. When two or more excitons are created in a SWNT, a remarkable recombination process between excitons occurs. Numerical calculation fittings in Fig. 7(a) and (b) show that Auger-like exciton–exciton annihilation occurs under high-density excitation.
 Fig. 7  (a) PL linewidth and (b) PL intensity of a single SWNT as a function of the femtosecond excitation laser intensity at room temperature. [Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 55.] (c) Transient absorption (ΔT/T) dynamics under 1.55 eV excitation at different intensities of 15, 30, 100, and 300 μJ cm−2. Transient absorption decay curves are normalized by the long decay component at 10 ps. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 56.] 
To examine the exciton decay dynamics, we measured the temporal change of the exciton density in ensemble samples by femtosecond pump–probe transient-absorption spectroscopy. An example of the transient bleaching signals is shown in Fig. 7(c).56 The ensemble sample was excited by 1.55 eV and 150 fs laser pulses, and the exciton density was monitored at the lowest E11 exciton energy at 1.22 eV. With an increase in the excitation intensity, the rapid decay component appears in the picosecond time region, because of the nonradiative Auger processes of excitons. In SWNTs, rapid and quantized Auger recombination determines exciton dynamics because of strong Coulomb interactions between excitons confined in 1D wires.55–59
From single nanotube PL and ensemble pump–probe experiments, we conclude that the PL linewidth of single SWNTs is determined by both the excitation power independent exciton–phonon interaction and the excitation power dependent Auger process. The PL linewidth broadening under high photoexcitation can be explained by the shortening of exciton lifetime due to the nonradiative Auger process.
3. Exciton decay dynamics
In Section 2, we discussed the exciton properties of suspended SWNTs revealed by single nanotube spectroscopy. The time-resolved PL and pump–probe spectroscopy of ensemble samples also provide new insight into the fundamental exciton dynamics in SWNTs.60 The radiative lifetime of excitons and the exciton coherence length61 cannot be usually obtained only by the frequency-domain single nanotube PL spectroscopy. By means of both time-domain and frequency-domain spectroscopy, we can clarify intrinsic optical properties of SWNTs. In particular, recent progress of the sample preparation enables us to obtain efficient PL from ensemble samples. For example, the PFO-dispersed SWNT samples show very small background in the absorption spectrum and pronounced exciton absorption peaks.17,62 Using these PFO-dispersed samples, we examine the PL decay dynamics and consider the exciton coherence length of SWNTs.
Time-resolved PL spectroscopy is one of the most powerful methods to elucidate the microscopic mechanism of exciton dynamics in SWNTs.63–67 Many different methods for PL decay curve analyses have been used: optical Kerr gating, streak camera, time-correlated single-photon counting, frequency up-conversion, and femtosecond excitation correlation (FEC) techniques. Using FEC spectroscopy, we examined the nonlinear time-resolved PL signals due to multiexciton recombination processes in SWNTs.62,65,68 The FEC signals in the long time range are dominated by the single exciton decay in SWNTs, because the exciton–exciton annihilation process is efficient in SWNTs.68 From PL lifetime measurements, exciton properties such as the radiative lifetimes and the coherence lengths of single excitons can be evaluated.
We performed the PL lifetime measurements in different SWNT samples, because PL properties of SWNTs are sensitive to bundling, surrounding environments, and so on. Fig. 8(a) shows the diameter dependence of the effective PL lifetimes of PFO-dispersed and SDBS-dispersed SWNTs,68 where SDBS-dispersed SWNTs are individually suspended in D2O using 0.5 wt% sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate (SDBS). The PFO-dispersed SWNTs have longer PL lifetimes than the SDBS-dispersed SWNTs in a smaller diameter range (d < 1 nm). This means that the nonradiative rate of the PFO-dispersed samples is smaller than that of the SDBS-dispersed sample. The effective PL lifetimes are determined by the nonradiative processes and the dispersion method of SWNTs strongly affects the exciton nonradiative decay rates. We consider the radiative recombination processes of excitons from experimental results of the PFO-dispersed samples.
 Fig. 8  (a) Effective PL lifetimes of SWNTs prepared with different dispersion methods. [Figure reproduced from ref. 68.] (b) Radiative lifetimes τR of SWNTs as a function of diameter. Inset shows deduced coherence lengths Lc as a function of diameter. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 62.] 

Fig. 8(b) shows the experimentally evaluated radiative lifetimes of PFO-dispersed SWNTs at room temperature as a function of the nanotube diameter.62 The radiative lifetimes are determined from the PL lifetimes and the PL efficiencies. The radiative lifetimes are typically ∼3–10 ns, in agreement with theoretical calculations,42,69 and they slightly increase with the tube diameter. From the obtained radiative lifetimes, we evaluate the oscillator strengths and the coherence lengths Lc of the 1D excitons in SWNTs.62 In the evaluation procedure, we consider the exciton distribution in the k space due to homogeneous linewidth and the exciton thermalization among bright and dark state bands. In the (7,5) SWNT, the coherence length of excitons is ∼10 nm along the nanotube axis at room temperature. The inset of Fig. 8(b) shows the exciton coherence length for various SWNTs with diameters of 0.8–1.1 nm. The exciton coherence lengths of 10–20 nm are one order of magnitude more than the exciton Bohr radius.
Time-resolved PL measurements reveal the fundamental properties of excitons: radiative lifetime of excitons, exciton coherence length, and exciton fine structures including bright and dark states.62,66,67 In addition, from FEC experiments and analyses, we found that fast Auger recombination plays a dominant role in nonlinear behaviors of the PL decay. As discussed in Section 2.3, fast Auger recombination causes the saturation of the PL intensity and the fast decay components of the transient bleaching signals. In SWNTs, spatially confined excitons in 1D structures and the reduced dielectric screening enhance the exciton–exciton interactions, leading to multiexciton processes such as the quantized Auger recombination, multiple exciton generation (MEG), and so on. We reported the first observation of the MEG process in SWNTs revealed by pump–probe spectroscopy in 2008.56 When the photon energy is three times larger than the exciton energy, MEG occurs and the MEG efficiency is estimated to be about 1.3 under 4.65 eV excitation. The achievement of efficient MEG in nanomaterials makes it possible to produce highly efficient solar cells with conversion efficiencies that exceed the Shockley–Queisser limit of 32%.70–72 Moreover, the Auger process is responsible for inhibiting simultaneous two-photon emission events. It is demonstrated that SWNTs can be used as a source of single photons by efficient Auger recombination and exciton localization at low temperatures.73 It is anticipated that strong interactions between excitons and multiexciton recombination processes create new optical functionalities of SWNTs.
Strong interactions between carriers or between excitons cause unique optical processes in semiconductor nanomaterials. The demonstrations described in this section suggest that new functionalities of SWNTs can be created by photo-doping of excitons and multiexcitons. In addition, SWNTs are one of single-element and covalent semiconductors, similar to Si and Ge semiconductors. Moreover, all the C atoms are located on the surface of SWNTs. Thus, for example, oxidization of SWNTs and graphenes modifies electronic band structures and optical properties,74,75 analogous to oxidized Si and Ge nanostructures.76,77 Chemical modifications of SWNTs and graphenes produce new luminescence and new optical responses. In the proceeding section, we discuss new optical phenomena produced by chemical doping of carriers. In strongly confined systems such as SWNTs, excess carriers determine the PL intensity and the PL dynamics.
4. Charged excitons
The doping of semiconductors with functional impurities is an essential issue in semiconductor science and technology. Doped semiconductor bulk crystals and nanostructures show unique multifunctional properties beyond those of undoped bulk crystals and nanostructures. In exciton optics, the intentional doping of electrons and holes leads to the observation of new optical phenomena. For example, three particle complexes composed of two electrons and a hole (negatively charged exciton) or an electron and two holes (positively charged exciton) are observed in a variety of semiconductors. Lampert pointed out the possibility of charged excitons in 1958,78 and the stability and the binding energy of charged excitons were discussed.79 In 1977, the experimental observation of charged excitons was reported in Si and Ge bulk crystals.80,81 Because quantum confinement of excitons increases the exciton binding energy, quantum nanostructures of 2D wells and 1D wires provide a chance for studying optical properties of charged excitons. In fact, the details of charged excitons have been studied in II–VI and III–VI quantum wells and wires.82–84 Furthermore, stability of charged excitons is theoretically discussed in SWNTs.85 In particular, SWNTs have huge exciton binding energies,19,20 and hole-doping effects on luminescence properties of SWNTs have been achieved by controlling pH or adding hole dopant molecules.86–90 Thus, exciton complexes are anticipated to be observed in hole-doped SWNTs.
Here, we discuss the existence of positively charged excitons below the lowest singlet exciton in hole-doped SWNTs. In both PL and absorption spectroscopy, a new peak appears with hole doping at room temperature, regardless of the dopant species. Fig. 9(a) shows the absorption spectra of CoMoCAT-PFO nanotubes with F4TCNQ solutions added,91 where F4TCNQ, 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane, is a hole dopant. The inset shows an enlarged view of the low-energy side. With increasing F4TCNQ concentration, the new absorption peaks appear as indicated by the arrows A and B. The new peaks were also observed in PL spectra. Fig. 9(b) shows the normalized PL spectra of the nondoped and doped CoMoCAT-PFO nanotubes under 1.9 eV excitation.91 The doping-induced new PL peaks are indicated by arrows in the figure. The relative PL intensities of the bright excitons for (7,6), (7,5), and (6,5) SWNTs were changed by hole doping, because PL intensities of larger-diameter tubes are more sensitive to the hole doping.90 The linewidths of the (7,5) bright excitons and the new PL peak are almost unchanged by the dopant concentration. The new PL peak observed in hole-doped SWNTs is independent of the dopant species: the new state exhibits intrinsic properties of hole-doped SWNTs, rather than any chemical complex with a specific dopant. In addition, in all doped samples, there is no essential Stokes shift between the absorption and PL peaks. These findings suggest that the new peaks are related to positively charged exciton complexes.
 Fig. 9  (a) Hole-doping dependence of the absorption spectra of CoMoCAT-PFO nanotubes. The inset shows an enlarged view of the lower-energy region. The new peaks indicated by the arrows A and B are associated with (7,5) and (7,6) SWNTs, respectively. (b) Normalized PL spectra of the nondoped and doped CoMoCAT-PFO nanotubes under 1.9 eV excitation. New PL peaks of (7,5) and (7,6) SWNTs are indicated by the solid and open arrows, respectively. [Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 91.] 

Fig. 10 shows the tube-diameter dependence of the energy separation Δ between the bright exciton and the positively charged exciton peaks observed in the PL and absorption spectra.91 The energy separation depends strongly on the tube diameter, and the value of Δ is about 130 meV for 1 nm diameter. In this figure, we also show the value of 2n + m for each chirality with the HiPCO-SDS data, where (n,m) is the chiral index. The HiPCO-SDS data show clear family patterns, which are well-known optical characteristics of SWNTs. This result also confirmed that the new PL arises from the intrinsic properties of carrier-doped SWNTs, rather than specific dopants. We conclude that the new peak exhibits formation of positively charged excitons.
 Fig. 10  Diameter d dependence of the energy separation Δ between the bright exciton state and the charged exciton state observed in PL and absorption spectra. The green numbers show the value of 2n + m for (n,m) nanotubes. The solid curve shows a fit with the sum of the exchange splitting and the charged exciton binding energy. Inset shows the schematic of the energy levels of the singlet and triplet excitons (XS and XT) and the charged excitons (X+). A free hole is denoted as h+. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 91.] 
Here, we comment on the binding energy of charged excitons in SWNTs. The energy separation between the bright excitons and charged excitons for a 1 nm-diameter tube is about 130 meV, which is surprisingly large. We attribute the extremely large energy separation to the electron–hole exchange interaction originating from the short-range Coulomb interaction in SWNTs.33 In Section 2.2, we showed that the excitons in SWNTs have large singlet–triplet splitting as much as several tens of millielectron volts. This is because the strong exchange interaction between an electron and a hole in SWNTs significantly lifts up the energy level of the singlet bright exciton. Thus, the binding energy of charged excitons corresponds to the energy separation between the charged exciton and the lowest triplet exciton states, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. 10. We show the energy separation Δ (meV) = 70/d2 + 60/d as the solid curve in Fig. 4, where the d−2 dependence is the singlet–triplet exciton splitting and the d−1 dependence is the binding energy of charged excitons. The solid curve is in good agreement with the experimental data. We conclude that charged excitons are stable in hole-doped SWNTs even at room temperature.
Further experimental and theoretical studies are needed for deep understanding of the nature of charged excitons in SWNTs. The observation of room-temperature charged excitons in hole-doped SWNTs seems to stimulate more detailed experimental and theoretical studies and increase our understanding of many-particle physics in 1D wires. Furthermore, recent theoretical studies have proposed novel schemes to optically manipulate the carrier spins in SWNTs through charged exciton states.92,93 The room-temperature charged excitons will facilitate the realization of the optical spin manipulation in carbon nanotubes.
5. Concluding remarks and summary
Since the observation of efficient luminescence from individual SWNTs in 2002,5 optical properties of SWNTs have attracted much attention from both their fundamental physics interest and their potential applicability in optical devices. In studying electronic structures of materials, PL spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools. PL spectroscopy reveals that excitons in SWNTs have huge binding energies of a few hundred millielectron volts19,20 and play a crucial role in optical responses. Detailed PL studies provide deep understanding of excitonic properties of SWNTs.
We showed diameter-dependent PL properties and discussed generic configurations of exciton structures in SWNTs. The low-energy PL peaks below the bright exciton are attributed to the even-parity dark exciton and the triplet exciton. We determined the diameter dependence of the bright–dark energy splitting and the singlet–triplet exciton splitting. Magneto-PL spectroscopy gives essential information on the dark exciton state. Dark excitons strongly affect the PL intensity and the PL decay dynamics at low temperatures. We experimentally and clearly show that short-range Coulomb interactions play an essential role in the exciton responses in SWNTs. From the experimentally determined energy structures of bright, even-parity dark, triplet, and K-momentum excitons, the inter-valley and intra-valley terms in the short Coulomb interaction will be determined theoretically.
Time-resolved PL spectroscopy provides further understanding of unique exciton dynamics in SWNTs. Radiative recombination lifetime of excitons is of the order of 10 ns, and the exciton coherence length is one order of magnitude more than the exciton Bohr radius. Moreover, strong exciton–exciton interactions cause rapid Auger recombination of excitons and multiexciton generation, leading to nonlinear optical phenomena. The Auger recombination rate is much larger than the radiative recombination rate. Because of enhanced Auger recombination, PL intensity saturation and PL line broadening appear.
In SWNTs, photogenerated electrons and holes are on the surface. The optical properties are sensitive to surrounding environments. It is demonstrated that PL enhancement in SWNTs occurs on a metal due to localized surface plasmons.94,95 Drastic changes in optical properties are also anticipated by controlling energy transfer through exciton–plasmon interactions in semiconductor/metal hybrid nanostructures.96 SWNT-based hybrid nanostructures will be useful for understanding energy transfer processes at nano-interfaces and for achievement of high-efficiency exciton PL.
The recent discovery of room-temperature charged excitons prompts further interest in carbon nanotubes and might be a breakthrough in quantum information physics using charged excitons. By doping of carriers, room-temperature charged excitons are observed. We determine the diameter dependence of the binding energy of positively charged excitons. The binding energy of charged excitons corresponds to the energy separation between the charged exciton and the lowest triplet exciton states. The observation of exciton complexes shows that SWNTs become an excellent stage for the study of the excitonic many-body effects in semiconductors, similar to wide-gap inorganic semiconductors with large exciton binding energies.97 Biexciton stability is discussed theoretically,98,99 but biexciton PL has never been observed experimentally. The role of excess carriers and exciton complexes in SWNTs remains unclear. Further detailed studies of SWNTs give deep understanding of exciton complexes, exciton Mott transition, electron–hole plasmas, and band-gap renormalization in 1D electronic systems.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank many colleagues and his graduate students for their contributions and discussions. In particular R. Matsunaga, K. Matsuda, and Y. Miyauchi deserve mention here. Part of this work is supported by KAKENHI (No. 20104006).
References
L. Esaki and R. Tsu, IBM J. Res. Dev., 1970, 14, 61 CrossRef CAS .
As an example, Optical Properties of Low-Dimensional Materials, ed. T. Ogawa and Y. Kanemitsu, World Scientific, Singapore,  1995 Search PubMed .
H. Sakaki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 19, L735 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takahashi, Y. Hayamizu, H. Itoh, M. Yoshita, H. Akiyama, L. N. Pfeiffer and K. W. West, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 243101 CrossRef .
M. J. O'Connell, S. M. Bachilo, C. B. Huffman, V. C. Moore, M. S. Strano, E. H. Haroz, K. L. Rialon, P. J. Boul, W. H. Noon, C. Kittrell, J. Ma, R. H. Hauge, R. B. Weisman and R. E. Smalley, Science, 2002, 297, 593 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Bachilo, M. S. Strano, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley and R. B. Weisman, Science, 2002, 298, 2361 CrossRef CAS .
R. Loudon, Am. J. Phys., 1959, 27, 649 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Elliot and R. Loudon, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1960, 15, 196 CrossRef .
G. Bastard, E. E. Mendez, L. L. Chang and L. Esaki, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1982, 26, 1974 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abe, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1989, 58, 62 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ogawa and T. Takagahara, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1991, 43, 14325 CrossRef ; T. Ogawa and T. Takagahara, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1991, 44, 8138 CrossRef .
R. D. Miller and J. Michl, Chem. Rev., 1989, 89, 1359 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasegawa, Y. Iwasa, H. Sunamura, T. Koda, Y. Tokura, H. Tachibana, M. Matsumoto and S. Abe, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 69, 668 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kanemitsu, K. Suzuki, Y. Nakayoshi and Y. Masumoto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1992, 46, 3916 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lefebvre, Y. Homma and P. Finnie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 217401 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hartschuh, H. N. Pedrosa, L. Novotny and T. D. Krauss, Science, 2003, 301, 1354 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nish, J.-Y. Hwang, J. Doig and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 640 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tu, S. Manohar, A. Jagota and M. Zheng, Nature, 2009, 460, 250 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, G. Dukovic, L. E. Brus and T. F. Heinz, Science, 2005, 308, 838 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maultzsch, R. Pomraenke, S. Reich, E. Chang, D. Prezzi, A. Ruini, E. Molinari, M. S. Strano, C. Thomsen and C. Lienau, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2005, 72, 241402(R) Search PubMed .
T. Ando, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1997, 66, 1066 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 207401 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pedersen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2003, 67, 073401 CrossRef .
C. D. Spataru, S. Ismail-Beigi, L. X. Benedict and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 077402 CrossRef .
E. Chang, G. Bussi, A. Ruini and E. Molinari, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 196401 CrossRef .
V. Perebeinos, J. Tersoff and Ph. Avouris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 257402 CrossRef .
T. Ando, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2005, 74, 777 CrossRef CAS .
Ph. Avouris, M. Freitag and V. Perebeinos, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 341 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lefebvre, J. M. Fraser, P. Finnie and Y. Homma, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2004, 69, 075403 CrossRef .
H. Htoon, M. J. O'Connell, P. J. Cox, S. K. Doorn and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 027401 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inoue, K. Matsuda, Y. Murakami, S. Maruyama and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2006, 73, 233401 CrossRef .
R. Matsunaga, K. Matsuda and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 147404 CrossRef .
T. Ando, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2006, 75, 024707 CrossRef .
S. Zaric, G. N. Ostojic, J. Kono, J. Shaver, V. C. Moore, M. S. Strano, R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley and X. Wei, Science, 2004, 304, 1129 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zaric, G. N. Ostojic, J. Shaver, J. Kono, O. Portugall, P. H. Frings, G. L. J. A. Rikken, M. Furis, S. A. Crooker, X. Wei, V. C. Moore, R. H. Hauge and R. E. Smalley, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 016406 CrossRef CAS .
I. B. Mortimer and R. J. Nicholas, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 027404 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shaver, J. Kono, O. Portugall, V. Krstic, G. L. J. A. Rikken, Y. Miyauchi, S. Maruyama and V. Perebeinos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1851 CrossRef CAS .
A. Srivastava, H. Htoon, V. I. Klimov and J. Kono, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 087402 CrossRef .
H. Ajiki and T. Ando, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1993, 62, 1255 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Matsunaga, PhD Thesis, Kyoto University,  2010 Search PubMed .
R. Matsunaga, Y. Miyauchi, K. Matsuda and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2009, 80, 115436 CrossRef .
V. Perebeinos, J. Tersoff and Ph. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2495 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kiowski, K. Arnold, S. Lebedkin, F. Hennrich and M. M. Kappes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 237402 CrossRef .
O. N. Torrens, M. Zheng and J. M. Kikkawa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 157401 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Murakami, B. Lu, S. Kazaoui, N. Minami, T. Okubo and S. Maruyama, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2009, 79, 195407 CrossRef .
H. Harutyunyan, T. Gokus, A. A. Green, M. C. Hersam, M. Allegrini and A. Hartschuh, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2010 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Mohite, T. S. Santos, J. S. Moodera and B. W. Alphenaar, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 425 CrossRef CAS .
R. Matsunaga, K. Matsuda and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2010, 81, 033401 CrossRef .
R. B. Capaz, C. D. Spataru, S. Ismail-Beigi and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2006, 74, 121401(R) CrossRef .
R. B. Capaz, C. D. Spataru, S. Ismail-Beigi and S. G. Louie, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2007, 244, 4016 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Castro Neto and F. Guinea, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 026804 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nagatsu, S. Chiashi, S. Konabe and Y. Homma, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 157403 CrossRef .
K. Yoshikawa, R. Matsunaga, K. Matsuda and Y. Kanemitsu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 093109 CrossRef .
J. Lefebvre, P. Finnie and Y. Homma, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2003, 70, 045419 CrossRef .
K. Matsuda, T. Inoue, Y. Murakami, S. Maruyama and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2008, 77, 033406 CrossRef .
A. Ueda, K. Matsuda, T. Tayagaki and Y. Kanemitsu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 233105 CrossRef .
F. Wang, G. Dukovic, E. Knoesel, L. E. Brus and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2004, 70, 241403(R) Search PubMed .
Y.-Z. Ma, L. Valkunas, S. L. Dexheimer, S. M. Bachilo and G. R. Fleming, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 157402 CrossRef .
L. Huang and T. D. Krauss, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 057407 CrossRef .
For an example,   M. W. Graham, Y. Z. Ma, A. A. Green, M. C. Hersam and G. R. Fleming, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 034504 CrossRef .
J. Feldmann, G. Peter, E. O. Gobel, P. Dawson, K. Moore, C. Foxon and R. J. Elliott, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 59, 2337 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miyauchi, H. Hirori, K. Matsuda and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2009, 80, 081410(R) Search PubMed .
F. Wang, G. Dukovic, L. Brus and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 177401 CrossRef .
A. Hagen, M. Steiner, M. B. Raschke, C. Lienau, T. Hertel, H. Qian, A. J. Meixner and A. Hartschuh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 197401 CrossRef .
H. Hirori, K. Matsuda, Y. Miyauchi, S. Maruyama and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 257401 CrossRef .
S. Berger, C. Voisin, G. Cassabois, C. Delalande, P. Roussignol and X. Marie, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 398 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berciaud, L. Cognet and B. Lounis, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 077402 CrossRef .
Y. Miyauchi, K. Matsuda and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2009, 80, 235433 CrossRef .
C. D. Spataru, S. Ismail-Beigi, R. B. Capaz and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 247402 CrossRef .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. H. Pijpers, R. Ulbricht, K. J. Tielrooji, A. O. Sherov, Y. Golan, C. Delerue, G. Allan and M. Bonn, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 811 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hogele, C. Galland, M. Winger and A. Imamoglu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 217401 CrossRef .
K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 1015 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, S. M. Bachilo, R. A. Simonette, K. M. Beckingham and R. B. Weisman, Science, 2010, 330, 1656 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kanemitsu, S. Okamoto, M. Otobe and S. Oda, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1997, 55, R7375 CrossRef CAS .
S. Okamoto and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 54, 16421 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Lampert, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1958, 1, 450 CrossRef CAS .
G. Munschy and B. Stebe, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1974, 64, 213 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawabata, K. Muro and S. Narita, Solid State Commun., 1977, 23, 267 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Thomas and T. M. Rice, Solid State Commun., 1977, 23, 359 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kheng, R. T. Cox, Y. Merle d'Aubigne, F. Bassani, K. Saminadayar and S. Tatarenko, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 71, 1752 CrossRef CAS .
G. Finkelstein, H. Shtrikman and I. Bar-Joseph, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 74, 976 CrossRef CAS .
G. Finkelstein, H. Shtrikman and I. Bar-Joseph, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 53, R1709 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Ronnow, T. G. Pedersen and H. D. Cornean, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2010, 81, 205446 CrossRef .
M. S. Strano, C. B. Huffman, V. C. Moore, M. J. O'Connell, E. H. Haroz, J. Hubbard, M. Miller, K. Rialon, C. Kittrell, S. Ramesh, R. H. Hauge and R. E. Smalley, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6979 CrossRef CAS .
G. N. Ostojic, S. Zaric, J. Kono, M. S. Strano, V. C. Moore, R. H. Hauge and R. E. Smalley, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 117402 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dukovic, B. E. White, Z. Zhou, F. Wang, S. Jockusch, M. L. Steigerwald, T. F. Heinz, R. A. Friesner, N. J. Turro and L. E. Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15269 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cognet, D. A. Tsyboulski, J.-D. R. Rocha, C. D. Doyle, J. M. Tour and R. B. Weisman, Science, 2007, 316, 1465 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. O'Connell, E. E. Eibergen and S. K. Doorn, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 412 CrossRef CAS .
R. Matsunaga, K. Matsuda and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 037404 CrossRef .
C. Galland and A. Imamoglu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 157404 CrossRef .
H. Sun, X.-L. Feng, S. Gong and C. H. Oh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2009, 79, 193404 CrossRef .
T. Sakashita, Y. Miyauchi, K. Matsuda and Y. Kanemitsu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 063110 CrossRef .
G. Hong, S. M. Tabakman, K. Welsher, H. Wang, X. Wang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15920 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hosoki, T. Tayagaki, S. Yamamoto, K. Matsuda and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 207404 CrossRef .
As an example,   T. Nagai, A. Yamamoto and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev B: Condens. Matter, 2005, 71, 121201(R) CrossRef .
D. Kammerlander, D. Prezzi, G. Goldoni, E. Molinari and U. Hohenester, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 126806 CrossRef .
K. Watanabe and K. Asano, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2011, 83, 115406 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
Table Content:

Yoshihiko Kanemitsu
	Yoshihiko Kanemitsu received his PhD at The University of Tokyo in 1986. He became a Research Associate of Chiba University, a Lecturer of Physics at University of Tsukuba, and a Professor of Nara Institute of Science and Technology. Since 2004, he is a Professor at Kyoto University. His research interests are nanomaterials science and optical properties of condensed matter. Currently, his interest is focused on optical properties and functionalities of exciton complexes and high-density electron–hole pairs in nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  (a) PL spectra of a single SWNT suspended on the patterned substrate and micelle-wrapped SWNTs dispersed in gelatin (ensemble). (b) Polar plot of the PL intensity of a typical single SWNT versus the polarized direction of the excitation laser. The PL data (circles) were fitted using cos2θ (solid line). [Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 32.]	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Normalized PL spectra of a single (9,4) SWNT at 20 K under different magnetic fields in the Voigt geometry. The split PL spectra are fit by two Lorentzian functions. (b) Normalized PL spectra of a single (9,5) SWNT at 20 K under different magnetic fields in the Faraday geometry. [Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 32.]	 

 	Fig. 3  Tube diameter dependence of the splitting energy between the dark and bright excitons at zero field. The solid curve corresponds to the theoretically predicted d−2 dependence. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 40.]	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Three-level model consisting of the bright- and dark-exciton states and the ground state. (b) Temperature dependence of ensemble-averaged PL intensity for (7,6) SWNTs dispersed in PFO. Using the three-level model, we calculate the temperature dependence of the PL intensity: the dotted curve (the Boltzmann exciton distribution) and the solid curve (the non-Boltzmann exciton distribution). [Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 41.]	 

 	Fig. 5  Tube-diameter dependence of the energy separation between the bright exciton and the triplet exciton. The curve shows a fit with the splitting energy proportional to 1/d2. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 48.]	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) PL spectra for several species of single SWNTs at room temperature. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 31.] (b) Diameter dependence of the PL linewidth for single SWNTs. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 53.]	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) PL linewidth and (b) PL intensity of a single SWNT as a function of the femtosecond excitation laser intensity at room temperature. [Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 55.] (c) Transient absorption (ΔT/T) dynamics under 1.55 eV excitation at different intensities of 15, 30, 100, and 300 μJ cm−2. Transient absorption decay curves are normalized by the long decay component at 10 ps. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 56.]	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Effective PL lifetimes of SWNTs prepared with different dispersion methods. [Figure reproduced from ref. 68.] (b) Radiative lifetimes τR of SWNTs as a function of diameter. Inset shows deduced coherence lengths Lc as a function of diameter. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 62.]	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Hole-doping dependence of the absorption spectra of CoMoCAT-PFO nanotubes. The inset shows an enlarged view of the lower-energy region. The new peaks indicated by the arrows A and B are associated with (7,5) and (7,6) SWNTs, respectively. (b) Normalized PL spectra of the nondoped and doped CoMoCAT-PFO nanotubes under 1.9 eV excitation. New PL peaks of (7,5) and (7,6) SWNTs are indicated by the solid and open arrows, respectively. [Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 91.]	 

 	Fig. 10  Diameter d dependence of the energy separation Δ between the bright exciton state and the charged exciton state observed in PL and absorption spectra. The green numbers show the value of 2n + m for (n,m) nanotubes. The solid curve shows a fit with the sum of the exchange splitting and the charged exciton binding energy. Inset shows the schematic of the energy levels of the singlet and triplet excitons (XS and XT) and the charged excitons (X+). A free hole is denoted as h+. [Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 91.]	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
