Recent advances in printable secondary batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA07856K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA07856K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22442-22458Recent advances in printable secondary batteries

        
          
            Cheng-Feng 
            Du
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qinghua 
            Liang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yubo 
            Luo
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yun 
            Zheng
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Qingyu 
            Yan
          
          
        
      *
      School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, 639798, Singapore. E-mail: alexyan@ntu.edu.sg
Received 
      7th September 2017
    , Accepted 9th October 2017First published on 9th October 2017AbstractIn past decades, with interest in wearable smart devices rapidly growing, the design and fabrication of novel energy storage devices have received increasing attention. Although secondary batteries are among the best options in this area, their bulky construction remains unable to fulfil the specific demands of miniaturization, portability, and flexibility. This review comprises a brief update on recent progress in printable secondary batteries, in combination with their principles and frequently used printing techniques. Moreover, we also discuss the challenges and advantages of printed secondary batteries and describe their future prospects in wearable smart devices.Cheng-Feng DuCheng-Feng Du is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. He obtained his BS degree from Ocean University, China, in 2011 and PhD degree from the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Xiao-Ying Huang. His research interests focus on the synthesis and assembly of 2D-based hybrid materials and their applications to energy conversion and storage.Qinghua LiangQinghua Liang obtained his Bachelor's degree from Southwest University in 2009 and Master's degree from the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2012. He obtained his PhD from Tsinghua University under the supervision of Prof. Quan-Hong Yang. His research interests focus on the synthesis and application of carbon-based and carbon-derived materials in energy storage and environmental protection.Yubo LuoYubo Luo is currently a research fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received his BS degree in Materials Physics in 2011 from Yanshan University, China, and his PhD degree from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, in 2016. His current research focuses on solid state thermoelectric materials and transmission electron microscopy.Yun ZhengYun Zheng is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received his BS degree in Materials Physics in 2010 and PhD degree in New Energy Materials in 2015 from Wuhan University of Technology, China, under the supervision of Prof. Xinfeng Tang. His research interests include the design of thermoelectric materials and devices.Qingyu YanQingyu Yan is currently an associate professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Nanyang Technology University. He obtained his BS degree in Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, and his PhD degree from the Materials Science and Engineering Department of the State University of New York at Stony Brook. He then joined the Materials Science and Engineering Department of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute as a postdoctoral research associate. He joined the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Nanyang Technological University as an Assistant Professor in early 2008 and became an Associate Professor in 2013. Yan's research has mainly focused on advanced electrode materials for energy storage devices and high-efficiency thermoelectric semiconductors.
1. Introduction
With growing interest in wearable smart devices for daily communication and health-monitoring applications, researchers have focused much effort toward the design and fabrication of miniaturized, light-weight, flexible, and shape-diverse wearable devices.1,2 These devices are usually designed to be embedded into traditional accessories, such as glasses and watches, or printed on fabrics.3 As power sources, rechargeable batteries are essential candidates for powering these devices.4,5 However, state-of-the-art rechargeable batteries, either prismatic, cylindrical, or coin-type, are bulky, heavy, and inflexible, and have intrinsic limitations that prevent them meeting the demands of wearable electronics above.
Printing is an attractive technique for realizing the high throughput production of digitally designed thin patterns on nearly any substrate. Before printing, organic dye molecules or inorganic nanoparticles are dispersed in a suitable solvent to form an ink with reasonable viscosity. These inks can be patterned on the predesigned substrate in an ultrathin form using different printing methods. After the solvent is evaporated, the solid components remain with patterning. Due to the generality of inks and substrates, printing techniques are particularly suitable for fabricating flexible, low-cost, and portable products. In the last several decades, printing techniques have been successfully applied in microelectronic manufacturing.6–10 Benefitting from this promising methodology, the manufacture of novel functional electronic devices has become possible, which has made printed electronics an indispensable part of daily life.9,11,12
Considering the requirements of power sources for wearable smart devices, their integration into a whole device is among the best options. Most parts of traditional batteries can be fabricated using the same printing methods applied to printed electronics. Therefore, the term “printable batteries” has been proposed, referring to batteries with at least one of components fabricated using printing techniques.13 When first making “printable” batteries, researchers mainly focused on printing electrode slurries due to their similarity to inks for printed electronics. Therefore, directly printing slurries of the active materials on nonprintable parts, including the current collector and separator, was initially studied. The printing of electrolytes has progressed at a similar pace to the fast development of solid state electrolytes.14–17 In recent years, benefiting from successful studies on three-dimensional (3D) printing techniques, researchers have also been able to print plastic and metallic materials, meaning that the printing of whole batteries can be achieved.18
In the past several years, there have been some comprehensive reviews on the rapidly expanding field of wearable smart devices and related energy storage systems.19–25 However, previous reviews have mainly focused on battery materials rather than the different printing processes. Few reviews of printable secondary batteries have been published.13,26 In this regard, we aim to provide a brief update on recent work toward printable secondary batteries, offering an overview of this promising field. In the first section, the deficiencies of traditional secondary batteries in wearable smart devices are summarized with regard to their principles and standard constructions. In the second section, combined with frequently used printing techniques, progress in printable secondary batteries is briefly summarized. The challenges of developing power sources for future wearable smart devices, and the advantages of printable batteries in this regard, are then discussed. Finally, we present the prospect of batteries fabricated using printing methods and their applications in wearable and integrated devices.
2. Secondary batteries and their conventional fabrication methods
As typical energy storage devices, secondary batteries can convert chemical energy from redox reactions into electrical power. These batteries usually comprise three parts, namely, anode, cathode, and electrolyte (Fig. 1). The anode materials, such as lithium and sodium, usually possessing strong reducing properties, can easily release electrons. The cathode materials, such as lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4, LFP), lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO2, LCO), and Na2MM′(PO4)3 with a NASICON structure,27 often serve as electron acceptors and ion accommodators (commonly, Li and Na ions). The electrolyte for secondary batteries is an ionic conductor that provides an ionic channel between anodes and cathodes. Based on their state, electrolytes can be divided into liquid electrolytes, including aqueous28 and nonaqueous systems,29 and solid state electrolytes, including gel,30 polymer, and ceramic electrolytes.31–34 A basic requirement for electrolyte selection is that the materials should be electrochemically stable in the working voltage window.29,35
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the main components and working principle of a C/LCO LIBy.21 Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Due to its high electropositive nature (−3.04 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode) and small molecular weight (6.94 g mol−1), lithium metal is deemed the most promising medium for energy storage devices. However, the direct use of lithium metal as an anode may cause serious safety issues owing to the formation of lithium dendrites during charge–discharge processes.36 To circumvent this drawback, a secondary insertion material must be utilized, such as graphite-like carbon.37 These devices are called Li-ion batteries (LIBs) or “rocking-chair” batteries. Graphite and LCO were used in the first commercialized rocking-chair battery as the anode and cathode, respectively.36,38 During charging, Li ions from LCO are intercalated into the graphite anode, accompanied by electrons passing through the external circuit. During the discharge process, Li ions are deintercalated from graphite and reinserted into the LCO lattice (Fig. 1). Although various cathode and anode materials have been developed,39–49 the basic working principle of secondary batteries has remained the same.
In the current battery manufacturing process, electrochemically active materials are first milled and mixed with a conductive agent, such as carbon black (to improve electrical conductivity), binder (to hold the active materials and conductive agent together), and a suitable solvent (to dissolve binder and form a homogeneous dispersion of each component) to form the slurries. The anodic and cathodic slurries are then cast onto conductive supports, such as aluminum foil or copper foil, as current collectors to obtain the final electrodes after drying. Finally, the anode, separator dipped with electrolyte, and cathode are assembled in a sandwich-like sequence and encapsulated into a cell to obtain the final products (Fig. 2a and b). This architecture is advantageous in providing a short path for lithium ion transport between the anodes and cathodes, which reduces the internal resistance. Furthermore, commercially available jelly-roll-based batteries can offer a very high energy density due to their coiled architecture with large internal electrode area.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of (a) coin and (b) prismatic LIBs structures with sandwich-like configurations. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright (2001), Macmillan Publishers Ltd. (c) Parallel configuration of LIBs. 
However, as discussed above, the traditional fabrication of batteries is complicated by the multiple steps needed to prepare the anodes and cathodes. Furthermore, the commonly used liquid electrolytes require a completely sealed and airtight shell. This increases the total weight and results in the final rigid and bulk configuration. In particular, decreasing the weight is important for flexible and portable devices. Therefore, another design, called a “parallel architecture”, was proposed by placing the anode and cathode parallel and immersing in a solid state electrolyte with high ionic conductivity (Fig. 2c).50 Compared with the sandwich-like form, the parallel configurations are easier to fabricate due to the non-overlapping configuration, resulting in a lower risk of shorting. Furthermore, the parallel batteries can be easily fabricated in thin-film form by decreasing the thickness of each component. Therefore, parallel architectures have recently received increasing attention for the construction of flexible and stretchable batteries.51–56 Furthermore, considering the requirements of wearable devices, especially highly integrated all-in-one systems with unitized power sources, a more accurate and promising method for large-scale production is urgently needed.
3. Printing techniques for secondary batteries
Since its invention, printing has been a convenient method for repetitively producing consistent artworks and has made a great contribution to human civilization. Until now, printing techniques were thought of as a high throughput manufacturing method for various products. Semi or fully automated printing processes can produce printed products with highly precise and repeatable patterns on large flexible substrates at low cost.57,58
In battery manufacturing, the above-mentioned fabrication procedures, especially electrode preparation, are highly dependent on the quality of slurries and coating techniques. For manufacturing, electrode slurry and printing ink preparation methods have the advantage of using different approaches to achieve equally satisfactory results with respect to dispersibility, wettability, and other rheological properties. Therefore, printing techniques are practicable for use in manufacturing batteries to meet the growing demand for thin-film type, shape-varied, and better integrated batteries.
In recent decades, more printing techniques have been used to produce batteries. Although there are many printing techniques that can realize the homogenous deposition of various slurries with different rheological properties on different substrates, suitable printing techniques still need to be carefully chosen according to the manufacturing requirements and product application. Moreover, beyond blade coating coupled with roll-to-roll processing, which has been applied in the current battery industry, the fabrication of batteries using advanced printing techniques is still in its infancy, and more research is needed toward determining the internal relationship between manufacturing parameters and physical properties of functional inks. In this section, based on different printing techniques, recent progress in printing secondary batteries is briefly discussed.
3.1. Blade coating
Blade coating is a technique that uses a doctor blade to coat electrode slurries onto a flat substrate. The vertical distance between the blade and substrate can be used to control the thickness of the coated slurries. In past decades, blade coating has been applied in various fields, including colloidal self-assembly,59 light-emitting diode preparation,60 solar cell fabrication,61,62 and battery manufacture.63,64Fig. 3a shows a laboratory blade coating setup. The doctor blade is placed vertically onto a flat substrate, usually the current collector (copper or aluminum foil), and the electrode slurry is added in front of the moving direction of the blade. When the blade moves horizontally, the slurry flows through the gap between blade and substrate, leaving a thin slurry layer on the substrate. Owing to the simple setup and ability to continuously work, blade coating has become the most commonly used technique for manufacturing batteries. The industrial setup is usually equipped with a substrate driven by a roll and a blade placed upon the substrate that continuously coats the battery slurries on the substrate as the roller turns (Fig. 3b). After this process, the coated substrates need to be heated to a suitable temperature followed by pressing under an appropriate pressure to obtain dry and compacted electrodes. The quality of the as-coated electrodes is highly dependent on the thickness of slurries, drying temperature, and calendering pressure. However, due to the blanket-coating process, this method can only achieve a homogeneous coating on the substrate, while it is difficult to fabricate a pattern.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustrations of the blade coating process in (a) batch and (b) roll-to-roll processes. 
Blade coating is a widely used coating method for fabricating batteries with layer-stacked structures, such as flexible thin-film batteries. The performance of such batteries is closely related to the physical properties of the electrode film. Their electrochemical performance under mechanical creasing, bending, and stretching has been the subject of many recent reports.65–67 For instance, Chen and Yang et al. reported a flexible rechargeable Zn–air battery fabricated by blade coating (Fig. 4).65 Kohlmeyer et al. studied the failure modes of creasable batteries under dynamic mechanical conditions.66 Gaikwad and Arias systematically investigated the adhesion and cohesion strength of electrodes with different particle sizes and polymer binder for flexible LIBs.67
 Fig. 4  Schematic image of blade-coated, solid-state, flexible, and rechargeable zinc–air battery. (Left inset: Photo showing the cell flexibility (top); cross-sectional SEM image of the laminated battery structure (bottom)).65 Copyright (2015), Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Although blade coating is extensively used in battery manufacturing, more research has recently found that either the density or controllability of thickness using blade coated layers are insufficient for wearable and flexible batteries.68,69 A recent report by Yang et al. showed that a novel hybrid and dense separator coated with Li4Ti5O12 (LTO)/graphene used in a lithium–sulfur (Li–S) battery showed improved cycling performance by inhibiting the shuttle effect of soluble polysulfides.69 A thicker and loose layer can be obtained through normal blade coating. It is difficult for the loosely coated separator to prevent the shuttle effect. Instead, the authors used a vacuum-filtration method to achieve a dense layer. Therefore, the cells assembled with such a dense separator and pure sulfur electrodes showed ultra-high rate performance (709 mA h g−1 at 2C and 1408 mA h g−1 at 0.1C) and an excellent cycling performance (697 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at 1C with 85.7% capacity retention).
3.2. Flexographic printing
Another printing technique commonly used in industry is flexographic printing, which has a similar setup to blade coating. However, flexographic printing is a relief printing technique that requires different protruding templates and intricate patterns printed onto substrates, including paper, plastic, and metallic foils.70–72 As shown in Fig. 5, the industrial setup for flexographic printing usually comprises a fountain cylinder, anilox cylinder, plate cylinder, and impression cylinder. During a typical printing process, the ink is picked up by the fountain cylinder and transferred to the anilox cylinder. The anilox cylinder is chrome-plated or stainless-steel with some microengraved cells on the surface, which keeps a thin ink layer to transfer to the plate cylinder. Excess ink on the anilox cylinder will be removed by a doctor blade. On the plate cylinder, there are a series of raised image elements, namely, a printing plate. After attaching to the anilox cylinder, ink can cover the printing plate. The substrate for printing is placed between the plate cylinder and impression cylinder. The impression cylinder offers a constant force on the substrate and plate cylinder, which helps the ink print on the substrate. For multiple ingredients, such as colors or materials, the substrate requires several printing steps to build up the final product.26,71,73–75 Rheology, such as the viscosity and yield stress of the inks, significantly affects the transfer quality. The wettability influences spreading on the substrate, while dispersibility can affect the homogeneity of the printed film. Importantly, to obtain optimal printing quality, many manufacturing parameters, such as printing speed, surface tension, and drying techniques, need to be strictly controlled depending on the ink properties.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustrations of flexographic printing. 
As a commercially available printing method, flexographic printing is not only widely used to print newspapers and magazines, but also for the scalable manufacturing of solar cells and rechargeable batteries.70,71,76 Wang et al. reported a roll-to-roll flexographic printing process for the large-scale fabrication of Zn/MnO2 batteries with a stable reversible capacity of about 0.05 mA h cm−2 at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2.71 As shown in Fig. 6a, the whole battery was obtained by gradually printing the MnO2 cathode, poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) electrolytes, and zinc foil anode layer-by-layer on a stainless steel foil. To get an ink with good flexographic printing qualities, the authors studied the rheology, wettability, and dispersibility of a series of inks, such as commercial graphic ink-based ink, aqueous-based ink, and NMP-based ink. They found that an aqueous-based ink with styrene-butadiene rubber (PSBR) polymer as the binder showed the best printability. Accordingly, they successfully printed a cathode film of 2.5 billion cubic microns per square inch (BCM) with a uniform viscous figuring pattern (Fig. 6b).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of multistation flexographic printing process for large-scale battery production. (b) Flexographically printed PSBR-based cathode films under an optical microscope showing viscous figuring patterns from using a 2.5 BCM anilox roller. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright (2014), Elsevier Ltd. 
3.3. Stencil printing
Stencil printing is an “on-contact” process that utilizes a squeegee to drag ink over a mask using hollow patterns as a template.77 Stencil printing usually requires a laser cut metal or plastic stencil with the desired pattern placed in contact with the substrate (Fig. 7a).78 After coating the ink on the stencil with a squeegee, ink can fill the hollow pattern to print on the substrate. Later, ink from the designed pattern stays on the substrate, while excess ink is removed along with the stencil. The stencil can be pre-cut before covering the substrate and reused after cleaning. The thickness of the printed layer depends on the thickness of the stencil. Therefore, to form a well-printed pattern, ink needs to maintain good fluidity to move through the stencil smoothly, while simultaneously maintaining a certain viscosity and low wettability on the stencil to prevent ink seepage from the stencil edges.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of the process flow diagram of stencil printing. 
Recently, there have been continuous reports of the design and fabrication of flexible and shape-varied batteries for wearable electronics by stencil printing.79,80 Utilizing the stencil printing method, Subramanian and Braam developed a silver oxide battery by printing different components step-by-step on a poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) plastic substrate using a stencil.79 To decrease the internal resistance, improve robust mechanical characteristics, and achieve easy printing-based integration of the battery, they introduced a photopolymerized PAA (poly acrylic acid)-based gel electrolyte with poly(ethylene glycol) divinyl ether (PEGDE) and poly(ethylene oxide) as crosslinker and filler, respectively. This printed battery showed an areal capacity of 5.4 mA h cm−2 at a discharge rate of 2.75 mA cm−2, which were better than those previously reported.81
Lee et al. developed a printable, fully integrated, multilayer-structured, solid-state battery by stencil printing a solid-state composite electrolyte (SCE, ETPTA polymer/1 M LiPF6 in EC/PC/Al2O3 nanoparticles) and SCE matrix-embedded electrodes (LFP for cathode and LTO for anode) layer-by-layer, followed by ultraviolet cross-linking (Fig. 8a).80 The thickness of each printed layer of the battery can be strictly controlled. As shown in Fig. 8b, the cross-section SEM image indicated an obvious and smooth interface between each printed layer. The galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles showed good cycling stability of the printed LFP half-cell. In this work, the UV curing of SEC and SEC matrix-embedded electrodes plays an important role on the shape-control of printed batteries. Without UV curing, the printed patterns of conventional slurry merged again when tilted vertically (Fig. 8d). The authors also studied the performance of this printed battery when completely wound along rods with different diameters to offer mechanical bending. As expected, the charge/discharge behaviors of this battery showed no obvious deterioration under mechanical bending.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic depicting the stepwise fabrication of printable solid-state batteries, wherein chemical structures of their major components and a photograph of the self-standing, flexible “PRISS” letter-shaped cell are provided. (b) SEM image (cross-sectional view) of a PRISS full-cell (left) and galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of an LFP half-cell (right) at a fixed charge/discharge current density of 0.1C/0.1C in the voltage range 2.5–3.8 V, where the gravimetric charge/discharge capacity was estimated based on the mass of LFP active materials. (c) Photographs showing mechanical flexibility of printable electrodes upon physical deformation, such as folding and winding (rod diameter = 5 mm). (d) Photographs of letter-shaped LFP cathode slurry (represented by the word “UNIST”, upper image) and conventional LFP cathode slurry (lower image). The conventional LFP cathode slurry failed to maintain the letter form when tilted vertically. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright (2015), American Chemical Society. 
3.4. Screen printing
Similar to stencil printing, another typical porous printing method widely used in industry to print fabrics and electronics is screen printing.73,82 This technology can print images on flat and flexible substrates, and even substrates with curved surfaces. During the printing process, a screen held by a screen frame is laid over the substrate, and ink is daubed on the screen using a squeegee. Once ink covers the screen, it can only pass through the mesh region, leaving the same ink pattern on the substrate. Usually, the template for screen printing is made from synthetic fibers or steel mesh glued under tension as a supporting frame (Fig. 9). Due to the easily accessible hollow patterns on the mask, screen printing has received much interest in printing flexible and thin-film devices.6,8,9 The final quality of the products of screen printing are highly dependent on the printing parameters, such as mesh diameter or hollow pattern size, mask tension, and the printing speed and pressure. Furthermore, closely related to the above parameters, the ink viscosity needs to be acutely adjusted to obtain the desired patterns.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of screen printing. 
Tehrani et al. fabricated an ultra-thin polymer battery by screen printing using conducting poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophen):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and polyethyleneimine (PEI) modified with PEDOT:*PSS as cathode and anode materials, respectively.83 To produce a thin-film of electrolyte/liquid-gel solution, they synthesized a thin-film electrolyte from a dry gel of poly(styrene sulfonic acid) sodium (PSSNa), and hydroxypropyl cellulose. Furthermore, the authors conducted a comprehensive study to optimize parameters for screen printing each layer, such as flood speed, print speed, snap off, squeegee load, film thickness, and drying temperature. Importantly, the as-designed air-insensitive polymer battery generated an open circuit voltage of 0.6 V and a practical specific capacity of 5.5 mA h g−1 during the charge/discharge process.
Owing to the outstanding conductivity, PEDOT:PSS polymer has multiple applications and can be used as both conductive additive and binder. Therefore, PEDOT:PSS is a good candidate for printable batteries. Syrový et al. recently compared the performance of a screen printed LFP cathode and spiral-bar-coated LFP cathode (using PVDF as binder).84 Interestingly, the screen-printed LFP-PEDOT:PSS composites exhibited an overall higher capacities of 151.2 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 108.1 mA h g−1 at 5C compared to 125.7 and 76.1 mA h g−1 for the spiral-bar-coated version, respectively. These results clearly demonstrated the possibility of using printed batteries in wearable smart labels and textile applications.
Similarly, Baradai et al. studied the rheological characterization of a cellulose-based organic-free ink and the corresponding influences during screen printing for rechargeable LIBs.85 This is the first report of cellulose derivatives and water-based inks being elaborated for LIBs using a printing process. Extraordinarily, the printed electrode based on graphite as the anode material showed a reversible capacity of 315 mA h g−1 at 0.1C.
Likewise, screen printing is a powerful technology for fabricating primary batteries. Recently, Foulgr et al. reported a thin-film zinc/manganese oxide reserve battery prepared using biologically activated pressure through a combination of stencil and roll-to-roll printing.86 In the designed battery, manganese(II) oxide cathode and zinc anode were directly printed on the silver current collector and PET substrate, respectively. A layer of fish roe containing NaCl-based electrolyte was placed between them to assemble the thin-film battery. After being activated by pressure, the broken fish roe released the electrolyte. The outer shell acted as a physical separator and ionic conductor. As a result, the total discharge capacity of the thin-film battery reached about 1.12 mA h cm−2.
3.5. Spray printing
Although porous printing methods have many advantages including simple processes and equipment, short printing times, and good repeatability, their industrial application is restricted due to high costs. Therefore, an alternative quick and more economical printing method is required. Spray printing technology, which uses an airbrush to atomize inks of wide-ranging viscosity with compressed gas on arbitrary substrates (Fig. 10).87 To obtain a suitable printed layer, the ink solvent and the drying parameters must be well adjusted. For example, when the printing ink uses a solvent with a high vapor pressure, its concentration can be increased to obtain a thick printed layer. When using a solvent with low vapor pressure, a preheated substrate is needed to accelerate the drying process. Furthermore, to form homogeneous droplets, inks must have good dispersibility to achieve a fine pattern. Inks for spray printing also need good fluidity and low wettability on the mask to prevent seepage.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of spray printing. 
Spray printing is particularly suitable for printing batteries with multiple inks that stack layer-by-layer. Due to the quick drying process, each layer of the electrodes would not affect others. With a well-established industry spray printing setup, batteries can be printed more homogeneously over a large surface in several minutes. Arias et al. produced a high-throughput spray-coated carbon nanotube (CNT) film used as a flexible current collector for LIBs.88 The aqueous CNT ink consisted of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and sodium dodecyl benzenesulfonate (SDBS). After spray printing on stainless steel foil, the dry product was dipped in water and the CNT thin-film was delaminated from the stainless steel foil after 1 min. Next, LCO/LTO electrodes were mechanically pressed on top of the CNT thin-film. Flexible LIBs were obtained by assembling electrodes with a polypropylene-based separator and sealing inside an aluminum-lined battery pouch. The as-fabricated battery showed a higher tensile strength and three- to four-fold higher areal capacity than other reported LTO/LCO flexible batteries. Moreover, the printed battery showed excellent capacity retention after repeated cycling and bending.
Similarly, Chen et al. recently developed a conductive gel ink composed of a continuously conductive LTO network based on cross-linking a lithium titanate nanotube (Li-TNT) hydrogel and graphene oxide (GO) colloids.56 As illustrated in Fig. 11, the Li-TNT ink was prepared by ion-exchange. By tuning the hydrogel concentration, the gel with tunable viscosity was compatible for various printing techniques, such as screen and spray printing. After annealing under vacuum, Li-TNT/GO precursors can mainly be transformed into an LTO/rGO network that shows outstanding high-rate performance, with the specific capacity decreased from 216 to 125 mA h g−1 as the current rate increased from 0.2C to 90C, respectively. The authors demonstrated that a printed full-cell battery based on such an LTO/rGO network can power LED lamps using commercial LFP as the cathode.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of in situ formation of conductive Li-TNT inks: (i) ion-exchange process to obtain Li-TNT precursor; (ii) spraying technique to obtain uniform conductive Li-TNT precursor on Cu foil, which would convert to LTO/rGO after thermal treatment (digital photo).56 Copyright (2016), Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Chen et al. recently reported the spray printing of a LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4-based composite electrode on aluminum foil.68 A detailed evaluation was conducted on the mechanical and electrochemical performances of the spray-printed electrode and a traditional blade-coated electrode. Compared with the blade-coated electrode, the spray-printed electrode showed a more uniform distribution of each component, better mechanical strength, and, consequently, improved adhesion, cycling stability, and rate capability.
Recently, an improved spray printing technique has been used to prepare Li–S batteries with good cycling stability and rate capability.89 In this work, the ink was charged with a high-voltage DC electric field (Fig. 12). When ink drops were ejected from the nozzle, they were directed to the substrate by electrostatic attraction. Meanwhile, the electrostatic repulsion between each ink drop resulted in the droplets splitting into smaller droplets, which were homogeneously distributed on the substrate. Using the electrostatic spray printing technique, an integrated and compact nanosized carbon black/PEDOT:PSS layer was deposited on the electrode surface, which offered both the fast ion diffusion and high blocking efficiency of the polysulfide species. The as-produced coated cathode showed a reversible capacity of 792 mA h g−1 at 1C and good stability with 0.042% capacity decay per cycle at the same current density for 1000 cycles.
 Fig. 12  (a) Electrostatic-spray printing procedure for multifunctional polysulfide blocking layer-coated (MPBL-coated) electrode. (b) Schematic illustration of MPBL-coated cathode for Li–S battery. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright (2016), Elsevier Ltd. 
3.6. Inkjet printing
Inkjet printing is a digital printing method that does not need a pattern to transfer or define the target shape. The resultant pattern is directly formed on the substrate by ink microdroplets.3,10,90 Therefore, inkjet printing can be regarded as a form of dispenser printing. Currently, there are two main inkjet printing techniques, namely, continuous inkjet (CIJ) and drop-on-demand (DOD).10,13,26 In the CIJ technique, the ink is pressurized with a pump and continuously ejected from a microscopic nozzle. A piezoelectric crystal inside the ejection gun is triggered to vibrate by a digital signal, resulting in the ink stream breaking into droplets at regular intervals. The droplets are then charged in a controlled, variable electrostatic field and directed by electrostatic deflection plates to print on the substrate surface (Fig. 13a). As shown in Fig. 13b and c, the DOD process only produces ink microdroplets to print the effective image. Based on the microdroplet generation method, the DOD technique can be further devised into two types, including piezoelectric and thermal DOD. Piezoelectric DOD utilizes piezoelectric material behind the nozzle in each ink chamber. When the digital signal is applied, the piezoelectric material produces a pressure to force the ink to form a droplet from the nozzle. Different from piezoelectric DOD, thermal DOD ejects a droplet of ink onto the substrate using the pressure from rapid vaporization of ink heated in the chamber by applying a pulse current. As such, thermal DOD is usually practicable for printing with inks containing a volatile component and thermally stable pigments to satisfy the vaporization requirement.10 For both CIJ and DOD techniques, to form and eject ink droplets from the nozzle controllably, the ink viscosity needs to be decreased, while good wettability of inks with the nozzle is required.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of inkjet printing: (a) CIJ process, (b) piezoelectric DOD method, and (c) thermal DOD method. 
By introducing water-based ink, Lestriez et al. inkjet-printed microbatteries based on a porous LFP composite.91 These microbatteries showed a much better rate performance than the tape-casted equivalents, with a discharge capacity of more than 70 mA h g−1 at 90C. Owing to the high porosity and thinness of this printed electrode, a high LFP rate capability can be fully achieved. Similarly, Gu et al. reported the inkjet printing of an LFP electrode from a water-based ink.92 In this work, the influence of pH on the physical and chemical properties of LFP ink was studied.
Using LFP and LTO as the model compounds, Bideau et al. developed Li-ion microbatteries by inkjet printing a solid state electrolyte in 2015.93 In this work, the porous LFP cathode and LTO anode were separately prepared using a tape-casting method. The precursor of the gel electrolyte based on silica was then inkjet printed on the dry electrode surface to fill the voids. After the precursor had polycondensed, the printed electrodes were assembled into a half-cell and full-cell. Consequently, the inkjet-printed solid state electrolyte served as a liquid-like electrolyte in all-solid-state microbatteries. The as-developed full cell showed a specific capacity of 60 mA h g−1 at 0.1C.
Single wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) are appropriate materials for inkjet dispensing due to their small dimension being similar to the stringent size. Manthiram et al. inkjet-printed integrated Li–S cathodes using a top-down nanomanufacturing method and analyzed the discharge mechanism of S@SWCNTs.94 The confinement of S within microporous SWCNTs improved the conductivity and avoided the formation of soluble polysulfide. The as-printed electrode delivered a stable discharge capacity between 700 and 800 mA h g−1 with good cycling performance at 0.5C.
Unlike most research focused on the inkjet printing of cathodes, Sun et al. inkjet-printed a thin-film silicon anode for LIBs using commercial silicon nanoparticles (Si NPs) and polymer binders (Fig. 14a).95 Using this method, very uniform and thin-film electrodes were obtained with precise thickness control. By introducing conductive polymer PEDOT:PSS as binder, the as-printed anode showed good electrochemical performance and stability. They attributed the superior performance to the highly conductive and elastic network around Si NPs consisting of PEDOT:PSS chains and carbon black particles. During charge and discharge processes, the conductive polymer network offered good electrical contact with Si NPs and carbon black (Fig. 14b). Therefore, the printed thin-film battery showed a high capacity of more than 1700 mA h g−1 for 100 cycles, and retained 1000 mA h g−1 over 1000 cycles at 0.1C. Clearly, the inkjet printing method is favorable for the preparation of this type of thin-film battery.
 Fig. 14  (a) Photograph of Western University logo printed with SiNP ink and optical photographs and SEM images of inkjet-printed SiNP anode films on copper foil. Scale bars in red, white, and black represent 3 cm, 5 cm, and 500 nm, respectively. (b) Schematic illustration of proposed mechanism explaining the electrochemical performance of anodes prepared with PEDOT:PSS. The Si NPs remain electrically connected throughout charging/discharging and are, therefore, able to maintain a stable cycling capacity. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright (2017), Elsevier Ltd. 
3.7. Three-dimensional (3D) printing
In recent years, 3D printing, also known as additive manufacturing, has received increasing attention due to its feasibility in various industries.18,96–101 From a printing perspective, 3D printing can be considered another modified dispenser printing process (Fig. 15).13,26,102 The ink in 3D printing process is extruded through a needle made of stainless steel or glass capillaries with different inner diameters to create final objects with almost any shape or geometry by the accumulated footprints of stacked two-dimensional (2D) layers. Depending on the viscoelastic behavior of the ink, suitable extrusion stress is required to obtain a precise footprint of the defined images. Usually, for an elaborate 3D-printed object, the inks are required to have high viscosity, which minimizes deformation after extrusion. The higher dispersibility of solid parts will help to reduce the risk of nozzles clogging.
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of 3D dispenser printing process. 
In recent years, an extrusion-based process, named fused deposition modelling (FDM), has emerged as the most widely used 3D printing process. Using this technology, thermoplastic materials are heated and extruded from the dispenser needle in a semi-molten form.103 After dispensing onto the substrate layer-by-layer, the cold filaments combine into a solidified product. Recently, a more advanced robocasting method capable of printing almost any material into 3D form was established. Other 3D printing technologies have been invented, including powder-based 3D printing and laminated object manufacturing.98,104–109 Herein, as a typical ink-based printing process, the most versatile 3D extrusion printing is mainly discussed. Although 3D printing is considerably slower at printing large area images than other printing methods, the capability for printing stereo objects with controllable microstructures and local composition make 3D printing a promising approach to prepare novel and highly integrated batteries.
Hu et al. first developed all-component 3D-printed lithium-ion batteries using GO-based electrode composite inks and a solid-state electrolyte (Fig. 16).110 In this work, LFP and LTO were respectively selected as the cathode and anode materials, and water was used as the solvent. The viscosity of both inks was controlled using highly concentrated GO sheets. These GO-based inks showed high apparent viscosities, while exhibiting excellent shear-thinning behavior. Based on the 3D printing process, electrode arrays were fabricated (Fig. 16c and d). Interestingly, surface and cross-sectional SEM images of the printed electrodes showed that, during step-by-step deposition, GO flakes were aligned along the extruding direction, which improved the electrical conductivity (Fig. 16e). The authors attributed this to the shear stress induced by the nozzle. Using this GO-based 3D printing method, the obtained LFP cathode exhibited a reversible specific capacity of about 160 mA h g−1, close to the theoretical value. Meanwhile, the 3D printed LTO anode exhibited a specific capacity of about 170 mA h g−1. When 3D printed into a full-cell, a high mass loading (∼18 mg cm−2) and initial charge and discharge capacities of 117 and 91 mA h g−1 with good cycling stability were achieved.
 Fig. 16  Digital images of (a) LFP/GO and LTO/GO inks loaded in syringes; (b) the multi-layered structure being printed; (c) the 3D-printed electrode arrays; and (d) the interdigitated electrodes. (e) SEM images of the annealed LFP/rGO electrodes. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright (2016), Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Similarly, Pan et al. reported a 3D-printed cathode of LiMn0.21Fe0.79PO4@C (LMFP) nanocrystals for LIB,111 containing a stereo-parallel 3D printed structure 450 μm in width and 18 μm in height (Fig. 17). The as-printed battery showed an ultrahigh rate capacity and stability of 108.45 mA h g−1 at 100C and 150.21 mA h g−1 at 10C after 1000 cycles. Combined with the 3D-printed microstructure of the LMFP cathode, the authors showed that, instead of Li-ion diffusion in LMFP nanocrystals, electrolyte diffusion might play a decisive role in the ultrahigh rate performance. Therefore, by applying the 3D printing technique, fine control of the electrode microstructures is expected to meet performance improvement demands.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of battery preparation with the 3D-printed electrode. (b) Printing process recorded by a magnifying glass, and (c) 3D structure of (b) obtained by a 3D confocal microscope (printing width and height are 450 and 18 μm, respectively).111 Copyright (2016), Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Later, a series of studies on the effects of each component to optimize the overall performance of free-standing and current collector-embedded 3D printed LFP, LTO, and LCO batteries were reported by Kohlmeyer et al.112 To obtain a free-standing and current-collector-embedded ink, carbon nanofibers were chosen as the conductive additive, charge collector, and porous structural scaffold. Moreover, a PVDF-HFP separator was printed directly on top of the LFP electrode to form the all-printed battery. As a result, the printed LTO, LFP, and LCO electrodes all showed excellent theoretical utilization and extremely good stability, with consistent performance over 100 cycles.
3.8. Transfer printing
Transfer printing was developed in 2005 by Rogers et al.,113 and is divided into several steps (Fig. 18). First, the object microstructures are prepared on a donor substrate by self-assembly, micromachining, etching, or growing. Next, an elastomeric holder (stamp), such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) rubber, is placed onto the objects to adhere to them. The objects are then removed from the donor substrate by quickly peeling the stamp and placing on a receiver substrate. Finally, after peeling the objects from the holder, the whole object array is transferred to a new substrate. Throughout this process, the kinetically controllable adhesion of objects to the stamp plays a decisive role. The mechanism suggests that, by optimizing the properties of stamps, transfer printing can provide a robust strategy for manipulating micro- or nano-building blocks. Since then, the unique transfer printing method has expanded to fabricate various flexible thin-film devices, such as nanogenerators,114 transistors (TFTs),115 batteries,116,117 and more.118
 Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of the generic process flow for transfer printing solid objects. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright (2005), Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 
Lee et al. developed a flexible thin-film LIB using the transfer approach.116 Construction began from a standard radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering fabrication process. A cathode current collector, LCO cathode, lithium phosphorus oxynitride electrolyte (LiPON), Li metal anode, and protective encapsulation multilayers were sequentially deposited on the sacrificial brittle mica substrate (Fig. 19a-i). After physically delaminating the mica using sticky tape (Fig. 19a-ii), the thin-film battery was transferred onto a PDMS polymer sheet (Fig. 19a-iii). Finally, the battery was capped with another thin PDMS sheet (Fig. 19a-iv). The thin-film LIB was capable of a maximum charging voltage of 4.2 V and capacity of 106 μA h cm−2.
 Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of the transfer process for fabricating flexible LIBs. A cultivated LIB on brittle mica substrate (i) is followed by mica substrate delamination using sticky tape (ii), and the flexible LIB is then transferred onto a PDMS polymer substrate (iii). Finally, the flexible LIB is covered with another PDMS sheet to enhance mechanical stability (iv).116 Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society. 
Kutbee et al. also developed a flexible Li-ion microbattery using a two-step transfer process in the transfer printing method.117 They first fabricated a typical Li-free stacking battery on a rigid oxidized Si substrate.119 This consisted of an LCO cathode, LiPON electrolyte, and titanium layer as the anode. Using the Li-free design, the thin-film battery could withstand a high temperature during fabrication and eliminated the danger of using Li metal. After fabrication, the battery was inverted onto a PDMS substrate follow by etching the Si substrate. When the Si substrate was removed, the thin-film battery was transferred to the final surface by peeling from the PDMS substrate. When compared with the original battery on Si substrate, the thin-film battery and thin-film battery with 5 mm bending showed similar electrochemical performance with a normalized discharge capacity of about 130 μA h cm−2 at a current density of 130 μA cm−2 after 50 cycles.

Table 1 shows a comparison of the printing techniques discussed in this section, including their print speed, potential for large-scale production, patternability, and basic ink and cost requirements. For inks with different rheological properties, suitable printing methods must be selected carefully.
Table 1 Comparison of above-mentioned printing techniques.13,26,120–123




Techniques
Print speed
Compatible with roll-to-roll technique
Patternability
Ink viscosity (Pa s−1)
Equipment cost
Ink waste




Blade coating
Normal
Yes
No
0.01–100
Cheap
Medium


Flexographic printing
Very fast
Yes
2D pattern
0.05–0.5
Expensive
Slight


Stencil printing
Normal
No
2D pattern
0.1–100
Cheap
Medium


Screen printing
Normal
Yes
2D pattern
0.5–50
Very cheap
Medium


Spray printing
Fast
Yes
2D pattern
<0.15
Cheap
Slight


Inkjet printing
Fast
Yes
Digital master
0.001–0.04
Cheap
None


3D printing
Very slow
No
3D object
0.01–10
Very expensive
None


Transfer printing
Very slow
No
2D array
None
Very expensive
None




4. Advantages of printed secondary batteries for powering wearable devices
As discussed in the previous sections, printing methods are particularly suitable for the preparation of thin-film-type secondary batteries. However, despite the many advantages discussed, it should be noted that printed batteries still have some limitations, such as a low energy density compared with commercially available cylinder and pouch batteries. Furthermore, owing to the lack of unified standards, batteries prepared using different printing methods with diverse thicknesses make comparing the areal capacities difficult. In this section, the advantages of printed secondary batteries in powering wearable devices will be discussed, for which integrative manufacturing, customizability, thin-film-type, and flexibility are more important and harder to achieve using commercial cylinder and thin pouch batteries.
4.1. Patterned and large area production
The main advantage of printing techniques in battery manufacture is that they can simultaneously meet the requirements of patterning and large-scale production. As mentioned above, for batteries with sandwich-like configuration, the stacking and arrangement of each layer needs to be designed in detail during the fabrication process, such as the blade terminal design for each electrode and the stacking region of each layer. For batteries configured in parallel, processing the two electrodes simultaneously or in continuous procedures seems to be particularly important. Therefore, a printing technique that can precisely pattern with simultaneous large-scale production would be the best choice.
One specific example is the high-throughput spray-printing of a current-collector film used in batteries (Fig. 20a).88 By utilizing the spray-printing technique, a free standing CNT thin-film was deposited onto stainless steel foil followed by peeling after post-processing. For commercial production, a continuous process is a basic requirement for large-scale production due to the decreased cost. Among the printing methods mentioned above, most are capable of being extended to a roll-to-roll process to realize large-scale production. As reported by Wang et al., the large-scale manufacture of patterned PSBR cathode films on a piece of stainless steel foil could easily be produced up to several meters using a continuous roll-to-roll flexographic printing process (Fig. 20b).71
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration (top) and photograph (bottom) of spray-coated CNT ink on stainless steel (SS) foil with a thickness of approx. 2–3 μm and sheet resistance of approx. 10 Ω □−1. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright (2015), Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA. (b) Photograph of five continuous printed PSBR cathode films on a piece of stainless steel foil. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright (2014), Elsevier Ltd. 
4.2. Customizable configuration and high integration
With research interest in wearable smart devices growing, the batteries for these devices need to be carefully designed and machined to achieve the maximum integration efficiency. Undoubtedly, there is no special position for placing batteries because of the requirement of portability for every smart device placed on a flat surface. Therefore, designing a targeted configuration and shape of the battery for wearable smart devices is an important technology.
Most currently available batteries are produced in a rigid design (such as coin cells, cylinder cells, or prismatic cells). This greatly restricts their development in power source-unitized wearable devices. However, through printing techniques, constructing stacked and thin-film-type batteries is easy. Meanwhile, precisely controlling their shape and size offers a new approach toward novel battery allocation. Based on a stencil printing process, Lee et al. proposed a conceptual “shape-conformable design” of printed batteries for wearable smart devices.80 As depicted in Fig. 20a, a novel shape-conformable battery could be allocated in every possible space of spectacle frames based on the printing technique. This can also seamlessly integrate with other electronic devices. To explore their concept, paper glasses and a glass cup with curvilinear surface were chosen as model devices to confirm the versatile application of these printed batteries (Fig. 21b and c).
 Fig. 21  (a) Conceptual comparison of cell design and shape (left image = conventional cell, right image = PRISS cell that can be shape-conformable and also seamlessly integrate with electronic devices). (b) Photograph showing direct fabrication of a PRISS cell on paper eyeglasses. The PRISS cell-unitized wearable eyeglasses operated an LED lamp. (c) Photograph showing direct fabrication of a heart-shaped PRISS cell on a transparent glass cup with curvilinear surface. The PRISS cell, mounted on the round-shaped glass cup, delivered normal charge/discharge behavior (at charge/discharge current density of 0.05C/0.05C under voltage range of 1.0–2.5 V, gravimetric charge/discharge capacity was estimated based on the mass of LFP active materials).80 Copyright (2015), American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, combined with state-of-the-art printing electronics techniques, this technology will greatly simplify the design and manufacturing procedures to integrate battery processing with device fabrication, making producing highly integrated on-chip devices much easier. As reported by Lee et al., an integrated all-in-one flexible OLED system with LIB was obtained based on a transfer printed battery (Fig. 22).116 As shown in Fig. 22a, a thin-film OLED device was assembled on a printed battery by wrapping with a PDMS sheet to improve the mechanical stability. After connecting them, the printed battery was able to power the OLED device to display a luminous word (Fig. 22b).
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic diagram of an all-flexible LED system. (b) Picture of an all-in-one flexible LED system integrated with a bendable LIB.116 Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society. 
4.3. Feasible on various substrates and flexibility
Flexibility, a basic requirement for wearable devices, is also a general requirement for wearable batteries. By adjusting the composition of inks and choosing suitable printing techniques, batteries can be deposited on nearly any kind of substrate, which is another advantage of printed batteries.
In addition to the above discussed batteries printed on curved surfaces and flexible substrates, it is also important to make the printed batteries themselves flexible. A thin printed layer with high tensile strength is needed for flexible batteries. For example, Arias et al. used a spray printed CNT film as the flexible current collector and a nonwoven membrane as the framework to construct flexible electrodes.88 During the repeated bending process, the printed battery kept its excellent performance (Fig. 23).
 Fig. 23  Optical images of flexible lithium ion battery connected to a voltmeter (a) when flat, (b) after flexing once, and (c) after flexing for 50 cycles to a bending radius of 4 mm. (d) Demonstration of the flexible lithium-ion battery connected in series with a 200 Ω resistor and a green light-emitting diode (LED). The battery was able to power the green-LED continuously even after flexing 50 times to a bend radius of 4 mm (e).88 Copyright (2015), Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
As for inorganic materials, preparing flexible variants remains challenging due to their more rigid bonding structures compared with polymer-based materials. By utilizing printing techniques, inorganic layers can be deposited with a controllable thickness, therefore improving their flexibility. Kutbee et al. developed flexible integrated microbatteries with an all inorganic thin-film structure using a transfer printing process.117 Several inorganic layers were deposited on a rigid Si substrate. After transferring to a PDMS substrate, the integrated microbattery exhibited good flexibility and could be fitted onto a bent surface without breaking.
5. Summary and outlook
In summary, the imperative requirements of powering wearable smart devices offer a new challenge for the rational design and fabrication of rechargeable batteries beyond traditional configurations. To realize the large-scale manufacture of patterned, light weight, flexible, complex-shaped, and even on-chip integrated batteries, various printing techniques have been developed and utilized in recent years. In this review, we have mainly focused on recent advances in fabricating secondary batteries using printing techniques. Particularly, we summarized the principles of eight widely-used printing techniques, and related work published recently. It should be noted that none of these techniques is absolute independent. There might be more than one choice that can achieve the same purpose. Therefore, it is important for researchers to know the principles of each printing technique and select the most suitable technique for battery manufacturing.
Moreover, the selection of suitable materials for printing secondary batteries is a complicated and challenging task. It requires overall consideration of the material characteristics, including chemical and physical properties, and the corresponding printing parameters. We have only briefly described these themes in this review, and more work is required to systematically clarify this relationship.
Based on the challenges of powering wearable smart devices, the advantages of fabricating batteries using printing techniques are briefly discussed in Section 4. Through the printing process, batteries with designed patterns, customizable configurations and flexibility can be easily fabricated to meet the requirements of future power sources for wearable smart devices. However, although much representative work has been summarized here, work related to printable batteries is still much less abundant than that on wearable devices or printed electronics. This indicates that the study on printable batteries is still in its infancy, with more research needed in this field.
There is no doubt that printing techniques will eventually become the general manufacturing method for the production of secondary batteries. However, these techniques still have far to go. In the near future, the most urgent task of printable batteries is to focus on understanding the relationships among ink properties, printing techniques, and product performance, to provide a systematic direction for industrial production.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from Singapore MOE AcRF Tier 1 under grant No. RG113/15 and 2016-T1-002-065, and Singapore EMA project EIRP 12/NRF2015EWT-EIRP002-008. The authors also acknowledge the Facility for Analysis, Characterization, Testing and Simulation (FACTS), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, for use of their TEM JEOL 2100, FESEM 7600F, and XRD Bruker D8 Advance facilities.
References
Y. Qian, X. Zhang, D. Qi, L. Xie, B. K. Chandran, X. Chen and W. Huang, Sci. China Mater., 2016, 59, 589–608 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4177–4179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, L. H. Li and Y. L. Song, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2971–2993 RSC .
Q. Huang, D. Wang and Z. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600783 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, J. Lopez, H. W. Lee, N. Liu, G. Zheng, C. L. Wu, J. Sun, W. Liu, J. W. Chung, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2455–2461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Bubnova, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017 DOI:10.1038/nnano.2016.297 .
J. Perelaer, P. J. Smith, D. Mager, D. Soltman, S. K. Volkman, V. Subramanian, J. G. Korvink and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8446–8453 RSC .
W. Wu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7342–7372 RSC .
J. S. Chang, A. F. Facchetti and R. Reuss, IEEE Trans. Emerg. Sel. Topics Circuits Syst., 2017, 7, 7–26 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Zhan, J. N. An, Y. F. Wei, V. T. Tran and H. J. Du, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 965–993 RSC .
S. Khan, L. Lorenzelli and R. S. Dahiya, IEEE Sens. J., 2015, 15, 3164–3185 CrossRef .
Y. Yu, X. Xiao, Y. Zhang, K. Li, C. Yan, X. Wei, L. Chen, H. Zhen, H. Zhou, S. Zhang and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4926–4934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Gaikwad, A. C. Arias and D. A. Steingart, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 305–328 CrossRef .
C. W. Sun, J. Liu, Y. D. Gong, D. P. Wilkinson and J. J. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 363–386 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patil, V. Patil, J. W. Choi, J. S. Kim and S. J. Yoon, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2017, 17, 29–71 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, C. M. Li, M. Piszcz, E. Coya, T. Rojo, L. M. Rodriguez-Martinez, M. Armand and Z. B. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 797–815 RSC .
T. T. Dong, J. J. Zhang, J. C. Chai, Q. M. Jia and G. L. Cui, Acta Polym. Sin., 2017, 906–921 CAS .
X. Tian, J. Jin, S. Yuan, C. K. Chua, S. B. Tor and K. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700127 CrossRef .
S. Lawes, A. Riese, Q. Sun, N. C. Cheng and X. L. Sun, Carbon, 2015, 92, 150–176 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Fu, J. Cheng, T. Li and L. B. Hu, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1065–1079 CrossRef CAS .
U. Gulzar, S. Goriparti, E. Miele, T. Li, G. Maidecchi, A. Toma, F. De Angelis, C. Capiglia and R. P. Zaccaria, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16771–16800 CAS .
J. J. Shi, X. Guo, R. J. Chen and F. Wu, Progress in Chemistry, 2016, 28, 577–588 Search PubMed .
Z. Y. Wang, W. K. Zhang, X. L. Li and L. Z. Gao, J. Mater. Res., 2016, 31, 1648–1664 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wen, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4306–4337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, M. S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603436 CrossRef PubMed .
R. E. Sousa, C. M. Costa and S. Lanceros-Mendez, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3539–3555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, X. Bie, Q. Fu, D. Dixon, N. Bramnik, Y.-S. Hu, F. Fauth, Y. Wei, H. Ehrenberg, G. Chen and F. Du, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Beck and P. Rüetschi, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2467–2482 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Song, Y. Y. Wang and C. C. Wan, J. Power Sources, 1999, 77, 183–197 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Kharton, F. M. B. Marques and A. Atkinson, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 174, 135–149 CrossRef CAS .
P. Verma, P. Maire and P. Novak, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6332–6341 CrossRef CAS .
D. Golodnitsky, E. Strauss, E. Peled and S. Greenbaum, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2551–A2566 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and P. Singh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2387–A2392 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roy and S. K. Srivastava, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2454–2484 CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mohri, N. Yanagisawa, Y. Tajima, H. Tanaka, T. Mitate, S. Nakajima, M. Yoshida, Y. Yoshimoto, T. Suzuki and H. Wada, J. Power Sources, 1989, 26, 545–551 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and K. S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, S. Ren, M. Bruns and M. Fichtner, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 706–711 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Massé, E. Uchaker and G. Cao, Sci. China Mater., 2015, 58, 715–766 CrossRef .
X. Liu, J. Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601759 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Park, H. Sun, H. Lee, J. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 780–800 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Ma, D. Bao, M.-M. Shi, J.-M. Yan and X.-B. Zhang, Chem, 2017, 2, 525–532 CAS .
Q. Pang, X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16132 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Parker, C. N. Chervin, I. R. Pala, M. Machler, M. F. Burz, J. W. Long and D. R. Rolison, Science, 2017, 356, 415–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 947–958 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ponrouch, C. Frontera, F. Barde and M. R. Palacin, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 169–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Z. Guo, B. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9126–9130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. Humble, J. N. Harb and R. LaFollette, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A1357–A1361 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Braam, S. K. Volkman and V. Subramanian, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 367–372 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Gaikwad, A. M. Zamarayeva, J. Rousseau, H. Chu, I. Derin and D. A. Steingart, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5071–5076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ning, J. H. Pikul, R. Zhang, X. Li, S. Xu, J. Wang, J. A. Rogers, W. P. King and P. V. Braun, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 6573–6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. F. Garay and R. Bashirullah, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2015, 24, 70–79 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Pikul, J. Liu, P. V. Braun and W. P. King, J. Power Sources, 2016, 315, 308–315 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, X. Rui, D. Qi, Y. Luo, W. R. Leow, S. Chen, J. Guo, J. Wei, W. Li, J. Deng, Y. Lai, B. Ma and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1567–1576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Stringer, T. M. Althagathi, C. C. W. Tse, V. D. Ta, J. D. Shephard, E. Esenturk, C. Connaughton, T. J. Wasley, J. Li, R. W. Kay and P. J. Smith, Manuf. Rev., 2016, 3, 12 Search PubMed .
H. W. Tan, T. Tran and C. K. Chua, Virtual Phys. Prototyp., 2016, 11, 271–288 CrossRef .
H. Yang and P. Jiang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13173–13182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-R. Tseng, H.-F. Meng, K.-C. Lee and S.-F. Horng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 153308 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Chang, S.-R. Tseng, C.-Y. Chen, H.-F. Meng, E.-C. Chen, S.-F. Horng and C.-S. Hsu, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 741–746 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, E. Peng, Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1544–1550 CAS .
L. Hu, H. Wu, F. La Mantia, Y. Yang and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5843–5848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Singha, Am. J. Polym. Sci., 2012, 2, 39–49 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, D. U. Lee, F. M. Hassan, L. Yang, Z. Y. Bai, M. G. Park and Z. W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5617–5622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Blake, R. R. Kohlmeyer, L. F. Drummy, J. S. Gutierrez-Kolar, J. Carpena-Nunez, B. Maruyama, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, H. Huang and M. F. Durstockt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5196–5204 CAS .
A. M. Gaikwad and A. C. Arias, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6390–6400 CAS .
R. Yu, Y. Sun, B.-K. Zou, M.-M. Deng, J.-Y. Xie and C.-H. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2017, 340, 258–262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, M. Liu, W. Lv, Y.-B. He, C. Wang, Q. Yun, B. Li, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, J. Fyenbo and M. Jørgensen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8994 RSC .
Z. Wang, R. Winslow, D. Madan, P. K. Wright, J. W. Evans, M. Keif and X. Rong, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 246–254 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Z. H. Chen, Y. Zheng, C. Newman, J. R. Quinn, F. Dotz, M. Kastler and A. Facchetti, Nature, 2009, 457, 679–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, J. Fyenbo and M. Jorgensen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8994–9001 RSC .
J. S. Yu, I. Kim, J. S. Kim, J. Jo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, R. R. Sondergaard, M. Hosel, D. Angmo, M. Jorgensen and F. C. Krebs, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6032–6040 RSC .
T. R. Andersen, H. F. Dam, M. Hosel, M. Helgesen, J. E. Carle, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, S. A. Gevorgyan, J. W. Andreasen, J. Adams, N. Li, F. Machui, G. D. Spyropoulos, T. Ameri, N. Lemaitre, M. Legros, A. Scheel, D. Gaiser, K. Kreul, S. Berny, O. R. Lozman, S. Nordman, M. Valimaki, M. Vilkman, R. R. Sondergaard, M. Jorgensen, C. J. Brabec and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2925–2933 CAS .
A. Lorenz, C. Gredy, S. Beyer, Y. Yao, P. Papet, J. Ufheil, A. Senne, H. Reinecke and F. Clement, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 550–557 CrossRef CAS .

          N. B. C. Engineers, Handbook on Printing Technology (Offset, Flexo, Gravure, Screen, Digital, 3D Printing), ASIA Pacific Business Press Inc., 3rd edn,  2017 Search PubMed .
R. Kay and M. Desmulliez, Soldering Surf. Mount Technol., 2012, 24, 38–50 CrossRef .
K. Braam and V. Subramanian, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 689–694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kim, K. H. Choi, S. J. Cho, S. Choi, S. Park and S. Y. Lee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5168–5177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Ho, J. W. Evans and P. K. Wright, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2010, 20, 104009 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef .
Z. Tehrani, T. Korochkina, S. Govindarajan, D. J. Thomas, J. O'Mahony, J. Kettle, T. C. Claypole and D. T. Gethin, Org. Electron., 2015, 26, 386–394 CrossRef CAS .
T. Syrový, T. Kazda, L. Syrová, J. Vondrák, L. Kubáč and M. Sedlaříková, J. Power Sources, 2016, 309, 192–201 CrossRef .
O. El Baradai, D. Beneventi, F. Alloin, R. Bongiovanni, N. Bruas-Reverdy, Y. Bultel and D. Chaussy, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2016, 32, 566–572 Search PubMed .
T. M. McFarlane, J. A. Shetzline, S. Creager, C. F. Huebner, C. Tonkin and S. Foulger, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6432–6436 CAS .
N. Singh, C. Galande, A. Miranda, A. Mathkar, W. Gao, A. L. Reddy, A. Vlad and P. M. Ajayan, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 481 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Gaikwad, B. V. Khau, G. Davies, B. Hertzberg, D. A. Steingart and A. C. Arias, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401389 CrossRef .
S. Niu, W. Lv, G. Zhou, H. Shi, X. Qin, C. Zheng, T. Zhou, C. Luo, Y. Deng, B. Li, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 138–145 CrossRef CAS .
P. Calvert, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3299–3305 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Delannoy, B. Riou, T. Brousse, J. Le Bideau, D. Guyomard and B. Lestriez, J. Power Sources, 2015, 287, 261–268 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, A. Wu, H. Sohn, C. Nicoletti, Z. Iqbal and J. F. Federici, J. Manuf. Process, 2015, 20, 198–205 CrossRef .
P. E. Delannoy, B. Riou, B. Lestriez, D. Guyomard, T. Brousse and J. Le Bideau, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 1085–1090 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Milroy, S. Jang, T. Fujimori, A. Dodabalapur and A. Manthiram, Small, 2017, 13, 1603786 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lawes, Q. Sun, A. Lushington, B. W. Xiao, Y. L. Liu and X. L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 313–321 CrossRef CAS .
E. MacDonald and R. Wicker, Science, 2016, 353, aaf2093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10712–10738 CAS .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2740–2755 RSC .
J. C. Ruiz-Morales, A. Tarancón, J. Canales-Vázquez, J. Méndez-Ramos, L. Hernández-Afonso, P. Acosta-Mora, J. R. Marín Rueda and R. Fernández-González, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 846–859 CAS .
J. A. Lewis and B. Y. Ahn, Nature, 2015, 518, 42–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Pan, M. H. Lin, H. W. Chung, H. Chen, S. R. Yeh, Y. J. Chuang, Y. C. Chang and T. R. Yew, Analyst, 2016, 141, 279–284 RSC .
A. A. Yazdi, A. Popma, W. Wong, T. Nguyen, Y. Pan and J. Xu, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2016, 20, 50 CrossRef .

          S. S. Crump, US Pat., 5121329, Stratasys, Inc.,  1992 .
J. P. Kruth, X. Wang, T. Laoui and L. Froyen, Assemb. Autom., 2003, 23, 357–371 CrossRef .
J. P. Kruth, L. Froyen, J. Van Vaerenbergh, P. Mercelis, M. Rombouts and B. Lauwers, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2004, 149, 616–622 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yadroitsev and I. Smurov, Phys. Procedia, 2010, 5, 551–560 CrossRef .
J. A. Lewis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2193–2204 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, F. Ye, L. Liu and Q. Liu, Mater. Des., 2015, 66, 331–335 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bin, W. Xiao-yu, M. Jiang, L. Xiong, L. Jian-guo, W. Bo, R. Shuang-chen and W. Zhen-long, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2016, 26, 035004 CrossRef .
K. Fu, Y. Wang, C. Yan, Y. Yao, Y. Chen, J. Dai, S. Lacey, Y. Wang, J. Wan, T. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Xu and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2587–2594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, Y. Jiang, S. Cui, Y. Duan, T. Liu, H. Guo, L. Lin, Y. Lin, J. Zheng, K. Amine and F. Pan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600856 CrossRef .
R. R. Kohlmeyer, A. J. Blake, J. O. Hardin, E. A. Carmona, J. Carpena-Núñez, B. Maruyama, J. Daniel Berrigan, H. Huang and M. F. Durstock, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16856–16864 CAS .
M. A. Meitl, Z.-T. Zhu, V. Kumar, K. J. Lee, X. Feng, Y. Y. Huang, I. Adesida, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2005, 5, 33–38 CrossRef .
K. I. Park, M. Lee, Y. Liu, S. Moon, G. T. Hwang, G. Zhu, J. E. Kim, S. O. Kim, D. K. Kim, Z. L. Wang and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2999–3004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, S. K. Kim, S. Y. Choi and K. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5438–5442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Koo, K. I. Park, S. H. Lee, M. Suh, D. Y. Jeon, J. W. Choi, K. Kang and K. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4810–4816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Kutbee, M. T. Ghoneim, S. M. Ahmad and M. M. Hussain, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2016, 15, 402–408 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Shi, E. Secret, L. Wang, H. Zhang and Y. Chen, Microelectron. Eng., 2010, 87, 2513–2517 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bates, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 33–45 CrossRef CAS .

          J. M. Adams and P. A. Dolin, Printing Technology, Delmar,  2002 Search PubMed .

          H. Kipphan, Handbook of Print Media: Technologies and Production Methods, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg,  2001 Search PubMed .

          V. Subramanian and D. Sung, Gravure as an Industrially Viable Process for Printed Electronics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California at Berkeley,  2008 Search PubMed .
K. J. Baeg, M. Caironi and Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4210–4244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Cheng-Feng Du	Cheng-Feng Du is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. He obtained his BS degree from Ocean University, China, in 2011 and PhD degree from the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Xiao-Ying Huang. His research interests focus on the synthesis and assembly of 2D-based hybrid materials and their applications to energy conversion and storage.
Qinghua Liang	Qinghua Liang obtained his Bachelor's degree from Southwest University in 2009 and Master's degree from the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2012. He obtained his PhD from Tsinghua University under the supervision of Prof. Quan-Hong Yang. His research interests focus on the synthesis and application of carbon-based and carbon-derived materials in energy storage and environmental protection.
Yubo Luo	Yubo Luo is currently a research fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received his BS degree in Materials Physics in 2011 from Yanshan University, China, and his PhD degree from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, in 2016. His current research focuses on solid state thermoelectric materials and transmission electron microscopy.
Yun Zheng	Yun Zheng is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received his BS degree in Materials Physics in 2010 and PhD degree in New Energy Materials in 2015 from Wuhan University of Technology, China, under the supervision of Prof. Xinfeng Tang. His research interests include the design of thermoelectric materials and devices.
Qingyu Yan	Qingyu Yan is currently an associate professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Nanyang Technology University. He obtained his BS degree in Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, and his PhD degree from the Materials Science and Engineering Department of the State University of New York at Stony Brook. He then joined the Materials Science and Engineering Department of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute as a postdoctoral research associate. He joined the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Nanyang Technological University as an Assistant Professor in early 2008 and became an Associate Professor in 2013. Yan's research has mainly focused on advanced electrode materials for energy storage devices and high-efficiency thermoelectric semiconductors.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the main components and working principle of a C/LCO LIBy.21 Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of (a) coin and (b) prismatic LIBs structures with sandwich-like configurations. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright (2001), Macmillan Publishers Ltd. (c) Parallel configuration of LIBs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustrations of the blade coating process in (a) batch and (b) roll-to-roll processes.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic image of blade-coated, solid-state, flexible, and rechargeable zinc–air battery. (Left inset: Photo showing the cell flexibility (top); cross-sectional SEM image of the laminated battery structure (bottom)).65 Copyright (2015), Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustrations of flexographic printing.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of multistation flexographic printing process for large-scale battery production. (b) Flexographically printed PSBR-based cathode films under an optical microscope showing viscous figuring patterns from using a 2.5 BCM anilox roller. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright (2014), Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of the process flow diagram of stencil printing.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic depicting the stepwise fabrication of printable solid-state batteries, wherein chemical structures of their major components and a photograph of the self-standing, flexible “PRISS” letter-shaped cell are provided. (b) SEM image (cross-sectional view) of a PRISS full-cell (left) and galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of an LFP half-cell (right) at a fixed charge/discharge current density of 0.1C/0.1C in the voltage range 2.5–3.8 V, where the gravimetric charge/discharge capacity was estimated based on the mass of LFP active materials. (c) Photographs showing mechanical flexibility of printable electrodes upon physical deformation, such as folding and winding (rod diameter = 5 mm). (d) Photographs of letter-shaped LFP cathode slurry (represented by the word “UNIST”, upper image) and conventional LFP cathode slurry (lower image). The conventional LFP cathode slurry failed to maintain the letter form when tilted vertically. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright (2015), American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of screen printing.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of spray printing.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of in situ formation of conductive Li-TNT inks: (i) ion-exchange process to obtain Li-TNT precursor; (ii) spraying technique to obtain uniform conductive Li-TNT precursor on Cu foil, which would convert to LTO/rGO after thermal treatment (digital photo).56 Copyright (2016), Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Electrostatic-spray printing procedure for multifunctional polysulfide blocking layer-coated (MPBL-coated) electrode. (b) Schematic illustration of MPBL-coated cathode for Li–S battery. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright (2016), Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of inkjet printing: (a) CIJ process, (b) piezoelectric DOD method, and (c) thermal DOD method.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Photograph of Western University logo printed with SiNP ink and optical photographs and SEM images of inkjet-printed SiNP anode films on copper foil. Scale bars in red, white, and black represent 3 cm, 5 cm, and 500 nm, respectively. (b) Schematic illustration of proposed mechanism explaining the electrochemical performance of anodes prepared with PEDOT:PSS. The Si NPs remain electrically connected throughout charging/discharging and are, therefore, able to maintain a stable cycling capacity. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright (2017), Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of 3D dispenser printing process.	 

 	Fig. 16  Digital images of (a) LFP/GO and LTO/GO inks loaded in syringes; (b) the multi-layered structure being printed; (c) the 3D-printed electrode arrays; and (d) the interdigitated electrodes. (e) SEM images of the annealed LFP/rGO electrodes. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright (2016), Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of battery preparation with the 3D-printed electrode. (b) Printing process recorded by a magnifying glass, and (c) 3D structure of (b) obtained by a 3D confocal microscope (printing width and height are 450 and 18 μm, respectively).111 Copyright (2016), Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of the generic process flow for transfer printing solid objects. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright (2005), Macmillan Publishers Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of the transfer process for fabricating flexible LIBs. A cultivated LIB on brittle mica substrate (i) is followed by mica substrate delamination using sticky tape (ii), and the flexible LIB is then transferred onto a PDMS polymer substrate (iii). Finally, the flexible LIB is covered with another PDMS sheet to enhance mechanical stability (iv).116 Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society.	 

Blade coating	Normal	Yes	No	0.01–100	Cheap	Medium
Flexographic printing	Very fast	Yes	2D pattern	0.05–0.5	Expensive	Slight
Stencil printing	Normal	No	2D pattern	0.1–100	Cheap	Medium
Screen printing	Normal	Yes	2D pattern	0.5–50	Very cheap	Medium
Spray printing	Fast	Yes	2D pattern	<0.15	Cheap	Slight
Inkjet printing	Fast	Yes	Digital master	0.001–0.04	Cheap	None
3D printing	Very slow	No	3D object	0.01–10	Very expensive	None
Transfer printing	Very slow	No	2D array	None	Very expensive	None

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration (top) and photograph (bottom) of spray-coated CNT ink on stainless steel (SS) foil with a thickness of approx. 2–3 μm and sheet resistance of approx. 10 Ω □−1. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright (2015), Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA. (b) Photograph of five continuous printed PSBR cathode films on a piece of stainless steel foil. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright (2014), Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Conceptual comparison of cell design and shape (left image = conventional cell, right image = PRISS cell that can be shape-conformable and also seamlessly integrate with electronic devices). (b) Photograph showing direct fabrication of a PRISS cell on paper eyeglasses. The PRISS cell-unitized wearable eyeglasses operated an LED lamp. (c) Photograph showing direct fabrication of a heart-shaped PRISS cell on a transparent glass cup with curvilinear surface. The PRISS cell, mounted on the round-shaped glass cup, delivered normal charge/discharge behavior (at charge/discharge current density of 0.05C/0.05C under voltage range of 1.0–2.5 V, gravimetric charge/discharge capacity was estimated based on the mass of LFP active materials).80 Copyright (2015), American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic diagram of an all-flexible LED system. (b) Picture of an all-in-one flexible LED system integrated with a bendable LIB.116 Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Optical images of flexible lithium ion battery connected to a voltmeter (a) when flat, (b) after flexing once, and (c) after flexing for 50 cycles to a bending radius of 4 mm. (d) Demonstration of the flexible lithium-ion battery connected in series with a 200 Ω resistor and a green light-emitting diode (LED). The battery was able to power the green-LED continuously even after flexing 50 times to a bend radius of 4 mm (e).88 Copyright (2015), Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
