Recent advances in materials for and applications of triplet–triplet annihilation-based upconversion  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC03551G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC03551G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 4483-4496Recent advances in materials for and applications of triplet–triplet annihilation-based upconversion

        
          
            Sung Eun 
            Seo
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Hyun-Seok 
            Choe
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Haein 
            Cho
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Hyoung-il 
            Kim
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Jae-Hyuk 
            Kim
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Oh Seok 
            Kwon
          
        
      *a
aInfectious Disease Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea. E-mail: oskwon79@kribb.re.kr
bDepartment of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, Pusan National University, Busan 46241, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jaehyuk.kim@pusan.ac.kr
cDepartment of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hi.kim@yonsei.ac.kr
Received 
      30th July 2021
    , Accepted 29th November 2021First published on 8th December 2021AbstractTriplet–triplet annihilation upconversion (TTA-UC) has been attracting attention in various fields as a promising tool to efficiently generate a shorter-wavelength photon than incident light. Compared to conventional UC technologies (e.g., lanthanide-doped inorganic nanoparticles), TTA-UC has advantages of tunable spectral range and high UC efficiency (>1–40%) at non-coherent solar irradiance (Iex < 1–102 mW cm−2). This review article provides a succinct overview of the historical background and recent strategies for solving a critical problem (i.e. oxygen quenching) of TTA-UC to improve the efficiency and to expand its applicability in various fields. We also introduce recent strategies to develop host materials (e.g., films, polymers, nanocapsules, gels) for overcoming a quenching problem, before we detail recent progress in applications of TTA-UC materials involving bioimaging, biomedicines, photocatalysts, photovoltaics and OLEDs. This review article aims to highlight the challenges and recent advances in the field of TTA-UC, providing the readers with guidance and opportunities to join the research.
1. Introduction
Most luminescent materials show Stokes-emission, absorbing high-energy photons and emitting low-energy photons. In contrast, photon energy upconversion (UC) is an anti-Stokes process in which two or more lower-energy photons are converted into a higher-energy photon. For example, through UC, near-infrared (NIR) light can be converted into visible (Vis) light, or Vis light can be converted into ultraviolet (UV) light. UC has mainly been implemented using lanthanide-based inorganic nanoparticles (e.g., NaYF4:Er3+, Yb3+). However, lanthanide-based UC has some drawbacks such as narrow absorption bands, a requirement for an excitation source with a high power density (Iex > 103–105 mW cm−2), and a relatively low UC quantum yield. To overcome these limitations of inorganic UC, researchers have turned their attention to organic-based UC via triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA-UC).
 Scheme 1  History of the development of TTA-UC technology from the discovery to advanced several systems (top) and summarization of various recent applications that were divided dependent on the morphology of TTA-UC (bottom). 
TTA-UC has appealing characteristics compared to lanthanide-based UC, such as implementation under a noncoherent irradiation source with a low excitation power density (Iex < 102 mW cm−2), broad absorbance range, high quantum yield, and tunable absorption/emission wavelength. TTA-UC was first reported in 1962 by Parker and Hatchard but remained dormant until the revival by Baluschev and coworkers in 2003.15,16 After then, research on TTA-UC has widened to quantification of detailed TTA-UC mechanisms,19,20 computational simulation related to TTA-UC,23–26 and development of new chromophores for TTA-UC28–32 within an active research period of less than 20 years. The substance of the developed UC materials is also very diverse, including solutions, polymeric solids, micro-/nanocapsules, nanofibers, and so on. In addition, TTA-UC is applied to various fields utilizing light such as bioimaging, biomedicines, photocatalysts, photovoltaics, and OLEDs (Scheme 1). In this review, we first describe the general mechanism of TTA-UC, and in the following section, recent advances in the host materials and their applicable research fields.
2. The basic theory of TTA-UC and quantum yield
TTA-UC is achieved through several photochemical steps via chromophore pairs consisting of a sensitizer (donor) and an acceptor (emitter or annihilator) (Fig. 1). ① Initially, the sensitizer absorbs a photon and then populates a singlet excited state (1S*); ② then a triplet excited state (3S*) forms through intersystem crossing (ISC). In the absence of a triplet quencher such as oxygen, 3S* spontaneously decays to the ground state with phosphorescence emission, or decays non-radiatively. ③ Furthermore, when acceptors with an appropriate triplet energy level exist with sensitizers, 3S* transfers its energy to 1A0 through triplet–triplet energy transfer (TET), resulting in the formation of a triplet excited state acceptor (3A*). ④ 3A* undergoes triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) with another 3A* generated by the same processes to form a singlet excited state acceptor (1A*). ⑤ Finally, anti-Stokes delayed fluorescence is observed from 1A* upon its radiative relaxation. During the whole TTA-UC process, molecular oxygen can quench the triplet energy of the UC chromophores; thus oxygen must be removed from the TTA-UC host material.
 Fig. 1  Jablonski energy diagram describing the photochemical processes of TTA-UC between sensitizer (donor) and acceptor (emitter/annihilator). SENS: sensitizer; ACC: acceptor; ISC: intersystem crossing; TET: triplet–triplet energy transfer; TTA: triplet–triplet annihilation. 
To successfully implement TTA-UC, several essential prerequisites must be met. First, singlet and triplet states of the sensitizer must exist between the singlet and triplet states of the acceptor, which is sometimes expressed as the energy state of the sensitizer is sandwiched with the energy state of the acceptor. Moreover, the singlet energy level of the acceptor must be lower than two times the triplet energy level of the acceptor (3A* + 3A* > 1A*). Otherwise, the high energy generated by the TTA process cannot reach the singlet state of the acceptor. Furthermore, a high ISC yield of the sensitizer is preferred to produce a sufficient quantity of 3S* and consequently 3A*. The long triplet lifetime of chromophores (more than microseconds) provides enough time for the TET and TTA processes to occur, resulting in effective TTA-UC. Finally, since both TET and TTA are generally based on Dexter-type energy transfer, TTA-UC processes are greatly affected by the diffusivity of the matrix and the chromophore should be within 1 nm.50,51 In general, the higher diffusivity of the chromophores in the matrix results in higher TTA-UC efficiency. This is the reason that many TTA-UC studies have been conducted in liquid solvents, and even in the solid phase, flexible polymers with relatively low Tg (i.e. elastic polyurethane) are preferred as a TTA-UC matrix. However, it is noteworthy that there are several cases that reported TTA-UC in highly diffusion-limited conditions (e.g. crystal, MOFs, on surfaces, etc.) wherein the UC mechanism was based on triplet self-exchange or triplet energy migration between highly concentrated and/or aligned chromophores, rather than the energy transfer by molecular diffusion.52–54
The quantum yield which is defined as the incident photon-to-luminescent electron ratio, is a key parameter used to evaluate the efficiency of TTA-UC. The quantum yield used in the TTA-UC field can be classified in various terms depending on which standard for quantum yield is used.58 For instance, the number of upconverted states, the number of upconverted photons generated, and the number of upconverted photons observed can be the standard for quantum yield. The TTA-UC quantum yield (ΦUC) is defined as the UC emission divided by the number of absorbed photons and can be theoretically calculated by multiplying the quantum yield of each TTA-UC step in eqn (1). ΦUC = ΦISCΦTETΦTTAΦf(1)where ΦISC, ΦTET, ΦTTA, and Φf denote the quantum yields of the ISC of the sensitizer, sensitizer-to-acceptor triplet energy transfer (i.e., TET), acceptor-acceptor triplet annihilation (i.e., TTA), and fluorescence of the acceptor, which are the individual steps of TTA-UC, respectively. It is assumed that losses that occur during the detection process are negligible and the ISC of acceptor does not occur. Therefore, a sensitizer with high ISC efficiency and an acceptor with high fluorescence efficiency are benchmarked for effective TTA-UC. For a similar reason, high TET and TTA efficiencies have a substantial influence on the overall TTA-UC efficiency improvement, and as described above, TET and TTA are based on Dexter-type energy transfer, so highly diffusive media are preferred for TTA-UC.
During the TTA-UC process, 3A* can decay in two different ways: pseudo-first-order decay including either radiative or non-radiative decay by itself, and second-order decay by TTA. To efficiently implement TTA-UC, the latter is preferred and is greatly affected by the incident power density.19,20,60 At a low excitation power density, the dependency of the emission intensity on the incident power intensity (i.e., excitation power dependency) is quadratic since the concentration of 3A* is not sufficient; thus, then 3A* cannot undergo TTA sufficiently during its lifetime and decays spontaneously. However, at a high excitation power density, enough 3A* is generated, so that the TTA-based second-order decay becomes dominant and the excitation power dependency becomes linear. Upon plotting the incident power density and emission in a log–log graph, the change from a quadratic to linear dependency is observed (Fig. 2A). In other words, in the region where the slope is 2, 3A* is not consumed via TTA, and in the region where the slope is 1, most 3A* is consumed via TTA. This phenomenon is very unique to TTA-UC, and it can be used to determine whether TTA-UC is effectively occurring. The point where slopes 2 and 1 meet is called the threshold intensity (Ith) and is directly affected by the rate of spontaneous decay of the acceptor, the absorption coefficient of the sensitizer, the efficiency of TET, and the rate of TTA.19,20,60,61 More specifically, the aforementioned parameters can be affected by the following factors: the concentration of UC chromophores, the choice of media, the presence of oxygen, the singlet branching ratio, the triplet lifetime of the acceptor, the excitation wavelength, the ISC yield of the sensitizer, and the operating temperature, and so on.19,20 A low Ith means that TTA-UC occurs effectively in that system under a low excitation power density. Similarly, the UC quantum yield also increases according to incident light and then tends to converge to a constant value through the transition region (Fig. 2B).
 Fig. 2  (A) Quadratic to linear dependency in tlog–log plot of TTA-UC intensity as a function of excitation power density. (B) UC quantum yield as a function of excitation power density.7 Reproduced with permission from ref. 7. Copyrights, 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Although the method of mathematically determining the TTA-UC quantum yield is presented in eqn (1), it is practically very difficult to determine the overall TTA-UC quantum yield by measuring and multiplying the yield of each step, particularly due to the difficulty of measuring the TTA quantum yield (ΦTTA). Therefore, the TTA-UC quantum yield has been determined in two more practical ways. The first method involves eqn (2) and a quantum counter or internal standard, which is already known or can be measured, as the reference material.62 (2)where Φ, A, I, and η denote the quantum yield, absorbance at the excitation wavelength, photoluminescence intensity, and refractive index of the matrix, respectively. The subscript “std” refers to the quantum counter and “UC” refers to upconverting samples. This equation can be universally applicable for the measurement of the UC quantum yield, although there is a difference in difficulty in selecting and applying an appropriate quantum counter depending on the type of TTA-UC material. Some researchers use a multiplication factor of 2 to obtain the maximum UC quantum yield as 100%  because theoretically the maximum UC quantum yield is assumed to be 100% when two lower-energy photons are absorbed and one higher-energy photon is emitted. Although there are still some arguments regarding the use of this factor, however, the multiplying factor of “2” is removed in this manuscript by following the IUPAC definition ofthe quantum yield – the ratio of the number of events to the number of absorbed photons, for clarity of the terminology.58,63 The quantum counters are selected according to the media and excitation wavelength of the UC chromophores, and rhodamine, methylene blue, and the sensitizer itself are mainly selected as the quantum counters.9,64,65
It is difficult to select an appropriate quantum counter for TTA-UC micro-/nanoparticles, making it difficult to apply the above method using the quantum counter. An alternative way to measure the TTA-UC quantum yield is to use an integrating sphere.66–69 The upconverted fluorescence spreads in all directions, whereas the detector only collects emitted light from a specific area. To overcome these limitations, an integrating sphere which collects all emitted light from the sample, is applied. The interior of the integrating sphere consists of a highly reflective wall, and the emitted light undergoes multiple reflections. Then, all light is gathered in one outlet and is measured using a detector. A shortpass filter through which only light with wavelengths shorter than that of the incident light passes is adapted to detect only the upconverted fluorescence. Absolute quantum yield is simply evaluated using the integrating sphere without having to set and compare the quantum counter.70
3. TTA-UC materials
3.1. TTA-UC in macro-/micromaterials
Early TTA-UC studies were conducted using low-viscosity solutions such as dimethylformamide (DMF), acetonitrile, and toluene, which are capable of maximizing the energy transfer of UC chromophores.71–73 However, solution-state TTA-UC in these organic solvents suffered from triplet energy quenching by molecular oxygen, resulting in a decrease in the overall TTA-UC efficiency. Therefore, in most studies published between 2000 and 2010, the solution had to be degassed to replace the dissolved oxygen with an inert gas (nitrogen or argon) by gas purging or freeze–pump–thaw methods. Due to the inconvenience of excluding oxygen, practical applications of TTA-UC in solution are challenging. In 2012, Kim and coworkers first reported efficient TTA-UC without the degassing process in a mixture of hexadecane and polyisobutylene.4 Similarly, in later published studies, TTA-UC under ambient conditions was implemented using oxygen scavengers such as a mixture of soybean oil/bovine serum albumin, hyperbranched unsaturated polyphosphates, and oleic acid.74–76 Although using an oxygen scavenging matrix eliminates the need for a deoxygenation process, the low processability and applicability of solution-state TTA-UC were highlighted as problems in exploiting TTA-UC.
Accordingly, studies using solid-state TTA-UC materials have been actively developed since solid-state TTA-UC was first reported by Castellano and coworkers in 2007.77 Although solid media inhibit the diffusion and energy transfer of UC chromophores, energy transfer can occur inside the solid media at the limited boundary, resulting in TTA-UC. Monguzzi and coworkers evaluated the effect of the glass transition temperature (Tg) and diffusion length (LT) by adjusting the polymerization of poly(n-alkyl acrylates). The TTA-UC polymer with a lower Tg showed higher UC efficiency owing to its longer LT.78
Polyurethane (PU) has advantages in that it has an elastic structure and low oxygen-permeability due to its high cross-linking rate and it can be facilely synthesized at room temperature. Accordingly, many studies have adapted PU as a TTA-UC host material.3,18,38,79,80 Kim and coworkers reported notably efficient TTA-UC in flexible and transparent PU films (Fig. 3A). The benchmark red-to-blue UC pair (PdTPBP/perylene) was blended in commercially available PU and a UC film was fabricated using a spin-coater. Then poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and polyurethane acrylate layers were further spin-coated to block oxygen invasion. The material showed a high UC efficiency of 7% and a long shelf life despite a thickness of 15 μm.9
 Fig. 3  (A) Photographs of a flexible and transparent PU-based UC material.9 Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyrights 2018, American Chemical Society. (B) Photograph of an UC material containing acceptors covalently bound to a polymeric backbone.17 Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyrights 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Photograph of a poly(olefin sulfone)s-based UC material achieved at temperatures above the polymer's glass transition.40 Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyrights 2017, American Chemical Society. (D) Microscope images of an UC microcapsule containing two and three upconverting cores.46 Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyrights 2015, American Chemical Society. (E) Confocal microscopy image of an UC microcapsule made using microfluidic techniques.55 Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyrights 2017, Wiley-Blackwell. (F) Confocal microscopy image of UC oil-laden hollow mesoporous silica microcapsules.59 Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyrights 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Although rubbery polymers are favorable for implementing TTA-UC, rigid polymers such as poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) can also be used to implement TTA-UC at a high concentration of UC chromophores. Simon and coworkers suggested a new methodology to achieve TTA-UC in glassy polymers by covalently binding acceptors to the polymeric methyl methacrylate backbone (Fig. 3B). They achieved green-to-blue UC at a low power density of 32 mW cm−2 in a UC film containing a sensitizer and an acceptor covalently bound to the polymeric backbone.17 Turshatov and coworkers introduced an efficient TTA-UC polymeric host, poly(olefin sulfone), at Tg of 315 K under oxygen-rich ambient conditions (Fig. 3C). They assessed TTA-UC efficiency using four kinds of poly(olefin sulfone), and a maximum quantum yield of 2.1% was measured in poly(1-dodecene sulfone).40
There have also been studies on aqueous-phase TTA-UC in microparticles. Kim and coworkers reported the first encapsulation of TTA-UC oil in a rigid polymer shell using microfluidics. The core-UC oil/shell-polymer structured UC emulsions were stable not only when dispersed in water or but also in the dry state.4 In a follow-up study, they produced a more complicated TTA-UC double and triplet emulsion that maximized the TTA-UC efficiency (Fig. 3D).46 Elsa and coworkers designed a single-step microfluidic emulsification using a brominated hydrocarbon oil-based core to produce ultrathin oil–water-oil–water configured microemulsions, resulting in an enhancement of the UC quantum yield (Fig. 3E).55
However, microparticles synthesized using microfluidic technology had a limitation in that they cannot reload other UC oils. Kim and coworkers reported aqueous red-to-blue TTA-UC in hollow mesoporous silica microcapsules (HMSM) by postencapsulation (Fig. 3F). They infused TTA-UC oil into presynthesized HMSM through the mesochannels, floated it on water, and then centrifuged it to obtain an aqueous suspension of UC oil-laden HMSMs. HMSMs stabilizes the TTA-UC oil in water, and UC oil-laden HMSMs can be washed using an organic solvent and then reversibly filled with another TTA-UC oil.59
3.2. TTA-UC in nanomaterials
The last few decades have seen enormous growth in the field of upconversion materials, from fundamental principal research to applications in biochemical sensing, bioimaging, biotherapy, and energy-environmental technology. In particular, to the achieve multipurpose biological/photonic applications of TTA-UC materials, researchers have attempted several methodologies to fabricate various forms of nanostructures such as silica shell-coated nanocapsules,5,8,81 polymer-encapsulated nanocapsules,14,47,82 electrospun nanofibers,45,83,84 and biomaterial-loaded nanomaterials.35 In this section, we will briefly introduce these preparation techniques for various applications.
As shown in Fig. 4A, to transfer the annihilation upconversion process into a water environment while removing the possibility of oxygen quenching by the fabricated TTA-UC solution embedding nanomaterials, silica encapsulation has been developed for water-soluble nanoparticles. Kwon and coworkers reported multifunctional silica-based nanocapsules to encapsulate two distinct TTA-UC chromophore pairs (PdTPBP and BPEA; PdTPBP and Perylene).8 After self-assembling micelles were formed in the core, silane reagent treatment was used to construct an inorganic outer shell. The solubilized organic materials in the core part were coated with rigid silica shells. The outstanding properties of silica surfaces, such as facile surface treatment, biocompatibility, and large surface area, have been demonstrated in several studies. The synthesized silica shell constructed by the microemulsion method can penetrate the UV-VIS-IR wavelength range, and can be utilized as the source of upconversion. The surface of the silica shell was immobilized with different species of cancer-targeting peptides, and each nanocapsule detected different cancer cells by upconverted emission (BPEA: green, colorectal cancer; perylene: blue, breast cancer).
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of various forms of TTA-UC nanomaterials. (A) Preparation of a triplet–triplet annihilation upconversion solution embedding silica nanocapsules using a micro-emulsion methodology.5 Reproduced with permission from ref. 5. Copyrights, 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic of the phototriggering of the polymeric micellar nanoparticle by TTA-UC.14 Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 Copyrights, 2015 American Chemical Society. (C) Co-assembly of peptide and TTA-UC chromophores for the peptide-assisted TTA-UC in non-deoxygenated water.35 Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyrights, 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Schematics of the colloid-electrospinning process for embedding TTA-UC nanocapsules in nanofibers.45 Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyrights, 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Recently, polymer shell coating strategies have attracted much attention for facile synthetic processes. General polymer-encapsulated nanomaterials showed remarkable biocompatibility for sufficient cellular uptake, facile surface functionalization for the detection of target molecules, and notable photostability suitable for long-term storage. Based on these advantages, polymer encapsulated nanoparticles were applied in phototriggering polymeric micellar nanoparticles, as reported by Kohane and coworkers (Fig. 4B).14 The upconversion chromophore pair was located in the hydrophobic core of a polymeric micelle self-assembled from the block copolymer poly(d,l-lactic acid)–poly(ethylene oxide) (PLA–PEG). For micelle formation, both the reagent photosensitizer-acceptor solution and PLA–PEG were simply mixed and rotary evaporation was used to slowly evaporate the solvent and obtain TTA-UC materials containing micelles. Finally, the obtained PLA–PEG-encapsulated micelles consisted of inner hydrophobic dyes and an outer hydrophilic PEG chain moiety. Utilizing a highly stable and low-toxicity system, further experiments were conducted in aqueous medium.
The above approaches should include organic solvents, which exhibit volatility and toxicity, during the nanomaterial construction process. Various studies have reported limitations, such as encaging organic molecules.5,8,14,41,47,82 Encapsulating upconversion chromophores that were dissolved in an organic solvent prevents molecular collision that leads to energy transfer and photoluminescence efficiency. Along with maintenance of an adequate distance between chromophores under aqueous conditions, to assign biocompatibility, co-assembly of biological peptides and TTA-UC chromophores was attempted by Yan and coworkers (Fig. 4C).35 Multicomponent coordination self-assembly synthesis has been utilized frequently in the field of biomedical nanotechnology and diagnostic systems.85,86 In particular, when photosensitizers are used, aggregation interferes with the proposed reaction. Peptide-modulated self-assembly with upconversion materials can isolate photosensitizers and emitters from each other, resulting in self-aggregation and retaining the photoluminescence intensity. In addition, amphiphilic peptides prevent oxygen quenching of inner organic molecules and leads to a stable state under aqueous conditions. By diversifying the concentration and reaction ratio of molecules and peptides, the upconversion efficiency and upconversion intensity increase because of strong hydrophobicity. The proposed system can be used in photodynamic therapy, bioimaging and biotherapeutic approaches.
In addition, along with applications in biotechnology, upconversion materials have also been developed in the form of nanofibers. For further application, various shapes of the substrates were fabricated. As a liquid matrix, the materials could not be used in films, gels or any other solid materials. By combining the emulsion-solvent evaporation process and electrospinning, nanofibers consisting of both an upconversion material and a polymer (PVA) were prepared by Turshatov and coworkers.45 Electrospun nanofibers embedding upconversion materials provided a double protection layer composed of a nanoparticle shell and a polymer shell (Fig. 4D). These remarkable advantages increased the air stability of the upconversion materials.
3.3. TTA-UC in other materials
In addition to the above TTA-UC application, a variety of new attempts have been made to overcome the limitations of UC materials in aqueous environments such as gels (hydrogels,10,43,87,88 organogels89–91), metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)27,92,93 and binary crystalline solid types.44 Various gel types allow unique air-stable TTA-UC by proper stabilization with hydrogen bonding networks in TTA-UC chromophores.90–92,94 Furthermore, Yanai and Kimizuka et al. proposed a new hydrogel type consisting of gelatin, Triton X-100 and emitter/acceptor pairs as biopolymers, surfactants and chromophores.10 General interiors in the aqueous phase, such as micelles and lipid bilayers were used to increase the solubility of hydrophobic TTA-UC dyes, but inevitably, high concentrations of oxygen scavengers or degassing procedures should be added. Herein, the hydrogel is self-assembled in water to give a hierarchical structure with hydrophobic domains. It achieved a UC emission intensity of 13.5% and long acceptor triplet lifetimes of 4.9 ms even in an air-stable state (Fig. 5A). Interestingly, constant UC emission intensity of an air-saturated G-TX-PtOEP-DPAS hydrogel was confirmed even after 10 heating/cooling cycles, which led to a dis/coassembly transition. Moreover, the unique properties of organogel, another type of TTA-UC gel, increased the average diffusion distance of triplet molecules (∼300 nm) due to all TTA-UC occurrences in the liquid cavities.89,95 Shadab et al. created another form of annihilator with MOFs to reduce phase segregation and dye aggregation. They combined a Pd porphyrin as a fixed sensitizer in the framework walls and DPA as an annihilator, which has mobility in the channels (Fig. 5B).27 Meinardi, who has performed similar research before, promoted diffusion of excitons with nMOF nanocrystals to achieve a negligible spontaneous recombination rate and a threshold-less upconverter.92 Another example of utilizing the migration of triplet excitons through a bimolecular process, similar to the aforementioned MOFs, is binary crystals. Kenji et al. conducted a simple synthesis under rapid drying conditions to generate binary crystalline solids with alkyl-strapped derivatives (C7-sDPA).44 A general DPA emitter shows a spherical structure, while C7-sDPA has rectangular- and petal-shaped crystals (Fig. 5C). The migration speed of triplet excitons could be improved with this crystalline regularity and dense packing of binary crystals. Therefore, these authors identified centimeter-sized large-area UC emissions at an excitation intensity similar to that of sunlight (1 mW cm−2) and achieved up to 20% UC quantum yield under aerobic conditions.
 Fig. 5  (A) A schematic representation of G-TX-DPAS-PtOEP co-assembly in a photon upconverting hydrogel and UC emission intensity of the air-saturated G-TX-PtOEP-DPAS hydrogel in the heating/cooling cycles.10 Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyrights, 2018 American Chemical Society. (B) Design concept for the CA/DPA@PCN-222(Pd) TTA-UC MOF; Pd(TCPP) as the linker and triplet donor; Zr6(m3-OH)8(OH)8 as the secondary building units (SBUs); DPA as the triplet acceptor; CA coordinated to the SBUs as a “solvent” in the hexagonal channels; grey (Zr), red (O), blue (N), white (C), light blue (Pd), and H atoms omitted.27 Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyrights, 2020 Wiley-Blackwell. (C) PtOEP:DPA and PtOEP:C7-sDPA fabricated via drop-casting under rapid-drying conditions. The arrows show the excitation wavelength (532 nm). Centimeter-scale upconverted emission image of the PtOEP:C7-sDPA cast sample under illumination from an expanded beam from a diode laser at 532 nm.44 Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyrights, 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4. Applications
4.1. Biological applications

4.1.1. Bioimaging (in vitro). 
The aforementioned advantages of TTA-UC materials are attractive characteristics for biological applications especially for bioimaging.2,35,90,91,96 The stable dispersion state under aqueous conditions and the versatile shell of TTA-UC materials for functionalization and bioconjugation allowed the demonstration of the most common bioimaging applications both in vivo and in vitro. Optical imaging is the most accurate method to observe the metabolism and physiological behavior of cells.97 However, among the whole spectrum of light, living tissues absorb the UV-VIS excitation that is required by most fluorescent probes.2 To avoid this phenomenon, the power of irradiation is increased and background autofluorescence from the tissues increases and reduces the signal-to-noise ratio. Through the wavelength conversion process by upconversion materials, which convert lower-energy irradiation to higher-energy emission, TTA-UC materials have overcome the abovementioned problems.
In this section, the overall research on bioimaging applications will be summarized. Beverina and coworkers prepared water-dispersible TTA-UC-active nanomicelles using highly biocompatible materials for advanced theranostics (Fig. 6A).2 The synthesized nanomicelles showed efficient emission at low excitation power, limiting damage to living tissues. Biocompatible materials consisting of the nanomicells enabled multichannel, high-contrast optical imaging of 3T3 cells using only a single excitation light source (green laser excitation at 532 nm). As shown in Fig. 6B, blue light (upconverted emission from PtOEP and DPA; λem = 435 nm) was acquired in the cytoplasmic region around the cell nucleus, and red light was generated from the dye (phalloidin positive F actin). As seen from the merged confocal fluorescence image, the upconversion nanomicelles were successfully internalized into the cytoplasm. In addition, upconversion can also be utilized for imaging perinuclear localization with good stability in biological media.
 Fig. 6  (A) Illustration of the chromophores (sensitizer and acceptor) embedding up-converting nanomicelles.2 Reproduced with permission from ref. 2. Copyrights, 2016 Wiley-Blackwell. (B) Cell fluorescence imaging of 3T3 murine fibroblast cells stained with up-converting nanomicelles (left) and phalloidin stained (middle) merged image of both (right).2 Reproduced with permission from ref. 2. Copyrights, 2016 Wiley-Blackwell. (C) Fluorescent images of live HeLa cells incubated with the SiO2 UCNPs for 30 min; (left) live HeLa cells and (right) hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis cells.36 Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyrights, 2018 American Chemical Society. (D) In vitro imaging using upconverting polymersomes in cancer cells; living lung carcinoma cells in bright field mode (left column), with λexc = 405 nm (middle column), and with λexc = 635 nm (right column). Cells were incubated with upconverting polymersomes (middle row: without antioxidants, bottom row: with antioxidants).47 Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyrights, 2016 Wiley-Blackwell. (E) Polymeric upconversion nanocapsules sensing temperature in HeLa cells and the calibration curve of temperature-dependence of the normalized integral UC fluorescence.56 Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyrights, 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, Lin and coworkers imaged live cells by utilizing the quenching mechanism of the TTA-UC process (2,6-diiodo-1,3,5,7-tetramethyl-8-phenyl-4,4-difluoroboradiazaindacene-Py (DIBP-Py) UC system) and monitored cell viability by imaging apoptotic cells.36 As shown in Fig. 6C, the membrane of the live cells could not be penetrated by upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs), and there were no stained cells in the fluorescence image. In contrast, the hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptotic cells showed upconversion after staining with UCNPs. Bonnet and coworkers developed block copolymer-coated upconversion nanomaterials to reduce the oxygen quenching effect and target specific cancer cells.47 By utilizing surface-treated nanomaterials, the location and number of cancer cells could be visualized. By adding biocompatible antioxidants, the upconverted emission was brighter than that without those materials (Fig. 6D). The results could help address the sensitivity issue in which TTA-UC was decreased by the presence of oxygen.
Most reported research has focused on bioimaging applications to detect the location and number of cells. In the research of Landfester and coworkers, the prepared polymeric upconversion nanocapsules reacted as nanothermometers.36 The research team fabricated PMMA shell-coated upconversion nanocapsules containing a liquid core hosting PdTBP (sensitizer) and BDMBP (emitter). As the temperature increased from 22 °C to 40 °C, the activity of HeLa cells increased and oxygen consumption became faster leading to a decrease in the oxygen concentration in the media. Consequently, the upconversion emission intensity increased with increasing temperature (Fig. 6E).


4.1.2. Bioimaging (in vivo). 
Most of the characteristics of TTA-UC materials have already been mentioned, and upconverted emission has shown remarkable advantages in the field of bioimaging such as increased excitation penetration depth in vivo, elimination of autofluorescence and prevention of irradiated tissue damage. For the bioimaging of underneath the skin, the irradiated light should penetrate through a biological tissue with low risk of injury. TTA-UC materials can efficiently convert the deep penetrating light that possesses low energy (longer wavelength) to higher energy (shorter wavelength). Based on these properties, researchers have tried to apply upconversion materials to in vivo bioimaging. Kwon and coworkers reported both in vitro and in vivo experimental results for the selective sensing of breast cancer cells and colon cancer cells.8 A variety of chromophore pairs were hosted in silica nanocapsules, and target-specific bioprobes were immobilized on the surface of the silica shell, leading to the diagnosis of a wide range of cancer types (Fig. 7A). The results indicated the possibility of simultaneous multicolor imaging for numerous cancer cell types.
 Fig. 7  (A) Differential cancer bioimaging in vivo; with the injection of bare silica nanocapsules (left) and blue and green photoluminescence image of a mouse bearing breast and colorectal cancers with the injection of bioprobe-conjugated TTA-UC nanocapsules (right).8 Reproduced with permission from ref. 8. Copyrights, 2016 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of TTA-UC nanocapsules with reductive solvent soybean oil inside (left) and the upconversion imaging of organs such as liver, spleen, and kidney in vivo.22 Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyrights, 2018 American Chemical Society. (C) In vivo lymph node imaging after injection of a TTA-UC metal organic framework in the footpad of the forepaw.48 Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyrights, 2018 American Chemical Society. (D) Upconversion luminescence images of mice after injecting upconversion nanocapsules at various time points.42 Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyrights, 2017 Elsevier. (E) Schematics of sensitively responsive TTA-UC nanocapsules to temperature changes and evaluated temperature distributions in the two legs.57 Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyrights, 2018 Nature. 
The most important environment for the TTA-UC mechanism is deoxygenated conditions that prevent the poor photostability caused by singlet oxygen. Li and coworkers synthesized reductive solvent soybean oil containing TTA-UC nanocapsules.22 Compared to solvents that are not reductive, the prepared system was adjusted for deep-penetration imaging with a high signal-to-noise ratio. The injected TTA-UC nanocapsule emission can also be monitored with the naked eye. Through in vivo and ex vivo imaging, the upconversion signals confirmed that the emission came from the liver (Fig. 7B). Moreover, to amplify the upconverted signal from in vivo imaging, Zhou and coworkers combined a conventional TTA-UC system and a MOF as a biocompatible nanoplatform to achieve efficient energy migration in water.48 Luminescence quenching can be prevented with the water-stable MOFs serving as an ideal TTA-UC platform for the facilitation of efficient energy migration (Fig. 7C). With the optimized TTA-UC MOF system, real-time lymph node imaging with a high signal-to-noise ratio in vivo under ultralow light irradiation was conducted. Although various biological and therapeutic applications of TTA-based upconversion nanomaterials have been conducted, biosafety issues have not been proven. Li and coworkers conducted experiments on the biodistribution and toxicity of TTA-UC nanomaterials.42 After injection of the TTA-UC solution containing droplets into live mice, HeLa cell proliferation was not affected even when the dose was increased to 12 mg mL−1. The biodistribution of TTA-UC nanocapsules was observed after injection at various time points (Fig. 7D). Through real-time monitoring tests, it was confirmed that these upconversion nanocapsules were metabolized by the liver and that there was no harmful effect on live mice. Several biological factors of treated mice, such as body weight, histology, and blood biochemical parameters, were not changed, and there was no noticeable toxicity issues. In addition, experiments to monitor the in vivo metabolism of TTA-UC nanomaterials were proposed by Li's research group.57 The TTA chromophores (PtTPBP: sensitizer, BDM: acceptor) were contained in the BSA-encapsulated nanocapsules. The prepared nanocapsules were injected into the two legs of live mice. One leg was used as the control, and the other leg was established as the arthritis model. The temperature increment caused by inflammation resulted in a higher mobility of TTA-UC chromophore pairs contained in the shell. Consequently, the temperature change in mice can be observed by upconverted emission from the leg with inflammation (Fig. 7E).


4.1.3. Biotherapy. 
Compared with other photoinduced drug-release systems, prodrug activation is limited by poor tissue penetration in in vivo applications.1 To overcome this problem, TTA-UC materials were applied because they require a low excitation power density with minimal photo-damage, offer low risk of injury to the tissue and are capable of deeper penetration. Han and coworkers used the energy of TTA-UC for the regulation of coumarin-chlorambucil (Cou-C), which can suppress tumor growth.1 Upon red (650 nm) LED irradiation of the tissue containing the prodrug-loaded TTA-UC nanocapsule (TTA-CS), the drug was successfully photocleaved and released into the tissue (Fig. 8A). Only when the mice were treated with TTA-CS and a red LED was applied was tumor growth inhibited. In addition to the preloaded prodrug, singlet oxygen can also serve as a medicine in the photodynamic therapy of tumors by inducing apoptosis and producing tumor-specific immunity. Li and coworkers prepared biocompatible host/guest nanorods for highly effective upconversion photodynamic therapy.13 Upon 650 or 808 nm laser irradiation, the prepared Tc/Pc (tetracene/pentacene) nanorods generated 1O2. The in vivo antitumor activity was monitored by the tumor volume and the body weight of mice over a period of a few days after the injection of Tc/Pc nanorods under laser irradiation. Tumor growth in mice treated with 650 nm irradiation was significantly inhibited, and the tumor inhibition rate reached 95% (Fig. 8B). This was the first application of multifunctional upconversion nanorods as an excellent antitumor system.
 Fig. 8  (A) Illustration and time dependent drug release efficiency graph of the photocleavage drug release by TTA-UC.1 Reproduced with permission from ref. 1. Copyrights, 2017 Wiley-Blackwell. (B) Schematic illustration of synthesized nanorod complex's self-delivered TTA-UC and excited photodynamic therapy of tumors with 650 nm and 808 nm laser irradiation.13 Reproduced with permission from ref. 13. Copyrights, 2019 American Chemical Society. 

4.2. Environmental/energy applications

4.2.1. Environmental applications. 
Various applications of photocatalysts using TTA-UC films have been researched. Photocatalysts are mainly utilized under ultraviolet light irradiation, which has a high proton energy. To maximize the photocatalytic activity, photon upconversion has the potential to act as a key factor. Then, the photocatalyst can use low-energy photons to economically widen the usable solar energy absorption wavelength range. There has been much research on environmental applications aimed at decomposing environmental pollutants in the air or aqueous phase by enhancing the efficiency of the photocatalyst with TTA-UC.
Kim et al. first achieved photocatalytic degradation of indoor air pollution by applying low-energy, sub-bandgap photons with TTA-UC.3 Most indoor light irradiation is not sufficient for photocatalysts. To solve this problem, they designed a device that combines a TTA-UC polymer film and a nanodiamond (ND)-loaded WO3 photocatalyst as shown in Fig. 9A. Furthermore, Ag nanoparticle-SiO2, a plasma particle, was synthesized into the TTA-UC polymer film to enhance the decomposition efficiency of acetaldehyde (CH3CHO) which is a representative indoor air pollutant (Fig. 9B).3 Anna et al. suggested a dual-layer UC film system composed of multiple sensitizers as another promising TTA film application for indoor air purification.38 These multiple sensitizers, which consist of red-to-blue and green-to-blue UC films, can degrade acetaldehyde more than twice as much as a single sensitizer (Fig. 9C). The authors also coated a film system containing ND/K-WO3 onto fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) and measured the photocurrent under white LED excitation. These data indicate that the photocatalyst film can be activated by UC fluorescence absorption. Fig. 9D shows the highest photocurrent value of the dual-layer UC film with PdTPBP–PtOEP as multiple sensitizers, which correlates with the results of acetaldehyde decomposition. The layered film system with broad light absorption is a promising strategy that is influenced by sensitizers that best harvest low-energy emission, acceptors that best activate appropriate devices and optimal ordering of the individual layers.38
 Fig. 9  (A) Photographs of a sub-bandgap photocatalyst device.3 (B) Time profiles of the photocatalytic degradation of CH3CHO over the course of a 3 h period in a reactor with sub-bandgap photocatalyst setups: PtOEP/DPA-WO3, PtOEP/DPA-ND/WO3, PtOEP/DPA/AgNP-SiO2-ND/WO3 (Ag-20; 20 wt% vs. PtOEP), and a control film without DPA (PtOEP-ND/WO3). [CH3CHO]0 = 20 ppmv.3 Reproduced with permission from ref. 3. Copyrights, 2016 American Chemical Society. (C) Illustration of a sub-bandgap photocatalyst device powered by a PdTPBP–PtOEP dual-layer UC film system.38 (D) Photocurrent generation of sub-bandgap photocatalyst devices pairing a film of ND/K-WO3 coated onto FTO with a PtOEP UC film, PdTPBP UC film, or dual-layer UC film system (top/front film listed first) under periodic white LED excitation (525 nm LP, 130.1 mW cm−2, 30–60 and 90–120 s).38 Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyrights, 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Photocatalysts can generate electron–hole pairs on their surface when exposed to sunlight, producing reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as OH radicals that can decompose pollutants from wastewater.98–100 The application of TTA-UC with photocatalysts in water can contribute to efficient environmental remediation as in the above-described air conditions, but TTA-UC is mainly used by insoluble chromophores, and triplet states are easily quenched when exposed to oxygen.101 Therefore, Kim et al. developed aqueous dispersible TTA-UC microcapsules on WO3 loaded with Pt to maintain a core–shell structure.4 These TTA-UC microcapsules show both Stokes- and anti-Stokes emission under green-light excitation because the rigid polymer preventing diffusion between PtOEP/DPA and UC was eliminated (Fig. 10A). The persistence of UC release in the shell core was confirmed even after storage in water for one month, and the efficiency was optimized by adjusting the size of the microcapsules. Consequently, the authors confirmed the increase in OH radical formation by detecting a fluorescent coumarin–OH adduct, 7-hydroxycoumarin, under green-light (532 nm) laser irradiation.4 Since this study, many capsule-type TTA materials have been developed to produce high-efficiency of photocatalysts. Kwon et al. proposed simple silica nanocapsule fabrication as a practical alternative host medium preparation method, using sub-bandgap photons with high diffusion and stability even in oxygen-rich aqueous phases.33 This work is the first approach towards photocatalyst OH radical production under 635 nm red light through TTA-UC nanoscale encapsulation using a self-assembled microemulsion process (Fig. 10B).5 The TTA-UC-based nanosilica shell structure can also be found in other studies. Fang et al. investigated the green-to-blue upconversion efficiency of encapsulated clusters without deoxygenation to increase the mobility of the core liquid.40 They applied these clusters to directly decompose tetracycline instead of a radical generation experiment. Fig. 10C demonstrates the pseudo-first-order rate constant (kpfo) of photocatalytic tetracycline degradation under different 520 nm/visible light irradiation. In here, TTA-UC luminescence (TTA-UCL) clusters with Pt facilitates photocatalysis under irradiation of 520 nm/visible light since Pt helps to separate excitons effectively.39 Furthermore, the film structure of TTA-UC, which uses graphene as an adhesive and conductive layer, was also applied for photocatalytic activity.49 Efficient plasmon-enhanced TTA-UC photons increased the photocatalytic tetracycline degradation rate by TTA film-deposited CdS nanoparticles (AuNPs-PtDPAP/G/CdS). As shown in Fig. 10D, the tetracycline degradation rate of PtDPAP/G/CdS reached 3 times that of the control sample in 3 h under green light.
 Fig. 10  (A) Photocatalytic OH radical generation and fluorescence microscopy images of microcapsules containing PtOEP/DPA in the HD/PIB core phase under xenon arc lamp irradiation through a ∼540 nm bandpass filter.4 Reproduced with permission from ref. 4. Copyrights, 2012 American Chemical Society. (B) Photocatalytic OH radical generation by using red-to-blue TTA-UC emission of OA-core SNCs (6 wt%) in water and aqueous-stable nano-scale encapsulation of TTA-UC.5 Reproduced with permission from ref. 5. Copyrights, 2015 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic illustration of TTA-UCL clusters and pseudo-first-order rate constant (kpfo) of degrading TC with the photocatalysts under different light irradiation.39 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyrights, 2017 Elsevier. (D) Photocatalytic degradation of tetracycline over samples under visible light.49 Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyrights, 2020 American Chemical Society. 


4.2.2. Energy applications. 
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) which consist of anodes, cathodes and electrolytes, can convert solar energy to electricity by using dye molecules. All photovoltaic energy conversion devices waste the most photon energy below the bandgap, especially high-bandgap materials such as amorphous silicon, polythiophenes and Pd-halide perovskites.102 Therefore, since the first research in 2012,103 TTA-UC has been recognized as a new energy conversion technology that can greatly improve the energy conversion efficiency of most solar cell types by expanding the absorption range and by increasing the UC quantum yield under incoherent light irradiation.104–107 Furthermore, upconversion can be applied to photo(electro)chemical energy storage by facilitating photoinduced electron transfer.108–110 According to recent research, harnessing TTA-UC has made a lot of progress in applications to solar cells by optical or electrical coupling.111 Both approaches have the advantages of long triplet lifetimes and appropriate energy matching between new sensitizers with long triplet lifetimes and a new annihilator with high TTA yields but it needs further improvements due to device-relevance thresholds and commercial applications.112 To optimize hybrid research of TTA-UC and solar cells, it should focus on minimizing the reverse energy transfer from the annihilator to the sensitizer and maximizing the photon output coupling yield from the UC film to the solar cell beyond the high-efficiency UC quantum efficiency.102 Until presenting this point of view, Schmidt et al. had been actively investigating the compatibility of TTA-UC devices with solar cells.113–115 Schmidt et al. demonstrated a TTA-UC system that absorbs photons of infrared wavelengths (>1100 nm) and evaluated the potential of TTA-UC to improve the efficiency of solar cells. Schmidt et al. also reported that the solar cell photocurrent increased by up to 0.2% in 19 organic cells by applying the TTA-UC upconverter. Zhou et al. overcame the above transmission limitation between a sensitizer and acceptor by incorporating a singlet sensitizer (SS).6 SS-to-S singlet energy transfer and S-to-A triplet energy transfer allow cross surface energy migration, and TTA and excited-state electron transfer from 1A* to TiO2. Fig. 11A shows that the higher the absorbance range is, the higher the IPCE, and with the introduction of SS, the higher the overall absorbance is, the better the utilization of the incident photon; as a result, the maximum current density could be reached (0.315 mA cm−2 under 1 sun irradiation). Li et al. also investigated DSSCs combined with TTA-UC in a solid-state film configuration.18 This film was resistant to oxygen quenching and could easily fit into conventional solar cell structures. Fig. 11B shows the photovoltaic performance of one or three TTA layers under 1 or 2 sun irradiation. While the values of 1 sun and 2 sun do not differ much, the use of a reflector leads to light absorption more efficiently, resulting in the photocurrent yield obtained by the UC being more than doubled. As such, interest in the effects of reflectors has increased rapidly. Choi et al. applied a UC-enabled luminescent back reflector (LBR) to photochemical water splitting with a Mo:BiVO4 photoelectrode to extend the absorption wavelength (Fig. 11C).37 A reflector using TiO2 nanoparticles to cause Rayleigh scattering was developed, and by calculating the applied bias photon-to-current conversion efficiency (ABPE) values of the Mo:BiVO4/LBR, they confirmed 46% enhancement compared to pristine Mo:BiVO4. Moreover, Mo:BiVO4/LBR can convert not only red-to-blue but also UV-to-blue light due to the downshifting fluorescence emission of perylene among the components of LBR.
 Fig. 11  (A) Schematic representation of a self-assembled trilayer (TiO2-A-Zn-S-Zn-SS) (ET = singlet energy transfer; TET = triplet energy transfer; mig = triplet exciton migration; TTA = triplet–triplet annihilation; e-inj = electron injection). IPCE/absorptance spectra for bilayer and trilayer solar cells.6 Reproduced with permission from ref. 6. Copyrights, 2019 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of TTA film-assisted absorption of photons in a dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cell and TTA-UC-induced Jsc enhancement using LED (wavelength centered at 625 nm) illumination of DSPC devices with 5 μm sensitized TiO2 layer thicknesses.18 Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyrights, 2016 American Chemical Society. (C) Scheme of LBR-assisted water splitting of Mo:BiVO4 photoelectrodes and ABPE as a function of the applied potential; inset image shows a digital image of the Mo:BiVO4/LBR photoanode immersed in an electrolyte solution.37 Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyrights, 2019 Wiley-Blackwell. 
The following is an introduction to solar energy-to-chemical energy conversion based on TTA-UC materials with photocatalysts such as hydrogen.37,108,116 Plasmon-enhanced TTA nanoparticles and polymer films as a promising strategy to improve the utilization of solar energy have mainly been investigated to observe the high-efficiency of TTA-UC. Fang et al. hybridized a photocatalyst with plasmon-based TTA-UC nanoparticles.11 By combining platinum and gold nanoparticles on TTA nanoparticles, the green-to-blue TTA efficiency was increased, and effective photocatalytic hydrogen production was achieved by incorporating it into g-C3N4-CdS sheets. In Fig. 12A, it was confirmed that the hydrogen generation rate for the incident photon through TTA upconversion was higher than that of OA@SiO2@0.5NC2 without the upconversion function. In addition, by combining gold nanoparticles, an apparent quantum yield (AQY) of 1.493% was achieved even under green light irradiation. These results imply that the high-energy photons obtained through the TTA-UC process and metal nanoparticles can significantly increase the photocatalytic hydrogen production.11 Yu et al. proposed upconversion micelles for red-to-cyan photon conversion by integrating with Cd0.5Zn0.5S.21 By changing the concentration of Cd0.5Zn0.5S and the light irradiation strength, the optimal pathway of photocatalytic hydrogen production was found, which was able to produce approximately 2.3 mL of hydrogen after 5 hours of red light (629 nm) irradiation (2.4 mW cm−2). Here, NBPEA, a quaternary ammonium (Na2S, Na2SO3 → Na2S2O3) with excellent water solubility, was used as a cationic derivative to increase the efficiency of the photocatalyst. When red light irradiation was applied, poor photocatalytic performance was observed due to an insufficient ability to capture upconverted photons at a low concentration (1 mg mL−1) of Cd0.5Zn0.5S (Fig. 12B). When Cd0.5Zn0.5S was overconcentrated, the scattering effect was dominant, reducing the hydrogen production efficiency. In addition, it is also possible to convert solar energy into hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) among the solar energy-driven chemical energy.41 Photocatalytic hydrogen peroxide production is mainly intended to be used as an oxidizer in advanced oxidation processes or as an alternative energy source. Hydrogen peroxide is produced by oxygen-reducing reactions using a two-molecular photoelectron generated by an incident photon on the surface of the photocatalyst. Kim et al. first discovered in situ photocatalytic hydrogen peroxide formation by using TTA-UC of low-energy, sub-bandgap photons. To achieve this, they designed a ternary system consisting of a nanoscale silica core–shell structure, a low-band gap CdS photocatalyst, and a graphene oxide nanodisk (GOND), as shown in Fig. 12C. Herein, a CdS photocatalyst excites those photons by absorbing high-energy photons generated from silica core–shell-containing TTA-UC molecules; the upconverted photon-induced electrons in CdS are efficiently transferred to molecular oxygen through GONDs as cocatalysts to form hydrogen peroxide.
 Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of the upconversion-photocatalysis system and the apparent quantum efficiency of hydrogen evolution of composites.11 Reproduced with permission from ref. 11. Copyrights, 2019 Elsevier. (B) Influence of the concentrations of Cd0.5Zn0.5S on the photochemical production of hydrogen under irradiation with a red LED (2.4 mW cm−2).21 Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyrights, 2019 Wiley-Blackwell. (C) Time-profiles of photocatalytic H2O2 production on SNC, CdS–SNC, and GOND (3 wt%)/CdS–SNC under non-coherent excitation (red LED, active area ≈2.25 cm2, 23 mW cm−2 (total 52 mW)).41 Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyrights, 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4.3. OLED application
In the field of OLED applications, photon upconversion by the TTA mechanism has been widely considered as a promising technology. Friend and coworkers fabricated an efficient TTA fusion system in OLEDs (Fig. 13A).12 By embedding various emitters in the matrix, emission occurred over different wavelength ranges. Moreover, continual efforts have been focused on the fabrication of blue-light emitters. Monkman and coworkers showed elaborate variation in molecular structure for the deep-blue TTA OLED device.34 In this work, the energy transfer between the para-substituted derivative and the meta-substituted isomer was utilized as blue emission exhibiting delayed fluorescence (Fig. 13B). The close physical state of the triplet levels in the two isomers (guest and host) enabled the highest quantum efficiency. The composition of two differently oriented derivatives, p-TPB-2Cz and m-TPB-2Cz displayed remarkable performance in OLEDs, with a quantum efficiency of 14.1%.
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of the flow chart of energy conversion processes in the TTA upconversion reaction in triplet fusion LED (FuLED) (top left) and the photographs (top middle) showed the upconverted emission performance containing various chromophores (DPA; deep blue; λem = 440 nm, Perylene; green; λem = 520 nm, Rubrene; yellow; λem = 570 nm, TIPS-pentacene; red; λem = 670 nm) and luminance-voltage characteristics (top right).12 Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyrights, 2017 Wiley-Blackwell. (B) Chemical structures of both the emitter and triplet energy host of an electroluminescence deep-blue OLED (bottom left), electroluminescence spectra of the fabricated device (bottom middle), and graph of the current density–voltage-luminance curves (bottom right).34 Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyrights, 2017 American Chemical Society. 
4.4. Other applications
TTA-UC materials can also be applied to other fields. Kim and coworkers suggested TTA-UC-based anti-counterfeiting technology by superimposing a striped Stokes emission layer over the micropatterned TTA-UC layer (Fig. 14A). When the anti-counterfeiting UC film was exposed to ultraviolet light, which induced Stokes emission of both layers, the luminescence of the striped layer hid the micropattern underneath so that hidden information could not be recognized. On the other hand, the 635 nm laser cannot induce Stokes emission of the striped layer but can read information by implementing TTA-UC of the micropatterned layer.9 Kwon and coworkers developed up-/downconversion (DC) nanohybrids that can detect and track heavy metals with high sensitivity and selectivity (Fig. 14B).
 Fig. 14  (A) UC-based anti-counterfeiting technology that can identify hidden information according to the type of filters.9 Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyrights, 2018 American Chemical Society. (B) Photograph and fluorescence images of the mussel sample for the up-/down-conversion-based biosensor to detect mercury.33 Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyrights, 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Time-lapse images of hippocampal neurons forming dendritic-spine-like structures induced by UC emission.43 Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyrights, 2019 Wiley-Blackwell. 
These nanohybrids exploited TTA-UC to track mercury in real time and downconversion to detect mercury under a single excitation source in mussels. Noise from background autofluorescence could be avoided by adapting UC for nanohybrids. Furthermore, the nanohybrids showed high selectivity for mercury.33 Kimizuka and coworkers reported the first NIR-to-blue TTA-UC in biocompatible hydrogels and its application to UC-triggered optogenetics (Fig. 14C). The upconverted blue emission activated Cre recombinase, resulting in the acceleration of hippocampal spine-like structure formation. NIR-to-blue TTA-UC and its application to optogenetics open the possibility to treat deep tissue.43
Conclusions
In summary, the state-of-the-art TTA-UC synthesis and a wide range of applications were discussed. Although TTA-UC materials have a number of advantages, there are limitations, such as the low efficiency caused by exposure to external conditions. The oxygen quenching effect of TTA-UC emission should be considered for further practical applications designed to overcome the environmental limitations. Researchers have developed novel concepts for the fabrication of TTA-UC materials in the past few decades, such as covering an outer shell around a liquid core, embedding chromophores into a solid matrix (gel, MOF, and polymers), and binding chromophores to a polymeric backbone.
Through those efforts to improve the upconversion efficiency, integration into various fields was enabled. The morphology was investigated using various methodologies from macro-/microscale to nanoscale materials for promising applications such as bioimaging, biotherapy, and energy and environmental technologies. Recently, applications of upconversion materials have expanded from simple imaging of target materials to environmental energy conversion including solar cell technology. In the future, with the increased yield of upconversion and the potential ability to be applied to various fields, upconversion materials will be utilized in diverse ways.
Author contributions
S. E. S., H. S. C. and H. I. J. wrote the manuscript and contributed to data collection. H. I. K., J. H. K. and O. S. K. designed and supervised the project and wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Smart Farm Innovation Technology Development Program (421020-03); the Ecological Imitation-based Environmental Pollution Management Technology Development Project (2019002790008) funded by the Korea Ministry of Environment (MOE); the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF-2021M3H4A4079509); the 2021 BK21 FOUR Program of Pusan National University; the Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB) Research Initiative Program (1711134045) and the support of “Cooperative Research Program for Agriculture Science and Technology Development (Project No. PJ014790022021)” Rural Development Administration.
References
L. Huang, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, K. Huang, J. Yang and G. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14400–14404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mattiello, A. Monguzzi, J. Pedrini, M. Sassi, C. Villa, Y. Torrente, R. Marotta, F. Meinardi and L. Beverina, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8447–8454 CrossRef CAS .
H.-i. Kim, S. Weon, H. Kang, A. L. Hagstrom, O. S. Kwon, Y.-S. Lee, W. Choi and J.-H. Kim, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 11184–11192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Kim and J.-H. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17478–17481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. S. Kwon, J.-H. Kim, J. K. Cho and J.-H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 318–325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. Ruchlin, A. J. Robb and K. Hanson, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1458–1463 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, W. Wu, Y. Li, K. Huang, L. Zeng, W. Lin and G. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 18460–18470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. S. Kwon, H. S. Song, J. Conde, H.-I. Kim, N. Artzi and J.-H. Kim, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1512–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Hagstrom, H.-L. Lee, M.-S. Lee, H.-S. Choe, J. Jung, B.-G. Park, W.-S. Han, J.-S. Ko, J.-H. Kim and J.-H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8985–8992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bharmoria, S. Hisamitsu, H. Nagatomi, T. Ogawa, M.-A. Morikawa, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10848–10855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fang, Y. Chen, W. Wang, L. Fang, C. Lu, C. Zhu, J. Kou, Y. Ni and Z. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117762 CrossRef CAS .
D. Di, L. Yang, J. M. Richter, L. Meraldi, R. M. Altamimi, A. Y. Alyamani, D. Credgington, K. P. Musselman, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605987 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, Y. Guan, Z. Zhu, H. Lv, F. Li, S. Sun and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37479–37490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Q. Liu, C. Zhan, A. Barhoumi, T. Yang, R. G. Wylie, P. A. Armstrong and D. S. Kohane, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6332–6338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Parker, C. G. Hatchard and E. J. Bowen, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1962, 269, 574–584 Search PubMed .
P. E. Keivanidis, S. Baluschev, T. Miteva, G. Nelles, U. Scherf, A. Yasuda and G. Wegner, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2095–2098 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, M. A. Ayer, R. Vadrucci, C. Weder and Y. C. Simon, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 6898–6904 RSC .
C. Li, C. Koenigsmann, F. Deng, A. Hagstrom, C. A. Schmuttenmaer and J.-H. Kim, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 784–790 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Murakami and K. Kamada, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 18268–18282 RSC .
A. Monguzzi, J. Mezyk, F. Scotognella, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 195112 CrossRef .
T. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Zeng, J. Chen, G. Yang and Y. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 16270–16276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, M. Xu, T. Yang, B. Tian, X. Zhang and F. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9883–9888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sato, H. Kitoh-Nishioka, K. Kamada, T. Mizokuro, K. Kobayashi and Y. Shigeta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5334–5340 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Elgar, H. Y. Otaif, X. Zhang, J. Zhao, P. N. Horton, S. J. Coles, J. M. Beames and S. J. A. Pope, Chem. – Eur. J., 2021, 27, 3427–3439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Alipour and Z. Safari, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 17126–17141 RSC .
N. A. Durandin, J. Isokuortti, A. Efimov, E. Vuorimaa-Laukkanen, N. V. Tkachenko and T. Laaksonen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 22865–22872 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gharaati, C. Wang, C. Förster, F. Weigert, U. Resch-Genger and K. Heinze, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 1003–1007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. E. Pomestchenko, C. R. Luman, M. Hissler, R. Ziessel and F. N. Castellano, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 1394–1396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sasaki, S. Amemori, H. Kouno, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5063–5067 RSC .
Y. Wei, Y. Li, M. Zheng, X. Zhou, Y. Zou and C. Yang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1902157 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, W. Wu, J. Sun and S. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5323–5351 RSC .
Y. Liu, K. Chen, S. Yang, D. Zheng, G. Ren, Y. Yang, J. Zhao, D. Wei and K. Han, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4368–4373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Seo, C. S. Park, S. J. Park, K. H. Kim, J. Lee, J. Kim, S. H. Lee, H. S. Song, T. H. Ha, J.-H. Kim, H. W. Yim, H.-I. Kim and O. S. Kwon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1668–1677 RSC .
N. A. Kukhta, T. Matulaitis, D. Volyniuk, K. Ivaniuk, P. Turyk, P. Stakhira, J. V. Grazulevicius and A. P. Monkman, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 6199–6205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, J. Li, L. Zhao, X. Zhang, A. Wang, H. Jian, S. Bai and X. Yan, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 3072–3077 RSC .
Y. Zuo, M. Tian, J. Sun, T. Yang, Y. Zhang and W. Lin, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 14602–14609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Choi, S. K. Nam, K. Kim and J. H. Moon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6891–6895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Hagstrom, S. Weon, W. Choi and J.-H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13304–13318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fang, W. Wang, C. Zhu, L. Fang, J. Jin, Y. Ni, C. Lu and Z. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
A. Turshatov, D. Busko, N. Kiseleva, S. L. Grage, I. A. Howard and B. S. Richards, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8280–8286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-i. Kim, O. S. Kwon, S. Kim, W. Choi and J.-H. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1063–1073 RSC .
B. Tian, Q. Wang, Q. Su, W. Feng and F. Li, Biomaterials, 2017, 112, 10–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sasaki, M. Oshikawa, P. Bharmoria, H. Kouno, A. Hayashi-Takagi, M. Sato, I. Ajioka, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17827–17833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kamada, Y. Sakagami, T. Mizokuro, Y. Fujiwara, K. Kobayashi, K. Narushima, S. Hirata and M. Vacha, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 83–87 RSC .
C. Wohnhaas, K. Friedemann, D. Busko, K. Landfester, S. Baluschev, D. Crespy and A. Turshatov, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 446–450 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim and J.-H. Kim, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 633–638 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. C. Askes, W. Pomp, S. L. Hopkins, A. Kros, S. Wu, T. Schmidt and S. Bonnet, Small, 2016, 12, 5579–5590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, M. Xu, F. Li and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5493–5499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fang, C. Zhou, Y. Chen, L. Fang, W. Wang, C. Zhu, Y. Ni and C. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 717–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Joarder, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4613–4624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bharmoria, H. Bildirir and K. Moth-Poulsen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6529–6554 RSC .
P. Duan, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19056–19059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5354–5370 RSC .
X. Li and M. L. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4429–4440 RSC .
J.-H. Kang, S. S. Lee, J. Guerrero, A. Fernandez-Nieves, S.-H. Kim and E. Reichmanis, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606830 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Iyisan, R. Thiramanas, N. Nazarova, Y. Avlasevich, V. Mailänder, S. Baluschev and K. Landfester, Biomacromolecules, 2020, 21, 4469–4478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, X. Zou, Q. Su, W. Yuan, C. Cao, Q. Wang, X. Zhu, W. Feng and F. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2698 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, F. N. Castellano, T. W. Schmidt and K. Hanson, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2322–2326 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Lee, J. H. Park, H.-S. Choe, M.-S. Lee, J.-M. Park, N. Harada, Y. Sasaki, N. Yanai, N. Kimizuka, J. Zhu, S. H. Bhang and J.-H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26571–26580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Haefele, J. Blumhoff, R. S. Khnayzer and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino, S. Hoseinkhani, M. Campione and F. Meinardi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4322–4332 RSC .
G. A. Crosby and J. N. Demas, J. Phys. Chem., 1971, 75, 991–1024 CrossRef CAS .

          A. D. McNaught and A. Wilkinson, IUPAC. Compendium of Chemical Terminology, Blackwell Scientific Publications, 2nd edn,  1997 Search PubMed .
Z.-Q. Liang, P. Ding, J.-F. Zhang, X.-M. Wang, G.-L. Dai, C.-Q. Ye and X.-T. Tao, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 5297–5303 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ogawa, N. Yanai, H. Kouno and N. Kimizuka, J. Photonics Energy, 2017, 8, 022003 Search PubMed .
M. Wu, D. N. Congreve, M. W. B. Wilson, J. Jean, N. Geva, M. Welborn, T. Van Voorhis, V. Bulović, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Baldo, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yanai, K. Suzuki, T. Ogawa, Y. Sasaki, N. Harada and N. Kimizuka, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2019, 123, 10197–10203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ogawa, N. Yanai, S. Fujiwara, T.-Q. Nguyen and N. Kimizuka, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 5609–5615 RSC .
N. Harada, Y. Sasaki, M. Hosoyamada, N. Kimizuka and N. Yanai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 142–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Singh-Rachford, R. R. Islangulov and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 3906–3910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 9266–9269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Baluschev, V. Yakutkin, T. Miteva, Y. Avlasevich, S. Chernov, S. Aleshchenkov, G. Nelles, A. Cheprakov, A. Yasuda, K. Müllen and G. Wegner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7693–7696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, B. Yin, T. Yang, Y. Yang, Z. Shen, P. Yao and F. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5029–5037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Marsico, A. Turshatov, R. Peköz, Y. Avlasevich, M. Wagner, K. Weber, D. Donadio, K. Landfester, S. Baluschev and F. R. Wurm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11057–11064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Lee, M.-S. Lee, H. Park, W.-S. Han and J.-H. Kim, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2019, 36, 1791–1798 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Islangulov, J. Lott, C. Weder and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12652–12653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Monguzzi, M. Mauri, A. Bianchi, M. K. Dibbanti, R. Simonutti and F. Meinardi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2609–2614 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim, F. Deng, F. N. Castellano and J.-H. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2250–2252 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Hagstrom, F. Deng and J.-H. Kim, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 127–137 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
Q. Liu, W. Wang, C. Zhan, T. Yang and D. S. Kohane, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4516–4520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hosoyamada, N. Yanai, K. Okumura, T. Uchihashi and N. Kimizuka, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6828–6831 RSC .
X. Liao, F.-J. Kahle, B. Liu, H. Bässler, X. Zhang, A. Köhler and A. Greiner, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1605–1612 RSC .
J. Li, A. Wang, L. Zhao, Q. Dong, M. Wang, H. Xu, X. Yan and S. Bai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28420–28427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Q. Zou, Y. Li, C. Yuan, R. Xing and X. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10794–10802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Oddo, T. Mani and C. V. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 39293–39303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fan, L. Wei, T. Niu, M. Rao, G. Cheng, J. J. Chruma, W. Wu and C. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15070–15077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sripathy, R. W. MacQueen, J. R. Peterson, Y. Y. Cheng, M. Dvořák, D. R. McCamey, N. D. Treat, N. Stingelin and T. W. Schmidt, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 616–622 RSC .
R. Vadrucci, C. Weder and Y. C. Simon, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 120–124 RSC .
P. Duan, D. Asthana, T. Nakashima, T. Kawai, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 196, 305–316 RSC .
F. Meinardi, M. Ballabio, N. Yanai, N. Kimizuka, A. Bianchi, M. Mauri, R. Simonutti, A. Ronchi, M. Campione and A. Monguzzi, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2169–2177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Amemori, R. K. Gupta, M. L. Böhm, J. Xiao, U. Huynh, T. Oyama, K. Kaneko, A. Rao, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 8590–8594 RSC .
P. Bharmoria, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Gels, 2019, 5, 18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Duan, N. Yanai, H. Nagatomi and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1887–1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fückel, D. A. Roberts, Y. Y. Cheng, R. G. C. R. Clady, R. B. Piper, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley and T. W. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 966–971 CrossRef .
A. P. Dhawan, B. D. Alessandro and X. Fu, IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, 2010, 3, 69–92 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang and Y. Nosaka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10824–10832 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cho, H. Chung, W. Choi and J. Yoon, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2005, 71, 270–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, C. Wang and G. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2020, 15, 3239–3253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Kishimoto, T. Wakihara and T. Okubo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7021–7029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Schulze and T. W. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 103–125 RSC .
Y. Y. Cheng, B. Fückel, R. W. MacQueen, T. Khoury, R. G. C. R. Clady, T. F. Schulze, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley, B. Stannowski, K. Lips and T. W. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6953–6959 RSC .
J. Pedrini and A. Monguzzi, J. Photonics Energy, 2017, 8, 022005 Search PubMed .
T. Dilbeck and K. Hanson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5810–5821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Dilbeck, S. P. Hill and K. Hanson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11652–11660 RSC .
N. J. Ekins-Daukes and T. W. Schmidt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 063507 CrossRef .
S. Chandrasekaran, Y.-L. T. Ngo, L. Sui, E. J. Kim, D. K. Dang, J. S. Chung and S. H. Hur, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 13912–13919 RSC .
C. Ye, J. Wang, X. Wang, P. Ding, Z. Liang and X. Tao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3430–3437 RSC .
A. Monguzzi, A. Oertel, D. Braga, A. Riedinger, D. K. Kim, P. N. Knüsel, A. Bianchi, M. Mauri, R. Simonutti, D. J. Norris and F. Meinardi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40180–40186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Beery, T. W. Schmidt and K. Hanson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 32601–32605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Richards, D. Hudry, D. Busko, A. Turshatov and I. A. Howard, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 9165–9195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Gholizadeh, S. K. K. Prasad, Z. L. Teh, T. Ishwara, S. Norman, A. J. Petty, J. H. Cole, S. Cheong, R. D. Tilley, J. E. Anthony, S. Huang and T. W. Schmidt, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 585–590 CrossRef CAS .
L. Frazer, J. K. Gallaher and T. W. Schmidt, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1346–1354 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Schulze, J. Czolk, Y.-Y. Cheng, B. Fückel, R. W. MacQueen, T. Khoury, M. J. Crossley, B. Stannowski, K. Lips, U. Lemmer, A. Colsmann and T. W. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22794–22801 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barawi, F. Fresno, R. Pérez-Ruiz and V. A. de la Peña O’Shea, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 207–211 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  History of the development of TTA-UC technology from the discovery to advanced several systems (top) and summarization of various recent applications that were divided dependent on the morphology of TTA-UC (bottom).	 

 	Fig. 1  Jablonski energy diagram describing the photochemical processes of TTA-UC between sensitizer (donor) and acceptor (emitter/annihilator). SENS: sensitizer; ACC: acceptor; ISC: intersystem crossing; TET: triplet–triplet energy transfer; TTA: triplet–triplet annihilation.	 
ΦUC = ΦISCΦTETΦTTAΦf	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (A) Quadratic to linear dependency in tlog–log plot of TTA-UC intensity as a function of excitation power density. (B) UC quantum yield as a function of excitation power density.7 Reproduced with permission from ref. 7. Copyrights, 2020 American Chemical Society.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (A) Photographs of a flexible and transparent PU-based UC material.9 Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyrights 2018, American Chemical Society. (B) Photograph of an UC material containing acceptors covalently bound to a polymeric backbone.17 Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyrights 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Photograph of a poly(olefin sulfone)s-based UC material achieved at temperatures above the polymer's glass transition.40 Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyrights 2017, American Chemical Society. (D) Microscope images of an UC microcapsule containing two and three upconverting cores.46 Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyrights 2015, American Chemical Society. (E) Confocal microscopy image of an UC microcapsule made using microfluidic techniques.55 Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyrights 2017, Wiley-Blackwell. (F) Confocal microscopy image of UC oil-laden hollow mesoporous silica microcapsules.59 Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyrights 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of various forms of TTA-UC nanomaterials. (A) Preparation of a triplet–triplet annihilation upconversion solution embedding silica nanocapsules using a micro-emulsion methodology.5 Reproduced with permission from ref. 5. Copyrights, 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic of the phototriggering of the polymeric micellar nanoparticle by TTA-UC.14 Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 Copyrights, 2015 American Chemical Society. (C) Co-assembly of peptide and TTA-UC chromophores for the peptide-assisted TTA-UC in non-deoxygenated water.35 Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyrights, 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Schematics of the colloid-electrospinning process for embedding TTA-UC nanocapsules in nanofibers.45 Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyrights, 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) A schematic representation of G-TX-DPAS-PtOEP co-assembly in a photon upconverting hydrogel and UC emission intensity of the air-saturated G-TX-PtOEP-DPAS hydrogel in the heating/cooling cycles.10 Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyrights, 2018 American Chemical Society. (B) Design concept for the CA/DPA@PCN-222(Pd) TTA-UC MOF; Pd(TCPP) as the linker and triplet donor; Zr6(m3-OH)8(OH)8 as the secondary building units (SBUs); DPA as the triplet acceptor; CA coordinated to the SBUs as a “solvent” in the hexagonal channels; grey (Zr), red (O), blue (N), white (C), light blue (Pd), and H atoms omitted.27 Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyrights, 2020 Wiley-Blackwell. (C) PtOEP:DPA and PtOEP:C7-sDPA fabricated via drop-casting under rapid-drying conditions. The arrows show the excitation wavelength (532 nm). Centimeter-scale upconverted emission image of the PtOEP:C7-sDPA cast sample under illumination from an expanded beam from a diode laser at 532 nm.44 Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyrights, 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Illustration of the chromophores (sensitizer and acceptor) embedding up-converting nanomicelles.2 Reproduced with permission from ref. 2. Copyrights, 2016 Wiley-Blackwell. (B) Cell fluorescence imaging of 3T3 murine fibroblast cells stained with up-converting nanomicelles (left) and phalloidin stained (middle) merged image of both (right).2 Reproduced with permission from ref. 2. Copyrights, 2016 Wiley-Blackwell. (C) Fluorescent images of live HeLa cells incubated with the SiO2 UCNPs for 30 min; (left) live HeLa cells and (right) hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis cells.36 Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyrights, 2018 American Chemical Society. (D) In vitro imaging using upconverting polymersomes in cancer cells; living lung carcinoma cells in bright field mode (left column), with λexc = 405 nm (middle column), and with λexc = 635 nm (right column). Cells were incubated with upconverting polymersomes (middle row: without antioxidants, bottom row: with antioxidants).47 Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyrights, 2016 Wiley-Blackwell. (E) Polymeric upconversion nanocapsules sensing temperature in HeLa cells and the calibration curve of temperature-dependence of the normalized integral UC fluorescence.56 Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyrights, 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Differential cancer bioimaging in vivo; with the injection of bare silica nanocapsules (left) and blue and green photoluminescence image of a mouse bearing breast and colorectal cancers with the injection of bioprobe-conjugated TTA-UC nanocapsules (right).8 Reproduced with permission from ref. 8. Copyrights, 2016 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of TTA-UC nanocapsules with reductive solvent soybean oil inside (left) and the upconversion imaging of organs such as liver, spleen, and kidney in vivo.22 Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyrights, 2018 American Chemical Society. (C) In vivo lymph node imaging after injection of a TTA-UC metal organic framework in the footpad of the forepaw.48 Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyrights, 2018 American Chemical Society. (D) Upconversion luminescence images of mice after injecting upconversion nanocapsules at various time points.42 Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyrights, 2017 Elsevier. (E) Schematics of sensitively responsive TTA-UC nanocapsules to temperature changes and evaluated temperature distributions in the two legs.57 Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyrights, 2018 Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Illustration and time dependent drug release efficiency graph of the photocleavage drug release by TTA-UC.1 Reproduced with permission from ref. 1. Copyrights, 2017 Wiley-Blackwell. (B) Schematic illustration of synthesized nanorod complex's self-delivered TTA-UC and excited photodynamic therapy of tumors with 650 nm and 808 nm laser irradiation.13 Reproduced with permission from ref. 13. Copyrights, 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Photographs of a sub-bandgap photocatalyst device.3 (B) Time profiles of the photocatalytic degradation of CH3CHO over the course of a 3 h period in a reactor with sub-bandgap photocatalyst setups: PtOEP/DPA-WO3, PtOEP/DPA-ND/WO3, PtOEP/DPA/AgNP-SiO2-ND/WO3 (Ag-20; 20 wt% vs. PtOEP), and a control film without DPA (PtOEP-ND/WO3). [CH3CHO]0 = 20 ppmv.3 Reproduced with permission from ref. 3. Copyrights, 2016 American Chemical Society. (C) Illustration of a sub-bandgap photocatalyst device powered by a PdTPBP–PtOEP dual-layer UC film system.38 (D) Photocurrent generation of sub-bandgap photocatalyst devices pairing a film of ND/K-WO3 coated onto FTO with a PtOEP UC film, PdTPBP UC film, or dual-layer UC film system (top/front film listed first) under periodic white LED excitation (525 nm LP, 130.1 mW cm−2, 30–60 and 90–120 s).38 Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyrights, 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Photocatalytic OH radical generation and fluorescence microscopy images of microcapsules containing PtOEP/DPA in the HD/PIB core phase under xenon arc lamp irradiation through a ∼540 nm bandpass filter.4 Reproduced with permission from ref. 4. Copyrights, 2012 American Chemical Society. (B) Photocatalytic OH radical generation by using red-to-blue TTA-UC emission of OA-core SNCs (6 wt%) in water and aqueous-stable nano-scale encapsulation of TTA-UC.5 Reproduced with permission from ref. 5. Copyrights, 2015 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic illustration of TTA-UCL clusters and pseudo-first-order rate constant (kpfo) of degrading TC with the photocatalysts under different light irradiation.39 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyrights, 2017 Elsevier. (D) Photocatalytic degradation of tetracycline over samples under visible light.49 Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyrights, 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Schematic representation of a self-assembled trilayer (TiO2-A-Zn-S-Zn-SS) (ET = singlet energy transfer; TET = triplet energy transfer; mig = triplet exciton migration; TTA = triplet–triplet annihilation; e-inj = electron injection). IPCE/absorptance spectra for bilayer and trilayer solar cells.6 Reproduced with permission from ref. 6. Copyrights, 2019 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of TTA film-assisted absorption of photons in a dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cell and TTA-UC-induced Jsc enhancement using LED (wavelength centered at 625 nm) illumination of DSPC devices with 5 μm sensitized TiO2 layer thicknesses.18 Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyrights, 2016 American Chemical Society. (C) Scheme of LBR-assisted water splitting of Mo:BiVO4 photoelectrodes and ABPE as a function of the applied potential; inset image shows a digital image of the Mo:BiVO4/LBR photoanode immersed in an electrolyte solution.37 Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyrights, 2019 Wiley-Blackwell.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of the upconversion-photocatalysis system and the apparent quantum efficiency of hydrogen evolution of composites.11 Reproduced with permission from ref. 11. Copyrights, 2019 Elsevier. (B) Influence of the concentrations of Cd0.5Zn0.5S on the photochemical production of hydrogen under irradiation with a red LED (2.4 mW cm−2).21 Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyrights, 2019 Wiley-Blackwell. (C) Time-profiles of photocatalytic H2O2 production on SNC, CdS–SNC, and GOND (3 wt%)/CdS–SNC under non-coherent excitation (red LED, active area ≈2.25 cm2, 23 mW cm−2 (total 52 mW)).41 Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyrights, 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of the flow chart of energy conversion processes in the TTA upconversion reaction in triplet fusion LED (FuLED) (top left) and the photographs (top middle) showed the upconverted emission performance containing various chromophores (DPA; deep blue; λem = 440 nm, Perylene; green; λem = 520 nm, Rubrene; yellow; λem = 570 nm, TIPS-pentacene; red; λem = 670 nm) and luminance-voltage characteristics (top right).12 Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyrights, 2017 Wiley-Blackwell. (B) Chemical structures of both the emitter and triplet energy host of an electroluminescence deep-blue OLED (bottom left), electroluminescence spectra of the fabricated device (bottom middle), and graph of the current density–voltage-luminance curves (bottom right).34 Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyrights, 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) UC-based anti-counterfeiting technology that can identify hidden information according to the type of filters.9 Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyrights, 2018 American Chemical Society. (B) Photograph and fluorescence images of the mussel sample for the up-/down-conversion-based biosensor to detect mercury.33 Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyrights, 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Time-lapse images of hippocampal neurons forming dendritic-spine-like structures induced by UC emission.43 Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyrights, 2019 Wiley-Blackwell.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
