Body-clearable chromium nitride for synergetic photothermal and photodynamic treatment   - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NJ03943H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NJ03943H
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 20039-20046Body-clearable chromium nitride for synergetic photothermal and photodynamic treatment†

        
          
            Yutuo 
            Fu‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Le 
            Wang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoyu 
            Chi‡
a, 
      
        
          
            F. 
            Alvarado-Cesar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Na 
            An
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuanjun 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yadong 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Zhang
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Chongshen 
            Guo
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China. E-mail: chongshenguo@hit.edu.cn
bHeilongjiang Provincial Hospital, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China
cCenter for Precision Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China. E-mail: zp@hit.edu.cn
Received 
      6th August 2020
    , Accepted 28th October 2020First published on 29th October 2020AbstractPhototherapy is one of most promising antitumor alternatives that realizes the photoablation of solid tumors with the help of photoactive materials. However, the long-term in vivo toxic potential of the non-degradable photoactive material hinders it from clinical applications. In this work, a body-clearable nanomaterial of chromium nitride was applied for synergetic phototherapy. Chromium nitride is a broad-spectra near infrared (NIR) absorbent that can be excited by NIR to generate hyperthermia and reactive oxygen species (ROS) simultaneously. As a result, the dual actions of photothermal and photodynamic treatment outcomes could be achieved by this single matter. The in vitro cell experiments proved a better antitumor outcome of the synergetic phototherapy action over the single-role photothermal or photodynamic therapy. More interestingly, in vivo metabolic studies disclosed that the overall in vivo content of chromium nitride dropped significantly after intravenous injection, and the excretion of chromium nitride was found in urine and feces. Consequently, this work presents a new idea for precise and low side-effect phototherapy modality.
1. Introduction
Cancer is one of the leading causes of human death worldwide. Nowadays, clinical antitumor treatments mainly involve surgery, radiotherapy or chemotherapy. Surgery is very effective for early-stage un-metastasized tumors; however, it is incapable of addressing diffuse tumors or some inoperable tissues.1,2 Chemotherapy relies on antitumor drugs to inhibit the cell cycle of cancer cells and ultimately to eliminate tumors. Nonetheless, the poor targeting behavior of chemotherapeutic drugs often results in the unwanted biodistribution of drugs in normal organs as well and consequently incurs high side-effects. Another common antitumor treatment is radiotherapy, which gives rise to massive on-site reactive oxygen species (ROS) to destroy solid tumors under the effect of short-wave irradiation. However, these radioactive rays are very harmful for normal tissue as well as a teratogenic risk.3,4 Recently, phototherapy has emerged as a promising alternative to the traditional oncotherapies.5–9 For achieving a better penetration depth, near infrared light (NIR) of 800–1400 nm is usually applied for the phototherapy due to the limited light scattering and absorption by the body. Under NIR irradiation, the photoactive materials at the tumor site could generate hyperthermia (photothermal therapy, PTT) or ROS (photodynamic therapy, PDT) to damage the cancer cells.10–13 Obviously, phototherapy shows a higher superiority to traditional methods. First, phototherapy can often result in an immungentic cell death effect and trigger the host antitumor immune effect; that is, treating one tumor but eliminating all tumors.14–16 This is much better than the surgery method. Second, these photoactive materials as photothermal agents or photosensitizers are nontoxic in the absence of external NIR. Consequently, the photoablation effect only takes place on-site where the NIR and photoactive materials are both available. Compared with chemotherapy, the side-effects of phototherapy are quite low because these non-excited photoactive materials at normal organs have lower cytotoxicity than chemotherapeutic drugs.17 Finally, NIR is a part of sunlight and makes up about 50% of solar energy, and thus the health threat from NIR is very limited in contrast to the radioactive rays used in radiotherapy.18,19
Although great advances have been made in the area of phototherapy, there are still some problems that must be paid attention to. The first important one is the long-term in vivo risk of photoactive materials. After the phototherapy, the photoactive materials would be left in vivo and some materials are even non-biodegradable, such as carbon-based materials and ceramic-like materials. The unknown long-term risks, such as related to teratogenesis, allergization, and oncogenicity, hinder the development of phototherapy in clinical applications.20 Hence, ideal photothermal agents or photosensitizers should be body-clearable after the treatment. Second, a synergetic PTT and PDT treatment is highly required, especially for single-material mediated treatments. The PDT treatment outcome often decreases with time alongside the tissue oxygen depletion and the weakening of the generation of ROS. Therefore, PDT treatment is an early-effective modality. On the contrary, the antitumor effect of PTT treatment increases with time alongside the temperature elevation, and meanwhile, the PTT outcome has no relationship with tissue oxygen. Consequently, PDT and PTT are complementary antitumor modalities that can induce dual antitumor effects.21 So far, some researchers have made important contributions to the synergetic PTT/PDT treatment via the integration of photothermal materials and photosensitizers into a complex nanosystem. However, this brings the problems of mutual interference and a possible absorption mismatch between the photothermal material and photosensitizer, as all as a complex synthesis, in vivo disintegration, and so forth.21
In this work, chromium nitride (Cr2N) nanoparticles were selected as a body-clearable phototherapeutical agent for the synergetic PTT/PDT treatment. Chromium nitride shows a wide photoabsorption in the biological window of 800–1400 nm. More importantly, both hyperthermia and ROS could be generated by this singe-matter of Cr2N when subjected to NIR irradiation, thus realizing the desired PTT and PDT outcome simultaneously. An in vivo biodegradation study revealed that the Cr2N could be excreted by urine and feces and the in vivo content of Cr2N in the major organs clearly decreased with time. Moreover, the histology and hematological analyses verified the adequate biosafety of Cr2N. Consequently, this work presents a plausible way to achieve synergetic phototherapy with a single biodegradable material.
2. Experimental
2.1 Materials
Cr2N nanoparticles were obtained from Shanghai Chaowei Nano Technology Co. Ltd. Cr2N nanoparticles were synthesized by laser plasma gas-phase synthesis with metal Cr powder as a Cr resource under an NH3 atmosphere. Live–dead stains of calcein acetoxymethyl ester (Calcein-AM) and propidium iodide (PI), ROS indicators of 2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (H2DCFDA) and 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran (DPBF), and 3-(4,5-dimethylthialzol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) were bought from Sigma-Aldrich. Female BALB/C nude mice were obtained from Vitalriver Experimental Animal Technical Co., Ltd (Beijing).
2.2 Characterizations
The structural feature and elemental analysis of the samples were studied by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM 2100F). XRD analysis was performed by X-ray diffractometry (Smartlab9, 40 kV, 150 mA). The chemical states and elemental composition of the samples were carried out by X-ray photoelectron energy spectroscopy (ThermoFisher K-Alpha). UV-Vis-NIR spectrometry (U-2600, Shimadzu, Japan) was used for the optical absorbance test of both the powders and solutions. Hematological analysis was performed on an HF-3800 automatic blood analyzer. For recording the temperature profile of the photo-irradiated solutions or mice, an infrared camera (FLIR E6) was applied.
2.3 Photothermal conversion tests
First, 0.4 mL Cr2N aqueous dispersion (0.5 mg mL−1) was set in a quartz tube and irradiated with an NIR laser of 808 nm (1.5 W cm−1) for 10 min. Then, it was allowed to cool naturally for another 10 min. During the whole process, the temperature variations were monitored with an infrared camera.
2.4 ROS detection
ROS generation detection was performed with a probe of BPDF first to check the ROS level in the solution. Next, 30 μL DPBF solution in N,N-dimethylformamide (1 mg mL−1) was added into 3 mL Cr2N aqueous dispersion (0.5 mg mL−1). Then, the resultant above solution was irradiated with an 808 nm laser (1.5 W cm−1) for 1 h and the optical absorbance value at 420 nm was recorded at 5, 10, 15, 30, and 60 min post irradiation. Meanwhile, the Cr2N-mediated ROS level in the solution was checked by electron spin resonance (ESR) tests as well. Here, 3 mL Cr2N aqueous dispersion (0.5 mg mL−1) with the addition of TEMP underwent NIR irradiation for 20 min and then the ESR spectra were obtained. Fluorescence visualization of the intracellular ROS level was realized by the H2DCFDA probe. HepG2 cells seeded in 6-well plates were treated with 0.5 mg mL−1 Cr2N aqueous dispersion for 6 h. Then, 10 min irradiation was applied to the cells, which were then stained with H2DCFDA (5 mg mL−1, 50 μL) for 1 h and finally imaged on a fluorescence microscope. In this part, the positive control was H2O2 (50 mM, 150 μL)-treated cells. The negative control groups were cells that had only received NIR irradiation and cells treated with Cr2N aqueous dispersion. For investigating the ROS quenching effect of vitamin C (Vc), 100 μL (5 mM) Vc solution was introduced while the other parameters were kept unchanged.
2.5 
          In vitro cell experiments
The cytotoxicity was evaluated with a standard MTT method. First, HepG2 and HUVEC cells seeded in 96-well plates were treated with varied concentrations of Cr2N solution for 24 h. Then, the cells were rinsed with PBS to remove the excessive Cr2N and MTT solution was added (5 mg mL−1, 20 μL per well). After 4 h incubation, 150 μL dimethyl sulfoxide was added to dissolve formazan for 30 min. The absorbance at 490 nm was recorded on a microplate reader. The trials were conducted three times and the cell viabilities were evaluated with regard to the untreated cells.
To study the in vitro phototherapy efficiency, the cells were divided into six groups: (1) untreated cells, (2) cells treated with NIR irradiation (1.5 W cm−1, 10 min), (3) cells treated with Cr2N aqueous dispersion (0.5 mg mL−1), (4) cells treated with NIR + Cr2N + ice bath, (5) cells treated with NIR + Cr2N + Vc (100 μL, 5 mM), and (6) cells treated with NIR and Cr2N. Then, the cell viabilities of the above groups were determined by MTT assay as well. The live–dead staining on cells were conducted with Calcein-AM and PI. Cells after treatment were co-stained with Calcein-AM (5 μL, 1 μg mL−1) and PI (200 μL, 20 μg mL−1) and imaged by fluorescence microscopy.
2.6 
          In vivo antitumor study
All the animal experiments and operations were conducted according to the criteria of the National Regulation of China for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and Guidelines for the Care and Use of Experimental Animals of the Heilongjiang Provincial Congress, and approved by the Ethics Research Committee of the Harbin Institute of Technology (No. IACUC-2019009). The HepG2-tumor model was established on nude mice via the injection of 1 × 107 HepG2 cells in 50% matrigel on the left flank leg of the mice. When the volume of the tumor reached about 200 mm3, the mice were randomly divided into five groups (n = 5 in each group): group 1, untreated control mice; group 2, Cr2N treated mice (intratumoral injection with 200 μL, 0.5 mg mL−1 Cr2N solution); group 3, NIR-irradiated mice (1.5 W cm−1, 10 min); group 4, Cr2N injection + NIR irradiation + Vc injection (5 mM, 100 μL); and group 5, Cr2N injection + NIR irradiation. All the treatments were performed only once. After the treatment, the tumor volume and body weight were measured every other day. The tumor volume was calculated as V = (tumor length) × (tumor width)2/2. The antitumor outcome was reflected by the relative tumor volume of V/V0, where V0 is the tumor volume before treatment and V is the tumor volume at a certain day post treatment.
2.7 Histology analysis
At the 14th day post treatment, the mice were euthanatized and the tumor and major organs (spleen, liver, kidney, heart, lung) were harvested for the H&E staining. Tissues were saved in 4% paraformaldehyde solution and stained with H&E. The images of the tissues were observed by an Olympus BX53 microscope.
2.8 
          In vivo biodistribution and excretion
Mice were intravenously injected with Cr2N solution (1 mg mL−1, 100 μL). At different times post injection, the mice were sacrificed and the major organs of the heart spleen, liver, kidney, heart, lung, brain, and bone were boiled in 68 wt% HNO3 solution. Then, the ICP-OES analysis was performed for confirming the content of Cr element. Similarly, the Cr content in the urine and feces of mice was tested by ICP-OES as well. The statistical analysis was performed on five mice for each experimental point.
2.9 Statistical analysis
The statistical significance was obtained with the analysis of variance (ANOVA) and two-tail Student's t test. In this work, *: p < 0.05, **: p < 0.01, p value < 0.05 were considered significant.
3. Results and discussion
In this work, we employed Cr2N nanoparticles for the synergetic PDT/PTT treatment in virtue of its unique photoactive performance and body-clearable property. A shown in the Fig. 1a, d–f and Fig. S1 (ESI†), these Cr2N nanoparticles were sheet-like and their dimensions were in the range of 30–100 nm. In addition, the hydrodynamic diameter of the Cr2N nanoparticles was determined by dynamic light scattering to be 234 nm, which was bigger than in the TEM observation, illustrating a slight aggregation between the particles in water. (Fig. S2, ESI†). The HR-TEM image showed clear and regular lattice fringes, indicating the high crystallinity. In addition, the crystal lattice spacing was 0.214 nm, which was in accordance with the (1 1 1) facet of Cr2N (Fig. 1b). The EDS analysis in Fig. 1c–f disclosed that the sample consisted of Cr and N elements. Then, the crystal nature of the sample was investigated by XRD. In Fig. 1g, all of the detectable diffractive peaks well matched the Cr2N (standard card: 35-0803) and no impurity could be found. Then, the XPS survey was carried out on Cr 3p and N 1s orbits. As displayed in Fig. 1h, the spin–orbit coupling doublet of Cr 2p3/2 and Cr 2p1/2 were seen at binding energies of 575.7 and 585.8 eV, which were consistent with the typical character of Cr2N species. Meanwhile, the characteristic Cr2N peak was found in the N 1s spectra at 396.6 eV as well (Fig. 1g). In addition, another weak shoulder peak at 397.9 eV in the N 1s spectra illustrated the presence of CrOxNy to a certain degree according to previous reports.22,23 Considering that there was no impurity in the XRD pattern, a slight oxidation may happen on the surface of Cr2N to form an amorphous layer or presence of superficially adsorbed oxygen. Anyway, we confirmed the Cr2N nature of the sample in this work on the basis of the above characterizations in terms of the crystal nature, chemical valence, and elemental composition. Finally, Cr2N could be well dispersed in water, PBS, and culture medium as evidenced by there being no macroscopical sedimentation (Fig. S3, ESI†).
 Fig. 1  Characterizations of Cr2N. (a) TEM image, (b) HR-TEM image, (c) EDS profile, (d–f) EDS mapping, (g) XRD pattern, (h) XPS spectra of Cr 3p and (i) N 1s. 
Being a photoactive material for NIR-driven phototherapy, the optical absorbance in the biological window is a basic requirement. In this work, we first measured the photoabsorption of powder Cr2N. As disclosed in Fig. 2a, wide and strong absorbance across the ultraviolet, visible, and NIR region was seen for the Cr2N sample. This led to its high absorbance value above 0.85 in all wavelengths, including the desired NIR window of 800–1400 nm. Further, the absorbance of Cr2N aqueous dispersion was tested with water as a background. In Fig. 2b, the photoabsorption of Cr2N solution linearly increased with the concentration of the sample. Afterwards, the photothermal conversion effect was carried out on 0.5 mg mL−1 Cr2N solution. Under NIR irradiation of 1.5 W cm−2 (808 nm), the Cr2N solution showed a higher and faster temperature elevation as compared with pure water, suggesting the excellent photothermal properties of Cr2N even at such a low concentration (Fig. 2c). The temperature changes in the cooling stage were applicable for calculation of the heat transfer hS between container and surrounding, where h is the heat transfer coefficient and A is the surface area of the quartz tube. According to a well-established method, the photothermal conversion efficiency (η) could be calculated by eqn (1).24 (1)where, I is the laser power and A808 is the absorbance of Cr2N dispersion at 808 nm; Tmax is the equilibrium temperature after 10 min irradiation; Tsurr is the ambient temperature; and Qdis is the heat dissipation of light absorbed by the quartz sample cell itself, whose value is so small as to be negligible. In this work, I was 0.424 W (1.5 W cm−1, spot diameter = 6 mm), Tmax was 44.3 °C, Tsurr was 28 °C, and A808 was 0.52. Then, the only unknown value was hS, which could be determined by the following equations. First, one needs to define a dimensionless quantity of θ as per eqn (2). (2)
 Fig. 2  Photoabsorption and photothermal behavior of Cr2N. (a) Powder absorbance, (b) absorbance of dispersion, (c) photothermal conversion curve (808 nm, 1.5 W cm−2), and (d) plot of cooling time versus −lnθ. 
In the natural cooling stage, the cooling time t and θ follow eqn (3) and the time constant (τs) could be obtained by plotting −lnθ versus t. Obviously, the slope value was τs, which was 212.93 s in this work according to the Fig. 2d. t = −τsln(θ)(3)
Then, the hS could be calculated by eqn (4) (hS = 7.9 mW °C−1), where m is the mass of solution (0.4 g) and Cp is the heat capacity of water (4.2 J g−1). (4)
Finally, the photothermal conversion efficiency (η) of Cr2N was calculated as 43.4%, which was higher than most of the previously reported inorganic nanomaterials, such as Au nanorods (22%), Cu2−xSe nanocrystals (22%), black phosphorus (28.4%), Pd nanosheets (27.8%), Fe3O4 clusters (16.9%), and MoO3−x nanospheres.25–30
Our above efforts confirmed the photothermal behavior of Cr2N nanoparticle under NIR irradiation. Until now, most photothermal agents are nanomaterials that perform the single role of the photothermal effect. Our previous studies found that some metallic inorganic materials could act as photosensitizers as well. The localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect, hot electron effect, or phonon–polaron hopping action could facilitate the generation of free electrons to further give rise to ROS.18,19 Among various ROS, singlet oxygen has been verified to be the most effective one to treat tumors.31 In this work, Cr2N nanoparticles were check by the photosensitive properties of ROS generation. First, the NIR-triggered generation of singlet oxygen was realized by the DPBF probe, which could be degraded by singlet oxygen and result in an absorbance loss of its characteristic absorption at 420 nm. Thus, the photodegradation performance of DPBF could well reflect the ROS level.20,21 As shown in Fig. 3a, only NIR irradiation without Cr2N gave very limited DPBF degradation as the control. In sharp contrast, Cr2N could mediate distinct DPBF degradation under irradiation, corresponding to massive ROS production. Herein, we also introduced a ROS quencher of Vc in this work. In Fig. 3a, it can be seen that the addition of Vc could well inhibit the degradation of Vc as a result of ROS quenching. In this work, the photodegradation of DPBF followed the pseudo-first-order reaction kinetic model as shown in Fig. 3b. It is well known that the thermolysis of organic compounds often follows the pseudo-zero-order reaction kinetic model, while the ROS-related photodegradation of organic compounds is a pseudo-first-order reaction. Hence, this further verified the production of ROS by Cr2N for the DPBF degradation, instead of by thermolysis. Next, the generation of singlet oxygen was checked by ESR analysis. In Fig. 3c, the typical adduct of TEMP-1O2 was discerned, thus further verifying the ROS generation. Finally, the intracellular ROS level was examined with a probe of H2DCFDA, which is a non-fluorescent molecule. After being oxidized by singlet oxygen, H2DCFDA would turn into a green fluorescent molecule. By this way, the visualization of ROS could be realized by fluorescent imaging. In Fig. 3d, the untreated cells and Cr2N-treated cells showed no green fluorescence, thus suggesting no ROS production. As to NIR-irradiated cells (without Cr2N), bits of green spots emerged. Massive green fluorescence could be seen in the NIR-excited Cr2N group and in the positive control of the H2O2-treated control, which once again proved the photosensitive properties of Cr2N. Similarly to the finding in Fig. 3a, Vc could well quench the singlet oxygen as there was no green fluorescence seen with the introduction of Vc. Consequently, this work presents a novel Cr2N that has the dual identity of a photothermal agent and photosensitizer. Obviously, it showed great superiority to the other synergetic phototherapy systems with multicomponents. The Cr2N in this work could generate ROS and hyperthermia simultaneously under a single wavelength laser, which avoids the mismatch of incident NIR for exciting individual photothermal agents and photosensitizers, respectively. Compared to the other single-functional photoactive material, Cr2N exhibited higher photon utilization and dual antitumor effects. Moreover, a better in vivo robustness of single Cr2N is another merit with regard to the multicomponent system. Taken together, Cr2N displayed potent NIR-triggered photothermal and photosensitive performances.
 Fig. 3  Detection of photosensitive properties of Cr2N. (a) Photodegradation of DPBF and (b) first order kinetics behavior of DPBF degradation, (c) ESR spectra of TEMP-1O2 adduct spin-trapping, (d) fluorescent image of cells after different treatments (cells were stained with H2DCFDA, the bar inset is 200 μm). 
Being a metalloid material, the free electron density of Cr2N was high and it had a localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) property. NIR irradiation would trigger LSPR in Cr2N and massive “hot electrons” would be excited and transferred, forming matched holes simultaneously.32,33 Then, the electrons would react with dissolved oxygen to form ROS via a classic photophysical process as that shown in the photocatalytic reaction as below. The electrons would be captured by dissolved oxygen to form ˙O2−, which would subsequently react with H+ ions to produce ˙HO2. On the other hand, holes on the surface of Cr2N would oxidize OH− into ˙OH. Finally, the reaction between ˙O2− and ˙OH would give rise to singlet oxygen (1O2) and OH−. O2 + e− → ˙O2−(5) ˙O2− + H+ → ˙HO2(6) Cr2N* + h+ + OH− → ˙OH(7) ˙O2− + ˙OH → 1O2 + OH−(8)
All of the above radical formations were partly proved by the ESR results in Fig. 3b and Fig. S4 (ESI†), which gave evidence of ˙OH and 1O2 in the ESR test.
Prior to the phototherapy, the cytotoxicity test was conducted with a standard MTT assay. Human malignant tumor cells of HepG2 and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were incubated with Cr2N of different concentrations for 24 h. As shown in the Fig. 4a and b, the cell viabilities were higher than 80% even when incubated with as high as 1 mg mL−1 Cr2N solution, indicating an adequate biocompatibility in the absence of NIR excitation. Next, the in vitro cancer cell-killing efficiency was evaluated with the MTT assay as well. Cells in 96-well plates received different treatments and then the cell viabilities were recorded. In Fig. 4c, the cells subjected to only NIR irradiation or Cr2N incubation showed nearly no cell death. As to the phototherapeutic treatment, we conducted PDT, PTT, and synergetic PDT/PTT treatments. Considering that both hyperthermia and ROS would be produced by NIR-excited Cr2N, it is necessary to remove one of them respectively to examine the single action of PDT or PTT. Our above results evidenced the ROS quenching effect of Vc, which could be given to remove the ROS. In this way, the single PTT efficiency was proved to be 61% cancer cells death. On the other hand, the ice bath was applied to ensure the temperature of the irradiated area was below 20 °C, and thus the PTT action was eliminated through this. The PDT could contribute to 36% cancer cells death. As expected, the synergetic PDT/PTT treatment gave the highest cell death of 89.4%. Then, live–dead staining was performed on 6-well plates with Calcein-AM (live cells, green fluorescence) and PI (dead cells, red fluorescence). Fig. 4d clearly shows the remarkable cancer cell death circle within the phototherapy area, while the other three control groups showed live cells only. The above in vitro results verified the synergistic PDT and PTT outcome of Cr2N.
 Fig. 4  Cell viability of (a) HepG2 and (b) HUVEC after incubation with Cr2N for 24 h, (c) cell viability of HepG2 cells after different treatments (*P < 0.05, Student t test), (d) live–dead staining of cells after different treatments. 
The in vivo antitumor study was established on HepG2-tumor-bearing mice. First, the in vivo temperature elevation at the tumor site was recorded by thermography. It could be seen that Cr2N meditated a faster and higher temperature elevation to 56.5 °C after 10 min irradiation, in contrast to only 41 °C without Cr2N (Fig. 5a). Moreover, the injection of Vc or not had no influence on the tumor temperature. After the treatment, the antitumor efficiency was judged by the relative tumor volume changes over the following two weeks. The control groups of untreated, NIR-irradiated, and Cr2N-treated mice all showed continuous tumor development, while the mice in the PTT and synergetic PDT/PTT groups were cured with the complete removal of the solid tumor (Fig. 5b and d). By comparison, the antitumor outcome of the PDT/PTT group showed very limited advantage over the single PTT action, illustrating that the PTT action played the major role in the antitumor effect on mice. There was no obvious difference in body weight between these groups, which illustrated there were no acute side effects of the phototherapy (Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  
In vivo antitumor study. (a) Temperature changes at the tumor site, (b) relative tumor volume, (**P < 0.01, ANOVA, analysis of variance) (c) relative body weight, (d) representative photographs and (e) H&E staining images of tumors int different groups. (f) H&E staining images of major organs in the phototherapy group. 
Histology analysis of the H&E staining on the tumors harvested from the different groups evidenced severe cancer cell necrosis in the PTT and synergetic PDT/PTT groups, especially for the PDT/PTT groups. This is in accordance with the above tumor-ablation results being related to the photoablation effect of Cr2N (Fig. 5e). Meanwhile, H&E staining of the major organs of the mice in the PDT/PTT group revealed no detectable lesions, manifesting the excellent biosafety of the phototherapy (Fig. 5f).
Hemanalysis on the mice after intravenous injection with Cr2N was carried out, including for the blood indicators of white blood cells (WBC), lymphocyte number (LYM), monocytes number (MON), granulocyte count (GRA), hemoglobin (HGB), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), red blood cells (RBC), mean corpuscular volume (MCV), platelets (PLT), hematocrit (HCT), and plateletcrit (PCT). As can be seen in Fig. 6a, all of the blood indicators were within the normal range for the two weeks post injection, which well verified the biosecurity of Cr2N. In Fig. 6b, the in vivo biodistribution results disclosed that the Cr2N mainly was captured by the liver and spleen. It is well known that reticuloendothelial systems in the liver and the spleen could capture the nanoparticles. Then, various enzymes, including neutrophil myeloperoxidase, glucuronic acid or glycine, and metallothionein, would participate in degradation of the nanoparticles. Accordingly, we observed a continuous decrement of Cr2N in the major organs. Meanwhile, the exertion of Cr2N in the urine and feces was found (Fig. 6c). These results suggested the body-clearable nature of Cr2N.
 Fig. 6  (a) Hematological analysis. (The mice were intravenously injected with Cr2N and the blood was collected on the 1st, 3rd, 7th, and 14th day post injection. The normal range of blood index is shown in the inset.) (b) In vivo biodistribution of Cr2N and (c) Cr mass in feces and urine. 
In this work, we speculated that the Cr2N may be turned to Cr ions first and then excreted from the body. To verify this, the degradation of Cr2N in simulated body fluid (SBF) was carried out on 0.5 mg mL−1 Cr2N solution in SBF (Fig. 7). After being heated for 12 h at 37 °C, Cr2N solution in SBF was centrifuged to separate the Cr2N nanoparticles and the supernatant was harvested. Then, the absorbance of the supernatant was analyzed with a spectrophotometer. It is known that Cr3+ ions have a typical absorptive peak at 427 nm, as shown by the control of Cr(NO3)3 solution. The Cr2N-degraded supernatant showed distinct photoabsorption at 427 nm after 3, 6, and 12 h as well, suggesting that Cr2N could be degraded into Cr ions gradually. Hence, it is reasonable to understand that Cr2N is a body-clearable nanomaterial. The toxicity of Cr element was related to the chemical valence of Cr ions. Hexavalent chromium is poisonous and carcinogenic because it can reduce the enzymatic activity of glutathione reductase and then oxidize hemoglobin to methemoglobin, thus inhibiting the oxygen carrying capacity; while for the metallic Cr and Cr3+ ions, there is nearly no harmful effects to the human body and they are not considered toxic. Trivalent chromium (Cr3+) is a beneficial element for the human body and it plays an important role in the metabolism of glucose, insulin, and lipid. Trivalent chromium ion is an essential nutrient in trace amounts in humans and its nourishment often contains Cr3+ for chromium supplementation. In this work, the degradation of Cr2N into Cr3+ was confirmed, which could well explain the limited cytotoxicity, hematotoxicity, and tissue toxicity of Cr2N.
 Fig. 7  UV-Visible absorbance of Cr(NO3)3 solution and Cr2N degradation in simulated body fluid (SBF) for varied times. 
4. Conclusions
In this work, we selected Cr2N for the phototherapy for consideration of its body-degradable property and dual phototherapeutic outcome. Cr2N showed photoabsorption in a wide range from 300–1400 nm. Under NIR irradiation, the generation of ROS and heat by Cr2N was found to be able to facilitate a synergetic photothermal and photodynamic effect. The antitumor outcome of PTT was confirmed to be more effective than PDT in both in vitro cell tests and in vivo with a solid tumor. Cr2N had high biocompatibility in terms of low cytotoxicity, hematotoxicity, and tissue toxicity. Finally, Cr2N was found to be a body-clearable material that could be degraded in vivo and exerted via excrement. Thus, Cr2N was demonstrated to be a multifunctional photoactive material that could reduce the operative risk of phototherapy.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by Heilongjiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LH2019E046)
References
J. D. Shao, C. S. Ruan, H. H. Xie, Z. B. Li, H. Y. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700848 CrossRef .
Q. Q. Yu, Y. M. Han, X. C. Wang, C. Qin, D. Zhai, Z. F. Yi, J. Chang, Y. Xiao and C. T. Wu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2695 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, M. Y. Guo, J. M. Liu, J. Liu, H. G. Zhou, J. Y. Li, L. M. Wang, H. B. Liu, Y. L. Li, Y. L. Zhao and C. Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8436 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Peng, Y. Xiao, W. T. Li, Q. Yang, L. W. Tan, Y. P. Jia and Z. Y. Qian, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700891 CrossRef .
Q. Guan, L. Zhou, Y. Li, W. Li, S. Wang, C. Song and Y. Dong, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13304 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, L. Liu, S. Li, Y. Wan, J. Chen, S. Tian, Z. Huang, Y. Xiao, X. Cui and C. Xiang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12901 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, R. Xie, L. Feng, B. Liu, R. Lv, C. Li, S. Gai, F. He, P. Yang and J. Lin, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13144 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Yang, L. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Yan, J. Xu, R. Gao and P. Lei, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904836 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, F. Zhang, D. Shao, Z. Chang, L. Wang, H. Hu, X. Zheng, X. Li, F. Chen and Z. Tu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901690 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Q. L. Wang, S. Z. Geng, R. Lou, Q. W. Yin and W. R. Ye, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 102, 541 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Fan, B. Shen, W. B. Bu, X. P. Zheng, Q. J. He, Z. W. Cui, D. L. Ni, K. L. Zhao, S. J. Zhang and J. L. Shi, Biomaterials, 2015, 69, 89 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, M. J. Moon, S. P. Surendran and Y. Y. Jeong, Pharmaceutics, 2019, 11, 306 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chang, M. Lim, J. Goos, R. Qiao, Y. Y. Ng, F. M. Mansfeld, M. Jackson, T. P. Davis and M. Kavallaris, Front. Pharmacol., 2018, 9, 831 CrossRef .
K. Ni, T. Aung, S. Li, N. Fatuzzo, X. Liang and W. Lin, Chemistry, 2019, 5, 1892 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, L. Liu, R. Liang, Z. Luo, H. He, Z. Wu, H. Tian, M. Zheng, Y. Ma and L. Cai, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8633 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, J. Song, F. Zhou, A. R. Hoover, C. K. Murray, B. Zhou, L. Wang, J. Qu and W. R. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802157 CrossRef .
C. Y. Yang, W. C. Huang, Y. Gao, Z. Liu, N. An, W. Mu, Q. M. Pan, B. Yang, C. S. Guo and X. J. Han, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 386, 123961 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Li, C. S. Guo, M. Yan and S. Q. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 142 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Huang, H. X. Meng, Y. Gao, J. X. Wang, C. Y. Yang, D. Q. Liu, J. Liu, C. S. Guo, B. Yang and W. W. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18538 RSC .
Q. Zhang, W. C. Huang, C. Y. Yang, F. Wang, C. Q. Song, Y. Gao, Y. F. Qiu, M. Yan, B. Yang and C. S. Guo, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 2729 RSC .
W. Guo, C. S. Guo, N. N. Zheng, T. D. Sun and S. Q. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604157 CrossRef .
Y. J. Chen, S. H. Wang, Y. Hao, J. B. Pu, X. Jiang, L. F. Huang and L. P. Wang, Tribol. Int., 2020, 143, 106079 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. L. Liu, J. L. Li, J. W. Huang, J. Kong, Q. J. Wu and D. S. Xiong, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2020, 397, 126067 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ren, Y. Yan, L. Zeng, Z. Shi, A. Gong, P. Schaaf, D. Wang, J. Zhao, B. Zou and H. Yu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 1526 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Liu, K. L. Ai, J. H. Liu, M. Deng, Y. Y. He and L. H. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1353 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Hessel, V. P. Pattani, M. Rasch, M. G. Panthani, B. Koo, J. W. Tunnell and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2560 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Huang, S. H. Tang, X. L. Mu, Y. Dai, G. X. Chen, Z. Y. Zhou, F. X. Ruan, Z. L. Yang and N. F. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 6, 28 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, Y. N. Wu, G. N. Wang, J. W. Yi, C. L. Yu, Y. X. Huang, L. G. Sun, Y. L. Bao and Y. X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 5479 RSC .
M. Q. Chu, Y. X. Shao, J. L. Peng, X. Y. Dai, H. K. Li, Q. S. Wu and D. L. Shi, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 4078 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bao, W. Y. Yin, X. P. Zheng, X. Zhang, J. Yu, X. H. Dong, Y. Yong, F. P. Gao, L. Yan, Z. J. Gu and Y. L. Zhao, Biomaterials, 2016, 76, 11 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Wu, X. D. Shao, J. Z. Zhao and M. B. Wu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700113 CrossRef .
C. Song, C. Yang, F. Wang, D. Ding, Y. Gao, W. Guo, M. Yan, S. Liu and C. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 9015 RSC .
W. Huang, H. Meng, Y. Gao, J. Wang, C. Yang, D. Liu, J. Liu, C. Guo, B. Yang and W. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18538 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nj03943h‡ Yutuo Fu, Le Wang and Xiaoyu Chi contributed equally to this study.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Characterizations of Cr2N. (a) TEM image, (b) HR-TEM image, (c) EDS profile, (d–f) EDS mapping, (g) XRD pattern, (h) XPS spectra of Cr 3p and (i) N 1s.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Photoabsorption and photothermal behavior of Cr2N. (a) Powder absorbance, (b) absorbance of dispersion, (c) photothermal conversion curve (808 nm, 1.5 W cm−2), and (d) plot of cooling time versus −lnθ.	 
t = −τsln(θ)	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 3  Detection of photosensitive properties of Cr2N. (a) Photodegradation of DPBF and (b) first order kinetics behavior of DPBF degradation, (c) ESR spectra of TEMP-1O2 adduct spin-trapping, (d) fluorescent image of cells after different treatments (cells were stained with H2DCFDA, the bar inset is 200 μm).	 
O2 + e− → ˙O2−	(5)
˙O2− + H+ → ˙HO2	(6)
Cr2N* + h+ + OH− → ˙OH	(7)
˙O2− + ˙OH → 1O2 + OH−	(8)

 	Fig. 4  Cell viability of (a) HepG2 and (b) HUVEC after incubation with Cr2N for 24 h, (c) cell viability of HepG2 cells after different treatments (*P < 0.05, Student t test), (d) live–dead staining of cells after different treatments.	 

 	Fig. 5  
In vivo antitumor study. (a) Temperature changes at the tumor site, (b) relative tumor volume, (**P < 0.01, ANOVA, analysis of variance) (c) relative body weight, (d) representative photographs and (e) H&E staining images of tumors int different groups. (f) H&E staining images of major organs in the phototherapy group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Hematological analysis. (The mice were intravenously injected with Cr2N and the blood was collected on the 1st, 3rd, 7th, and 14th day post injection. The normal range of blood index is shown in the inset.) (b) In vivo biodistribution of Cr2N and (c) Cr mass in feces and urine.	 

 	Fig. 7  UV-Visible absorbance of Cr(NO3)3 solution and Cr2N degradation in simulated body fluid (SBF) for varied times.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nj03943h
‡ Yutuo Fu, Le Wang and Xiaoyu Chi contributed equally to this study.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020
