Insight into the tannic acid-based modular-assembly strategy based on inorganic–biological hybrid systems: a material suitability, loading effect, and ...  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00887G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00887G
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 3867-3876Insight into the tannic acid-based modular-assembly strategy based on inorganic–biological hybrid systems: a material suitability, loading effect, and biocompatibility study†

        
          
            Xiaoning 
            Ren‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Panqing 
            Yin‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Liang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiangjian 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wugen 
            Zhan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiaojiao 
            Niu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tong 
            Si
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dan 
            Wu
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Bo 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aCAS Key Laboratory of Quantitative Engineering Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: bo.wang@siat.ac.cn
bShenzhen Key Laboratory of Polymer Science and Technology, Guangdong Research Center for Interfacial Engineering of Functional Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China. E-mail: wudan@szu.edu.cn
Received 
      30th October 2020
    , Accepted 18th March 2021First published on 18th March 2021AbstractThe tannic acid (TA)-based modular-assembly strategy has exhibited great prospects for fabricating inorganic–biological hybrid systems recently, albeit the technique is still at the early stage of development. Herein, we investigate this strategy in different aspects, including the material suitability, loading effects, and biocompatibility. The successful functionalization of InP nanoparticles, Bi nanospheres, and g-C3N4 by TA–Fe3+ nanofilm and their subsequent modular assembly onto the yeast surface demonstrated the good versatility of this approach toward the different types of nanomaterials. The proper utilization of TA and nanomaterials in the surface-functionalization step was found to be critical for the material-loading effect, which could also be negatively impacted by the excessive amounts of TA and Fe3+ in the modular-assembly process. The biocompatibility of TA–Fe3+-functionalized nanomaterials to living cells could be optimized via adjusting the relative ratio of TA to nanomaterials during the functionalization. A balance between the material loading and biocompatibility could also be achieved via fine-tuning the TA concentration in the biohybrid studies. The presented deep insight into the TA-based modular-assembly strategy would allow the rational construction of inorganic–biological hybrid systems with a feasible pathway for the development of solar-to-chemical conversion technology, and also for the development of microbe-mediated drug delivery, tumor treatment, and environmental remediation.
1. Introduction
The inorganic–biological hybrid system has emerged as a powerful platform to integrate inorganic catalysts and natural systems for efficient chemical production.1 The goals of this integration include utilizing the catalytic properties of some biological systems (e.g., microorganisms) to improve the chemical selectivity and product diversity of inorganic catalysts, and enhancing the energy-harvesting capacity of biological systems through the properties of inorganic catalysts (e.g., photosensitivity).2 In recent years, several living cell-based biohybrid systems have been successfully constructed via different strategies. For example, the microbial detoxification mechanism and the surface display technique were utilized to grow cadmium sulfide (CdS) nanoparticles (NPs) on the surface of living bacteria.3–8 Cross-membrane transportation can be employed to bring ligand-tagged quantum dots (QDs) into the cell for in vivo energy delivery.9 In addition, electron shuttles have been used to transfer electrons from the photosensitized NPs into living cells to sustain the metabolism.10 However, these strategies also face various challenges in practice. For instance, nanomaterials fabricated via microbial detoxification are so far limited to heavy metal sulfides. Cross-membrane transportation is potentially only effective with particle sizes that lie within the level of QDs, and the transfer efficiency of electron shuttles would be affected by the long-distance transportation between cells and nanomaterials in an aqueous suspension.2,11,12 Furthermore, the range of microbes suitable for the construction of biohybrid system is also limited to a small number of species, most of which differ from common microorganisms in subtle aspects of cellular biochemistries, such as their specific energy delivery routes, particular enzymes, or uncommon metabolic pathways.13,14 Since it is unlikely that the rational design and selection of photosensitizers and microbes could be achieved based on the above-mentioned strategies, alternative approaches that are easy to perform and benign to living cells are thus needed to interface the living microbes with light-harvesting inorganic materials.
Very recently, the TA-based modular-assembly strategy has exhibited great prospects to build biohybrid systems.15,16 TA is a polyphenol with abundant o-hydroxyl functional groups, which means it can act as a multidentate ligand to coordinate with metal ions, such as Fe3+, to form a pentagonal ring chelate. A one-step assembly method based on the excellent adhesion and film-forming ability of TA–Fe3+ complex was reported in 2013.17 The surface of materials can be conformably coated with a TA–Fe3+ nanofilm via a relatively easy and rapid process, regardless of the composition, size, or shape of the particles. Quartz crystal microbalance analysis characterized that the TA–Fe3+ nanofilm could be formed in merely 10–20 s.18 Therefore, the TA–Fe3+coating can be applied for the surface functionalization of nanomaterials, resulting in various nanohybrid materials for application in catalysis, organic contaminants removal, and lithium-ion batteries.18–20 Furthermore, the TA–Fe3+ nanofilm is also beneficial to certain biological systems. TA–Fe3+ nanofilm was coated on three types of mammalian cells and it was found that it could effectively protect the cells against damage caused by either UV irradiation or cytotoxic compounds.21 Additionally, the proliferation rate of cells could be modulated via programming the formation and degradation of the TA–Fe3+ nanofilm, a process that mimicked the sporulation and germination of the natural proliferation cycle. More importantly, the TA–Fe3+ film could enhance the adhesion of functional materials onto the surface of various templates, which is a key step toward the modular assembling of superstructure composites on living cells.16 Based on this technique, TA-functionalized inorganic photosensitizer indium phosphide (InP) was successfully assembled on the surface of the widely used yeast strain Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and was then utilized for light-driven fine chemical production.22 To assist the assembly process, a biocompatible polymer poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH, which was rich in –NH2 groups) was applied to form a positively charged polymer layer on the yeast cell surface. A number of earlier studies also demonstrated that the enwrapping of polyelectrolyte-treated yeast cells with inorganic nanomaterials did not affect the viability of cells.23–25 In this milestone study, InP NPs were selected owing to their proper bandgap (Eg = 1.34 eV), excellent stability to oxygen, and good compatibility to biological system. As one of the best microbial factories, S. cerevisiae was chosen owing to its great potential for the production of various valuable chemicals through synthetic biology engineering.23,24 The TA–Fe3+-functionalized InP adhered to the PAH-treated surface of the yeast cells, while maintaining its excellent photosensitizing property and achieving energy transfer.22 Compared to other methods used in the construction of biohybrid systems, the modular-assembly approach has demonstrated promising versatility in the construction of inorganic–biological composites, as a wide range of existing microbial species and functional nanomaterials can be rationally selected to carry out the fabrication. In addition to the solar-to-chemical energy conversion, such rationally designed biohybrids would also possess potential in microbe-mediated drug delivery, tumor treatment, and environmental remediation. However, studies on the TA-based modular-assembly strategy are still at an early stage of development, in which the feasibility of assembling and the performance of the resultant composites require further in-depth investigation.
In this study, we rationally included Bi nanospheres and g-C3N4 in addition to InP, because Bi nanospheres (NSs) have exhibited good photocatalytic performance in recent studies,26–30 yet their biocompatibility in cell-based biohybrid systems has not been fully explored yet, while g-C3N4 is regarded as one of the most promising metal-free photocatalysts that has great potential for future applications in living cells-related systems.31–33 We systematically explored and tested the versatility of this TA-based modular-assembly strategy to prepare different material–microbial hybrid systems in three important aspects: (1) the suitability of different inorganic nanomaterials for TA–Fe3+ functionalization and cell surface assembly; (2) the key factors affecting the material loading on individual cells, and (3) the biocompatibility of TA–Fe3+-functionalized materials to living cells.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Materials synthesis
InP NPs (Fig. S1, ESI†) were obtained from commercial InP powder (3–20 mesh, 99.998% trace metals basis, Aladdin, China) after mechanical ball-milling treatment by a cell disrupter (Mini-Beadbeater-96, BioSpec, USA) for 30 min. Bi NSs were prepared through a solvothermal method. Typically, 2.0 mmol of Bi(NO3)·5H2O and 10.0 mmol of anhydrous citric acid were mixed in 25 mL of ethylene glycol. After stirring for 30 min, the mixture was transferred into a 50 mL Teflon-lined steel autoclave and maintained at 180 °C for 24 h. The product was washed with ethanol and then freeze-dried for use. The yellow g-C3N4 was synthesized by calcinating 5.0 g of urea to 550 °C for 4 h at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1.
2.2 Preparation of TA–Fe3+-functionalized nanomaterials (TA–Fe3+/NM)
For the preparation of TA–Fe3+/NM (NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4), the NM suspension (5 mL, 10 mg mL−1 aq.), FeCl3·6H2O (0.1 mL, 5 mg mL−1, aq.), and TA (50 μL, 40 mg mL−1, aq.) were mixed. The pH of this mixture was adjusted to 6.0 using Tris buffer (0.1 M, pH 8.0).22 After washing with water and ethanol, the TA–Fe3+/NM were suspended in Delft medium (pH 6.0, Table S1, ESI†), sterilized via UV irradiation for 12 h, and adjusted to the desired OD values for the different experimental conditions. The concentration of NM suspension, FeCl3·6H2O, and TA were changed for comparison, respectively, with similar preparation procedures.
2.3 Preparation of the TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids
The yeast cells (S. cerevisiae) were inoculated in YPD medium (Table S2, ESI†) at 30 °C for 24 h. After washing with phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 6.0, Vazyme, China), the collected yeast cells were resuspended in Delft medium at a density of OD600 = 3.0. The PAH (MW ∼ 17500, Product Number 283215, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was added to the cell suspension with a final concentration of 0.1 mg mL−1. After incubation at 30 °C for 30 min, the suspension was washed with PBS and resuspended in Delft medium at a density of OD600 = 2.0. The above-mentioned suspensions of PAH-treated yeast cells and TA–Fe3+/NM (TA–Fe3+/InP NPs, TA–Fe3+/Bi NSs or TA–Fe3+/g-C3N4) were mixed at a volume ratio of 1:1 with defined OD600 values. After incubation at 30 °C for 30 min, the mixture was aliquoted and cultured in a multi-channel thermal shaker (TCS10, Ruicheng, China) at 30 °C.
2.4 Characterization
X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a SmartLab X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan). Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were measured using a Nicolet 670 FT-IR spectrometer (Thomas Nicolet, Waltham, USA). Zeta-potential and particle-size measurements were carried out in water using a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern, UK). The morphology of the samples was characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, FEI Tecnai Spirit G2 BioTWIN, USA) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi, Japan) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), respectively. The biohybrid samples were fixed by glutaraldehyde (4% in PBS, pH 6.0) and dehydrated with gradient ethanol for SEM observation. The fixed biohybrid samples were sequentially dehydrated by acetone, embedded in hardened resin (Spurr Low Viscosity Embedding Kit, Electron Microscopy Sciences, USA), and then sectioned into 70 nm samples for TEM observation.
2.5 Calculation of the material loading over the TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast
The material loading of NM (NM%, mol per cell) in TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast was calculated as follows:  where mNM is the metal content (mol mL−1) and Nyeast is the cell number (cell per mL) in the TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast samples. The TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast pellet was digested by concentrated HNO3 for 12 h. After dilution and filtration, the mM in the liquid supernatant was quantified by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, Optima 7000DV, PerkinElmer, USA). For measuring the Nyeast of the TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids in each sample, 1 mL of suspension was mixed with 1 mL of PBS (pH 6) and filtered through a membrane filter (0.48 μm) to remove any large particles. The filtered suspension was dispensed into the wells of a 96-well plate in triplicate and used for cell counting by flow cytometry (FACSCelesta™ Catalog Number 660345, BD Biosciences, USA). The instrument settings were as the following: flow rate, 30 μL min−1; measurement time, 1 min; FSC, 390; SSC, 238; PI, 424; FITC, 340. The flow cytometry measurements were optimized to differentiate the nanomaterials and cells for accurate cell counting.
2.6 Study of the biocompatibility
To obtain the cell growth profile, 200 μL of the biohybrid sample was collected from the reaction mixture as a function of time and transferred to 96-well plates for flow cytometry-based cell counting. To further understand the viabilities of the yeast cells in different biohybrid systems, the samples were stained with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and propidium iodide (PI) and analyzed by flow cytometry according to the protocol of the testing kit (LIVE/DEAD™ Yeast Viability Kit, ThermoFisher). To evaluate the cell respiration activity, 1 mL of biohybrid suspension was collected from the reaction mixtures, pelleted via centrifugation, and then resuspended in an aqueous mixture of 500 μL of 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC, 1% w/v) and 500 μL of glucose (1% w/v). After incubation at 30 °C for 24 h, 1 mL of acetone was added to the above mixture and the OD485 of the supernatant was measured by UV/vis spectrometry (UV8000, Metash, China). To measure the leakage of the cellular contents, 1 mL of biohybrid suspension was pelleted via centrifugation (12000g, 2 min), and the DNA and RNA concentrations in the supernatant were measured by a microvolume spectrophotometer (NanoDrop 2000C, Thermo Fisher, USA). Potassium ions (K+) were quantified by ICP-OES. (Optima 7000DV, PerkinElmer, USA). Intracellular NAD levels were quantified with an NAD Quantification Kit (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). In brief, the biohybrid systems of the three nanomaterials were prepared and cultured with or without light irradiation for 1 h (light from a higher power LED lamp source, PLS-LED100C, Beijing Perfectlight Technology Co., Ltd.), and the intracellular total NAD (NADTotal), including both the oxidized (NAD+) and the reduced (NADH) forms, were extracted and quantified according to the kit's protocol. The NADH was quantified using the same protocol after heating small portions of these samples at 60 °C for 30 min.
3. Results and discussion
The TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids were prepared by the modular assembly of TA–Fe3+ surface-functionalized nanomaterials and PAH-treated yeast cells, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Initially, the free TA molecules could rapidly coordinate with Fe3+ in aqueous solutions to form a TA–Fe3+ chelate complex. This complex could form a TA–Fe3+ nanofilm and adhere to the surface of nanomaterials (Step 1).17 Second, the surface charge of yeast cells was inverted from negative to positive via PAH treatment (Step 2). Finally, the surface-functionalized nanomaterials (TA–Fe3+/NM) were mixed with positively charged yeast cells to facilitate the modular assembly, resulting in the formation of TA–Fe3+/NM/Yeast biohybrids (Step 3).
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram for the preparation of TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids. NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4. 
3.1 Material feasibility for TA–Fe3+ functionalization
The XRD patterns of InP NPs, Bi NSs, and g-C3N4 could be perfectly indexed to the standard diffraction peaks of zinc blende InP (JCPDS 32-0452), rhombohedral Bi (JCPDS 44-1246), and planar g-C3N4 (JCPDS 87-1526), respectively (Fig. 2A–C). The highly crystallite structures featured strong and sharp reflection peaks without additional impurity peaks observed for their TA–Fe3+/NM counterparts, indicating that the TA–Fe3+ surface functionalization had little effect on the crystal structures of the nanomaterials. The surface information before and after functionalization were further provided by the FT-IR spectra. For the spectral profile of the InP NPs (Fig. 2D), the peaks at 3450 and 1605 cm−1 were assigned to νO–H and νCC, respectively, owing to the residual H2O and organics introduced in the preparation process. Comparatively, additional peaks located at 1400, 1100, and 585 cm−1 were observed for TA–Fe3+/InP NPs, which could be assigned to the characteristic peaks of rO–H, νC–O, and νFe–O for the TA–Fe3+ compound.34 Similarly, the peaks associated with the TA–Fe3+ compound could also be found for TA–Fe3+/Bi NSs compared with the compound before surface functionalization (Fig. 2E). These results suggest a successful introduction of TA–Fe3+ into the TA–Fe3+/InP and TA–Fe3+/Bi NSs compounds. However, no obvious differences could be found for g-C3N4 before and after surface functionalization, which was maybe due to the similar peak domains of the C–N(–C)–C bonds between the TA–Fe3+ compound and non-metal g-C3N4.35 The TA–Fe3+/NMs had higher relative intensities of O 1s and C 1s peaks than the native NMs did in the XPS etching images (Fig. 2G–I and Table S3, ESI†), which indicated the adherence of TA–Fe3+ on the surface of the NMs in TA–Fe3+/NMs. However, the Fe 2p peak was not evident in TA–Fe3+/NMs, which may be due to the ultralow content of Fe3+ for XPS characterization. The Fe 2p peaks were evident in the spectra of the InP NPs and TA–Fe3+/InP NPs. These were likely introduced in the material preparation process (InP powder milled with steel balls). To help confirm the presence of Fe3+, ICP/OES characterization was conducted, and the results (Fig. S2, ESI†) showed a slight difference in Fe content between TA–Fe3+/NMs (2.5 × 10−4 g(Fe) g(M)−1) and the NMs (0 g(Fe) g(M)−1), and the ultralow content of Fe3+ in TA–Fe3+/NMs corresponded to the low signal intensities of the Fe 2p peak in the XPS results.
 Fig. 2  Characterizations of the TA–Fe3+-functionalized nanomaterials: (A–C) XRD patterns of NM and TA–Fe3+/NM; (D–F) FT-IR spectra of TA–Fe3+ compound, NM, and TA–Fe3+/NM; (G–I) XPS etching images of NM and TA–Fe3+/NM. NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4. 
The morphologies of the TA–Fe3+-functionalized TA–Fe3+/NMs were further characterized by TEM images (Fig. 3). The TA–Fe3+/InP NPs appeared as irregular nanoparticles with a translucent thin layer on their surface (Fig. 3A–C). Moreover, the distributions of Fe and C elements had a wider outline than those of In and P elemental distributions in the EDS mappings, as marked by the dashed lines (Fig. 3D). Besides, the profiles of In and P possesses a clear boundary, whereas those of Fe and C were misty. These observations suggest that the transparent thin layer on InP NPs was the TA–Fe3+ nanofilm. Similar observations also were made in the TA–Fe3+/Bi NSs (Fig. 3E–H) and TA–Fe3+/g-C3N4 (Fig. 3I–L), whereby a layer of translucent thin film on the surface of nanomaterials was evident in the TEM images. The elements that originated from the bulk material (e.g., Bi of TA–Fe3+/Bi NSs, and C and N of TA–Fe3+/g-C3N4) resulted in well-resolved EDS elemental mappings that clearly reflected the morphology of the corresponding nanoparticles, while those that originated from the TA–Fe3+ nanofilm (C, O, and Fe) featured an outline without a clear border, with shapes slightly larger than those of the bulk material. These results provide strong evidence for the successful deposition of TA–Fe3+ nanofilm on the surface of the nanomaterials. Particularly, the loading of TA–Fe3+ was very low in TA–Fe3+/g-C3N4, which was evident in both the TEM and EDS mapping images in Fig. 3L. The transparent TA–Fe3+ layer was extremely thin, and so its signal in EDS mapping was too weak. This may be caused by the ultrathin sheet structure and distinct surface character of g-C3N4, which was harder to adhere to than those of the InP NPs and Bi NSs. However, some other evidence still showed the successful adherence of TA–Fe3+ on g-C3N4. In the new added XPS etching images, TA–Fe3+/g-C3N4 possessed higher C 1s and O 1s peaks than the g-C3N4; while in the ICP/OES results, there was a uniform rise in Fe content in all three materials after TA–Fe3+ functionalization. According to EDS elemental analysis diagram of TA–Fe3+/g-C3N4 in Fig. 3L, atomic ratio of C and N was around 8:1, which was much higher than that of g-C3N4 (3:4), while the atomic percentage of O was as high as 79.45%, accompanied with 1.28% Fe, all of which indicated the successful adherence of TA–Fe3+ on g-C3N4.
 Fig. 3  TEM and EDS mapping images of the TA–Fe3+-functionalized nanomaterials: (A–C) TEM and (D) EDS mapping of TA–Fe3+/InP NPs; (E–G) TEM and (H) EDS mapping of TA–Fe3+/Bi NSs; (I–K) TEM and (L) EDS mapping of TA–Fe3+/g-C3N4. 
3.2 Material suitability for modular assembly on yeast cells
The electrostatic interactions between nanomaterials and the cell surface play a vital role in modular assembly.16,22 As shown in Fig. 4A, the surface potentials of TA–Fe3+/InP NPs, TA–Fe3+/Bi NSs, and TA–Fe3+/g-C3N4 were −46.0, −49.6, and −42.8 mV, respectively, which were more negative than their counterpart before TA–Fe3+ functionalization. The native yeast cells were also negatively charged with a surface potential of −29.63 mV. In order to facilitate the interactions to TA–Fe3+/NM, the yeast cells were treated with PAH (rich in –NH2) to form a positively charged polymer layer on the cell surface. As expected, the surface of the cell was successfully inverted to a positive charge (25.70 mV, Fig. 4B). As a result, the electrostatic attraction spontaneously drives the yeast cells and TA–Fe3+/NM to be in close contact upon mixing. Moreover, Fe–O coordination bonds were formed by the introduction of Fe3+ in to the modular-assembly process.16,22 These bonds serve to promote interparticle locking between individual nanoparticles of TA–Fe3+/NM and interfacial locking between TA–Fe3+/NM and the yeast cell surface, both of which eventually assist in the formation of TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids.
 Fig. 4  Surface potentials of the (A) nanomaterials and (B) yeast cells before and after the TA–Fe3+ functionalization and PAH treatment, respectively. NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs or g-C3N4. 
The morphology of TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids was further characterized by SEM observation (Fig. 5). The SEM images clearly indicate that the TA–Fe3+/NM can attach to the surface of yeast cells. This close contact was also confirmed by the corresponding TEM images of thin-sectioned yeast cells (insets in Fig. 5A and C). The C signals from the EDS mapping give the morphological profile of yeast cells. In addition, the In, Bi, and N were in good agreement with the localization patterns of the InP NPs, Bi NSs, and g-C3N4 observed from their corresponding SEM images, respectively. Despite the nanomaterials having different chemical compositions (e.g., metal phosphide InP, metallic Bi, and non-metallic g-C3N4), and various morphologies (NPs, NSs and nanosheets), the biohybrids could be successfully attained, demonstrating the versatility of the modular-assembly method for the biohybrids fabrication.
 Fig. 5  Characterizations of the TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids. SEM images for: (A) TA–Fe3+/InP/yeast, (C) TA–Fe3+/Bi/yeast, and (E) TA–Fe3+/g-C3N4/yeast, and (B, D and F) corresponding EDS mappings. (insets: corresponding TEM images of the thin-sectioned samples). NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4. 
3.3 Factors affecting the material loading of the biohybrids
To investigate the key factors affecting the material loading of the TA–Fe3+/NM/yeasts, orthogonal experiments were performed on TA, M, OD, Fe3+, where TA and M means the TA and M concentrations in the TA–Fe3+/NM preparation, OD and Fe3+ means the OD ratio of functionalized nanomaterials to yeast cells and the Fe3+ concentration in material–yeast hybridization process, respectively. The conditions are summarized in Table S5 (ESI†). The surface-functionalized nanomaterials had a significant influence on the final state of the inorganic–biological hybrids. Thus, the loading effect of TA–Fe3+/NM in terms of the different weight ratios of TA/NM (mg:mg) on the morphology of the biohybrids was investigated by SEM observation (Fig. 6). For convenience, the OD ratio (TA–Fe3+/NM to cell and Fe3+ concentration) and Fe3+ concentration were adjusted to 1:2 and 1%, respectively. With the TA/NM = (2 mg:50 mg), the TA–Fe3+/NM could efficiently cover the surface of the yeast cells. When increasing the amount of TA (TA/NM = 40 mg:50 mg), no distinct differences in the coverage of TA–Fe3+/NM on the yeast cell were observed, suggesting that an excess amount of TA did not enhance the loading amount of nanomaterials. However, when further decreasing the amount of NM (TA/NM = 40 mg:10 mg), the coverage domain of TA–Fe3+/NM on the yeast cell remarkably decreased, indicating that a higher amount of NM to TA in the functionalization step could enhance the loading amount of nanomaterials on the TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids.
 Fig. 6  SEM images of the TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids prepared under different conditions: (A–F) TA–Fe3+/InP/yeast, (G–L) TA–Fe3+/Bi/yeast and (M–R) biohybrids assembled with different TA/NM weight ratios. TA/NM = (2 mg:50 mg) for (A, B, G, H, N, and M), TA/NM = (40 mg:50 mg) for (C, D, I, J, O, and P) and TA/NM = (40 mg:10 mg) for (E, F, K, L, Q and R). NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4. 
In the modular-assembly process, modifying the OD ratio and the Fe3+ concentration can affect the Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids. Thus, the material loading over TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast (NM%) was also semi-quantified (Fig. 7). Accurate cell counting was ensured by flow cytometry measurement, which was optimized to differentiate the nanomaterials and cells (Fig. S3, ESI†). Due to the quantification difficulty for non-metal g-C3N4 by ICP-OES, the TA–Fe3+/g-C3N4/Yeast biohybrids were excluded from the analysis. The results revealed that the overall NM% lay within the range of 10–60 × 10−14 mol per cell. When a higher initial OD of the TA–Fe3+/NM suspension (OD ratio = 1:1) was applied, a higher NM% was achieved (Fig. 7B and D), which was reasonable since more nanomaterials were involved in the modular-assembly process under this condition. The generally lower loading ratio under the TA/NM = 40:50 condition than that under the TA/NM = 2:50 condition revealed that an excess amount of TA may negatively affect the material loading. More studies are needed to reveal the underlying mechanisms of this. In terms of the effect of Fe3+ on the material loading, a negative correlation was established when a high Fe3+ concentration (10% v/v) was used in the TA/NM = 40:50 conditions, in which an excess amount of TA was used. Since the presence of free TA and Fe3+ results in the rapid formation of TA–Fe3+ complexes, an increased Fe3+ concentration likely leads to the deposition of excessive TA–Fe3+ complexes on the surface of yeast cells, which would eventually impact the nanomaterial loading.
 Fig. 7  Nanomaterial loading efficiency calculated under different experimental conditions. Loading efficiency of functionalized (A) InP NPs and (B) Bi NSs on yeast cells, respectively. NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4. 
3.4 Investigation of the biocompatibility
The biocompatibility at the biotic–abiotic interface is a serious consideration when combining living cells with inorganic nanomaterials. Therefore, the viability of yeast cells in the TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids was studied. Cells incubated without nanomaterials were used as the control group. Under the TA/NM = (2 mg:50 mg) and TA/NM = (40 mg:50 mg) conditions, the increase in cell density (× 106 cells per mL) for all biohybrids was slower than that of the control (Fig. 8A and B), whereas the cell growth was not affected when the highest TA/NM ratio (40 mg:10 mg) was applied (Fig. 8C). The FITC/PI staining and flow cytometry analysis revealed that, after 48 h of culture, the relative viabilities of the yeast cells under most of the experimental conditions were above 90%, and some of them even exceeded 95% (Fig. S4, ESI†). The only exception was that of the Bi NCs, which gave rise to relative viabilities of 89% and 91% (Fig. S4D, ESI†). These results indicate that a higher TA/NM ratio can lead to better biosafety for the system, and that Bi NSs likely affected the viability of yeast cells to a greater extent than InP NPs did and g-C3N4 did. This was also supported by the results from the DNA/RNA leakage study, where the group with the highest TA/NM had the lowest level of leakage (Fig. 8D). Since the genetic materials (DNA and RNA) are presented in the nucleus and cytoplasm of living cells, the presence of them in extracellular space indicates a compromised integrity of the cell membrane. Therefore, the lower level of DNA/RNA detected in the samples with higher TA:NM ratios implied a positive effect of a higher TA:NM ratio for biohybrid fabrication. The respiration assay is based on the conversion of TTC, a colorless water-soluble tetrazolium salt, into a water-insoluble red formazan, by the mitochondrial dehydrogenases within viable cells.36 In good agreement with the results presented in Fig. S4 (ESI†), a significantly lower respiration rate was observed for the Bi group (Fig. 8E), suggesting that the biosafety of Bi NSs was less than that of the InP NPs and g-C3N4. Furthermore, g-C3N4 possessed comparable respiration rates with the control group, demonstrating its promising feasibility for biohybrid construction with excellent biocompatibility.37,38 Viable yeast cells maintain an optimal cytosolic potassium (K+) concentration (200–300 mM) via the proper functioning of various ion transporters on the cell membrane.39 Since the biotic–abiotic interface is located on the cell membrane, the integrity of cell membrane was also studied via measuring the concentration of leaked potassium ions (K+)40 after the fabrication of the biohybrids. No distinct difference in K+ leakage was identified between the groups using different nanomaterials and preparation conditions (Fig. 8F).
 Fig. 8  Results of the biocompatibility assays: (A–C) cell densities as a function of time for biohybrids prepared with different weight ratios of TA/NM; (D) relative leakage of intracellular DNA and RNA, (E) relative respiration rates, and (F) relative leakage of intracellular K+ after 48 h of incubation for biohybrids prepared with different weight ratios of TA/NM. NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4. 
The light-energy-conversion abilities of these biohybrid systems were explored via measuring the intracellular total NAD and NADH levels, since the cycling of this coenzyme plays a vital role in cellular energy conversion and metabolism.27 The intracellular total NAD in the biohybrids of InP NPs and g-C3N4 showed a minor increase after light irradiation (Fig. S5C, ESI†). The same treatment resulted in a decrease in intracellular total NAD in the biohybrid of Bi NSs (Fig. S5C, ESI†), which was in good agreement with the decreased biocompatibility of this material, as also confirmed in the other assays. Although the absorbance of the light-irradiated Bi NSs biohybrid sample showed a minor increase over that of the dark sample (Fig. S5A, ESI†), their intracellular NADH levels were unable to be quantified due to their low absorbance (Fig. S5B, ESI†). Light irradiation on the other two biohybrids resulted in a substantial increase in intracellular NADH levels, and the effect of InP NPs was more evident than that on g-C3N4 (Fig. S5B, ESI†). The evidence thus suggests that the light energy had been transformed by the nanomaterials, most likely into free electrons, and then subsequently utilized by yeast cells to supply the formation of intracellular NADH. Therefore, the modular-assembly strategy and nanomaterials are considered relatively safe to the cell membrane integrity. According to the above results, the biocompatibility and nanomaterial loading effects of the TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids depended on multiple factors and the optimization of a single factor might not result in the best outcome. Therefore, striking a balance between the appropriate material loadings and reasonable biocompatibility should be aimed for via careful selection of the reaction conditions, especially the amount of TA used in the biohybrid assembly and the toxicity of the nanomaterials.
4. Conclusions
In summary, a promising strategy for fabricating an inorganic–biological hybrid system based on TA–Fe3+ surface functionalization and modular assembly was systematically evaluated for a number of different aspects, including material suitability, loading effects, and biocompatibility. The successful surface functionalization of InP NPs, Bi NSs, and g-C3N4 by the TA–Fe3+ nanofilm and the subsequent modular assembly onto the surface of yeast cells demonstrated the good versatility of this approach toward different types of nanomaterials. Several important factors that could potentially affect the material-loading efficiencies were investigated. It was revealed that the proper utilization of TA and a relatively higher quantity of nanomaterials in the surface-functionalization step are critical for the material loading. The biocompatibility of TA–Fe3+/NM to the living cells is material dependent, which could also be optimized via adjusting the relative ratio of TA to nanomaterials during the functionalization process. More importantly, a balance between the loading of nanomaterials and the biocompatibility can be achieved via fine-tuning the TA concentration in the biohybrid systems. Overall, this study provides a deep insight into the TA–Fe3+-based modular-assembly strategy for the construction of inorganic–biological hybrid systems. With more in-depth investigations carried out in the future, it could be expected that more feasible strategies for constructing such systems will be established, which could significantly drive the development and expansion of the solar-to-chemical conversion based on inorganic–biological hybrid systems.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare they have no conflicts of interests.
Acknowledgements
Dr Bo Wang thanks to the funding support from the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2020YFA0907400), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 22008252), and CAS Key Laboratory of Quantitative Engineering Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. The authors would like to thank Niu Ruiwen from Shiyanjia Lab (http://www.shiyanjia.com) for the TEM measurement.
References
S. Cestellos-Blanco, H. Zhang, J. M. Kim, Y. Shen and P. Yang, Photosynthetic semiconductor biohybrids for solar-driven biocatalysis, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 234–240 CrossRef .
N. Kornienko, J. Z. Zhang, K. K. Sakimoto, P. Yang and E. Reisner, Interfacing nature's catalytic machinery with synthetic materials for semi-artificial photosynthesis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 890–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Sakimoto, A. B. Wong and P. Yang, Self-photosensitization of nonphotosynthetic bacteria for solar-to-chemical production, Science, 2016, 351, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, C. Zeng, K. H. Chu, D. Wu, H. Y. Yip, L. Ye and P. K. Wong, Enhanced biological hydrogen production from Escherichia coli with surface precipitated cadmium sulfide nanoparticles, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700611 CrossRef .
W. Wei, P. Sun, Z. Li, K. Song, W. Su, B. Wang, Y. Liu and J. Zhao, A surface-display biohybrid approach to light-driven hydrogen production in air, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaap9253 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, K. Xiao, Z. Jiang, J. Wang, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, Biohybrid photoheterotrophic metabolism for significant enhancement of biological nitrogen fixation in pure microbial cultures, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2185–2191 RSC .
M. Chen, X. Zhou, Y. Yu, X. Liu, R. J. Zeng, S. Zhou and Z. He, Light-driven nitrous oxide production via autotrophic denitrification by self-photosensitized Thiobacillus denitrificans, Environ. Int., 2019, 127, 353–360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, J. Yu, Y. Zhang, M. Chen, X. Liu, S. Zhou and Z. He, Light-driven carbon dioxide reduction to methane by Methanosarcina barkeri-CdS biohybrid, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117916 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, J. R. Bertram, C. Eckert, R. R. Bommareddy, R. Pater, A. Conradie, S. Bryan and P. Nagpal, Nanorg microbial factories: light-driven renewable biochemical synthesis using quantum dot-bacteria nanobiohybrids, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10272–10282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Honda, H. Hagiwara, S. Ida and T. Ishihara, Application to photocatalytic H2 production of a whole-cell reaction by recombinant Escherichia coli cells expressing [FeFe]-hydrogenase and maturases genes, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 8177–8180 CrossRef .
S. Cestellos-Blanco, H. Zhang, J. M. Kim and Y. Shen, P. Yang. Photosynthetic semiconductor biohybrids for solar-driven biocatalysis, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 245–255 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Sakimoto, N. Kornienko, S. Cestellos-Blanco, J. Lim, C. Liu and P. Yang, Physical biology of the materials–microorganism interface, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1978–1985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Sakimoto, N. Kornienko and P. Yang, Cyborgian material design for solar fuel production: The emerging photosynthetic biohybrid systems, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 476–481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Nangle, K. K. Sakimoto, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Biological-inorganic hybrid systems as a generalized platform for chemical production, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2017, 41, 107–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, B. L. Tardy, A. J. Christofferson, Y. Dai, J. J. Richardson, W. Zhu, M. Hu, Y. Ju, J. Cui, R. R. Dagastine, I. Yarovsky and F. Caruso, Modular assembly of superstructures from polyphenol-functionalized building blocks, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1105–1111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, T. Suma, J. J. Richardson and H. Ejima, Modular assembly of biomaterials using polyphenols as building blocks, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 5, 5578–5596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ejima, J. J. Richardson, K. Liang, J. P. Best, M. P. Koeverden, G. K. Such, J. Cui and F. Caruso, One-step assembly of coordination complexes for versatile film and particle engineering, Science, 2013, 341, 154–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, Z. Yao, Z. Yang, X. Ma, J. Wang and C. Y. Tang, A one-step rapid assembly of thin film coating using green coordination complexes for enhanced removal of trace organic contaminants by membranes, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 12638–12643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, C. Duan, J. Guo, N. Zhao and J. Xu, Facile in situ synthesis of silver nanoparticles on boron nitride nanosheets with enhanced catalytic performance, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16663–16669 RSC .
G. Zhang, Y. Yang, T. Zhang, D. Xu, Z. Lei, C. Wang, G. Liu and Y. Deng, FeIII chelated organic anode with ultrahigh rate performance and ultra-long cycling stability for lithium-ion batteries, Energy Stor. Mater., 2020, 24, 432–438 CrossRef .
J. Lee, H. Cho, J. Choi, D. Kim, D. Hong, J. H. Park, S. H. Yang and I. S. Choi, Chemical sporulation and germination: cytoprotective nanocoating of individual mammalian cells with a degradable tannic acid–FeIII complex, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18918–18922 RSC .
J. Guo, M. Suástegu, K. K. Sakimoto, V. M. Moody, G. Xiao, D. G. Nocera and N. S. Joshi, Light-driven fine chemical production in yeast biohybrids, Science, 2018, 362, 813–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, P. Liu, W. Jiang, H. Pan, X. Xu and R. Tang, Yeast cells with an artificial mineral shell: protection and modification of living cells by biomimetic mineralization, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3560–3564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, K. B. Lee, B. Kong, J. H. Kim, H. S. Kim and I. S. Choi, Biomimetic encapsulation of individual cells with silica, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9160–9163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Zamaleeva, I. R. Sharipova, A. V. Porfireva, G. A. Evtugyn and R. F. Fakhrullin, Polyelectrolyte-mediated assembly of multiwalled carbon nanotubes on living yeast cells, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2671–2679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Celia and D. Thompson, The renaissance of yeasts as microbial factories in the modern age of biomanufacturing, Yeast, 2019, 36, 685–700 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yu, Y. J. Zhou, M. Huang, Q. Liu, R. Pereira, F. David and J. Nielsen, Reprogramming yeast metabolism from alcoholic fermentation to lipogenesis, Cell, 2018, 174, 1549–1558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, M. Lin, J. Long, Z. Zhang, H. Lin, J. C. Wu and X. Wang, Monolayered Bi2WO6 nanosheets mimicking heterojunction interface with open surfaces for photocatalysis, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 CAS .
D. Wu, L. Ye, H. Y. Yip and P. K. Wong, Organic-free synthesis of {001} facet dominated BiOBr nanosheets for selective photoreduction of CO2 to CO, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 265–271 RSC .
J. Zhao, Q. Han, J. Zhu, X. Wu and X. Wang, Synthesis of Bi nanowire networks and their superior photocatalytic activity for Cr(VI) reduction, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10062–10070 RSC .
X. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Fe-g-C3N4-catalyzed oxidation of benzene to phenol using hydrogen peroxide and visible light, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11658–11659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Don, Z. Zhao, T. Xiong, Z. Ni, W. Zhang, Y. Sun and W. K. Ho, In situ construction of g-C3N4/g-C3N4 metal-free heterojunction for enhanced visible-light photocatalysis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11392–11401 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yan, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Photodegradation performance of g-C3N4 fabricated by directly heating melamine, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10397–10401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. D'Antonio, A. Wladimirsky, D. Palacios, L. Coggiolaa, A. C. González-Baró, E. J. Baran and R. C. Mercader, Spectroscopic investigations of iron(II) and iron(III) oxalates, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2009, 20, 445–450 CrossRef .
N. Meng, J. Ren, Y. Liu, Y. Huang, T. Petit and B. Zhang, Engineering oxygen-containing and amino groups into two-dimensional atomically-thin porous polymeric carbon nitrogen for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 566–571 RSC .

          L. A. Castro-Concha, R. M. Escobedo and M. L. de Miranda-Ham. Measurement of cell viability in in vitro cultures, Plant Cell Culture Protocols, Humana Press,  2006, pp. 71–76 Search PubMed .
M. Xu, P. L. Tremblay, L. Jiang and T. Zhang, Stimulating bioplastic production with light energy by coupling Ralstonia eutropha with the photocatalyst graphitic carbon nitride, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 2392–2400 RSC .
P. L. Tremblay, M. Xu, Y. Chen and T. Zhang, Nonmetallic abiotic-biological hybrid photocatalyst for visible water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction, iScience, 2020, 23, 100784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Borovikova, P. Herynkova, A. Rapoport and H. Sychrova, Potassium uptake system Trk2 is crucial for yeast cell viability during anhydrobiosis, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 2014, 350, 28–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, C. Hu and J. Qu, Photocatalytic decomposition of acetaldehyde and Escherichia coli using NiO/SrBi2O4 under visible light irradiation, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 69, 17–23 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0qm00887g‡ Equal contribution.This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

 		 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram for the preparation of TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids. NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characterizations of the TA–Fe3+-functionalized nanomaterials: (A–C) XRD patterns of NM and TA–Fe3+/NM; (D–F) FT-IR spectra of TA–Fe3+ compound, NM, and TA–Fe3+/NM; (G–I) XPS etching images of NM and TA–Fe3+/NM. NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM and EDS mapping images of the TA–Fe3+-functionalized nanomaterials: (A–C) TEM and (D) EDS mapping of TA–Fe3+/InP NPs; (E–G) TEM and (H) EDS mapping of TA–Fe3+/Bi NSs; (I–K) TEM and (L) EDS mapping of TA–Fe3+/g-C3N4.	 

 	Fig. 4  Surface potentials of the (A) nanomaterials and (B) yeast cells before and after the TA–Fe3+ functionalization and PAH treatment, respectively. NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs or g-C3N4.	 

 	Fig. 5  Characterizations of the TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids. SEM images for: (A) TA–Fe3+/InP/yeast, (C) TA–Fe3+/Bi/yeast, and (E) TA–Fe3+/g-C3N4/yeast, and (B, D and F) corresponding EDS mappings. (insets: corresponding TEM images of the thin-sectioned samples). NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of the TA–Fe3+/NM/yeast biohybrids prepared under different conditions: (A–F) TA–Fe3+/InP/yeast, (G–L) TA–Fe3+/Bi/yeast and (M–R) biohybrids assembled with different TA/NM weight ratios. TA/NM = (2 mg:50 mg) for (A, B, G, H, N, and M), TA/NM = (40 mg:50 mg) for (C, D, I, J, O, and P) and TA/NM = (40 mg:10 mg) for (E, F, K, L, Q and R). NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4.	 

 	Fig. 7  Nanomaterial loading efficiency calculated under different experimental conditions. Loading efficiency of functionalized (A) InP NPs and (B) Bi NSs on yeast cells, respectively. NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4.	 

 	Fig. 8  Results of the biocompatibility assays: (A–C) cell densities as a function of time for biohybrids prepared with different weight ratios of TA/NM; (D) relative leakage of intracellular DNA and RNA, (E) relative respiration rates, and (F) relative leakage of intracellular K+ after 48 h of incubation for biohybrids prepared with different weight ratios of TA/NM. NM = nanomaterials, including InP NPs, Bi NSs, or g-C3N4.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0qm00887g
‡ Equal contribution.

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
