Cobalt-based heterogeneous catalysts in an electrolyzer system for sustainable energy storage  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0DT01469A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0DT01469A
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 11430-11450Cobalt-based heterogeneous catalysts in an electrolyzer system for sustainable energy storage

        
          
            Anurupa 
            Maiti
          
          
        
      
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur-721302, India. E-mail: anu.inorganic@gmail.com;   Tel: +919647982311
Received 
      21st April 2020
    , Accepted 22nd June 2020First published on 23rd June 2020AbstractNowadays, the production of hydrogen and oxygen focuses on renewable energy techniques and sustainable energy storage. A substantial challenge is to extend low-cost electrocatalysts consisting of earth-abundant resources, prepared by straightforward approaches that display high intrinsic activity compared to noble metals. The expansion of bifunctional catalysts in alkaline electrolytes for both the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) has become very crucial in recent times. Herein, the recent progress in cobalt-based HER–OER electrocatalysts has been are brushed up and numerous bifunctional cobalt-based catalysts such as cobalt-oxides, phosphides, sulfides, selenides, nitrides, borides, carbides, perovskites, and MOF-based cobalt analogs have been investigated in detail. Specifically, much more attention has been paid to their structural variation, bifunctional activity, overpotential of the overall system, and stability. Cobalt-based catalysts with lower cell voltage, remarkable durability, and unique electronic structures, offer a new perspective in energy-related fields. In recent years, cobalt-based analogs with diagnostic facilities have been introduced due to their electronic structures, tunable d band structures, and tailorable active sites. This perspective also elucidates the present issues, promising ideas, and future forecasts for cobalt-based catalysts. The critical aspects of cobalt-based catalysts and the numerous opportunities, as discussed at the end, can possibly enrich the sustainable energy field.Anurupa MaitiMs Anurupa Maiti is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the Department of Chemistry, Indian institute of Technology Kharagpur. She obtained her B.Sc. and M.Sc. degree in Chemistry from Vidyasagar University, Medinipur. Her current research mainly focuses on the design and development of new nanomaterials and their current behavior as electrocatalysts.
1. Introduction
Today, renewable energy crises and global warming have driven scientists to explore green energy resources that could possibly substitute fossil fuels.1 However, water splitting has been paid much more attention owing to the considerable production of hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) through hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Water is split into oxygen and hydrogen gas, which is evolved at the anode and cathode, respectively. This energy-conversion technology has risen enormously due to negligible pollution and potential extensive applications. Water electrolyzers have generally required active catalysts to drive both HER and OER. Recently, Pt-group metals have been found to act as benchmark catalysts for HER, while the most effective catalysts related to OER are Ir/Ru-based compounds.2 Further, high cost and scarcity limit their widespread application. Scientists are putting more emphasis on non-precious and highly-efficient electrocatalysts for full water splitting.2 Recently, considerable efforts have been dedicated to emerging earth-abundant, highly effective, steady HER and OER catalysts, such as transition metal chalcogenides,3,4 nitrides,5,6 phosphides,7–10 and carbides11 (for HER), and hydroxides/oxyhydroxides,12,13 transition metal oxides,14,15 and phosphates,16,17 sulphide,18 layer double hydroxide18 and carbon materials19 (for OER); however, it is very difficult to pair HER and OER within the same electrolyte for efficient hydrogen and oxygen production due to the different thermodynamic requirements of HER and OER. Recently, bifunctional catalysts, such as transition metal oxides,12,20 chalcogenides,17,21,22 hydroxides/oxyhydroxides,23 nitrides,24–26 phosphides,27–29 and carbon materials,30,31 have been reported as excellent HER and OER active catalysts in alkaline electrolytes. However, to maintain lower overpotentials, water splitting is mostly carried out in either strongly acidic or basic solutions32 but it is very urgent to assimilate all HER/OER merits and demerits in alkaline medium. However, acidic or basic condition poses to be challenging for most non-noble metal-based compounds as water-splitting catalysts due to their inactivity or instability.2 Hence, the HER/OER electrocatalyst's stability is important for integrating their structures. It has been shown that gas bubbles with large adhesion to catalysts cause negative outcome of the catalysts. Also, 3D architectures on conductive metal substrates might increase the undesirable effect. However, a highly rough structure may reduce the interaction between the gas and the solid surface. In addition, the role of polymer binders on the electrochemically active surface area, electrolyte penetration, and electron transportation cannot be ruled out.33–36 Thus, it is desirable for constructing bifunctional electrocatalysts with low overpotential, smaller Tafel slope, high TOF, and long-term stability in alkaline medium (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Schematic design of a cobalt-based electrocatalyst for overall water splitting. 
2. Mechanism of electrocatalysis
An electrolyzer comprises of three main parts: an anode, a cathode, and an aqueous electrolyte (Fig. 1). Bifunctional electrocatalysts are drop-cast on both the anode and cathode to drive the overall water splitting reaction. An operational voltage is applied on the two electrodes where the OER and HER occur at the anode and cathode, respectively. Depending on the electrolytes, water splitting could be described as below.
 Fig. 1  Schematic design of electrolysis through overall water splitting reaction. 
In acidic solution,Cathode 2H+ + 2e− = H2(1)Anode H2O = 2H+ + ½ O2 + 2e−(2)Total reaction, H2O = H2 + ½ O2(3)
In alkaline solution,Cathode 2H2O + 2e− = H2 + 2OH−(4)Anode 2OH− = H2O + ½ O2 + 2e−(5)Total reaction, H2O = H2 + ½O2(6)
Recently, most reported bifunctional HER–OER catalysts have shown activity in alkaline electrolytes rather than in acidic electrolytes. However, alkaline electrolytes mostly favor the oxygen-evolution process, with a faster rate compared to that of acidic electrolytes.37 The thermodynamic voltage of water splitting is reported to be 1.23 V (25 °C and 1 atm) irrespective of the reaction medium. Further, operation at an applied extra voltage, which is known as the extra operational voltage (Vop), could be described as Vop = 1.23 V + ηa + ηc + ηΩ.38 Here, ηΩ is the internal system resistance, i.e., the solution resistance, and contact resistance, and ηa and ηc are the overpotentials needed to overcome the intrinsic activation barriers of the anode and cathode, respectively. Regarding these issues, it is challenging to develop efficient and low-cost bifunctional water splitting electrocatalysts based on earth-abundant elements wherein ηa and |ηc| will be minimized.38 It has been noted that unoccupied d-orbitals could dramatically improve the HER performances.39 Further, lower adsorption energies of the O˙ and OOH˙ intermediates have revealed 1st order kinetics for oxygen evolution reaction.40 Hence, it is very challenging to lower the d-electron density and the adsorption energy of O˙/OOH˙ intermediates so as to maintain the minimal overpotential for overall water splitting. Three mechanistic pathways describe as to how HER occurs in the alkaline medium, which are described below, wherein M denotes the catalyst center.38
Volmer reaction: H2O + M + e− = MHads + OH−(7)Hervorskey reaction: MHads + H2O + e− = M + OH− + H2(8)Tafel reaction: 2MHads = 2M + H2(9)
The overall reaction of HER depends on the free energy ΔGH of each mechanistic pathway. The very weak adsorption energy of hydrogen limits the overall kinetics of the Volmer step. Further, very strong desorption limits the Heyrovsky and Tafel pathways, thus causing slower kinetics. Thus, an optimal ΔGH due to the appropriate coverage of the catalyst surface is a necessary condition of an ideal HER catalyst.38
Most electrocatalysts exhibit overall water splitting reaction in alkaline medium. Thus, drawing a volcano curve for hydrogen evolution reaction in the alkaline medium so as to compare the activities of the electrocatalysts is important. The volcano plot in Fig. 2 represents that Pt still acts as the best electrocatalyst for HER in alkaline medium as it exhibits the highest exchange current density compared to others.41–43 Herein, W, Fe, Ni, Co, and Pd show the highest binding energy with hydrogen and Cu, Ag, and Au exhibit the lowest adsorption energy. It is essential that the hydrogen binding energy (HBE) of the metal should be optimal, i.e., it should neither be too strong nor too weak for the hydrogen evolution reaction. Thus, moderate HBE in HER activity is desired, as elaborated by the Sabatier principle and many previous studies.41,44 Besides these, hydrogen evolution depends on the active centers, which should be (i) metallic,45 (ii) hydrogen acceptor sites,45 (iii) exposed centers,45 (iv) synergistically active metal centers, (v) numerous exposed metal centers than basal panes,46 and/or (vi) oxyphilic centers.47 A large surface area, anchored sites, and conductive platform also facilitate the hydrogen evolution reaction in alkaline medium.48 Recently, some plateau effects, such as catalyst loading, limit the catalyst transport issues. High intrinsic activity arises from low catalyst loading. Hence, low catalyst loading would facilitate the hydrogen evolution reaction as well as decrease the catalyst cost.
 Fig. 2  Exchange current densities, log (i0), on monometallic surfaces plotted as a function of the calculated HBE. The i0s for non-Pt metals were obtained by extrapolation of the Tafel plots between −1 and −5 mA cm−2 to the reversible potential of the HER and then normalization by the ECSA of these metal surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Transition metal oxides, hydroxides, sulfides, selenides, and perovskites have been well-investigated in OER.49 However, their mechanistic pathway is relatively more complex compared to that of HER. Till now, the mechanistic pathways involving compounds except oxide have not been discovered. Here, the proposed oxygen evolution mechanism is either dissociative or associative.50 According to a previous study, the oxygen evolution reaction involves a standard four-electron (4e) reaction pathway in alkaline aqueous conditions, where * denotes the catalyst center:51
Step 1: OH− + * = ˙OH + e−(10)Step 2: ˙OH + OH− = ˙O + H2O + e(11)Step 3: ˙O + OH− = ˙OOH + e−(12)Step 4: ˙OOH + OH− = * + O2 + H2O + e−(13)
According to the Sabatier principle (Fig. 3), very strong (i.e., LaCuO3) or very weak (i.e., LaMnO3) adsorption energy is not appropriate for OER. Furthermore, moderate adsorption energy (between LaCoO3 and LaNiO3) is suitable for proper catalysts. Vojvodic and Nørskov52et al. revealed DFT calculations (Fig. 3) wherein the electrons on both eg and t2g contribute to the oxygen adsorption energy. Fig. 3b exhibits that eg symmetry is the ideal choice for good electrocatalysts. It is noted that the occupied t2g and unoccupied eg set contributes ideally to OER. Furthermore, the p states of the oxygen atom and the filled d orbital of the metal atom form a covalency, and the oxophilicity of metal center produces M–OOH, which is the key species in OER.53 Besides these, doping,54 distribution of the d band character, and higher oxidation state of the metal centers affect the OER performance.55 A strong conductivity of the material, highest Fermi level, intermetallic property,56 morphology modulation, Mott–Schottky heterojunction,57 and synergistic effect58 have been found to significantly improve the OER activity.59 Among anodic catalysts, IrO2 exhibits the highest exchange current density among all the catalysts due to their lower redox potential.60 All group of oxides have been scaled and summed up in the volcano plot (Fig. 4a) so as to compare the OER activity, wherein IrOx/SrIrO3 exhibits the highest activity.60 Ternary FeCoW oxyhydroxides have bene recently found to exhibit high anodic activity in alkaline media rather than in other media.60 The volcano plot further concludes that the OER activity depends upon the moderate filling of the eg descriptor. Moreover, Pt and Ir/Ru oxides are the most efficient electrocatalysts for HER and OER, respectively.60 Most reference catalysts that are used are cost-effective. However, alkaline water electrolyzers use RANEY® Ni and Ni alloys as the cheapest catalysts but their performances are limited due to their low activities. Thus, designing an efficient, durable, and robust multifunctional electrocatalyst to boost water-splitting performance is highly desirable. Menezes et al. described LiCoBPO as a bifunctional catalyst with high stability (>2.5 months) in alkaline water electrolysis. This research is an excellent example for researchers due to its long lifetime in alkaline medium and its ∞[BP2O8]3 tetragonal unit with a center of symmetry. Each unit forms a helical structure that enhances the structural diversity. Further, Co-enriched surface-active sites and several structural modifications enhance the overall water splitting performance. Fig. 5 represents LiCoBPO∥LiCoBPO and NaCoBPO∥NaCoBPO as the cathode and the anode where they showed overpotentials of 1.53 and 1.58 V, respectively, for achieving a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with a long-term stability of 73 days.61
 Fig. 3  (a) “volcano plot” for the reaction rate. (b) Descriptor choice with respect to the eg symmetry of the metal oxides (c) schematic of the occupancy of the d states with the projected density of states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright © 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
 Fig. 4  (a) OER volcano plot for metal oxides. (b) Chronological trend in the overpotential of various OER catalysts in acidic and alkaline media. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright © 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
 Fig. 5  An alkaline electrolyzer using the two-electrode configuration. (a) is the current–potential plot of an alkaline electrolyzer using LiCoBPO∥LiCoBPO and NaCoBPO∥NaCoBPO on NF as both the cathode and anode (bare NF is shown in brown) in 1 M KOH at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The inset of (a) shows the stability of the electrodes at an applied bias of 1.53 (LiCoBPO) and 1.58 V (NaCoBPO) (CA). (b) The CA of LiCoBPO was further investigated for ∼73 days and yielded continuous growth in the current, demonstrating the undying nature of the catalysts. The inset of (b) shows the schematic view of an electrolyzer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2019. The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The kinetic barriers change as a function of pH for a specified potential versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), which results in pH-dependence of the current density. Further, using different reference, counter, and the working electrodes, the potential can differ widely. To avoid all these, cell voltage (V) could be converted to reversible hydrogen electrode (V vs. RHE). All the measured potential in this context is adopted in terms of the reversible hydrogen electrode display in eqn (14).29 ERHE = Ereference + 0.059 × pH(14)
3. Transition metal-based bifunctional electrocatalysts
First-row transition metal including Co, Ni, Mn, and Fe-based catalysts have been widely investigated as effective electrocatalysts for overall water splitting owing to their earth abundance, theoretically high electrocatalytic activities, and low cost.62 Recently, Co-based electrocatalysts have been extensively reported by scientists among all the transition metal-based electrocatalysts in overall water splitting.63 The electronic level of the cobalt-containing group could be improved by facet control,64 heteroatom doping,65 and oxygen vacancies.66 Again, similar to Ni, Co (111) interacts with the H1s orbital, forming clear bonding and antibonding orbitals that are away from each other. This spin polarization of the hydrogen atom also regulates its electrocatalytic activity.67 Transition metal cobalt 3d and O 2p result in a strong hybridization, which has been calculated by first-principles calculation. The higher covalency also tunes the intermediate adsorption and enhances its bifunctional activity.68 Besides, charge transfer excitation of the Co 3d and O 2p states that appeared at about ∼1 eV resulted in low charge transfer value.68 Hence, the cobalt-containing group could be used as an outstanding and exceptional catalyst as an alternative to the state of art Pt/C and Ir/C catalysts. The upcoming sections will provide a detailed study of their structural variation and overall water splitting performance of cobalt-based electrocatalysts. However, the discussion emphasizes their exposed active sites, conductive support matrix, and excellent performances with durability.
3.1. Cobalt-based oxides
Recently cobalt-based oxides have been chosen as alternatives to RuO2 or IrO2 in electrochemical investigations due to their low cost, electronic properties, d-electron symmetry, σ* antibonding orbitals69 configuration, surface oxygens, and lattice oxygen. First of all, herein, the synergistic effect of different metal oxides and cobalt oxides, which accelerate the reactants and feasibly activate the substrate, have been emphasized. Novel, self-assembled honeycomb-like pore structured Co3O4 nanowires coated on two-dimensional (2D) CoMoO4 nanosheets arrays on nickel foam (denoted as Co3O4/CoMoO4/NF) were synthesized via the solvothermal method, followed by a post-annealing treatment in air. The resultant hierarchical structures associated with 1D, 2D, and 3D nanomaterials displayed remarkable electrochemical performances for both HER and OER of about 143 and 244 mV, respectively, at 10 mA cm−2 in alkaline solution without the addition of a binder. In an electrolyzer, a cell voltage of only 1.61 V was employed for achieving the current density at 10 mA cm−2.70
The Co3O4/MoS2 heterostructured catalyst revealed a notable enhancement in the HER and OER activities compared to pure Co3O4 and MoS2 nanostructures. Herein, the three dimensional (3D) layered MoS2 nanostructures could provide numerous active sites on the heterointerface. Electrochemical investigations revealed the overpotential of 230 mV (@20 mA cm−2) and 205 mV (@10 mA cm−2) for OER and HER, respectively, with excellent stability in alkaline electrolytes. Herein, higher activity towards OER and HER was attributed to a synergistic effect between the Co3O4 and MoS2 nanosheets, which provided a robust electrocatalyst among non-noble metal-based catalysts for overall water splitting applications.71 Omer et al. showed that the core–shell cobalt oxide nanowire covered with nanosheets of NiFeLDH exhibited excellent catalytic activity in 1 M KOH aq. soln. Electrochemical investigations showed that hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) occurred at 0.303 V vs. (RHE) and at 1.49 V vs. RHE to achieve 10 mA cm−2 and 40 mA cm−2, respectively. A 15 h long stability was achieved for both HER and OER. Herein, the mixed oxidation states of Co2+ and Co3+, the synergetic effects among the different oxidation states, and different metal counterparts considerably increased the electrocatalytic activity of the electrocatalyst.72 Xu et al. demonstrated that CuCo2O4@CuCo2S4 catalyst displayed an overpotential of 240 and 101 mV for OER and HER to achieve 10 mA cm−2, respectively. The CuCo2O4@CuCo2S4 catalysts also delivered a low cell voltage of only about 1.53 V in the electrolyzer. Herein, efficient synergistic effects and a large number of hierarchical hetero-interfaces enhanced the overall water splitting performances.73 Kumar et al. prepared a cobalt (Co) and nickel (Ni) oxide nanostructure, wherein the mixed oxide states and synergistic effects decreased the charge transfer transition and hence improved the overall performance.74 CoOx@CN75 and Co3O4@BDHC376 were employed in an electrolyzer, delivering 1.55 and 1.59 V potential for achieving 10 mA cm−2 current density, respectively. These electrolyzers achieved minimal overpotential due to the synergistic coupling of conductive carbon and metal oxide. Further, Co@CoO/NG exhibited an overpotential of 1.58 V for achieving 10 mA cm−2 current density owing to the coupling of graphitic carbon with the cobalt atom.77 Thus, it could be concluded that synergistic effect with different or same metal cations with different oxidation states or the addition of conducting carbon increased the bifunctional property. Further, the exploration of morphology plays a crucial role in advancing science and real-world applications in overall water splitting. Among all sheet-like structures, NiCo2O4 nanosheet deposited on nickel foam (NF) showed extraordinary performance in overall water splitting. Herein, the electrode preparation involved a binder-free 3D structure, which additionally facilitated the conductivity with direct contact between the substrate and the NiCo2O4 nanosheet. This NiCo2O4 nanosheet deposited on NF exhibited superior performances in overall water splitting rather than its octahedron and truncated-octahedron counterpart.78 Tao et al. synthesized Co0.2–VOOH with a unique sheet-like morphology, which required a cell voltage of 1.57 for achieving 10 mA cm−2 in an alkaline electrolyzer for overall water splitting.79 Menezes et al. exhibited helical cobalt borophosphates sheet for simple overall water-splitting systems with energetic efficiencies exceeding the 75% level and record long-term stability, with a two-and-a-half month period. These novel helical cobalt borophosphates displayed only 1.53 V for achieving 10 mA cm−2 in a two-electrode electrolyzer.61 The Co3O4@Cu-based conductive core–shell derived from a metal–organic framework formed nanowire arrays that showed 1.57 V overpotential for 10 mA cm−2 and 50 h stability in an alkaline electrolyzer. After long-term stability studies, no obvious change in the morphology was observed. Hence, the nanowires played a significant role in enhancing the electrocatalytic performances. Further, on substituting Cotd position with Cu, the electron density of O 2p was favorably transferred to Cotd, resulting in stronger covalency. The role of the conducting skeleton of Co–O–Cu could not be ruled out.80 Ken et al. exhibited NiCo–LHSs nanowires derived from ZIF-67. The branches of the nanowires showed excellent low overpotentials of 170 and 100 mV for OER and HER at 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH, respectively. This high performance was attributed to its 1 D nanowire dimensions, which increased its surface area and resisted agglomeration after conducting the electrochemical operation. Besides these nanosheets, flowers, nanowires, and nanoparticles also showed considerable contribution to improving the overall performances. The bimetallic NiCo–NiCoO2@NC nanoparticles (Fig. 6) needed only about 1.44 V to achieve a current density at 20 mA cm−2, along with a long-term stability of 50 h in alkaline media.81 Herein, the high electric conductivity, large surface area, and tolerance to the alkaline environment of this nanoparticle improved its long-term stability. Further, on decreasing the size, a considerable improvement in the long-term stability was observed. CoO/CNF, a nanocrystalline interconnected particle (∼2 nm), showed an onset potential of about 1.59 V and 200 h stability in the overall water splitting reaction. Herein, the increased surface area, atomic defects, and distortions also improved the catalytic activity (Fig. 7).82 The flower-like hierarchical nanoporous NiCo2O4 prepared from Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, Co(NO3)2·6H2O, and urea in the hydrothermal method showed an electrode potential of about 1.96 V for achieving 10 mA cm−2 in an electrolyzer.83 The researchers found that the efficient bifunctional 3D-flaked NPCoO-UCSs in an electrolyzer need only 1.389 V (onset potential) to obtain a jOWS of 10 mA cm−2 compared to the benchmark Ir/C∥Pt/C pair.84 The observed flower-like structures or 3D flakes contributed to slightly lower performances in the overall water splitting reaction, which was probably due to the fragile fragments in the alkaline medium after the potential was applied.
 Fig. 6  (a) HER LSV curves of NiCo–NiCoO2@NC, NiCo@NC, and NiCoO2@NC on GCE; (b) OER LSV curves of NiCo–NiCoO2@NC, NiCo@NC, and NiCoO2@NC on GCE; (c) LSV curves of NiCo–NiCoO2@NC on Ni foam for overall water splitting; (d) LSV of water electrolysis using NiCo–NiCoO2@NC as both the HER and OER catalyst (both loaded into Ni foam at a loading rate of 3 mg cm−2 based on the active mass in 1 M KOH); (e) time dependence of the current density at a voltage of 1.45 V for NiCo–NiCoO2@NC; (f) optical photograph showing the generation of hydrogen and oxygen bubbles on Ni foam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright@2017. Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 7  (a) TEM image of pristine CoO/CNF. The lattice structure and the FFT pattern indicate the single-crystalline nature of the pristine particle. (b) TEM image of 1-cycle CoO/CNF exhibits the defects, lattice distortions, and expanded (111) spacing. (c) TEM image of 2-cycle CoO/CNF shows ultra-small, interconnected NPs. The sizes are ∼2–5 nm. (d) TEM image of 5-cycle CoO/CNF shows a similar domain size to the 2-cycle one. The yellow dashed line in the upper image represents the boundary of the whole particle. The zoom-in image indicates the detachment of the ultra-small NPs from the mother particle. Scale bars in a–d, upper, 5 nm; lower, 2 nm. (e) OER catalytic activities of CoO/CNF on CFP in 0.1 M KOH under different galvanostatic cycles. The polarization scan rate is 5 mV s−1. Two-cycle CoO/CNF gives the best performance. (f) The Tafel plots of the OER polarization curves. (g) Electrochemical double layer capacitance of CoO/CNF under different cycles. The error bars include three identical samples tested for each cycle number. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright © 2015, Springer Nature. 
3.2. Cobalt-based sulfides
Transition-metal sulfides have also been widely considered as efficient electrocatalysts in the last few decades. There have been several electrocatalytic reports on cobalt-based chalcogenides compared to Pt/C and Ir/C. Herein, fewer sulfide-based materials have been discussed to understand their recent trends and strategies. Ma et al. reported CoS2 HNSs/CP with spherical-type morphology, which was synthesized from cobalt acetate, ethylenediamine, and CS2 through the solution-heating method. The author compared the electrocatalytic activity of all the prepared materials, which follow the order: Co9S8 < Co3S4 < CoS2. The CoS2 electrode was assembled into two electrolyzers, which showed cell voltages of 1.54 V at 60 °C to achieve 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH with a remarkable stability of 10 h at 1.90 V. The catalyst leached ∼18.1% in the alkaline medium after long-term potential-time operation and the H2/O2 volume ratio of about 2 provided 100% faradaic efficiency. The excellent performance was attributed to the sulfur enriched structure and spherical-type defect morphology. Herein, the formation of cobalt hydroxide in the intermediate step is the key factor in the overall performance.85 Zhang et al. synthesized CP/CTs/Co–S rods in where ZnO was used as a template on carbon fiber paper. Subsequently, ZnO was etched from the cobalt sulfide surface, which revealed unique nanorod-type conducting structures. The CP/CTs/Co–S electrode was connected to a battery of 1.5 V, which drove a current in the overall water splitting reaction (Fig. 8).86 The high performance of CP/CTs/Co–S was due to extended exposure, accessible active sites, and formation of the CoO/Co(OH)2 intermediate.
 Fig. 8  (a) Polarization curves of different catalytic electrodes for HER and OER in 1 M KOH at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. (b) The corresponding Tafel plots. (c) Chronoamperometric responses of CP/CTs/Co–S, Pt/C, and RuO2 electrodes at constant potentials for HER and/or OER. (d) Schematic illustration of the operating principle of CP/CTs/Co–S. (e) Polarization curves for overall water splitting with a CP/CTs/Co–S electrode as both the anode and cathode in 1 M KOH with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. The benchmarking RuO2 (+) and Pt/C (−) electrodes were tested side by side. (f) The corresponding chronoamperometric responses of CP/CTs/Co–S electrodes and the benchmarking combination at constant potentials of 1.743 and 1.679 V, respectively. (g) Amount of gaseous products theoretically calculated and experimentally measured versus time at a constant potential of 2 V. (h) Optical photograph of overall water splitting powered by an AAA battery with a nominal voltage of 1.5 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, 3D-skeleton Cu@CoSx/CF was also prepared from carbon fiber paper. Herein, the amorphous 3D skeleton had an excellent conducting structure and higher number of exposed active sites. On introducing copper atom into the lattice sites, the interfacial charge transfer kinetics increased. Further, the EXFS spectra revealed a slightly shorter bond in CoSx and lower coordination numbers, which facilitated oxygen evolution kinetics. Electrochemical investigations revealed that Cu@CoSx/CF needed 1.50 V to achieve 10 mA cm−2 current density in the electrolyzer. Herein, the carbon fiber paper increased the intrinsic conductivity during electrochemical performances.87 Further, a new amorphous 2D-sheet structure CoSx was hetero-coupled with a crystalline Co9S8 sheet prepared via a microwave-assisted liquid-phase method. Herein, the previously prepared Co(OH)2 precursor was sulfurized at room temperature, followed by microwave treatment. The obtained 2D sheet-like morphology facilitated extra active sites due to abundant vacancies, unsaturated atoms, and shrinkage structures. Further, Co(OH)2 formation in the intermediate step was believed to be the key source of performance of the electrocatalyst. The electrochemical performances revealed that this catalyst supplied 50 mA cm−2 at 1.55 V in 1 M KOH with an outstanding stability.88 This outstanding catalytic activity was attributed to the ultrathin 2D morphology with a random porous network and a suitable structure.88
The synergistic effect between different metal cations also helps to increase the overall performances of the electrolyzer. Ni4.3Co4.7S8, a binary sulfide, showed a high overlap of the density of states (DOS) at the Fermi-level, and the synergistic coupling of Ni and Co ions enhanced the overall water splitting performances. Herein, introducing a nickel atom into the cobalt moiety elevated the d-state center from −2.84 to −1.52 eV with a high occupation of the anti-bonding eg (dx2−y2 and dz2 orbitals). This might have helped to improve the electrochemical bifunctional property.89 Recently, the doping of several metals and non-metal has been found to enhance the electronic structure of different catalysts. The cobalt–molybdenum sulfide nanocomposite electrocatalyst, surrounded with numerous components with exclusive functionalities grown on carbon cloth (P–CoMoS/CC), was rationally designed and fabricated by the incorporation of phosphorus. This hybrid material exhibited hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions over a wide range of pH (1–14) with a remarkably high stability (∼90% retention of the initial current density) after 24 h of electrolysis. Interestingly, P–CoMoS/CC was employed as both the cathode and anode for overall water splitting. It achieved a very low cell voltage of 1.54 V to attain the 10 mA cm−2 current density, with a long-term stability (89.8% activity retention after 100 h). Herein, the incorporation of phosphorus improved the charge-transfer resistance and the catalytic durability of the P–CoMoS/CC catalyst.90 Mixed cobalt sulfide and selenide Co(SxSe1−x)2 nanoparticles encapsulated in carbon fibers were obtained from Co(CO3)0.5(OH)·0.11H2O nanowires, followed by an adjustable sulfuration/selenylation process. Herein, Co(SxSe1−x)2 nanoparticles encapsulated in carbon fibers exposed several active sites with excellent charge/mass transport capability. It was discovered that Co(S0.71Se0.29)2 demonstrated remarkable HER and OER performances. In the electrolyzer, Co(S0.71Se0.29)2 was employed as the cathode, and the anode exhibited a cell voltage of 1.63 V to deliver 10 mA cm−2, which contributed to an efficient, cost-effective catalyst in an electrolyzer.91
3.3. Cobalt-based phosphides
In general, metal phosphide catalysts could be chosen as efficient electrocatalysts due to rich heteroatoms and lone pair of electrons in P, which can efficiently coordinate with the adsorption sites. This section discusses some key concept, their strategies, and recent trends in overall water splitting. Herein, their conductivity, doping, synergistic effect, and synthetic process have been emphasized. Among the TMP electrocatalysts, cobalt-based phosphides have been extensively investigated in overall water splitting due to their excellent durability in alkaline electrolytes. Xu et al. prepared Co2P on a conducting Co foil via treatment with NaH2PO2 as the phosphorus source. These particles, similar to Co2P/Co, exhibited superior activity at 1.71 V after 15 hours. The DFT studies revealed that the top of phosphorus sites provide lower adsorption energy of hydrogen and facilitate faster kinetics.92 CoP@CC was synthesized on a piece of CC via treatment with NaH2PO2·H2O and Co(OH)2. CoP@CC exhibited a cell voltage of 1.68 V in zinc–air batteries to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The high electrochemical performances arose due to self-growth on the highly conducting carbon cloth.93 CoP NA/CC derived from α-Co(OH)2 NA/CC provides high activity and durability in neutral and alkaline media. CoP NA/CC afforded overpotentials of 145 and 52 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2 for HER in neutral medium and 1.0 M KOH, respectively, thus exhibiting higher activity compared to α-Co(OH)2 NA/CC. Herein, the water electrolyzer CoP NA/CC acted as both the cathode and the anode that showed 2 mA cm−2 current at a cell voltage of 1.60 V in 1.0 M PBS and needed 1.65 V for 10 mA cm−2 under alkaline conditions with excellent stability.94 The nanostructured Co(NO3)x(OH)2−x·y(H2O) film, on treatment with phosphine gas (PH3), generated the CoP film, which required slight development for bifunctional activity.95 Further, cobalt phosphide loaded on any conducting matrix also increases the overall performances. He et al. prepared rGO/Co2P, which exhibited 1.74 V to achieve 10 mA cm−2 current density for overall water-splitting. Herein, the synergistic effect among the carbon layer and cobalt facilitated the first order rate of charge transfer.96 Jiao et al. displayed that the CoP/rGO nanocomposite showed outstanding HER activity in a wide pH range of 0–14 with overpotentials of 105 mV in acidic solution and 150 mV in basic solution at 10 mA cm−2. In addition, it also exhibited excellent OER activity in basic medium with an overpotential of 340 mV at 10 mA cm−2. CoP/rGO-400 exhibited a porous hierarchical character on treatment with the Co3O4/rGO-400 composite (10 mg) and NaH2PO2 (100 mg), which exhibited an overpotential of ∼1.71 V for the overall water splitting reaction.97 Liu et al. prepared CoP NPs from Co(NO3)2·6H2O and NaH2PO2, which was further confined with p-doped dual carbon. CoP NPs in P-doped dual carbon shell required 1.66 V for overall water splitting and showed long-term durability after continuous operation for 15 h.98 Recently, it has been found that bimetallic phosphides or doping could attain a synergistic effect among cobalt-based phosphides, leading to higher performances. Song et al. showed that Cu doping in Cu0.3Co2.7P/nitrogen-doped carbon (NC) provides an ultralow overpotential, affording 0.19 V at 10 mA cm−2 for OER and 0.22 V at 10 mA cm−2 for HER. It is desirable that Cu0.3Co2.7P/NC exhibited 60% larger current density than the Pt/RuO2 couple at 1.74 V, along with negligible catalytic degradation after operation for 50 h. Herein, mild Cu doping in CuxCo3−xP/NC (x = 0.3) resulted in the lowest charge-transfer resistance and enhanced the electrocatalytic performance with the highest reaction kinetics. The analysis of the intrinsic catalytic activity of Cu0.3 Co2.7P/NC exhibited the highest TOF value at 5.82 × 10−3 s−1, which was larger than that of Cu0.6Co2.4P/NC (2.72 × 10−3 s−1), Cu1Co2P/NC (1.96 × 10−3 s−1), CoP/NC (2.87 × 10−3 s−1), and RuO2 (0.61 × 10−3 s−1). Further, DFT analysis revealed that the hydrogen adsorption free energy of pristine CoP (001) is reduced in the Cu-doped CoP (001) surface. Herein, doping of Cu led to a decrease in the hydrogen adsorption energy from 0.54 eV to 0.28 eV, which enhanced its cathodic process.99 Further, Cu0.3Co2.7P/NC possessed a higher current density at 1.74 V (70 mA cm−2) compared to the Pt/C/RuO2 pair (28 mA cm−2) at room temperature towards overall water splitting. Surprisingly, after 50 h of operation, Cu0.3Co2.7P/NC showed 102% current retention, which indicates the robustness of the catalyst.99 Chen et al. prepared Ni1−xCox–P catalysts derived from Co(NO3)2·6H2O, Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, and sodium hypophosphite. These yolk-shelled microspheres of Ni0.69Co0.31–P delivered 1.59 V to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2. This superior performance was attributed to the controllable shell thickness of less than 10 nm and synergistic effects between the two different metals.100 Alshareef et al. synthesized NiCoP via plasma treatment of PH3 gas on nickel foam. Herein, NiCoP was highly embedded in the porous network of Ni foam. A good integration of the nickel foam decreased the mass transport limitation, thus increasing the overall performances. A current density of 10 mA cm−2 could be achieved at a cell voltage as low as 1.58 V in an alkaline electrolyzer.101 Further, the performances in overall water splitting could be increased by integrating these dual cobalt phosphides on a graphene substrate. Qu et al. prepared Ni2−xCoxP on rGO, which showed higher performances due to the enhancement of its higher intrinsic surface area. This higher synergistic effect between Ni2−xCoxP and rGO provided ∼1.59 V to achieve a catalytic current density of ∼10 mA cm−2 and a long-term stability of 75 h.102 Dong et al. further reported a remarkable bifunctional catalyst via doping on NiCoP/NF. Tungsten doping on NiCoP/NF enhanced the synergistic effect between Ni and Co; as a result, remarkable performance was obtained in overall water splitting. W atoms display free energy closer to Pt; hence, the doping of W atom in the lattice could optimize the structure for overall water splitting.103 Wang et al. prepared Mn–Co phosphide (Mn–Co–P) with a yolk–shell structure by hydrothermal method, which showed a cell voltage of 1.74 V to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2.104 Recently, MOF-derived phosphide structures have been found to enhance the overall water splitting reaction. MOF-derived Ni1−xCox–P catalysts (0 < x < 1) exhibited 1.3 and 4.6-fold performance enhancement during HER at 168 mV in comparison to pure Ni and Co phosphides, respectively. Herein, the smaller Rct value could enhance the charge transport rate and consequently facilitate the HER kinetics. The alkaline water electrolyzer consisting of Ni0.69Co0.31–P catalyst as the cathode and anode catalysts required a cell voltage of 1.59 V to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which is comparable to the integrated performance of commercial Pt/C and IrO2.105 CoFe bimetal–organic framework triangular nanoplate arrays consist of numerous macropores. CoFeP TPAs/Ni needed a cell voltage of 1.47 V for overall water splitting, which is higher than those of noble–metal based compounds.106 Huang et al. prepared CoP–InNC@CNT from [In2(OH)2(BPTC)]·6H2O (InOF-1, H4BPTC = biphenyl-3,3′,5,5′-tetracarboxylic acid) and ZIF-67 polyhedra. CoP–InNC@CNT/CC achieved 1.52 V cell voltage in an alkaline electrolyzer.107 Recent developments in morphology have lead to an improvement in all the electrochemical performances. Kaifu et al. derived tungsten-doped CoP nanoneedles
on carbon cloth, which exhibited a stable current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.59 V, even after operation for 20 h in the long-term stability test. This type of a nanoneedle structure exposed higher abundant surface sites and good transportability to the ions.108 Fu et al. reported Co1−xNixP3 nanoneedle arrays (NAs) on carbon cloth prepared from the phosphorization of Co0.93Ni0.07(OH)F. The needle-like Co1−xNixP3 exhibited numerous exposed active sites and metallic centers. The DFT calculation for Co1−xNixP3 (Fig. 9) exhibited that the (200) surface is the lowest and the most stable surface among all the planes. It has been shown that only the cobalt atom and nickel atom displayed higher adsorption energy while on incorporation of nickel into the cobalt surface, free energy decreased to −0.10 eV, which was most favourable for the bifunctional catalyst.109 Xiao et al. prepared carbon-incorporated porous honeycomb NiCoFeP/C nanospheres derived from a MOF precursor, which showed a potential of 1.6 V to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The porous honeycomb-like structure exposed more contact sites to the electrolytes, which easily separated the bubbles formed.110 Yu et al. prepared C-coated CoP hollow microporous nanocages derived from Co2CrO4, KIT-6, and NaH2PO2·H2O, which delivered a low voltage of 1.650 V and excellent stability for 24 h under a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2. Herein, hollow nanocage-like structures also exposed numerous active sites to adsorbents.111
 Fig. 9  Hydrogen adsorption free energy, ΔGH, on different sites for CoP3(200) surfaces: (a) CoP3(200) surface without Ni doping, (b) CoP3(200) surface with one Ni atom doped on the terminal atoms, and (c) CoP3(200) surface with four Ni atoms doped on the terminal atoms (the top P atom in the middle of the lattice is considered as the P-1 site and the top P atom located at the lattice is considered as the P-2 site). (d) Schematic design of the synthesized Co1−x NixP3 nanoneedles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. 
3.4. Cobalt-based selenides
Apart from these, cobalt-based selenide structures have also been applied in alkaline electrolyzers. Herein, a few key points of their strategy and performances have been introduced. Zhao et al. prepared cobalt selenide by directly selenizing Co foil with Se powder in a vacuum-sealed ampoule, which exhibited 1.8 V in overall seawater electrolysis. Herein, the EXAFS spectra for Co–Se1 and Co–Se4 confirmed the formation of the Co–Se bond. A higher intensity associated, which is with a higher coordination number of the Co species, suggests higher oxidation states of the cobalt atom. Further, the formation of Co–OOH from Co–Se4 and Seδ− was mainly responsible for H adsorption.112 Cao et al. prepared a CuCo2Se4 electrocatalyst, which had very high electrical conductivity and metallic state, and could achieve a current density of 50 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.782 V with a high energy efficiency of 83.05%.113 Li et al. exhibited monolithic Co3Se4 nanowires for overall water splitting in alkaline medium. The remarkable electrocatalytic activity and stability of the Co3Se4/CF could be attributed to the mixed valences of Co2+ and Co3+ for HER and OER. The outstanding electrocatalytic activity and stability of Co3Se4/CF could be attributed to non-stoichiometric mixed valences of Co2+ and Co3+, which showed high catalytic activities for HER and OER. The XPS spectra exhibited small electron density transfer from the Co (δ+) center to the Se (δ−) sites, which served as electron and proton acceptance sites for H2 and O2 production, respectively. Herein, Co3Se4 facilitated the formation of (OOHad) via nucleophilic attack.114 Further, the performances could be increased by supporting the conducting substrate. The catalyst CNTs@CoSxSe2(1−x) on carbon cloth attained a cell voltage of 1.74 V, which delivered 10 mA cm−2 in the electrolyzer. The in situ formation of CoOOH and synergistic coupling of carbon increased the overall performances.115 CoSe2 encapsulated in the N-doped few-layer carbon shell delivered 50 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.73 V and retain its performances after 50000 s. Here, N-doped few-layer carbon prevents the corrosion of the catalyst in an alkaline medium.116 CoSe2 @N/C–CNT a bifunctional electrocatalyst delivered overpotential 185 mV vs. RHE at 10 mA cm−2 for HER and 340 mV vs. RHE for OER. A ternary porous cobalt phosphoselenide was chosen as an efficient catalyst in overall water splitting. This ternary electrocatalyst was prepared through hydrogenation, followed by phosphation. Here, greater electric conductivity, large surface area, the ternary structures, and the presence of exfoliated graphene electrodes provided excellent catalytic activity with high durability toward hydrogen evolution in alkaline conditions, achieving current densities of 10 and 20 mA cm−2 at overpotentials of 150 and 180 mV, respectively. The theoretical calculations revealed the presence of the Se vacancy and phosphorus substitution resulted in an optimal energy barrier in hydrogen desorption, resulting in accelerated proton kinetics. However, this minimal energy barrier further helped to increase the overall water splitting performances. This novel ternary catalyst achieved 10 mA cm−2 current density only at 1.64 V in an electrolyzer, which is higher than that of the Ir/C–Pt/C couple. Moreover, the distribution of the ternary nanosheets and macropores created by silicon enabled highly efficient solar-driven hydrogen production.117 Mixed metals with cobalt selenide have been investigated recently. MnCo selenide yolk–shell structures provided high intrinsic conductivity and synergetic effect, which contributed to high performances in overall water splitting. Electrochemical investigations showed that MnCo selenide possessed 50 mA cm−2 current density with a low cell voltage of 1.66 V.118 A ternary hybrid of EG/Co0.85Se/NiFe-LDH prepared from cobalt selenide and NiFe layered-double-hydroxide achieved 20 mA cm−2 at 1.71 V. Herein, the strong interface between different metal cations increased the water splitting.119 Cao et al. showed a ternary composite, CuCo2Se4, which delivered a current density of 50 mA cm−2 at a voltage of 1.782 V (Fig. 10) and 83.05% capacity retention.
 Fig. 10  (a) Comparison of LSV curves of the CuCo2Se4 catalyst measured in N2-saturated 1.0 M KOH before and after 8 h chronoamperometry. The inset shows the chronoamperometric measurement of CuCo2Se4 under continuous O2 evolution. (b) Comparison of the PXRD pattern of CuCo2Se4 on an Au substrate before and after 8 h chronoamperometry. XPS spectra of (c) Co 2p, (d) Cu 2p, and (e) Se 3d after chronoamperometric measurement for 8 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. 
The high catalytic performances were attributed to the synergistic coupling of Cu and Co. Fig. 10b–e exhibit the XRD pattern and XPS spectra of the catalyst after 8 h post-treatment of the chronoamperometry curve, respectively.113 Xu et al. reported a cobalt–selenide-based film as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for complete water splitting. Amorphous CoOx–CoSe film on NF, a superior bifunctional OER and HER catalyst, was prepared through a facile and cost-effective electrodeposition method; it required a small overpotential of 380 mV to achieve a high current density of 500 mA cm−2 for the OER and 90 mV to deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for the HER. Moreover, the CoOx–CoSe film was used as the cathode and anode, and carried a current density of 20 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.66 V in 1 M KOH.120 The morphology variation of cobalt-based selenides also plays a significant role in the electrochemical performances. Liu et al. prepared monoclinic Co3Se4 thin nanowires on cobalt foam to achieve a low cell voltage of 1.59 V so as to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for 3500 h. The novel catalyst showed no degradation after the stability test. This long-term duration arose due to its thin nanowire structure and the conducting skeleton of cobalt foam.121 Ternary CoP2xSe2(1−x) NWs on carbon fibers enhanced their own catalytic performances due to the nanowire-like structures, which afforded a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.65 V.122 Wang et al. prepared nanosheet-like Co0.85Se arrays that achieved a current of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.60. These folded sheets exposed more edge structures to the adsorbents; as a result, good performances were obtained in the electrolyzer.123 Tang et al. prepared porous CoSe2 nanosheets on carbon cloth by treating α-Co(OH)2/CC with selenium powder. Herein, the porous network facilitated random charge transfer. The electrochemical investigations showed a cell voltage of 1.62 V at 10 mA cm−2 in the electrolyzer.
3.5. Cobalt-based nitrides
Among various nitride materials, cobalt-based nitrides have been recognized as one of the efficient electrocatalysts. 7 μm porous nanowires with a diameter of 135 nm cobalt nitride were synthesized on carbon cloth, which displayed superior catalytic activities with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 97 mV and 251 mV for HER and OER, respectively. Further, the alkaline electrolyzer delivered a cell voltage of 1.587 V to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and showed long-term stability at a high current density (∼360 mA cm−2) for over 37 h, which was comparable to the integrated performance of commercial Pt and IrO2.124 Among cobalt nitrides, CoN, Co2N, Co3N, and Co4N were chosen as non-noble metal electrocatalysts owing to their 3d structures. Herein, nitrogen atom over the Co–Co framework could strongly adsorb water molecule, which helped to increase the bifunctional properties.125,126 Balogun et al.126 reported metallic Co4N nanowires assembled with FeOOH, which delivered an overpotential of 1.59 V at 10 mA cm−2 with a long-term stability of up to 4 days. The theoretical aspect showed that the d orbital of Co4N expands by FeOOH and lowers the free energy of hydrogen adsorption. Further, some literature has been found on cobalt nitrides over conducting matrices or with other metals. The NC@CuCo nitride nanosheet network127 achieved a cell voltage at 1.62 V in an electrolyzer for supplying a current density at 10 mA cm−2 with excellent long-term stability (15 h at 20 mA cm−2). The superior performance was attributed to its hierarchical porous structure, highly exposed surface area, and the synergistic effect of N-doped carbon that provides numerous channels for the diffusion of electrolyte ions.127 Another nitride, Co5.47N@N–PC125 electrode, drove a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of only 1.62 V in the alkaline electrolyzer. Co4N@NC framework with carbon shell in Fig. 11 acts as an efficient electrocatalyst for both HER and OER. Herein, Co4N could lower the charge-transfer resistance between NC and Co4N, which was further analyzed by the in situ electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM) technology.128 The EQCM study exhibited that the mass of Co4N increased during the HER process but the slope did not change during the process, i.e., hydroxylation did not affect the reaction kinetics. Further, for OER in the range of 0–0.25 V, there was an obvious change in mass. It was shown that the mass increased during this overpotential range, i.e., Co4N was oxidized during the process. A significant charge enhancement occured in the Fermi level due to the synergetic effects of Co4N and NC, which improved the carrier density. It has been observed that the d band shifted to a higher energy of −2.02 eV compared to that of the Co4N system (−2.17 eV). This d band expansion elevated the eg orbital to a higher energy level, which could significantly optimize the desorption step. Li et al. exhibited that the CoO-modified Co4N heterostructured electrocatalyst drove 1.79 V for 10 mA cm−2 for the overall water splitting reaction.129 The electrocatalytic performances were attributed to electron transport through the interface of cobalt, oxygen, and nitrogen. Zhong et al. showed that Co@NC/NG-700 exhibited 1.25 V at a current density of 100 mA cm−2 in Zn–air batteries.130 The extremely high performances were attributed to its positive synergistic effect, an electron-rich nitrogen atom, and a conducting graphene cell. The DFT calculations exhibited that CoxN was more localized on the Fermi level than Co2P. Hence, weaker desorption was observed in CoxN than in Co2P. Thus, a combination of heterostructures improves the overall water splitting and the long-term stability. Li et al. prepared CoNx@GDY NS/NF via the cross-coupling reaction of CoNx NS/NF and the ultrathin GDY layers. After coupling with the GDY layer, the surface roughness and conductivity increased. The DFT calculations revealed that the adsorption energy of OH was less compared to other nitride compounds. Electrochemical investigations of CoNx@GDY NS/NF showed an overpotential of 1.48 V to reach the current density of 10 mA cm−2.131 Tong et al. synthesized (Co/CoN/Co2P-NPC) from Co-MOF and NaH2PO2·H2O in a nitrogen atmosphere. The Co/CoN/Co2P-NPC hybrid network exhibited a cell potential of 1.60 V in an electrolyzer to achieve 10 mA cm−2. This multiple cobalt species increased the number of active sites and lowered the charge transfer resistance. However, instead of multiple active cobalt centers, the addition of a carbon layer is a suitable choice for enhancing the electrochemical activity.132
 Fig. 11  First-principles calculations via DFT methods on NC, Co4N, and Co4N@NC. (a) Side view of the model structure of the Co4N@NC system. The C, N, and Co atoms are presented in gray, green, and yellow, respectively. (b) Density of states (DOS) of NC, Co4N, and Co4N@NC. The Fermi level is shifted to 0 eV. (c) Projected DOS (PDOS) of the Co 3d orbitals from Co4N and Co4N@NC. The dashed lines indicate the d-band center for each system. (d) Plots of GH˙ for Co4N, NC, and Co4N@NC. The calculated free energy diagrams for the OER of NC (e) and Co4N@NC (f). Schematic design (g). Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. 
3.6. Cobalt-based layered double hydroxides
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are very promising electrocatalysts for water splitting due to their low cost and favorable activity. LDHs are formulated as [M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2], where M2+ and M3+ are the metal cations. LDH possesses a layered structure, wherein water is situated in the interlayer. Bao et al. showed that CoMo-LDH133 delivered 10 mA cm−2 current density at a cell voltage of 1.63 V with excellent stability for 30 h towards overall water splitting. Bulk CoMn-LDH showed exposed active sites that enhanced the overall water splitting performances.134 Li et al. synthesized NiCo-LDH, which exhibited a cell voltage of 1.66 V to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Herein, the ultrathin LDH sheet and the synergistic effect between nickel and cobalt atoms provided the bifunctional property.135 Yan et al. prepared CoMn-LDH@g-C3N4 to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.56 V in an alkaline electrolyzer. Herein, g-C3N4 increased the charge transport capability as well as the synergy among all the cations and carbon.136 Yan et al. prepared CoFe-LDH@g-C3N4 composite that needed 1.55 V in electrolyzer to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Herein, interfacial charge transfer from g-C3N4 to different cations led to its superior performances.137 Yu et al.138 synthesized Cu@CoFe LDH core–shell nanostructured catalyst for efficient overall water splitting in an alkaline electrolyte. The Cu@CoFe LDH core–shell nanostructure comprised a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a 1.681 V for two electrodes. This CoFe-LDH nanosheet increased the charge transport facilitation and diffusion of gaseous products.139 An interesting cobalt-based LDH, the CoFe@NiFe/NF LDH catalyst, acted as a superior bifunctional catalyst for HER and OER. A cell voltage of 1.59 V was needed to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in a stable alkaline electrolyzer.
Herein, the synergistic effect between CoFe-LDH and NiFe-LDH nanosheet increased the overall water splitting reaction.140 CoFe LDH-C is a unique LDH wherein unsaturated metals act as active sites and increase the electronic conductivity (Fig. 12). CoFe LDH-C possessed 10 mA cm−−2 current density at a cell voltage of 1.63 V with remarkable stability in the electrolyzer.141 Lin et al. showed that the NiFe-CoFe2O4@Co3S4 nanoflower array on three-dimensional (3D) carbon fiber paper (denoted as NiFe-CFS/CFP) exhibited good catalytic activity at 1.53 V (with iR correction) and a robust duration of 48 h in the alkaline electrolyzer.139
 Fig. 12  (a) Polarization curves for overall water splitting at the scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (b) Chronoamperometric measurement of overall water splitting at the applied potential of 1.63 V. Inset of (b) photograph of the system showing hydrogen (left) and oxygen (right) generation during water electrolysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society. 
3.7. Cobalt-based borides
Another class of attractive compounds is metal boride-based catalysts. Recently, metal boride types catalysts have been explored as bifunctional catalysts for overall water splitting. Cobalt boride is an efficient electrocatalyst in alkaline electrolytes, which is synthesized from starting materials such as cobalt chloride and sodium borohydride. A minimal cell voltage of 1.61 V is needed to achieve a current density at 10 mA cm−2 and 60 h long-term stability in an electrolyzer. The drawbacks of boride chemistry arise due to lattice strain and the kinetic barrier of the hydroxylation adsorption, which limits the overall water splitting reaction.142 Xu et al. exhibited Co–Ni–B@NF as a bifunctional catalyst for overall water splitting, which demonstrated a cell voltage of 1.72 V at 10 mA cm−2. However, it is not a promising electrocatalyst due to its lack of surface smoothness and higher resistance.143 Li et al. synthesized a NiCoFeB nanochain that required a cell voltage of 1.81 V, which was also not so as efficient as Pt/C and Ir/C.144 Wu et al. prepared Co1–Fe1–B–P, which delivered 1.68 V to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2 due to its exposed active sites after phosphorization (Fig. 13). Herein, the coupling of boron and phosphorus led to a significant improvement in the bifunctional property.145 Guo et al. prepared NiCoFeB nano chains using Ni, Co, Fe, PVP, and NaBH4. These amorphous nano chains supply 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.81 V for overall water splitting.146 Further, Wang et al. improved the conductivity of CoB by depositing it on nickel foam. This conducting nickel foam derived CoB required an overpotential of 1.69 V to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in overall water splitting.147 Wang et al. synthesized amorphous Co2B, which was further coupled with CoSe2 and was found to be an efficient electrocatalyst. The coupled Co2B/CoSe2 afforded a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.73 V.148 Sun et al. prepared the Co–B@CoO nanoarray via the hydrothermal method, treating with Co(NO3)2·6H2O, NH4F, and urea on Ti mesh. Finally, the product on the Ti mesh was treated with NaBH4 solution. The in situ derived Co–B@CoO/Ti carried 50 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.67 V in the electrolyzer. This experiment further explained that Ti foil and CoO increased the conductivity and synergistic interaction with cobalt boride particles.149
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Co1–Fe1–B–P nanochains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2019 © The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.8. Cobalt-based carbides
Among metal carbides, cobalt carbide has drawn considerable attraction in electrochemistry. Jiang et al. exhibited that the CoxMoy@NC catalyst requires ∼0.218 V and ∼0.33 V overpotential to produce a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in HER and OER, respectively. However, an alkaline water electrolyzer delivered a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with a cell voltage of 1.74 V.150 The observed performances were attributed to the high electrical conductivity of each part and the synergistic cooperation between carbide and Co nanoparticles in the carbon matrix. Co/W–C@NCNSs were prepared by the hydrothermal treatment of Co(CH3COOH)2·4H2O, tungstic acid, and 2-methylimidazole, followed by pyrolysis of the obtained product with Co4(2-mim)6WO4·1.5(DMF). The prepared product needed a cell voltage of 1.68 V to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and a long-term stability of 36000 s in an electrolyzer.151 The high performances of this catalyst were attributed to the synergy between different metal counterparts and conducting carbon. The coupling of cobalt phosphide on molybdenum carbide achieved 107 and 330 mV for HER and OER at 10 mA cm−2, respectively. An electrolyzer afforded a cell voltage of 1.64 V for a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in alkaline medium, with stable current till 40 h after obtaining the chronoamperometric curve.152 Herein, the synergy of carbide and phosphide accelerated the kinetics whereas nitrogen-doped graphene enhanced its stability in alkaline medium. Zhang et al. prepared VxCo3−xC by the graphitization of vanadium acetylacetonate and cobalt chloride. Further, the mixture was in situ electrospun with carbon nanofibers. VxCo3−xC/CNF supplied a current density 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH at an overpotential of 87 and 210 mV for HER and OER, respectively. This excellent performance was attributed to the lattice distortion, defects, and low electronegativity of vanadium atom.153 The DFT analysis and Bader charge calculations (Fig. 14) showed the substitution of vanadium atom in VxCo3−xC and electron transfer from cobalt to the oxygen atom; as a result, the electron was transferred from oxygen to hydrogen. This phenomenon lowered the adsorption energy of OH–VxCo3−xC and achieved a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.47 V, thus making this a promising catalyst in the electrolyzer.153
 Fig. 14  (a) Scheme of electron transfers for Co3C and V0.28Co2.72C. (b) Bader charge of Co, V, O, and H for Co3C and V0.28Co2.72C. (c–f) Charge density difference analysis of VxCo3−xC during the OER processes. (g) The optimized (100) plane of V0.28Co2.72C. (h) Gibbs free energy of the four parts during the OER process for V0.28Co2.72C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. 
3.9. Cobalt-based perovskites
Perovskite oxides have the formula ABO3, where A is designated as a rare-earth or alkaline earth metal, and B is a transition metal, which have attracted considerable attention in different fields owing to their low cost, and structural and chemical properties.154,155 Recently, perovskite-based catalysts have been explored in oxygen evolution and oxygen reduction reaction, whereas very few reports have been found for hydrogen evolution reaction. Hence, it is very desirable to search out pervorskite-based catalysts in overall water-splitting technology. Moreover, very few have been discovered in this field, thus reducing the discussion of this section; hence, a firm conclusion cannot be arrived. Shao et al. prepared SrNb0.1Co0.7Fe0.2O3−δ perovskite nanorods using SrCO3, Nb2O5, Co2O3, and Fe2O3. SrNb0.1Co0.7Fe0.2O3−δ supplied a low voltage of ∼1.68 V and a long-term stability of 30 h.
The highly efficient performances were attributed to the abundant surface oxygen vacancies, eg orbital filling, and metal–oxygen covalency. Herein, the reaction of OER follows two pathways: AEM and LOM method. AEM is an adsorbate evolution mechanism wherein HO˙, O˙, and HOO˙ are involved in the intermediate step. LOM is a lattice oxygen species, wherein lattice oxygen are exchanged with the surface oxygen vacancies. Further, the hydrogen evolution reaction follows the usual two pathways, namely, Volmer Heyrovsky and Volmer Tafel. The value of the Tafel slope determines the reaction pathway of cobalt-based perovskites.156 La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ perovskite oxides were prepared by the stoichiometric amounts of metal nitrate precursors, citric acid, and polyethylene glycol. Further, La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ perovskite oxides and 1T MoSe2 together formed a heterostructure, which exhibited long-term stability of over 1000 h at a high current density of 100 mA cm−2. Herein, due to the introduction of highly electron-withdrawing Mo into the perovskite lattice and the higher electrophilicity of cobalt, a higher covalency was achieved, which is expected in oxygen evolution reaction. Moreover, the local phase transition, synergetic effects, and increased surface area dramatically increased its stability towards overall water splitting.157
3.10. Cobalt-based MOFs
MOF-based cobalt catalysts or MOF-derived cobalt catalysts can be treated as efficient electrocatalysts, in which the MOFs provide the stable part of the metallic part. Sun et al. prepared Co–P/NC via calcination of their as-developed Co-based zeolitic imidazolate frameworks at the desired temperatures for 3 hours. Further, phosphatization was carried out using Co/NC-x and sodium hypophosphite. The Co–P/NC couple achieved an onset potential at ∼1.55 V in a two-electrode system. Herein, the performances were attributed to the large specific surface area and the abundant pores from the MOF-derived structure (Fig. 15).158 Lee et al. prepared CoNi-MOF using cobalt acetate tetrahydrate, nickel acetate trihydrate, and 2,6-naphthalene dicarboxylate acid using the hydrothermal method, followed by calcination. CoNi-MOF exhibited 1.64 V for overall water splitting to achieve 10 mA cm−2. Herein, numerous pores, high surface area, and synergy between cobalt and nickel were responsible for electrocatalysis.159 There are few reports wherein cobalt-based compounds have been embedded over metal–organic frameworks compared to metal organic framework-derived cobalt composites for overall water splitting. Hence, our discussion has shifted to metal–organic framework-derived cobalt-based composites. Herein, only their preparation, structural variation, and performances have been highlighted. Kim et al. firstly prepared Co(OH)2 NWs array via Co(NO3)2·6H2O, CO(NH2)2 and NH4F in the hydrothermal method. To make MOF-assisted Co(OH)2 NWs, 2-methylimidazole and previously prepared Co(OH)2 NWs were subjected to hydrothermal reaction for 12 h. This MOF-modified Co NW and Na2SeO3 were further subjected to hydrothermal reaction so as to develop the MOF-CoSeO3 NW hybrid. This 1D MOF-modified Co NW afforded 1.675 V at a current density of 100 mA cm−2 for overall water splitting.160 Tong et al. prepared Co/CoN/Co2P by Co-MOF and NaH2PO2·H2O in a nitrogen atmosphere. Co/CoN/Co2P exhibited 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.60 V. The excellent performances were attributed to the multiple active sites that originated from the MOF.132 Gong et al. prepared metal–organic-framework template-derived hierarchical porous CoP via the phosphatization of Co(OH)2 arrays and Co MOF on nickel foam in a furnace at 300 °C. This MOF derived CoP affords a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH at a cell voltage of 1.38 V. This MOF-derived CoP delivered its performances due to its abundant active sites.161 Zhao et al. prepared MOF-derived CoxNiyO/C and NaH2PO2·H2O by an upstream heating method. Li et al.162 developed MOF-derived CoTe2 encapsulated in nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube made from ZIF-67 polyhedron, Co(NO3)2·6H2O, and Te powder by the heating method. CoTe2@NCNTFs afforded a current density 10 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1.67 V. This excellent performance was attributed to its low-spin configuration t62ge1.
 Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of the two-step synthesis of Co–P/NC nanopolyhedrons. (b) Polarization curves of Co–P/NC and Pt/IrO2 catalyst couples for overall water splitting in 1.0 M KOH. The mass loadings of Co–P/NC and Pt/IrO2 couples were 1.0 and 0.5 mg cm−2, respectively. The inset is the expanded region around the onset of catalysis. (c) Long-term controlled potential electrolysis of Co–P/NC in 1.0 M KOH at η = 400 mV. The inset is the corresponding current change over time. Black lines were collected for background electrolysis without Co–P/NC as the electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Further, a long-term stability of 30 h appeared due to the abundant active sites as well as the interconnected pores through several CoTe2 nanotubes channel and higher surface area of the nitrogen-doped carbon network.162 The Co4Ni1P nanotubes supplied 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.59 V in an electrolyzer. The high performance of this MOF-derived Co4Ni1P among all the other discussed MOF arises due to its special nanotube morphology and the synergistic effect. Further, its long-term stability of 50 h was attributed to the surface area and large number of active pores.163Table 1 summarize the performances of cobalt-based electrocatalysts for overall water splitting in alkaline medium.
Table 1 Summarization of the catalytic performances for overall water splitting




Catalysts
Overpotential (mV) for HER at 10 mA cm−2
Overpotential (mV) for OER at 10 mA cm−2
Overpotential (mV) for overall water splitting
Substrate for overall water splitting
Medium for overall water splitting
Catalyst loading (overall water splitting)
Ref.




CoOx@CN
232
260
1.55@20
Ni foam
1 M KOH
2.1 mg cm−2

75



CoMnO@CN
71
263
1.5
Ni foam
1 M KOH
2 mg cm−2

164



NC/CuCo/CuCoOx
112
190
1.53
Ni foam
1 M KOH
1.5 mg cm−2

165



NiFe/NiCo2O4/N
105
340@1200
1.67
Ni foam
1 M KOH
—

166



FeOOH@CoN
—
254@20
1.59
Stainless steel
1 M KOH
—

126



CuCoO–NW
140
270@25
1.61
Ni foam
1 M KOH
1.2 mg cm−2

167



NiCo2O4
110
290
1.65
Ni foam
1 M NaOH
∼1 mg cm−2

20



CoO/N–MoS2/CF
78
458@ 50
1.5@53
Ni foam
1 M KOH
—

168



CoO(OH)0.75S0.25
166
378@30
—
Ni foam
1 M KOH
1.4 mg cm−2

108



Fe3O4–CoPx/TiN
—
331
1.75
Ni foam
1 M KOH
—

169



CoFePxOy(OH)z
57
282
1.56
Graphite plate
1 M NaOH
3.0 and 3.5 mg cm−2

170



Co5.47N NP@N–PC
149
248
1.62
—
1 M KOH
—

125



CoP@NF
100
300
1.62
Ni foam
1 M KOH
1.05 mg cm−2

171



CoSx/Ni3S2@NF
204
280@20
1.572
Ni foam
1 M KOH
—

172



Co0.9S0.58P0.42
—
266
1.59


1 M KOH
—

173



CoAl-LDH
67
250
1.75
Ni foam
1 M KOH
0.28 mg cm−2

174



CoNPs@C
153
270
1.65
Carbon cloth
1 M KOH
3.43 mg cm−2

93



MOF CoSeO3 NWs
150
290@50
1.675
Ni foam
1 M KOH
3.5 mg

160



CoO/MoOx
40
230
1.53
Ni foam
1 M KOH
0.7 mg cm−2

175



rGO/NMC–312 oxide
52
320
1.56
Ni form
1 M KOH
0.53 mg cm−2

176



FeCoNi–LTH/NiCo2O4/CC
151@20
302@50
1.65
Carbon cloth
1 M KOH
—

177



Co4N@NC
62
257
1.55
—
1 M KOH
0.285 mg cm−2

128



FeCo2S4/NF
132
270@50
1.56
Ni Form
1 M KOH
1 mg cm−2

178



Co3ZnC/Co–NCCP
188
400
1.65
Carbon cloth
1 M KOH



179



NiCoP
71
268
1.57
Ni foams
1 M KOH
—

180



Co–Ni–P-2
103
340


Ti sheet
1 M KOH
—

181



CoS2–MoS2
97
272
1.6
Carbon fiber
1 M KOH
1 mg cm−2

182



CoFe based LDH
70@15
345
1.63
Ni foam
1 M KOH
1 mg cm−2

183



Ni/Co hydr(oxy)oxid
132@20
338
1.71
Ni foam
1 M KOH
—

103



NiCoFexP/CC
39
275
1.51
Carbon cloth
1 M KOH
2 mg cm−2

184



CoP@NCHNCs
93
304
1.62
Ni foam
1 M KOH
1 mg cm−2

185



Ni0.33Co0.67S2 nanowires
334
295
1.57
Carbon cloth
1 M KOH
3.5 mg cm−2

186



Co1−xFex-LDH
273
249
1.59
Ni foam
1 M KOH
5.1 mg cm−2

187



CoFe–PBA
183.1
1.44 V
1.59
Ni foam
1 M KOH
0.01 mg cm−2

188



CuCo2Se4
125
320@50
1.782@50
Carbon fiber paper
1 M KOH
0.57 mg cm−2

113



Co(OH)2/Ag/FeP
118
236
1.56
Ti foil
1 M KOH
3.5 mg cm−2

189



CoP(MoP)–CoMoO3
198
296
1.55
Ni foam
1 M KOH
3 mg cm−2

115



Co–P films
94
345
1.56
Copper foil
1 M KOH
—

28



Co–MoS2
48
260
1.55
Carbon fibers
1 M KOH
—

190



CoSn2
196
299
1.55
Ni foam
1 M KOH
3 mg cm−2

191



CoS2 nanowires
217
299
1.66
Ni foam
1 M NaOH
—

192



CoMoOx
60
279
1.59
Ni foam
1 M KOH
—

193



Co0.75Ni0.25(OH)2
95
235
1.62
Carbon fiber paper
1 M KOH
0.2 mg cm−2

194



Co2P@PC/PG
39
272
1.567
Ni foam
1 M KOH
—

140



α-Co (OH)2
145
320
1.60
Carbon fiber paper
1 M KOH
0.157 mg cm−2

195



Mn–Co–P
66
350@50
1.74
Carbon paper
1 M KOH
1.7 mg cm−2

104



Co–Ru–MoS2 hybrid
52
308
1.67@20
—
1 M KOH
—

196



3D CoFeZr
104
—
1.63
Carbon cloth
1 M KOH
—

197



CoP–InNC@CN
159
270
1.58
Carbon cloth
1 M KOH
0.35 mg cm−2

107



Cu0.3Co2.7P/NC
220
190
1.74
Ni foam
1 M KOH
∼2 mg cm−2

99



Co/NBC-900 hybrid
117
302
1.68
Ni foam
1 M KOH
—

198



Co–P@PC
76
280
1.60
Carbon paper
1 M KOH
1.0 mg cm−2

199



Co/W–C@NCNSs (800)
252
323
1.68
GCE
1 M KOH
—

200



NiCoP@NC NA/NF
37
305
1.56
Ni foam
1 M KOH
3.5 mg cm−2

201



NiCoN NWs
145
360
—
Carbon cloth
1 M NaOH
—

202



W–CoP/CC
77
252
1.59
Carbon cloth
1 M KOH



203



CoS@Co(OH)2@aMoS2+x/NF
143
380
1.58
Ni foam
1 M KOH
1.64 mg cm−2

204



CoPO nanosheets
158
280
1.52
Ni foam
1 M KOH
2 mg cm−2

205



NiCo2S4
169
319
1.61
Ni foam
1 M KOH
0.2 mg cm−2

206



YP–Co (OH)F
55
238
1.5
Ni foam
1 M KOH
3.4 mg cm−2

207



Co3(OH)2(HPO4)2
87
182
1.54
Ni foam
1 M KOH
2 mg cm−2

208



Cu–Co3O4 NAs/NF
—
230
1.58
Ni foam
1 M KOH
—

209



CoSe2@MoSe2
183
309
1.524
Ni foam
1 M KOH
—

210





4. Conclusions
Cobalt-based catalysts, integrating their merits of catalytic sites, make a connection with homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts to attain high activity and robust durability. These catalysts are promising and impressive as their structural morphology and atomic ratio can be controlled. Recently, cobalt-based catalysts have been applied in vast energy applications, which further helps as an alternate source of energy in our present global warming situation. Moreover, these cobalt-based heterogeneous electrocatalyst contains the following merits. (i) eg orbital filling, spin states, d band position; (ii) the p orbital of the adsorbed hydroxide ions is directed towards the eg orbital of the Co atom;211 hence, electron transfer is accelerated. (iii) Further, the morphology of cobalt-based composites could be regulated by adjustable precursors, temperatures, and solvents. (iv) Recently, their controllable porosity and surface area through carbon-based material enhances their electrochemical performances. (v) Further, choosing a substrate during in situ synthesis (such as carbon fiber and nickel foam) could regulate their tunable structures and electrical conductivity. It has been noted that choosing nickel foam as the substrate could boost their water-splitting performances via the induction of their conductivity and honeycomb structures. (vi) Further, the synergy between different metal cations enhances their catalytic property rather than their single counterparts. In addition, cobalt-based oxides, sulfides, phosphides, nitrides, carbides, borides, perovskites, and their MOF-derived structures are prepared from controllable reagents subjected to heating at higher temperatures. The treatment at higher temperatures calcined the product, thus creating lower coordination and more unsaturated atoms, which is a practical requirement in the electrochemical application field. Further, the wall thickness and sheet thickness of the synthesized material also affects the electrochemical performances. The sheet-type cobalt-based sulfide compound with lower wall thickness regulates the lower overpotential. Cobalt-based phosphides have been much explored recently than other their synthesized derivatives due to their unique electronic structures, controllable morphology, as well as optimized energy. It has been noticed that their 1D nanowires with controllable thickness couple with different metal cation parts and enhance their electrochemical performances. The role of other morphologies cannot be ignored but it depends on their surrounding environment and electrical conductivity. Cobalt-based nitride, carbide, and boride analogs are still on the way of research. It has been noted that both cobalt-based nitrides and carbides have delivered their optimized electronic structures at their Fermi levels. Doping, adjusting the hetero atom, and embedding the conducting carbon also regulate the cell voltage and the long-term stability. MOF-derived cobalt analogs also provide higher electrochemical performances due to their abundant active sites as well as porosity and tunable morphology. Although the cell voltage of MOF-derived cobalt analogs lies in the same region with the other cobalt-based analogs, its long-term stability does not show superiority as expected. Beyond these, some challenges are required to control their performances such as catalyst loading, choosing the substrate, and concentration of the alkaline medium. By furnishing an optimized catalyst loading, an electrolyzer can deliver its highest activities and long-term stability. Further, alkaline impurities, glass cell contamination, and leaching of the catalyst part might decrease or increase their performances. Hence, choosing a special electrochemical cell with a pure solution could affect their performances. The role of cell binder and their wt% influence the kinetics of overall water splitting cell voltage, total current, and the long-term stability.
Besides the XAFS technique, the metal coordination and metal oxide bond cannot be explained. Hence, by exploring their proper structural environment, it could be easy to fix the ratio of the precursors materials. Further, the reaction intermediates are trapped by in situ Raman spectra or in situ IR spectra. These studies only explored the metal oxide bond formation with their different oxidation states. However, it should be more technically researched to record the all possible changes in surroundings. Hence, using proper realistic active sites, a stepwise pathway could be evaluated.
Concerning the applications of cobalt-based catalysts, most researchers are focused on the oxygen evolution reaction and hydrogen evolution in the alkaline electrolyzer. However, it could be further explored on lithium/sodium battery, solar-driven water splitting, electrochemical, and photochemical CO2 reduction. Though some works are continuing in progress, more actions should be encouraged to explore these materials in the future. Recently, acidic PEM electrocatalysis has been constructed, which supply cleaner and greener energy than the alkaline PEM cell. Hence, it could be further explored in their acidic PEM cell. Besides, this perspective suffers from some current limitations related to the present behavior of electrocatalysts. The addition of the MOF network and carbon material should influence their conductivity but their recent literature does not find any potential improvement in the performances. The mechanism of carbon and the synergistic effect should be potentially explored based on their orbital correlation. Further, perovskite structures have been investigated only in oxygen evolution reaction. At present, more attention should be paid to their current catalytic applications in the electrolyzer. Carbon and MOF-based structures should be investigated through DFT calculations so as to evaluate their proper geometries. Though the catalytic reaction is well elaborated in light of the anodic criteria, cathodic criteria have not been discussed. However, their in situ behavior during overall water splitting should be investigated. The catalytic surface-active sites, and the cathodic and anodic performances after long-term potential application in the electrolyzer have not been not explored till now. In addition, their ex situ observation after long-term application have not been discovered in detail. Hence, a combination of ex situ and in situ treatment of the current research converts cobalt-based materials as a future alternative and a promising green and sustainable energy storage material among all other noble metal-based catalysts such as Pt/C or Ir/C.
Conflicts of interest
The authors announce no conflicting financial interest.
Acknowledgements
AM is very much thankful to Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur for providing fellowship.
References
M. S. Faber and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3519–3542 RSC .
Z. Pu, Y. Xue, W. Li, I. S. Amiinu and S. Mu, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 2154–2159 RSC .
G. Li, D. Zhang, Q. Qiao, Y. Yu, D. Peterson, A. Zafar, R. Kumar, S. Curtarolo, F. Hunte and S. Shannon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16632–16638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, B. Huang, C. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. An, D. Zhou, H. Lin, M. K. Leung and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 593–603 RSC .
W. F. Chen, K. Sasaki, C. Ma, A. I. Frenkel, N. Marinkovic, J. T. Muckerman, Y. Zhu and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6131–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, C. Tian, L. Wang, A. Wu, M. Meng, L. Zhao and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6325–6329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, N. Cheng, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9577–9581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. V. Kolen'ko, X. Q. Bao, K. Kovnir and L. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8188–8192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, L. Hu, R. Liu, Y. Hu, T. Xiong, W. Qiu, M.-S. J. T. Balogun, A. Pan and Y. Tong, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 251, 181–194 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, T. Xiong, Y. Li, Y. Huang, Y. Li and M.-S. J. T. Balogun, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 16130–16138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Li, Y. Wang, C.-H. Liu, S.-L. Li, Y.-G. Wang, L.-Z. Dong, Z.-H. Dai, Y.-F. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–8 CrossRef .
M. Görlin, J. Ferreira de Araújo, H. Schmies, D. Bernsmeier, S. R. Dresp, M. Gliech, Z. Jusys, P. Chernev, R. Kraehnert and H. Dau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2070–2082 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Gebauer, P. Fischer, M. Wassner, T. Diemant, Z. Jusys, N. Hüsing and R. J. Behm, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 136–148 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. D. Ng, M. García-Melchor, M. Bajdich, P. Chakthranont, C. Kirk, A. Vojvodic and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–8 Search PubMed .
C.-W. Tung, Y.-Y. Hsu, Y.-P. Shen, Y. Zheng, T.-S. Chan, H.-S. Sheu, Y.-C. Cheng and H. M. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xie, R. Zhang, L. Cui, D. Liu, S. Hao, Y. Ma, G. Du, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1064–1068 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ma, B. Hu, W. Wu, X. Liu, J. Zai, C. Shu, T. T. Tsega, L. Chen, X. Qian and T. L. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. He, J. Zai, X. Liu, Y. Zhu, A. Iqbal, T. T. Tsega, Y. Zhang, N. Ali and X. Qian, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118594 CrossRef .
X. Gao, H. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Yu, Z. Hong, X. Zhang, C. Liang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6290–6294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-L. Feng, G. Yu, Y. Wu, G.-D. Li, H. Li, Y. Sun, T. Asefa, W. Chen and X. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14023–14026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, D. Pohl, B. Rellinghaus, R. Dong, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6702–6707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, H. Liang, F. Ming and Z. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 573–577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, P. Cui, W. Zhong, J. Li, X. Wang, Z. Wang and J. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13233–13236 RSC .
Y. Hu, D. Huang, J. Zhang, Y. Huang, M. S. J. T. Balogun and Y. Tong, ChemCatChem, 2019, 6051–6060 CrossRef CAS .
S. Torii, K. Jimura, S. Hayashi, R. Kikuchi and A. Takagaki, J. Catal., 2017, 355, 176–184 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ledendecker, S. Krick Calderón, C. Papp, H. P. Steinrück, M. Antonietti and M. Shalom, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12361–12365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, B. You, M. Sheng and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6251–6254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, K. Sun, S. Liu, X. Cao, K. Wu, W.-C. Cheong, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2610–2618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Balogun, W. Qiu, H. Yang, W. Fan, Y. Huang, P. Fang, G. Li, H. Ji and Y. Tong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3411–3416 RSC .
J. Zhang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13296–13300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Hernández-Pagán, N. M. Vargas-Barbosa, T. Wang, Y. Zhao, E. S. Smotkin and T. E. Mallouk, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7582–7589 RSC .
D. Kong, H. Wang, Z. Lu and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4897–4900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Faber, R. Dziedzic, M. A. Lukowski, N. S. Kaiser, Q. Ding and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10053–10061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, W. Xu, W. Zhu, Q. Yang, X. Lei, J. Liu, Y. Li, X. Sun and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6479–6482 RSC .
D. Kong, H. Wang, Z. Lu and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4897–4900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu and X.-B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7746–7786 RSC .
Y. Yan, B. Y. Xia, B. Zhao and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17587–17603 RSC .
H. Lin, N. Liu, Z. Shi, Y. Guo, Y. Tang and Q. Gao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5590–5598 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Liu, L. Xi, Y. Yu, N. Chen, S. Sun, W. Wang, K. M. Lange and B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3876–3879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov and U. Stimming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, J23–J26 CrossRef .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1972, 39, 163–184 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sheng, M. Myint, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1509–1512 RSC .
M. Miles and M. Thomason, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 1459 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Son, I. H. Kwak, Y. R. Lim and J. Park, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2819–2822 RSC .
Y. Dou, W. Zhang and A. Kaiser, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Danilovic, R. Subbaraman, D. Strmcnik, K. C. Chang, A. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12495–12498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mahmood, F. Li, S.-M. Jung, M. S. Okyay, I. Ahmad, S.-J. Kim, N. Park, H. Y. Jeong and J.-B. Baek, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, H. Liu, H. Shen, Y. Huang, S. Wang, L. Zheng and D. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909889 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tuo, X. Wang, C. Chen, X. Feng, Z. Liu, Y. Zhou and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 335, 135682 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vojvodic and J. K. Nørskov, Science, 2011, 334, 1355–1356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Parent and K. Sakai, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2070–2080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Augustyn and A. Manthiram, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3787–3791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Matsumoto, S. Yamada, T. Nishida and E. Sato, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 2360–2364 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ma, J. Zai, Y. Wang, Q. Qiao and X. Qian, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 1043–1047 CrossRef CAS ; K. He, T. Tadesse Tsega, X. Liu, J. Zai, X. H. Li, X. Liu, W. Li, N. Ali and X. Qian, Angew. Chem., 2019, 58, 11903–11909 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Huang, H. Wang, S. Wang, Z. Hu, L. Zhou, Z. Chen, Y. Jiang and X. Qian, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 5236–5244 RSC .
M. Zhang, J. Zai, J. Liu, M. Chen, Z. Wang, G. Li, X. Qian, L. Qian and X. Yu, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 9511–9516 RSC .
X. Li, G. Zhu, Q. Kang, Z.-D. Huang, X. Feng, Y. Li, R. Liu and Y. Ma, RSC Adv., 2015, 5 Search PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
P. W. Menezes, A. Indra, I. Zaharieva, C. Walter, S. Loos, S. Hoffmann, R. Schlögl, H. Dau and M. Driess, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 988–999 RSC .
N. C. S. Selvam, J. Lee, G. H. Choi, M. J. Oh, S. Xu, B. Lim and P. J. Yoo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27383–27393 RSC .
G. Huang, Z. Xiao, R. Chen and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1465–1468 RSC .
Z. Chen, C. X. Kronawitter and B. E. Koel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 29387–29393 RSC .
X. Zou, J. Su, R. Silva, A. Goswami, B. R. Sathe and T. Asefa, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7522–7524 RSC .
L. Xu, Q. Jiang, Z. Xiao, X. Li, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5277–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Quaino, F. Juarez, E. Santos and W. Schmickler, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 846–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-I. Kim, Y. J. Sa, T. S. Yoo, S. R. Choi, R. A. Afzal, T. Choi, Y.-S. Seo, K.-S. Lee, J. Y. Hwang and W. S. Choi, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaap9360 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, H. Wang, Z. Cui, Y. Li, S. Xin, J. Zhou, Y. Long, C. Jin and J. B. Goodenough, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav6262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pei, L. Xu and W. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 433, 256–263 CrossRef CAS .
A. Muthurasu, V. Maruthapandian and H. Y. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 202–210 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tahira, Z. H. Ibupoto, M. Vagin, U. Aftab, M. I. Abro, M. Willander and O. Nur, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 2879–2887 RSC .
X. Xu, Z. Huang, C. Zhao, X. Ding, X. Liu, D. Wang, Z. Hui, R. Jia and Y. Liu, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 13125–13132 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Kumar, P. Ilanchezhiyan, C. Siva, A. Madhankumar, T. Kang and D. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 391–400 CrossRef .
H. Jin, J. Wang, D. Su, Z. Wei, Z. Pang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, M. Antonietti and T. P. Fellinger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7655–7665 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, X. Yu, F. Yan, C. Li, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12046–12053 RSC .
L. Fang, Z. Jiang, H. Xu, L. Liu, X. Gu and Y. Wang, J. Catal., 2018, 357, 238–246 CrossRef .
B. X. Tao, X. L. Li, C. Ye, Q. Zhang, Y. H. Deng, L. Han, L. J. Li, H. Q. Luo and N. B. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18238–18245 RSC .
L. Hu, T. Xiong, R. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. Mao, M. S. Balogun and Y. Tong, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 6575–6583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, P. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Dai, Y. Ma, Y. Wang, Y. Jiang, M. Liu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15901–15912 RSC .
H. Wang, H.-W. Lee, Y. Deng, Z. Lu, P.-C. Hsu, Y. Liu, D. Lin and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
R. Elakkiya, R. Ramkumar and G. Maduraiveeran, Mater. Res. Bull., 2019, 116, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, W. Xi, C. Li, X. Li, J. Shi, Y. Shen, J. He, L. Zhang, L. Xie and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 371–377 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, W. Zhang, Y. Deng, C. Zhong, W. Hu and X. Han, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4816–4824 RSC .
J. Wang, H.-X. Zhong, Z.-L. Wang, F.-L. Meng and X.-B. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2342–2348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Q. Li, R. Si, G. D. Li, W. Li, D. P. Liu, D. Wang, L. Sun, Y. Zhang and X. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606200 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Souleymen, Z. Wang, C. Qiao, M. Naveed and C. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7592–7607 RSC .
Y. Tang, H. Yang, J. Sun, M. Xia, W. Guo, L. Yu, J. Yan, J. Zheng, L. Chang and F. Gao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 10459–10466 RSC .
C. Ray, S. C. Lee, K. V. Sankar, B. Jin, J. Lee, J. H. Park and S. C. Jun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37739–37749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fang, W. Li, Y. Guan, Y. Feng, H. Zhang, S. Wang and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701008 CrossRef .
C.-Z. Yuan, S.-L. Zhong, Y.-F. Jiang, Z. K. Yang, Z.-W. Zhao, S.-J. Zhao, N. Jiang and A.-W. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10561–10566 RSC .
Q. Jin, B. Ren, D. Li, H. Cui and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31913–31921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, L. Xie, J. Yang, R. Kong, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun and L. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1840–1845 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Vigil and T. N. Lambert, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 105814–105819 RSC .
X. Zhao, Y. Fan, H. Wang, C. Gao, Z. Liu, B. Li, Z. Peng, J.-H. Yang and B. Liu, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 6516–6522 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiao, Y.-X. Zhou and H.-L. Jiang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1690–1695 RSC .
S. V. Mohite, R. Xing, B. Li, S. S. Latthe, Y. Zhao, X. Li, L. Mao and S. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 1996–2004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, C. Zhu, B. Z. Xu, S. Fu, M. H. Engelhard, R. Ye, D. Du, S. P. Beckman and Y. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601555 CrossRef .
Z. Yin, C. Zhu, C. Li, S. Zhang, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19129–19138 RSC .
H. Liang, A. N. Gandi, D. H. Anjum, X. Wang, U. Schwingenschlögl and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7718–7725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, M. Yan, X. Zhou, Z. Q. Huang, Z. Xia, C. R. Chang, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6785–6796 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chaturvedi, S. Sarker, X. Chen, S. Das, H. Luo and S. N. Smirnov, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 11303–11312 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tang, Y. Zeng, B. Wei, H. Liang, J. Wu, P. Yao and Z. Wang, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1900066 CrossRef .
L. Yan, L. Cao, P. Dai, X. Gu, D. Liu, L. Li, Y. Wang and X. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703455 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, X. Wang, A. Li, X. Zheng, L. Peng, J. Huang, Z. Deng, H. Chen and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17529–17535 RSC .
L. Chai, Z. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Xu, L. Zhang, T. T. Li, Y. Hu, J. Qian and S. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ren, X. Ren, L. Zhang, C. Fu, X. Li, Y. Zhang, B. Gao, L. Yang, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5229–5236 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, T. Wu, G. Fu, T. Gao, J. Han, T. Yao, Y. Zhang, W. Zhong, X. Wang and B. Song, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1744–1752 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, Y. Zhang, H. He, L. Peng, S. Xiao, S. Yao and P. Xiao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10896–10899 RSC .
W. Li, G. Cheng, M. Sun, Z. Wu, G. Liu, D. Su, B. Lan, S. Mai, L. Chen and L. Yu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 17084–17092 RSC .
Y. Zhao, B. Jin, Y. Zheng, H. Jin, Y. Jiao and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801926 CrossRef .
X. Cao, J. E. Medvedeva and M. Nath, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3092–3103 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, X. Gao, D. Xiong, F. Wei, W. G. Song, J. Xu and L. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602579 CrossRef .
L. Yu, Y. Xiao, C. Luan, J. Yang, H. Qiao, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Dai, Y. Yang and H. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6890–6899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, C. Zhang and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 3372–3381 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, T. Zhang, X. Zhuang, C. S. Kim, C. Yuan and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701589 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Mei, H. Liang, B. Wei, H. Shi, F. Ming, X. Xu and Z. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 290, 82–89 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, M. R. Lohe, J. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 478–483 RSC .
X. Xu, P. Du, Z. Chen and M. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10933–10939 RSC .
W. Li, X. Gao, D. Xiong, F. Wei, W. G. Song, J. Xu and L. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602579 CrossRef .
K. Liu, F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, Z. Wang, K. Xu, Y. Zhang, Z. Cheng, X. Zhan and J. He, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3995–4001 RSC .
Z. Wu, J. Li, Z. Zou and X. Wang, J Solid State Electrochem., 2018, 22, 1785–1794 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xue, J. Kang, D. Guo, C. Zhu, C. Li, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 273, 229–238 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Ha, Y. Liu, H. Wang, H. Yang, H. Xu, Y. Li and R. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7134–7144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, H. Yang, J. Chen, T. Xiong, M.-S. J. T. Balogun and Y. Tong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5152–5158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, X. Chen, X. Zhong, S. Li, T. Liu, G. Zhuang, X. Li, S. Deng, D. Mei and J. G. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704169 CrossRef .
W. Yuan, S. Wang, Y. Ma, Y. Qiu, Y. An and L. Cheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 692–700 CrossRef CAS .
R.-Q. Li, P. Hu, M. Miao, Y. Li, X.-F. Jiang, Q. Wu, Z. Meng, Z. Hu, Y. Bando and X.-B. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24767–24772 RSC .
X. Zhong, Y. Jiang, X. Chen, L. Wang, G. Zhuang, X. Li and J.-G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10575–10584 RSC .
Y. Fang, Y. Xue, L. Hui, H. Yu, Y. Liu, C. Xing, F. Lu, F. He, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 591–597 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, Y. Hu, R. Liu, Y. Mao, M.-S. J. T. Balogun and Y. Tong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 11402–11410 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bao, Z. Wang, J. Xie, L. Xu, F. Lei, M. Guan, Y. Huang, Y. Zhao, J. Xia and H. Li, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 2964–2970 RSC .
P. F. Liu, S. Yang, B. Zhang and H. G. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34474–34481 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, J. Bao, M. Guan, Y. Zhao, J. Lian, J. Qiu, L. Xu, Y. Huang, J. Qian and H. Li, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 8372–8376 RSC .
M. Arif, G. Yasin, M. Shakeel, X. Fang, R. Gao, S. Ji and D. Yan, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 1045–1052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Arif, G. Yasin, M. Shakeel, M. A. Mushtaq, W. Ye, X. Fang, S. Ji and D. Yan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 520–531 RSC .
L. Yu, H. Zhou, J. Sun, F. Qin, D. Luo, L. Xie, F. Yu, J. Bao, Y. Li and Y. Yu, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 327–336 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, D. Cao and Y. Gong, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 1933–1944 RSC .
R. Yang, Y. Zhou, Y. Xing, D. Li, D. Jiang, M. Chen, W. Shi and S. Yuan, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 253, 131–139 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Liu, S. Yang, B. Zhang and H. G. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34474–34481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Masa, P. Weide, D. Peeters, I. Sinev, W. Xia, Z. Sun, C. Somsen, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502313 CrossRef .
N. Xu, G. Cao, Z. Chen, Q. Kang, H. Dai and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12379–12384 RSC .
Y. Li, B. Huang, Y. Sun, M. Luo, Y. Yang, Y. Qin, L. Wang, C. Li, F. Lv and W. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1804212 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, D. Nie, M. Song, T. Jiao, G. Fu and X. Liu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7506–7512 RSC .
Y. Li, B. Huang, Y. Sun, M. Luo, Y. Yang, Y. Qin, L. Wang, C. Li, F. Lv and W. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1804212 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, Q. Kang, G. Cao, N. Xu, H. Dai and P. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 6076–6087 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Z. Yao, C. Shang and E. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39312–39317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, T. Liu, L. Xie, C. Tang, D. Liu, S. Hao, F. Qu, G. Du, Y. Ma and A. M. Asiri, Small, 2017, 13, 1700805 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jiang, Q. Liu, C. Zeng and L. Ai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16929–16935 RSC .
T. Zhao, J. Gao, J. Wu, P. He, Y. Li and J. Yao, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1800969 CrossRef .
S. Dutta, A. Indra, H. Han and T. Song, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3956–3964 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, G. Gao, J. Hao, M. Wang, H. Zhu, S. Lu, F. Duan, W. Dong, M. Du and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 43261–43269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, C. Chen, Z. M. Baiyee, Z. Shao and F. Ciucci, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 9869–9921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, J. Yu, Y. Chen, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1691–1697 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, Y. Zhong, Y. Bu, X. Chen, Q. Zhong, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602122 CrossRef .
N. K. Oh, C. Kim, J. Lee, O. Kwon, Y. Choi, G. Y. Jung, H. Y. Lim, S. K. Kwak, G. Kim and H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, N. Jiang, M. Sheng, S. Gul, J. Yano and Y. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7636–7642 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, W. Zheng, S. Ran, S. T. Boles and L. Y. S. Lee, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800849 CrossRef .
A. Muthurasu, B. Dahal, K. Chhetri and H. Y. Kim, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 3817–3827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Li, R. Wang, B. He and Y. Gong, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 284, 504–512 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Huang, W. Gao, Y. Tang, P. Jiang, K. Lan, R. Yang, B. Wang and R. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3684–3691 RSC .
L. Yan, L. Cao, P. Dai, X. Gu, D. Liu, L. Li, Y. Wang and X. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703455 CrossRef .
J. Li, Y. Wang, T. Zhou, H. Zhang, X. Sun, J. Tang, L. Zhang, A. M. Al-Enizi, Z. Yang and G. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14305–14312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, S. Cao and L. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704447 CrossRef .
C. Xiao, Y. Li, X. Lu and C. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3515–3523 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuang, P. Han, Q. Wang, J. Li and G. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8555–8561 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pang, A. Barras, Y. Zhang, M. A. Amin, A. Addad, S. Szunerits and R. Boukherroub, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 31889–31898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guo, J. Sun, X. Hu, Y. Wang, Y. Sun, R. Hu, L. Yu, H. Zhao and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 2, 40–47 CrossRef .
F.-T. Tsai, H.-C. Wang, C.-H. Ke and W.-F. Liaw, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5298–5307 CAS .
B. Qiu, A. Han, D. Jiang, T. Wang and P. Du, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 2360–2369 CrossRef .
S. Shit, S. Chhetri, W. Jang, N. C. Murmu, H. Koo, P. Samanta and T. Kuila, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27712–27722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dai, H. Geng, J. Wang, Y. Luo, B. Li, Y. Zong, J. Yang, Y. Guo, Y. Zheng and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11031–11040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Zhou, L. Wu, Y. Sun, X. Xu, W. Hou, X. Zhou and Y. Du, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10087–10096 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, L. Tian, S. Atkins, Y. Liu, J. Murowchick and X. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 3743–3749 CrossRef CAS .
R. Miao, J. He, S. Sahoo, Z. Luo, W. Zhong, S.-Y. Chen, C. Guild, T. Jafari, B. Dutta and S. A. Cetegen, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 819–832 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Bai, Y. Han, Z. Yu, S. Zhang, G. Wang, J. Wei, Q. Wu and K. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36917–36926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, Y. Ou, Y. Li, D. Gao, Y. Zhang and P. Xiao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11724–11733 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, Y. Bai, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, N. Zhang, G. Wang, J. Wei, Q. Wu and K. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6245–6252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-G. Wang, W. Hua, M. Li, H. Liu, M. Shao and B. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41237–41245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pei, Y. Yang, F. Zhang, P. Dong, R. Baines, Y. Ge, H. Chu, P. M. Ajayan, J. Shen and M. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31887–31896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, B. Zhang, Z. Li, S. Cao, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, Z. Gao and L. Sun, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4612–4621 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Liu, S. Yang, B. Zhang and H. G. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34474–34481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ray, S. C. Lee, B. Jin, A. Kundu, J. H. Park and S. C. Jun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6146–6156 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, M. Wang, S. Xiang, J. Liu, S. Feng, C. Wang, N. Zhang, T. Feng, M. Yang and K. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10912–10919 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. Ye, X. L. Li, Y. H. Deng, B. X. Tao, W. Xiao, L. J. Li, N. B. Li and H. Q. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27723–27733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rajeshkhanna, T. I. Singh, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42453–42468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. He, B. Cui, B. Hu, J. Liu, K. Tian, M. Wang, Y. Song, S. Fang, Z. Zhang and Q. Jia, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3915–3928 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ding, Y. Xia, Q. Li, S. Dong, X. Jiao and D. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7936–7945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiong, Y. Wang, P. F. Liu, L. R. Zheng, G. Wang, H. G. Yang, P. K. Wong, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801450 CrossRef PubMed .
P. W. Menezes, C. Panda, S. Garai, C. Walter, A. Guiet and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 15457–15462 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, S. Bhoyate, P. K. Kahol, K. Siam, T. P. Poudel, S. R. Mishra, F. Perez, A. Gupta, G. Gupta and R. K. Gupta, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 1240–1246 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ren, D. Li, Q. Jin, H. Cui and C. Wang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 413–420 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Li, D. Y. Wu, G. R. Shen, C. Zou, Y. Feng, H. Liu, C. K. Dong and X. W. Du, Small, 2019, 15, 1804832 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Shilpa, A. Nadeema and S. Kurungot, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 5300–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Kwon, T. T. Debela, I. H. Kwak, Y. C. Park, J. Seo, J. Y. Shim, S. J. Yoo, J. G. Kim, J. Park and H. S. Kang, Small, 2020, 16, 2000081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, D. Chen, G. Luo, Y. R. Lu, C. Chen, Y. Zou, C. L. Dong, Y. Li and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901439 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Liu, Q. L. Hong, Q. H. Li, Y. Du, H. X. Zhang, S. Chen, T. Zhou and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801136 CrossRef .
J. Wu, D. Wang, S. Wan, H. Liu, C. Wang and X. Wang, Small, 2019, 1900550 Search PubMed .
T. Zhao, J. Gao, J. Wu, P. He, Y. Li and J. Yao, Energ. Tech., 2019, 7, 1800969 CrossRef .
B. Cao, Y. Cheng, M. Hu, P. Jing, Z. Ma, B. Liu, R. Gao and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906316 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, K. Feng and Z. Chen, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1908–1911 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, X. Ren, L. Zhang, C. Fu, X. Li, Y. Zhang, B. Gao, L. Yang, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5229–5236 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoon and K. S. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7386–7393 CrossRef CAS .
G. Anandhababu, Y. Huang, D. D. Babu, M. Wu and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706120 CrossRef .
J. Yu, C. Lv, L. Zhao, L. Zhang, Z. Wang and Q. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701396 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, B. Wang, L. Li and S. Yang, Small, 2019, 15, 1904105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Menezes, C. Panda, C. Walter, M. Schwarze and M. Driess, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808632 CrossRef .
Y. Tian, L. Cao and P. Qin, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 4420–4426 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, W. Wang, S. Huang, P. Ning, Y. Wu, C. Gao, T.-T. Le, J. Zai, Y. Jiang and Z. Hu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 326–335 RSC .
G. Li, Q. Xu, W. Shi, C. Fu, L. Jiao, M. E. Kamminga, M. Yu, H. Tüysüz, N. Kumar and V. Süβ, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw9867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Anurupa Maiti	Ms Anurupa Maiti is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the Department of Chemistry, Indian institute of Technology Kharagpur. She obtained her B.Sc. and M.Sc. degree in Chemistry from Vidyasagar University, Medinipur. Her current research mainly focuses on the design and development of new nanomaterials and their current behavior as electrocatalysts.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic design of a cobalt-based electrocatalyst for overall water splitting.	 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic design of electrolysis through overall water splitting reaction.	 
2H+ + 2e− = H2	(1)
H2O = 2H+ + ½ O2 + 2e−	(2)
H2O = H2 + ½ O2	(3)
2H2O + 2e− = H2 + 2OH−	(4)
2OH− = H2O + ½ O2 + 2e−	(5)
H2O = H2 + ½O2	(6)
H2O + M + e− = MHads + OH−	(7)
MHads + H2O + e− = M + OH− + H2	(8)
2MHads = 2M + H2	(9)

 	Fig. 2  Exchange current densities, log (i0), on monometallic surfaces plotted as a function of the calculated HBE. The i0s for non-Pt metals were obtained by extrapolation of the Tafel plots between −1 and −5 mA cm−2 to the reversible potential of the HER and then normalization by the ECSA of these metal surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
OH− + * = ˙OH + e−	(10)
˙OH + OH− = ˙O + H2O + e	(11)
˙O + OH− = ˙OOH + e−	(12)
˙OOH + OH− = * + O2 + H2O + e−	(13)

 	Fig. 3  (a) “volcano plot” for the reaction rate. (b) Descriptor choice with respect to the eg symmetry of the metal oxides (c) schematic of the occupancy of the d states with the projected density of states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright © 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) OER volcano plot for metal oxides. (b) Chronological trend in the overpotential of various OER catalysts in acidic and alkaline media. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright © 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 5  An alkaline electrolyzer using the two-electrode configuration. (a) is the current–potential plot of an alkaline electrolyzer using LiCoBPO∥LiCoBPO and NaCoBPO∥NaCoBPO on NF as both the cathode and anode (bare NF is shown in brown) in 1 M KOH at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The inset of (a) shows the stability of the electrodes at an applied bias of 1.53 (LiCoBPO) and 1.58 V (NaCoBPO) (CA). (b) The CA of LiCoBPO was further investigated for ∼73 days and yielded continuous growth in the current, demonstrating the undying nature of the catalysts. The inset of (b) shows the schematic view of an electrolyzer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2019. The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
ERHE = Ereference + 0.059 × pH	(14)

 	Fig. 6  (a) HER LSV curves of NiCo–NiCoO2@NC, NiCo@NC, and NiCoO2@NC on GCE; (b) OER LSV curves of NiCo–NiCoO2@NC, NiCo@NC, and NiCoO2@NC on GCE; (c) LSV curves of NiCo–NiCoO2@NC on Ni foam for overall water splitting; (d) LSV of water electrolysis using NiCo–NiCoO2@NC as both the HER and OER catalyst (both loaded into Ni foam at a loading rate of 3 mg cm−2 based on the active mass in 1 M KOH); (e) time dependence of the current density at a voltage of 1.45 V for NiCo–NiCoO2@NC; (f) optical photograph showing the generation of hydrogen and oxygen bubbles on Ni foam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright@2017. Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TEM image of pristine CoO/CNF. The lattice structure and the FFT pattern indicate the single-crystalline nature of the pristine particle. (b) TEM image of 1-cycle CoO/CNF exhibits the defects, lattice distortions, and expanded (111) spacing. (c) TEM image of 2-cycle CoO/CNF shows ultra-small, interconnected NPs. The sizes are ∼2–5 nm. (d) TEM image of 5-cycle CoO/CNF shows a similar domain size to the 2-cycle one. The yellow dashed line in the upper image represents the boundary of the whole particle. The zoom-in image indicates the detachment of the ultra-small NPs from the mother particle. Scale bars in a–d, upper, 5 nm; lower, 2 nm. (e) OER catalytic activities of CoO/CNF on CFP in 0.1 M KOH under different galvanostatic cycles. The polarization scan rate is 5 mV s−1. Two-cycle CoO/CNF gives the best performance. (f) The Tafel plots of the OER polarization curves. (g) Electrochemical double layer capacitance of CoO/CNF under different cycles. The error bars include three identical samples tested for each cycle number. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright © 2015, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Polarization curves of different catalytic electrodes for HER and OER in 1 M KOH at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. (b) The corresponding Tafel plots. (c) Chronoamperometric responses of CP/CTs/Co–S, Pt/C, and RuO2 electrodes at constant potentials for HER and/or OER. (d) Schematic illustration of the operating principle of CP/CTs/Co–S. (e) Polarization curves for overall water splitting with a CP/CTs/Co–S electrode as both the anode and cathode in 1 M KOH with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. The benchmarking RuO2 (+) and Pt/C (−) electrodes were tested side by side. (f) The corresponding chronoamperometric responses of CP/CTs/Co–S electrodes and the benchmarking combination at constant potentials of 1.743 and 1.679 V, respectively. (g) Amount of gaseous products theoretically calculated and experimentally measured versus time at a constant potential of 2 V. (h) Optical photograph of overall water splitting powered by an AAA battery with a nominal voltage of 1.5 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Hydrogen adsorption free energy, ΔGH, on different sites for CoP3(200) surfaces: (a) CoP3(200) surface without Ni doping, (b) CoP3(200) surface with one Ni atom doped on the terminal atoms, and (c) CoP3(200) surface with four Ni atoms doped on the terminal atoms (the top P atom in the middle of the lattice is considered as the P-1 site and the top P atom located at the lattice is considered as the P-2 site). (d) Schematic design of the synthesized Co1−x NixP3 nanoneedles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Comparison of LSV curves of the CuCo2Se4 catalyst measured in N2-saturated 1.0 M KOH before and after 8 h chronoamperometry. The inset shows the chronoamperometric measurement of CuCo2Se4 under continuous O2 evolution. (b) Comparison of the PXRD pattern of CuCo2Se4 on an Au substrate before and after 8 h chronoamperometry. XPS spectra of (c) Co 2p, (d) Cu 2p, and (e) Se 3d after chronoamperometric measurement for 8 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  First-principles calculations via DFT methods on NC, Co4N, and Co4N@NC. (a) Side view of the model structure of the Co4N@NC system. The C, N, and Co atoms are presented in gray, green, and yellow, respectively. (b) Density of states (DOS) of NC, Co4N, and Co4N@NC. The Fermi level is shifted to 0 eV. (c) Projected DOS (PDOS) of the Co 3d orbitals from Co4N and Co4N@NC. The dashed lines indicate the d-band center for each system. (d) Plots of GH˙ for Co4N, NC, and Co4N@NC. The calculated free energy diagrams for the OER of NC (e) and Co4N@NC (f). Schematic design (g). Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Polarization curves for overall water splitting at the scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (b) Chronoamperometric measurement of overall water splitting at the applied potential of 1.63 V. Inset of (b) photograph of the system showing hydrogen (left) and oxygen (right) generation during water electrolysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Co1–Fe1–B–P nanochains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2019 © The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Scheme of electron transfers for Co3C and V0.28Co2.72C. (b) Bader charge of Co, V, O, and H for Co3C and V0.28Co2.72C. (c–f) Charge density difference analysis of VxCo3−xC during the OER processes. (g) The optimized (100) plane of V0.28Co2.72C. (h) Gibbs free energy of the four parts during the OER process for V0.28Co2.72C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of the two-step synthesis of Co–P/NC nanopolyhedrons. (b) Polarization curves of Co–P/NC and Pt/IrO2 catalyst couples for overall water splitting in 1.0 M KOH. The mass loadings of Co–P/NC and Pt/IrO2 couples were 1.0 and 0.5 mg cm−2, respectively. The inset is the expanded region around the onset of catalysis. (c) Long-term controlled potential electrolysis of Co–P/NC in 1.0 M KOH at η = 400 mV. The inset is the corresponding current change over time. Black lines were collected for background electrolysis without Co–P/NC as the electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

CoOx@CN	232	260	1.55@20	Ni foam	1 M KOH	2.1 mg cm−2	
75

CoMnO@CN	71	263	1.5	Ni foam	1 M KOH	2 mg cm−2	
164

NC/CuCo/CuCoOx	112	190	1.53	Ni foam	1 M KOH	1.5 mg cm−2	
165

NiFe/NiCo2O4/N	105	340@1200	1.67	Ni foam	1 M KOH	—	
166

FeOOH@CoN	—	254@20	1.59	Stainless steel	1 M KOH	—	
126

CuCoO–NW	140	270@25	1.61	Ni foam	1 M KOH	1.2 mg cm−2	
167

NiCo2O4	110	290	1.65	Ni foam	1 M NaOH	∼1 mg cm−2	
20

CoO/N–MoS2/CF	78	458@ 50	1.5@53	Ni foam	1 M KOH	—	
168

CoO(OH)0.75S0.25	166	378@30	—	Ni foam	1 M KOH	1.4 mg cm−2	
108

Fe3O4–CoPx/TiN	—	331	1.75	Ni foam	1 M KOH	—	
169

CoFePxOy(OH)z	57	282	1.56	Graphite plate	1 M NaOH	3.0 and 3.5 mg cm−2	
170

Co5.47N NP@N–PC	149	248	1.62	—	1 M KOH	—	
125

CoP@NF	100	300	1.62	Ni foam	1 M KOH	1.05 mg cm−2	
171

CoSx/Ni3S2@NF	204	280@20	1.572	Ni foam	1 M KOH	—	
172

Co0.9S0.58P0.42	—	266	1.59	
	1 M KOH	—	
173

CoAl-LDH	67	250	1.75	Ni foam	1 M KOH	0.28 mg cm−2	
174

CoNPs@C	153	270	1.65	Carbon cloth	1 M KOH	3.43 mg cm−2	
93

MOF CoSeO3 NWs	150	290@50	1.675	Ni foam	1 M KOH	3.5 mg	
160

CoO/MoOx	40	230	1.53	Ni foam	1 M KOH	0.7 mg cm−2	
175

rGO/NMC–312 oxide	52	320	1.56	Ni form	1 M KOH	0.53 mg cm−2	
176

FeCoNi–LTH/NiCo2O4/CC	151@20	302@50	1.65	Carbon cloth	1 M KOH	—	
177

Co4N@NC	62	257	1.55	—	1 M KOH	0.285 mg cm−2	
128

FeCo2S4/NF	132	270@50	1.56	Ni Form	1 M KOH	1 mg cm−2	
178

Co3ZnC/Co–NCCP	188	400	1.65	Carbon cloth	1 M KOH	
	
179

NiCoP	71	268	1.57	Ni foams	1 M KOH	—	
180

Co–Ni–P-2	103	340	
	Ti sheet	1 M KOH	—	
181

CoS2–MoS2	97	272	1.6	Carbon fiber	1 M KOH	1 mg cm−2	
182

CoFe based LDH	70@15	345	1.63	Ni foam	1 M KOH	1 mg cm−2	
183

Ni/Co hydr(oxy)oxid	132@20	338	1.71	Ni foam	1 M KOH	—	
103

NiCoFexP/CC	39	275	1.51	Carbon cloth	1 M KOH	2 mg cm−2	
184

CoP@NCHNCs	93	304	1.62	Ni foam	1 M KOH	1 mg cm−2	
185

Ni0.33Co0.67S2 nanowires	334	295	1.57	Carbon cloth	1 M KOH	3.5 mg cm−2	
186

Co1−xFex-LDH	273	249	1.59	Ni foam	1 M KOH	5.1 mg cm−2	
187

CoFe–PBA	183.1	1.44 V	1.59	Ni foam	1 M KOH	0.01 mg cm−2	
188

CuCo2Se4	125	320@50	1.782@50	Carbon fiber paper	1 M KOH	0.57 mg cm−2	
113

Co(OH)2/Ag/FeP	118	236	1.56	Ti foil	1 M KOH	3.5 mg cm−2	
189

CoP(MoP)–CoMoO3	198	296	1.55	Ni foam	1 M KOH	3 mg cm−2	
115

Co–P films	94	345	1.56	Copper foil	1 M KOH	—	
28

Co–MoS2	48	260	1.55	Carbon fibers	1 M KOH	—	
190

CoSn2	196	299	1.55	Ni foam	1 M KOH	3 mg cm−2	
191

CoS2 nanowires	217	299	1.66	Ni foam	1 M NaOH	—	
192

CoMoOx	60	279	1.59	Ni foam	1 M KOH	—	
193

Co0.75Ni0.25(OH)2	95	235	1.62	Carbon fiber paper	1 M KOH	0.2 mg cm−2	
194

Co2P@PC/PG	39	272	1.567	Ni foam	1 M KOH	—	
140

α-Co (OH)2	145	320	1.60	Carbon fiber paper	1 M KOH	0.157 mg cm−2	
195

Mn–Co–P	66	350@50	1.74	Carbon paper	1 M KOH	1.7 mg cm−2	
104

Co–Ru–MoS2 hybrid	52	308	1.67@20	—	1 M KOH	—	
196

3D CoFeZr	104	—	1.63	Carbon cloth	1 M KOH	—	
197

CoP–InNC@CN	159	270	1.58	Carbon cloth	1 M KOH	0.35 mg cm−2	
107

Cu0.3Co2.7P/NC	220	190	1.74	Ni foam	1 M KOH	∼2 mg cm−2	
99

Co/NBC-900 hybrid	117	302	1.68	Ni foam	1 M KOH	—	
198

Co–P@PC	76	280	1.60	Carbon paper	1 M KOH	1.0 mg cm−2	
199

Co/W–C@NCNSs (800)	252	323	1.68	GCE	1 M KOH	—	
200

NiCoP@NC NA/NF	37	305	1.56	Ni foam	1 M KOH	3.5 mg cm−2	
201

NiCoN NWs	145	360	—	Carbon cloth	1 M NaOH	—	
202

W–CoP/CC	77	252	1.59	Carbon cloth	1 M KOH	
	
203

CoS@Co(OH)2@aMoS2+x/NF	143	380	1.58	Ni foam	1 M KOH	1.64 mg cm−2	
204

CoPO nanosheets	158	280	1.52	Ni foam	1 M KOH	2 mg cm−2	
205

NiCo2S4	169	319	1.61	Ni foam	1 M KOH	0.2 mg cm−2	
206

YP–Co (OH)F	55	238	1.5	Ni foam	1 M KOH	3.4 mg cm−2	
207

Co3(OH)2(HPO4)2	87	182	1.54	Ni foam	1 M KOH	2 mg cm−2	
208

Cu–Co3O4 NAs/NF	—	230	1.58	Ni foam	1 M KOH	—	
209

CoSe2@MoSe2	183	309	1.524	Ni foam	1 M KOH	—	
210


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
