Atomic (single, double, and triple atoms) catalysis: frontiers, opportunities, and challenges  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA11416A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA11416A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3492-3515Atomic (single, double, and triple atoms) catalysis: frontiers, opportunities, and challenges

        
          
            Z. W. 
            Chen†
, 
      
        
          
            L. X. 
            Chen†
, 
      
        
          
            C. C. 
            Yang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Q. 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Automobile Materials, Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun 130022, China. E-mail: ccyang@jlu.edu.cn; jiangq@jlu.edu.cn
Received 
      27th November 2018
    , Accepted 23rd January 2019First published on 23rd January 2019AbstractThe atomic dispersing of metal atoms supported on an optimal substrate exhibits an ideal strategy for maximizing metal utilization for catalysis, which is particularly significant for exploiting new catalysts with low cost and high catalytic efficiency. The dramatic development of atomic metal catalysts, including single atom catalysts (SACs), double atoms catalysts (DACs), and triple atoms catalysts (TACs), has spawned two remarkable platforms: (1) bridging homogeneous catalysts and heterogeneous catalysts; (2) linking theoretical calculations and experimental results. In this review, recent syntheses, characterizations, and applications of SACs, DACs, and TACs are highlighted through a focus on various applied substrates. We extensively discuss the synthetic strategies of successfully achieving SACs, DACs, and TACs. Moreover, the opportunities and challenges in developing SACs, DACs, and TACs are pointed out, together with the prospects for the development of atomic catalysis.Z. W. ChenZhi Wen Chen is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, China. His research interests focus on the design of catalysts combining two dimension materials and metals to improve the selectivity and activity through density functional theory calculations. Some of his work is carried out in close collaboration with experiments.L. X. ChenLi Xin Chen is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, China. Her research interests focus on the synthesis of MoS2 nanomaterials and their applications for the hydrogen evolution reaction and in batteries. Some of her work is carried out in close collaboration with density functional theory.C. C. YangChun Cheng Yang received his B.Sc. and Ph.D. from Jilin University in 2001 and 2006, respectively. He is currently working as a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University. He previously worked as a postdoctoral fellow at The University of New South Wales and The University of Sydney for 7 years. His research interests focus on micro- and nanoscale energy materials. He has published 47 scientific articles in international peer-reviewed journals.Q. JiangDr Jiang obtained a doctorate (Ph.D.) in Chemistry from the University of Stuttgart, Germany in 1990. Since 1992, he has been a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, China. He has published more than 500 scientific articles. His publications have been cited more than 14000 times and he has a H-index of 63. He was elected as a Member of the EU Academy of Sciences in 2018, and an Academician of the Asia Pacific Academy of Materials in 2015. He is a Fellow of The Institute of Physics (U.K.), and he is a member of the editorial board or advisory boards of several journals. His research interests focus on the synthesis of nanomaterials, as well as their applications in catalysis, energy storage and conversion, and the interface thermodynamics and kinetics of nanomaterials.
1. Introduction
Ubiquitous chemical reactions are the foundation of human survival and social development. With the development of society and the progress of science and technology, all chemical reactions are required to possess high selectivity and a fast reaction rate,1 especially those chemical reactions involving energy storage and conversion systems, such as metal–air batteries,2 fuel cells,3 the carbon cycle,4 and ammonia synthesis technology,5 which usually suffer from sluggish kinetics and low efficiency. The development of environmentally-friendly and powerful energy systems is severely limited and the energy crisis and environmental pollution are thus becoming more and more serious. As a result, an optimal catalyst, the core part of improving the efficiency of chemical reactions, has been one of the most important issues and a long-standing goal in modern society.
Highly efficient and low-cost catalysts have always been our aim, with a low energy barrier and high selectivity toward definite products for catalytic reactions. Metal-based catalysts are a major category of heterogeneous catalysts due to their high stability and reusability.6 It is well established that decreasing the dimension and size of active materials can effectively increase their catalytic performance. The number of active atoms (on the surface) in comparison with their total number of atoms is profoundly increased with the low dimension and small size of catalysts.7 Owing to their favourable geometric and electronic effects, nanocatalysts, with their abundant highly reactive surface sites, have a great advantage in catalytic applications.8
During the past few decades, two-dimensional (2D) materials, due to their large surface/volume ratio, have been extensively applied in various catalytic reactions, such as the nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR),9 hydrogen evolution reaction (HER),10 CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR),11 and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).12 Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), a representative 2D material, has been considered to be an attractive HER catalyst thanks to its highly exposed edge sites, large surface area, and appropriate hydrogen adsorption free energy.13,14 The novel 2D material MoC6, discovered by our group, exhibited excellent catalytic activity for NRR.15 Further reducing the dimension of the materials to one-dimension (1D), Guo et al. synthesized a series of Pt-based alloy nanowires with high indexes, Pt-rich facets and ordered intermetallic structures.16–18 These nanowires demonstrated exceptional catalytic performance for HER, ORR, and alcohol oxidation reactions due to the large atomic-level utilization of Pt. Metal clusters, 0D materials, have also shown splendid catalytic performance for CO oxidation,19 ORR,20 and NRR21 due to their higher utilization of active atoms and intrinsic catalytic activity.22 The ultimate goal of catalyst design has always been to achieve 100% utilization of active atoms, which is realized by the successful development of single atom catalysts (SACs), double atoms catalysts (DACs), and triple atoms catalysts (TACs).23
SACs were first proposed by Zhang et al. in 2011.24 They synthesized a SAC with only isolated single Pt atoms anchored on the surfaces of iron oxide, which had extremely high atomic utilization, good stability, and excellent activity for both CO oxidation and the preferential oxidation of CO in H2. Since then, SACs have developed rapidly in catalytic fields. SACs have attracted a lot of attention mainly because of the following advantages: (1) 100% active atomic utilization, which demonstrates high catalytic efficiency; (2) a uniform active center, where the selectivity of the chemical reaction is exclusive and the reaction mechanism is easy to identify; (3) the low atomic coordination number of the active center, which denotes a stronger adsorption ability and thus a higher catalytic activity of the active center.
Recently, there have been a number of reviews on SACs from different perspectives.25–28 Li et al. highlighted recent advances in the synthesis of SACs via wet-chemistry approaches among various synthetic methods,29 which show the feasibility of fabricating SACs.30–33 Liu enumerated a series of characterization techniques to identify the existence of exclusive SACs and ascertain their uniform distribution.28 For example, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and aberration-corrected electron microscopy (ACEM) can directly image single metal atoms dispersed on supports with a high specific surface area;34–36 X-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy can provide information about the dispersity of single metal atoms and their chemical states;37,38 and infrared (IR) spectroscopy can be used to evaluate the existence of single metal atoms and quantify the percentage of dispersed single metal atoms on a supported metal catalyst.39,40 For the application of SACs, Ye et al. highlighted the achievements of SACs in producing a prominent performance in some catalytic reactions,41 including thermocatalytic reactions (CO oxidation, water–gas shift reaction, methane conversion),42–46 photocatalytic reactions (photocatalytic HER, photocatalytic CO2RR, dye-sensitized solar cells),47–50 electrocatalytic reactions (electrocatalytic HER, ORR, OER, NRR),37,51–54 and organic conversion.55
Highly dispersed metals on a substrate could provide more uniform active sites and inhibit the further agglomeration of metal atoms, especially for SACs, DACs, and TACs, which directly determine the catalytic performance of the catalysts. However, it remains a huge challenge to stabilize atomically dispersed single metal atoms due to the high surface energy and thus the low loading of SACs, which can be further elucidated through site percolation theory. In the site percolation model, there are abundant single filled sites only when p (the probability of filled sites among all sites) approaches zero, but when p = 25%, the number of single filled sites is a third of the number of all filled sites.56 Increasing the p value with abundant single filled sites requires plentiful sites of larger weight, which corresponds to more adsorption sites with stronger adsorbability on the substrate being able to attract a larger loading of SACs. On the basis on this strategy, one can expect the bottleneck of the low loading of SACs to be broken. Zheng et al. discussed in depth several approaches to stabilizing supported atomically dispersed metal catalysts,57 including surface-dispersed mononuclear organometallic catalysts, micropore-confined SACs, and surface-stabilized SACs.58–62 All these studies demonstrate that SACs, the smallest unit of a top active site, have already become a new frontier in heterogeneous catalysis. Nevertheless, there is relatively little work on DACs or TACs,63–67 which are the smallest units of bridge and hollow active sites, respectively.
For studies on SACs, DACs, and TACs, density functional theory (DFT) calculations have provided insights into metal atom–support interactions and the corresponding catalytic mechanisms.68–73 According to DFT calculations, we found in 2011 that single Cu atom doped graphene shows excellent catalytic performance for CO oxidation.74 Since then, SACs have been widely studied and synthesized experimentally. In 2014, Yoshizawa et al. theoretically investigated the reaction mechanism of the direct decomposition of NO over double Cu atoms in zeolite.75 Henceforth, researchers began to synthesize DACs experimentally. Unfortunately, only a few DACs were successfully synthesized, such as Pt2 on graphene,76 Co2N5 active sites,77 and Pt2-doped MoS2.78 Although these DACs have demonstrated outstanding catalytic activity, even better than SACs, the synthesis of DACs is still difficult because of the complexity of the preparation process. Compared with the synthesis of DACs, the preparation of TACs is even more complex because it is difficult to regulate the precise number of atoms (double or triple) during the synthesis processes. Moreover, the stabilities of DACs and TACs are usually unsatisfactory due to the high surface energy of low-coordination double or triple atoms. Therefore, an appropriate substrate is essential and urgently needed for fixing and dispersing DACs and TACs.
As the studies of SACs, DACs, and TACs are in their infancy and, in particular, studies of DACs and TACs are an emerging field, this review will introduce recent syntheses, characterizations, and applications of SACs, DACs, and TACs, taking various substrates as the main line of enquiry. We focus on the key to successfully achieving SACs, DACs, and TACs with high dispersion, uniformity, and stability based on our own perspectives. Furthermore, we discuss in depth the great opportunities and challenges for the development of SACs, DACs, and TACs. The main purpose of this review is to summarize the latest theoretical and experimental results for SACs, DACs, and TACs to determine the key problems in this research field, and thus to extract fundamental understandings and development objectives.
2. SACs
SACs, with single metal atoms dispersed on various supports, are currently one of the most important catalytic systems due to their maximum atom efficiency, low coordination atom, high selectivity, and identifiable reaction mechanism. With the rapid development of SACs, the substrates necessary for SACs have attracted a lot of attention. We review the development of SACs on substrates of metals, oxides, 2D materials, and porous materials. More comprehensive and detailed summaries are available in previous reviews.28,57,79
2.1 SACs supported on metals
The high activation of reactants and the weak adsorption of products are key conditions for efficient and selective catalysis. Unfortunately, these two requirements are closely related and cannot be optimized simultaneously. Sykes et al. put forward a strategy of isolated metal atom geometries for selective heterogeneous hydrogenations.34 Single Pd atoms in a Cu surface showed low energy barriers for both hydrogen-dissociated adsorption on Pd atoms and subsequent desorption from the Cu surface (see Fig. 1a–c), which demonstrated that isolated catalytically active metal atoms can substantially influence the catalytic performance of less reactive metals. Single Pd atoms supported on a Cu surface yielded a bi-functional surface in different regions, facilitating different steps in the reaction. This strategy would break the linear scaling relationship between the adsorption energies of reaction intermediates, which is considered to be the fundamental limitation on catalytic efficiency.80
 Fig. 1  (a) STM images of Pd alloys into the Cu(111) surface preferentially above the step edges as evidenced by the rumpled appearance of the upper terrace (scale bar, 5 nm). (Inset) Atomic resolution of the Pd/Cu alloy on the upper terrace showing individual, isolated Pd atoms in the surface layer appearing as protrusions (scale bar, 2 nm). (b) Schematic showing H2 dissociation and spillover at individual, isolated Pd atom sites in the Cu surface layer. (c) Islands of H atoms imaged after hydrogen uptake appear as depressed regions on the clean Cu(111) lower terrace (scale bar, 5 nm). (Inset) High-resolution image of individual hydrogen atoms on Cu(111) (scale bar, 2 nm). (d left) Difference Fourier map of the flat (F) atomic layer in Pt-doped Al13Fe4 from refinement 1 and (d right) the corresponding atomic positions. (e) The catalytic performances of single atom Pd sites on a PdIn(110) surface and Pd trimer sites on a Pd3In(111) surface. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (d) reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (e) reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Metallic alloys are also used as substrates for SACs.81–83 For example, Tsai et al. prepared a 0.2 atom% Pt-doped monoclinic Al13Fe4 using a single-crystal Czochralski method.81 A combination of STEM and single-crystal XRD indicated that the doped Pt atoms were dispersed as single atoms and preferentially substituted at Fe(1) in Al13Fe4, as shown in Fig. 1d. Unexpectedly, single Pt atoms in the surface layer showed lower activity and selectivity than those of Al2Pt and bulk Pt for propyne hydrogenation, indicating that the active state of a given single-atom Pt site is strongly dominated by the bonding with surrounding Al atoms. While a single-Pd site with In to form intermetallic PdIn is an effective way to endow Pd with high selectivity and to stabilize the single Pd site with the intermetallic PdIn (Fig. 1e). These findings provided new insights for designing stable SACs supported on metals.
2.2 SACs supported on oxides
The concept of SACs was first proposed by Zhang's group. They prepared a single-atom Pt1/FeOx catalyst by a co-precipitation method with a finely tuned co-precipitation temperature and pH value.24 The Pt atoms uniformly dispersed on the surface of FeOx nanocrystals and occupied exactly the positions of the Fe atoms (Fig. 2a and b). Fig. 2c and d present images of contrasting samples (a larger Pt loading of 2.5 wt%) with single Pt atoms, 2D Pt rafts with fewer than ten Pt atoms, and 3D Pt clusters of a size smaller than 1 nm. The Fe1/FeOx catalyst shows extremely high atom efficiency, excellent stability, and high activity for both CO oxidation and the preferential oxidation of CO in H2; the corresponding reaction pathways are explored by DFT calculations, as shown in Fig. 2e. Inspired by the research on Pt1/FeOx, Chen et al. systemically examined various SACs by means of DFT calculations, aiming at developing more efficient and low-cost SACs for CO oxidation.84 The results show that five SACs of Rh1/FeOx (oxygen-defective), Pd1/FeOx (oxygen-defective), Ru1/FeOx, Ti1/FeOx (vacancy-free), and Co1/FeOx (vacancy-free) exhibit improved catalytic performance compared with Pt1/FeOx for CO oxidation.
 Fig. 2  (a–d) HAADF-STEM images of two samples with different Pt loadings. Pt single atoms (white circles) are seen to be uniformly dispersed on the FeOx support (a) and occupy exactly the positions of the Fe atoms (b). (c and d) A mixture of single atoms (white circles), two-dimensional Pt rafts consisting of fewer than 10 Pt atoms (black circles) and three-dimensional Pt clusters of size about 1 nm or less (white squares) can clearly be observed. (e) The proposed reaction pathways for CO oxidation on the Pt1/FeOx catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. 
CeO2 is usually used as a substrate to support single metal atoms85,86 because it can effectively inhibit the sintering of metal atoms by forming a surface complex.87 This means that the surface energy of single metal atoms decreases due to their coordination with CeO2.88,89 Datye et al. sought to determine the effectiveness of various CeO2 shapes (cubes, nanorods, or polyhedra) for trapping Pt atoms under typical diesel oxidation catalysis aging conditions, 800 °C in air.90 A schematic illustration of a physical mixture of various CeO2 shapes trapping Pt from an alumina catalyst is shown in Fig. 3a. For CO oxidation, the physically mixed polyhedral and nanorod CeO2 show similar performances while the cubic CeO2 gives the lowest reactivity. Moreover, when the physically mixed polyhedral CeO2 was aged for 1 week, the reactivity actually increased, whereas the aged Pt/La–Al2O3 was almost inactive (Fig. 3b). This means that polyhedral CeO2 can anchor single Pt atoms after thermal aging in air at 800 °C to yield an atomically dispersed and sinter-resistant SAC. Unsatisfactorily, the catalytic efficiency for low-temperature CO oxidation falls short of the goal of achieving 90% conversion of all criteria pollutants at 150 °C set by the US Department of Energy. To further improve the catalytic activity of Pt1/CeO2, Datye et al. created a new type of active site on CeO2 in the vicinity of Pt2+ through high-temperature (750 °C) treatment in steam, as shown in Fig. 3c.42T100 (the temperature required to reach 100% conversion) of CO decreased from 320 to 148 °C, and the catalytic performance of Pt1/CeO2 showed no obvious attenuation in consecutive CO oxidation measurements (Fig. 3d). The enhanced catalytic activity is attributed to the activation of surface lattice oxygen that is bonded to H, forming hydroxyls on the CeO2 substrate in the vicinity of atomically dispersed Pt (Fig. 3e).
 Fig. 3  (a) Illustration of Pt nanoparticle sintering, showing how ceria can trap mobile Pt to suppress sintering. Cubes appear to be less effective than rod-shaped or polyhedral ceria. (b) Light-off curves for CO oxidation on a 1 wt% Pt/La–Al2O3 sample (20 mg of catalyst in the reactor) with the samples physically mixed with ceria (20 mg of 1 wt% Pt/La–Al2O3 mixed with 10 mg of ceria powder) and then aged at 800 °C in air. (c) The active sites created by steam treatment, which is responsible for low-temperature CO oxidation activity, are highlighted by dashed green circles. (d) Catalytic CO oxidation light-off performance of different catalysts. (e) Proposed reaction mechanism for CO oxidation on isolated Pt on a CeO2(111) surface. The inset shows the calculated energy profiles in kJ mol−1. The structures of intermediates and transition states (TSs) of the key elementary steps are shown in the reaction cycle. The reaction cycle corresponds to the energy profile for Pt/CeO2_S (steam-treated Pt/CeO2), which is shown by the blue line in the inset. The red line shows the energy profile for Pt/CeO2. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (c–e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The nature of the active sites in SACs is vital for catalytic reactions.35,91,92 Negatively charged single-atom Au supported by monolayer CuO grown on Cu(110) is active for CO oxidation with its adjacent lattice O atom depleted to generate an O vacancy in the CuO monolayer, while a single-atom Au is neutralized and inhibits CO oxidation.93 Conversely, the neutral charge state of individual Pt atoms supported on a “29” copper oxide surface has been synthesized and showed satisfactory catalytic performance for CO oxidation.94 Positively charged single-atom Pt also presented excellent low-temperature activity on substrates of TiO2 or Al2O3.95,96 He et al. found that oxidation catalysis is driven by electron cycling amongst single-atom Au doped aluminum oxide clusters (AuAl3O3+, AuAl3O4+, AuAl3O5+), primarily through forming and breaking the Au–Al bond.97 Moreover, SACs for different metal atoms supported on distinct substrates have been applied to other catalytic reactions with high activity and selectivity, such as the hydroformylation reaction (Rh1/CoO),98 methanol steam reforming (M1/ZnO, M = Pd, Pt, Au),99,100 ORR (Pt1/WO3),101 and NO reduction with CO (Rh1/SiO2).102
For SACs supported on oxide surfaces, metal–support interactions have an impact on the single atom's catalytic performance. Therefore, understanding metal–support interactions is essential for tuning the activity, selectivity, and stability of oxide-supported SACs. Senftle et al. used DFT calculations combined with a statistical learning approach to identify property descriptors, which predicted interaction strengths between single metal atoms and oxide substrates (Fig. 4a–e).103 The interfacial binding is correlated with readily available physical properties of both the supported metal (oxophilicity measured by oxide formation energy) and the support (reducibility measured by oxygen vacancy formation energy) (Fig. 4f and g). These properties can be used to empirically screen interaction strengths between metal–support pairs, thus aiding the design of SACs.
 Fig. 4  (a–c) Top view of adsorbed late transition metals on the CeO2(111) surface at the threefold hollow site (Ag) (a), twofold oxygen bridge site (Ir) (b), and oxygen side-bridge site (Pd) (c). (d) Adsorbed metals on MgO(100) all prefer the anionic oxygen site. The black rectangle represents the unit cell used in the study. (e) Correlation between metal/support adsorption energies and metal adatom's oxide formation enthalpy. (f) Correlation between the slopes from (e) and the support's oxygen vacancy formation energy. (g) Correlation between metal/support adsorption energies and the support's oxygen vacancy formation energy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
2.3 SACs supported on 2D materials
Graphene, the star among 2D materials, shows great potential as a substrate for supporting various single metal atoms, such as Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Pd, Pt, Au, Ru, and Nb.104–109 In order to achieve high dispersion and stability of single metal atoms, these metal atoms are always anchored on the defects of graphene, including partially oxidized graphene, nitrogen atom doping, sulfur atom doping, and vacancies.110–113
Sun et al. synthesized a low-cost, efficient, and durable single-atom Pt electrocatalyst supported on carbon black with carbon monoxide/methanol tolerance for the cathodic ORR by a simple pyrolysis method.114 The corresponding power density can reach 680 mW cm−2 at 80 °C with a low Pt loading of 0.09 mgPt cm−2. This means that the Pt utilization is 0.13 gPt kW−1 in a fuel cell. Moreover, Wu et al. demonstrated a facile approach to generating atomically monodispersed Pt through the photochemical reduction of frozen chloroplatinic acid solution using ultraviolet light (Fig. 5a).115 The single Pt atoms on mesoporous carbon showed elite catalytic performance for electrochemical HER with an overpotential of only 65 mV at a current density of 100 mA cm−2 and long-term durability (>10 h), superior to state-of-the-art Pt/C (Fig. 5b–d). Non-noble metal SACs supported on graphene also exhibited satisfactory catalytic performances in some catalytic reactions: for instance, ORR (Co–N–C),116 hydrogenation reactions (Ni–N–C),117 and recalcitrant organic oxidation (Co–N–C).118
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the iced-photochemical process. In a conventional photochemical reduction of H2PtCl6 aqueous solution, Pt nanocrystals are formed by the agglomeration and nucleation of Pt atoms (top row). Conversely, in the bottom row, we froze the H2PtCl6 solution before exposing it to UV irradiation and obtained Pt single atoms dispersed in ice. The ice lattice naturally confined the ions/atoms and prevented their nucleation (scale bar, 2 nm). (b) Polarization curves of Pt1/MC and Pt/C before and after 1000 CV cycles. (c) Tafel plots of Pt1/MC and Pt/C (collected before and after 1000 CV cycles). (d) Long-term running of Pt1/MC and Pt/C electrocatalysts at the same overpotential of 30 mV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
The low loading of SACs is hard to avoid. To overcome this bottleneck, Baek et al. introduced additional N species from dicyandiamide, which can securely trap and protect the Cu atoms, to synthesize single Cu atoms homogeneously distributed in ultrathin nitrogenated carbon nanosheets with a highest Cu content of 20.9 wt%.119 Therefore, the synthesis strategy is critical for the further development of SACs. Recently, Li et al. reported a simple and practical strategy to access the large-scale synthesis of single-atom catalysts via direct atoms emitted from bulk metals, and their subsequent trapping on nitrogen-rich porous carbon with the assistance of ammonia.120 First, the ammonia coordinates with the copper atoms to form volatile Cu(NH3)x species based on the strong Lewis acid–base interaction. Then, following transportation under an ammonia atmosphere, the Cu(NH3)x species are trapped by the defects on the nitrogen-rich carbon support, forming isolated copper sites. The corresponding preparation schematic is shown in Fig. 6. Using a similar strategy, Wu et al. obtained thermally stable single Ni atoms on N-doped carbon from Ni metal nanoparticles.121 This strategy is readily scalable and has been confirmed as being feasible for producing functional SACs at an industrial level.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the preparation of Cu–SAs/N–C. (a) Apparatus diagram. (b) Proposed reaction mechanism. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
Coming up behind graphene, MoS2 can also be taken as a substrate for single-atom metal doping.122–124 However, unlike SACs supported on graphene, the doping metal atoms are not active sites while the inert S atoms on the MoS2 surface are activated by the doping single metal atoms.122 The doped Pt atoms substitute for Mo atoms (Fig. 7a–c) and activate the neighbouring S atoms, which is beneficial to improving the catalytic activity for HER. When the doped metal atoms are located in the S vacancies of MoS2 (Fig. 7d and e), the Au, V, or Zn dopants may provide desirable catalytic activity for HER.123 In addition, Tsang et al. synthesized MoS2 monolayer sheets decorated with isolated Co atoms on Mo top sites (Fig. 7f–h), which exhibited superior activity, selectivity, and stability for the hydrodeoxygenation of 4-methylphenol to toluene.124 These studies of single metal atoms doping on MoS2 broaden the understanding of SACs.
 Fig. 7  (a) HAADF-STEM images of Pt–MoS2 showing that the single Pt atoms uniformly disperse in the 2D MoS2 plane. (b) Magnified domain with red dashed rectangle in (a) showing a honeycomb arrangement of MoS2, and the single Pt atoms occupying the exact positions of the Mo atoms (marked by red arrows). The bottom inset shows the simulated configuration of Pt–MoS2. The green, yellow, and blue balls represent Mo, S, and Pt, respectively. (c) The k2-weighted EXAFS spectra of Pt–MoS2 in comparison to Pt foil and commercial 40% Pt/C. (d) Enlarged ADF-STEM image, showing strong contrast from a single Pt atom located in an S lattice site. (e) DFT relaxed atomic model showing a Pt atom in a 2S vacancy site. (f) HAADF-STEM image of Co–SMoS2, showing two bright contrast sites in the MoS2 monolayer (arrows). (g) An HAADF image simulation, and (h) corresponding atomic model, from geometrically optimized DFT of a single Co on a Mo top site. Scale bar, 0.5 nm. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry; (d and e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (f–h) Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
Other 2D materials also show great potential as substrates for SACs due to their large surface/volume ratio. For example, Guo et al. revealed that the binding of an FeN4 moiety and MXene can induce remarkable Fe 3d electron delocalization and spin-state transition of Fe(II) ions, which lead to easier oxygen adsorption and reduction on active FeN4 sites, and thus enhanced ORR activity.125 Single-atom Au supported on NiFe LDH possessed an overpotential of 0.21 V.37 By means of DFT calculations, single Mo atoms supported by defective BN nanosheets exhibited the highest catalytic activity for N2 fixation at room temperature through an enzymatic mechanism with a quite low overpotential of 0.19 V.126
2.4 SACs supported on porous materials
Graphdiyne (GD), a 2D carbon material with natural uniform pores and butadiyne linkages, is an ideal candidate for supporting SACs.127 Li et al. directly used GD as a SAC substrate without any pretreatment and fabricated stable SACs (Ni1/GD and Fe1/GD) through a fast, scalable, controllable, and efficient electrochemical method (Fig. 8a).128 The Fe1/GD presented remarkable catalytic performance with an onset overpotential of 9 mV, Tafel slope of 37.8 mV dec−1, and TOF of 4.15 s−1 at 100 mV for HER. Cai et al. further demonstrated that GD can provide a unique platform for synthesizing well-defined and uniform single-atom metal catalysts by DFT predictions and experimental validation.129 The corresponding reaction mechanisms of ORR are shown in Fig. 8b–d, where the O2 molecule can bind with an Fe atom, and the electron transformation process of ORR occurs through a 4e− pathway with the largest free energy change of 0.65 eV (rate-determining step).
 Fig. 8  (a) Protocols for the synthesis of Ni/GD and Fe/GD. A two-step strategy for anchoring-isolated Ni/Fe atoms on GD, including the in situ growth of GD layers on 3D carbon cloth (CC) surfaces via a Glaser–Hay cross-coupling reaction, followed by the electrochemical reduction of metal ions (Ni2+ and Fe3+) into zero-valent metallic species [Ni(0) and Fe(0), respectively]. (b) Top-side views of the atomic configurations of *OOH, *O, and *OH adsorbed on an Fe–graphdiyne surface. Atomic color code: pale blue, carbon in the C6 ring with sp2 hybridization; green, carbon in the acetylenic-like rods with sp hybridization; orange, Fe; red, oxygen; and white, hydrogen atom. (c and d) Calculated free energy diagrams of 4e− pathways of the ORR at the Fe–graphdiyne (black line) and Pt(111) (red line) catalyst surfaces. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group; (b–d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Carbon nitride compounds have emerged as a new and prominent member of the family of 2D materials. Due to the large N content in carbon nitride compounds, some are constructed from holey generated C–N covalent networks, which makes them a promising substrate for supporting SACs. In light of the DFT results, Jiang et al. studied the catalytic performance of single-atom non-noble metal ions (Co2+, Cu2+, and Ni2+) anchored on C2N for HCOOH dehydrogenation.130 Specifically, C2N–Co2+ had the lowest barrier (0.30 eV) for the rate-determining step for HCOOH dehydrogenation, mainly due to the reaction occurring through a dual-active center composed of Co2+ and a nearby N atom of C2N. The insights obtained provided a new viewpoint for SACs. Another carbon nitride compound of C3N4 was used as a substrate for supporting single Pd, Ag, Ir, Pt, and Au atoms by the direct synthesis method, while the postsynthetic approach of SACs was shown as a comparison (Fig. 9a).131 As a result, SACs were most readily attained via direct approaches applying co-polymerizable metal precursors and employing high-surface-area carriers. In contrast, although postsynthetic routes improved the metal loading, nanoparticle formation was more prevalent. To further explore the catalytic performance of SACs supported on C3N4, Li et al. fabricated single-atom Ru supported on mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride (Ru1/mpg-C3N4) by a wet impregnation method.132 As shown in Fig. 9b, the systematic reaction mechanisms of hydrogenation and hydrodeoxygenation of vanillin suggested that the product of vanillyl alcohol was obtained with a selectivity of ∼100% and conversion of 95% at 60 °C. When the temperature rose to 140 °C, a selectivity of ∼100% and conversion of ∼100% into 2-methoxy-p-cresol were achieved. This work plays a guiding role in the selection of SACs at an appropriate temperature for specific selectivity.
 Fig. 9  (a) Direct synthesis (-D1, -D2) and post-synthesis (-P1) approaches to stabilizing metal atoms within g-C3N4, exemplified for the mesoporous MCN carrier. In the idealized location depicted, the metal atom is coordinated by up to 6 nitrogen atoms within interstices defined by the packing of the tri-s-triazine units. (b) Free energy diagrams of vanillin hydrogenation to vanillyl alcohol and 2-methoxy-2-methoxy-p-cresol at 60 °C (blue) and 140 °C (red). The structures of reactant and products are shown above the energy profiles, while the intermediate state structures are shown below the energy profiles. The geometry of Ru1/mpg-C3N4 is shown in the upper right. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (b) reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
3D porous materials, such as periodic mesoporous organosilica,133 metal–organic frameworks,58 hollandite-type manganese oxide,134,135 and ZSM,46 have shown commendable advantages as substrates for SACs. However, there are still some obstacles which need to be addressed urgently: (1) single atoms hardly diffuse into the interior of the 3D porous matrix while ensuring uniformity and dispersion. (2) The mobilities of reactants and products are restricted in the 3D pores. Lou et al. developed a facile and versatile strategy to decorate a nitrogen-containing porous carbon matrix with single Pt atoms (Fig. 10a).104 Mesopores with a uniform size of ∼15 nm guaranteed sufficient space for confined Pt sites to react with adsorbed water molecules, affording facile catalytic kinetics and excellent high durability (Fig. 10b–e).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure of Pt@PCM. First step: loading of the Pt component onto the surface of PDA/PS-b-PEO to form Pt@PDA/PS-b-PEO. Second step: fabrication of Pt@PCM through pyrolysis of Pt@PDA/PS-b-PEO. (b and c) LSV curves of various catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH. (d) Comparison of TOFs among catalysts at different overpotentials. (e) I–t curves of Pt@PCM in 1 M KOH and 0.5 M H2SO4 media at a bias of 0.15 V versus RHE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
3. DACs
DACs with a small unit of a bridge active site are in their research infancy.64,78,136 Current theoretical and experimental studies on DACs show that substrates for supporting double atoms are very scarce and mainly include the following categories:
3.1 DACs supported on oxides
As previously summarized, some oxides were selected for supporting SACs with high stability and dispersibility.90,103,137,138 Notwithstanding this, catalysts featuring well-defined double atoms on oxides are poorly studied, mainly due to the difficulty in synthesizing such structures. Wang et al. applied a facile method to synthesize Ir dinuclear heterogeneous catalysts (DHCs) on an Fe2O3 substrate.65 The synthesis procedure of Ir DHC is shown in Fig. 11a. The Fe2O3 substrate was soaked in an Ir homodimer solution and then thoroughly rinsed with deionized water to form an Ir intermediate. Then photochemical treatments were performed using a UVO cleaner system equipped with UV light. In a typical procedure, the Ir intermediate product was placed in the middle of the UVO chamber. The process lasted 28 min to obtain Ir DHCs. The test conditions are optimized at a pH of 6.0 because Fe2O3 will dissolve under acidic conditions. As shown in Fig. 11b, the Ir DHCs exhibited the highest activity. The per-atom TOF of Ir DHCs at 1.23 V (vs. RHE) is 2.6 times higher than that of Ir SACs and 5.0 times higher than that of Ir NPs. The chronoamperometry data of Ir DHCs without degradation for 10 h (Fig. 11c) suggested that the Ir DHCs on Fe2O3 were stable during the catalytic process. Furthermore, to observe the inherent thermal stability, Ir DHCs were subjected to focused electron beam irradiation under HAADF-STEM conditions, as shown in Fig. 11d–f. There is no aggregation or detachment observable after nearly a minute of irradiation. Thus, Ir2 supported on Fe2O3 should have outstanding stability and activity.
 Fig. 11  (a) Synthesis procedure of Ir DHC. It starts with the immobilization of molecular Ir catalysts, followed by the photochemical removal of organic ligands. The binding details of H2O and OH groups are proposed. (b) The polarization curve of Ir DHC (pink) in comparison with three control samples, Ir SAC (green), Ir NP (grey), and bare α-Fe2O3 support (black). The electrolyte was 0.1 M KNO3 (pH 6.0), and the illumination intensity was 100 mW cm−2 with AM 1.5 filters. (c) Chronoamperometry showing the stability of Ir DHC over 10 h with negligible decay. Evolution of Ir DHC on α-Fe2O3 during electron beam exposure for the following times: (d) 0 s, (e) 35 s, (f) 75 s. The electron dose received by the sample was ∼100 eV Å−2 s−1 (scale bar: 2 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2018, National Academy of Sciences. 
3.2 DACs supported on 2D materials
Compared with oxides, 2D materials have greater potential as substrates for supporting active metal atoms due to their large specific surface areas, which are crucial in the field of heterogeneous catalysis.
MoS2 was used to support isolated Pt atoms with a mass loading of 0.2% (Fig. 12a–c), while neighbouring Pt monomers were achieved by increasing the Pt mass loading up to 7.5% while maintaining the atomic dispersion of Pt (Fig. 12d–f).78 XANES (Fig. 12g) and EXAFS (Fig. 12h) were measured to determine the electron and coordination structures of Pt atoms in Pt/MoS2 catalysts. It was found that the coordination number of Pt atoms was 5.2, and no other peaks typical of a Pt–Pt contribution at a longer distance (>2.50 Å) were observed, revealing the high atomic dispersion of Pt atoms. As shown in Fig. 12i, 0.2% Pt/MoS2 contained only isolated Pt monomers, whereas 7.5% Pt/MoS2 consisted of isolated (10.8%), neighbouring (65.5%), and patches (23.7%) of Pt monomers. Neighbouring Pt monomers exhibited higher catalytic activity and lower activation energy than isolated monomers for CO2 hydrogenation into methanol. The discovery of DACs may create a new way to manipulate catalytic properties.
 Fig. 12  Structural characterizations of Pt/MoS2. (a) HAADF-STEM image of 0.2% Pt/MoS2. (b and c) Magnified HAADF-STEM image of 0.2% Pt/MoS2 and its corresponding structural model, showing the isolated Pt monomers. (d) HAADF-STEM image of 7.5% Pt/MoS2. (e and f) Magnified HAADF-STEM image of 7.5% Pt/MoS2 and its corresponding structural model, showing one type of neighbouring Pt monomer. (g) Pt K-edge XANES spectra for atomically dispersed Pt/MoS2 with different Pt loadings and Pt nanoparticles/MoS2. Pt foil was used as a reference. (h) Pt K-edge EXAFS in R space for atomically dispersed Pt/MoS2 with different Pt loadings and Pt nanoparticles/MoS2. Pt foil was used as a reference. The dashed lines are the corresponding fitted curves. (i) Histogram of the contents of isolated Pt monomers, neighbouring Pt monomers, and patches of Pt monomers for atomically dispersed Pt/MoS2 with different Pt loadings based on direct observation from HAADF-STEM images. Blue, cyan, and yellow spheres in (c) and (f) represent Pt, Mo, and S atoms, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
Carbon materials have proved to be excellent substrates for supporting metal nanoparticles and even single metal atoms,139–141 where the metal nanoparticles and single metal atoms are always anchored on the defects of graphene, such as vacancies and impurity atoms. The precise synthesis of metal dimers on graphene with a high surface area remains a grand challenge. Therefore, researchers are committed to synthesizing defective graphene to support DACs.76,136 Lu et al. showed that noble Pt2 dimers can be fabricated with a bottom-up approach on graphene using atomic layer deposition. The preliminarily deposited Pt1 single atoms are utilized as proper nucleation sites to selectively attach a secondary Pt atom, forming Pt2 dimers on graphene.76 A detailed illustration of the bottom-up synthesis of dimeric Pt2/graphene is shown in Fig. 13. In the hydrolytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane, Pt2 dimers exhibit a high specific rate of 2800 molH2 molPt−1 min−1 at room temperature, ∼17- and 45-fold higher than graphene-supported Pt single atoms and nanoparticles, respectively. These findings open up an avenue for the bottom-up fabrication of supported atomic DACs.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of bottom-up synthesis of dimeric Pt2/graphene catalysts. Controlled creation of isolated anchor sites on pristine graphene; one cycle of Pt ALD on the anchor sites for Pt single atom formation by alternately exposing MeCpPtMe3 and molecular O2 at 250 °C; second cycle of Pt ALD on Pt1/graphene to selectively deposit secondary Pt atoms on the preliminary ones for Pt2 dimer formation at 150 °C. The balls in cyan, white, red, and blue represent carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and platinum while the ball in grey represents carbon atoms in the graphene support. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
Using a similar synthetic strategy to Pt2/graphene, a DAC of Pt1@Fe–N–C was created via a precise “single-atom to single-atom” grafting of a Pt atom onto the active moiety Fe–N4 of Fe–N–C.136 The Pt1@Fe–N–C showed unexpectedly high catalytic activities toward OER and HER, with overpotentials of 310 mV for OER in alkaline solution and 60 mV for HER in acidic media at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, outperforming the benchmark RuO2 and comparable with Pt/C (20%). This study of DACs with different metal atoms paves a new way to improve and extend DACs for practical applications.
Additionally, Xing et al. designed and successfully fabricated a novel binuclear active site structure of Co2NxCy through the pyrolysis of bimetal–organic frameworks.77 Precisely controlling the atomic scale structure of bimetal–organic frameworks is the key to achieving a DAC of Co2NxCy. Fortunately, the activity of the Co2N5 site in Co2NxCy is approximately 12 times higher than that of the conventional CoN4 site of SACs for ORR, approaching a commercial Pt/C catalyst and presenting the best activity among Co–N–C catalysts (Fig. 14a–f). DFT calculations reveal that the novel binuclear site exhibits a considerably reduced thermodynamic barrier towards ORR, thus contributing to the much higher intrinsic activity, as shown in Fig. 14g–i. This work opens up a new path to designing DACs with non-noble metals, thus pushing the development of DACs in heterogeneous catalysis.
 Fig. 14  (a) ORR polarization curves for Co–N–C-x, N–C and commercial Pt/C catalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and rotation speed of 1600 rpm. (b) Hydrogen peroxide yield and (c) corresponding electron transfer number during the ORR process for the synthesized catalysts. (d) Tafel plots for Co–N–C-x and Pt/C catalysts from the data in panel (a). (e) Mass-specific (normalized to the Co content based on the ICP results) activity of Co–N–C-x catalysts at different potentials. (f) Comparison of mass-specific activity of each active site structure. (g and h) Schematic energy profiles for the ORR pathway on different CoxNy active sites in acidic media. (i) Proposed mechanism for the ORR on the Co2N5 active site. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
3.3 DACs supported on porous materials
The accurate synthesis of DACs on substrates of oxides or 2D materials is still very difficult. The synthetic DAC samples usually contain some SACs or various metal clusters. Moreover, DACs on oxides or 2D materials also confront the problem of the further agglomeration of metal atoms during catalytic reactions. Thus, porous materials, with their confinement effect, may be an efficient strategy to overcome the above-mentioned problems.
Copper-exchanged zeolites, in particular Cu-ZSM-5, with porous structures exhibit the fascinating ability to decompose NO. At a larger Cu/Al ratio, the formation of Cu dimers in Cu-ZSM-5 is responsible. Yoshizawa et al. theoretically investigated the reaction mechanism of NO decomposition over dimeric Cu active sites in zeolite in 1T and 2T systems, where the double Cu atoms are separated by one or two SiO4 tetrahedra, respectively, as shown in Fig. 15a and b.75 They found that the presence of a proton plays an important role in the production of N2O from two NO molecules. The proton-assisted NO decomposition mechanism is in agreement with the experimental observations that the decomposition of N2O as well as O2 desorption are the controlling steps in the decomposition of NO. This study explained the role of the Cu2 species of Cu-ZSM-5 in the NO decomposition reaction.
 Fig. 15  (a and b) Schematic representation of the zeolite structures employed in the present study. The 10T cluster model in the intersection of straight and zigzag channels with a pair of Cu atoms along with the aluminum T-sites are treated as high-level calculations in the ONIOM method. The QM region is represented by balls and sticks, and the corresponding structures are indicated on the right-hand side of the figure. Crystal structures of the MOFs (c) 1, (d) 2, and (e) 3 determined by single-crystal X-ray diffraction. (f) Perspective views, in detail, of a channel of 3 in the ab (left) and bc (right) planes. Cu cyan, Ca blue, organic ligands grey sticks, S yellow, Pt purple. Dashed lines represent the Pt⋯S interactions. (g) Fragment of a channel of 3 emphasizing the interactions with the network. Pt@S and Pt⋯O interactions are represented by yellow and blue dashed lines, respectively. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (c–g) Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
MOFs, which have a lot of potential coordination sites, defects, and porosities to anchor metal atoms, have proven to be ideal substrates for SACs.48,58 An 8 wt% dinuclear Pt2 on a MOF was achieved through a multi-gram-scale chemical synthesis, which included three intermediate states, as shown in Fig. 15c–g.60 SC-XRC, AC-STEM, ICP-MS, PXRD, TGA, XPS, FTIR, and DFT calculations were undertaken to establish the nature of the Pt2 units in MOF. The synthesized Pt2–MOF catalyst has powerful catalytic behaviour for multiple catalytic reactions, such as the synthesis of NH4CN, CO2 reduction at low temperature, and the hydrogenation of alkenes. The intrinsic catalytic activity of a precisely-defined DAC of Pt2–MOF opens up a new method for the design of many active catalysts, although MOFs have poor thermal stability at a high reaction temperature.
C2N, a novel layered material with a uniform porous distribution, was first fabricated by Baek et al.142 The abundant and uniform pyridine-like sp2-bonded nitrogen atoms in C2N provide coordination sites to bond tightly with metal atoms due to their rich electron lone pairs. Furthermore, the uniform big holes of C2N offer the opportunity to anchor two metal atoms, which efficiently suppresses the diffusion and aggregation of metal atoms.71 We designed a series of double non-noble metal atoms (Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni) anchored on C2N (TM2–C2N) as electrocatalysts for NRR by DFT calculations, while the corresponding single metal atoms anchored on C2N were used for comparison.63 Our results showed that all DACs systems had lower potentials for NRR compared with the corresponding SACs (Fig. 16a–e). Zhou et al. extended the system of TM2–C2N to other metals (TM = Ti, Cu, Mo, Ru, Rh, Pd, Ag, Ir, Pt, Au),143 and they found that Mo2–C2N exhibited the best catalytic performance for NRR with a maximum free energy change of 0.41 eV and a low energy barrier of 0.51 eV. Except for NRR, the TM2–C2N (TM = Co, Ni, and Cu) catalysts exhibited higher adsorption energies and extremely lower dissociation barriers for O2 than those of their corresponding single-atom counterparts.72
 Fig. 16  (a and b) Adsorbed structures of N2 on Mn–C2N and Mn2–C2N, including the corresponding charge density differences. (c) Adsorption energy (Ead) of NNH* and (d) reaction free energy (ΔG) of N2* + H+ + e− → NNH* on SAC and DAC. (e) Free energy diagram of NRR on Mn–C2N and Mn2–C2N at an applied potential of 0 V, including the corresponding geometric structures of intermediates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Analogously, C3N4 is imbued with uniformly distributed nanopores, which provide abundant anchoring sites to stabilize the metal species or even precise metal atoms. But synthesizing monodispersed DACs on C3N4 remains a great challenge. Li et al. reported a “precursor-preselection” wet chemistry strategy to synthesize highly dispersed Fe2 clusters supported on C3N4.64 The key to the successful preparation of Fe2–C3N4 is the preselection of the precursor bis(dicarbonylcyclopentadienyliron) (Fe2O4C14H10). The HAADF-STEM image (Fig. 17a), the corresponding EDX mapping analysis (Fig. 17b), and the AC HAADF-STEM image with atomic resolution (Fig. 17c and d) elucidated the homogeneous distribution of Fe2 clusters. Statistical analysis of Fe2 dimers showed that the projected Fe–Fe distance between adjacent bright dots varies from 1.02 to 2.45 Å (Fig. 17e and f). The TOF-SIMS characterizations of the samples showed that there existed only Fe2 without larger Fe clusters, such as Fe3 or Fe4, indicating that the Fe2 clusters did not agglomerate. Intriguingly, the synthesized DAC of Fe2–C3N4 displays outstanding catalytic performance for the epoxidation of trans-stilbene to trans-stilbene oxide, exhibiting a splendid selectivity of 93% at a high conversion of 91% (Fig. 17g and h). The general applicability of the “precursor-preselection” strategy could produce more DACs and establish a substantial foundation for further developments in DACs.
 Fig. 17  (a) HAADF-STEM images of Fe2/mpg-C3N4. Scale bar, 50 nm. (b) Corresponding element maps showing distributions of Fe (green), N (red), and C (blue), respectively. Scale bar, 50 nm. (c) AC HAADF-STEM images of Fe2/mpg-C3N4. Scale bar, 2 nm. (d) Magnified AC HAADF-STEM images of Fe2/mpg-C3N4. Scale bar, 1 nm. (e and f) Intensity profiles obtained in areas 1, 2, and 3. (g) Catalytic epoxidation of trans-stilbene using different catalysts. (h) Recycling of Fe2/mpg-C3N4 for catalytic epoxidation of trans-stilbene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
4. TACs
Zeng et al. reported that a triangular Au3 active site (hollow site) on nanosized Au clusters can act as a promoter for the scission of the O–O bond of O2.144 During the process of CO oxidation, the key step in the O–O bond scission in the OOCO* intermediate is significantly accelerated due to the electrophilic attack of the co-adsorbed neighbouring CO molecule on the triangular Au3 site. This new mechanism is called CO self-promoting oxidation. HER is a critical catalytic reaction for the development of the hydrogen economy. Zheng et al. activated MoS2 basal planes by introducing sulfur (S) vacancies as the HER catalysts with excellent catalytic activity.14 By exploring MoS2 with S vacancies in depth, we found that the active sites were Mo3 exposed by removing the surface S atoms. Subsequently, we discovered that the Mo3 active sites of MoS2 with S vacancies also endowed it with outstanding catalytic activity for the CO reduction reaction.145 Moreover, our work also proved that the Cu3 active site (hollow site) was the main active site for CO catalytic oxidation, and a new intermediate state of OCO* was found in the reaction process.146 These studies indicate that TACs with the smallest unit of a hollow site have great potential in the catalysis field. Therefore, both theoretical and experimental studies have contributed significantly to the development of TACs, as follows:
4.1 TACs supported on metals
PtM alloys and Mcore@Ptshell core–shell structures (where M denotes Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Al, etc.) provide opportunities to alter the electronic structures and chemical properties of the bimetallic surfaces.147–150 Chen et al. designed model catalysts of Pt3 cluster-decorated core–shell structures (Co or Ni as the core, Pd as the shell) by DFT calculations.73 For ORR, the incorporation of Pt3 clusters on Pd/M surfaces creates various O2 and O adsorption sites with a bond strength difference of 0.4 eV. Thus, the slightly stronger oxygen bonding surface sites are expected to be suitable for O–O bond cleavage, and those with slightly weaker oxygen bonding are suitable for reducing O atoms, which balances the competing relations: O–O bond splitting and the removal of the adsorbed intermediates. Moreover, the activity descriptor of the d-band center can be regulated by the electron interactions and strain effects of various core and shell metals.139,151 This work offered a new strategy for developing TACs on alloys, even though the research projects are difficult and challenging.
4.2 TACs supported on oxides
Similar to homogeneous catalysis and heterogeneous catalysis, Ag trimers supported on MgO(100) was proposed by Fortunelli et al. through DFT calculations.152 The TAC (Ag3/MgO) can be used for the partial oxidation of ethylene to ethylene oxide and the EtOx reaction. Detailed molecular orbital, charge, and catalytic cycle analyses highlight the similarities of the given catalytic chemistry with homogeneous analogues, which seems to promise to widen the design of heterogeneous catalysts and realize synergistic investigations with accumulated knowledge about homogeneous systems. Based on DFT calculations and microkinetic analysis, Li et al. designed a TAC of Fe3 anchored on the θ-Al2O3(010) surface as a heterogeneous catalyst for ammonia synthesis.66 They found that the adsorbed N2 was first hydrogenated to NNH rather than the dissociative mechanism, which was mainly attributed to the large spin polarization, the low oxidation state of Fe, and the multi-step redox capability of the Fe3 cluster. All studies demonstrate that the TACs have excellent catalytic performances, and we can find new reaction mechanisms on TACs. Nevertheless, it is a huge challenge to synthesize TACs on oxides experimentally.
Vajda et al. successfully synthesized a narrow size distribution of Agn (n = 2–4) clusters with a dominant trimer contribution on Al2O3 at 2.2% atomic monolayer coverage using a quadrupole mass filter and deflector assembly.153 As expected, for direct propylene epoxidation, the observed turnover rate on the TAC (Ag3/Al2O3) is orders of magnitude higher than in previously reported data. With respect to other subnanometer catalysts, the turnover rate of Ag3 is greater by a factor of 4 than that obtained for Au6–10 under identical reaction conditions with comparable selectivity toward propylene oxide. However, it is a daunting prospect due to the particularly complex preparation process, as shown in Fig. 18.153,154 A continuous beam of Ag clusters was generated in a new high-flux laser vaporization cluster source which utilizes a Quantronix Nd:YAG laser operating at 4.5 kHz. The beam of neutral and charged clusters passes through a biased skimmer into the ion guide of the second differentially pumped vacuum stage and then into the third stage. The positively charged clusters are guided and focused into a quadrupole mass spectrometer for mass analysis. Narrow cluster distributions in the size range Agn+, n = 1,…, 10, with 2–4 dominant sizes can be produced by optimizing the temperature of the cluster source, the pressure of the helium carrier gas, and the potential settings on the individual ion optics elements. Moreover, in situ grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) revealed that the sintering of Ag3 clusters begins at around 110 °C, leading to the formation of Ag particles with average size of 3.5 nm at 200 °C, which limits their applications in many catalytic fields.153
 Fig. 18  Cluster deposition. Schematic of the cluster deposition apparatus. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2010, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
4.3 TACs supported on carbon
The atomic dispersion of TACs is a grand challenge for preparation and reaction conditions, which usually result in a broad size distribution and even multiple forms of species, including nanoparticles, clusters, and single atoms. Li et al. developed a novel approach to synthesize uniform atomically dispersed Ru3 clusters via a cage-separated precursor of Ru3(CO)12 and pyrolysis strategy.67 The preparation procedure is shown in Fig. 19a. Their strategy includes two steps: (1) encapsulating and separating preselected Ru3(CO)12 precursors by molecular-scale cages of ZIF-8, followed by (2) pyrolysis to remove ligands of Ru3(CO)12 precursors and the formation of nitrogen-doped porous carbon to stabilize the Ru3 clusters (Ru3/CN). Fig. 19b–g exhibit the corresponding TEM and HAADF-STEM images, confirming that the Ru3 clusters are distributed uniformly on the N-doped porous carbon. XANES, EXAFS, wavelet transform (WT), and time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) analysis were carried out to further identify the structures of the Ru3 clusters. The results suggest the existence of Ru–Ru metallic and Ru–N coordination bonds of Ru3 triangular structures, denoting that uniform Ru3 clusters are atomically dispersed and stabilized by nitrogen species. The oxidation of 2-aminobenzyl alcohol was chosen as a model reaction to evaluate the catalytic performance of Ru3/CN. As shown in Fig. 19h and i, the Ru3/CN catalyst exhibits high conversion of 2-aminobenzyl alcohol (up to 100%) after 0.5 h and a high TOF value (4320 h−1). When the reaction is over, the used uniformly dispersed structure of Ru3 clusters remain unchanged. This work provides a new strategy for synthesizing TACs and exploits a new avenue for further research in the application of TACs.
 Fig. 19  (a) Illustration of the Ru3/CN preparation process. (b) TEM images, (c) HAADF-STEM images, and (d) corresponding element maps showing distributions of Ru (red), N (blue), C (green), respectively. (e) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of Ru3/CN. (f) Corresponding intensity maps (left) and models (right) and (g) intensity profiles obtained in areas labeled 1, 2, and 3 in (e). (h) Conversion (%) of 2-aminobenzyl alcohol vs. time for Ru3/CN (red), Ru1/CN (blue), Ru NPs/CN (yellow), and commercial Ru/C (green). The inset shows the scheme of oxidation of 2-aminobenzyl alcohol to 2-aminobenzaldehyde. (i) Corresponding TOFs obtained at 20% conversion of 2-aminobenzyl alcohol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
5. Characterization techniques
An integrated electron microscopy approach, DFT calculation, and spectroscopy techniques could provide detailed and reliable data to describe structural information at the atomic scale, analyze the structure–activity relationship, and confirm the reaction mechanism.155,156 The characterization techniques of SACs have already been discussed and summarized in previous reviews.28,41 Herein, we discuss only some characterization techniques of DACs and TACs.
High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) is the most direct way to prove that we have obtained DACs or TACs.64,76,157 As shown in Fig. 11d–f, two bright points were identified as Ir DACs, while the darker points of the substrate were ascribed to Fe atoms. Also, very few Ir SACs can be found in Fig. 11d–f. It should be noted that we could not completely eliminate the existence of other species by STEM characterization. Spectroscopic techniques provide additional support on this front. X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) are applied to determine the electronic and coordination structures of DACs and TACs.67,78,158 Moreover, the oxidation states and coordination structures of DACs and TACs could be further pinpointed by a pressure-dependent diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform (DRIFT) measurement and wavelet transform (WT).64,77 These characterization techniques can well describe and illustrate the electron states, coordination states, and bond lengths of double or triple atoms, which are very important for catalytic reactions.
6. Synthesis strategies
The strategies to synthesize SACs have been reported in previous literature through different perspectives.23,29,41,57,79,156 Ye et al. summarized approaches to the preparation of SACs, including the wet-impregnation method, the modular synthetic approach, metal–organic complex (MOC) derived SACs, the atomic layer deposition (ALD) method, and the high-temperature atom trapping approach.41 From another perspective, Zheng et al. mainly discussed how to stabilize single metal atoms on the supports through direct chemical interaction and focused on the following three different classes of atomically dispersed catalysts: (1) surface-dispersed mononuclear organometallic catalysts; (2) micropore-confined SACs; and (3) surface-stabilized SACs. In this review, we extract only three strategies for synthesizing DACs and TACs:
6.1 Increasing metal atom loading
For SACs, the loading of metal atoms is generally kept very low, indicating that these single atoms are far apart, to prevent the formation of metal clusters through sintering. Increasing the loading of metal atoms while maintaining them as atomically dispersed catalysts can not only improve the number of active atoms, but also narrow the separation between single atoms, leading to the formation of double atoms. This strategy is simple and feasible, the crux being the precise control of the metal atom loading. Zeng et al. synthesized Pt2 on MoS2 by increasing the Pt mass loading up to 7.5% while still maintaining the atomic dispersion of Pt, and this exhibited higher catalytic activity and lower activation energy than single Pt atoms in CO2 hydrogenation into methanol.78 However, there were 23.7% of Pt clusters and 10.8% of single Pt atoms in the system of 7.5% Pt/MoS2. This means that this strategy would almost certainly involve the presence of single atoms or metal clusters in the system of DACs.
6.2 Grafting single-atom to single-atom
The precise synthesis of DACs on a high-surface-area substrate remains a grand challenge. Another plausible strategy is to use previously fabricated SACs as nucleation sites to trap another single atom, finally forming DACs. In general, the single atoms in SACs always have a stronger adsorption capacity than any other sites of support. Thus, the secondary atom is thermodynamically more likely to be captured to form DACs. As reported by Lu et al., Pt2 dimers can be fabricated with a bottom-up approach on graphene using atomic layer deposition, through the creation of proper nucleation sites, Pt1 single-atom deposition, and attaching a secondary Pt atom selectively on the preliminary one.76 Importantly, the Pt2/graphene catalyst showed strikingly high activity and stability. Their findings pointed out a new avenue to the bottom-up synthesis of atomically precise DACs on high-surface-area supports for advanced catalysis.
6.3 Precursor-preselection
During the synthesis of DACs or TACs, to avoid forming too many undesirable SACs or metal clusters, some molecular precursors with double or triple atom centers protected by some ligands are preselected to fabricate DACs or TACs. Due to their structural characteristics, SACs will not exist. Moreover, to a degree, the steric hindrance of their ligands inhibits the aggregation of metal atoms during nucleation. Using this strategy, Li et al. synthesized atomically dispersed uniform catalysts of Ru3/CN, where well-defined Ru3(CO)12 was selected as a precursor, separated by suitable molecular-scale cages of zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs).67 Recently, this research group again took advantage of the “precursor-preselection” strategy with the precursor Fe2O4C14H10 to synthesize highly dispersed Fe2 clusters supported on mesoporous C3N4.64 The general applicability indicates that this “precursor-preselection” strategy may be the most promising approach, which can be applied to produce other DACs and TACs, establishing a substantial foundation for further studies of the structure–activity relationship in catalysis.
7. Conclusions and opportunities
In this review, recent developments in various substrate-supported SACs, DACs, and TACs have been summarized and classified. Suitable substrates are concentrated on oxides, 2D materials, carbon materials, and porous materials. In particular, materials with nanopores have greater potential due to their confinement effects for active atoms, which make it easier to achieve uniformity and dispersion of SACs, DACs, and TACs. Moreover, different catalytic reactions pose additional requirements on the substrates. For instance, photocatalysis requires the substrate to possess an appropriate optical gap for specific reactions while electrocatalysis favours a highly conductive substrate.
With the development of society and the progress of science, synthesis methods for catalysts are becoming more and more abundant, and their characterization techniques are getting better and better. Atomic-scale catalysts have become the most popular catalysts in the field. In particular, SACs, DACs, and TACs plausibly serve as the most promising catalysts with low cost and high efficiency. Furthermore, the significance of SACs, DACs, and TACs is that they create two compelling platforms:
The first compelling platform is a bridge between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts, which are based on the nature of catalysis. For SACs, DACs, and TACs, all active atoms are able to participate in chemical reactions, and their substrates can be viewed as ligands to active centers, just like the situation in homogeneous organometallic catalysts. Both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts have their own strengths and weaknesses. Fortunately, SACs, DACs, and TACs combine their own advantages and spurn their shortcomings. Therefore, these atomic catalysts shorten the traditional gap between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts, and will become the most popular theme in the field of catalysis.
Another compelling platform is linking theoretical calculations and experimental results. The practical synthesized supported metal catalysts are inhomogeneous and usually consist of mixed nanoparticles or subnanometer clusters with a wide range of size distributions. Thus, there exist various active sites and complex reaction mechanisms in the studied systems. Theoretical calculations usually abstract these mixed nanoparticles into an optimal simple model to study the reaction mechanisms, thus leading to a partial understanding of catalysis. Commendably, the active centers of SACs, DACs, and TACs are explicit and uniform. The gap between the theoretical model and the experimental sample becomes small. Consequently, theoretical calculations can explain experimental phenomena reasonably well and, conversely, experimental results can verify theoretical predictions accurately. The platform for linking theoretical calculations and experimental results indicates that SACs, DACs, and TACs are ideal models for exploring new catalytic mechanisms and further rationally designing catalytic materials.
8. Perspective and challenges
SACs, as the unit of the top site, are in a boom period for research. With the improvement in synthesis methods, the continuous development of characterization techniques, and the theoretical support of computational simulation, some barriers to SACs have been overcome. SACs with satisfactory uniformity and dispersion have been successfully synthesized. And some novel mechanisms have also been explored through theoretical calculations and experimental analysis. However, there are still two serious obstacles to the further development of SACs, which need to be addressed urgently. The first one is the low loading of SACs on substrates. An optimal substrate with a suitable synthesis approach remains the subject of our future research. Another obstacle is that the nature of how the interaction between single-atom and substrate affects the catalytic activity of SACs remains ambiguous. At present, the selections of substrate and active atom are based mainly on the traditional trial and error method, rather than on rational design. Percolation theory may provide directional guidance for the rational design of SACs. Moreover, only by gaining a deep understanding of the structure–activity relationship can we design SACs more rationally and defend their position in the field of catalysis.
DACs and TACs, as the units of bridge and hollow sites, are in the early stage of research. Although the successful syntheses of DACs or TACs are not yet mature, the corresponding application potentials are invaluable because the recently reported catalytic performances of DACs or TACs are excellent, even better than those of SACs. The precise control of DACs or TACs is more challenging than that of SACs. The requirements of the substrate, precursor, and synthetic strategy are more rigorous for DACs or TACs with uniform and dispersed atomic distributions. Thus, finding the optimal substrate and precursor, and developing the appropriate synthetic strategy are the foci of current research into DACs and TACs. Furthermore, the corresponding structure–activity relationship is vague, which is very important and worthy of further study.
Research into SACs, DACs, and TACs is a long-term, challenging, and meaningful project. With the rapid development of SACs, DACs, and TACs, catalytic efficiency has been raised to a higher level, which makes some impossible reactions possible, greatly promoting the development of a modern economy. Furthermore, as the units of top, bridge, and hollow sites, well-defined SACs, DACs, and TACs can be used as ideal model systems to investigate structure–activity relationships and catalytic mechanisms at the atomic scale by theoretical calculations and in situ characterization technologies. An in-depth understanding of SACs, DACs, and TACs is expected to shed light on the nature of catalytic reactions, which is of great significance to the rational design of catalysts with optimized activity, selectivity, and durability.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C. C. Y. and Q. J.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51631004), JLU Science and Technology Innovative Research Team (No. 2017TD-09), the fund of “World-class Universities and World-class Disciplines”, and the computing resources of High Performance Computing Centers of Jilin University and Jinan, China.
References
O. Gutfleisch, M. A. Willard, E. Bruck, C. H. Chen, S. G. Sankar and J. P. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 821–842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xia, R. Black, R. Fernandes, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 496–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Suthirakun, S. C. Ammal, A. B. Munoz-Garcia, G. Xiao, F. Chen, H.-C. Zur Loye, E. A. Carter and A. Heyden, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8374–8386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Li, J. Ciston and M. W. Kanan, Nature, 2014, 508, 504–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. van der Ham, M. T. Koper and D. G. Hetterscheid, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5183–5191 RSC .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamamoto, T. Imaoka, W. J. Chun, O. Enoki, H. Katoh, M. Takenaga and A. Sonoi, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 397–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Imaoka, H. Kitazawa, W. J. Chun and K. Yamamoto, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9810–9815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, G.-F. Chen, L. Ding, X. Chen, L.-X. Ding and H. Wang, Joule, 2018, 1, 15–17 Search PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, P. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18093–18100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zitolo, V. Goellner, V. Armel, M. T. Sougrati, T. Mineva, L. Stievano, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Chen, Z. W. Chen, Y. Wang, C. C. Yang and Q. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8107–8114 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Norskov and X. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 48–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Chen, X. Y. Lang and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9623–9628 RSC .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Wan, S. Guo, G. Lu, J. Yao and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bu, S. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Shen, D. Su, G. Lu, X. Zhu, J. Yao, J. Guo and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, D. Zhao, S. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Zhu, J. Guo, G. Lu and X. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601705 CrossRef PubMed .
G. M. Mullen and C. B. Mullins, Science, 2014, 345, 1564–1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Calle-Vallejo, J. Tymoczko, V. Colic, Q. Huy Vu, M. D. Pohl, K. Morgenstern, D. Loffreda, P. Sautet, W. Schuhmann and A. S. Bandarenka, Science, 2015, 350, 185–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Shi, D. Bao, B. R. Wulan, Y. H. Li, Y. F. Zhang, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606550 CrossRef PubMed .
E. C. Tyo and S. Vajda, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 577–588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-F. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, Q. Shi, D. Du and Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13944–13960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang and W. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2988–2993 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. E. Kim and H. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 104–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 34–59 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C. T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Wang, J. Dong, K. Wu, W. C. Cheong, J. Mao, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800396 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C. T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Dong, S. Tian, W. C. Cheong, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16086–16090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dvorak, M. Farnesi Camellone, A. Tovt, N. D. Tran, F. R. Negreiros, M. Vorokhta, T. Skala, I. Matolinova, J. Myslivecek, V. Matolin and S. Fabris, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Han, W. Chen, S. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Han, J. Zhang, S. Ji, L. Zheng, Y. Wang, L. Gu, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706508 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Kyriakou, M. B. Boucher, A. D. Jewell, E. A. Lewis, T. J. Lawton, A. E. Baber, H. L. Tierney, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. H. Sykes, Science, 2012, 335, 1209–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Li, W. Zhang, X. Zhao, J. Qiu, A. Li, X. Zheng, Z. Hu, R. Si and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4712–4718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. Chen, K. Wu, W. C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, J. Li, Q. Lu, X. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Liu, L. Xi, Y. Yu, N. Chen, S. Sun, W. Wang, K. M. Lange and B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3876–3879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, T. Cao, C. Cao, J. Luo, W. Chen, L. Zheng, J. Dong, J. Zhang, Y. Han, Z. Li, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10004–10011 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Wu, W. C. Cheong, W. Chen, R. Lin, J. Li, L. Zheng, W. Yan, L. Gu, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1002 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Xie, T. Pu, A. Nie, S. Hwang, S. C. Purdy, W. Yu, D. Su, J. T. Miller and C. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4044–4048 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Shi and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef .
L. Nie, D. Mei, H. Xiong, B. Peng, Z. Ren, X. I. P. Hernandez, A. DeLaRiva, M. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, L. Kovarik, A. K. Datye and Y. Wang, Science, 2017, 358, 1419–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, A. Wang, B. Qiao, X. Liu, X. Yang, X. Wang, J. Liang, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15314–15317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Lin, L. Li, B. Qiao, J. Liu, Y. Su and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 859–868 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, H. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, L. Hua, H. Li, X. Han, Q. Liu, F. Yang, L. He, X. Chen, Q. Li, J. Xiao, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem, 2018, 4, 1902–1910 CAS .
Y. Tang, Y. Li, V. Fung, D. E. Jiang, W. Huang, S. Zhang, Y. Iwasawa, T. Sakata, L. Nguyen, X. Zhang, A. I. Frenkel and F. F. Tao, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1231 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, W. Bi, L. Zhang, S. Tao, W. Chu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2427–2431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, Q. Shang, Y. Wang, L. Jiao, T. Yao, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo and H. L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705112 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, C. Zhao, H. Wei, J. Guo, S. Liang, A. Wang, T. Zhang, J. Liu and T. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8147–8153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T. K. Sham, L. M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, G. Wan, R. Zhang, H. Zhou, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8525–8529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, G. Gao, X. Yan, N. Chen, J. Chen, M. T. Soo, B. Wood, D. Yang, A. Du and X. Yao, Chem, 2018, 4, 285–297 CAS .
X. F. Li, Q. K. Li, J. Cheng, L. Liu, Q. Yan, Y. Wu, X. H. Zhang, Z. Y. Wang, Q. Qiu and Y. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8706–8709 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Q. Zhang, W. Chen, J. Dong, H. Yao, X. Zhang, X. Tong, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen, W. He and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704720 CrossRef PubMed .
M. E. Fisher and J. W. Essam, J. Math. Phys., 1961, 2, 609 CrossRef .
R. Qin, P. Liu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700286 CrossRef .
C. Zhao, X. Dai, T. Yao, W. Chen, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8078–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, W. Sun, J. Luo, W. Chen, T. Cao, L. Zheng, J. Dong, J. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Han, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 28, 1802167 Search PubMed .
M. Mon, M. A. Rivero-Crespo, J. Ferrando-Soria, A. Vidal-Moya, M. Boronat, A. Leyva-Perez, A. Corma, J. C. Hernandez-Garrido, M. Lopez-Haro, J. J. Calvino, G. Ragazzon, A. Credi, D. Armentano and E. Pardo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6186–6191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, H. Asakura, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. De and N. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8319–8323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Sha, H. Fei, M. Liu, S. Yazdi, J. Zhang, Q. Zhong, X. Zou, N. Zhao, H. Yu, Z. Jiang, E. Ringe, B. I. Yakobson, J. Dong, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6930–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Chen, J.-M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Small Methods, 2018, 1800291,  DOI:10.1002/smtd.201800291 .
S. Tian, Q. Fu, W. Chen, Q. Feng, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, W. C. Cheong, R. Yu, L. Gu, J. Dong, J. Luo, C. Chen, Q. Peng, C. Draxl, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2353 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, K. R. Yang, Z. Wang, X. Yan, S. Cao, Y. Ye, Q. Dong, X. Zhang, J. E. Thorne, L. Jin, K. L. Materna, A. Trimpalis, H. Bai, S. C. Fakra, X. Zhong, P. Wang, X. Pan, J. Guo, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, G. W. Brudvig, V. S. Batista and D. Wang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 2902–2907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Liu, X. L. Ma, Y. Li, Y. G. Wang, H. Xiao and J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1610 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ji, Y. Chen, Q. Fu, Y. Chen, J. Dong, W. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Wang, L. Gu, W. He, C. Chen, Q. Peng, Y. Huang, X. Duan, D. Wang, C. Draxl and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9795–9798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lu, M. Zhou, C. Zhang and Y. P. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20156–20161 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Zhou, G. Yu, W. Chen and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6250–6254 CrossRef .
S. Back and Y. Jung, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 969–975 CrossRef .
F. Li and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15696–15705 RSC .
X. Li, W. Zhong, P. Cui, J. Li and J. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1750–1755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhuang, J.-P. Chou, P.-Y. Liu, T.-Y. Chen, J.-j. Kai, A. Hu and H.-Y. Tiffany Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23326–23335 RSC .
E. H. Song, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3678–3683 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Sajith, Y. Shiota and K. Yoshizawa, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2075–2085 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Y. Lin, H. Wu, W. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Cheng, W. Liu, C. Wang, J. Li, X. Huang, T. Yao, J. Yang, S. Wei and J. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1070 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xiao, H. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, L. Gao, Z. Jin, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, S. Chen, C. Liu and W. Xing, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 396–403 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Wang, Y. Dai, Z. Pu, Z. Lao, Y. Chen, M. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, W. Zhang, R. Si, C. Ma and J. Zeng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801649 CrossRef .
X. Hong, K. Chan, C. Tsai and J. K. Norskov, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4428–4437 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamada, T. Kojima, E. Abe, S. Kameoka, Y. Murakami, P. Gille and A. P. Tsai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3838–3841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Pei, X. Y. Liu, A. Wang, A. F. Lee, M. A. Isaacs, L. Li, X. Pan, X. Yang, X. Wang, Z. Tai, K. Wilson and T. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3717–3725 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Feng, S. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, D. He, D. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, L. Gu, Z. Li, Y. Liu, R. Yu, J. Li and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7294–7301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Li, X. C. Zeng and Z. Chen, ACS Catal., 2014, 5, 544–552 CrossRef .
B. Qiao, J. Liu, Y.-G. Wang, Q. Lin, X. Liu, A. Wang, J. Li, T. Zhang and J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6249–6254 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Liu, Y. G. Wang and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6190–6199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Chen, P. Han, Y. Du, Z. Gu, X. Xu and G. Zheng, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7113–7119 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X.-K. Gu, H. Yan, Y. Lin, J. Li, D. Liu, W.-X. Li and J. Lu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 887–891 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, F. Liu, Y. Tang, L. Li, S. Miao, Y. Su, J. Zhang, J. Huang, H. Sun, M. Haruta, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7795–7799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jones, H. Xiong, A. T. DeLaRiva, E. J. Peterson, H. Pham, S. R. Challa, G. Qi, S. Oh, M. H. Wiebenga, X. I. P. Hernández, Y. Wang and A. K. Datye, Science, 2016, 353, 150–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, H. Asakura, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhou, Y. Han, T. Tanaka, A. Wang, T. Zhang and N. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhu, A. Patlolla, J. Shan, H. Yoshida, S. Takeda, A. I. Frenkel and F. Tao, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1011–1019 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Q. Shen, K. Yuan, W. Yang, Q. Chen, Z. Geng, J. Zhang, X. Shao, W. Chen, G. Xu, X. Yang and K. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 554–557 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Therrien, A. J. R. Hensley, M. D. Marcinkowski, R. Zhang, F. R. Lucci, B. Coughlin, A. C. Schilling, J.-S. McEwen and E. C. H. Sykes, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 192 CrossRef .
S. C. Ammal and A. Heyden, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 301–309 CrossRef .
M. Moses-DeBusk, M. Yoon, L. F. Allard, D. R. Mullins, Z. Wu, X. Yang, G. Veith, G. M. Stocks and C. K. Narula, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12634–12645 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Li, Z. Yuan, X.-N. Li, Y.-X. Zhao and S.-G. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14307–14313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Zhang, S. Wang, Z. Gao, Z. Luo, X. Wang, R. Zeng, A. Li, H. Li, M. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, W. Zhang, C. Ma, R. Si and J. Zeng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 14036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. B. Rawal, S. R. Acharya, S. Hong, D. Le, Y. Tang, F. F. Tao and T. S. Rahman, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5553–5569 CrossRef CAS .
X.-K. Gu, B. Qiao, C.-Q. Huang, W.-C. Ding, K. Sun, E. Zhan, T. Zhang, J. Liu and W.-X. Li, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3886–3890 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, X. X. Qin, F. P. Duan-Mu, H. M. Ji, Z. R. Shen, X. P. Han and W. B. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 130, 9495–9500 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Y. Tang, L. Nguyen, Y.-F. Zhao, Z. Wu, T.-W. Goh, J. J. Liu, Y. Li, T. Zhu, W. Huang, A. I. Frenkel, J. Li and F. F. Tao, ACS Catal., 2017, 8, 110–121 CrossRef .
N. J. O'Connor, A. S. M. Jonayat, M. J. Janik and T. P. Senftle, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 531 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, P. An, W. Zhou, B. Y. Guan, P. Zhang, J. Dong and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaao6657 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Choi, S. Back, N.-Y. Kim, J. Lim, Y.-H. Kim and Y. Jung, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7517–7525 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Geng, Y. Liu, X. Kong, P. Li, K. Li, Z. Liu, J. Du, M. Shu, R. Si and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803498 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Jiang and H. Wang, Chem, 2018, 4, 194–195 CAS .
C. Zhu, Q. Shi, B. Z. Xu, S. Fu, G. Wan, C. Yang, S. Yao, J. Song, H. Zhou, D. Du, S. P. Beckman, D. Su and Y. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801956 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, J. Guo, P. Guan, C. Liu, H. Huang, F. Xue, X. Dong, S. J. Pennycook and M. F. Chisholm, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1924 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yan, H. Cheng, H. Yi, Y. Lin, T. Yao, C. Wang, J. Li, S. Wei and J. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10484–10487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fei, J. Dong, M. J. Arellano-Jimenez, G. Ye, N. Dong Kim, E. L. Samuel, Z. Peng, Z. Zhu, F. Qin, J. Bao, M. J. Yacaman, P. M. Ajayan, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Choi, M. Kim, H. C. Kwon, S. J. Cho, S. Yun, H. T. Kim, K. J. Mayrhofer, H. Kim and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gao, S. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, L. Song, W. Zhang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1704624 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, L. Lu, H. M. Barkholtz, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Jiang, Z. Wu, D. J. Liu, L. Zhuang, C. Ma, J. Zeng, B. Zhang, D. Su, P. Song, W. Xing, W. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang and G. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, K. Huang, D. Wang, R. Zhang, B. Ge, J. Ma, B. Wen, S. Zhang, Q. Li, M. Lei, C. Zhang, J. Irawan, L. M. Liu and H. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1490 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yin, T. Yao, Y. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Lin, W. Liu, H. Ju, J. Zhu, X. Hong, Z. Deng, G. Zhou, S. Wei and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10800–10805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, Y. Chen, H. Qi, L. Zhang, W. Yan, X. Liu, X. Yang, S. Miao, W. Wang, C. Liu, A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7071–7075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Huang, S. Xi, S. Miao, J. Ding, W. Cai, S. Liu, X. Yang, H. Yang, J. Gao, J. Wang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12469–12475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, G.-F. Han, H.-J. Noh, S.-J. Kim, Y. Lu, H. Y. Jeong, Z. Fu and J.-B. Baek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2263–2269 RSC .
Y. Qu, Z. Li, W. Chen, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, X. Wang, F. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 781–786 CrossRef .
J. Yang, Z. Qiu, C. Zhao, W. Wei, W. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Qu, J. Dong, J. Luo, Z. Li and Y. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14095–14100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
H. Li, S. Wang, H. Sawada, G. G. Han, T. Samuels, C. S. Allen, A. I. Kirkland, J. C. Grossman and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3392–3403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, A. W. Robertson, M. M. Li, W. C. H. Kuo, M. T. Darby, M. H. Muhieddine, Y. C. Lin, K. Suenaga, M. Stamatakis, J. H. Warner and S. C. E. Tsang, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 810–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Z. Zhuang, F. Lv, H. Zhu, L. Zhou, M. Luo, J. Zhu, Z. Lang, S. Feng, W. Chen, L. Mai and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803220 CrossRef .
J. Zhao and Z. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12480–12487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Ma, T. Li, Q. Wang, G. Yang, C. He, B. Ma and Z. Lu, Carbon, 2015, 95, 756–765 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, B. Huang, Y. Yi, Y. Guo, Z. Zuo, Y. Li, Z. Jia, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1460 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gao, Z. Cai, X. Wu, Z. Lv, P. Wu and C. Cai, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10364–10374 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhong, Y. Liu, M. Deng, Y. Zhang, C. Jia, O. V. Prezhdo, J. Yuan and J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11105–11112 RSC .
Z. Chen, S. Mitchell, E. Vorobyeva, R. K. Leary, R. Hauert, T. Furnival, Q. M. Ramasse, J. M. Thomas, P. A. Midgley, D. Dontsova, M. Antonietti, S. Pogodin, N. López and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605785 CrossRef .
S. Tian, Z. Wang, W. Gong, W. Chen, Q. Feng, Q. Xu, C. Chen, C. Chen, Q. Peng, L. Gu, H. Zhao, P. Hu, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11161–11164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Duan, M. Li, G. Zhang, J. R. Gallagher, Z. Huang, Y. Sun, Z. Luo, H. Chen, J. T. Miller, R. Zou, A. Lei and Y. Zhao, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3752–3759 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hu, Z. Huang, Z. Amghouz, M. Makkee, F. Xu, F. Kapteijn, A. Dikhtiarenko, Y. Chen, X. Gu and X. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3418–3421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, X. Gu, Q. Cao, P. Hu, J. Hao, J. Li and X. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4198–4203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zeng, J. Shui, X. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Li, J. Shang, L. Zheng and R. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701345 CrossRef .
L. DeRita, S. Dai, K. Lopez-Zepeda, N. Pham, G. W. Graham, X. Pan and P. Christopher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14150–14165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, S. Mei, K. Yuan, D.-J. Wang, H.-C. Liu, C.-H. Yan and Y.-W. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6203–6215 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3463–3468 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, D. Cheng, D. Cao and X. C. Zeng, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 339–348 CrossRef .
X. Cui, Y. Li, S. Bachmann, M. Scalone, A. E. Surkus, K. Junge, C. Topf and M. Beller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10652–10658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mahmood, E. K. Lee, M. Jung, D. Shin, I. Y. Jeon, S. M. Jung, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, S. Y. Bae, S. D. Sohn, N. Park, J. H. Oh, H. J. Shin and J. B. Baek, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, A. Chen, Z. Zhang and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18599–18604 RSC .
C. Liu, Y. Tan, S. Lin, H. Li, X. Wu, L. Li, Y. Pei and X. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2583–2595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Chen, W. Gao, W. T. Zheng and Q. Jiang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1455–1459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Chen, J. M. Yan, W. T. Zheng and Q. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xiao, Y. Zhu, X. Lang, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Lang, G. F. Han, B. B. Xiao, L. Gu, Z. Z. Yang, Z. Wen, Y. F. Zhu, M. Zhao, J. C. Li and Q. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 230–237 CrossRef CAS .
M. Escudero-Escribano, P. Malacrida, M. H. Hansen, U. G. Vej-Hansen, A. Velázquez-Palenzuela, V. Tripkovic, J. Schiøtz, J. Rossmeisl, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2016, 352, 73–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bu, N. Zhang, S. Guo, X. Zhang, J. Li, J. Yao, T. Wu, G. Lu, J. Y. Ma, D. Su and X. Huang, Science, 2016, 354, 1410–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Du, L. Cui, Y. Cao and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7397–7403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sementa, G. Barcaro and A. Fortunelli, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2015, 431, 150–155 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, F. Mehmood, S. Lee, J. Greeley, B. Lee, S. Seifert, R. E. Winans, J. W. Elam, R. J. Meyer, P. C. Redfern, D. Teschner, R. Schlögl, M. J. Pellin, L. A. Curtiss and S. Vajda, Science, 2010, 328, 224–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Winans, S. Vajda, G. E. Ballentine, J. W. Elam, B. Lee, M. J. Pellin, S. Seifert, G. Y. Tikhonov and N. A. Tomczyk, Top. Catal., 2006, 39, 145–149 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Tang, Y. Ma, Z. Zhang, F. F. Tao and Y. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38134–38140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tao, C. Choi, L.-X. Ding, Z. Jiang, Z. Han, M. Jia, Q. Fan, Y. Gao, H. Wang, A. W. Robertson, S. Hong, Y. Jung, S. Liu and Z. Sun, Chem, 2019, 1, 204–214 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Liu, G. Luo, Z. Li, C. Zhao, H. Zhang, M. Zhu, Q. Xu, X. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Qu, Z. Yang, T. Yao, Y. Li, Y. Lin, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3375–3379 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Z. W. Chen	Zhi Wen Chen is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, China. His research interests focus on the design of catalysts combining two dimension materials and metals to improve the selectivity and activity through density functional theory calculations. Some of his work is carried out in close collaboration with experiments.
L. X. Chen	Li Xin Chen is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, China. Her research interests focus on the synthesis of MoS2 nanomaterials and their applications for the hydrogen evolution reaction and in batteries. Some of her work is carried out in close collaboration with density functional theory.
C. C. Yang	Chun Cheng Yang received his B.Sc. and Ph.D. from Jilin University in 2001 and 2006, respectively. He is currently working as a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University. He previously worked as a postdoctoral fellow at The University of New South Wales and The University of Sydney for 7 years. His research interests focus on micro- and nanoscale energy materials. He has published 47 scientific articles in international peer-reviewed journals.
Q. Jiang	Dr Jiang obtained a doctorate (Ph.D.) in Chemistry from the University of Stuttgart, Germany in 1990. Since 1992, he has been a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, China. He has published more than 500 scientific articles. His publications have been cited more than 14000 times and he has a H-index of 63. He was elected as a Member of the EU Academy of Sciences in 2018, and an Academician of the Asia Pacific Academy of Materials in 2015. He is a Fellow of The Institute of Physics (U.K.), and he is a member of the editorial board or advisory boards of several journals. His research interests focus on the synthesis of nanomaterials, as well as their applications in catalysis, energy storage and conversion, and the interface thermodynamics and kinetics of nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  (a) STM images of Pd alloys into the Cu(111) surface preferentially above the step edges as evidenced by the rumpled appearance of the upper terrace (scale bar, 5 nm). (Inset) Atomic resolution of the Pd/Cu alloy on the upper terrace showing individual, isolated Pd atoms in the surface layer appearing as protrusions (scale bar, 2 nm). (b) Schematic showing H2 dissociation and spillover at individual, isolated Pd atom sites in the Cu surface layer. (c) Islands of H atoms imaged after hydrogen uptake appear as depressed regions on the clean Cu(111) lower terrace (scale bar, 5 nm). (Inset) High-resolution image of individual hydrogen atoms on Cu(111) (scale bar, 2 nm). (d left) Difference Fourier map of the flat (F) atomic layer in Pt-doped Al13Fe4 from refinement 1 and (d right) the corresponding atomic positions. (e) The catalytic performances of single atom Pd sites on a PdIn(110) surface and Pd trimer sites on a Pd3In(111) surface. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (d) reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (e) reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–d) HAADF-STEM images of two samples with different Pt loadings. Pt single atoms (white circles) are seen to be uniformly dispersed on the FeOx support (a) and occupy exactly the positions of the Fe atoms (b). (c and d) A mixture of single atoms (white circles), two-dimensional Pt rafts consisting of fewer than 10 Pt atoms (black circles) and three-dimensional Pt clusters of size about 1 nm or less (white squares) can clearly be observed. (e) The proposed reaction pathways for CO oxidation on the Pt1/FeOx catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Illustration of Pt nanoparticle sintering, showing how ceria can trap mobile Pt to suppress sintering. Cubes appear to be less effective than rod-shaped or polyhedral ceria. (b) Light-off curves for CO oxidation on a 1 wt% Pt/La–Al2O3 sample (20 mg of catalyst in the reactor) with the samples physically mixed with ceria (20 mg of 1 wt% Pt/La–Al2O3 mixed with 10 mg of ceria powder) and then aged at 800 °C in air. (c) The active sites created by steam treatment, which is responsible for low-temperature CO oxidation activity, are highlighted by dashed green circles. (d) Catalytic CO oxidation light-off performance of different catalysts. (e) Proposed reaction mechanism for CO oxidation on isolated Pt on a CeO2(111) surface. The inset shows the calculated energy profiles in kJ mol−1. The structures of intermediates and transition states (TSs) of the key elementary steps are shown in the reaction cycle. The reaction cycle corresponds to the energy profile for Pt/CeO2_S (steam-treated Pt/CeO2), which is shown by the blue line in the inset. The red line shows the energy profile for Pt/CeO2. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (c–e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a–c) Top view of adsorbed late transition metals on the CeO2(111) surface at the threefold hollow site (Ag) (a), twofold oxygen bridge site (Ir) (b), and oxygen side-bridge site (Pd) (c). (d) Adsorbed metals on MgO(100) all prefer the anionic oxygen site. The black rectangle represents the unit cell used in the study. (e) Correlation between metal/support adsorption energies and metal adatom's oxide formation enthalpy. (f) Correlation between the slopes from (e) and the support's oxygen vacancy formation energy. (g) Correlation between metal/support adsorption energies and the support's oxygen vacancy formation energy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the iced-photochemical process. In a conventional photochemical reduction of H2PtCl6 aqueous solution, Pt nanocrystals are formed by the agglomeration and nucleation of Pt atoms (top row). Conversely, in the bottom row, we froze the H2PtCl6 solution before exposing it to UV irradiation and obtained Pt single atoms dispersed in ice. The ice lattice naturally confined the ions/atoms and prevented their nucleation (scale bar, 2 nm). (b) Polarization curves of Pt1/MC and Pt/C before and after 1000 CV cycles. (c) Tafel plots of Pt1/MC and Pt/C (collected before and after 1000 CV cycles). (d) Long-term running of Pt1/MC and Pt/C electrocatalysts at the same overpotential of 30 mV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the preparation of Cu–SAs/N–C. (a) Apparatus diagram. (b) Proposed reaction mechanism. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) HAADF-STEM images of Pt–MoS2 showing that the single Pt atoms uniformly disperse in the 2D MoS2 plane. (b) Magnified domain with red dashed rectangle in (a) showing a honeycomb arrangement of MoS2, and the single Pt atoms occupying the exact positions of the Mo atoms (marked by red arrows). The bottom inset shows the simulated configuration of Pt–MoS2. The green, yellow, and blue balls represent Mo, S, and Pt, respectively. (c) The k2-weighted EXAFS spectra of Pt–MoS2 in comparison to Pt foil and commercial 40% Pt/C. (d) Enlarged ADF-STEM image, showing strong contrast from a single Pt atom located in an S lattice site. (e) DFT relaxed atomic model showing a Pt atom in a 2S vacancy site. (f) HAADF-STEM image of Co–SMoS2, showing two bright contrast sites in the MoS2 monolayer (arrows). (g) An HAADF image simulation, and (h) corresponding atomic model, from geometrically optimized DFT of a single Co on a Mo top site. Scale bar, 0.5 nm. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry; (d and e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (f–h) Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Protocols for the synthesis of Ni/GD and Fe/GD. A two-step strategy for anchoring-isolated Ni/Fe atoms on GD, including the in situ growth of GD layers on 3D carbon cloth (CC) surfaces via a Glaser–Hay cross-coupling reaction, followed by the electrochemical reduction of metal ions (Ni2+ and Fe3+) into zero-valent metallic species [Ni(0) and Fe(0), respectively]. (b) Top-side views of the atomic configurations of *OOH, *O, and *OH adsorbed on an Fe–graphdiyne surface. Atomic color code: pale blue, carbon in the C6 ring with sp2 hybridization; green, carbon in the acetylenic-like rods with sp hybridization; orange, Fe; red, oxygen; and white, hydrogen atom. (c and d) Calculated free energy diagrams of 4e− pathways of the ORR at the Fe–graphdiyne (black line) and Pt(111) (red line) catalyst surfaces. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group; (b–d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Direct synthesis (-D1, -D2) and post-synthesis (-P1) approaches to stabilizing metal atoms within g-C3N4, exemplified for the mesoporous MCN carrier. In the idealized location depicted, the metal atom is coordinated by up to 6 nitrogen atoms within interstices defined by the packing of the tri-s-triazine units. (b) Free energy diagrams of vanillin hydrogenation to vanillyl alcohol and 2-methoxy-2-methoxy-p-cresol at 60 °C (blue) and 140 °C (red). The structures of reactant and products are shown above the energy profiles, while the intermediate state structures are shown below the energy profiles. The geometry of Ru1/mpg-C3N4 is shown in the upper right. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (b) reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure of Pt@PCM. First step: loading of the Pt component onto the surface of PDA/PS-b-PEO to form Pt@PDA/PS-b-PEO. Second step: fabrication of Pt@PCM through pyrolysis of Pt@PDA/PS-b-PEO. (b and c) LSV curves of various catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH. (d) Comparison of TOFs among catalysts at different overpotentials. (e) I–t curves of Pt@PCM in 1 M KOH and 0.5 M H2SO4 media at a bias of 0.15 V versus RHE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Synthesis procedure of Ir DHC. It starts with the immobilization of molecular Ir catalysts, followed by the photochemical removal of organic ligands. The binding details of H2O and OH groups are proposed. (b) The polarization curve of Ir DHC (pink) in comparison with three control samples, Ir SAC (green), Ir NP (grey), and bare α-Fe2O3 support (black). The electrolyte was 0.1 M KNO3 (pH 6.0), and the illumination intensity was 100 mW cm−2 with AM 1.5 filters. (c) Chronoamperometry showing the stability of Ir DHC over 10 h with negligible decay. Evolution of Ir DHC on α-Fe2O3 during electron beam exposure for the following times: (d) 0 s, (e) 35 s, (f) 75 s. The electron dose received by the sample was ∼100 eV Å−2 s−1 (scale bar: 2 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2018, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 12  Structural characterizations of Pt/MoS2. (a) HAADF-STEM image of 0.2% Pt/MoS2. (b and c) Magnified HAADF-STEM image of 0.2% Pt/MoS2 and its corresponding structural model, showing the isolated Pt monomers. (d) HAADF-STEM image of 7.5% Pt/MoS2. (e and f) Magnified HAADF-STEM image of 7.5% Pt/MoS2 and its corresponding structural model, showing one type of neighbouring Pt monomer. (g) Pt K-edge XANES spectra for atomically dispersed Pt/MoS2 with different Pt loadings and Pt nanoparticles/MoS2. Pt foil was used as a reference. (h) Pt K-edge EXAFS in R space for atomically dispersed Pt/MoS2 with different Pt loadings and Pt nanoparticles/MoS2. Pt foil was used as a reference. The dashed lines are the corresponding fitted curves. (i) Histogram of the contents of isolated Pt monomers, neighbouring Pt monomers, and patches of Pt monomers for atomically dispersed Pt/MoS2 with different Pt loadings based on direct observation from HAADF-STEM images. Blue, cyan, and yellow spheres in (c) and (f) represent Pt, Mo, and S atoms, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of bottom-up synthesis of dimeric Pt2/graphene catalysts. Controlled creation of isolated anchor sites on pristine graphene; one cycle of Pt ALD on the anchor sites for Pt single atom formation by alternately exposing MeCpPtMe3 and molecular O2 at 250 °C; second cycle of Pt ALD on Pt1/graphene to selectively deposit secondary Pt atoms on the preliminary ones for Pt2 dimer formation at 150 °C. The balls in cyan, white, red, and blue represent carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and platinum while the ball in grey represents carbon atoms in the graphene support. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) ORR polarization curves for Co–N–C-x, N–C and commercial Pt/C catalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and rotation speed of 1600 rpm. (b) Hydrogen peroxide yield and (c) corresponding electron transfer number during the ORR process for the synthesized catalysts. (d) Tafel plots for Co–N–C-x and Pt/C catalysts from the data in panel (a). (e) Mass-specific (normalized to the Co content based on the ICP results) activity of Co–N–C-x catalysts at different potentials. (f) Comparison of mass-specific activity of each active site structure. (g and h) Schematic energy profiles for the ORR pathway on different CoxNy active sites in acidic media. (i) Proposed mechanism for the ORR on the Co2N5 active site. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) Schematic representation of the zeolite structures employed in the present study. The 10T cluster model in the intersection of straight and zigzag channels with a pair of Cu atoms along with the aluminum T-sites are treated as high-level calculations in the ONIOM method. The QM region is represented by balls and sticks, and the corresponding structures are indicated on the right-hand side of the figure. Crystal structures of the MOFs (c) 1, (d) 2, and (e) 3 determined by single-crystal X-ray diffraction. (f) Perspective views, in detail, of a channel of 3 in the ab (left) and bc (right) planes. Cu cyan, Ca blue, organic ligands grey sticks, S yellow, Pt purple. Dashed lines represent the Pt⋯S interactions. (g) Fragment of a channel of 3 emphasizing the interactions with the network. Pt@S and Pt⋯O interactions are represented by yellow and blue dashed lines, respectively. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (c–g) Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a and b) Adsorbed structures of N2 on Mn–C2N and Mn2–C2N, including the corresponding charge density differences. (c) Adsorption energy (Ead) of NNH* and (d) reaction free energy (ΔG) of N2* + H+ + e− → NNH* on SAC and DAC. (e) Free energy diagram of NRR on Mn–C2N and Mn2–C2N at an applied potential of 0 V, including the corresponding geometric structures of intermediates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) HAADF-STEM images of Fe2/mpg-C3N4. Scale bar, 50 nm. (b) Corresponding element maps showing distributions of Fe (green), N (red), and C (blue), respectively. Scale bar, 50 nm. (c) AC HAADF-STEM images of Fe2/mpg-C3N4. Scale bar, 2 nm. (d) Magnified AC HAADF-STEM images of Fe2/mpg-C3N4. Scale bar, 1 nm. (e and f) Intensity profiles obtained in areas 1, 2, and 3. (g) Catalytic epoxidation of trans-stilbene using different catalysts. (h) Recycling of Fe2/mpg-C3N4 for catalytic epoxidation of trans-stilbene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 18  Cluster deposition. Schematic of the cluster deposition apparatus. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2010, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Illustration of the Ru3/CN preparation process. (b) TEM images, (c) HAADF-STEM images, and (d) corresponding element maps showing distributions of Ru (red), N (blue), C (green), respectively. (e) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of Ru3/CN. (f) Corresponding intensity maps (left) and models (right) and (g) intensity profiles obtained in areas labeled 1, 2, and 3 in (e). (h) Conversion (%) of 2-aminobenzyl alcohol vs. time for Ru3/CN (red), Ru1/CN (blue), Ru NPs/CN (yellow), and commercial Ru/C (green). The inset shows the scheme of oxidation of 2-aminobenzyl alcohol to 2-aminobenzaldehyde. (i) Corresponding TOFs obtained at 20% conversion of 2-aminobenzyl alcohol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
