Polymorphic phase transition among the titania crystal structures using a solution-based approach: from precursor chemistry to nucleation process  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR01657B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR01657B
(Feature Article)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11574-11632Polymorphic phase transition among the titania crystal structures using a solution-based approach: from precursor chemistry to nucleation process

        
          
            S. Girish 
            Kumar
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            K. S. R. Koteswara 
            Rao
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore-560012, Karnataka, India. E-mail: ksrkrao@physics.iisc.ernet.in; raoksrk@gmail.com
Received 
      26th March 2014
    , Accepted 15th May 2014First published on 19th May 2014AbstractNanocrystalline titania are a robust candidate for various functional applications owing to its non-toxicity, cheap availability, ease of preparation and exceptional photochemical as well as thermal stability. The uniqueness in each lattice structure of titania leads to multifaceted physico-chemical and opto-electronic properties, which yield different functionalities and thus influence their performances in various green energy applications. The high temperature treatment for crystallizing titania triggers inevitable particle growth and the destruction of delicate nanostructural features. Thus, the preparation of crystalline titania with tunable phase/particle size/morphology at low to moderate temperatures using a solution-based approach has paved the way for further exciting areas of research. In this focused review, titania synthesis from hydrothermal/solvothermal method, conventional sol–gel method and sol–gel-assisted method via ultrasonication, photoillumination and ILs, thermolysis and microemulsion routes are discussed. These wet chemical methods have broader visibility, since multiple reaction parameters, such as precursor chemistry, surfactants, chelating agents, solvents, mineralizer, pH of the solution, aging time, reaction temperature/time, inorganic electrolytes, can be easily manipulated to tune the final physical structure. This review sheds light on the stabilization/phase transformation pathways of titania polymorphs like anatase, rutile, brookite and TiO2(B) under a variety of reaction conditions. The driving force for crystallization arising from complex species in solution coupled with pH of the solution and ion species facilitating the orientation of octahedral resulting in a crystalline phase are reviewed in detail. In addition to titanium halide/alkoxide, the nucleation of titania from other precursors like peroxo and layered titanates are also discussed. The non-aqueous route and ball milling-induced titania transformation is briefly outlined; moreover, the lacunae in understanding the concepts and future prospects in this exciting field are suggested.S. Girish KumarDr S. Girish Kumar is a native of Karnataka (Kolar District, Malur Taluk) and has obtained his M.Sc. degree in Physical Chemistry (2005) and Ph.D. (2012) degree in the area of photocatalysis from Bangalore University, Bangalore. He is the recipient of India's most prestigious Dr D. S. Kothari Post Doctoral Fellowship (2012) and works under the supervision of Prof. Rao in the Department of Physics, I.I.Sc., Bangalore, in the field of CdTe/CdS thin film heterojunction solar cells. The study of phase transition and photoluminescence properties of mixed phase titania and other heterojunctions are his present interests.K. S. R. Koteswara RaoDr K. S. R. Koteswara Rao is an associate professor at the Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. He works in the field of semiconductors. His research interests include understanding the defects in semiconductor materials and their heterostructures by optical methods (such as photoluminescence, and optically induced conductivity modulation) and electrical methods. The growth and study of III–V- and II–VI-based binary, ternary and quaternary compound semiconductor nano- and micro-structures and their utility for device applications are his current research studies.
1 Introduction
Polymorphic TiO2 is an extensively studied nanomaterial because of its specific properties and important roles in alleviating environmental and energy crisis by the effective utilization of solar energy. The landmark report on the photocatalytic splitting of water using a TiO2 electrode has triggered investigation of its applications in diverse areas like photocatalysis, photovoltaics, batteries, photonic crystals, UV blockers, smart coatings, and filling materials in textiles, paints, papers, cosmetics and biomedical sciences.1–5 Titania possesses numerous unique features such as high redox potential, low cost, non-toxicity, good stability towards adverse environment, hydrophilicity, humidity and gas sensing, dielectric character, favorable band edge positions, and facile preparation with diverse morphologies.6–10 Most of the fascinating properties of titania NPs originate from the size quantization effect. By decreasing the particle size, the bandgap widens as reflected by the blue shift in the absorption edge. The shift of CB and VB towards more negative and positive potentials, respectively, favors the redox process that cannot occur in their bulk counterparts.11
Each crystalline form of titania has been highlighted in a spectrum of applications, and the lattice structure differences among the polymorphs quite often lead to multifaceted physico-chemical and opto-electronic properties that control the electronic structure and bulk diffusion ability of charge carriers. For instance, rutile has a high refractive index, exceptional light scattering efficiency and UV absorptivity, which enables its utility as a filter in solar creams, pigments, opacifiers and optical communication devices (isolators, modulators and switches),12,13 while anatase is largely preferred in photocatalysis and photovoltaics. Although brookite and TiO2(B) are rare polymorphs in nature and are synthesized only under sensitive conditions, their importance in photocatalysis, photovoltaics and lithium ion insertion has been recently realized.14–17 In addition, some structural features of a polymorph will be vital than others depending on the application: size or surface area to volume ratio play a central role in catalysis,18 while controlling their size and shape (exposed facet) is important for fabricating photonic crystals, providing more flexibility and options for the design of nanostructures to satisfy unique requirements.19 The mixed crystal framework of titania is also beneficial for green energy technologies, pointing to the possibility of achieving optimized performances via controlling the phase composition. The morphology at the polymorphic interfaces and surface states are critical for such a synergistic effect, and intimate contact between the phases exhibits “magic effects” on the charge carrier transfer dynamics in light-induced photoreactions. The different band gaps, as well as the position of CB and VB edges, result in the formation of a stable heterojunction that allows the absorption of a wide spectral range and improves the charge carrier dynamics generation, separation and transfer process.20–25
The study on the phase transition of titania polymorphs is an active area of research from the view point of flourishing scientific interest and technological applications. Since there is no equilibrium temperature between the polymorphs of titania, a specific or particular temperature regime for the phase transition to occur is not well defined. It is unambiguously accepted that intrinsic parameters, such as particle size, purity, nature of titanium precursor, surface energy, density of intrinsic and induced defects, aggregation tendency or particle packing, solution chemistry, and crystal growth dynamics, coupled with external factors, like peptization, addition of modifiers/surfactant/chelating agents and annealing ambience, govern the temperature and activation energy of any phase transformation pathways.26–33 Owing to such complexities, it is inevitable to identify a simple method to control the physical features like particle size, shape and the crystal structure that indicates phase. The defect richness and structural diversity in TiO2 can be manipulated via careful monitoring of the processing conditions. Among the several wet and dry methods, synthesis from a homogeneous solution via wet chemical approaches seems to be very promising as multiple reaction parameters like precursor concentration, chelating agents, solvents, mineralizer, pH of the solution, aging time, reaction temperature, and kinetics of precursor hydrolysis, can be easily adjusted to tailor the intrinsic properties of the final crystal structure. The solution approach offers the possibility to control the reaction pathways on a molecular level during the transformation of precursor species into final products, enabling the synthesis of well-defined crystal polymorphs and morphologies without impurities.34–37 More importantly, it dispenses impurity doping into the titania matrix to achieve the desired phase stabilization/transition. The broad focus from wet chemical approaches is reviewed to shed light on the solution chemistry and complex species responsible for the nucleation of a particular crystal structure.
2 Structural features of titania polymorphs
TiO2 exists in several crystallographic forms like anatase (a = b = 3.785 Å, C = 9.514 Å; space group D4h19, I41/amd), brookite (a = 5.143 Å, b = 5.456 Å, C = 9.182 Å; space group D2h15, pbca), rutile (a = b = 4.593 Å, C = 2.959 Å; space group D4h14, P42/mnm) and TiO2(B) (a = 12.1787 Å, b = 3.7412 Å, C = 6.5249 Å; space group C2/m).38–49 The local order in each phase is represented by an octahedron constituting oxygen ions at its vertices and titanium atoms at the center with different spatial arrangements sharing the edges and corners in a different manner.49–54 There is a structural inter-relationship between anatase and rutile, as evidenced from theoretical and experimental studies.55–57 Rutile is thermodynamically the most stable phase at all temperatures and pressures, while metastable anatase and brookite are kinetic products. Rutile is composed of corner-sharing octahedra with each octahedron surrounded by ten octahedra, in which two are edge-shared and eight are corner-shared (Fig. 1).1e,54,57 Note that [TiO6] in anatase is surrounded by eight octahedra (four edge-shared and four corner-shared).58–60 Thus, the fraction of edge-sharing octahedra required to form anatase is greater compared to rutile (50% versus 20%, respectively). The two juxtaposed hydrolysis and condensation reactions between the two octahedra are required to form an edge-shared bonding, while corner-sharing octahedra demand hydrolysis and condensation reactions in the co-ordination sphere. The body-centered tetragonal anatase consists of edge-shared octahedra to form zigzag ribbons along [221], while octahedra in the primitive tetragonal rutile lattice share two edges to form linear chains parallel to [001]: the [TiO6] chains are linked together via corner connections along [110] and [10].47,61,62 Brookite adopts an orthorhombic structure, in which the octahedra share three edges with one of the edges determining the crystal distribution along the [100] direction and the other two edges determining the crystal distribution along the [001] direction60 with tunnels along the c-axis. The octahedral chains are rotated at 90° in rutile and nearly 90° in brookite, but they are not rotated to a large extent in anatase. The lattice structure of brookite resembles that of anatase, and its structural characteristics are in between those of anatase and rutile.46,62–66 For instance, the refractive indexes of anatase, brookite and rutile are 2.52, 2.63, and 2.72, while the theoretical densities are 3.84, 4.11, and 4.26 g cm−3, respectively.61 The optical (3.11 eV) and indirect band gaps (2.85 eV) of brookite were found to lie between those of anatase and rutile,67 while few studies suggest that the optical band gap is 0.46 and 0.16 eV higher than rutile and anatase, respectively.68 Thus, studying the properties of pure brookite without the co-existence of anatase or rutile remains a challenging task. The low density monoclinic TiO2(B) has edge- and corner-shared [TiO6] with perovskite-like windows between the sites and a relatively open structure.46,69–71 The unit cell volume of TiO2(B) is 35.27 (Å)3, whereas those of anatase, rutile, and brookite are 34.02, 31.12, and 32.20 (Å)3, respectively.43,72 It is obvious that rutile is more symmetric and compact compared to other titania polymorphs. The other rare crystal structures encountered are high pressure phase TiO2(II) with α-PbO2 structure,73 TiO2(R),42 baddeleyite,74 cubic TiO2,75 srilankite,76 TiO2–H (I4/m),41 and TiO2-III (P21/c).77,78
 Fig. 1  Arrangement of [TiO6] in titania polymorphs (reprinted with permission from ref. 1e; Copyright @ 2013 American Chemical Society). 
3 Classical theories of phase transition
3.1 Parameters governing the phase transition: a well-documented approach

(a) Types of nucleation processes. 
The transformation among the titania polymorphs involves the fundamental issues of both kinetic and thermodynamic aspects. The rutile configuration is thermodynamically favorable as its linearity allows the relaxation of the Ti–Ti bond. In contrast, the right angle configuration cannot relax as easily, but statistically encourages the nucleation of anatase–brookite.61 During the crystallization, anatase-type crystallite seems to form prior to rutile-type, but when rutile crystallizes, anatase nucleation will be either inhibited or transformed to rutile.79 ART occurs in a wide temperature range of 600–1100 °C, while brookite is generally regarded as a byproduct in the synthesis. The preference of BAT80,81 or BRT82–84 is largely ambiguous due to difficulties associated with obtaining pure brookite as it is far away from equilibrium under ambient conditions85 and a specific nucleus facilitating such transition is unknown. Few researchers argued that low pH of the solution and high concentration of chloride anions,82,86 presence of sodium cations87,88 and mechanical activation (ball milling conditions) strongly influence brookite formation.89 Note that brookite was observed as a byproduct when precipitated in an acidic medium at low temperatures while aging the precipitate from TiCl4 and NH3 for 15 months, and in pure form in the hydrothermal method or by the replication of a metal organic framework.88,90–95
The predilection of a particular polymorph to crystallize under the given conditions and phase transition rate has been explained by several acceptable models. In general, phase transition can be described as rutile ← anatase ↔ brookite → rutile. In the first pathway, anatase or brookite transforms directly to rutile, if the rutile nucleus is already present in the system. In the second pathway, anatase and brookite nuclei are inter-convertible, and the anatase–brookite interface nucleation sites promote rutile nucleation.96 The phase transition from rutile to anatase is thermodynamically irreversible, but it was achieved via the doping of rare earth ions in Degussa P 25 (anatase–rutile), which resulted in formation of pure anatase.97,98 Unfortunately, the mechanism pertinent to such transition has not been investigated to date.
The Ea values for ART, ranging from 147 to 837 kJ mol−1,99–102 are diverse, and the lowest reported value thus far is ∼20 kJ mol−1.103 The latter was ascribed to the high surface state density and the uniformity of size and shape can be attributed to the diffusion-controlled sol–gel synthesis. On the other hand, the high activation energy was due to the non-uniformity of the morphology and wide particle size distribution.100,102,104 The reaction rate is expressed by the standard first-order kinetics and JMAK model with an Avrami exponent value of n = 0.62–0.66, indicates that growth along the defect sites like dislocations and vacancies. The first-order kinetics resulted in Ea value of 412 kJ mol−1, while the JMAK model yielded a value of 429 kJ mol−1 for this transition.62 The rate of ART is limited by the density of the potential nucleation sites along with the formation of twins and clusters having a rutile-like character in anatase.47,105 The thermodynamics indicates that phase stability follows a decreasing sequence of rutile, brookite and anatase,106 which suggests that ABT takes place at a faster rate. The reconstructive ART involves an overall volume contraction of ∼8%, while BRT is accompanied by volume shrinkage of ∼3.4%.107 Zhang and Banfield108 reported that BRT has low barrier energy against ART as brookite is metastable with respect to rutile but more stable than anatase. Thus, the phase transition pathways among titania polymorphs followed the sequence: ABT (11.9 kJ mol−1) > BRT (163.8 kJ mol−1) > ART (>400 kJ mol−1 for bulk, as widely accepted).
Based on the phase transition in titania by high-energy ball milling, it was proposed that anatase and brookite interfaces may form by the OA of primary brookite and anatase {112} twin interfaces and other interfaces with different structures from that of bulk.47,48,109 Since the {112} anatase twin interfaces contain a unit cell of brookite, it was concluded that brookite nucleates at twin planes and grows at the expense of anatase at low temperatures;48 therefore, ABT was facile as compared to BRT. Such OA of primary particles between anatase and brookite results in the formation of planar defects, including twin planes and other interfaces.47,48 Anatase and brookite have a polytypic or reversible solid state transformation rather than polymorphic structural relationship, and their interconversion involves the displacement of atoms into adjacent sites on two or four Ti planes.48
The stable rutile nuclei maintain {101} facets during growth as a result of nucleation from the layers of alternating anatase {112} twins. Since the unit cell of brookite also contains two anatase {112} twins, this form of TiO2 is considered as a special case of {112} twin-like anatase.110 In contrast, Zhou et al.110 concluded that OA is not necessary for the formation of {112} twin boundaries; moreover, {112} twin-like anatase easily forms at the surface and at the interface between the two nanocrystals in an aggregate, leading to selective rutile nucleation at these locations among the twins and at the disordered surfaces.110 Subsequent to twin formation, small and isolated rutile particles form among the twins, which grow and shrink until a critical nucleus is formed. Despite the differences in the pathways of {112} twin formation, the mechanism of rutile nucleation appears to be similar to that proposed based on experimental studies.47 It was observed that rutile nuclei form when half of [TiO6] adjacent to the anatase {112} twin boundary are displaced along the 〈110〉 direction to form “straight” rutile-like octahedral chains instead of “zigzag” anatase-like chains. The simultaneous displacement of Ti octahedral along the 〈110〉 direction in every two out of four such planes leads to the formation of a rutile {101} facet.110 The ability of {112} twin-like anatase transforming into various polymorphs is apparent and might be tailored via careful monitoring of the experimental conditions.


(b) Thermodynamics and particle size effects. 
The main factor determining the transformation rate from phase ‘a’ to ‘b’ is the nucleation and growth mechanism (Δga–b) that represents the free energy difference between the phases ‘a’ and ‘b’. The transformation sequence among anatase, brookite and rutile is size-dependent because the energies of these three polymorphs are sufficiently close such that they can be reversed even by small differences in the surface energy. According to theoretical predictions, anatase has lower surface and higher bulk Gibbs free energy as compared to rutile.102,111–117 Anatase NPs were reported to be thermodynamically more stable than equal-sized rutile in the size regime smaller than the critical size, which is highly dependent on the surface complexation conditions.105,108,112–117 Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that TiO2 prefers to homogeneously nucleate in the anatase form and rutile heterogeneously nucleates via the aggregation of anatase NPs.47,48,118,119 The critical nuclei size for ART is governed by the volume free energy, surface energy and strain energy, which fluctuates depending on the synthesis of the materials and processing conditions. Zhang and Banfield108 concluded that anatase is stable for a particle size <11 nm, brookite is stable in the size regime of 11–35 nm and rutile is preferred for a particle size >35 nm. Alternatively, Zhu et al.27 reported that anatase, brookite and rutile are the most stable at the sizes <4.9 nm, 4.9–30 nm and >30 nm, respectively.
If the sizes are equal, anatase transforms to brookite and then to rutile. If the crystal sizes are unequal, the transition pathways can be altered. Anatase (4.9 nm) with a larger grain size transforms into rutile at a faster rate compared to anatase with a smaller grain size (2.6 nm) in anatase–brookite. In other words, anatase (4.9 nm) with a smaller grain size than brookite (5.8 nm) is transformed to rutile at a faster rate than the opposite case (2.6 and 2.0 nm, respectively). When the free energy of anatase is smaller than brookite, anatase is stabilized over brookite and their interface moves towards brookite, leading to BAT. In contrast, ABT prevails when the free energy of anatase is larger than that of brookite. The preference of ABT or BAT depends on the relative grain sizes, and thus the surface free energy between anatase and brookite. When the grain size of brookite is equal to the critical size, anatase and brookite transform to rutile; in contrast, if the size is larger than the critical size, ABT is preferred, which is followed by BRT or directly ART. However, when the size of brookite is smaller than the critical size, BAT followed by ART or directly BRT will be observed.27 Conversely, pure anatase with a smaller crystallite size would undergo rapid ART compared to a larger crystallite due to the critical nuclei size attainment of the former.120 Therefore, thermodynamic stability is size dependent due to the balance of the bulk and surface contribution.
Recent findings by Navrotsky121 indicate that although bulk anatase is metastable relative to rutile, the much lower surface energy of anatase reverses the thermodynamic stability for very small NPs. The analysis indicated that the edge and corner atoms significantly influence the critical size at which rutile nanocrystals energetically dominate over anatase.110 The thermodynamic model based on the surface free energies and first-principle calculations revealed that anatase NPs are stabilized by surface adsorbates containing a large fraction of hydrogen, while rutile particles become stable by surface adsorbates containing a large fraction of oxygen.112 However, this conclusion may be questioned because systematic studies on the size effects in pure anatase NPs are unavailable and there is a lack of knowledge on surface studies that can be extended to all NPs. Thus, particle size is not the only factor that influences the phase transition, surface structure also contributes to the nucleation of a particular polymorph. The size below which anatase becomes more stable than rutile (cross over diameter) is dependent on the environment of NPs. It is smaller in vacuum than that in water and continues to decrease with an increase in temperature, and the phase stability in water is different from vacuum for NPs with the same size.122,123 ART is facilitated by enhanced ionic mobility at temperatures near the melting point of NPs. The molecular dynamics simulations showed that rutile will be stable if NPs are in vacuum and become smaller in size as the temperature is elevated.123a The grain size of the three phases cannot be practically equal as the grain coalesces during thermal treatment or phase transition. Moreover, the grain size of the initial powder is one of the most important parameters in governing the phase stability of titania, especially in the nanometer scale region.109 The structural feature that stabilizes rutile in its bulk form is its low tolerance to defects; consequently, surfaces, edges and vertices induce a much higher energetic penalty in rutile as compared to anatase, since these defects are relatively more abundant when the particle sizes are small, stabilizing anatase at the nanoscale. The surface defects including edges and vertices also contribute towards the surface energies of the particles due to their uncoordinated nature that inverts the relative stabilities of anatase and rutile. The total surface energies are critically dependent upon the defects associated with the edges and corners of NPs at particles sizes ≤3 nm.26b
Banfield et al.124 found that the creation of interfacial boundaries with the introduction of surface impurities suppressed the grain growth and shifted the ART temperature towards higher values. The interface nucleation model dominates for ART in anatase with denser particle packing, whereas the surface nucleation model dominates for those with less dense particle packing.114 The rutile nucleates at the interface of necking anatase particles or on the surface of a single anatase particle. The bulk nucleation is associated with growth processes during which rutile nuclei are formed within the anatase and grow in size eventually consuming the entire anatase.125–127 The concentration of crystalline particles in the system can impact the rearrangement and packing of the structural units. For instance, a low concentration of particles results in anatase because the lack of proper attachment or co-ordination of anatase particles reduces any chances of rutile nucleation. The densification in a limited space at a high particle concentration facilitates OA to promote ART.128 Koparde and Cummings found that the final sintering agglomerate transforms to rutile if one of the sintering NPs is rutile, while the sintering of anatase and amorphous NPs resulted in brookite agglomerates.123a A shear mechanism was found to be operative, resulting in the formation of rutile lathes (plates) within anatase particles.129 Shannon and Pask130 suggested that most of the atomic arrangements are likely to take place within the “pseudo” close-packed planes of oxygen in the respective structures. The oxide ion in anatase has an fcc arrangement, and changes to the hexagonal packing are experienced during ART; moreover, this atomic rearrangement will be accompanied by the breakage of Ti–O bonds. Thus, ART is classically defined as a “co-operative movement of titanium and oxygen atoms, in contrast to a strict diffusion mechanism.” ART involves the breakage of 2 out of 6 Ti–O bonds in anatase or bulk anatase, and it ruptures 7 out of 24 Ti–O bonds per unit cell and leads to the co-operative displacement of both titanium and oxygen.130 This process will be accompanied by the formation of oxygen vacancies that accelerate Ti–O bond breaking and consequent structural rearrangement with a drastic crystallite growth. The tuning of anatase or brookite to rutile via calcination is a difficult task, because the transformation of metastable to stable polymorphs proceeds at a rapid rate. The delicate microstructure and surface property may be destroyed under high temperature or pressure. The abnormal particle growth of rutile during ART was accounted via three scenarios: (a) anatase particles sinter and form a single crystal, which transforms into larger rutile particles; (b) a single crystal of anatase transforms into rutile and each rutile particle attaches to its neighbour forming new “bigger” rutile particles, which would have either a single crystalline orientation or subgrain structure because of imperfect attachments; and (c) anatase particles become attached to rutile particles and the former particle rotates acquiring a favourable crystallographic orientation for the transformation to proceed, thus forming a larger single crystal of rutile (Fig. 2). An OA relationship of the type [110]A//[001]R and [112]A//[110]R was revealed by TEM.129 The calcination temperature was found to have a significant effect on the ART. The annealing under oxygen ambience stabilized anatase, while rutile was favored under reducing/vacuum/nitrogen atmosphere.130,131
 Fig. 2  Growth of rutile particles during sintering (reprinted with permission from ref. 129; Copyright @ 2001 John Wiley and Sons). 

3.2 Phase nucleation depending on solution chemistry
ART during calcination in air proceeds via solid state interface nucleation,102,114 while in an aqueous solution under hydrothermal treatment, it occurs through the dissolution–precipitation pathway via the dissolution of one phase by surface protonation (as in ART) or hydroxylation (as in ABT or BAT), followed by the reprecipitation of the most stable phase. In this mechanism, the phase with higher free energy tends to dissolve and the phase with a lower surface energy precipitates out. In general, surplus TiO2 growth units exist in the solution. Considering the solution chemistry, Ti(IV) species in aqueous solutions are octahedrally coordinated using vacant ‘d’ orbitals of titanium ions to accept electron pairs from nucleophilic ligands such as the –OH group or H2O forming species like [Ti(OH)n(H2O)6−n](4−n)+.132 At elevated temperatures, the mononuclear structure will dehydrate and condense to form amorphous TiO2·nH2O oligomers, containing a metal–oxo–polymer (Ti–O–Ti) network.120 The nature of the ligand co-ordinated to the central titanium is determined by the pH of the solution and the presence of species acting as complexing agents.54,133 In the absence of any complexing species, the pH of the medium plays a major role. For instance, [Ti(H2O)6]4+ undergoes a stepwise spontaneous hydroxylation forming [Ti(OH)(H2O)5]3+, [Ti(OH)2(H2O)4]2+, [Ti(OH)3(H2O)3]+ and [Ti(OH)4(H2O)2]0 because of the polarizability of Ti4+ ions. These reactions can be initiated by adding a strong base or heating the solution. These complexes result in the formation of a solid phase through the creation and growth of nuclei via olation and oxolation pathways. In the presence of a complexing agent that can react with the co-ordination sphere of the cation, a solid phase is likely to result from different zero charge precursors, leading to the nucleation of a particular polymorph.
The formation of a titania crystal via the connection of octahedral by corner/edge sharing is generally discussed on the basis of the ‘partial charge model’,52,79,134–137 while the linkage of [TiO6] units in TiO2 is formed by the condensation of [Ti(OH)n(H2O)6−n](4−n)+. If deoxolation does not occur, oxolation leads to linear growth along the equatorial plane of the cations in the lower pH range. This reaction followed by oxolation between the resulting linear chains leads to rutile. When deoxolation takes place at higher pH, condensation can proceed along the apical directions, leading to skewed chains of anatase. Henry et al.138 proposed that if deoxolation occurs before nucleation, condensation may orient towards the cis-skewed chains of anatase. Conversely, if deoxolation occurs after nucleation, a trans-linear chain of rutile is formed. Gopal et al.50 pointed out that when two octahedra join along an edge after initially sharing a corner during condensation, the placement of the third octahedron determines the final crystal structure. If the third octahedron bonds to the other two octahedra to form a linear chain (basic structural unit for rutile), a nucleus favoring rutile will be formed (Fig. 3). Alternatively, anatase or brookite may nucleate if the third octahedron joins in such a way that a right angle is formed (basic structural unit of anatase–brookite). The competition between the growth units of various polymorphs together with their relative stabilities from the aspects of surface/bulk energy and geometric configuration depends on the nature of the growth units specific to the processing conditions. During the anatase formation, the rearrangements of these octahedra from the amorphous phase proceeds through a solid state reaction, in which the water molecules form bridges between the surface hydroxyl groups of different octahedra that share only one common vertex using two lone pairs of electrons on oxygen. Due to the size of the water bridges, it is facile for the formation of two bridges between two octahedra, thus linking them by a triangular face. Thus, having aligned the octahedral correctly, dehydration occurs resulting in two titanium ions linked by two further oxygen ion vertexes, which share a face. The presence of a small quantity of base increases the hydroxyl group density as well as the number of potential bridging sites favoring anatase. In strong acidic conditions, the hydroxide group in the pair of octahedra sharing one edge will be protonated. When a neighbouring octahedron attacks the pair of octahedra, electrostatic repulsion favours opposite edge sharing; thus, a 3-D linear chain sharing the vertex results in rutile (Fig. 4).139 In a mild acidic medium, hydroxide groups in neighbouring octahedra sharing an edge are partly protonated, thereby promoting the formation of linear and spinal or zigzag chains, simultaneously leading to anatase, rutile or brookite. By adopting the partial charge model,140 Aruna et al.134 proposed that the crystallization of TiO2 starts with [TiO(OH)(OH2)4]+, which is evolved from Ti4+via [Ti(OH)(H2O)5]3+ and [Ti(OH)2(H2O)4]2+ by increasing the pH of the solution. The [Ti(OH)2(H2O)4]2+ can yield [Ti(OH)3(H2O)3]+via intramolecular deoxolation depending on the pH conditions. The deoxolation has much less probability to take place and oxolation among [TiO(OH)(H2O)4]+ results in linear growth along the equatorial plane of cations at a relatively low pH. This reaction followed by oxolation between the resultant chains yields rutile. The condensation can proceed along apical directions via deoxolation, leading to skewed chains of anatase at high pH values. Cheng et al.54 explained the pH effect from the view point of the TiO2 crystal structure: the linking of [TiO6] units in TiO2 is formed through oxolation (dehydration) between the hydroxyl ligand in [Ti(OH)n(H2O)6−n](4−n)+. As the formation of one-edge shared bonding requires two oxolation reactions between a pair of complex ions to occur simultaneously, high pH supports edge-shared bonding (anatase crystallization). At low pH (high acidity), edge-shared bonding is suppressed to some extent and corner-shared bonding is facile to form rutile. Brookite has both shared edges and corners and is midway between that of anatase and rutile in terms of edge-shared bonding. This might be attributable to brookite stabilization at intermediate pH. At pH values far below the PZC of titania, the NPs of rutile are more stable than anatase and vice versa at pH values above PZC.116
 Fig. 3  Orientation of the third [TiO6] in linear and zigzag fashion. 
 Fig. 4  The formation of rutile under acidic conditions (reprinted with permission from ref. 139; Copyright @ 2006 Elsevier). 
Due to the different co-ordination ability and spatial steric effects of anions like F−, Cl−, NO3−, ClO4−, SO42− and PO43−, the crystal phase of titania can be tailored by changing these mineralizers (acids), which affects the linkage of six-fold co-ordinated monomers in different bonding modes.141 These anions would replace the –OH or –OH2+ species to form a Ti–anion and its relative magnitude depends on the bonding energy and anionic concentration. According to the ligand field theory,54 nucleation and crystallization into an actual crystallographic structure will be effectively influenced by the ligands and dehydration reactions between partially hydrolyzed Ti4+ complexes existing in solution such as Ti(OH)n(A1)m(A2)o (A: anion, n + m + o = 6). Accordingly, Cheng et al.54 suggested that the crystallization of TiO2 should proceed via dehydration between partially hydrolyzed [Ti(OH)n(Cl)m]2− (n + m = 6, representing the acidity and concentration of chloride anions in the solution, respectively) obtained from the hydrolysis of TiCl4. The phase formation/transformation is governed by the aggregation rate of octahedral complexes.50 The high concentration of protons results in a stronger repulsion among the particles and a slower aggregation rate leads to rutile and vice versa. [TiO6] separated at an acidic pH enhances the mobility of [TiO6] to benefit the formation of larger crystallites by depositing discrete [TiO6] on the preformed nuclei. Alternatively, amorphous TiO2 cannot be separated due to less protonation at high pH and [TiO6] units would be still in the aggregate form via hydrogen bonding. The aggregated amorphous TiO2 will take part in face shared bonding via solid state epitaxial process during heat (hydrothermal) treatment.120,141 Barbe et al.142 also evidenced that the low aggregation of anatase particles suppressed rutile formation. Thus, the ART rate will increase dramatically when the interacting anatase is finely crystalline and aggregated due to the increased contact sites between the NPs and are potential nucleation sites for rutile formation.116,143 In contrast, rutile can also co-precipitate with anatase in an aqueous environment rather than that from the structural rearrangement of the aggregated anatase crsytallites.123a
3.3 Peptization and growth mechanism for NPs
The nucleation will be followed by the growth of NPs via coarsening (classical growth) and aggregation (non-classical growth).48,144 The grain growth in nanocrystallites can be regarded as the movement of grain boundaries by atomic diffusion during the coalescence of smaller neighbouring grains. The processes such as coarsening and aggregation can compete with nucleation and growth in modifying the particle size distribution within the liquid medium. The phase transformation rate and particle growth dynamics are fundamental processes that govern the final particle size, morphology and phase composition. The syntheses under aqueous conditions are categorized into two regimes: synthesis at low and high water-to-titanium ion ratios (r). In the former case (r < 10), relatively monodisperse aggregates of spherical nanocrystallites (0.5–1 nm) are obtained, and the growth kinetics of aggregates are determined by the stability of the colloid. The nucleation and growth processes are completed within seconds (r > 10) due to the rapid hydrolysis of the titanium precursors.145–152 The formed TiO2 particles are unstable and precipitate to form larger aggregates, which collapse into very small aggregates after peptization. This method is regarded as an efficient approach to obtain crystalline phases at relatively low temperatures.153,154 Kumar and co-workers153–155 concluded that less agglomerated samples obtained from peptization created efficient packing of particles, whereas the unpeptized samples favored the formation of structures with greater porosity and larger pore size. Thus, the peptized sol will be uniformly packed and compact to favor rutile formation at low temperatures compared to the unpeptized sol in the course of thermal treatment. The pore sizes of the peptized samples were monomodal and relatively narrow as compared to the bimodal distribution for unpeptized ones.
As a peptizing agent, TEAOH promoted ART as compared to TMAOH and TBAOH for Ti(OBu)4 under hydrothermal conditions (200–240 °C, 2 h) and subsequent calcination (1050 °C, 1 h). The particle morphology changed from sphere to rod-like and asterisk-like with an increase in the concentration of TMAOH and TEAOH, respectively, while it was unaffected by TBAOH. It was proposed that the asterisk-like morphology offered a higher density of potential nucleation sites to promote ART.156 The hydrothermal processing of unpeptized titania precipitated from an alkoxide precursor formed a highly crystallized powder in all the cases.157 After peptization (precipitates were redispersed in HNO3 and refluxed to obtain transparent sols), a varying amount of anatase–rutile was obtained for ethoxide and isopropoxide and pure anatase from a tertiary butoxide precursor. The obtained powder from the hydrolysis of TTIP in water–HCl mixture (pH 1–2) was anatase–brookite and it was later transformed to rutile during calcination (500 °C, 1 h).125 The rutile content was the highest in the sample previously peptized at RT as compared to artificial peptization (50 °C and 70 °C).125 Surprisingly, the sample peptized at 70 °C showed no significant rutile enhancement even after calcination. This phenomenon was explained by the fact that peptization at high temperatures resulted in smaller particle sizes even below the critical nuclei size due to high thermal energy (kT). Alternatively, peptized powders at high temperatures when dried at RT showed high rutile content compared to those dried at 0–5 °C. The lattice defects and produced microstrains within the titania were reduced by the cool-drying technique, which retarded the rearrangement of parallel octahedra in the case of anatase to 90°-rotated octahedra in rutile. Relatively smaller Ea value (11 kJ mol−1) was observed for the powder dried at RT compared to the cool-drying process (21 kJ mol−1). Due to the very small crystallite size (∼3.5 nm), the temperature for ART was within the regime of nanoscale transformation. The transformation Ea was calculated in the range from 7.5–11 kJ mol−1 to 11–21 kJ mol−1 based on the peptization and drying temperature, respectively. Furthermore, the enthalpy change for crystallization was 10.4 ± 0.3 kJ mol−1 according to the DSC analysis.125 The peptization of the gel with HNO3 at 35 °C resulted in the dominant anatase for all the concentrations of TTIP. After calcination (400 °C, 1 h), anatase–rutile–brookite with dominant rutile was observed in the samples having a hydrolysis ratio (Ti4+/H2O) of 30:1. The high concentration of Ti4+ leads to faster agglomeration and increases the total contact area, which promotes ART.158a On the other hand, peptization with HCl leads to the formation of rutile.158b
During peptization, aggregates will be broken down and the sol is electrostatically stabilized, wherein the particles attain a positive charge as a result of protons adsorption. The particles are then repelled (double-layer repulsion), yielding a stable sol with the minimum degree of aggregation.153–155 The character of the hydroxyl anion and a large cation group of tetra alkyl ammonium hydroxide permit them to serve as catalysts in hydrolysis and as peptizers for the deagglomeration of precipitates.159,160
The driving force for crystal growth arises from surface energy reduction with specific morphological features.48,119 The coarsening or Ostwald ripening (OR) is a dissolution–reprecipitation growth mechanism by which smaller particles dissolve due to thermodynamic instability and larger particles continue to grow by consuming the dissolved species in the solution (Fig. 5). In other words, larger particles grow at the expense of smaller ones. In this case (OR), particles tend towards an isotropic growth, generating particles with regular and almost spherical shapes. Alternatively, secondary particles can also be produced by the aggregation of primary particles.161–166 In this mechanism (OA), primary particles aggregate first, and then align crystallographically at specific locations to form mesocrystals. It favors the formation of anisotropic nanocrystals by the coalescence of two or more nanocrystals.164,165 Although primary particles in mesocrystals are not in direct contact with each other, they will be in the crystallographic registry. Subsequently, mesocrystals transform to secondary crystalline particles or oriented aggregates.166–168 This mechanism is predominant in materials with very low solubility. In general, OR results in a characteristic equilibrium morphology of the crystal,112,117,119 while OA leads to irregular morphologies due to twists, tilts and shifts at the attachment planes.48,119 Another growth mechanism that results in dislocations and tilts is repeated nucleation, in which heterogeneous nucleation takes place on pre-existing crystallites in the system.169,170 It was also hypothesized that the particle grows by coarsening and assembly as opposed to coarsening alone.171 The driving force for the assembly process once again stems from the reduction of surface energy as observed for a variety of metal oxides.118,172,173 The growth mechanism is a fairly complicated process, yielding a variety of attachment sites and local surface environments. The particle growth kinetics can be tailored by using different solvents or complexing agents that can enhance the solubility of the titanium complexes in solution.
 Fig. 5  Growth of nanoparticles by OR and OA mechanisms (reprinted with permission from ref. 166; Copyright @ 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
4 Hydrothermal/solvothermal route
This route offers a promising approach owing to its multiple merits like low reaction temperatures to obtain particles without agglomeration or reduced aggregation, fast reaction velocity, narrow particle size distribution, high surface area and tailored crystal structures with well-defined unique morphology. In this method, the chemical reaction proceeds in aqueous media to form highly crystalline materials along with the generation of heat and pressure. The reaction develops an anomalous dielectric constant, density and ionic strength that cannot be achieved under ambient pressure/temperature, allowing unusual reactions to occur. By interplaying with reaction parameters like solution pH, precursor chemistry, solvents, temperature and time, phase compositions with diverse morphologies can be tailored depending on the chemical structure and electronic environment of the Ti(IV) complex. The only disadvantage of this method is the longer aging time for crystallisation at low temperatures.174 The driving force for hydrothermal crystallization originates from the free energy difference generated by the relative supersaturation that occurs when increasing the temperature from RT to hydrothermal conditions and follows the dissolution–precipitation mechanism.79 It is generalized that anatase is stabilized under basic solutions, while rutile prevails in acidic conditions; moreover, larger rutile particles are stable regardless of the pH for this method. For instance, Cheng et al.54 concluded that high acidity and concentration of TiCl4 favor rutile formation, whereas a solution with a wide pH range of 3.4–8.2 promoted anatase formation.
4.1 Preparation of TiO2 from titanium chlorides
The crystallographic structure of titania formed at different concentrations of TiCl4 is concerned with the co-ordination ability of Ti4+ complex ions.54,86 Nicholls et al.175 found that Ti4+ exists as [Ti(OH)Cl5]2− and [TiCl6]2− in HCl. Hildenbrand et al.176 revealed that corner-sharing titanium oxygen octahedral dimers and trimers exist in a TiCl4 (2.17–4.98 M) solution. The hydrothermal treatment (200 °C, 24 h) of TiCl4 yielded anatase–rutile for [TiCl4] < 0.5 M and pure rutile above this concentration.79 Surprisingly, brookite coexisted at an intermediate concentration of 1 M, and it completely transformed to rutile at 2 M. The increase of the hydrothermal treatment time from 18 to 42 h enhanced the rutile content, as the anatase crystallites migrate and align themselves followed by the in situ rearrangement of the lattice to form larger rutile crystallites.111 Based on the microscopic model, this transformation can be explained as follows: (i) low [TiCl4] contains a large amount of dispersed [Ti(OH)2(OH2)4]2+ monomers or edge-sharing dimers at RT, while [TiO(OH)5]2+ exists at high [TiCl4];177,178 (ii) after the attainment of the reaction temperature, the solution saturates and the species in solution will become unstable, and they are prone to combine via oxolation or olation to form the original nuclei. As these nuclei grow to exceed the critical size, they become stable and further growth continues. During the formation of the original nuclei, [Ti(OH)2(OH2)4]2+ monomers can form different structures of polymers by sharing equatorial or apical edges, while [TiO(OH)5]2+ monomers can only form linear chain polymers by sharing equatorial edges.179 Thus, a rutile crystallite develops as the solution contains only linear polymer chains at [TiCl4] > 0.4 M. Brookite–rutile prepared at a high concentration of TiCl4 (1.0 M) was dominant in spherical particles with a minor portion of NRs, while an increased proportion of rutile NRs was formed in dilute TiCl4 (0.3 M) under hydrothermal conditions (from 333 to 423 K, 12 h).180 The excess H+ under strong acidic conditions suppressed the hydrolytic process of TiCl4; therefore, fewer nuclei are formed in the concentrated acidic solution via the layer-by-layer growth mechanism. NRs with an aspect ratio close to 10 were obtained with an excess of chloride ions (3 M NaCl). The equilibrium between the dissolution and precipitation of NPs under strong acidity is different from those in a weakly acidic solution. The rutile NRs with {101} facets were observed compared to the {110} plane. The surface energies of {011}, {110}, {100} and {221} facets are 1.85, 1.78, 2.08 and 2.02 J m−2, respectively.181 The most stable surface is {110} containing five and six co-ordinate species, which in part may be the source of the selective adsorption (physical, chemical or both) of chloride or anionic complex of Ti(IV) ions in the acidic medium. However, it is assumed that the tips composed of the high energy surface facet {101} adsorbs more anionic complexes of Ti(IV) ions for lowering the surface energy. These Ti(IV) complexes dehydrate on the tips of NRs and form units of [TiO6] continuously, thus favouring anisotropic growth along the c-axis.180
The hydrothermal treatment (100 °C, 18 h) of TiCl4 in a mixed organic medium of alcohol and AcOH gave rutile, anatase and amorphous phase with ethanol, ethylene glycol and glycerol, respectively.182 In contrast, treatment without AcOH resulted in anatase for ethanol and no crystalline product was observed for ethylene glycol and glycerol. However, rutile formation with glycerol was observed at 150 °C and no structural changes took place for the other two solvents. It was interesting to note that anatase–rutile was observed for ethylene glycol at 150 °C and no crystalline product was detected for glycerol without AcOH. This suggests that the in situ generation of water as a reaction between alcohol and acid was instrumental in the nucleation of titania polymorphs. The formation of titania was mainly through the hydrolytic process via the water released from the esterification of ethanol and AcOH, although the non-hydrolytic pathway cannot be excluded. HCl retained in the reaction system played a catalytic role to initiate the esterification reaction at elevated temperatures and makes the hydrolytic process more feasible.182 The nature of the titanium precursor and alcohol influenced the final phase formation under microwave-assisted solvothermal process (190 °C, 30 min): pure anatase was observed for the reaction of TiCl4 with propanol or butanol and rutile with octanol, while anatase–brookite, brookite–rutile and anatase–rutile were observed for TiCl3 with the aforementioned solvents, respectively. Interestingly, only anatase was observed for TiCl4 or TiCl3 with ethanol.183 Unlike TiCl4, the solvent reaction with TiCl3 involves oxidation and hydrolysis to form TiO2. It is known that residual alkoxy groups determine the crystallization behavior of the titania precursor, which is influenced by the initial ultrastructure of the amorphous phase.184 Brookite nucleation might be related to the unique formation of hydroxyl groups in the reaction of butanol with TiCl3. This formation may be due to the increased cationic character on the tertiary carbon atom of butanol that favored the nucleophilic attack of chloride ions: –Ti–Cl + BuOH → Ti–OH + BuCl(1)
In addition, varied morphologies were obtained: spheres, NPs and nanorod building spheres with ethanol, propanol and octanol, respectively, were found with TiCl4, while a mixture of NRs and NPs was observed for TiCl3 and butanol. The reaction between titanium chlorides and alcohol becomes less vigorous with an increase in the number of carbon atoms in the alcohol; thus, the evolution of HCl with the replacement of chloride ions in the precursor by alkoxy groups becomes more difficult. Consequently, the reaction steps involved the etherification of alcohols and water as a byproduct. Accordingly, the crystal structure changes from anatase to rutile or brookite with an increasing number of carbon atoms in the solvent. The solvothermal treatment of TiCl3 (353 K, 24 h) and urea in HNO3 showed rutile, anatase and varying amounts of anatase–rutile in aqueous, ethanol and water–ethanol, respectively.185 The hydrothermal reactions (250 °C, 4 h) of TiCl4 with IPA–water resulted in anatase for 1 M [TiCl4], while rutile (3–15%) was favoured with an increase in the precursor concentration from 2 to 3 M after calcination (600 °C, 2 h).186 The precipitate obtained by the hydrolysis of TiCl4 and NH3 were anatase, but amorphous with Ti(OC2H5)4 and dry ethanol. However, the hydrothermal aging (120 °C, 90 min) of the amorphous powder with different salt solutions (K2SO4, Na2SO4, KCl, NaCl) crystallized the anatase and totally different products were formed with NaF. The progressively lower amount of crystallization with chloride, sulfate and fluoride ions was attributed to increasing the charge-to-size ratio, which adsorbs strongly on the titania surface and reduces the surface/solution ion exchange and delays structure reorganization.187 The solvothermal treatment (110 °C, 12 h) of TiCl4–acetone resulted in anatase and rutile for the ratio of 1:15 and 1:10, respectively.188 At the initial stages of the reaction, the Lewis acid, TiCl4, catalyzed the aldol condensation reaction of acetone to form diacetone alcohol, which easily dehydrates to form mesityl oxide and its isomers. The dehydrated dimers further condensates with the remaining acetone to produce varying amounts of dehydrated trimers and tetramers.189 Thus, water molecules produced from the dehydration of acetone oligomers trigger TiCl4 hydrolysis to produce Ti–OH species and HCl. The dehydration of Ti–OH to form Ti–O–Ti continues, leading to either anatase or rutile.
The hydrothermal treatment (220 °C, 3 h) of amorphous TiO2 with HF and HNO3 or HCl resulted in pure anatase, although rutile was observed at mild concentrations of HCl or after prolonging the reaction time (10 h).141 The TEM images revealed a broad size particle distribution, indicating that the crystallization of anatase from amorphous solid proceeds via solid-state epitaxial crystal growth with a slow nucleation process for hydrothermally treated amorphous TiO2 at pH 9 without acids. In contrast, this transition preceded by the face sharing polycondensation of protonated [TiO6] with acid as a catalyst.187 The addition of mineral acids dispersed the aggregate [TiO6] and related species in the amorphous phase into discrete species by protonating the surface Ti–OH to Ti–OH2+,190 which easily combines with –OH groups of neighbouring [TiO6] to form a Ti–O–Ti bridge accompanied by the elimination of water molecules (dehydration) by which a crystal grows to a larger size.141,191 Interestingly, pure rutile with a rod-like morphology was obtained with citric and nitric acids (pH 0.8–1.09), attributed to the prevention of surface sharing polycondensation by the chelation of citrates to [TiO6]. Such chelation favours the edge sharing between [TiO6] rather than face sharing owing to the spatial inhibition effect of organic ligands. The increase of pH > 1.09 with citric acid promoted anatase along with rutile (150 °C, 22 h). The chelation of citrate to amorphous TiO2 was affected by the degree of protonation. If the acidity of the suspension is sufficiently high to achieve discrete dispersion of [TiO6], the amorphous phase can be uniformly modified with citrate, giving rise to pure rutile. Otherwise, the chelation of citrate to amorphous TiO2 will be incomplete due to the existence of aggregated amorphous masses, resulting in anatase–rutile. The catalytic activity of HNO3 and HF for anatase crystallization from amorphous is lower than HCl since both acids have very poor nucleophilicity, leading to the slow dispersion of amorphous aggregates into discrete [TiO6] and related species. The slow nucleation may induce competitive crystal growth, leading to irregular faces of anatase titania. The competitive formation of chlorine atom-substituted octahedral similar to the partially hydrolyzed [Ti(OH)n(Cl)m]2− and related species like TiO2(OH)nn− may explain the slow rate of rutile formation.141
The hydrothermal reaction (200 °C, 20 h) of TiCl3 and NaNO3 in an alkaline medium (pH > 10) gave pure brookite, while the addition of tartaric acid (C4H6O6) facilitated BAT and complete anatase was observed for a molar ratio of tartaric acid/TiCl3 at 0.75 (Fig. 6).192 The obtained brookite was aggregated into spindle-like particles, while the addition of tartaric acid changed the morphology to a nanorod structure. The time dependent evolution of TiO2 indicated the transition from amorphous to layered titanate (4 h) and later transformed to anatase and brookite. Brookite in its pure form was not observed for the reaction system with pH < 9 and temperature < 180 °C. For C4H6O6/Ti with molar ratio < 0.75, insoluble amorphous Ti(OH)4 and soluble Ti-contained species [Ti(OH)x(C4H4O6)y]z− (4 ≤ x + 2y ≤ 6, z = x + 2y − 4) exist in the solution. The former transformed to layered titanate (Na2−xH2Ti2O5·H2O) that further crystallized to form brookite under certain concentrations of Na+ and OH− ions. Due to the steric hindrance of carboxylic acid ligands, [Ti(OH)x(C4H4O6)y]z− should combine together by sharing equatorial or apical edges and arrange in zigzag chains to favor anatase.193 The strong chelation between the Ti center and C4H6O6 reduces the condensation pathways between titania complexes, resulting in relatively slow nucleation and the growth of anatase embryos. Interestingly, anatase–brookite–rutile was transformed to pure anatase with the exposed {001} facets via the addition of ascorbic acid and the morphology changed from elongated NRs and nanoparticles to spindle-like particles after hydrothermal treatment (180 °C, 10 h).194
 Fig. 6  Influence of tartaric acid on brookite content (reprinted with permission from ref. 192; Copyright @ 2012 Springer). 
Anatase, rutile and brookite were selectively synthesized by the hydrothermal treatment (180 °C, 3 h) of TiCl3 using (NH4)2S2O8, H2O2, and HNO3 (or HClO4) in the absence of mineralizers.67 The three polymorphs showed distinct crystal shapes: rounded nanocrystals for anatase, nanoplates for brookite and NRs for rutile. Pure anatase was obtained with (NH4)2S2O8 irrespective of the synthesis conditions (solution pH and initial Ti3+ concentration), while the phase selective synthesis of anatase, brookite and rutile was achieved with other oxidants like H2O2, HNO3 and HClO4 depending on [TiCl3] and pH of the solution. A unique transition sequence was observed for the hydrothermal treatment of TiCl3 (0.05–0.9 M) with oxidants like H2O2, HNO3 and HClO4 in the pH range of <0–1.68. (2)
The chemically co-ordinated sulfate ion orients the precursor cations upon deoxolation and oxolation, which promotes anatase. Note that the alkaline condition (pH 9.0) favoured anatase, low pH (0.44) resulted in rutile, and intermediate pH (1.32) stabilized brookite. Alternatively, very low (0.005 M TiCl3) and high reactant (0.9 M TiCl3) concentrations stabilized anatase, while 0.0625 M yielded pure brookite. The high reactant concentration results in rapid interactions among the precursor cations, which suppressed sufficient rearrangements of [TiO6] for brookite formation, while low precursor content decreased the growth/nucleation ratio.67 Ovenstone and Yanagisawa195 reported that a powder with a small crystallite size and trace brookite content undergoes ART at a faster rate compared to the amorphous powder and pure anatase, suggesting that BRT was favored during calcination. The smaller crystallite would contain a large number of lattice defects such as interstitial ions or ion vacancies. The atoms in these defects have higher energy than those in the main lattice and can act as nucleation sites for rutile formation at the surface of the anatase crystallites.196–201
Pure rutile NRs were obtained in the hydrothermal reaction (150 °C, 24 h) of TiCl4 and water, while brookite co-existed with the addition of TEA as a selective adjusting agent.202 The TEA co-ordinates with Ti(IV) to form [TiO–N(C2H5)3]2+, which could shield some charges and diminish the effects of electrostatic stabilization (repulsion). In the presence of excess TEA (>7 mL), the original transparent solution becomes opaque and the adsorbed amines lower the acidity of the solution to facilitate brookite formation. The addition of 1.5 mL of TEA facilitated BRT, while a reverse trend was observed for additions >1.5 mL and pure brookite was observed for 9.0 mL.202 The shape transformation from NRs to NPs was realized in the presence of MC and NaCl together with a partial phase transition from rutile to brookite under hydrothermal conditions (160 °C, 2 h) using TiCl3.203 As a hydrophobically modified cellulose derivative, MC completely dissolved in water when it was added to the solution.204 At elevated temperatures, the hydrophobic association of MC chains became pronounced and was intensified further due to the salt-out effect of NaCl.205 This assists the MC molecules in forming 3-D networks with high density hydroxyl groups exposed to water, in which “hydrolyzed” Ti species were prone to settling. The interactions between MC networks and Ti (species) facilitate the olation and oxolation reactions such that the driving force for rutile nucleation is largely suppressed. Obviously, the MC network density was raised as more MC is added in the solution and enhanced the brookite proportion. The hydrothermal treatment (200 °C, 3 days) of TiCl3 at acidic conditions (pH 1) resulted in anatase–brookite–rutile. Upon calcination, both anatase and brookite transformed to rutile at 800 °C, accompanied by the gradual formation of a new corundum-like titania phase at 500 °C that stabilized up to 900 °C.206 The stability of anatase and brookite was due to hydroxyl groups bonded to its crystalline structure during hydrothermal treatment. The preparation of TiO2 from titanium chlorides is worthy of investigation as it does not lead to the formation of any organic impurities in the final product.
4.2 Preparation of TiO2 from titanium alkoxide precursor
Thermally stable anatase was obtained by the solvothermal treatment (200 °C, 4 h) of Ti(OBu)4 with 1-butanol in an acidic medium.207a This was due to the capping action of n-butanol on the surface of titania, which inhibited the aggregation, reduced particle–particle contact area, and thus suppressed pore collapse and ART during calcination. The aggregation and decomposition of surface alkoxy groups at temperatures >800 °C facilitated complete rutile formation thereafter. The hydrothermal treatment (90 °C, 10 h) of the amorphous powder obtained by TTIP and triblock copolymer EO20PO70EO20 in the presence of AcAc transformed to anatase and was stabilized even after calcination up to 700 °C, which can be attributed to the small crystallite sizes in the inorganic domain.207b However, rutile was formed at 700 °C for non-hydrothermally treated samples due to the collapse of the pore structure. Thus, an amorphous phase can destroy the mesoporous framework during calcination. The triblock co-polymer surfactant forms micelles in an aqueous solution in the temperature range of 35–80 °C because the PPO block is more hydrophobic than the PEO block, and thus titania particles can only form at the latter sites. The hydrolysis and condensation leads to the growth of larger NPs, which slowly aggregate and become microscopic to form well-defined mesoporous structures with spherical shape particles. At this stage, it is assumed that micelle surrounds mesoporous titania, facilitating the formation of a spherical shape. After hydrothermal treatment and calcination, mesoporous titania particles with well-defined spherical shapes were obtained.207b
The solvothermal treatment (180 °C, 3 h) of toluene–HCl–Ti(OBu)4 showed unique morphology of loosely aggregated NPs and NRs with random orientations.49 The NPs were derived from anatase and brookite and NRs from rutile, indicating that tricrystalline titania was simultaneously nucleated by this protocol. The preferential growth of rutile nanorod along the [001] direction (c-axis) arises from the unique crystal structure of rutile itself. It is known that the rutile phase has 42 screw axes along the crystallographic c-axis. The screw structure promotes the crystal growth along this direction, leading to a crystal morphology dominated by {110} facets.208 It was proposed that polar water from HCl formed a water–toluene interface that hydrolyzed the titanium precursor. As the temperature increases, the water molecules diffuse away from the high energy water–toluene interface to minimise the system energy and react with Ti4+ in toluene, resulting in the formation of crystal nucleus from which mixed crystals were simultaneously formed.49 The powder dominant with rutile was observed for a toluene–HCl–Ti(OBu)4 ratio of 15.0:4.0:2.0, while a tricrystalline framework was obtained for different concentrations. In any case, the rutile content decreased first and increased later by varying the concentrations of toluene–HCl–Ti(OBu)4, while brookite and anatase followed the reverse behaviour. In another study, the hydrothermal treatment (160 °C, 4–8 h) of Ti(OBu)4 with HCl and toluene yielded a rutile microsphere on a glass substrate.209 The Ti4+ precursor will hydrolyze with water at the water/glass interface, resulting in the formation of the first nanocrystalline layer. Thus, a new interface between hydrophilic titania and toluene is formed with continuous hydrolysis, and subsequently crystallization takes place. Finally, formation of hierarchical microspheres, which are adhered to the glass substrate, takes place.209 Pure anatase was observed after the hydrothermal treatment (573 K, 2 h) of Ti(OBu)4 in toluene with 25 cm3 of water even after calcining at 1073 K, while those prepared with 10 cm3 of water yielded anatase–rutile.210
The powder obtained from the hydrolysis of TTIP in water was amorphous and crystallised to anatase under an acid free condition and to rutile with HNO3 under hydrothermal condition (180 °C, 24 h).120 The hydrothermal treatment of TTIP (mole ratio of water to TTIP is 200, acidifying with HNO3 at pH 1) at 200 °C showed anatase and brookite up to 60 h, while ART was promoted by prolonging the aging times (140 h).171 The amorphous powder from TTIP transformed to anatase after calcination (450 °C, 2 h), while this crystallization was observed at low temperatures via hydrothermal aging (80 °C, 24 h).120 The anatase NPs (∼10 nm) obtained (180 °C, 24 h) were stable up to 800 °C compared to the samples with crystallite sizes of 6 and 28 nm that were prepared at 80 and 240 °C, respectively. The annealing induced a slow grain growth of anatase with 10 nm size and inhibited the attainment of the critical size required for ART. In addition, the loose packing of particles generated in hydrothermal conditions reduces the possibility for rutile nucleation. During the process, amorphous hydrous gels transform into titania with further hydrolysis/polycondensation reactions, accompanied by structural rearrangements, and a mild environment is capable of yielding a well-defined structure with less surface impurities/defects to stabilize anatase. A lower aging temperature produces a fine grain size (6 nm), but may not induce the complete reactions of residual alkoxy/hydroxyl groups. Note that these organic impurities serve as defect sites to promote ART. On the other hand, the presence of non-equiaxed grains might have contributed to the grain growth to reach the critical nuclei size for the sample with ∼28 nm size.120
Rutile was crystallized from acid peptized gel (HNO3), while anatase was crystallized from alkaline (TBAOH) gel via hydrothermal treatment at 210 and 270 °C, respectively.211 The anatase NPs were more homogeneous with prismatic morphology and relatively narrower size distribution, while rutile exhibited a bimodal distribution of particle size with larger rod-like particles (60–80 nm) together with small spherical particles (5–10 nm), attributed to the OR mechanism during the rutile crystal growth. The induction time of particle formation from alkaline peptized gel at 210 and 270 °C was 25 min, which is lower than that of acid peptized gel (34 and 30 min, respectively) at the same temperature. It was noteworthy that smaller crystallites are produced at lower process temperatures from both acidic and alkaline gels.211 The hydrothermal treatment of the amorphous powder under basic conditions leads to anatase (250 °C, 90 min), while rutile and brookite nucleated along with anatase under 0.5 M HCl (250 °C, 5 h).187 The mechanism for this reaction involves the protonation of surface amorphous titania, which blocks the formation of kinetically favorable anatase. Li and Gray212 re-investigated the influence of acidity on ART and concluded that the rutile content in anatase–rutile does not increase monotonically with increasing acidity. The rutile fraction increased with a change in the HCl/Ti molar ratio from 0 to 10.5 and the reverse behavior prevailed from 14.1 to 35.2. The decline in the rutile content was balanced by the increased proportion of brookite nucleus. At relatively low HCl/Ti molar ratios, the precipitation process slowly facilitates rutile formation. In addition, rutile is stable under the influence of electrostatic repulsion in a charged environment. At high HCl/Ti ratios, more Cl− or H2O shields the positive charges and serves to lessen the effect of electrostatic repulsion. Thus, precipitation proceeds via titanium hydroxo–chloro complexes, such as [Ti(OH)2Cl3(OH2)]− and [Ti(OH)2Cl4]2−, favour the formation of anatase or brookite.86 The hydrothermal reaction (200 °C, 6 h) of the amorphous powder (obtained from TTIP) with AcOH (1.5 M) resulted in anatase, while pure rutile (200 °C, 8 h) and brookite (175 °C, 7 h) were obtained at 4 M and 3 M HCl, respectively.213 It was proposed that anatase was dominated by surface energy effects, and rutile or brookite formation followed the dissolution–precipitation pathway at higher concentrations of HCl (pH < 0). The nucleation of brookite and rutile under almost identical conditions (high acid concentration and same temperature) reflects that the recrystallization process involves different precursor chemistry for each phase. The amorphous titania will be in equilibrium with the soluble species of titanium (e.g. TiO2+ and chloro complexes) prior to crystallization. Asymmetric complexes [Ti(OH)2Cl(OH2)3]+ predominate at RT according to the speciation model for titania–chloro complexes in 3 M HCl, which in turn form a symmetrical chlorine-rich complex, i.e. [Ti(OH)2Cl4]2−, with an increase in acidity. Homogeneous nucleation is assumed to involve zero charge complexes; hence, it is liable that the eventual precursor for nucleation consists of two or more complexes combined with water as the ligand. The chlorolysis–oxolation process leads to brookite in the case of asymmetric chloro-complex, while rutile nucleates from a symmetric complex.213 This was supported by their similarity in the crystal structures, in which both brookite and rutile are formed by straight 2μ2 polyhedron chains linked by corner sharing. An important difference between them is that the symmetry of the octahedral in rutile is higher compared to brookite, and the linking of 2μ2 chains occurs through trans-oxo bridges and via cis-oxo bridges in brookite. Finnegan et al.116 concluded that as the obtained titania (85% anatase, 15% brookite) transformed to rutile at pH 1, although such transition was not significant at pH close to or above the PZC of titania under hydrothermal conditions (200 °C, 500 h). At pH > 12, brookite transformed to anatase. Interestingly, no phase transformation was observed at 105 °C as thermal fluctuations were not enough to overcome the activation barrier for rutile formation and/or the dissolution of anatase, which was otherwise observed at 250 °C. Pure anatase was achieved for the treatment of amorphous powder obtained by Ti(OC2H5)4 precursor after dry, vapor and hydrothermal conditions (250 °C, 1 h).187 The powder treated in dry atmosphere had less crystallinity compared to the powder treated in either vapor or hydrothermal conditions, suggesting that water adsorbs on amorphous titania and rearranges [TiO6] to favour the crystallization process. The use of a low acid concentration in the reaction medium suppressed the anatase crystallization, since H3O+ cannot bridge because of only one lone pair of electrons in the oxygen atom. As the acid concentration is increased, the surface of titania becomes protonated and titania becomes solubilised, which allows the dissolution–precipitation mechanism to operate, resulting in rutile.
Sabyrov et al.214 reported that the hydrothermal treatment (250 °C, 20 h) of anatase with particle sizes of 3.1 and 3.7 nm transformed to rutile at a faster rate compared to those with sizes of 6.0 and 12.7 nm in an acidic medium (pH 1) via the dissolution of anatase and precipitation of rutile. Anatase ↔ dissolved species ↔ rutile(3)
At pH 3, the solubility of anatase is an order of magnitude lower compared to pH 1; hence, an aggregative mechanism contributes to partial ART.47,116,215,216 In contrast, a suspension containing 3.7 nm particles transformed rapidly to rutile compared to the suspension with 3.1 nm particle size. The cryo-TEM study revealed the particle densities of suspension with 3.1 nm had more open, fractal-like structures, whereas aggregates of 3.7 nm crystals had denser and compact structures. Thus, the increased compactness of the aggregates triggered the effective concentration of particle–particle contacts and favoured ART.47,115 HCl promoted brookite formation for the hydrothermal treatment of amorphous powder and anatase.217,218
The sol–gel products that were not previously dialyzed were sensitive to BAT compared to dialyzed samples under hydrothermal conditions (200 °C, 4 h).217 The former particles are strongly agglomerated, which favored phase transformation,219 while side products and anions are removed to reduce the ionic strength, which resulted in strong electrostatic repulsions because of increased electrical double layer thickness in the latter case. In another study, brookite formation was favoured with an increase in pH from −0.5 to 3.0. However, brookite content at their respective pH values decreased after hydrothermal aging (200 °C, 48 h) and the tendency of BAT was the highest at pH −0.5. This was attributed to the solubility of small-sized brookite NPs compared to anatase. The particle growth mechanism at pH −0.5 was dominated by coarsening, while both coarsening and oriented aggregation were observed for particles obtained at pH 3.220 The refluxing of TTIP with NaNO3 (2 M) leads to anatase, while hydrothermal aging (200 °C, 48 h) triggered ART.221 In contrast, anatase–rutile was observed with NaCl (2 M) and the anatase fraction increased with hydrothermal aging at pH −0.6. Anatase–brookite was observed at pH 3 after refluxing and further hydrothermal aging did not influence the final phase composition. The brookite content was suppressed with an increase in the ionic strength when the salts were added during synthesis, while a reverse trend was observed when the salts were added during reflux and hydrothermal aging (pH 3). The role of chloride ions in the initial step of the hydrolysis–condensation process, rearrangement of titanium complexes in solution and changes in surface energy was not clear.
The sample without ED treatment in the preparative step showed brookite (400 °C, 4 h) at the initial stage of calcination and later transformed to anatase (600 °C) and completely to rutile (800 °C). In contrast, brookite was stable up to 800 °C and anatase–rutile was observed at 900 °C for the sample with ED treatment.222 The synthesis involved three stages: (i) the hydrolysis of the titanium precursor in an acid medium, resulting in an aggregated amorphous phase; (ii) the addition of CTAB during a hydrothermal process (120 °C, 36 h) under the basic condition effectively dispersing the agglomeration and further inducing the assembly of the as-prepared crystallites. The strong electrostatic attraction between CTA+ and negatively charged titania surface resulted in the dispersion of NPs together with the phase transformation from amorphous to crystalline and further induced assembly to form mesoporous titania;223–225 (iii) during refluxing with ED, titania nanocrystals will have strong interaction with the amine groups of ED similar to ammonia.226 Thus, the synergistic interaction between ED and TiO2, as well as CTAB and TiO2, stabilizes the porous framework, rendering outstanding thermal stability; and (iv) the XPS spectra revealed that the nitrogen containing species in the titania matrix retained anatase even at high temperatures. Due to the high pressure in the sealed reaction vessel, in situ monitoring and the growth analysis of NPs under hydrothermal conditions are very difficult; hence, a detailed sequence of hydrothermal reactions during particle formation/growth and phase transformation remains unclear. Note that additional problems such as high energy consumption and low throughput are yet to be resolved.
5 Sol–gel route
The aqueous sol–gel process is defined as the conversion of the precursor solution into a solid via inorganic polymerization reactions by the introduction of water. It involves the formation of a metal–oxo–polymer network from a molecular precursor such as metal alkoxides or metal salts. M–OR + H2O → M–OH + R–OH(4) M–OH + M–OR → M–O–M + R–OH(5) M–OH + M–OH → M–O–M + H2O(6)
This method constitutes hydrolysis–condensation reactions catalyzed in the presence of an acid, governed by the hydrolysis ratio and the nature of co-ordinating groups in the titanium precursor.34,132,136,227–235 Hydrolysis leads to the formation of original nuclei or the basic unit of TiO2, while condensation leads to the growth of a cross-linked network system of original basic units. The faster sol–gel reaction leads to the formation of amorphous and non-uniform particles, whereas a slow rate has the potential to produce an ordered structure. With the use of bulky and branched alkoxy groups such as butoxides, the hydrolysis rates can be reduced to favour the formation of fine particles with a more uniform size distribution.120 This method provides large amounts of powders with a high level of chemical purity (chemical homogeneity) and the possibility of deriving unique metastable structures. The adsorption of water on the surface sites of the oxide powder will be via the physical mode and organic species adsorption will be via the chemical mode.
5.1 Preparation of TiO2 from titanium alkoxide/chloride precursors
The alcohol washing of precipitated powders in an ammoniacal medium suppressed the anatase crystallization from amorphous, while it promoted ART attributed to the organic impurities (oxo-alkoxide) on the particle surface (Fig. 7).236,237 The crystallization of anatase from amorphous at 390 °C was shifted to 467 °C after washing with alcohol. Upon further calcination, the rutile fraction was 5% and 58% for water and alcohol washed samples, respectively (Fig. 8). The crystallization from amorphous exhibits combined effects of dehydration and structural relaxation; therefore, alcohol rinsing might have affected the dehydration step as it lowers the water content, and hence suppresses crystallization.238 The alcohol washed powders showed a wider ART temperature range from 550 to 925 °C compared to the water washed samples (800–1100 °C).237 The alcohol rinsing reduced the particle agglomeration and the residual organics served as nucleation sites for rutile formation.239 The H2O and –OH groups remaining after anatase crystallization induces the breaking of Ti–O bonds or creating oxygen vacancies.240,241 The ART for alcohol rinsed powders obeys first order kinetics, while rinsing with water showed no unique value of the reaction order. The brookite nucleus precipitated at low pH (<5) promoted ART during calcination (Fig. 9).242a The interaction of brookite with anatase reduces the pressure on anatase grains, and the consequent decrease in strain energy promotes rutile formation.105 In this study, brookite was not the intermediate phase during ART, since it was not observed for powders synthesized at pH > 5 under heat treatment.96,242a In addition, the interface between brookite and anatase with robust interfacial energy provides a high density of potential nucleation sites to favour ART. In anatase-rich or brookite-rich titania NPs, ABT is preferred at temperatures ≤600 °C due to the thermodynamic stability of brookite. Both ART and BRT dominated as a result of particle growth at temperatures ≥700 °C. The increased particle–particle contact sites of anatase favoured aggregation and promoted ART over BRT.242b The TGA analysis revealed that BRT takes place at 1104 K.243
 Fig. 7  XRD profile for (a) water washed sample; (b) alcohol washed sample calcined at different temperatures (reprinted with permission from ref. 236; Copyright @ 1999 Elsevier). 
 Fig. 8  Fraction of rutile for the powder washed with water (PW) and butanol (PB) after thermal treatment (reprinted with permission from ref. 237; Copyright @ 2000 Elsevier). 
 Fig. 9  Kinetics of ART for the powders precipitated at different pH conditions and the fraction of rutile is denoted as X (reprinted with permission from ref. 242a; Copyright @ 2003 Elsevier). 
The sample precipitated from Ti(OBu)4 at pH 4.5 showed pure rutile (850 °C), while that precipitated at pH 6.5 converts to rutile at a much lower temperature (650 °C). The unreacted butoxide group of precursors and larger concentration of oxygen vacancies accelerated ART in the latter case.244 The gel obtained by the hydrolysis of TTIP with ethanol showed 20% anatase, while 55% with IPA after calcination (500 °C, 3 h).245 The slow hydrolysis with the latter was due to its long carbon chain, which avoided the rapid precipitation of rutile. Generally, an induction period is observed in which slow particle growth will be followed by the rapid precipitation of titanium particles from the aggregation of titanium clusters.246 The induction period is dependent on the carbon chain length in an alcohol solvent, where ethanol shows a low induction period and butanol displays the longest. The less steric hindrance in ethoxy groups facilitates both primary nucleophilic reaction and polymerization process to result in larger particles. The induction period is very short at alkaline pH values compared to that in an acidic medium. At pH 3, the hydrolysis reaction is catalyzed by acidic protons by the protonation of leaving groups (alkoxy groups). At the same time, the protonation of hydroxyl groups on the Ti cluster inhibits the nucleophilic attack and retards the condensation pathways.247 The positive surface charge of clusters/colloids hinders the aggregation due to repulsive forces. Thus, the slow polycondensation rate results in the formation of sol at acidic pH. In an alkaline medium, strong nucleophiles are produced via the deprotonation of hydroxo ligands, resulting in increased condensation rates.246 The hydrolysis of TTIP with HCl promoted the amorphous to anatase and ART, while hydrolysis with NH4OH retarded both the transition pathways irrespective of their concentrations.248 The powders hydrolyzed with acid and base showed small and large average grain sizes, respectively, during calcination. This decrease in crystallite size with acid increased the nucleation sites, and consequently accelerated the phase transformation.249 In addition, XRD and Raman studies concluded that the molecular structure of the titania precursor resembled that of crystalline anatase, as it was stable than amorphous at low pH conditions.250,251 The gel obtained at pH 4 (also at pH 2) by the hydrolysis of TiCl4 in NH4OH showed anatase–rutile after calcination (450 °C, 2 h) and complete rutile at 600 °C.136
The aging of gel (12–48 h) promoted ART to occur at higher temperatures compared to unaged samples.31 The large agglomeration number for unaged samples induces more number of anatase crystallites and crystallite–crystallite contact with each cluster to promote rutile via interface nucleation. The Ea values of ART for aged and unaged samples were 426–506 kJ mol−1 and 205 kJ mol−1, respectively.31 In contrast, the aging of the gel for 3–4 weeks at RT favored the formation of rutile, while aging the gel for 3 weeks followed by firing (200–300 °C, 2 h) resulted in anatase–brookite–rutile with brookite disappearing at temperatures >400 °C.61 The method of drying the gel was found to influence ART: hydrogel obtained by TiCl4 dried under infrared light after refluxing with water retained anatase, while the sample without refluxing showed anatase–rutile.252 The gel dried by azeotropic distillation with n-butanol showed pure rutile, while those dried by reacting with acetic oxide shifted ART to higher temperatures. Depending on the pH of the gelling solution, only anatase was obtained in the samples gelled at pH 5 (or 9), while anatase–brookite–rutile and anatase–brookite were observed at pH 3 and 7, respectively, followed by calcination (400 °C, 12 h).253
The sol–gel synthesis of TiO2 using the triblock copolymer EO20PO70EO20 (P123) resulted in mesoporous anatase–rutile for H+/Ti4+ ≥ 1.0 and only anatase for H+/Ti4+ < 1.0.254 Acidity influenced the interaction between the inorganic framework and organic template to hinder the gelatination of titania oligomers, thereby promoting crystallite growth. For low acid concentrations, oligomers adsorbing on the positive charge repelled each other and condensation was suppressed,255 while association between titanium species and PEO moiety were strengthened. Under high acid concentrations, more protons were adsorbed on the surface of titania oligomers and the repulsive force became stronger, suppressing the condensation and consequent mesoporous structure formation. The addition of triblock copolymer Pluronic F127 (PEO106PPO70PEO106) as structure-directing agent to titania sol followed by calcination (400 °C, 6 h) promoted ABT.256 The local pressure produced by the fast combustion of co-polymer adsorbed on the surface during calcination favored a denser structure of brookite; in contrast, the addition of DEA suppressed brookite formation. The modified sol–gel method using TTIP in absolute ethanol with a cellophane membrane stabilized anatase up to 900 °C, despite the drastic grain growth (15 to 108 nm) upon calcination (400–900 °C, 3 h).257 The cationic surfactant CTAC assisted sol–gel hydrolysis of TiO2 using Ti(OBu)4 showed brookite–anatase after aging (100 °C, 24 h).258
Scotti et al.259 suggested that the rutile fraction increased with an increase in the H2O/Ti molar ratio at a faster rate as compared to HCl/Ti ratio using triblock co-polymer (EO20PO70EO20) as a templating agent. The anatase configuration is statistically favored since octahedral units share several edges to form right angle arrays, and therefore is preferred at higher reaction rates.259 Thus, the increased random organization of octahedral units at higher concentration of titanium ions favoured anatase, and the ordered arrangement of octahedral units at lower concentrations promoted rutile. The presence of triblock polymer co-ordinates to metal ion precursors, and it slows the reaction rate to favor rutile.259 The extraction of PVP at the refluxing step with ethanol–HCl changed the phase composition; anatase was formed with the initial stages and switches to rutile by further increasing the acid concentration.260 The non-ionic surfactant template has an amphiphilic character derived from the presence of a hydrophilic amide group and hydrophobic methylene and methine groups. The highly polarized amide groups make the carbonyl active to complex with titanium cations261 and hydrophilic/hydrophobic interactions lead to the formation of mesostructures. It was also found that the increase of the PVP content (up to 3.0 g) enhanced the surface area and later decreased it. When the concentration of PVP reaches to the CMC, the surfactant organization into micelles takes place and sufficient balance between the hydrolysis–condensation process of the titanium precursor and self assembling reactions will be established.260 The sol–gel process using LAHC/TTIP modified with AcAc showed anatase–rutile after thermal treatment (700 °C).262 The LAHC served as a template to mesoporous formation and also as gel-formation assisting agent, while AcAc slowed down the hydrolysis of the titanium precursor. The organic–inorganic hybrid powder obtained by sol–gel hydrolysis with PEO and AcAc was spherical in shape and transformed into anatase–rutile core–shell double structure at 800 °C.263 The anatase surface transformed into rutile via surface nucleation and growth mechanism. During heating, partial ART starts and with subsequent air quenching, anatase core and rutile shell separate from each other due to the difference in their thermal coefficients of expansion. The anatase core shrinks more in the course of cooling since the thermal expansion coefficient value of anatase and rutile are 10.2 × 10−6 and 7.14 × 10−6 K−1, respectively. The crystal volume shrinkage via rutile formation, as well as removal of PEO (and AcAc) trapped inside the cores, would result in further shrinkage of the core and the formation of nanopores, which accounted for 5–10% diameter difference between the shell and core. The structural features of the core and shell are different: the core is nanocrystalline and nanoporous, while the shell is microcrystalline and dense. The nanoporosity of the cores arises from the decomposition of PEO and AcAc and subsequent gas evolution during the heat treatment. The sol–gel synthesis assisted by surfactants is used to synthesize nanoporous titania with a large surface area.264–268 Both ionic and non-ionic surfactants have been used because their amphiphilic character provides electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding between the surfactant micelles and TiO2 framework.
The ART was influenced by the hydrolysis rate by varying the H2O/Ti4+ ratio in the reaction system. The higher the water content, larger are the rutile particles formed after the thermal treatment and vice versa.61 Sahni et al.269 reported that increasing the water content enhanced the hydrolysis rate and the formation of larger particles thermodynamically favoured ART. The significance is that the gelation time is effectively reduced by increasing the water concentration as it accelerates the cross-linking process.270 At high water concentrations, some liquid is formed after gelation and macromolecular networks form rapidly by hydrolysis–condensation process to have very low inter-connectivity. Consequently, the network is rather loose and the solvent drifts out of the network. In contrast, a system with low water content will form a dense and compact structure network that can incorporate a high solvent concentration. Note that rutile was formed at a much lower temperature (300 °C) for higher water content and complete ART was observed at 600 °C, which was otherwise observed at 500 and 800 °C, respectively, for lower water content.61 The hydrolysis temperature influenced the phase formation of titania: transition from amorphous to anatase was observed at 300 °C and ART at 600 °C for the gel hydrolysed at 0 °C, while this transition temperature was increased to 100 °C for the gel hydrolyzed at 80 °C. When water concentration is very high, the effect of the hydrolysis temperature on phase transition becomes quite insignificant and residual alkyl (halides) groups will be relatively small, which does not affect the phase transition pathways. In contrast, a large amount of unhydrolyzed alkyls remained in the powder for very low water concentration during hydrolysis, preventing the crystallization from the amorphous state.271 Ding et al.272 synthesized titania powders from titanium secondary butoxide by controlling the amount of water during the hydrolysis reaction. The grain size of the prepared powder at low water concentrations was smaller compared to that prepared at high water concentrations. As a result, ART takes place at low temperatures in the former powder than that in the latter. Anatase–brookite was formed during the sol–gel hydrolysis of Ti(OBu)4 with HNO3 and ABT was observed in preference to ART during calcination, indicating brookite is more stable than anatase.27 Above 500 °C, both brookite and anatase directly transformed to rutile or anatase transforms to brookite and then to rutile. Interestingly, the absence of HNO3 during the hydrolysis step favored more anatase (70%) and marginal brookite (30%) and BAT was also observed during calcination, suggesting that anatase was more stable than brookite. In either case, BRT was faster as compared to ART, which can be attributed to the presence of more nucleation sites for rutile formation within the brookite grain.27 The sample with 44.7% brookite transformed to rutile at a faster rate compared to the sample with 30% brookite, indicating that brookite plays a major role in rutile formation. The brookite content increased from 13 to 33 with an increase in the ratio of Ti/H2O from 1:700 to 1:4 and with an increase in the sol–gel pH (0–3) in the HNO3 medium via the sol–gel route. In addition, no systematic change in brookite content was observed by changing the temperature during sol–gel synthesis. In contrast, synthesis with HCl resulted in amorphous along with anatase, indicating that chloride inhibits nucleation and particle growth.217 Hydrolysis with a high concentration of chloride (2 M) and low pH (−0.6) resulted in nanosized rutile.221 The hydrolysis of TTIP at RT followed by drying at 382 K yielded anatase–brookite. The maximum amount of brookite (41.8%) was observed after thermal treatment at 472 K and that of anatase (68.7%) was observed at 672 K. Anatase–brookite–rutile co-existed at 872 K with rutile as the minor content. After 872 K, brookite disappeared and anatase–rutile coexisted. The complete transformation to rutile was observed at 1172 K.273
The gel obtained by TTIP and AcOH at pH 3–4 stabilized the anatase up to 1000 °C, while that obtained at pH 5–6 transformed to rutile at 800 °C.274 This was attributed to the strong chelating effect of AcOH, which declines with an increase in the pH of the reaction solution. At low pH, the condensation reaction is slow compared to hydrolysis because of the charge–charge repulsion between the hydrated metal cations, which facilitates branching to occur before particle growth to produce strong cross-linked gels. A further increment in pH perturbs the well-organized cross-linked network structure. The gel containing polymeric chains with little branching and cross-linking and also a smaller void region is structurally weak; therefore, it collapses rapidly on calcination forming rutile at low temperatures.275 Likewise, the addition of water during the hydrolysis of TTIP with formic acid also promoted the rutile formation at low temperatures. In contrast, increasing the volume of formic acid retained anatase even during high temperature treatments. This result suggests that the addition of water critically affects the chelation effect of anchoring groups to titania and thus ART.276,277 The formate group favored a bridging (syn–anti or syn–syn) mode of chelation depending on the reaction conditions (Fig. 10). The syn–anti bonding hinders the cross-linking of the gel network, resulting in a weak structure, while the syn–syn mode of binding produced ordered gel networks. The addition of water favoured the syn–anti mode of binding and destabilized the system by collapsing the highly cross-linked network structure that facilitates hydrolysis and rutile formation. The addition of carboxylic acids like AcOH, propanoic acid and butyric acid during the hydrolysis step showed surprising results in the crystallization behavior.278 In this study, the precursor was modified with carboxylic acid prior to hydrolysis, while water and alkoxide are reacted without dilution in the hydrolysis step. Both AcOH and propanoic acid exerted similar effects on amorphous to anatase and ART as the quantity of carboxylic acids was similar. However, both the transitions were found to accelerate for butyric acid, which can be attributed to the creation of defects by disrupting the ordering of the hydrolysate structure. During annealing, organic residues undergo combustion and these defects will be destroyed accompanied by the release of stored energy, which overcomes the activation barrier for the nucleation of the crystalline phase. As the quantities of the residual butanoate groups are greater than those of the acetate and propionate groups, the net effect in butyric hydrolysates is to decrease the energy required to induce crystallization and phase transformation.278 The presence of mixed complexing agents, such as DEA–polyethylene glycol (A), in the hydrolysis of TTIP yielded brookite, while other complexing agents like AcAc (B), DEA (C), polyethylene glycol (D), AcAc–polyethylene glycol (E) and AcAc–AcOH (F) showed pure anatase after calcination (600 °C, 1 h). Interestingly, only (B) and (F) stabilized anatase, while the rest showed rutile at 800 °C.279 The in situ water produced during esterification via the modified sol–gel method favoured anatase–TiO2(B). The monoclinic phase initially appeared (400 °C, 6 h), followed by gradual transformation to anatase (550 °C). The steric effects induced from large stable acetate and sulfates may be beneficial to the formation of loose zigzag chains of octahedral in TiO2(B) as compared to the linear chains of octahedral in rutile.280
 Fig. 10  Chelation of formate ion to Ti4+via (a) syn–syn mode; (b) syn–anti mode (reprinted with permission from ref. 277; Copyright @ 2009 American Chemical Society). 
The hydrolysed product of titanium glycolate crystallized to anatase (400 °C, 2 h) and later to rutile (850 °C).281 The formation of glycolate precursor is expressed as follows: Ti(OBu)4 + 2OHCH2CH2OH → Ti(OCH2CH2O)2 + 4BuOH(7)
On adding acetone, the glycolated precursor undergoes slow hydrolysis and spherical titania particles are tuned through a homogeneous nucleation and growth process. Acetone is believed to accelerate the hydrolysis of the glycolated precursor.282 The water content in acetone influenced the final size of these particles: inhomogeneous spherical particles were formed for water content >0.4% and titania particles were not generated at all for content <0.05%. Thus, oxygen deficient spherical NPs with low dispersion were obtained at the optimized water content (∼0.3%). The hydrolysis process and formation of titania can be expressed as follows: (8) (9)
The nucleophillic substitution reaction between ethylene glycol and Ti(OBu)4 produces titanium glycolate. Bridging occurs by chelating the alkoxy ligand with ethylene glycol unit, and it is more stable to moisture as compared to alkoxide.
Typically, sol–gel derived precipitates are amorphous in nature, requiring further heat treatment for crystallization, as well as to remove organic compounds on the product surface, which inevitably results in the partial agglomeration and collapse of initial nanostructures accompanied by phase transition. Depending on the pH and concentration of Ti4+ ions, a large number of oligomeric species are formed, making the aqueous chemistry quite complex. The counter ions co-ordinated to Ti4+ form a molecular precursor with different chemical reactivity towards hydrolysis and condensation and they are impossible to predict. Since the hydrolysis and condensation of the molecular precursor are too fast, the loss of morphology and structure of oxide material is very frequent. Another problem is that the protocol developed for bulk metal oxide cannot be extended to its nanoscale counterparts.
5.2 Ultrasonication assisted sol–gel synthesis
Sonochemistry has became an effective technique for nanomaterial synthesis as unique reactions can be realized by irradiating the liquid at RT.283 This system offers a potential to produce inorganic materials of high purity, cause novel chemical reactions and physical changes, and yield uniform and narrow particle size distribution with controlled shapes. The sonochemical effect arises from acoustic cavitation, formation, growth and implosive collapse of bubbles in the liquid medium.284–286 After several compression cycles, cavitation bubbles collapse violently and adiabatically to generate localized hot spots with transient temperatures of 5000 K, pressure of about 500 atm, heating and cooling rates >109 K s−1.284,287 Therefore, the application of ultrasound to enhance the reaction rate and to shorten the time has become a synthetic technique for many homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical reactions.284–289 The turbulent flow and shock waves produced by acoustic cavitation drives the metal particles together at high velocities.290 A high speed collision produces a localized high temperature region to accelerate the condensation reaction among the hydroxyl groups on adjacent TiO2 sol particles.291 It was proposed that292,293 there are three regions in an aqueous sonochemical process: (a) gas phase region (5000 K, 180 atm) within the cavitation bubble; (b) interface zone (1900 K) between the gas phase and bulk solution; and (c) the bulk solution region. It is assumed that the formation and growth of titania nuclei are accelerated at the interfacial region because of low vapor pressure of the reactants.294 Therefore, more growth units will be formed and titania nucleus grows at high velocities.
Anatase, rutile and anatase–rutile were obtained after ultrasonicating (3 h) TTIP, TiCl4 and its mixture, respectively.174 The hydrolysis of TTIP with 0.2 M HCl under sonication resulted in anatase–rutile and with only TTIP (303 K, 3 h) yielded anatase–brookite. This indicated that ultrasound irradiation induces crystallization, while the nature of the precursor and acidity governs the phase transition pathways. The particle size of rutile was almost twice that of anatase: TiCl4 hydrolyzes rapidly in water and a part of titanium hydroxide precipitates before dissolving in the acidic solution. Simultaneously, some of the titanium ions that exist as titanyl are further co-ordinated by chloride anions. In contrast, the hydrolysis of TTIP is rather slow in water resulting in a nearly neutral, partly condensed and more homogeneous gel. In the latter case, ultrasound irradiation creates more localized hot spots within the gel, outside which polycondensation of Ti–OH species will be accelerated. This causes the homogeneous formation of a large number of seed nuclei with smaller particle sizes. It was proposed that the interaction caused by sonication amongst the titanium species in the gel is stronger compared to the mixture containing Ti–Cl species that results in less condensed metastable anatase.174 The hydrolysis of Ti(OBu)4 with H2SO4 and Na2SO4via ultrasound irradiation (358 K, 3 h) gave anatase, while rutile was formed with HCl (1.3–4.0 M).139 The variation in the concentrations of NaCl and KNO3 in the synthesis step showed no influence on the titania polymorphs. Anatase–brookite–rutile was observed for 1 M HNO3, while both anatase and brookite were transformed to rutile in 2 M HNO3. Anatase–brookite co-existed at 0.5 M HCl, while ART and ABT were observed at 0.8 M, followed by pure rutile at 1.3 M. Thus, the sulfate anion promoted anatase, while chloride and nitrate favoured different polymorphs depending on their concentrations. The sulphate anion reacts with octahedral hydroxyls via static electricity. Because of its steric effect, the third octahedron attacks along the reverse direction to reduce the steric repulsion and the orientation of the third octahedron is more conducive to favour anatase (Fig. 11). The ultrasonication of TTIP in ethanol–water (40 °C, 3 h) was amorphous and crystallized to anatase by increasing the reaction temperature (90 °C).295 Anatase was stabilized for ultrasonicated samples, while samples without ultrasonication transformed to pure rutile after calcination (800 °C, 2 h). The latter suffered from interparticle agglomeration and the particles were uniformly distributed in the former case.296 The ultrasonication (20 min) induced brookite formation at a low temperature (25 °C) compared to samples without ultrasonication (70 °C) during the hydrolysis of TTIP in ethanol–water. BAT was dominant up to 500 °C and ART was observed thereafter (500–800 °C, 2 h) in the former case. For the sample without ultrasonication, ABT was observed up to 400 °C, followed by BAT up to 500 °C, while ART prevailed at the later stages. Note that pure anatase was observed at 500 °C in both these cases.297
 Fig. 11  Ligation of sulfate anion on [TiO6] to facilitate anatase formation (reprinted with permission from ref. 340; Copyright @ 2005 American Chemical Society). 
Mesoporous anatase TiO2 with worm-like framework structures was obtained using long-chain organic amines as the structure-directing agent via ultrasonication (6 h). The large surface area and high stability was achieved with an increase in the alkyl chain length of amines without any change in the morphology. The strong hydrogen bonding between amines and titanium precursors can be attributed to the formation of the mesoporous structure.298 The ultrasound (3 h) initiated hydrolysis of TTIP for a short period of time, followed by calcination (673 K, 1 h), resulted in 3-D and thermally stable mesoporous anatase titania without the use of any templates.299 AcOH was used as a modifying agent to slow down the hydrolysis rate and as a ligand to change the chemical identity of titanium alkoxide at the molecular level. AcOH inhibited the hydrolysis rate of TTIP by forming Ti(OPri)x(OAc)y as AcOH is negatively charged (δAcOH = −0.7) and PrOH is positively charged (δIPA = +0.1). When this precursor is added to water, less electronegative alkoxide groups are hydrolyzed preferentially, whereas strongly bound complexing groups are difficult to remove. The remaining complexing groups act as terminating agents that decrease the tendency towards condensation. It was proposed that monodispersed TiO2 sol particles are initially formed by the ultrasound-assisted hydrolysis of AcOH-modified TTIP. The mesoporous spherical or globular particles with a narrow pore-size distribution are produced by controlled condensation and agglomeration of these sol NPs. The high thermal stability of mesoporous titania was attributed to its thick and robust inorganic walls.299 The ultrasound-assisted synthesis of mesoporous TiO2 using TTIP with a triblock copolymer (EO20PO70EO20) for 3 h increased the brookite content, which partially transformed to anatase after calcination (673 K, 1 h).300 The hybrid inorganic/organic precursor formed between triblock polymer and TTIP promoted brookite formation. In addition, ultrasound irradiation accelerated the crystallization of titania and also enhanced the extraction of triblock polymer from the hybrid inorganic/organic precursor. Thus, hydrolysis, crystallization of amorphous and extraction of surfactant can be accomplished in one step. Although the presence of strong acid or base or alkali ions was essential for brookite formation,86,88,301 it was achieved under neutral pH conditions without alkali ions. The ultrasonication of TTIP in ethanol–water (molar ratio is 10) transformed to anatase upon calcination (400 °C, 1 h), while anatase–brookite was observed with pure water. The addition of ethanol inhibited crystallization and brookite formation by adsorbing on the TiO2 surface.302 The increase of calcining treatment (600 °C, 1 h) showed anatase–brookite–rutile and that brookite disappeared completely at temperatures >600 °C for the samples prepared in pure water. In contrast, high rutile content was observed with ethanol under the same conditions. The ultrasound-assisted (30 min) sol–gel hydrolysis of titanium ethoxide in AcOH followed by calcination (773 K, 3 h) yielded only anatase.303 The phase transformation pathways were found to depend on the mode of ultrasonication via tip-type (irradiation carried out inside a reactor with a probe tip) and bath-type (irradiation from outside the reactor). In the former case, ART and ABT dominated during the initial stages (60 min), followed by BAT (90 min) and BRT (120 min).304 In the latter case, only ABT was observed in the entire reaction time (60–120 min) after calcination (500 °C, 3 h). Tricrystalline anatase–brookite–rutile with anatase as the dominant phase was observed in both these cases. Based on a series of experiments, the parameter effects can be summarized as follows: (i) increase of ultrasonic power density in tip-type (18–42 W L−1) favored ABT with less preference to ART; (ii) increasing the reactor size in bath-type promoted ABT and ART up to 500 mL, while BRT and BAT was preferred at 1000 mL; (iii) ABT was observed accompanied by the disappearance of rutile with an increase in the water content (H2O/TTIP ratio) from 10–175 mL in bath-type; and (iv) increase of the hydrolysis temperature (5–40 °C) favoured ABT in tip-type.304 The rutile fraction increased initially with an increase in the ultrasonic irradiation amplitude (up to 40%) and later decreased after calcination (750 °C, 3 h).305 At this optimal amplitude, there would be an ideal balance between high temperature and high energy collapse that would limit the local volatilization of 2-propanol and heat energy would be utilized solely for phase transformation. At higher amplitudes, acoustic shielding or acoustic dampening effect together with the volatilization of the solvent predominates, leading to a low yield for the reaction and ill-formed crystallinity of the samples. In addition, the cavity diameters will be too high to generate any cavitation that would be useful for titania synthesis.305
The operating variables, such as ultrasonic power density, reactor size, stirring effect, rise in local temperature and mode of applications (tip- or bath-type), strongly influence the properties of titania. The cavitation process must be as efficient as possible in order to optimize the sonochemically driven reactions. This would result in a minimum loss of energy and optimum frequency of bubble oscillation and collapse, since the topology of the acoustic pressure field depends on the type of reactor and source of ultrasound.304,305
5.3 Photo-illumination assisted sol–gel synthesis
In addition to facilitating the photoreduction of metal ions onto the semiconductor surface, UV irradiation is used to densify and crystallize sol–gel derived powder as an alternative to calcination. The photo-illumination (8 h) applied during the hydrolysis of TTIP with HCl and heat treatment (100 °C) gave anatase, while it was amorphous for non-irradiated samples.306 Since amorphous to anatase transition involves an overall shrinkage of 8% with a co-operative movement of ions, the removal of oxygen ions and/or oxygen defects generated by the UV light was found to accelerate this transformation. In addition, pure rutile was formed at 600 and 700 °C for photoilluminated and non-irradiated samples, respectively, suggesting that the former reduced the ART temperature to an extent of 100 °C (Fig. 12). The rutile particles were regular polyhedra and small grain size distribution without agglomeration in the former case, while deformed and agglomerated particles were observed for the typical sol–gel powder.307 The UV illumination can generate Ti3+ defect sites on the TiO2 surface by a surface reduction process of Ti4+ to Ti3+, which is similar to that induced by Ar sputtering, electron beam exposure and high energy UV light.308,309 These surface Ti3+ defects are accompanied by the removal of surface oxygen atoms or most likely bridging oxygen atoms310 generating surface oxygen vacancies to promote crystallization at low temperatures. The possible reaction to induce the formation of oxygen vacancies is as follows: (10)
 Fig. 12  XRD profile of powder with (a) and without (b) UV illumination followed by calcination at different temperatures (reprinted with permission from ref. 307; Copyright @ 2003 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
In addition, photo-irradiated samples exhibited a new absorption band at wavelengths greater than 400 nm, which suggests its possible applications under visible light.311 The production of Ti3+ also resulted in the formation of TiO2–Ti2O3 binary oxides.312,313
The photoirradiation (15 h) of the gel obtained from TTIP resulted in enhanced crystallinity and rutile formation at high water content after calcination (373 K, 4 h).314 The UV light can excite the weak Ti–OR bonds and promotes hydrolysis, replacing alkoxy groups by hydroxyl groups;315–317 thus, olation is expected to occur at a faster rate at various hydrolysis ratios. The growth of rutile at higher water concentrations stems from the enhanced surface hydroxylation combined with the highly distorted bulk atomic arrangements.318 The surface of titania becomes protonated in an acidic medium, which facilitates dissolution–precipitation pathway to operate and results in the formation of rutile.187,319,320 In contrast, rutile nucleated at an intermediate water content (r = H2O/Ti = 7) and anatase at extreme ends (r = 4 and 10) for the samples prepared by the conventional sol–gel method. Surprisingly, brookite was formed at a value of r = 20. At a low hydrolysis ratio (r = 4), more isopropoxy groups are retained since the hydrolysis is usually incomplete, and it is difficult to remove alkoxy groups.157,321,322 The oxolation leading to a linear chain will be unfavorable because of steric hindrance, and accordingly olation will be preferred to form the skewed chains. When the hydrolysis ratio increases (r = 7), condensation proceeds by oxolation or olation pathway and the competition between these two processes leads to anatase–rutile. The promotion of hydrolysis (r ≥ 10) facilitates more hydroxyl groups favoring anatase. In contrast to a previous report,307 ART was not faster in photoirradiated samples compared to the traditional sol–gel powder due to the absence of Ti3+ formation, as evidenced by the XPS spectra. Crystalline anatase was observed at a very low temperature (80 °C) by combining non-hydrolytic/UV illumination (30–100 min) utilizing TiCl4 and tertiary butyl alcohol via the alkyl halide elimination process.323 The surface hydroxyl group and oxygen vacancies are enriched under UV light, which transforms semicrystalline anatase to crystalline anatase accompanied by the ‘self-oxidation’ photochemical effect. The large surface area, high crystallinity and less carbonaceous species can be achieved by photoassisted sol–gel method that facilitates better applications for titania.
6 ILs-assisted sol–gel synthesis
ILs are RT molten salts consisting of virtually bulky organic cations and weakly co-ordinating anions. They are widely studied as a new kind of reaction media in the context of green chemistry due to their unique features such as low volatility, low flammability, wide liquidus, no combustion, non-toxicity, good chemical–thermal stability, unusual solvent power for both organic and inorganic compounds, strongly designable structures, high ionic conductivity and wide electrochemical window.324–327 The high vapor pressure of organic solvents used in conventional sol–gel methods causes gel shrinkage, followed by the loss of pore volume and surface area, during solvent evaporation.328 In contrast, low or negligible vapor pressure of ILs reduces the problem of gel shrinkage during sol-aging and gel-drying, avoiding the loss of surface area.329 In addition, RTILs with hydrophobic regions and high directional polarizability from extended hydrogen bond systems in the liquid state result in a highly structured self-assembly of RTILs. ILs containing a small amount of water can be well blended with alcohol solvents to reduce the rate of hydrolysis reaction, thereby yielding a better porous structure. RTIL can capture protons or hydroxides through hydrogen bonds or electrostatic functions acting as acid–base pairs and accelerate the polycondensation pathway in the sol–gel process.330 However, the amount of RTIL has no obvious effect on the average pore diameter of TiO2. The strength of hydrogen bonds on the anion part of IL with water is essential to form a mesoporous structure, while the alkyl chain length of the cationic part determines the pore size and volume of nanoparticles. Since RTIL can cap the surface of nanocrystals, it affords low agglomeration tendency, good dispersibility and has the potential to tailor the surface properties.
The addition of [cmim][HSO4] changed the morphology from rutile NRs to nanoflowers and induced a high degree of crystallization under hydrothermal conditions (180 °C, 3 h).331 The following peculiar properties of [cmim][HSO4] enhanced the growth of rutile flowers containing a bunch of aligned NRs: (i) it promotes the ionic strength by dissolving in solution, and therefore enhances the solubility of Ti species; (ii) [cmim][HSO4] served as surfactants by dissolving in solution, and then capping the nanocrystal facets to enhance the orientation of particles after rutile formation; and (iii) it favored the formation of small crystals through electrostatic screening, which is not available in traditional surfactants.332 Anatase–brookite formed by the thermolysis of 0.15 M TiCl4 (100 °C, 24 h) transformed to rutile with the addition of [emim][Br] up to 0.602 M due to the different structures of the anatase (101) and rutile (110) planes.333 The structure of the rutile (110) plane is very close to the bulk truncated geometry and the most stable crystal face.51,334 In this way, the (110) plane unit cell contains one two-fold co-ordinated bridging oxygen atoms above the (110) truncated plane. The space between the [emim]+ ions after anchoring onto the (110) plane via rutile (110)-c(2 × 2)-[emim]+ will be 0.592 nm. Fortunately, [emim]+ ions are separated in various directions according to mutual π-stacking distance (0.6–0.7 nm) between the aromatic rings.335,336 Thus, [emim]+ ions were allowed to anchor onto the rutile (110) plane to form a relatively compact coverage layer (Fig. 13). The [emim]+ substitutes H+ ion, which results in the formation of [emim–O–Ti] that favoured linear chains via edge-shared [TiO6] based on mutual π-stacking between the aromatic rings in the acidic medium. However, the anatase (101) plane is toothed and the distance between bridging-oxygen atoms is not in the space range of mutual π-stacking between the aromatic rings. Among the usual crystal plane of anatase, no one was suitable for forming a coverage layer by this [emim]+ ion adsorbing model.
 Fig. 13  Anchoring of [emim]+ on rutile {110} crystal planes (reprinted with permission from ref. 333; Copyright @ 2009 American Chemical Society). 
The hydrothermal treatment of TiCl4 and [bmim][Cl] promoted ART, while the presence of hard bases F− or SO42− stabilized only anatase.337 The fluoride ion selectively adsorbed on the {001} facets, leading to highly truncated bipyramidal-shaped primary NPs, while SO42− was less selectively adsorbed, leading to truncated pyramid and parallelepiped-shaped nanocrystals. The nucleation and growth of rutile after prolonging the reaction time with bmim+Cl− and water were determined by the aggregation manner of anatase nanocrystals and OR, respectively.338 The yellow solid [bmim+]2[TiCl6−x(OH)x]2− was initially formed by mixing TiCl4 and bmim+Cl−. The adsorbed bmim+ cation layer served as a steric protection shell to slow down the random aggregation process. The observed phase transformation was explained as follows: (i) the hydrolysis of [bmim+]2[TiCl6−x(OH)x]2− facilitates the substitution of hydroxyl groups through the attack of water molecules and the formed Ti–oxo species acts as monomers for nucleation and growth. (ii) The concentration of Ti–oxo species increases rapidly due to fast hydrolysis. According to the LaMer model, a nucleation burst occurs if the degree of supersaturation is high enough to overcome the energy barrier for nucleation. Thus, numerous anatase nanocrystals are formed and Ti–oxo species concentration reduces rapidly. (iii) The aggregation of anatase NPs results in rutile or interface structure having rutile-like character favouring ART. The increase of acidity, Ti precursor concentration and water content favored the rutile fraction due to the weaker adsorption of bmim+ on the TiO2 surface, leading to the faster aggregation of nanocrystals. In addition, the increase of temperature also promoted the rutile growth as a result of an increase in the concentration of the Ti–oxo species and the activation of Ti–O bonds.
Mesoporous anatase with narrow pore-size distribution was obtained at very low temperatures (60–100 °C, 24 h) under hydrothermal conditions with [bmim][BF4] and was thermally stable up to 900 °C.339 The [bmim][BF4] consists of a large imidazolium cation, and the BF4− ion adsorbed on the surface of the octahedron through hydrogen bonding creates a steric barrier for brookite and rutile formations.340 In addition, RTIL has low interface tension and high ionic strength, resulting in high nucleation rates to facilitate anatase formation.327 The IL extraction using acetonitrile followed by annealing (100 °C, 2 h) were amorphous, while the thermal annealing of the product followed by acetonitrile extraction showed anatase.341 ILs play an important role in driving the surface crystallization of amorphous to anatase by retaining a suitable amount of water through the dissolution–crystallization mechanism. The anatase crystallization induced by ILs was not observed at a very low H2O/TTIP molar ratio due to the association of ILs as compact ion pairs.341 For other H2O/TTIP molar ratios, an amorphous hydroxylated titanium compound could be formed due to rapid hydrolysis or IL-induced water dissolution of the condensation product. ILs served as a water adsorption agent and steric stabilizer to the amorphous phase. The self-organization ability of ILs drives the formation of anatase through the dehydration of the hydroxyl group in the hydroxylated titanium compound in the subsequent thermal step. It has been reported that a water–IL mixture cannot be considered as homogeneous, but rather as a nanostructured system.342 Liu et al.343 and Zhu et al.342 found that most of the ILs were self-associated as compact ion pairs in a system rich in ILs. However, most of the water molecules were also self-associated in a water-rich system. In addition to these two extreme cases, ILs are hydrogen-bonded to water molecules. This specific characteristic of a water–IL system might make the anatase crystallization behavior dependent on the H2O/TTIP molar ratio in ionothermal (sol–gel method containing ILs) systems. The increase in the volume of ILs increased the crystallite size of titania, which can be attributed to the increased viscosity and decreased diffusion co-efficient.330,344
The titanium precursor was hydrolyzed and condensed around the self-assembled [C4mim][BF4] or [bmim][PF6] combined with water at a controlled rate, resulting in porous anatase (80 °C, 12 h or 100 °C, 2 h).345–347 Furthermore, heat treatment improved the crystallinity and thermal stability without significant pore collapse due to their sponge-like mesoporous structure, constituting narrow size distribution and no large pores indicating the homogeneity of ILs in the titania matrix.346 The possible mechanism for the formation of these titania NPs might be an effective aggregation of titania particles with a self-assembled IL in the sol. The reduced hydrolysis with ILs renders longer aging time for the formation of stable sol–gel networks with an ordered array of Ti and O without accompanying any shrinkage and collapse of the gel network. The particle possesses a disordered mesostructure without a long-range order in the pore arrangement and no micropore was present. The water molecules in the IL preferentially react with [PF6]− strongly through hydrogen bonding, whereas the imidazolium ring does not interact with water.348 Accordingly, [bmim]+ should array in the opposite direction to [PF6]− bonded with water and then start to pile up and stack, possibly by π–π interactions or other non-covalent interactions between the imidazolium rings. This indicates that IL can be used as a self-assembling template like long chain surfactants without the formation of ordered micelles by hydrophilic and hydrophobic molecular chains.327,348,349 Consequently, the titanium precursor is hydrolyzed and condenses around the self-assembled IL structure combined with water at a controlled rate, resulting in the formation of highly porous crystalline TiO2. The [bmim][PF6]-assisted hydrolysis of TTIP stabilized anatase even up to 800 °C, while unmodified titania completely transformed to rutile at the same temperature.344,345 IL-assisted sol–gel synthesis was crystalline anatase at 100 °C, while unmodified titania was still amorphous. At least 3 moles of IL are necessary to form crystalline titania for each mole of titania precursor at this temperature. Among the various ILs like [bmim][PF6], [bmim][BF4], [bmim][CF3SO3] and [hmim][PF6], only [bmim][PF6] was effective in inducing a mesoporous structure.344 However, the role of water in [bmim][PF6] is complex, and its structure–chemical reactivity is different from those of bulk water as it is tightly bonded and activated in the hydrogen bond system of ILs.348,350–352 Note that [bmim][PF6] acts as a capping agent for preventing the direct hydrolysis of TTIP due to its water immiscibility and creates a localized anhydrous or water poor area between the ILs and titanium precursor. This water poor condition suppresses the formation of hydroxide and oxyhydrate (amorphous species) as a limited amount of water drives the mass balance to completely condensed and directly crystalline systems.347 Moreover, in the conventional sol–gel route, employing an excessive amount of water (surface tension, γ = 72 mJ m−2 at 293 K), nucleation of TiO2 is slow, while low interface energy (γ = 46 mJ m−2 at 293 K) and adaptability of [bmim][PF6] results in a high nucleation rate generating NPs.327,347,353 NMR and FTIR studies revealed that IL was entrapped in the growing covalent titania network rather than being chemically bound to the inorganic matrix. The water immiscibility of [bmim][PF6] initiates the formation of Ti–O–Ti framework and TiO2 particles would be homogeneously dispersed in hydrophobic [bmim][PF6], resulting in the formation of highly porous TiO2. The ultrasonication of [C3mimOH][Tf2N] with TTIP resulted in pure anatase, which transformed to rutile after calcination (800 °C, 5 h) with an Ea value of 13.87 ± 0.54 kJ mol−1.354 The other ILs like [P66614][Tf2N], [N1888][Tf2N], [C4Py][Tf2N] and [C4mim][Tf2N] resulted in anatase–brookite. The ultrasonication of TiCl4 with [N1888][Tf2N] showed anatase–rutile, while anatase and rutile were observed with urea and HCl, respectively (Fig. 14). Interestingly, [C3mimOH][Tf2N] under hydrothermal treatment (170 °C, 20 h) resulted in anatase, while microwave irradiation yielded anatase–brookite. The morphology of anatase was controlled by the IL cation; moreover, nanospheres with [C3mimOH][Tf2N], [P66614][Tf2N] and [C4Py][Tf2N], while NRs with [N1888][Tf2N] and spindle shapes for [C4mim][Tf2N] were observed. The TiO2(B) content in anatase–TiO2(B) was tuned by varying the ratio of surfactant to IL (C16mimCl + C4mimBF4).355 The maximum TiO2(B) content was observed for a very low ratio of ∼10%, while a low content for a mixture of CTAC and C4mimBF4. Finally, systems in which the solvent was based on the ammonium group and independent of the surfactant structure, only anatase was formed irrespective of the surfactant to IL ratio. The mixture with C16mimBF4 + C4mimBF4 resulted in TiO2(B) for very high concentration ratios (>10%). Therefore, TiO2(B) was observed only with IL based on imidazolium moieties and the peculiar charge distribution and polarization pattern created by the self-assembled surfactant.
 Fig. 14  Tuning of crystal phase with IL by varying the reaction parameters using ultrasonication (US) (reprinted with permission from ref. 354; Copyright @ 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The use of ILs in the synthesis of metal oxides is very simple. The reaction is performed under atmospheric pressure in a glass vessel without harsh conditions and highly crystalline products together with tailored composition and large surface area can be obtained. The titania synthesis via photoillumination, ultrasonication and with IL template has important implications, as this not only saves energy and cost of synthesis procedure by avoiding the calcination step to induce crystallization, but also allows a wider selection on the type of support materials to immobilize the crystalline material at low temperatures.
7 Thermolysis/thermohydrolysis
7.1 Influence of water
Orthotitanic acid was formed by the hydrolysis of TiCl4 in water (TiCl4/H2O = 1:10), followed by boiling for 2 h yielding anatase–rutile.356 Anatase–brookite obtained by the hydrolysis of TTIP in hot water, transformed completely to rutile at 600 °C.256 Anatase, rutile and brookite were tuned in the thermohydrolysis (100 °C, 48 h) of TiCl4 in various proportions of water. The rutile content gradually decreased, while anatase increased with a change in the TiCl4/H2O ratio from 1:5 to 1:150. Brookite was observed at 0.25 M TiCl4 (TiCl4/H2O of 1:35), and its fraction was not considerably affected with water. Conversely, increasing the aging time to 48–76 h, the brookite content increased at the expense of anatase and rutile irrespective of the TiCl4/H2O ratio. Anatase–brookite–rutile, anatase–brookite and anatase–rutile were observed in the region of 0.25–0.09 M, 0.06 M and 0.81–0.34 M, respectively, and pure rutile at 1.48 M TiCl4.357 Mesoporous rutile without amorphous content was obtained by the simple hydrolysis of TiCl4 in water (40 °C, 48 h) with octyl phenolpolyethylene oxide as the surfactant, which was later removed by extraction with acetone and UV illumination.358 It was suggested that the formation mechanism obeys the self-assembly of rutile nanocrystals instead of inorganic/PEO-contained polymer assembly mechanism. In the absence of a surfactant, these rutile nanocrystals are aligned together along one direction to form needle-like crystals with an appropriate ratio due to strong acidic conditions. The hydrophilic PEO moieties of the surfactant are strongly absorbed on the surface of the rutile nanocrystals and hydrophobic moieties are directed to the solution. Thus, the formation of needle-like titania sample by aligning together with rutile crystals was hindered. When the concentration of the surfactant is above the CMC, rutile crystals with hydrophilic moieties are self-assembled to form a mesoporous structure by the self-assembly formation of hydrophobic moieties.358
7.2 Influence of alcohol
The hydrolysis of the TiCl4 ethanolic solution (50 °C, 24 h) in water yielded pure rutile nanorod superstructures, while the presence of KCl and TTIP instead of TiCl4 yielded anatase, indicating that the strong protonated condition from ethanolysis and hydrolysis of TiCl4 favoured rutile.359 When KCl was replaced by HNO3 or H2SO4, rutile and anatase were formed, respectively. The direct hydrolysis of TiCl4 with water in the absence of ethanol resulted in fewer rod-like rutile NPs, suggesting that ethanol was vital in the formation of a nanorod superstructure. TiCl4 dissolves in C2H5OH to form [TiClm(OC2H5)6−m]2− and HCl, followed by reaction with water to give [Ti(OH)nClm(OC2H5)6−m]2−. The high acidity and large amount of chloride ions reduced the number of hydroxyl ligands to promote vertex-shared bonding to form rutile.359 The thermohydrolysis of TiCl4 in HCl–ethanol aqueous solution (40–90 °C, 30 min) resulted in rutile with well-defined rod-like shapes, while irregular shapes with high polydispersity were observed in the absence of alcohol.332 Anatase was formed via alcoholysis of TiCl4 with ethanol (<100 °C, 72 h) and rutile nucleated after calcination (700 °C, 2 h). The critical size for ART was in the range of 32–42 nm.360 The reaction of TiCl4 and ethanol leads to [TiClx(OCH2–CH3)4−x], whose structural units are similar to the anatase lattice.361 The grain growth kinetics for anatase NPs can be described as follows: D2 = D02 + 3.86 × 104 × t0.286(9)e−32(2)/RT(11)
The FTIR spectra revealed a large degree of surface hydration by hydrogen bonds with a wide set of energetically non-equivalent surface hydroxyl groups due to the presence of different anatase crystal planes and various types of surface defects. The surface hydration increases with decrease in anatase particle size accompanied by volume contraction. The heating of the hydrated particles (100 °C, 2 h) allows for the removal of a small amount of water with only a small increase in the particle size. However, the removal of surface water below a certain threshold value leads to significant grain growth. The rapid precipitation of rutile particles was observed with an increase in the volume of IPA to water ratio, while it was decreased for ethanol and methanol.332 The acidic hydrolysis of TiCl4 in IPA–water resulted in brookite, anatase and rutile at 0.3 M, 1.0 M and 1.4 M HCl, respectively, (83 °C, 15 h) under alcohol rich conditions. Further calcination (200 °C, 2 h) did not result in any change in the crystalline structure, but induced crystalline growth.362 The thermohydrolysis (373 K, 16 h) of TiCl4 in water-rich condition (70:0) formed anatase–rutile, while increasing the ethanol content (50:20) favored brookite formation at the complete expense of anatase. Surprisingly, brookite formation initially increased and was later hindered when anatase starts to reappear at the expense of rutile with decreasing water content (20:50).363 Finally, pure anatase was observed under alcohol-rich conditions (10:60). The co-operative effect of excess chloride ions as a structure-directing agent and ethoxide suppressing the instant hydrolysis of precursor was responsible for brookite formation.357 At high concentrations of ethanol, ethoxide adsorbs on Ti4+ cations precludes corner-sharing and facilitates edge-sharing to promote anatase. Furthermore, ethanol facilitates the formation of spherical NPs and lowers the agglomeration by effectively acting as a surface stabilizing agent.
7.3 Influence of mineral acids
The hydrolysis of TiCl4 (80 °C, 2 h) in strongly acidic conditions followed by calcination (100 °C) yielded rutile.364 During peptization, there will be competition between the two growth units: anatase and rutile. At high proton concentrations, more oxolation bonds among titanium atoms are broken and the generated –OH groups facilitate the movement of titanium atoms, which was otherwise confined to its adjacent neighbours before peptization. The condensation among titania hydrates takes place among several titanium species, leading to structural rearrangement towards the formation of corner-shared octahedral chains.137,365 Thus, H+ in the solution rearranges the amorphous precipitate and forms rutile. Anatase–brookite–rutile was precipitated during the thermolysis of TiCl4 and HClO4 (1–5 M) and transformed to pure rutile after one month of thermal aging (100 °C).86 The perchlorate ions co-ordinated to Ti(IV) cation complexes are not very stable; hence, they do not have any specific role in the crystallization process.366 The thermohydrolysis (95 °C, 24 h) of TiCl4 in 1 M HNO3 resulted in anatase (72%)–brookite (6%)–rutile (22%).367 After 7 days of aging, anatase predominantly transformed to brookite and rutile. At this condition, the fractions of anatase, brookite and rutile were 25%, 25% and 50%, respectively. Brookite showed a weak signature of increase in the particle size because of the disappearance of anatase particles. Anatase was the main product for lower to intermediate concentrations of HNO3 (0.5–2.0 M), while the brookite content prevailed under strong acidic conditions (2–5 M). This specificity of HNO3 to stabilize brookite nucleus originates from the low solubility of TiO2 and its ability to form complexes with Ti(IV) ions like [Ti(OH)a(NO3)b(OH2)6−a−b](4−a−b)+, which yields neutral species [Ti(OH)2(NO3)2(OH2)2]0 during thermolysis that acts as a precursor for brookite nucleation. Therefore, the nitrate ion played a central role in nucleating different polymorphic structures of titania despite its weak complexing ability to Ti(IV) ions.367 The hydrolysis of TiCl4 using NH3 gas precipitator at low temperatures (30–60 °C, 2 h) yielded pure rutile at pH ≤ 1 and anatase for pH ≥ 4. The aging promoted NH4Cl formation without affecting the titania crystal structures.368 The heating of aqueous TiCl4 (50 °C, 150 min) under vigorous stirring resulted in rutile and anatase–rutile under refluxing conditions.252 The formation of rutile was attributed to low pH and high concentration of chloride ions. The hydrolysis of TiCl4 (100 °C, 24 h) with HCl showed pure rutile up to 2.0 M and later transformed into anatase with increase in [HCl] above it.333 When [HCl] ≤ 2.0 M, [TiO(OH2)5]2+ monomer dominates in TiCl4 solution, which is prone to condense via olation. This results in edge sharing linear nuclei and forms rutile. If [HCl] ≥ 3.0 M, an intermediate species [Ti(OH)2Cl2(OH2)2]0 prevails and combines with each other to form anatase. In the case of 6 M HCl, brookite nucleated along with anatase. The thermolysis of TiCl4 in 3 M HCl (100 °C, 48 h) showed brookite–rutile, although anatase was formed at the very initial stages of hydrolysis (5 h).86 The relative proportion of brookite (∼80%) did not vary beyond 48 h of aging, but were dependent on the acidity of the medium (2 ≤ [HCl] ≤ 4 M) and the concentration of titanium ions (0.15 M). Irrespective of the acidity, brookite was formed by lowering the concentration of titanium ions to 0.05 M. Interestingly, pure rutile was present for 1 and 5 M HCl for 0.4 M Ti ions. It was proposed that the non-electrically charged complex [Ti(OH)2Cl2(OH2)2]0 is solely responsible for brookite formation (Fig. 15). The presence of aquo and hydroxo ligands in the co-ordination sphere of this complex facilitates condensation or olation, which involves the elimination of aquo ligands (chloride ions being more strongly bound groups) and the formation of dimers and small chains of octahedra. When all the water molecules are removed, further condensation will proceed by oxolation reaction with HCl elimination and formation of μ3-oxo bridges between the octahedra. This process removes all the chloride ions from the reacting species and yields oxides. Thus, the high concentration of chloride ions in the thermolysis medium appears to be necessary for brookite formation and also to avoid the recrystallization of brookite to rutile during aging. Note that the Cl:Ti ratio should be between 17 and 35 for obtaining the maximum fraction of brookite.86
 Fig. 15  Formation of brookite from [Ti(OH)2Cl2(OH2)2]0 precursor (reprinted with permission from ref. 86; Copyright @ 2001 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The hydrolysis of TiCl3 in HCl (60 °C, 24 h) showed varied polymorphs depending on the solution pH. Rutile was formed under strongly acidic conditions (pH 0.5), while brookite nucleated along with rutile (pH 1–3) followed by pure rutile at later stages (pH 3.5–4.0).369 At pH > 4, anatase crystallizes with brookite at the expense of rutile; thus, the phase transition with increased pH (1–7) followed the sequence: (12)
During thermolysis, the preferential oxidation of Ti(III) compared to hydroxylation leads to acidic Ti(IV) complexes. At these acidic conditions, zero-charged complexes [Ti(OH)4(H2O)2]0 are formed at a relatively slow rate to yield rutile. The brookite formation either due to mixed complexes Ti(III)/Ti(IV) or the partial oxidation of Ti(III) takes place along with a proper ratio of Cl/Ti. At pH > 4.5, oxidation will be very fast and the initial solid oxidizes quickly and leads to the formation of amorphous TiO2, followed by crystallization into anatase after continued heating. The hydrolysis of TiCl4 with H2SO4 or H3PO4 followed by refluxing (80 °C, 1 h) and precipitation in an alkaline medium was anatase, while hydrolyzing with HCl or CH3COOH or HNO3 exhibited anatase–rutile. Both sulfates and phosphates have tetrahedral geometry with negative ends at the oxygen atoms, which co-ordinate to [TiO6] via mono-, di- and tri-dentate modes by a well-known chelate effect. The bondings of these ions occupy a full face of the octahedral and inhibit the growth of chains along opposite edges and inhibit rutile formation. The basic unit [Ti(OH)2(H2O)4]2+ can exist in cis- and trans-isomers, which grow into a larger unit to crystallize titania polymorphs. Although the deprotonation of [Ti(OH)(H2O)5]3+ can yield [Ti(O)(H2O)5]2+, oligomer growth units with titanyl TiO bonds are not evidenced thus far; hence, their role is excluded from the formation mechanism itself.370
7.4 Aging effects on phase transition
As the obtained TiO2 gel was amorphous, aging by simple boiling for 12–48 h promoted anatase and its crystallinity was enhanced with increment in the aging time. The hydroxyl ion existing in the anatase lattice reduces the oxygen vacancy concentration, and hence inhibits the grain growth during sintering. As a result, ART shifted to high temperature with increasing aging time. Contrarily, the sample without aging underwent faster crystallite growth to reach the critical size for ART (800 °C).371 Aging is a process by which the physical properties of gels change as a consequence of polymerization, coarsening and phase transformation. The changes in structure and properties of gels that occur in the course of aging have a profound effect in the sintering process.372 The hydrolysis of TiCl4 in ice-bath conditions resulted in TiOCl2 and pH was regulated by the addition of NH4HCO3. The solution was then aged (40 °C) in an oil bath to get rutile (pH 0.4) and anatase–brookite (pH 2.7–4.0), while the addition of sulfate yielded anatase (pH 0.4).373 However, at pH 7, an amorphous powder was obtained (TiO2·xH2O) and remained the same even after aging for two weeks (40 °C) despite the presence of chloride ions. The amorphous phase transformed to anatase and brookite after reducing the pH to 2.6–5.0 and aging at 40 °C (4 days), while drying the slurry at RT did not crystallize even after aging for one week. Ding et al.374 reported that amorphous titania was converted into anatase and rutile after aging at RT for one year. Bosc et al.375 assigned the structure of dispersed alkoxide-derived colloids to anatase after aging for 3 h, while the precipitate obtained for longer aging (>5 h) corresponds to anatase–rutile. The hydrolysis of TiCl4 at RT was amorphous, while anatase crystallized after 0.5 h of aging and gradually transformed into rutile after extended aging (8 h) according to the OR mechanism (373 K).376–379 The anatase crystallite size remained stable up to 2 h of aging. Thus, the thermal effects in an aqueous suspension and amorphous TiO2−x were responsible for such phenomenon.378,379 These results suggest that ART was not governed by calcination but rather by the interaction of defective anatase with the other components in the aqueous suspension.376 It was hypothesized that amorphous titania and very defective anatase are initially formed and their mutual strong interaction leads to the progressive covering of anatase surface by amorphous phase, impeding the crystal growth and favoring slow ART. The interaction of acidic and basic hydroxyls promotes the formation of Ti–O–Ti bonds between amorphous and anatase, which increases the aggregation of NPs. These interactions destabilize anatase crystals and favor ART as the solution aging progresses.
7.5 Thermolysis with other titanium precursors
The modified thermolysis (90 °C, 4 h) of the mixture containing titanium powder, HCl, urea and PEG 10000 showed unique flower like brookite agglomerates with an average diameter of 400–500 nm composed of single brookite nanocrystals (4–5 nm).46 Further calcination (200 °C, 3 h) resulted in the amorphous phase along with anatase–brookite–rutile. The co-existing anatase rapidly grows out by the crystallization of the amorphous fraction to anatase at 500 °C. The annealing of brookite resulted in the gradual conversion to rutile and anatase in the range of 200–800 °C with brookite being stabilized up to 500 °C before anatase (700 °C); thus, anatase inhibited direct BRT during thermal treatment.46 The thermal hydrolysis (160 °C, 24 h) of TiBALDH with 0.1 M urea yields pure anatase, while anatase–brookite for 0.5–5.0 M.380 At higher concentration (≥6.0 M), high quality brookite NRs were observed (Fig. 16). Brookite did not transform through intermediate anatase; in fact, the brookite seed self-nucleates from the TiBALDH complex and continues to grow in the solution until it attains the appropriate size.381 Urea hydrolyzes slowly at RT but rapidly at temperatures >90 °C, releasing hydroxide ions.382,383 For low urea content, the in situ generated hydroxide ion dosing is sufficient for the slow hydrolysis of TiBALDH, leading to anatase NPs. The increase in the hydroxide ion capacity for high urea content facilitates the thermal hydrolysis of TiBALDH and the formation of anatase–brookite seeds. Thus, it can be concluded that the in situ hydroxide ion dosing favours brookite formation. This was supported by the coexistence of brookite along with anatase even at higher concentrations of NH4OH (8 N). It was speculated that the high concentration of urea affects the spatial confirmation of the TiBALDH complex such that the resulting complex resembles the architecture of brookite. This assumption was based on the rationale that the complexation of urea with Ti(IV) appears to be unlikely due to their low stability as compared with lactate. Even if urea chelates to Ti(IV) as a bidentate ligand, it forms a four-membered ring that is less stable than a five-membered ring formed by lactate. The thermolysis of 0.9 M TiOSO4 (90 °C, 4 h) leads to anatase, as sulfate species served as a directing agent to favour anatase.384 The sulphur species, which is difficult to remove by conventional washing, strongly bonds to the titania surface and increases the energy of crystallization and rutile formation.385 Koelsch et al.218 proposed that sulphate acts as a bidentate ligand in [Ti(OH)2SO4(H2O)2]0 from which anatase will be nucleated. In addition, Ti4+ in H2SO4 has shown the occurrence of 1Ti:1SO4 and 1Ti:2SO4 species with the predominance of the 1:1 complex. These complexes exist in low amounts, suggesting the role as catalyst or structure-directing agent for anatase formation. The formation of sulfate species in the vicinity of the cation may favour the condensation of the opposed coplanar edges to form anatase.386,387 The poor crystalline structure and slight decrease in anatase crystallinity in the presence of chloride and nitrate anions was attributed to their strong and weak complexing tendency with Ti4+, respectively. Interestingly, varying the concentration of [C2O4]2−/Ti4+(R) resulted in anatase–rutile for R = 0.2 and pure rutile at R = 2. At an intermediate concentration of R = 1, Ti2O3(H2O)2(C2O4)·H2O was identified. Thus, the oxalate ion either acts as a ligand with the stabilization of oxalate hydrate phase or as a chelating agent to stabilize rutile depending on its concentration. The titanium oxalate hydrate decomposes into either anatase388 or brookite. Thus, the brookite formed at 300 °C transformed to rutile at temperatures >600 °C. Brookite was embedded in large micrometer-sized particles and exhibited a large surface area (255 m2 g−1) because of the mesoporosity arising from water removal in the above oxalate species. The facile synthesis and low stability of Ti2O3(H2O)2(C2O4)·H2O make it a suitable precursor for the preparation of brookite.388
 Fig. 16  Nucleation mechanism for brookite NRs and anatase nanoparticles from TiBALDH precursor (reprinted with permission from ref. 380; Copyright @ 2010 American Chemical Society). 
An alternate to thermohydrolysis, solid-state metathesis uses exothermally driven chemical changes to rapidly synthesize crystalline solids from simple starting materials. TiBr4 dissolved in hexadecane and Na2O2 resulted in anatase–rutile after heating close to the reflux point of hexadecane, which involved rapid heating from RT to 288 °C within 15 min under constant stirring and maintaining this reflux temperature for 2 and 6 h.389 In contrast, pure anatase was observed for slow experimental conditions, which involved heating the precursor mixture over a period of 4 h with constant stirring from RT to reflux and maintaining the reflux temperature for 2 h. The same reaction with TiCl4 produced amorphous, while Na2O with TiBr4 resulted in poorly crystallized titania phases. The isolated crystalline titania powders are either anatase or anatase–brookite mixture, depending on how quickly the reagents are heated to reflux (Fig. 17). Locally exothermic solution-surface events are likely responsible for titania formation directly from the solvothermal reaction without any thermal treatments. These powders were resistant to thermal conversion to rutile at high temperatures. Since one reagent is dissolved, its reaction with a solid peroxide surface should be facile and may locally self-propagate to form crystalline oxide regions.389 The direct crystallization to rutile from aqueous TiOCl2 was observed after boiling (100 °C, 4 h). The addition of NbCl5, NiCl2 and FeCl3 stabilized rutile and ZrOCl2 facilitated anatase, while AlCl3 promoted anatase–rutile.390 The similar ionic radius of Nb5+ and Fe3+ seems to stabilize the pristine phase, while Zr4+ and Al3+ having higher and lower ionic radii, respectively, suppressed the precipitation process to form anatase. Interestingly, the similar ionic radius of Ni2+ compared to Ti4+ resulted in a small anatase fraction. The aging of titanatrane isopropoxide in HNO3 (40–50 °C, 12–24 h) showed pure rutile.391 The amorphous titania dissolved into a transparent titania gel in a stirred acidic solution (HCl or HNO3) reprecipitated as rutile after aging for a long time (48 h) at RT. The crystallization temperature was about 385 and 110 °C lower than those of calcination in air (407 °C) and hydrothermal route (130 °C), respectively. Before reprecipitation, titanium exists as a six-fold co-ordinated hydrated ion [Ti(H2O)6]4+, which dehydrates and polymerizes to [(H2O)4Ti–(OH)2–Ti(H2O)4]6+ and [(H2O)4Ti⋯O2⋯Ti(H2O)4]4+ followed by [TiO6] formation. The mole fraction of rutile decreased with an increase in the treatment temperature and pure anatase was obtained at temperatures >150 °C. It was suggested that a stable rutile nucleus with a compact structure is formed by a very slow reprecipitation rate at temperatures <60 °C, while anatase was formed at high temperatures due to a larger reprecipitation rate.392 In a modified dissolution–reprecipitation process, rutile particles dissolved in H2SO4 and reprecipitated with NH3 showed anatase–rutile after calcination (450–900 °C, 1 h).393
 Fig. 17  TiO2 formation pathway from TiBr4/Na2O2 solvothermal system (reprinted with permission from ref. 389; Copyright @ 2008 Elsevier). 
8 Microemulsion method
As “soft template” reverse microemulsions, the organized assemblies formed by water, oil and surfactant have compartmentalized water-in-oil liquid structure composed of dispersed bubbles in the dispersion medium with features of micrometer- or nanometer-scaled reactors for the generation of NPs.394–396 A microemulsion is a thermodynamically stable, optically isotropic and transparent solution of two immiscible liquids (water and oil) substituted by an interfacial film and separated by a thin surfactant monolayer and can be either water-in-oil, oil-in-water or bicontinuous.397–399 For water-in-oil microemulsions, an aqueous phase is dispersed as microdroplets surrounded by a monolayer of surfactant molecules in the continuous hydrocarbon phase. The formation of particles is controlled by the reactant distribution in the droplets and by the dynamics of interdroplet exchange. The surfactant stabilized by micro cavities provides a cage-like effect that suppresses particle nucleation, growth and agglomeration.400,401 The size of the particles formed in the reverse micelles is known to be larger than the thermodynamic size of reverse micellar droplets in which the particles are formed.402 This is due to the partial cluster formation of micellar droplets, which is affected by temperature and micellar size. The water nucleus is the only region where a titanium precursor could be hydrolyzed; therefore, the growth of particles in the water nucleus is restricted, leading to small size and large surface area for the microemulsified particles.
The microemulsion assisted preparation with Ti(OBu)4, cyclohexanol, CTAB, TEA and acetone resulted in amorphous, anatase and rutile for the as obtained product calcined at 550 and 750 °C (2 h), respectively. Finely dispersed anatase (15 nm) particles were obtained compared to those prepared through the sol–gel method (50 nm) with apparent agglomeration.403 By changing the volume ratio of oil to water in reverse microemulsion, rutile changed its morphology from nanoclusters to nanospherules, then grew into nanodumbbells and finally NRs were obtained.404 The TiO2 prepared via reverse microemulsion with Tween 60 and Brij 58 surfactant stabilized the anatase up to 500 °C and promoted the rutile formation at 600 °C.405 When the Brij series was used as the surfactant, the crystallite size decreased from 17 to 10 nm with an increase of the hydrophilic group chain length. It is known that the formation of a water pool in a reverse microemulsion occurs from the dispersion of water by the hydrophilic group of the surfactant. With a decrease in the hydrophilic group chain length, the formation of water pool in the reverse microemulsion becomes loose, and then the crystallite size increases by the rapid hydrolysis of water and titanium alkoxide. Interestingly, the crystallite size also decreased from 12 to 9 nm with an increase of the hydrophobic group chain length in the Tween series, as the size of the reverse micelles decreases because the hydrophobic chain prohibits the access of water near the micelles.405 The precipitate obtained by this route must be washed to remove the contaminated oil and surfactant (co-surfactant) from the particles.406 In this course, calcination was indispensable because (i) residual water and organic compounds must be removed via evaporation, followed by thermal decomposition to form pure products, and (ii) amorphous precipitate should be transformed to crystalline oxide at high temperatures. The removal of impurities will be incomplete at low calcination temperatures and grain growth was common due to the loss of microreactors at high temperatures. Thus, a further improvement was achieved by hydrothermally treating the microemulsified particles.
The anatase–rutile ratio was tuned by the microemulsion-mediated solvothermal method (180 °C, 12 h) using TiCl3 and urea.407 TiO2 showed gradual evolution of rutile to anatase with increasing urea content for series I (urea dissolved in water) and pure anatase was obtained after the addition of 1.8 g of urea. However, anatase–rutile coexisted even after the addition of 1.8 g of urea for series II samples (urea dissolved in HCl). At acidic pH, the reactions are as follows: [Ti(H2O)6]3+ + H2O → [Ti(OH)(H2O)5]2+ + H3O+(13) [Ti(OH)(H2O)5]2+ + O2 → Ti(IV) oxo species → TiO2(14)
[Ti(OH)(H2O)5]2+ is first produced by the hydrolysis of [Ti(H2O)6]3+ and it gets oxidized by the dissolved oxygen to form Ti(IV) oxo species. This species is assumed to be an intermediate between TiO2+ and TiO2 consisting of partly dehydrated polymeric Ti(IV) hydroxide that undergoes corner-shared bonding to form rutile.408,409 By increasing the concentration of urea in the reaction medium, the acidity would decrease as urea produces hydroxyl anions via hydrolysis at temperatures >85 °C. Thus, the degree of hydrolysis increases, resulting in more number of –OH coordinated to Ti centres. [Ti(H2O)6]3+ + HO− → [Ti(OH)x(H2O)6−x]3−x → [Ti(OH)3(H2O)3]0 → [Ti(OH)4(H2O)2]0 → TiO2(15)
The increase of hydroxyl anions leads to the formation of the zero–charge complex [Ti(OH)3(H2O)3]0, which subsequently oxidizes to [Ti(OH)4(H2O)2]0. The [Ti(OH)x(H2O)6−x]3−x monomers can form different structures of polymers by sharing edges or corners, leading to different crystalline polymorphs of titania.407 In another study, the anatase fraction increased with an increase in the concentration of (NH4)2SO4 at the aqueous phase.340 Anatase–rutile was tuned by varying the concentration of acid in the aqueous phase, and pure anatase was observed for 0.5 M HNO3 and pure rutile at ≥1.0 M HCl with anatase–rutile at 1.0 M HNO3 and ≤0.5 M HCl. Pure rutile was not observed by increasing [HNO3] at any temperature for any reaction times. In this study, water–Triton X-100–hexanol–cyclohexane microemulsion was used as a constrained microreactor for the controlled growth of titania particles under hydrothermal conditions (120 °C, 12 h).410 TiCl4 reacted with ammonia in water–(Triton X-100 + n-pentanol)–cycloheptane to form hollow spheres of anatase.411a FTIR spectra indicated that the water interior of the reverse micelles has a multilayered structure, consisting of interfacial, intermediate and core-water.412,413 The interfacial layer is composed of water molecules that are directly bonded by polar head groups of Triton X-100. Thus, the hydroxyl anion released from NH4OH penetrates into the interface, facilitating the reaction of Ti4+ with the hydroxyl anion near the interfacial layer (bound water layer) of the spherical emulsion droplets to form TiO2 nuclei surrounding the spherical aggregates, and finally forms hollow TiO2 microspheres. The low and high concentrations of TiCl4 results in hollows spheres with thin and thick shells, respectively.411a Due to their unique physical and chemical properties such as low density, high surface area and effective light-harvesting property, hollow nanostructures are extensively used in photocatalysis.411b–e An unusual orthorhombic crystal structure of titania was obtained during the controlled hydrolysis of TiCl4 due to chemical pressure generated within the constrained volume of the aqueous core of reverse micellar droplets.394 Furthermore, heating up to 900 °C, these metastable spherical crystals are converted into relatively more stable NRs via the making and breaking of Ti–O–Ti bonds without any further phase transitions. However, when the sample was dispersed in a water–acetone mixture, the nanorod structure is destroyed and granular particles are formed due to the hydrolysis of Ti–O–Ti to Ti–OH. The presence of HCl in the hydrothermal treatment (120 °C, 13 h) of microemulsion gave rutile, while anatase was obtained with HNO3.397 The droplet size templating effect was present during the solution mixing at RT and was completely absent at temperatures >40 °C, which was in contrast to a previous study.410 The turbidity and conductivity measurements suggested that microemulsions do not serve as a template under hydrothermal conditions, but rather as an initial size template during the mixing step prior to the hydrothermal treatment.
9 Preparation of TiO2 from various titanium precursors
9.1 Crystallization from inorganic titanium precursors
The nature of the titanium precursor often plays a key role in determining the morphology and crystallization of titania. The formation and organization of polynuclear complexes essential for the nucleation and growth of various polymorphs is determined by both anionic species and proton/hydroxyl ion concentrations.79,141,414 The commonly used titanium precursors like titanium chloride/halides are quite expensive, corrosive and sensitive to moisture as they readily hydrolyze in water or even with moist air. Thus, care is required in handling these chemicals such as submerging them in ice-cooled water bath or handling under inert gas, which makes titanium chemistry very complicated. Moreover, the complex assembly of nanoclusters is usually difficult to obtain from these precursors as they have predisposition towards the evolution of aggregated amorphous titania, invariably requiring thermal treatment for crystallization. To this end, few other titanium precursors are reported to tailor the phase composition of titania as well as to obtain hierarchical nanostructures.
The hydrothermal aging (200 °C, 24 h) of water soluble titanium complexes with citric acid, tartaric acid and malic acid yielded anatase, while rutile with glycolic acid and anatase–rutile were obtained from lactic acid.415 The hydrothermal treatment (180 °C, 12 h) of TiB2 in an acidic medium (1 M HCl) containing 3 mM Na2SO4 resulted in nanocone rutile and transformed to truncated bipyramidal anatase after reduction of the acid concentration (0.5 M). Alternatively, spherical brookite were obtained with HNO3.416 The evolution of titania polymorphs involved three stages: (i) the dissolution of TiB2 increases the concentration of soluble titanium species from zero to critical point for TiO2 nucleation at the initial stage (0–2 h); (ii) TiO2 nucleus co-existed with TiB2 due to the gradual release of the titanium source from TiB2 bulk as the treatment time proceeds (2–5 h); and (iii) for the reaction time >5 h, a dominant solid phase in the mother liquor is titania, which undergoes further crystallization and ripening.417 In comparison to Ti(III)/(IV) halides or alkoxides, crystalline TiB2 has the advantage of slow hydrolysis, non-toxic nature and non-corrosive by-products. The choice of TiB2 was attributed to specific bonds, intrinsic chemical stability and controlled release of titanium species from the bulk crystalline precursor and thus phase tunable titania can be obtained. TiOF2 was prepared by microwave-assisted hydrothermal route (200 °C, 20 min) using Ti(OBu)4 and HF was transformed to anatase (400 °C, 2 h) and was thermally stable up to 900 °C.418 The dual role of the adsorbed fluoride ion in lowering the anatase surface energy and suppression of grain growth during calcination inhibits the rutile formation.419–421 The microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis is superior as it leads to the reduction of heating time during the synthesis process because of rapid crystallization.422 Although rutile was observed in both conventional (195 °C, 2–32 h) and microwave-assisted hydrothermal route (195 °C, 5–60 min), the latter produced a nanostructural spherical crystals (fine aggregates) and former generated larger acicular crystals.423
Pure rutile was synthesized in hydrothermal reactions (150 °C, 12 h) from water soluble TiBALDH at neutral pH conditions.424 The Ti cation in the TiBALDH complex is octahedrally co-ordinated, containing two bidentate lactate ligands in the x–y plane and two hydroxyl groups along the z-axis. Thus, the hydrolytic stability of the TiBALDH complex is observed in an aqueous solution, and the lactate ligand affords the stability to the complex within the x–y plane, which is sufficient to initiate condensation along the z-axis to form rutile (Fig. 18). The carboxylic functional group allows for a conjugate system, which reduces the Lewis basicity of the bonding oxygens, and therefore lowers the charge donation to the metal centres.425 Another reason for the stability of the lactate ligand in the TiBALDH complex at a near neutral pH (stored in water) is likely due to its five-membered ring, which reduces the strain within the ring and thus the complex is not sterically crowded around the metal centre.425 In addition, condensation occurs primarily through the two existing hydroxyl groups along the z-axis, allowing corner-shared bonds. In an alkaline medium, the hydroxide cleaves the organic from the Ti complex by nucleophilic addition to either the Ti cation or the lactate group, forming ammonium lactate as a by-product.426 The rise in the pH cleaves the organic ligands from the Ti complex, thereby enabling the hydrolysis–condensation process through edge-shared bonding to form anatase.52,114 The co-existence of anatase–rutile suggests that the nucleophilic cleavage of organic ligands and the condensation reactions of two hydroxyl groups along the z-axis are competing reactions. At pH 9, the rate of the lactate group cleavage is slower compared to pH 10–11, enabling the formation of corner shared bonds to yield a small quantity of rutile. The growth of rutile rods appears to be driven by the OA mechanism due to the lower solubility of the Ti species. This reduces the dissolution of crystallites, thereby minimizing the amount of titanium ions available for growth via ion-by-ion addition (OR),48,119,427 while anatase crystallites continues to grow by the OR mechanism at pH > 10. This study concluded that the hydrolysis rate of the precursor with respect to pH determines the nucleation of titania crystal structure.424 The rutile–anatase core–shell structure was evolved from TiOxCy/C composite calcined at various temperatures.428 Such structures were obtained by two stages: (i) hydrothermal treatment (160 °C, 12 h) involved semicrystalline TiO2 embedded in caramelized sucrose matrix and (ii) thus formed TiOxCy/C calcined in nitrogen atmosphere (700–1300 °C, 4 h) transformed to crystalline titania. It was found that rutile exists within the anatase particles, and the depth of the rutile core in the anatase shell particles can be adjusted by tuning the thickness of TiOxCy (x < y) and TiOxCy (x > y) in the TiOxCy/C composite by varying the calcination temperature (Fig. 19). The concentration gradient of carbon atoms by its diffusion to bulk TiO2 leads to the formation of TiOxCy (x < y) in the outer shell of particles and TiOxCy (x > y) in the middle of the particles together with some non-reacted TiO2 particles in the core. The migration of the rutile core deep inside the anatase shell was evidenced by photoluminescence and UV-visible absorption spectroscopy studies.428 The hydrothermal treatment of water soluble TiS2 (200 °C, 24 h) with NaOH (>0.5 M) favored ABT and pure brookite was observed at 1.2 M NaOH. With further increase in the concentration of NaOH (1.5–2.0 M), sodium titanate was observed.429 When TiS2 is added to NaOH, the hydrolysis reaction occurs leading to the formation of a Ti(OH)x4−x complex: TiS2 + 4NaOH → Ti4+ + 4OH− + 2Na2S(16) Ti4+ + xOH− → Ti(OH)x4−x(17)
 Fig. 18  (A) Structure of TiBALDH with dashed lines demonstrating its octahedral structure. (B) Illustration of the TiBALDH precursor with hydrolytically stable lactate ligands, forcing condensation along the z-axis. (C) Illustration of TiBALDH cleavage by nucleophilic attack by the OH– at the (a) Ti metal center and at (b) bidentate ligands (shown by blue lines), which allows for two condensation reactions in the x–y plane of the coordination sphere to occur simultaneously, yielding edge-sharing bonds (reprinted with permission from ref. 424; Copyright @ 2010 American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 19  Synthesis of rutile–anatase core–shell structure (reprinted with permission from ref. 428; Copyright @ 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The appearance of brookite at high concentrations of NaOH was due to the rapid thermal hydrolysis of TiS2. The time dependent experiments confirmed that TiS2 with NaOH initially leads to layered titanate, which transforms to anatase and brookite after increasing the hydrothermal reaction time (≥6 h). Interestingly, both anatase NPs and brookite nanoplates were not interconverted even after increasing the reaction time up to 24 h (Fig. 20). The formation of sodium titanate at very low concentrations of NaOH was due to the lower bond energy of Ti–S (418 ± 3 kJ mol−1) in contrast to 10 M NaOH commonly used for TiO2 because of the high bond energy (672 ± 9 kJ mol−1). Pure anatase was observed in the hydrothermal treatment (220 °C, 48 h) of TiOSO4 with 0.21 M NaOH below pH 7 and transforms to titanates at neutral pH, followed by brookite nucleation with low concentration of defects in an alkaline medium (pH 10.5–12.5). Thus, brookite nucleation takes place directly from the layered titanate rather than from anatase.430 In this system, Na+ or H+ ions located in the interlayer spaces of layered titanate could be gradually released, which disturbs the static interaction and introduces internal structural tension. With an increase of this tension, layered titanate would become unstable and finally transformed to anatase in acidic or brookite under basic conditions. In the subsequent process, spindle- and flower-like brookite titania was formed, which undergoes preferential coarsening of NPs as governed by surface charges and surface energy. Once brookite nanocrystals are formed, Na+ and OH− in the reaction medium would adhere to their surface and destroy the local equilibrium concentration, giving gradient expense of the shrinkage of smaller particles.431 With a prolonged reaction time, these spindle-like titania particles would weld together to reduce the surface energy and finally produce brookite flowers. However, anatase–rutile was observed with LiOH and KOH, highlighting the importance of Na+ ions in brookite formation. Flower-like brookite was thermally stable up to 900 °C without a change in morphology and transformed to sphere-like shaped rutile at 1000 °C. High stability was closely related to the flower-like shape, facilitating strong interactions among the fine particles for the assembly of brookite flowers.430 Compared to the trivial titanium precursor, titanium amino–alcohol complexes exhibit improved hydrolysis–condensation properties over simple alkoxides, allowing for better control in the sol–gel reaction due to its “caged” structure.391 The titanatrane complex [N(CH2CH2O)3Ti–OiPr] reacts with water and forms hydroxyl titanium chelate [N(CH2CH2O)3Ti–OH], which is stable in water for an extended period of time.432a Since the only –OH group is in the complex and no –OH moiety is present in its dimer [N(CH2CH2O)3Ti–O–TiN(CH2CH2O)3], rutile nucleates without forming anatase. As the titanium is well protected by three arms of trialkoxides, the formation of [TiO6] enhances the kinetic stability; hence, the condensation rate is very slow due to this steric effect.
 Fig. 20  Variation in anatase and brookite contents with hydrothermal reaction time from TiS2 precursor with NaOH (reprinted with permission from ref. 429; Copyright @ 2013 American Chemical Society). 
As it is widely reported, anatase was the common phase from Ti(SO4)2 as the sulfate species inhibits the formation of rutile.432b,c Several co-doped systems of titania in the anatase form, as well as with reactive exposed {001} facets showing high photocatalytic activity, are also prepared from this precursor.432d–g The precipitated powders obtained from the thermohydrolysis of Ti(SO4)2 in propanol–water were found to be amorphous and transformed to anatase–rutile after calcination at 600 °C for 2 h and pure rutile at 800 °C. It was interesting to note that the spherical morphology of the samples (as obtained) was retained during calcination.432h The precipitate from Ti(SO4)2 and NaOH when dispersed in HNO3 yielded rutile after aging at room temperature without the formation of anatase.432i The protons in the solution rearranged the amorphous aggregates to form rutile, while the sulfate species retarded the crystalline growth. The active sulfate species (at 300 °C) was gradually expelled from the TiO2 network to form inactive sulfate species with an increase in the calcination temperature (800 °C). Peptizing with acid allowed the sulfate species to homogeneously disperse throughout the bulk of the crystals, thus favouring its incorporation into the TiO2 network. In contrast, anatase, anatase–brookite and brookite were obtained via the hydrothermal treatment (180 °C, 36 h) of Ti(SO4)2 and NaOH without any peptization at pH 5, 6–9 and 10–11, respectively.432j The fluoride-free-self-templated synthesis of anatase–rutile hollow nanostructures was obtained via the hydrothermal treatment (473 K, 24 h) of Ti(SO4)2 with H2O2 at pH 1.432k The lower amount of H2O2 (4–6 mM) resulted in agglomeration with a few hollow nanostructures, while a larger amount (20–50 mM) leads to the formation of NPs without any assembly of hierarchical nanostructures. Note that H2O2 (10 mM) served as a coordinating agent and stabilized the particle interface. The time-dependent experiments revealed that solid particles (6 h) transformed to a hollow structure (10 h), and the hollowing process continued to obtain hollow particles with a uniform interconnected cavity (24 h). Ti(SO4)2 reacted with H2O2via the ligand exchange reaction with O22− ion under acidic conditions to form an intermediate complex, which decomposes into titania phases. However, monodispersed NPs were obtained without H2O2, suggesting that peroxide played a major role in the formation of hollow structures. It was found that inside-out Ostwald ripening was responsible for the hollowing process, in which the evacuation of solid cores was driven by the minimization of the overall surface energy. Recently, Yu and co-workers432l reported H2O2-assisted fluoride induced self-transformation to obtain anatase hollow microspheres from Ti(SO4)2–NH4F–H2O2via the hydrothermal method (180 °C, 3 h). This method is advantageous over Troung et al.432k as the reaction time is very low and pure anatase was obtained. Thus, it can be concluded that the presence of H2O2 favored rutile, while fluoride ion stabilized anatase. The formation mechanism involved three stages. (i) Ti(SO4)2 reacts with H2O2 to form urchin-like microspheres,432m which are aggregated amorphous TiO2. Ti(SO4)2 + H2O2 → [H2TiO2(SO4)2] + H2O → (TiO2)m⋯O–O⋯(TiO2)n(18)
(ii) As the reaction proceeds further (up to 1 h), H2O2 decomposes and the particle interface becomes vacant due to the presence of dangling bonds (unsaturated titanium species), which are prone to dissolve in the presence of fluoride ions. In addition, HF induces the dissolution of particle interiors and subsequent mass transfer to the external surface.432m (iii) With further increase in the reaction time (3 h), the building blocks of TiO2 solid are transformed into a hollow structure due to the decomposition of the H2O2 complex in the interior. Therefore, the redistribution of matter from the interior to the exterior of the building blocks takes place spontaneously, forming hollow structures.
These results demonstrate that the reactivity of the precursor and process conditions need to be considered to produce well-defined nanostructured materials. Understanding the similarities between the fundamental structural unit (octahedral arrangement) and the molecular structure of the precursor provides insight into the nucleation and growth behavior with respect to the reaction conditions. Screening new types of precursors for titania synthesis still has great implications for materials' syntheses and processing.
9.2 Crystallization of TiO2 from layered titanates
Layered titanates are a group of solid TiO2 hydrates intercalated by protonated water molecules. Each layer in the crystal structure consists of side-by-side aligned [TiO6] connected above and below by additionally shared apical edges of [TiO6] at different levels.433–441 The layers within these titanate hydrates can either split into smaller fragments of [TiO6] for the assembly of more complex nanostructures or undergoes in situ dehydration to crystallize into specific titania polymorphs. Obviously, this is different from trivial titania formation via polymorphic growth units obtained from the hydrolysis of titanium precursor in the liquid medium.
A mixed or pure phase of titania was obtained after the hydrothermal treatment (180 °C, 12 h) of H/K titanate by varying the mineral acids and their relative concentrations.442 Rutile and anatase were observed at 4.0 M and 3 mM HCl, respectively, while TiO2(B) nucleated at 0.1 M HCl. Brookite–rutile and brookite–rutile–TiO2(B) were observed in the concentration range of 0.2–2.0 M HCl, while anatase–TiO2(B) was formed at 0.1 M to 3 mM HCl. The anatase content gradually increased with a decrease in the HCl concentration, while the content of TiO2(B) decreased and finally disappeared. Likewise, pure TiO2(B) and anatase were observed at 0.1 and 1 mM HNO3 and the abovementioned mixed polymorphs were obtained at 4.0–0.5 M, 0.5–0.15 M and 0.1–3.0 mM HNO3, respectively. In contrast, pure anatase and TiO2(B) along with anatase–TiO2(B) nucleated with H2SO4 depending on the acid concentration (Fig. 21). Thus, protons and anions played a dominant role in tuning the phase composition in the entire acidic range. Based on the XRD analysis and time-dependent morphological evolution of the titanate to form different polymorphs of titania, it was concluded that a change in the solution pH during the hydrothermal treatment was the main factor in governing such phase transitions. When [H+] < 0.1 M, H/K titanate proceeds via a topochemical reaction mechanism forming TiO2(B) nanowires, while the dissolution–nucleation pathway prevails with an increase in the solution pH, leading to anatase.443,444 When H+ concentration is >0.1 M, some of Ti–OH protonates to form Ti–OH2+, and it prefers corner-sharing between the octahedra as a result of the repulsion to form rutile and brookite. SO42− favored anatase, while Cl− facilitated rutile formation compared to NO3− at the same concentration.442 The brookite content increased at the expense of anatase without affecting the rutile fraction during the hydrothermal treatment (100–200 °C, 5 h) of TNT (H2TinO2n+1 such as H2Ti3O7 and H2Ti4O9) with HClO4 and HNO3.445 Although a similar trend was observed with HCl up to 150 °C, both BRT and ART dominated at 200 °C. This suggests that ABT is favoured over ART at the initial stages of the hydrothermal treatment. The presence of inorganic salts in the reaction solution showed complex behaviour: anatase and brookite were preferred with NaClO4 (or NaCl) and HClO4, respectively, while rutile dominated in NaCl–HClO4 (Fig. 22). It was suggested that brookite nucleation from the TNT precursor takes place only under high temperatures, strong acidic conditions and appropriate anion like ClO4− that prevents BRT.445 The presence of anatase under a weakly acidic or neutral solution with NaCl or NaClO4 suggests that these anions do not work as a control reagent of the crystal structure, presumably due to their weak co-ordination on the corner of [TiO6]. The reason for brookite formation with NO3− and ClO4− compared with Cl− might be that the former induces the lesser formation of the edge-sharing assembly of [TiO6] compared to chloride ions. The large fraction of brookite from TNT compared to the other research groups86,367 is due to the arrangement of [TiO6] and related assembly without fragmentation to the minimum [TiO6] unit.
 Fig. 21  Phase composition of titania with different acid concentrations from H/K titanate (reprinted with permission from ref. 442; Copyright @ 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Fig. 22  Relative fractions of titania phases with various kinds of additives: (a) 2 M NaClO4; (b) 2 M HClO4; (c) 2 M HClO4 + 2 M NaCl; (d) 2 M NaClO4 + 2 M HCl; (e) 2 M HCl; (f) 2 M NaCl (reprinted with permission from ref. 445; Copyright @ 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Wang et al.128 for the first time reported a unique phase transition sequence, anatase to rutile to anatase, according to the dissolution-reassembling equilibrium via the liquid phase solution-NaOH treatment of the hydrolysate of Ti(OBu)4 and the subsequent acidic peptization of H2Ti5O11·3H2O intermediate. At a very early stage of peptization, anatase dominates owing to the similarity in the crystal structure with intermediate H-titanate having four edge-sharing zigzag ribbons.446,447 The lamellar H-titanate dehydrates after the reaction with HNO3, while zigzag ribbons remains unchanged and anatase is formed via the direct rearrangement of the crystal lattice. Thus formed anatase nanosheets tend to split and form crystals because of their structural asymmetry, and thus release the strong stress and lower the total energy. After prolonging the acid peptization, rutile nucleates as a result of the aggregation of anatase particles. The reconstruction of lattice is achieved by resolving the zigzag ribbons of anatase into detached [TiO6] or their small clusters, which are later reconstructed as straight chains. With a further increase in the aging time, the rutile fraction decreases, followed by an increase of the anatase content, as rutile NRs dissolve in the strongly acidic medium and the dissolved crystals are smaller than the critical size; thus, the OR mechanism is followed to form well-defined anatase NRs. Therefore, the phase transition in the acid peptization procedure may be regulated by the equilibrium between the dissolution of rutile NRs and reassembling of smaller anatase grains. When the aging time lasted as long as 48 h, changes in the phase composition become indistinct, indicating that the thermodynamic equilibrium might have been established between the two phases (Fig. 23). The treatment of NaOH with the Ti–O–Ti framework results in the formation of Ti–O–Na and Ti–OH bonds in the structural units and that Na+ located between the layers are replaced by H+ in pH descending course of water washing, followed by the generation of protonated penta titanate intermediate H2Ti5O11·3H2O with a lamellar structure. The steric hindrance caused by the linkage of six water molecules in this intermediate forces the large structural units (aggregation of octahedra) to arrange in a zigzag configuration rather than a straight chain along the c-axis.448,449 Finally, Ti–OH bonds are dehydrated in HNO3 at the final acid peptization stage and new Ti–O–Ti and Ti–O–H–O–Ti hydrogen bonds are generated to form TiO2 crystals.128
 Fig. 23  Variations of anatase (A) and rutile (R) with hydrothermal aging time (reprinted with permission from ref. 128; Copyright @ 2010 American Chemical Society). 
(NH4)2Ti2O5·H2O obtained by the reaction of TiCl3 or Ti(OBu)4 with aqueous NH3 (in alkalescent media) transformed to anatase under hydrothermal conditions due to the deintercalation of NH4+ ions from the layered titanate and the combination of layers from ammonium dititanate.450–454 During the hydrothermal process, NH4+ gets hydrolyzed to NH4OH and the released H+ induces hydroxyl condensation to form anatase. The presence of NaCl favoured the nucleation of brookite with TiCl3 and pure brookite was observed only at a high concentration of NaCl (4.2 M) and 68 mL of NH4OH.452 With the introduction of NaCl, both Na+ and NH4+ exists in the interlayer to stabilize the structure and to balance the negative charge of the titanate. During the hydrothermal treatment, the deintercalation of NH4+ will induce the collapse of a few layers, while some bonds will be restrained by Na+ without breaking. Thus, the structural transformation is delayed, resulting in special lattice shear in the combination process of the layer and leads to a brookite-like structure, which further expands to form a brookite lattice. The introduction of water with NH4OH reduced the concentration of Na+ and retains NH4+ in the interlayer, thereby facilitating anatase (Fig. 24). At very high concentrations of NaCl, layered architectures are overwhelmingly maintained by Na+ ions forming Na2Ti2O5·H2O, which transforms to H2Ti2O5·H2O after washing with acid.451 Interestingly, anatase–brookite, brookite–hydrogen titanate along with pure brookite and hydrogen titanate were obtained with different concentrations of NaCl (0.25–1.5 M) depending on the hydrothermal temperature (180 °C).451 Zhao et al.453 predicted that the phase transition from hydrogen titanate to anatase follows the OR rule,455 while Mao and Wong456 hypothesised that the surface arrangements would be easier than complete solubilization and precipitation. As a result, primary anatase NPs that coalesced at specific points were altered to hydrogen titanate by reordering the {101} plane in anatase to the {110} plane in titanate with minimal lattice mismatch. This layered structure could be produced and maintained by NH4+ ions without the assistance of NaCl under hydrothermal conditions at 100–140 °C. The electrolyte NaCl facilitates the formation of hydrogen titanate at 80 °C and maintained up to 200 °C at high NaCl concentrations. Na+ locally stops the direct closure of titanate layers at their adjacent positions, which induces the formation of brookite-like structures.457 Replacing NaCl with KCl or LiCl resulted in anatase and tetratitanate (H2Ti4O9·1.9H2O) at lower and higher concentrations, respectively. Although a trace of brookite was observed with NH4Cl, its content did not evidently increase with an increase in the concentration of NH4Cl. Thus, these cations seem to promote the condensation of [TiO6] and stabilize the titanate too much, thereby suppressing brookite formation. NH4+ readily reacts with water to produce NH3 and displays similar results with those in the electrolyte absence. The hydrated K+ ion has similar radius compared to NH4+ and no internal stress arises from K+ on intercalation. Consequently, the phase transition with K+ was similar to NH4+ at very low KCl concentrations. However, K+ assumes much stronger electrostatic interaction with the negative host titanate layer, which stabilizes the titanate and retards the transformation of titanate even at relatively low concentrations. By prolonging the hydrothermal treatment time (24–72 h), the transition from titanate to anatase was observed with KCl (0.25 M) and LiCl (1 M). The presence NaNO3, Na2B4O7 and CH3COONa seems to favor pure brookite nucleation at 0.8 M (70 h), 0.06 M (84 h) and 0.3 M (60 h), respectively.450 Compared with chloride and nitrate, acetate and borate are better chelators to Ti4+ ions. They would promote the phase transition of titanate by forming metal–ligand complex intermediates during the hydrothermal process. Ligands such as borate may even dope into the titanate host layer (and TiO2),458 promoting brookite formation at extremely low concentrations of Na2B4O7. Almost a similar phase transition mechanism from titanate to anatase and brookite was observed with Ti(OBu)4 in ammoniacal medium and NaCl. The optimal hydrothermal reaction parameters for brookite formation were found to be 180 °C, 0.5 M NaCl and ≥72 h.450 In another study, brookite nanoflowers aggregated from brookite NRs under hydrothermal conditions (180 °C, 24 h) in an ammoniacal medium and NaCl.454 However, in the mixture of NaCl and NH4Cl, brookite fraction is gradually reduced and this effect became pronounced with an increase in the concentration of NH4Cl.459 Thus, the role of Na+ to favour brookite formation was weakened by NH4+ ions. Owing to the strong electrostatic attraction of Na+ towards negatively charged host layers than NH4+, it is difficult to expel Na+ completely even at high concentrations of NH4Cl. In contrast, NH4F stabilized the titanate and prevented the formation of anatase, as fluoride ion chemically interacts with [TiO6] and alters the phase transformation pathway. The fluoride ion catalyzes the condensation of Ti–OH to form Ti–O–Ti linkages,460–462 which results in better crystallization of the titanate. Interestingly, NaF promoted brookite formation and the tendency was higher compared to NaCl. The high concentration of NaCl stabilized the titanate, while NaF favoured brookite formation. The chloride ions interact weakly with [TiO6] of either the titanate or titania. It was interesting to note that pure anatase was not observed with NaF or NH4F independent of their concentrations, but was achieved by the combination of 0.25 M NaF and 1.5 M NH4F (Fig. 25). The fluoride ion can induce Na+ ions to leave the interlayers of the titanate more easily. Therefore, the role of Na+ ions is weakened and brookite formation is restrained with the addition of NH4F. A large number of fluoride ions enter the titanate, which ought to catalyse the condensation of Ti–OH by forming Ti–F groups with NH4F. The induced condensation of Ti–OH enhances the crystallinity of the titanate and results in the formation of the residual titanate in the composite. At much higher concentrations of fluoride ions, the over condensation of Ti–OH occurs, leading to the amalgamation of titanate layers and finally results in TiO2. Thus, the preference of titanate to transform into anatase or brookite depends on the concentration of inorganic electrolytes in the reaction medium.
 Fig. 24  Formation of anatase and brookite from ammonium titanate (reprinted with permission from ref. 450; Copyright @ 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Fig. 25  Change in phase compositions with varied concentrations of NH4F with 0.25 M NaF (reprinted with permission from ref. 459; Copyright @ 2013 Elsevier). 
In a different synthesis route, anatase was stable up to 900 °C without any doping or modification synthesized from the layered titanate. K2Ti2O5 exhibits a unique layered structure composed of edge-sharing trigonal bipyramids with TiO5 units comprising five oxygen anions coordinated to one titanium atom, which is different from all the other layered titanates.463,464a The water molecules entering the lattice changes the titanium co-ordination from five to six at an extensive rearrangement of the original structure.465 It was postulated that a water gradient develops between the solid/liquid interface and the core of the K2Ti2O5 fiber due to the slow inward diffusion of H3O+ ions. The original surface layers of (Ti2O5)2− composed of trigonal bipyramidal TiO5 units are now saturated and undergo structural rearrangements to form (Ti5O11)2− comprising [TiO6], while the unsaturated inner core of K2Ti2O5 remains unaffected. Consequently, HCl is added and H3O+ diffusion proceeds rapidly leading to the formation of H2Ti2O5·H2O and H2Ti5O11·H2O. During calcination, the latter transforms into a TiO2(B) shell, while the former crystallizes into the anatase core.43,466 The presence of TiO2(B) stabilized anatase even at 900 °C and rutile formation was observed only at 1000 °C, despite the fact that the inhibition of crystal growth was not observed.467 This was attributed to the presence of a protective TiO2(B) shell, which itself has thermal stability up to 800 °C. It was proposed that TiO2(B) was converted to anatase either by the growth of the steps on the lamellar margins that removed the shear component relating the interphase structure or by a bulk mechanism when anatase nucleus was scarce or absent. This heterogeneous phase transformation is due to the unique and unstable structures of K2Ti2O5, which is easily hydrated on exposure to moist air and partial ion-exchanged even in distilled water.463 Thus, the inner core anatase is surrounded by a TiO2(B) outer shell that has a specific crystallographic orientation with respect to anatase, i.e. [010]A//[010]B and [100]A//[001]B. In another study, TiO2(B) was stable up to 650 °C and pure anatase was observed at 700 °C.464b
The hydrothermal treatment (150 °C, 24 h) of H2Ti4O9·1.2H2O resulted in various titania polymorphs depending on the concentration of mineral acids: pure rutile was observed at 0.1–0.4 M and 6 M of HCl; 0.1–0.2 M and >7 M HNO3; and 0.1–0.8 M H2SO4.468 Likewise, anatase was obtained by using both HCl and HNO3 at 0.9 M and a broad concentration of 2–7 M H2SO4. Note that a small amount of brookite was observed with 1 M HCl and 4 M HNO3. A variety of nanostructures, including aligned NRs, nanoporous, nanocubes, and diamond-shaped nanocrystals, were obtained. The basic crystal structure units of H2Ti4O9·1.2H2O fibers are [Ti4O9]2− sheets that are composed of four side-by-side aligned [TiO6].435–438,469,470 The two central [TiO6] complexes connect with two adjacent [TiO6] complexes by sharing two opposite equatorial edges of the octahedra at one level. The other two sides of [TiO6] connect with four [TiO6] units located at the same level by sharing the corners. The periodic repeating of such a structure forms a single chain of [TiO6]. In addition, four side-by-side aligned [TiO6] at different levels are connected above and below by sharing the additional apical edges of [TiO6] forming zigzag strings extending in the ‘b’ direction as well as the axial direction of the pristine fibers. The protons and H3O+ ions are accommodated in the widely open interlayers of the layered framework of the [Ti4O9]2− sheets. During the dehydration process, the structural water content is totally removed and [Ti4O9]2− sheets—each involving four [TiO6] units—shift with respect to each other in the amount of /4 in the pristine structure. They share free corners of four [TiO6] units and gradually condense with each other to form octatitanate with a tunnel-like crystal structure, from which the nucleation of anatase and rutile proceeds by the dehydration and condensation of [Ti4O9]2− sheets. Anatase–rutile was observed for 0.5–0.8 M and 1–5 M HCl, 0.4–7 M HNO3 and 0.9–2 M H2SO4.468 The calcination (300–600 °C, 2 h) of titanates resulted in anatase–rutile at 700 °C and only rutile at 800 °C, indicating a narrow temperature range for ART.471 Bruce and co-workers reported that layered hydrogen titanate nanowires were converted into TiO2(B) and layered hydrogen titanate nanotubes were transformed to anatase with the loss of tubular morphology.71 The rinsing of Na1.18H0.82Ti3O7 nanotubes with 0.1 M HCl, followed by calcination (573 K), resulted in TiO2(B) and anatase co-existed at 673–773 K.472 Feist and Davies43 have reported heating the layered hydrogen titanate at temperatures <623 K transforms into TiO2(B). The solvothermal treatment (400–450 °C, 1 h) of H2Ti4O9·nH2O in water yielded anatase, while TiO2(B)–anatase was observed with methanol and ethanol. The transformation from monoclinic to anatase was slower in ethanol compared to methanol.473 This transformation results from crystallographic shear caused by the heat treatment.469,474 The successive dehydration reactions are as follows: (19)
The dielectric constant of water is much larger than those of methanol and ethanol, and therefore H2Ti4O9·nH2O has high solubility in water compared to alcohol. Since the solvothermal process continues to operate via the dissolution–precipitation process, a high solubility of H2Ti4O9·nH2O in water promotes faster anatase precipitation. The low solubility of titanate in alcohol facilitates the phase transformation to proceed much slowly and TiO2(B) was obtained under these conditions. The sample prepared at 350 °C in water, methanol and ethanol yielded pure anatase, monoclinic-anatase and pure monoclinic phases, respectively. In this study, a batch reactor made by heat resistant alloy was employed to extend the hydrothermal reaction temperature up to 450 °C.473 Zhu et al.447 concluded that the phase transition between the nanostructures of titanate and titania polymorphs takes place readily in simple wet chemical processes at temperatures close to the ambient temperature. The aging of monoclinic H2Ti3O7·xH2O transformed into anatase in very dilute HNO3 (0.05 M) and to rutile for high concentrations of 2 M HNO3 at 30 °C. The hydrogen titanate prepared at low temperatures (≤100 °C) transformed into anatase or rutile at 30 °C, while those synthesized at 100–200 °C transformed into anatase or rutile (0.05 and 2.65 M HNO3) in the range of 60–200 °C (Fig. 26).447 In general, titanate fibers prepared at low temperatures were thinner and possessed a large surface area, more defects (poorer crystallinity) and a less rigid crystal structure, and thus the phase change was easier. The aggregates of anatase nanocrystals inherit their morphology from the reactant titanate fibers, while rutile showed no morphology similar to the initial titanate fibers. Titanate and anatase have common structural features: both crystal lattices consist of an octahedral sharing four edges and zigzag ribbons.59,475,476 In reaction with acid, H-titanate nanofibers dehydrate and large structural units of zigzag ribbons remain relatively unchanged, rearranging to form anatase lattices. The zigzag ribbons of [TiO6] with four shared edges in H-titanate nanofibers have to be resolved into detached [TiO6] or their smaller clusters to form straight chains. Thus, a rutile lattice is reconstructed with the detached octahedral in an acidic solution. These hydrogen titanates were stable against thermal treatment exhibiting mineral-like behaviour: titanates prepared at low temperatures (≤100 °C) transformed into anatase after calcination (400–500 °C), while those prepared at 200 °C were thermally stable up to 650 °C. The increase of power from 350 to 650 W in the microwave-hydrothermal reaction of TiO2 and NaOH showed the evolution from titanate nanowires to anatase and later to brookite after calcination (450 °C, 2–5 h).477 Ribbens et al.478 found that hydrogen titanate partially transformed into anatase after calcination at 623 K.
 Fig. 26  Relation between titanate and other phases of titania in wet chemical approaches (reprinted with permission from ref. 447; Copyright @ 2005 American Chemical Society). 
The reversible phase transition between titanate and titania polymorphs under wet chemical approaches are of significant interest owing to its flexibility to obtain TiO2(B) and brookite phase at low temperatures. These studies indicated that titanates are potential precursors for the preparation of all the four polymorphs of titania.
9.3 Crystallization of TiO2 from PTC
Although several routes to prepare nanocrystalline titania with different phases have been reported till date, alternative approaches that are simple and inexpensive, affording high purity are worth investigating. To this end, facile and low-cost water soluble PTC was found to be a promising intermediate phase for the preparation of nanocrystalline titania.32,33,479–486 According to Salifoglou and co-workers,487 PTC is a dinuclear complex of two Ti4+ ions co-ordinated by peroxide ligands, central core in the dimer being composed of a Ti2O2 rhombic unit and is planar by the virtue of the centre of inversion. The detailed structure of PTC dinuclear complex is Ti2(OOH)2(OH)a(H2O)b, Ti2(O2)2(OH)a(H2O)b, Ti2(O2)(OOH)(OH)a(H2O)b or [Ti2O5(OH)2]∞, which changes with the concentration of the ligand. H2O2 is added to the gel/amorphous titania to form PTC, and the dissociation of H2O2 in an aqueous solution can be described as follows: H2O2 → −OOH + H+ → O22− + 2H+(20)
Thus, the concentration of oxygen ligands varies depending on the pH of the solution. PTC is mononuclear Ti(O2)OH+ at pH < 1 and dimerises to [Ti2O5(OH2)(H2O)2] at pH 1–3, and it is capable of further deprotonation with the base leading to the formation of dinuclear complexes like [Ti2O5(OH)3(H2O)]−, [Ti2O5(OH)4]2−, [Ti2O5(OH)5]3− and [Ti2O5(OH)6]4−.138,486,488 In all these dimeric species, a Ti2O5 unit exists as two five-membered rings with a common Ti–O–Ti linkage. The transformation to a polynuclear complex [Ti2O5(OH)2]∞ at pH > 3 is also reported.486
The modification of a titania precursor with H2O2 resulted in the formation of (interstitial oxygen) oxygen rich titania that stabilized anatase up to 900 °C.489 The stability increased with an increase in the H2O2 concentration. The in situ generation of oxygen due to the thermal decomposition of PTC hinders the oxygen vacancy formation and strengthens Ti–O–Ti network, rendering anatase stability and also preventing grain growth. Contrarily, controlled titania samples becomes non-stoichiometric via oxygen vacancy formation during calcination.130,490 The PTC derived from TiCl4 showed only anatase, while anatase–rutile was observed with TTIP after aging (100 °C, 24 h) in closed bottles.491 The formation of TiO2via PTC from different titanium precursors can be presented as follows: (21) (22)
The external addition of NH4Cl to PTC derived from TTIP did not influence the resulting crystal structure confirming that neither NH4+ nor Cl− ions had any role in phase evolution. The addition of H2O2 to TiO2·xH2O resulted in pH 1 for TTIP and pH 2 for TiCl4. However, pure anatase was obtained by increasing the pH to 2 and reducing the pH to 1, respectively, in the above precursors, suggesting that PTC derived from both the precursors had different chemical entities. At low pH, the surface hydroxyl groups on hydrated [TiO6] units will be less and the edge-sharing condensation process becomes kinetically favourable leading to rutile, while the concentration of the surface hydroxyl groups on hydrated [TiO6] increases with an increase in the pH, facilitating the face-sharing condensation to form anatase. The hydrothermal treatment (200 °C, 2 h) of [Ti(OH)3O2]− (obtained by aging metallic Ti and H2O2 at 100 °C followed by immersion in an ice bath) resulted in rutile at pH 0 and anatase in a wide pH range of 2–12, followed by hydrogen titanate at pH 14 (Fig. 27).32 The orientation mechanism was predominantly observed in the growth of rutile NRs and anatase nanoribbons at pH 0 and 8, respectively. At pH 14, the total diffusion of the previous structure resulted in the reprecipitation of lamellar hydrogen titanate. Ribeiro et al.32,492 suggested that the role of pH in the phase transformation is not simply an attachment/detachment of ions induced by solution acidity/basicity. The situation is more complicated and the OA mechanism of nanocrystals seems to be the rate determining step. The hydrothermal synthesis (220 °C, 24 h) of PTC with glycolic acid showed pure brookite, while anatase–brookite with citric acid.493 In contrast, only anatase was obtained with lactic acid and AcOH. Thus, the obtained brookite was directly transformed into rutile, after thermal treatment at 1125 °C. The critical size for BRT was found to be 24 nm. The hydrothermal treatment of peroxotitanic acid (200 °C, 3 h) yielded anatase–rutile in the pH regime of 4–10 with dominant rutile and anatase at pH 4 and 10, respectively. The addition of polyvinyl alcohol stabilized only the anatase phase with specific exposed facets {101} and {001} by adsorbing on TiO2 during the crystallizing process and also prevented particle agglomeration.494 The addition of AcOH to PTC, followed by aging (100 °C, 24 h), resulted in similar content of anatase (57%) and rutile (43%), while the addition of H2O2 to titanium acetate complex [Ti(OiPr)4−x(OAc)x] showed dominant anatase (92%) with minor rutile (8%);483 however, the absence of H2O2 yielded only anatase. The PTC obtained by the addition of TTIP to 35 wt% H2O2 (pH 3.4–3.5) declines the pH to 1.1, and hence rutile nucleation begins. TTIP + H2O2 + 3H2O → [Ti(OH)3(OOH)] + 4IPA(23) [Ti(OH)3(OOH)] → [OTi(OH)(OO)]− + H+ + H2O(24)
 Fig. 27  Nucleation of different phases from PTC under different pH conditions (reprinted with permission from ref. 32; Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag). 
The proton formed reduces the solution pH during the formation of peroxo complexes. Thus, the addition of AcOH will have little influence as the PTC will be rapidly hydrolyzed. The rate of nucleation process of anatase and rutile will be approximately the same, yielding similar fractions for both the phases. The hydrolysis of TTIP–AcOH mixture in water results in pH 3.2–3.5 to favour anatase. The addition of H2O2 to Ti(OiPr)4−x(OAc)4 leads to a peroxo complex of Ti(OiPr)4−x(OAc)4, which hydrolyzes very slowly due to the presence of acetate group and the nucleation of anatase begins. The pH decrease was observed from 3.9–4.1 to 1.5 and the nucleation of rutile thus begins. Due to the slow rate of hydrolysis, rutile nucleation lags behind, giving rise to anatase as the major fraction. Thus, the sequence of addition of complexing agents or modifiers also influences the final phase composition. The hydrothermal treatment (150 °C, 24 and 48 h) of PTC with CF3COOH exhibited rice-like rutile, while only spherical anatase was observed under normal conditions.495 PTC has a tendency to form dinuclear Ti complexes like [Ti2O5(OH)x](2−x), followed by subsequent conversion to anatase via face sharing condensation.138,485,486,495-497 The rice-like morphology was due to the anisotropic growth of TiO2 along the [001] facet, which is perpendicular to the [110] facet.498 The CF3COOH played a dual role: adjusting the pH of the reaction mixture and as a growth regulator. In the initial stage of the experiments, the disintegration of the PTC gel network takes place, and the gel is then converted into smaller TiO2 nuclei, which on further growth yields TiO2 with different morphology and phases. The nuclei first formed are grown into bigger particles at the expense of smaller ones through the OR process. In the absence of CF3COOH, the solution pH was nearly neutral to promote anatase formation,499 while the increase of the fluoride anions in a wet gel reduces the surface energy of the {001} surfaces to a lower level than the {110} surface in rutile. The refluxing (100 °C, 48 h) of the PTC derived at pH 0 and 3 (6) resulted in rutile and anatase, respectively.33 However, brookite (63%) co-existed with anatase at pH 1. These results suggest that phase transition can be achieved with PTC by simply varying the solution pH. By varying the [H2O2]/Ti ratio from 5 to 20, anatase–brookite present at the lower ratio completely and partially transformed into rutile at pH 0 and 1, respectively. In contrast, only anatase was observed irrespective of the [H2O2]/Ti ratio at pH 6. Thus, titania formation is associated with the decomposition routes of different PTC structures, which leads to seeds for different phases at the same temperature. At pH 0, high acidity and [H2O2] benefit the formation of OOH− ligands, and hence Ti2(OOH)2(OH)a(H2O)b dominates in the solution. On the other hand, Ti atoms will be bridged by two peroxy groups to form an octahedron. As a result, a small rutile chain is favored by the decomposition of peroxo groups to yield free oxygen. Further condensation must proceed by olation and the formation of bridging hydroxyl ligands between several small chains. Finally, linear linkage is arranged to form rutile. At high pH, complexes like Ti2(O2)2(OH)a(H2O)b or [Ti2O5(OH)2]∞ are formed. Note that O2− can form a Ti–O2 triangular ring configuration.500 The peroxide group can laterally co-ordinate to Ti4+, and the octahedral favours linking together through shared edges only along the apical directions by decomposing the peroxo groups and then olation proceeds resulting in anatase. At pH 1, Ti2(O2)(OOH)(OH)a(H2O)b will be available in the solution. Because of the concurrence of O2− and OOH− ligands, crystals could grow along the equatorial plane or apical directions. This linkage favors the crystal structure between anatase and rutile, and as a result brookite was obtained.33
10 Preparation of TiO2via non-aqueous route
The strong sensitivity of titania precursor in the aqueous medium even towards slight changes in the synthesis conditions and simultaneous occurrence of hydrolysis–condensation makes it impossible to fully control the processing of metal oxides. The traditional hydrolysis is based mainly on the physical introduction of water as an oxygen donor in the reaction system, which exerts negative effects on the control of the reaction rate and homogeneity of the resulting particles.182,501–503 The metal oxide obtained will be enriched with hydroxyl groups/adsorbed water, thus influencing the surface properties of titania, and hence its crystallization behaviour at the annealing stages. The non-aqueous routes do not rely on the hydrolysis for the creation of Ti–O bonds360 and high reactivity of titania precursor towards hydrolysis can be circumvented. The role of organic solvents used in these systems can be diverse, providing not only size and shape control but also contributing to the particle formation and to the stabilization of the formed nanostructures, enabling a very simple reaction set up.501–503
The trivial route involves the reaction of TiCl4 with titanium alkoxides or ethers accompanied by the elimination of alkyl halides.504,505 TiX4 + Ti(OR)4 → 2TiO2 + 4RX(25) TiX4 + 2ROR → TiO2 + 4RX(26)
The ‘X’ functions as an electrophile attacking either oxygen-bound carbon or titanium center of the alkoxide precursor, resulting in a Ti–O bond without the incorporation of defects in the growing titania crystal. Trentler et al.506 suggested that this reaction follows the SN1 mechanism, as the reaction rate was enhanced with an increase in the branching of R (primary to tertiary) and is independent of the nature of the halide. Although the average particle size remained unaffected irrespective of the branching in R, the smaller crystallite size and rutile formation were observed by increasing the nucleophilicity of the halide in the titanium precursor. In addition, a high concentration of reactants yielded off-white precipitates, while a clear orange solution was observed at lower concentrations.506 Mesoporous anatase–rutile was tuned by non-hydrolytic evaporation-induced self assembly method based on the effect of acid–base pairs using TiCl4 and Ti(OBu)4 along with the Pluronic 123 template.507 The former acts as a pH adjustor and controls the hydrolysis–condensation pathways, while the latter served as a major titanium source and oxygen donor. TiCl4 reacts with ethanol to form Ti(Cl)4−x(OEt)x (x ∼ 2) species,508 resulting in an acidic mother solution (pH 1). The addition of Ti(OBu)4 reduced the pH and was accompanied by the formation of oligomers TiXx(OH)yO2−(x+y)/2 (X = OR or Cl; x ∼ 0.3–0.7; y = 0–0.2).509 The Ti–O–Ti bridge may partially result from the condensation reaction between Ti–Cl or Ti–OR. It was suggested that the mother solution's pH leads to the respective formation of hydrophobic Ti–oxo–alkoxo and hydrophilic Ti–oxo–hydroxo species.509,510 The former will hinder the proper folding of the polymers by “freezing” the disordered states, while the latter promotes the ordered template folding by creating conditions for an adequate phase segregation at the mesoscale. Moreover, the rutile fraction increased gradually with an increase in the volume of TiCl4. The gel obtained by the solvothermal reaction (140 or 160 °C, 3 h) of TiCl4 and TTIP in CCl4 was anatase, which on calcination (750 °C, 3 h) transformed partially to rutile. The gel obtained at a low temperature (140 °C, 3 h) showed maximum rutile content (95%) compared to the sample (60%) obtained at a high temperature (160 °C, 3 h). Thus, the gel with a smaller crystallite size (8.2 nm) inclined towards ART and that of the highly crystallized gel (8.5 nm) requires high temperature for ART.511 In another study, the very low crystallite size for anatase was observed with increasing the gelation time. IPA that was formed during gelation might have confined the crystal growth.512
The spontaneous in situ formation of water due to the condensation of BA at Ti centres initiates nucleation and a faster growth of titania NPs.513 The particle formation occurs within a very limited time span in the course of the synthesis, concurrently to a step-type pressure increase within the closed reaction system. The particle growth was parallel to the pressure rise, but when the pressure converges to a limiting level, the crystallite growth showed a small further increase. The investigations clearly revealed that the increase of pressure increased the formation of water and initiated the formation of NPs. In addition, small angle X-ray scattering measurements proved the absence of any NPs before the pressure surge, evidencing the crucial role of water on the particle formation kinetics.513 TiO2 could not be generated with n-butanol, while the diameter of TiO2 NPs was low with BA compared to n-octanol. Thus, BA played a pivotal role in limiting the size and controlling the morphology of NPs, which may be attributed to the carbocation effect.514 In the first step, carbocation and –OH were formed, with the latter serving as an oxygen donor. The carbocation reacts with the nucleophile, while –OH reacts with the metal cation forming Ti–OH bonds. The reaction can be illustrated from the perspective of the SN1 mechanism attributed to the easy formation of benzyl carbocation and the unique reactivity of benzyloxy group with nucleophilic agents. The carbocation served as a capping agent to avoid the introduction of other surfactants for the simplification of the reaction systems. The increase of the metal chloride concentration, high reaction temperature and long reaction time are prone to the polymerization of BA.514 The non-aqueous reaction of TiCl4 and BA showed only anatase, while the reaction medium seeded with ST21 (anatase) and P25 (anatase–rutile) showed anatase–rutile.515 The rutile content initially increased with an increase in the ST21 content and later decreased, while a low rutile fraction was observed in the titania obtained with the P25 seeds. The presence of rutile regardless of the type of seeds was accounted as follows: hydrophilic P25 or ST21 contains a high density of surface titanol groups. Thus, TiCl4 would react with these titanol groups and would adsorb water molecules. Therefore, the reaction produces new anatase on the seeds and HCl as a byproduct. As the non-hydrolytic condensation proceeds, the concentration gradient of HCl around the seed was then developed favoring the growth of rutile. The non-hydrolytic reaction of TiCl4 in anhydrous BA (or n-butanol) with or without ultrasonication resulted in anatase.516 The increase of calcination temperature enhanced the crystallization and rutile formation (700 °C, 3 h).
The solvothermal reaction (200 °C, 72 h) of TTIP with benzyl amine or m-xylylenediamine exhibited anatase nanoplatelets that are arranged in lamellar, highly ordered fashion with thin organic layers in between them acting as a ‘glue’.517 Benzyl amine provides control over the growth and assembly of nanocrystals through the selective binding of its amine groups to the (001) crystal surface. The phenyl groups of the bound benzyl amine undergo π–π interactions, which leads to the assembly and stacking of the platelets into a highly ordered material. The elimination of isopropoxy ligands of TTIP must be the underlying mechanism for the formation of Ti–OH groups. This further initiates the buildup of oxygen bridges as the starting point of oxide formation. Crystalline anatase was obtained by reacting TTIP with ketones (acetone, 2-butanone, 3-pentanone, cyclohexanone, acetophenone and benzophenone) under solvothermal conditions (130 °C).518 Based on 1H and 13C liquid state NMR, the following mechanism was proposed considering acetone as the model: (i) acetone is co-ordinated to the titanium centre and deprotonation leads to the enolate complex under a concurrent release of IPA; (ii) the enol ligand nucleophilically attacks a second ketone to form a C–C bond; and (iii) the ligand reacts with another titanium center to form a Ti–O–Ti bond, which is the starting point of particle formation and crystallization followed by the release of IPA and mesityl oxide (Fig. 28). The non-aqueous reaction of TiCl4 and TTIP leads to anatase and was stabilized up to 950 °C.519 The gelation time for the non-aqueous reaction of TiCl4 with various oxygen donors followed the below sequence: di-isopropyl ether (2 h) > diethyl ether (17 h) > tetrahydro furan (60 h) > di-n-propyl ether (70 h) > dimethoxyethane (85 h). The rutile fraction after calcination (950 °C) followed the below order: dimethoxyethane (100%) > diethyl ether (58%) > tetrahydrofuran (43%) > di-isopropyl ether (14%) ∼ di-propyl ether (11%). This suggests that there exists no correlation between the gelation time and rutile formation. Alternatively, the gelation time increased with an increase in the carbon chain length for primary alcohols and decreased from primary to tertiary alcohols. In fact, the gelation time occurred after 50 h with ethylene glycol. The powder obtained after drying was rutile with ethanol and anatase with ethylene glycol, n-propanol, n-butanol and IPA. It was observed that the rutile content decreased with an increase in the carbon chain length in primary alcohol. However, anatase–rutile and brookite–rutile were observed with secondary and tertiary butanol, respectively. The BRT was observed at 900 °C in the latter, while anatase was still stabilized in the former case. Thus, a unique formation of hydroxyl groups in the reaction of tertiary butanol with TiCl4 might be related to the crystallization of brookite. This formation may be accounted to the occurrence of tertiary butyl chloride instead of HCl owing to an increased cationic character on the tertiary carbon, which favors the nucleophillic attack of chloride.519
 Fig. 28  Proposed mechanism pathway for TiO2 in acetone (reprinted with permission from ref. 518; Copyright @ 2005 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The water supplied via the esterification reaction between AcOH and n-butanol in the non-hydrolytic reaction using Ti(OBu)4 yielded anatase (320 °C, 2 h) and transformed completely to rutile at 700 °C.520 However, pure rutile was observed at 800 °C with TTIP and ethanol (0.1% water). The amorphous to anatase crystallization was the same for both the routes when calcined in air. Interestingly, ART was shifted to higher values upon calcination in a helium atmosphere, and titania derived from Ti(OBu)4 was obtained at higher temperature compared to TTIP. The anatase nanoparticles were obtained by autoclaving treatment (150 °C, 12 h) of a high molar ratio of TiCl4–n-butanol, while rutile NRs were selectively synthesized at a low molar ratio.521 The evolved HCl was retained in the reaction solution in the latter to promote rutile, while HCl may escape from the reaction solution in the former. TiCl4 reacts with butanol producing TiCl4−x(CH3CH2CH2CH2O)x, CH3(CH2)3Cl and HCl. Due to the steric hindrance of butanol, this reaction is not vigorous; therefore, the evolution of HCl is relatively slow. Thus, HCl dissolved in butanol by forming oxonium salts. The dissolved HCl promotes the etherification of butanol and water is produced as a byproduct. The hydrolysis of TiCl4 can produce [Ti(OH)xCl4−x] species, because the ligand field strength of the hydroxyl anion is higher than that of chloride ions. Under hydrothermal conditions, the polycondensation of [Ti(OH)xCl4−x] species leads to the formation of a Ti–O–Ti network and its crystallization. However, only anatase was observed both at high and low molar ratios of TiCl4 to ethanol. The increase of the TTIP concentration (2–200 mol%) in a solvothermal reaction (250 °C, 20 h) with toluene increased the anatase crystallite size (10–23 nm).522 The anatase with size of 11 nm underwent ART at a faster rate compared with the 21 nm sample, which can be attributed to the faster coarsening rate of particles in the former case. The non-hydrolytic reaction between TiCl4 and cellulosic natural materials followed by calcination (400–700 °C, 2 h) exhibited anatase.523 The cellulose constitutes D-glucose monomers linked by β-1,4-ether linkages and contains nearly 50 wt% of oxygen in alcohols and ether groups, which makes it an excellent oxygen source for non-hydrolytic reaction with titanium halides. Thus, hydroxyl and ether groups in each cellulose unit react with TiCl4 leading to titanium alkoxide groups, which condense with TiCl4 to give titanium oxo bridges.
It is known that titania obtained via the non-aqueous route often contains a certain amount of organic compounds or carbonaceous species that ligate to the titania surface and inhibits the grain growth.524 Furthermore, post-thermal treatment is conducive for the complete removal of organic compounds. Organic solvents are highly interesting media for the formation of inorganic nano structures by non-aqueous processes due to their versatile properties and their ability to selectively bind to specific facets of nanocrystals.517 The absence of surface hydroxyls permits the evolution of new types of surface derivatization and properties that are subject of the current investigation. The study of organic solvents other than alcohols or ketones as oxygen suppliers to form a Ti–O–Ti network is a topic for future research in this area.
11 Preparation of TiO2 from ball milling (mechanochemical activation) method
Mechanochemistry involves the mechanical activation of solid-state reactions caused by collisions between particles and balls inside the mill.525–527 During milling, the ball/reactant/ball or ball/reactant/wall collisions impart mechanical energy to the reactant and raise the temperature by which the activation energy of the solid transformation is achieved.528–531 The local temperature of the powder particles at the collision sites will be 180–500 °C higher than the average environmental temperature, depending on the milling conditions and powder characteristics.532–534 In this process, cold-welding, fracturing and annealing of powder grains takes place simultaneously. The ball milling apart from the particle fracture may induce lattice strain in the form of lattice distortion. The development of strain is constant with time, but the residual strain is additive. Therefore, cumulative strain, which is locked up in the material, increases with time. By this process, many stable structures existing at high pressures or high temperatures can be formed even under laboratory conditions.
Anatase with a small crystallite size (22 nm) transformed to srilankite and rutile upon ball milling (220 rpm, 10 h) at a faster rate compared to large crystallites (96 nm).533 Since both these powders were milled under the same conditions, the impact pressure (8.08 GPa) and local temperature rise (425 °C) experienced are roughly estimated to be the same. However, the defects such as vacancies, triple junctions and grain boundaries in small crystallites raise the free energy of anatase and accelerate the phase transformations,535 while the rate of grain refinement is faster in titania with a larger grain size. Colin et al.536 proposed a generalised phase transformation pathway as “anatase to brookite to rutile” irrespective of the milling conditions. The ball milling of anatase resulted in anatase–brookite at 400 rpm, while ABT at 500 rpm followed by ART and BRT at a high milling speed (600 rpm).109 The increased milling speed above a critical value provides sufficient energy required for volume contraction.537 The pressure experienced by anatase particles during the collision of two colliding balls is estimated to be above 1 GPa and increase in the defect density may further reduce the lower pressure limit (1.5–10 GPa) required for ABT. After annealing (850 °C, 2 h), brookite disappeared and rutile content increased from 18.85% to 79.71%.109 The high pressure polymorph of titania (orthorhombic, α-PbO2; Pbcn) were obtained by high energy impact vibrational ball milling of the anatase powder.538 It was concluded that prolonged milling creates a sufficient impact shock at a localized point, similar to the shock waves generated by dynamic loading, forcing the transformation of anatase to the orthorhombic phase. If the milling time is short, a small amount of strain will be generated and much of it is dissipated by particle fracture, which fails to initiate any transformation. The shock waves are responsible for high pressure formation and intergrowth of other crystalline phases with a short range order that takes place inside the anatase lattice in a compressive stress field. The ball milling of anatase (450 rpm, 5 min) resulted in the partial transformation to anatase–rutile–srilankite and only rutile–srilankite was observed thereafter (3–15 h).539 The fraction of rutile gradually increased from 3% to 62% with an increase in the milling time from 5 min to 15 h (Fig. 29), while srilankite increased (24–68%) in the initial stages (0–1 h) and decreased thereafter (3–15 h). The anatase preferred srilankite transformation rather than rutile at the initial stages (0–1 h). Thus, rutile growth was prevented due to anatase at the initial stages and rapid growth was observed due to the instability of srilankite. The transformation from srilankite to rutile was slower compared with anatase to srilankite, indicating mutual interference of each phase on the transitions pathways. The local temperature rise and impact pressure at the collision sites of the powder and the balls, as well as the additional energy due to grain refinement, defects and lattice distortion, contribute to the milling induced transformations.540 The ball milling (600 rpm) of anatase–rutile with graphite transformed to srilankite–rutile with increase in the milling time (6–12 h). The decrease of anatase was followed by increase of srilankite up to milling time of 12 h with both anatase and srilankite transformed to rutile or amorphous at later stages (Fig. 30).541 Graphite suppressed the transformation of anatase to other crystalline/amorphous phases together with suppressing crystalline confinement. The presence of graphite was to provide lubrication and reduce the average pressure in the collision. The average environmental milling temperature for water cooled conditions was constant (20 °C) throughout the milling process, while it increased at the beginning of milling and stabilized at 120 °C after milling for 0.5 h in the case of air cooling. The increase of local temperature enhances the diffusivity of atoms to favour the transformation of anatase to srilankite and rutile. The formation of rutile is from anatase at the initial stages and from amorphous at later stages. The graphite was made amorphous during the course of milling.
 Fig. 29  Variation of phase contents with milling time (reprinted with permission from ref. 539; Copyright @ 2002 Elsevier). 
 Fig. 30  TiO2 transformations under ball milling conditions. Solid arrow(s) indicate the most possible transformation, while dashed arrow(s) presenting the possible or negligible transformation (reprinted with permission from ref. 541; Copyright 2000 Springer). 
The transformation rate of anatase to srilankite and rutile increased with decrease in the oxygen partial pressure of milling atmosphere (220 rpm, 40 h), although the local temperature and impact pressure experienced by the powders were the same.542 During ball milling, the partial Ti–O bonds on the surface layer may be broken due to mechanical activation, and oxygen is released from the TiO2 lattice, leading to oxygen vacancies as follows: (27)
The milling atmosphere with low oxygen partial pressure favors the formation of oxygen vacancies and accelerates the milling induced transformation. Since an oxygen atmosphere does not favour the production of oxygen vacancies, the transformation rate in oxygen-milled powder is distinctly slowed down, while more oxygen vacancies are produced under a nitrogen atmosphere to favor such transformation. Irrespective of the powder to ball weight ratio (1:50 or 1:10), the phase transition from anatase to TiO2II to rutile prevailed after ball milling (500 rpm) during the entire course.543 Interestingly, this transition was faster for high powder to ball weight ratio and completed in 1 h, while it took a longer time (10 h) for the other instances. The ART started from the centre of the particle due to local heating as a result of the ball milling effect, while anatase to TiO2II commenced on the particle surface. The high pressure, being dominant at the particle surface during collisions, favored the formation of high pressure TiO2II. Rezaee et al.544 concluded that increasing the milling time has no significant effect on the phase transformation, while the milling speed and powder to ball ratio is the most effective factor in tuning the phase transition. For a given collision time, an increase in the powder to ball ratio leads to a higher energy release for each particle. The collision frequencies of both ball to ball and ball to wall impact enhances with increasing speed, leading to significant kinetic energy transfer to the particles. This results in excess microstructural defects such as dislocations and vacancies.537,544,545 Alternatively, it is very likely that the microstructural changes in the milling speed reduce the microstructural diffusion path lengths, which accelerate the phase transformation kinetics.
Complete rutile was observed after ball milling (880 rpm, 60 min) of TiOSO4·xH2O and anhydrous Na2CO3, while anatase was obtained after calcining (300 °C, 1 h) the ball-milled sample (880 rpm, 5 min).529 TiOSO4·xH2O + Na2CO3 → TiO2 + Na2SO4·xH2O + CO2(28)
After 2 min of ball milling, the peaks of TiOSO4 were not visible and Na2SO4 was observed, indicating the formation of the amorphous phase. This short duration was attributed to the strong solid state acidobasic interaction and the presence of water during the milling process. TiOSO4 by itself contains 18 mass% of water, which acts as a solvent and facilitates the hydrolytic reaction between TiOSO4 and Na2CO3 to enhance the reaction rates. The rutile fraction declined with an increase in the diluents phase (NaCl) content in the NaCl–TiOSO4 mixture from 2:1 to 9:1 after ball milling (400 rpm, 4 h) followed by calcination (700 °C, 30 min).546 The anatase crystallite size increased, while rutile showed a decrease up to 5:1 followed by a sudden increase at higher NaCl content. The increase of the diluent phase reduces the volume of the reactant and that TiOSO4 particles will be surrounded by more number of diluent phase particles. This lowers the collision between the balls and the reactant particles inside the mill; hence, the reactant particles are shielded from mechanical activation. In addition, they avoid the rise of the local temperature inside the mill by absorbing the heat and kinetic energy from the reactant particles. The ball milling of NaCl and TiOSO4·xH2SO4·yH2O (400 rpm, 4 h) showed anatase after calcination (600 °C, 0.5 h) and complete rutile at 900 °C.547 TiOSO4·xH2SO4·yH2O → TiO2 + (x + y)H2O + (x + 1)SO3(29)
The anatase transformed to brookite–rutile after mechanical activation (6 h) and transformation to pure rutile after calcination (1050 °C, 1 h).530 The BRT activation energy was found to be 28 kJ mol−1 based on the first order Avrami–Erofeev kinetic model, which indicates the random nucleation of rutile followed by the instantaneous growth of nuclei accompanied by the decrease of microstrain with increased annealing temperature. TiO2 obtained with sol–gel and ball milling methods showed anatase (350 °C, 2 h) and transformed into rutile with increase in the annealing temperature (900 °C).548
Ball milling is a complex process, which depends on many factors like type of mill, dynamic conditions of milling, local temperature and atmosphere, chemical composition of powder and properties of grinding media. During milling, equilibrium between the breakage and rewelding of powders may be reached and the particle size remains almost unaltered on further milling due to the agglomeration of smaller particles into grains.549–551 In rare instances, contamination from the milling media in the course of excess milling creates additional crisis. Above the critical milling speed, balls are pinned onto the inner walls of the jar and do not fall down to exert any impact force. A partial surface amorphization and the occurrence of oxygen vacancies are also responsible during milling, although these effects were not noticed in the experimental methods. The accurate effects of its parameters on the transformation have not been completely understood because of the limitations for in situ analysis during the course of ball milling.
12 Conclusion and future prospects
The critical understanding of nucleation, particle growth, crystallization mechanism and thermodynamic behaviour at various particle size regimes among the titania polymorph remains the central goal and acts as an inspiration for designing nanostructures with fascinating properties for many green energy applications. The fact that a large number of reports are published and are still being extensively investigated is a reflection of interest in its material properties. Each crystal phase of titania—anatase, rutile, brookite and TiO2(B)—along with a mixed crystal framework finds an excellent scope in a broad spectrum of applications. This has triggered the need to employ low-processing temperature methods for activating the phase transformation in order to prevent rapid grain growth that occurs at high temperatures. This focused review underpins and sheds light on the nature of the chemistry associated with titania synthesis, phase transition/stabilization and growth mechanism under a variety of experimental conditions to deepen our knowledge for industrialization (Table 1 and Fig. 31). The easy reproducibility and versatility of wet chemical approaches offers a strategy to produce delicate nanostructures of phase pure or mixed crystal frameworks with great control and the examination of their size- and shape-morphology dependent properties.
Table 1 Some important results of phase transformation/stabilization of titania polymorphs under various experimental conditionsa




Titanium precursor
Important results of phase stabilization/transition
Ref.





a Note: for detailed experimental conditions, readers are requested to follow the corresponding references.






Hydrothermal/solvothermal method



Ti(OBu)4
Polar water at HCl–toluene interface hydrolyzed titanium precursor to give anatase–brookite NPs decorated on rutile NRs

49



TiCl3
Pure anatase was synthesized from (NH4)2S2O8 irrespective of pH and initial precursor concentration, while rutile was observed at pH 0.44 and brookite at pH 1.32 with oxidants like H2O2, HNO3 and HClO4

67



A unique transformation sequence was observed by changing the precursor concentration from 0.9 to 0.05 M and pH < 0–1.68


Rutile → anatase–brookite–rutile → anatase–brookite → brookite → anatase–brookite


TiCl4
Anatase–rutile was observed at concentrations < 0.5 M

79



Brookite coexisted at an intermediate concentration of 1 M


Pure rutile at 2 M


The complex [Ti(OH)2(OH2)4]2+ favored anatase–brookite, [TiO(OH)5]2+promoted rutile nucleus


TTIP
Anatase was crystallized under the acid free condition and rutile with HNO3

120



Anatase (10 nm) was thermally stable up to 800 °C compared to the samples with 6 and 28 nm particle sizes prepared at 80 and 240 °C, respectively


TiCl4
HF and HNO3 resulted in poor crystallization of anatase compared to HCl

141



The addition of citric acid facilitated the formation of pure rutile with rod-like morphology (pH 0.8) and anatase–rutile at pH 1.09


The chelation of citrate on amorphous titania was found to be dependent on pH, which influences the phase transformations


Ti(OBu)4
Peptizing with TEAOH promoted rutile formation at a faster rate compared to TMAOH and TBAOH

156



TiCl4
Spherical brookite–rutile NPs were observed at 1 M, while pure rutile NRs with {101} facet were obtained at 0.3 M

180



The addition of NaCl facilitated the NRs with an aspect ratio close to 10


TiCl4
The in situ generation of water via the esterification of alcohol and AcOH gave anatase with ethylene glycol and rutile with ethanol

182



In the absence of acid, no product formed with the former and anatase crystallized with the latter solvent


TiCl3
Anatase–brookite observed with propanol

183



Brookite–rutile observed with butanol


Anatase–rutile observed with octanol


TiCl4
Single phase anatase with propanol and butanol


Rutile with octanol


TiCl3
Anatase, rutile and anatase–rutile were observed with ethanol, water and water–ethanol systems, respectively, in the presence of urea and HNO3

185



Ti(OC2H5)4
Anatase was observed with K2SO4, Na2SO4, KCl, NaCl, while different products were observed for NaF salt solutions. The crystallinity was very poor due to the adsorption of these ions on the titania surface, which hinders structure reorganization

187



TiCl4
The in situ generation of water from the dehydration of acetone oligomers initiated hydrolysis to form anatase and rutile at precursor/acetone ratio of 1:15 and 1:10, respectively

188



TiCl3
The addition of tartaric acid promoted BAT and morphology changed from spindle-like structures to nanorods

192



TiCl3
Anatase–brookite–rutile was transformed to pure anatase with the exposed {001} facets via the addition of ascorbic acid

194



Ti(OC2H5)4
Powder with a very small crystallite size and trace brookite content along with anatase promoted ART at a faster rate as compared to the sample with only anatase

195



TiCl4
Pure rutile NRs were observed with water, while the addition of TEA as a selective adjusting agent promoted brookite formation

202



TiCl3
Anatase–brookite–rutile was observed at pH 1, which transformed to rutile accompanied by the formation of a new corundum-like titania phase that was stable up to 900 °C

206



Ti(OBu)4
Anatase formed with n-butanol was stable even after calcination (800 °C) due to the capping action of butoxy groups, which inhibited aggregation and reduced interparticle contact area

207a



TTIP
Mesoporous anatase titania was obtained with triblock co-polymer and AcAc and was thermally stable even after calcination (700 °C)

207b



Ti(OBu)4
Pure rutile microspheres were obtained on a glass substrate in an HCl–toluene suspension

209



Ti(OBu)4
Pure anatase and rutile with a very small crystallite size was observed from alkaline and from acid peptized gel, respectively

211



TTIP

It was shown for the first time that rutile content does not monotonically increase with increase in acidity


212



Rutile content initially increased with an increase in the HCl/Ti ratio and decreased thereafter accompanied by the formation of brookite


TTIP
Anatase was observed with 1.5 M AcOH, while pure rutile and brookite were observed at 4 M and 3 M HCl, respectively

213



Brookite was formed from unsymmetric [Ti(OH)2Cl(OH2)3]+ and rutile nucleated from symmetric [Ti(OH)2Cl4]2− complexes


TTIP
Anatase with smaller particle sizes (3.1 and 3.7 nm) underwent ART at a faster rate compared to the other sample (6.0 and 12.7 nm)

214



ART via the dissolution of anatase and the precipitation of rutile were observed at pH 1, while partial ART was found at pH 3


Ti(OBu)4

After the hydrothermal treatment, the synthesis step was followed by refluxing with ED


222



The synergistic interaction between CTAB with TiO2 surface, as well as amine groups of ED and TiO2, stabilized brookite up to 800 °C


 



Sol–gel hydrolysis



Ti(OBu)4
Hydrolysis with HNO3 favored ABT in preference to ART, while BAT dominated under the acid free condition

27



TiCl4
The Ea values of ART for aged and unaged samples were 426–506 and 205 kJ mol−1, respectively. The large agglomeration number for unaged samples induces interparticle contact to promote rutile

31



TiCl4
Brookite precipitated along with anatase at pH 5 to promote ART during calcination, due to high density of potential nucleation sites at the anatase–brookite interface

96 and 242a



TiCl4
The alcohol washing of precipitated powders suppressed anatase crystallization from amorphous, but promoted ART during thermal treatment, as organic impurities on the particle surface served as nucleation sites and also created surface oxygen vacancies

236 and 237



TTIP
The slow hydrolysis of the precursor with IPA prevented rutile precipitation

245



TTIP
Acidic hydrolysis promoted amorphous to anatase and ART, while both these transformation pathways were inhibited under basic conditions

248



Ti(OBu)4
Gel obtained at pH 5 (or 9) was anatase, while anatase–brookite–rutile and anatase–brookite were formed at pH 3 and 7, respectively, after calcination

253



Ti(OBu)4
Mesoporous anatase was observed using triblock co-polymer EO20PO70EO20 as a structure-directing agent

254



TTIP
The addition of Pluronic F127 promoted ABT, while the addition of DEA suppressed brookite formation

256



TTIP
Hydrolysis with ethanol and cellophane membrane resulted in thermally stable anatase up to 900 °C, despite its large grain size (108 nm)

257



TiCl4
Low and high titanium concentrations favored rutile and anatase due to an ordered arrangement and increased random organization of octahedral units, respectively

259



TTIP
Anatase–rutile core–shell structure was formed with PEO and AcAc, in which the latter slowed down the hydrolysis rate of the precursor and the former induced nanoporosity

263



Ti(OBu)4
The increase of water content in the hydrolysis step favored rutile with larger particle sizes during calcination

61 and 269



TTIP
The increase of hydrolysis temperature from 0–80 °C shifted the crystallization and ART temperatures to higher values

271



TTIP
Hydrolysis with AcOH at pH 3–4 stabilized anatase due to the chelation of the acetate group on the titania surface, while rutile was favored at pH 5–6

274



TTIP
The chelation of formate via the syn–syn mode stabilized anatase even at high temperatures, while the addition of water changed the binding mode to syn–anti to produce rutile at low temperatures

277



TTIP
The addition of butyric acid in the hydrolysis step accelerated the crystallization of anatase from amorphous and ART compared to AcOH and propanoic acid

278



TTIP
A Mixed complexing agent like DEA–polyethylene glycol in the hydrolysis promoted brookite, while AcAc–polyethylene glycol and AcAc–AcOH showed anatase after calcination (600 °C)

279



Ti(OBu)4

In situ generated water via esterification promoted the formation of Anatase–TiO2(B)

280



Ti(OBu)4
The hydrolysis of titanium glycolate with acetone transformed to rutile at 850 °C. The water content in acetone was the decisive factor in tuning the final size of the particles

281



 



Ultrasonication and photo-illumination assisted sol–gel hydrolysis



Ti(OBu)4
Anatase and rutile were obtained with H2SO4 and HCl, respectively

139



Anatase–brookite–rutile was obtained for 1 M HNO3 and only rutile at 2 M HNO3


TTIP–TiCl4
Anatase, rutile and anatase–rutile were obtained with alkoxide, halide and halide–alkoxide precursors, respectively

174



TTIP
Anatase–brookite was observed in ethanol–water systems

297



TTIP
Mesoporous titania with anatase crystal structure having a worm-like framework was observed using long chain organic amines as a structure-directing agent

298



TTIP
Mesoporous anatase was obtained under template free conditions, using AcOH as a modifying agent

299



TTIP
Anatase–brookite was observed using triblock copolymer at neutral pH conditions

300



TTIP
Anatase–brookite was observed with pure water, while ethanol inhibited brookite nucleation

302



TTIP
ABT and ART dominated during the initial stages (60 min), followed by BAT (90 min) and BRT (120 min) for Tip-type ultrasonication, while bath-type induced only ABT (60–120 min)

304



TTIP
Rutile fraction increased with an increase in the ultrasonic irradiation amplitude (40%) and decreased thereafter

305



TTIP
Photo-illumination during the hydrolysis with HCl promoted anatase crystallization and ART at low temperature

306 and 307



Ti(OBu)4
Photo-illumination during the sol–gel hydrolysis produced Ti3+ resulting in the formation of anatase TiO2–Ti2O3 binary system

312 and 313



TTIP
Rutile was observed for high water content for photoassisted sol–gel method, while it was obtained for intermediate water content via the conventional route

314



TiCl4
Anatase was obtained at a very low temperature (80 °C) with t-butylalcohol via alkyl halide elimination

323



 



IL-assisted sol–gel hydrolysis



TTIP
An increase in the volume of IL during the precursor hydrolysis enhanced the anatase crystal growth, due to the increased viscosity and decreased diffusion co-efficient

330



TTIP
The addition of [cmim][HSO4] changed the morphology from rutile NRs to nanoflowers

331



TiCl4
The addition of [emim][Br] favored rutile formation, as it anchored on rutile {110} plane due to favorable geometry

333



TiCl4
The addition of [bmim][Cl] in water promoted ART, while the presence of fluoride or sulfate anions stabilized anatase

337



Ti(OBu)4
Mesoporous anatase was observed with [bmim][BF4] at very low temperatures (60–100 °C) and was stable up to 900 °C

339



TTIP
The IL/Ti4+ ratio of 3:1 was necessary to form crystalline titania

344



Porous anatase with [bmim][PF6] that served as self-assembling templates like long chain surfactants


Other ILs like [bmim][BF4], [bmim][CF3SO3] and [hmim][PF6] were not effective to induce mesoporous structures


TTIP
Pure anatase was formed with [C3mimOH][Tf2N], while anatase–brookite was obtained for [P66614][Tf2N], [N1888][Tf2N], [C4Py][Tf2N] and [C4mim][Tf2N]

354



TiCl4
TiO2(B) was observed only with ILs based on imidazolium moieties

355



 



Thermolysis/thermohydrolysis



Ti powder
Brookite flowers obtained were stable up to 500 °C

46



TiCl4
Anatase–brookite–rutile was observed with HClO4 (1–5 M), while brookite–rutile with 3 M HCl

86



Brookite was formed by lowering the concentration of precursor to 0.05 M and [Ti(OH)2Cl2(OH2)2]0 was solely responsible for its formation


TTIP
Anatase–brookite was obtained in hot water

256



TiCl4
Pure rutile was observed with ≤2 M HCl and anatase above it

333



TiCl4
Anatase–brookite–rutile, anatase–brookite, and anatase–rutile were observed in the region of 0.25–0.09, 0.06 and 0.81–0.34 M TiCl4, respectively

357



Brookite content was scarcely affected with water, but increased with increase in aging time (48–76 h)


TiCl4
Mesoporous rutile titania was obtained using ocytl phenol (polyethylene oxide) as the surfactant

358



TiCl4
Pure rutile NRs were obtained with ethanol, while rod-like nanoparticles were obtained with water

359



TiCl4
Water to ethanol ratio

363



Anatase–rutile 70:0


Brookite–rutile 50:20


Anatase–brookite 20:50


Anatase 10:60


TiCl4
Anatase–brookite–rutile was synthesized with 1 M HNO3 and aging favored ABT and ART

367



TiCl3
Phase transition pathways with increase in pH (1–7) followed the order:

369



Rutile → brookite–rutile → anatase–brookite–rutile → anatase–brookite


TiCl4
Anatase with H2SO4 or H3PO4, while anatase–rutile with HCl/CH3COOH/HNO3

370



TiCl4
Aging the gel by simple boiling for 12–48 h promoted anatase crystallinity and shifted ART to higher temperatures

371



TiCl4
Anatase–brookite was observed after aging in the pH range of 2.7–4.0 via the addition of NH4HCO3

373



TiBALDH
The in situ generation of hydroxide ion from ≥6.0 M urea facilitated high quality brookite NRs

380



TiOSO4
Ti2O3(H2O)2(C2O4)·H2O was obtained through the addition of oxalic acid and mesoporous brookite with high surface area was obtained from the oxalate precursor

384



TiBr4
Anatase–rutile and pure anatase was obtained with Na2O2 depending on the refluxing conditions

389



TiOCl2
The addition of NbCl5, NiCl2 and FeCl3 stabilized rutile, ZrOCl2 favored anatase and AlCl3 promoted anatase–rutile

390



 



Microemulsion method



TiCl4
An unusual orthorhombic crystal structure was formed

394



Ti(OBu)4
Finely dispersed anatase (15 nm) nanoparticles were obtained

403



TiCl4
By changing the volume ratio of oil to water in reverse microemulsion, rutile changed its morphology from nanoclusters to nanospherules, and then grew into nanodumb bells and finally nanorods were obtained

404



TiCl3
Pure anatase was obtained with urea dissolved in water, while anatase–rutile for urea dissolved in HCl

407



Ti(OBu)4
Anatase 0.5 M HNO3

410



Rutile ≥1.0 M HCl


Anatase–rutile 1 M HNO3 and ≤0.5 M HCl


TiCl4
Anatase hollow spheres were obtained and their thicknesses were directly proportional to the precursor concentration

411a



 



Preparation with different titanium precursors



[N(CH2CH2O)3Ti–OiPr]
Rutile was directly formed from this precursor without anatase

391



Water soluble titanium complexes
Anatase was selectively synthesized from citric acid, tartaric acid and malic acid, while rutile with glycolic acid and anatase–rutile with lactic acid

415



TiB2
Nanocone rutile was obtained at 1 M HCl and 3 mM Na2SO4 and anatase with 0.5 M HCl, while brookite was observed with HNO3

416



TiOF2
Anatase formed was stabilized up to 900 °C due to the adsorption of fluoride ions

418



TiBALDH
The complete hydrolysis of the precursor (pH 10–11) resulted in anatase, partial hydrolysis (pH 9) showed anatase–rutile, and extreme stability at neutral pH lead to the formation of rutile

424



TiOxCy/C
Rutile–anatase core–shell structure was obtained

428



TiS2
Layered titanate was obtained at very low concentrations of NaOH (1–2 M) owing to the low bond strength of Ti–S

429



ABT was favored at a very low concentration of NaOH (0.5 M) and pure brookite was observed at 1.2 M NaOH


TiOSO4
Pure anatase was observed at pH < 7, layered titanate at neutral pH and pure brookite at alkaline conditions using 0.21 M NaOH. In contrast, anatase–rutile was observed with LiOH and KOH. The as obtained brookite flowers were thermally stable up to 900 °C

430



Ti(SO4)2
Pure rutile was observed after peptizing the precipitate with HNO3 at room temperature

432i



Ti(SO4)2
Anatase, anatase–brookite and brookite was obtained at pH 5, 6–9 and 10–11, respectively

432j



Ti(SO4)2
Anatase–rutile hollow spheres were observed with H2O2 at pH 1

432k



Ti(SO4)2
Pure anatase hollow spheres were obtained with NH4F–H2O2 system

432l



 



Preparation of titania from layered titanate precursors



H2Ti5O11·3H2O
Unique phase transition sequence: anatase to rutile to anatase was observed via increasing the hydrothermal aging time under acidic peptized conditions

128



H/K titanate
Brookite–rutile–TiO2(B) was observed with 0.2–2.0 M HCl and 0.5–0.15 M HNO3

442



Pure TiO2(B) was formed for 0.1 and 1 mM HNO3


H2TinO2n+1
ABT was preferred with HClO4 and HNO3

445



H2Ti3O7·xH2O
Anatase and rutile was observed with 0.05 M and 2 M HNO3, respectively, at 30 °C

447



Titanates prepared at low temperatures (≤100 °C) transformed to anatase at 400–500 °C, while those prepared at 200 °C were thermally stable up to 650 °C


(NH4)2Ti2O5·H2O
Anatase was formed in an alkaline medium due to the deintercalation of NH4+ ions

450–454



The presence of NaCl (or NaF) results in brookite




The presence of NaNO3, Na2B4O7 and CH3COONa also favored brookite depending on its concentration and hydrothermal aging time




The mixture of NH4F and NaF favored pure anatase, although it was not observed with only NH4F or NaF

459



K2Ti2O5
Anatase core was stabilized up to 900 °C, due to the presence of the TiO2(B) shell

467



H2Ti4O9·1.2H2O
Anatase–rutile was observed with different concentrations of mineral acids

468



H2Ti4O9·nH2O
Pure anatase was observed with water and TiO2(B)–Anatase with methanol and ethanol

473



 



Preparation of titania from PTC



PTC
Pure rutile at pH 0, anatase in wide pH range of 2–12 and lamellar hydrogen titanate was formed at pH 14

32



PTC
Brookite–anatase was observed at pH 1

33



PTC
The addition of AcOH yields anatase–rutile

483



PTC
Modification with H2O2 resulted in thermally stable anatase up to 900 °C because of the increased Ti–O–Ti bond strength

489



PTC
PTC derived from TiCl4 showed anatase, while anatase–rutile from TTIP

491



PTC
Pure brookite was obtained with glycolic acid and transformed to rutile at 1125 °C, while the critical size for BRT was found to be 24 nm

493



PTC
Rice like rutile was observed via the addition of CF3COOH

495



 



Preparation of titania via non-aqueous route



TiX4
Rutile was favored with increase in the nucleophilicity of halide in the precursor

506



TiCl4–Ti(OBu)4
Mesoporous anatase–rutile was obtained and anatase content decreased with an increase in [TiCl4]

507



TiCl4–TTIP
The gel obtained with CCl4 at a low hydrothermal temperature (140 °C, 3 h) showed maximum rutile content as compared to the sample obtained at a higher temperature (160 °C, 3 h) after thermal treatment

511



TiCl4
The in situ generation of water due to the condensation of BA at Ti centers initiates the nucleation and growth of titania NPs

513 and 514



The reaction was illustrated from the prospect of the SN1 mechanism


TiCl4
Reaction medium containing TiCl4 and BA seeded with ST21 (commercial anatase) resulted in anatase–rutile

515



TTIP
Anatase nanoplatelets were observed with benzyl amine or m-xylylene diamine

517



TTIP
Anatase was observed in the presence of various ketones as oxygen donors

518



TiCl4
Rutile content decreased with an increase in carbon chain lengths of primary alcohols, while anatase–rutile and brookite–rutile were observed for secondary and tertiary butanol, respectively

519



TiCl4
Anatase NPs and rutile NRs were obtained at high and low molar ratios of TiCl4–n-butanol, respectively, while only anatase was observed with ethanol irrespective of the concentration

521



TiCl4
Anatase was obtained with natural cellulosic material as oxygen donors

523



 



Preparation of titania via mechanical activation (ball milling method)



Anatase (70 nm)
ABT dominated at the milling speed of 500 rpm, while ART and BRT prevailed at 600 rpm

109



TiOSO4·xH2O
Rutile was observed with Na2CO3

529



Anatase
Smaller particle size (22 nm) transformed to srilankite and rutile at a faster rate as compared to large crystallites (96 nm)

533



Anatase (270 nm)
A High pressure polymorph of titania (orthorhombic; α-PbO2) was observed

538



Anatase–rutile (34.3:43.1 nm)
Anatase–rutile–srilankite was observed at the initial stages of ball milling

539



Anatase transformed to srilankite rather than to rutile


Anatase–rutile (17 nm)
Anatase–rutile transformed to srilankite or became amorphous at later stages of milling

541



An increase of temperature during milling under air cooled conditions destabilized anatase, while milling under water cooled conditions inhibited rutile


Anatase (30 nm)
The transformation rate of anatase to srilankite and rutile increased with a decrease in the oxygen partial pressure of milling atmosphere

542



Anatase (136 ± 51 nm)
Anatase to TiO2II phase transformation rate was faster for high powder to ball weight ratio

543



Anatase (70 nm)
Increasing the milling time did not affect phase transformation, but milling speed and ball to powder ratio lead to high energy release for each particle to facilitate phase transition

544



(TiOSO4·xH2O·yH2SO4)
Rutile formation was suppressed in the presence of NaCl as the diluents phase

546





 Fig. 31  Transformation of precursor into various titania polymorphs in solution based approach. Mineral acids = HCl, HNO3 and H2SO4. 
Despite extensive research, the ability to control TiO2 polymorphs by a suitable preparation process has still not been identified. A complicating factor for understanding the nanoparticle formation is the multitude of experimental conditions used for the synthesis, making it difficult to understand the reaction mechanisms. For instance, the effect of synthetic variables on brookite content and their influence on materials' properties is not entirely understood to date. On the other hand, the role of solvents and complexing agents in the crystallization process depending on the solution pH reveals widespread disagreement in the literature. Moreover, there is no thumb rule for the phase transition to occur, since the formed nucleation sites vary with the preparation methods, and the chemical reactions occurring at the molecular level cannot be fully controlled. The nature of such defects in the phase transition is largely unknown at this stage. The uncovering of these processes occur in a solution is challenging as the hydrolysis of precursors and the nucleation of particles are so fast that experimental techniques to characterize the reaction intermediates are still lacking, and these processes are highly sensitive to small variations in the reaction conditions. Furthermore, the factors that control the phase stability and crystal shape for this intensively studied system are not completely understood at the nanoscale. The establishment of a relation between the performance and properties of the obtained materials, their processing conditions and production costs necessitates a delicate continuous effort. The realization of solution based approaches is expected to enhance our capacity to tailor the composition and morphology, and thus their properties. The simplicity of the method suggests that it is amenable to commercial scale-up in the near future.
Acronyms

AcAcAcetylacetone
AcOHAcetic acid
ARTAnatase to rutile phase transition
ABTAnatase to brookite phase transition
BABenzyl alcohol
BATBrookite to anatase phase transition
BRTBrookite to rutile phase transition
CBConduction band
CTABCetyltriethylammonium bromide
CTACCetyltrimethylammonium chloride
CMCCritical micellar concentration
DEADiethanolamine

E
a
Energy of activation
DSCDifferential scanning calorimetry
EDEthylenediamine
FTIRFourier transform infrared
ILsIonic liquids
IPAIsopropyl alcohol
JMAKJohnson–Mehl–Avrami–Kolmogorov
LAHCLuarylamine hydrochloride
MCMethyl cellulose
NPsNanoparticles
NRsNanorods
NMRNuclear magnetic resonance
OAOriented attachment
OROstwald ripening
PEOPolyethylene oxide
PPOPolypropylene oxide
PTCPeroxo titanate complex
PVPPolyvinylpyrrolidone
PZCPoint of zero charge
RTRoom temperature
RTILsRoom temperature ionic liquids
TiBALDHTitanium(IV) bis(ammonium lactate)dihydroxide complex
TEATriethyl amine
TBAOHTetrabutylammonium hydroxide
TEAOHTetraethylammonium hydroxide
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
Ti(OBu)4Titanium n-butoxide
TTIPTitanium tetraisopropoxide
[TiO6]TiO6 octahedra
TMAOHTetramethylammonium hydroxide
XRDX-ray diffraction
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
VBValence band

Acknowledgements
The author S. Girish Kumar acknowledges financial support from Dr Daulat Singh Kothari Post Doctoral Fellowship (University Grants Commission, New Delhi, India) and the Department of Physics, IISc, Bangalore for providing the research facilities.
References

  (a) X. Lang, X. Chen and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 473–486 RSC ; 
  (b) J. B. Joo, M. Dahl, N. Li, F. Zaera and Y. D. Yin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2082–2092 RSC ; 
  (c) L. Jing, W. Zhou, G. Tian and H. Fu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9509–9549 RSC ; 
  (d) Y. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Zhan, F. Wang, M. Safdar and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8326–8339 RSC ; 
  (e) A. G. Dylla, G. Henkelman and K. J. Stevenson, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1104–1112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Aprile, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 769–783 RSC ; 
  (b) M. A. Lazar and W. A. Daoud, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 4130–4140 RSC ; 
  (c) S. Liu, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4085–4093 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Q. Xiang and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753–759 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. Liu, J. Yu, B. Cheng and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 173, 35–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. Yin, L. Wu, H. G. Yang and Y. H. Su, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4844–4858 RSC ; 
  (b) K. Lv, B. Cheng, J. Yu and G. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 5349–5362 RSC ; 
  (c) X. Pan, M. Q. Yang, X. Fu, N. Zhang and Y. J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3601–3614 RSC ; 
  (d) G. Liu, L. Wang, H. G. Yang, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 831–843 RSC ; 
  (e) X. Zhou, G. Liu, J. Yu and W. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21337–21354 RSC .

  (a) G. Kim, C. Jo, W. Kim, J. Chun, S. Yoon, J. Lee and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2932–2938 RSC ; 
  (b) M. Auffan, M. Pedeutour, J. Rose, A. Masion, F. Ziarelli, D. Borschneck, C. Chaneac, C. Botta, P. Chaurand, J. Labille and J. Y. Bottero, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 2689–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) A. Al-Kattan, A. Wichser, R. Vonbank, S. Brunner, A. Ulrich, S. Zuin and B. Nowack, Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts, 2013, 15, 2186–2193 RSC ; 
  (d) H. J. Kwon, Y. W. Lee, H. S. Kim, C. K. Zhoh and K. W. Park, Mater. Lett., 2013, 93, 175–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) M. Radetic, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 16, 62–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Fukushima and I. Yamada, J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 65, 619–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. J. Bard, Science, 1980, 207, 139–144 CAS ; 
  (c) U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J. Fan, S. Liu and J. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17027–17036 RSC .
A. Hemberg, S. Konstantinidis, P. Viville, F. Renaux, J. P. Dauchot, E. Llobet and R. Snyders, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 171–172, 18–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. G. Kumar and L. G. Devi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 13211–13241 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. G. Devi and S. G. Kumar, Cent. Eur. J. Chem., 2011, 9, 959–961 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) G. Liu, J. C. Yu, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6763–6783 RSC ; 
  (d) L. G. Devi and R. Kavitha, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140–141, 559–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520–5551 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. A. Henderson, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 185–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Nishimoto and B. Bhushan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 671–690 RSC .

  (a) A. S. Weber, A. M. Grady and R. T. Koodali, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 683–693 RSC ; 
  (b) A. Kubacka, M. F. Garcia and G. Colon, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1555–1614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. Hu, G. Li and J. C. Yu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3031–3039 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. A. Ismail and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11686–11707 RSC ; 
  (c) C. Z. Wen, H. B. Jiang, S. Z. Qiao, H. G. Yang and G. Q. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7052–7061 RSC ; 
  (d) S. Bingham and W. A. Daoud, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2041–2050 RSC .

  (a) D. Beydoun, R. Amal, G. Low and S. McEvoy, J. Nanopart. Res., 1999, 1, 439–458 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. L. Stroyuk, A. I. Kryukov, S. Y. Kuchmii and V. D. Pokhodenko, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2005, 41, 67–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gao, X. Wu, Y. Fan and X. Zhou, Dyes Pigm., 2012, 95, 534–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Tahir, P. Theato, P. Oberle, G. Melnyk, S. Faiss, U. Kolb, A. Janshoff, M. Stepputat and W. Tremel, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5209–5212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, H. Jia, L. Han, J. Wang, P. Gao, D. Xu, J. Yang and S. Che, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3201–3204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Dong, K. Pan, G. Tian, W. Zhou, Q. Pan, T. Xie, D. Wang and H. Fu, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 3808–3814 RSC ; 
  (b) G. Xiang, T. Li, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6801–6803 RSC .
T. Beuvier, M. R. Plouet and L. Brohan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13703–13706 CAS .

  (a) G. Zhu, T. Lin, X. Lu, W. Zhao, C. Yang, Z. Wang, H. Yin, Z. Liu, F. Huang and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9650–9653 RSC ; 
  (b) K. Li, J. Xu, W. Shi, Y. Wang and T. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1886–1896 RSC .

  (a) K. Nagaveni, M. S. Hegde and G. Madras, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 20204–20212 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Nagaveni, G. Sivalingam, M. S. Hegde and G. Madras, Appl. Catal., B, 2004, 48, 83–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) G. Sivalingam, K. Nagaveni, M. S. Hegde and G. Madras, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 45, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Fan and K. Lv, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2144–2149 RSC .

  (a) G. Li, C. P. Richter, R. L. Milot, L. Cai, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree, G. W. Brudvig and V. S. Batista, Dalton Trans., 2009, 38, 10078–10085 RSC ; 
  (b) W. Zhou, L. Gai, P. Hu, J. Cui, X. Liu, D. Wang, G. Li, H. Jiang, D. Liu, H. Liu and J. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 6643–6649 RSC .

  (a) S. Song, Z. Liu, Z. He, A. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Yang and X. Xu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 3913–3918 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Bai, W. Li, C. Liu, Z. Yang, X. Feng, X. Lu and K. Y. Chan, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7055–7061 RSC .

  (a) D. Tsukamoto, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6309–6315 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Li, J. Chen, F. Zheng, Y. Li and F. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12150–12155 RSC .

  (a) F. Shi, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 95, 1927–1932 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Q. Xiang, J. Yu and P. K. Wong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 357, 163–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) G. Liu, X. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Chen, F. Li, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 334, 171–175 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) G. Liu, X. Wang, Z. Chen, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 329, 331–338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Yu, M. Zhou, B. Cheng, H. Yu and X. Zhao, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 227, 75–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. O. Scanlon, C. W. Dunnill, J. Buckeridge, S. A. Shevlin, A. J. Logsdail, S. M. Woodley, C. R. A. Catlow, M. J. Powell, R. G. Palgrave, I. P. Parkin, G. W. Watson, T. W. Keal, P. Sherwood, A. Walsh and A. A. Sokol, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Yu, J. Xiong, B. Cheng and S. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 60, 211–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. M. Song, J. M. Wu, M. Z. Tang, B. Qi and M. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19484–19492 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Li and K. A. Gray, Chem. Phys., 2007, 339, 173–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. G. Kumar and K. S. R. K. Rao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 45–102 RSC .

  (a) W. Ong, L. Tan, S. Chai, S. Young and A. R. Mohamed, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1946–2008 RSC ; 
  (b) D. R. Hummer, J. D. Kubicki, P. R. C. Kent, J. E. Post and P. J. Heaney, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4240–4245 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Raju, A. C. T. Van Duin and K. A. Fichthorn, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1836–1842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Zhu, M. S. Zhang, J. M. Hong and Z. Yin, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2005, 403, 87–93 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) D. J. Reidy, J. D. Holmes and M. A. Morris, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 26, 1527–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Testino, I. R. Bellobono, V. Buscaglia, C. Canevali, M. D'Arienzo, S. Polizzi, R. Scotti and F. Morazzoni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3564–3575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Li, Y. Ye, L. Shen, J. Chen and H. Zhou, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2005, 390, 265–270 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) H. I. Hsiang and S. C. Lin, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 95, 275–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) D. Chandra and A. Bhaumik, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 112, 533–541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, S. Mei and J. M. F. Ferreira, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2000, 83, 1361–1368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. I. Hsiang and S. C. Lin, Ceram. Int., 2008, 34, 557–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ribeiro, C. M. Barrado, E. R. D. Camargo, E. Longo and E. R. Leite, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 2217–2222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Wu, Q. Zeng and J. Zhi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16457–16462 CAS .

  (a) S. M. Gupta and M. Tripathi, Cent. Eur. J. Chem., 2012, 10, 279–294 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. H. Wang, A. M. N. Lopez, S. Li, D. A. Dixon and J. L. Gole, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 7561–7570 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Kakihana, M. Kobayashi, K. Tomita and V. Petrykin, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2010, 83, 1285–1308 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. Chen and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1356–1374 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. Gateshki, S. Yin, Y. Ren and V. Petkov, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2512–2518 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. B. Chen, Chin. J. Catal., 2009, 30, 839–851 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. Liu, X. Chen, J. Zhang and J. W. Schwank, Catal. Today, 2014, 225, 34–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) P. Roy, S. Berger and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2904–2939 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) D. P. Macwan, P. N. Dave and S. Chaturvedi, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 3669–3686 CrossRef CAS .
U. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3701–3715 RSC .
T. Froschl, U. Hormann, P. Kubiak, G. Kucerova, M. Pfanzelt, C. K. Weiss, R. J. Behm, N. Husing, U. Kaiser, K. Landfester and M. W. Mehrens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5313–5360 RSC .
D. T. Cromer and K. Herrington, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1955, 77, 4708–4709 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Tompsett, G. A. Bowmaker, R. P. Conney, J. B. Metson, K. A. Rodgers and J. M. Seakins, J. Raman Spectrosc., 1995, 26, 57–62 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marchand, L. Brohan and M. Tournoux, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 1129–1133 CrossRef CAS .
M. Latroche, L. Brohan, R. Marchand and M. Tournoux, J. Solid State Chem., 1989, 81, 78–82 CrossRef CAS .
J. Akimoto, Y. Gotoh, Y. Oosawa, N. Nonose, T. Kumagai, K. Aoki and H. Takei, J. Solid State Chem., 1994, 113, 27–36 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Feist and P. K. Davies, J. Solid State Chem., 1992, 101, 275–295 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Simons and F. Dachille, Acta Crystallogr., 1967, 23, 334–336 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takahashi, N. Kijima and J. Akimoto, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 748–752 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bakardjieva, V. Stengl, L. Szatmary, J. Subrt, J. Lukac, N. Murafa, D. Nizansky, K. Cizek, J. Jirkovsky and N. Petrova, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1709–1716 RSC .
R. L. Penn and J. F. Banfield, Am. Mineral., 1999, 84, 871–876 CAS .
R. L. Penn and J. F. Banfield, Am. Mineral., 1998, 83, 1077–1082 CAS .
Y. Liao, W. Que, Q. Jia, Y. He, J. Zhang and P. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7937–7944 RSC .
M. Gopal, W. J. M. Chan and L. C. D. Jonghe, J. Mater. Sci., 1997, 32, 6001–6008 CrossRef CAS .
U. Diebold, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53–229 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kaper, F. Endres, I. Djerdj, M. Antonietti, B. M. Smarsly, J. Maier and Y. S. Hu, Small, 2007, 3, 1753–1763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, J. Ma, Z. Zhao and L. Qi, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 663–671 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lazzeri, A. Vittadini and A. Selloni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 155409 CrossRef .
A. Vittadini, A. Selloni, F. P. Rotzinger and M. Grätzel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 2954–2957 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Chiarello, A. D. Paola, L. Palmisano and E. Selli, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2011, 10, 355–360 CAS .
S. D. Mo and W. Y. Ching, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 51, 13023–13032 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Burdett, T. Hughbanks, G. J. Miller, J. W. Richardson and J. V. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 3639–3646 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bokhimi, A. Morales, M. Aguilar, J. A. T. Antonio and F. Pedraza, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 1279–1287 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. J. White and S. H. Lim, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 1372–1381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huberty and H. Xu, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 508–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kim, K. Lee, J. H. Kim, N. H. Lee and S. J. Kim, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 364–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zallen and M. P. Moret, Solid State Commun., 2006, 137, 154–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Koelsch, S. Cassaignon, J. F. Guillemoles and J. P. Jolivet, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403–404, 312–319 CrossRef CAS .
B. I. Lee, X. Wang, R. Bhave and M. Hu, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 1179–1183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Li, T. Ishigaki and X. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4969–4976 CAS .
D. Yang, H. Liu, Z. Zheng, Y. Yuan, J. Zhao, E. R. Waclawik, X. Ke and H. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17885–17893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vittadini, M. Casarin and A. Selloni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18973–18977 CAS .
W. Li, Y. Bai, W. Zhuang, K. Y. Chan, C. Liu, Z. Yang, X. Feng and X. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3049–3055 CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2286–2288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Chakraborty, Z. Qi, S. Y. Chai, C. Lee, S. Y. Park, D. J. Jang and W. I. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 93, 368–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Banfield and D. R. Veblen, Am. Mineral., 1992, 77, 545–557 CAS .
H. Sato, S. Endo, M. Sugiyama, T. Kikegawa, O. Shimomura and K. Kusaba, Science, 1991, 251, 786–788 CAS .
M. Mattesini, J. S. D. Almeida, L. Dubrovinsky, N. Dubrovinskaia, B. Johansson and R. Ahuja, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 212101 CrossRef .
P. Xiaoyan, C. Yi, M. Xueming and Z. Lihui, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87, 1164–1166 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Dewhurst and J. E. Lowther, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, R3673–R3675 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Mammone, M. Nicol and S. K. Sharma, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1981, 42, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yanqing, S. Erwei, C. Zhizhan, L. Wenjun and H. Xingfang, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1547–1551 RSC .
X. Ye, J. Sha, Z. Jiao and L. Zhang, Nanostruct. Mater., 1997, 8, 919–927 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kang and S. Chen, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 45, 2696–2702 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Li, C. Tang, D. Li, H. Haneda and T. Ishigaki, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87, 1358–1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Yang, P. C. Chen, M. C. Tsai, T. T. Chen, I. C. Chang, H. T. Chiu and C. Y. Lee, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 441–447 RSC .
J. G. Li and T. Ishigaki, Acta Mater., 2004, 52, 5143–5150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Nie, S. P. Zhuo, G. Maeng and K. Sohlberg, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2009, 294042 Search PubMed .
A. Pottier, C. Chaneac, E. Tronc, L. Mazerolles and J. P. Jolivet, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1116–1121 RSC .
Y. Zheng, E. Shi, S. Cui, W. Li and X. Hu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2000, 83, 2634–2636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. Kominami, M. Kohno and Y. Kera, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 1151–1156 RSC ; 
  (b) B. Ohtani, J. Handa, S. Nishimoto and T. Kagiya, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1985, 120, 292–294 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yin, H. Yamaki, M. Komatsu, Q. Zhang, J. Wang, Q. Tang, F. Saito and T. Sato, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2996–3001 RSC .
B. L. Bischoff and M. A. Anderson, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1772–1778 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Hall, A. Kondo, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16276–16279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Music, M. Gotic, M. Ivanda, S. Popovic, A. Turkovic, R. Trojko, A. Sekulic and K. Furic, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1997, 47, 33–40 CrossRef .
X. Bokhimi, B. A. Morales, O. Novaro, T. Lopez, E. Sanchez and R. Gomez, J. Mater. Res., 1995, 10, 2788–2796 CrossRef .
J. P. Jalava, L. Heikkila, O. Hovi, R. Laiho, E. Hiltunen, A. Hakanen and H. Harma, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1998, 37, 1317–1323 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Mi, C. Clausen, M. Bremholm, N. Lock, K. M. O. Jensen, M. Christensen and B. B. Iversen, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 6092–6097 CAS .
Y. Hu, H. T. Tsai and C. L. Huang, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2003, 344, 209–214 CrossRef .
K. T. Ranjit, I. Willner, S. H. Bossmann and A. M. Braun, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 1544–1549 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Ranjit, I. Willner, S. H. Bossmann and A. M. Braun, J. Catal., 2001, 204, 305–313 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Shannon and J. A. Pask, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1965, 48, 391–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. P. Kumar, K. Keizer, A. J. Burggraaf, T. Okubo and H. Nagamoto, J. Mater. Chem., 1993, 3, 1151–1159 RSC .
K. J. D. MacKenzie, Trans. J. Br. Ceram. Soc., 1975, 74, 77–84 CAS .
H. Zhang and J. F. Banfield, Am. Mineral., 1999, 84, 528–535 CAS .
H. Mehranpour, M. Askari, M. S. Ghamsari and H. Farzalibeik, J. Nanomater., 2010, 626978 Search PubMed .
K. N. P. Kumar, K. Keizer and A. J. Burggraaf, J. Mater. Chem., 1993, 3, 1141–1149 RSC .
A. A. Gribb and J. F. Banfield, Am. Mineral., 1997, 82, 717–728 CAS .
T. Mitsuhashi and O. J. Kleppa, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1979, 62, 356–357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Hanaor and C. C. Sorrell, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 855–874 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang and J. F. Banfield, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 3481–3487 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rezaee, S. Mohammad, M. Khoie and K. H. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 5055–5061 RSC .
Y. Zhou and K. A. Fichthorn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8314–8321 CAS .
H. Zhang and J. F. Banfield, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 2073–2076 RSC .
A. S. Barnard and L. A. Curtiss, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1261–1266 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Barnard, P. Zapol and L. A. Curtiss, Surf. Sci., 2005, 582, 173–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang and J. F. Banfield, J. Mater. Res., 2000, 15, 437–448 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gilbert, H. Zhang, F. Huang, M. P. Finnegan, G. A. Waychunas and J. F. Banfiled, Geochem. Trans., 2003, 4, 20–27 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Finnegan, H. Zhang and J. F. Banfield, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1962–1968 CAS .
M. P. Finnegan, H. Zhang and J. F. Banfield, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3443–3449 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Penn and J. F. Banfield, Science, 1998, 281, 969–971 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Penn and J. F. Banfield, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1999, 63, 1549–1557 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Wang and J. Y. Ying, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3113–3120 CrossRef CAS .
A. Navrotsky, Geochem. Trans., 2003, 4, 34–37 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Barnard, P. Zapol and L. A. Curtiss, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2005, 1, 107–116 CrossRef .

  (a) V. N. Koparde and P. T. Cummings, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1620–1624 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) V. N. Koparde and P. T. Cummings, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6920–6926 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, H. Zhang, B. Gilbert and J. F. Banfield, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 106103 CrossRef .
M. R. Mohammadi, D. J. Fray and A. Mohammadi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 112, 392–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, M. P. Finnegan and J. F. Banfield, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6742–6746 RSC .
X. Z. Ding and X. H. Liu, J. Mater. Res., 1998, 13, 2556–2559 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, X. Han, C. Liu, W. Zhang, R. Cai and Z. Liu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 2185–2191 CAS .
P. I. Gouma and M. J. Mills, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2001, 84, 619–622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. D. Shanon and J. A. Pask, Am. Mineral., 1964, 49, 1707–1717 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) R. D. Shannon, Chem. Abstr., 1964, 63, 2468 Search PubMed .

  (a) Y. Iida and S. Ozaki, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1961, 44, 120–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. G. Serrano, E. G. Hernandez, M. O. Fernandez and U. Pal, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2009, 9, 1097–1105 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) P. W. Chou, Y. S. Wang, C. C. Lin, Y. J. Chen, C. L. Cheng and M. S. Wong, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2009, 204, 834–839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Livage, M. Henry and C. Sanchez, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1988, 18, 259–341 CrossRef CAS .

          J. P. Jolivet, Metal oxide chemistry and synthesis: From solution to solid state, Wiley, New York,  2000 Search PubMed .
S. T. Aruna, S. Tirosh and A. Zaban, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 2388–2391 RSC .
D. Zhang, L. Qi, J. Ma and H. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 3677–3680 RSC .
J. Sun and L. Gao, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2002, 85, 2382–2384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yin, H. Hasegawa, D. Maeda, M. Ishitsuka and T. Sato, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 163, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
M. Henry, J. P. Jolivet and J. Livage, Struct. Bonding, 1992, 77, 155–206 CrossRef .
B. Tian, F. Chen, J. Zhang and M. Anpo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 303, 142–148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Henry, J. P. Jolivet and J. Livage, in Aqueous Chemistry of Metal Cations, Hydrolysis, Condensation, and Complexation, ed. R. Reisfeld and C. K. Jorgensen, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1992 Search PubMed .
H. Yin, Y. Wada, T. Kitamura, S. Kambe, S. Murasawa, H. Mori, T. Sakata and S. Yanagida, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1694–1703 RSC .
C. J. Barbe, F. Arendse, P. Comte, M. Jirousek, F. Lenzmann, V. Shklover and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1997, 80, 3157–3171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang and J. F. Banfield, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3421–3425 CrossRef CAS .
G. Oskam, Z. Hu, R. L. Penn, N. Pesika and P. C. Searson, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2002, 66, 011403 CrossRef .
E. A. Barringer and H. K. Bowen, Langmuir, 1985, 1, 414–420 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Barringer and H. K. Bowen, Langmuir, 1985, 1, 420–428 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jean and T. A. Ring, Langmuir, 1986, 2, 251–255 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Look and C. F. Zukoski, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1992, 75, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Look and C. F. Zukoski, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1995, 78, 21–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vorkapic and T. Matsoukas, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1998, 81, 2815–2820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vorkapic and T. Matsoukas, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1999, 214, 283–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, V. Privman and E. Matijevic, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11630–11635 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. P. Kumar, K. Keizer, A. J. Burggraaf, T. Okubo, H. Nagamoto and S. Morooka, Nature, 1992, 358, 48–51 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. P. Kumar, J. Kumar and K. Keizer, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1994, 77, 1396–1400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nair, P. Nair, J. G. V. Ommen, J. R. H. Ross, A. J. Burggraaf and F. Mizukami, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1998, 81, 2709–2712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, S. Mei and J. M. F. Ferreira, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2001, 84, 1696–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Bacsa and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1996, 79, 2185–2188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. T. Colomer, J. Guzman and R. Moreno, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 93, 59–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. S. Chen, C. Su, J. L. Chen, T. Y. Yang, N. M. Hsu and W. R. Li, J. Nanomater., 2011, 869618 Search PubMed .
A. Chemseddine and T. Moritz, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 1999, 235–245 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, J. Li, J. D. Guo and P. Zavalij, Mater. Sci. Forum, 1994, 152–153, 99–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Lifshitz and V. V. Slyozov, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1961, 19, 35–50 CrossRef .
M. Kahlweit, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 1975, 5, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. V. Mantzaris, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2005, 60, 4749–4770 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Wang, V. N. Richards, S. P. Shields and W. E. Buhro, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5–21 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. Xue, R. L. Penn, E. R. Leite, F. Huang and Z. Lin, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 1419–1429 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Polleux, N. Pinna, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 436–439 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. H. Lee, C. Ribeiro, E. Longo and E. R. Leite, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20842–20846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, F. Huang and Z. Lin, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 18–34 RSC .
V. M. Yuwono, N. D. Burrows, J. A. Soltis and R. L. Penn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2163–2165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Niederberger and H. Colfen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3271–3287 RSC .
S. Hirano, K. Masuya and M. Kuwabara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4576–4578 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ma, G. K. L. Goh, J. Ma and T. J. White, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, D557–D561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Oskam, A. Nellore, R. L. Penn and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1734–1738 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Penn, G. Oskam, T. J. Strathmann, P. C. Searson, A. T. Stone and D. R. Veblen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2177–2182 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2000, 289, 736–737 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, X. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. Koltypin and A. Gedanken, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1415–1416 RSC .

          D. Nicholls, Complexes and first-row transition elements, The Macmillan Press Ltd, New York,  1974, ch. 11 Search PubMed .
V. D. Hildenbrand, H. Fuess, G. Pfaff and P. Reynders, Z. Phys. Chem., 1996, 194, 139–150 CrossRef CAS .
P. Comba and A. Merbach, Inorg. Chem., 1987, 26, 1315–1323 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Ellis, G. A. K. Tompson and A. G. Sykes, Inorg. Chem., 1976, 15, 3172–3174 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Henry, J. P. Jolivet and J. Livage, Structure and bonding, ed. R. Reisfeld and C. K. Jorgensen, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1992, vol. 77, p. 155 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang and L. Gao, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 967–971 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Oliver, G. W. Watson, E. T. Kelsey and S. C. Parker, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 563–568 RSC .
C. Wang, Z. X. Deng and Y. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 5210–5214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoon, E. S. Lee and A. Manthiram, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 3505–3512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Jolivet, S. Cassaignon, C. Chaneac, D. Chiche and E. Tronc, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2008, 46, 299–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi and D. Weng, J. Environ. Sci., 2008, 20, 1263–1267 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Kim, T. Lim, T. Chang and C. Shin, Catal. Lett., 2007, 117, 112–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yanagisawa and J. Ovenstone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7781–7787 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, H. Liu and B. Xu, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2007, 21, 146–149 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paulis, M. Martin, D. B. Soria, A. Diaz, J. A. Odriozola and M. Montes, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 180, 411–420 CrossRef CAS .

          C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, in Sol-Gel Science: The Physics and Chemistry of Sol-Gel Processing, Academic Press, New York,  1990, p. 240 Search PubMed .
T. Jesty and M. L. P. Reddy, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 8, 841–854 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, J. Zhang, B. Tian and M. Anpo, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 5743–5751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, N. H. Lee, D. S. Hwang, J. S. Song, E. G. Lee and S. J. Kim, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 10838–10844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Ren, S. Y. Jia, S. H. Wu, Y. Liu and X. Han, Mater. Lett., 2013, 101, 69–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ovenstone and K. Yanagisawa, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2770–2774 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Devi, N. Kottam and B. N. Murthy, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 328, 44–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Devi, S. G. Kumar, B. N. Murthy and N. Kottam, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 794–798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Devi, N. Kottam and S. G. Kumar, Chin. J. Chem., 2010, 28, 2151–2161 CrossRef .
L. G. Devi, N. Kottam, S. G. Kumar and K. S. A. Raju, Catal. Lett., 2009, 131, 612–617 CrossRef .
L. G. Devi, N. Kottam and S. G. Kumar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15593–15601 CAS .
L. G. Devi and S. G. Kumar, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 2779–2790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1785–1790 CAS .
J. Wei, J. Yao, X. Zhang, W. Zhu, H. Wang and M. J. Rhodes, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 4610–4613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, B. A. Holmberg and Y. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9928–9929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu and L. Li, Polymer, 2005, 46, 7410–7417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bokhimi and F. Pedraza, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 2456–2463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Li, X. Sun, H. Li, S. Wang and Y. Wei, Powder Technol., 2009, 194, 149–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. S. Kim and S. Y. Kwak, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 323, 110–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, G. Lin, D. Chen, G. Wang, D. He, S. Feng and R. Xu, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1974–1980 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mali, C. A. Betty, P. N. Bhosale and P. S. Patil, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 6349–6351 RSC .
H. Kominami, S. Murakami, M. Kohno, Y. Kera, K. Okada and B. Ohtani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 4102–4106 RSC .
M. Rehan, X. Lai and G. M. Kale, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 3725–3732 RSC .
G. Li and K. A. Gray, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1143–1146 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Coronado, G. R. Gattorno, M. E. E. Pesqueira, C. Cab, R. D. Coss and G. Oskam, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 145605 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sabyrov, N. D. Burrows and R. L Penn, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1408–1415 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sugimoto, X. Zhou and A. Muramatsu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2002, 252, 339–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Liberti, V. Chiantella and F. Corigliano, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1963, 25, 415–427 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Isley and R. L. Penn, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15134–15139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Koelsch, S. Cassaignon and J. P. Jolivet, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2004, 822, S5 CrossRef ; 
  (b) J. H. Lee and Y. S. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 2843–2847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Lee and J. M. Zuo, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87, 473–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Isley and R. L. Penn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4469–4474 CAS .
S. L. Isley, D. S. Jordan and R. L. Penn, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 119–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tian, H. Fu, L. Jing, B. Xin and K. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3083–3089 CAS .
E. Beyers, P. Cool and E. F. Vansant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 10081–10086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. S. Illia, A. Louis and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 750–759 CrossRef .
T. Y. Peng, D. Zhao, K. Dai, W. Shi and K. Hirao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4947–4952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cassiers, T. Linssen, M. Mathieu, Y. Q. Bai, H. Y. Zhu, P. Cool and E. F. Vansant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3713–3721 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Sanchez and F. Ribot, New J. Chem., 1994, 18, 1007–1047 CAS ; 
  (b) M. Kakihana, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1996, 6, 7–55 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) L. L. Hench and J. K. West, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 33–72 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) R. Sui and P. Charpentier, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 3057–3082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Su, B. Y. Hong and C. M. Tseng, Catal. Today, 2004, 96, 119–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. T. Harris and C. H. Byers, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1988, 103, 49–64 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) U. G. Akpan and B. H. Hameed, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 375, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ogihara, M. Iizuka, T. Yanagawa, N. Ogata and K. Yoshida, J. Mater. Sci., 1992, 27, 55–62 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Yoldas, J. Mater. Sci., 1986, 21, 1087–1092 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Sanchez, J. Livage, M. Henry and F. Babonneau, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1988, 100, 65–76 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Guglielmi and G. Carturan, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1988, 100, 16–30 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. C. Mehrotra, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1988, 100, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Yoldas, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1984, 63, 145–154 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez and J. Livage, New J. Chem., 1990, 14, 513–521 CAS .

  (a) T. Sugimoto, X. Zhou and A. Muramatsu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 259, 53–61 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Sugimoto and X. Zhou, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2002, 252, 347–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) T. Sugimoto, X. Zhou and A. Muramatsu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 259, 43–52 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) T. Sugimoto, X. Zhou and A. Muramatsu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2002, 252, 339–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Youn, P. S. Ha, H. S. Jung, K. S. Hong, Y. H. Park and K. H. Ko, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1999, 211, 321–325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Ha, H. J. Youn, H. S. Jung, K. S. Hong, Y. H. Park and K. H. Ko, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2000, 223, 16–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Lee and B. C. Choi, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1991, 74, 2309–2311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ocana, J. V. G. Ramos and C. J. Serna, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1992, 75, 2010–2012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. D. MacKenzie, Trans. J. Br. Ceram. Soc., 1975, 74, 121–125 CAS .
R. D. Shannon, J. Appl. Phys., 1964, 35, 3414–3416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Hu, H. L. Tsai and C. L. Huang, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2003, 23, 691–696 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. A. Kandiel, L. Robben, A. Alkaim and W. Bahnemann, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2013, 12, 602–609 RSC .
M. Addamo, M. Bellardita, A. D. Paola and L. Palmisano, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4943–4945 RSC .
C. Rath, P. Mohanty, A. C. Pandey and N. C. Mishra, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 205101 CrossRef .
V. Loryuenyong, K. Angamnuaysiri, J. Sukcharoenpong and A. Suwannasri, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38, 2233–2237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Simonsen and E. G. Sogaard, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2010, 53, 485–497 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kallala, C. Sanchez and B. Cabane, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1992, 147–148, 189–193 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Song and S. E. Pratsinis, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2001, 84, 92–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Ding, X. H. Liu and Y. Z. He, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1996, 15, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
K. Terabe, K. Kato, H. Miyazaki, S. Yamaguchi, A. Imai and Y. Iguchi, J. Mater. Sci., 1994, 29, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. So, S. B. Park and S. J. Moon, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1998, 17, 1219–1222 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, A. Lin and F. Gan, Powder Technol., 2006, 167, 109–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lopez, R. Gomez, E. Sanchez, F. Tzompantzi and L. Vera, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2001, 22, 99–107 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, Q. Sheng, J. Zhang, F. Chen and M. Anpo, Mater. Lett., 2004, 58, 2757–2760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Crepaldi, G. J. A. A. S. Illia, D. Grosso, F. Cagnol, F. Ribot and C. Sanchez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9770–9786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bleta, P. Alphonse and L. Lorenzato, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2039–2048 CAS .
N. Wetchakun and S. Phanichphant, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2008, 8, 343–346 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Lee, H. U. Lee, S. M. Lee, G. Lee, W. G. Hong, J. Lee and H. J. Kim, Mater. Lett., 2012, 79, 191–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Scotti, I. R. Bellobono, C. Canevali, C. Cannas, M. Catti, M. D. Arienzo, A. Musinu, S. Polizzi, M. Sommariva, A. Testino and F. Morazzoni, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4051–4061 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ou, J. Lin, S. Fang and D. Liao, Catal. Commun., 2007, 8, 936–940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Hu, Y. Cao, P. Yang, J. Deng and K. Fan, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2002, 185, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sreethawong, Y. Suzuki and S. Yoshikawa, Catal. Commun., 2005, 6, 119–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Sung, J. K. Lee and W. S. Chae, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 805–808 CAS .
Y. Yue and Z. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1755–1756 RSC .
D. Chen, L. Cao, F. Huang, P. Imperia, Y. B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4438–4444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kluson, P. Kacer, T. Cajthaml and M. Kalaji, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 644–651 RSC .
G. Calleja, D. P. Serrano, R. Sanz, P. Pizarro and A. Garcia, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2004, 43, 2485–2492 CrossRef CAS .
T. Z. Ren, Z. Y. Yuan and B. L. Su, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 374, 170–175 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sahni, S. B. Reddy and B. S. Murty, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2007, 452–453, 758–762 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ponton, S. B. Doeuff and C. Sanchez, Colloids Surf., A, 2000, 162, 177–192 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, K. C. Song and S. E. Pratsinis, J. Nanopart. Res., 2000, 2, 419–424 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Ding, Z. Z. Qi and Y. Z. He, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1995, 14, 21–22 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mahdjoub, N. Allen, P. Kelly and V. Vishnyakov, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 210, 125–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Suresh, V. Biju, P. Mukundan and K. G. K. Warrier, Polyhedron, 1998, 17, 3131–3135 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Kung and E. I. Kuo, Chem. Eng. J., 1996, 64, 203–214 CAS .
S. C. Padmanabhan, S. C. Pillai, J. Colreavy, S. Balakrishnan, D. C. McCormack, T. S. Perova, Y. Gunko, S. J. Hinder and J. M. Kelly, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4474–4481 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Nolan, M. K. Serry and S. C. Pillai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16151–16157 CAS .
P. A. Venz, R. L. Frost, J. R. Barlett, J. L. Woolfrey and J. T. Kloprogge, Thermochim. Acta, 2000, 346, 73–82 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Djaoued, S. Badilescu, P. V. Ashrit, D. Bersani, P. P. Lottici and J. Robichaud, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2002, 24, 255–264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, J. Zhang, F. Chen and M. Anpo, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 3378–3381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pal, J. G. Serrano, P. Santiago and U. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 96–102 CAS .
X. Jiang, T. Herricks and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1205–1209 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Manickam, Theoretical and experimental sonochemistry involving inorganic systems, Springer, Heidelberg,  2011 Search PubMed .
K. S. Suslick, Science, 1990, 247, 1439–1445 CAS .
K. S. Suslick, S. B. Choe, A. A. Cichowlas and M. W. Grinstaff, Nature, 1991, 353, 414–416 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hyeon, M. Fang and K. S. Suslick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5492–5493 CrossRef CAS .
S. Koda, K. Tanaka, H. Sakamoto, T. Matsuoka and H. Nomura, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 11609–11612 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Suslick and G. J. Price, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1999, 29, 295–326 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gedanken, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2004, 11, 47–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Doktycz and K. S. Suslick, Science, 1990, 247, 1067–1069 CAS .
S. Ramesh, Y. Koltypin and A. Gedanken, J. Mater. Res., 1997, 12, 3271–3277 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, J. Zhu, J. Zhu, S. Huang, X. Zhu and G. Ma, Mater. Lett., 2003, 57, 4639–4642 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Wang, S. G. Chen, X. H. Tang, O. Palchik, A. Zaban, Y. Koltypin and A. Gedanken, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 521–526 RSC .
P. Jeevanandam, Y. Koltypin, Y. Mastai and A. Gedanken, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 2143–2146 RSC .
W. Guo, Z. Lin, X. Wang and G. Song, Microelectron. Eng., 2003, 66, 95–101 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Kim, T. S. Chang and C. H. Shin, Catal. Lett., 2007, 118, 224–230 CrossRef CAS .
O. C. Duvarci and M. Ciftcioglu, Powder Technol., 2012, 228, 231–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Tang, L. Yin, W. Huang, Y. R. Hacohen and A. Gedanken, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1183–1186 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, L. Zhang and J. Yu, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 416–420 RSC .
J. C. Yu, L. Zhang and J. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4647–4653 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nagase, T. Ebina, T. Iwasaki, H. Hayashi, Y. Onodera and M. Chatterjee, Chem. Lett., 1999, 911–912 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, J. Yu, L. Zhang and W. Ho, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 148, 263–271 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Awati, S. V. Awate, P. P. Shah and V. Ramaswamy, Catal. Commun., 2003, 4, 393–400 CrossRef CAS .
B. Neppolian, Q. Wang, H. Jung and H. Choi, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2008, 15, 649–658 CAS .
K. Prasad, D. V. Pinjari, A. B. Pandit and S. T. Mhaske, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2010, 17, 697–703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, W. Yang, Y. Ma, Y. Cao and J. Yao, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 975–977 RSC .
H. Liu, W. Yang, Y. Ma, X. Ye and J. Yao, New J. Chem., 2003, 27, 529–532 RSC .
N. Sakai, R. Wang, A. Fujishima, T. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 5918–5920 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, K. Hashimoto, A. Fujishima, M. Chikuni, E. Kojima, A. Kitamura, M. Shimohigoshi and T. Watanabe, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 135–138 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Shultz, W. Jang, W. M. Hetherington, D. R. Baer, L. Q. Wang and M. H. Engelhard, Surf. Sci., 1995, 339, 114–124 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, W. Yang, Y. Ma, Y. Cao, J. Yao, J. Zhang and T. Hu, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 3001–3005 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Atla, C. C. Chen, C. Y. Chen, P. Y. Lin, W. Pan, K. C. Cheng, Y. M. Huang, Y. F. Chang and J. S. Jean, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 236, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, W. Yang, Y. Ma and J. Yao, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 299, 218–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gao, Y. Ma, Y. Cao, J. Zhao and J. Yao, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 41–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Imai, M. Yasumori, H. Hirashima, K. Awazu and H. Onuki, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 8304–8309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nagase, T. Ooie and J. Sakakibara, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 357, 151–158 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Guan, X. T. Zhang, Y. Ma, Y. A. Cao and J. N. Yao, J. Mater. Res., 2001, 16, 907–909 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jung, H. Shin, J. R. Kim, J. Y. Kim, K. S. Hong and J. K. Lee, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 11732–11737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, J. Zhang, Z. Cheng and Z. Zhang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 77, 314–317 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Guo, J. Zhao, H. Xu and Z. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 77, 501–506 CrossRef CAS .
J. Blanchard, M. In, B. Schaudel and C. Sanchez, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 1998, 1115–1127 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Velasco, F. Rubio, J. Rubio and J. L. Oteo, Thermochim. Acta, 1999, 326, 91–97 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, Z. Bian, J. Ren, Y. Liu, Y. Cao, H. Li, W. Dai, H. He and K. Fan, Catal. Commun., 2007, 8, 971–976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071–2084 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. Ma, J. Yu and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 261–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. P. Hallett and T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3508–3576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dupont, R. F. Suoza and P. A. Z. Suarez, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3667–3692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Parvulescu and C. Hardacre, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2615–2665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Antonietti, D. Kuang, B. Smarsly and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4988–4992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, S. Tomura, M. Maeda, F. Ohashi, K. Inukai and M. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 2000, 1414–1415 CrossRef CAS .
O. Aschenbrenner, S. Supasitmongkol, M. Taylor and P. Styring, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 1217–1221 RSC .
Y. Liu, J. Li, M. Wang, Z. Li, H. Liu, P. He, X. Yang and J. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2005, 5, 1643–1649 CAS .
S. S. Mali, C. A. Betty, P. N. Bhosale, R. S. Devan, Y. R. Ma, S. S. Kolekar and P. S. Patil, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1920–1924 RSC .
W. Wang, B. Gu, L. Liang, W. A. Hamilton and D. J. Wesolowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 14789–14792 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, X. Liu, Z. Yan and L. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 115–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Bullock, L. Patthey and S. G. Steinemann, Surf. Sci., 1996, 352–354, 504–510 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Yaghi, G. M. Li and H. L. Li, Nature, 1995, 378, 703–706 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, T. Iyoda, C. Cao, Y. Song, L. Jiang, T. Li and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2135–2138 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ding, Z. Miao, B. Hu, G. An, Z. Sun, B. Han and Z. Liu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5129–5134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ding, Z. Miao, B. Hu, G. An, Z. Sun, B. Han and Z. Liu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 10294–10302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Liang, H. Hu and M. Wang, Solid State Sci., 2009, 11, 1655–1660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yan, F. Chen, J. Zhang and M. Anpo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8673–8678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Liu, M. C. Chang, H. Shao, M. S. Huang and A. C. M. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 45, 369–376 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, Y. Wang and H. Li, AIChE J., 2009, 55, 198–205 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, T. Zhao, Y. Zhang, H. Wang and M. Yu, J. Solution Chem., 2006, 35, 1337–1346 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Yoo, T. G. Lee and J. Kim, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 84, 211–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Yoo, H. Choi and D. D. Dionysiou, Catal. Commun., 2006, 6, 259–262 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Yoo, H. Choi and D. D. Dionysiou, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2000–2001 RSC .
Y. Zhou and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14960–14961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cammarata, S. G. Kazarian, P. A. Salter and T. Welton, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 5192–5200 RSC .
Y. Zhou, J. H. Schattka and M. Antonietti, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 477–481 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mukhopadhyay and W. Freyland, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 1951–1953 CrossRef CAS .
A. Elaiwi, P. B. Hitchcock, K. R. Seddon, N. Srinivasan, Y. M. Tan, T. Welton and J. A. Zora, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1995, 3467–3472 RSC .
H. Choi, Y. J. Kim, R. S. Varma and D. D. Dionysiou, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5377–5384 CrossRef CAS .
G. Law and P. R. Watson, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 6138–6141 CrossRef CAS .
T. Alammar, H. Noei, Y. Wang and A. V. Mudring, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8045–8055 RSC .
H. Kaper, S. Sallard, I. Djerdj, M. Antonietti and B. M. Smarsly, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3502–3510 CrossRef CAS .
M. Addamo, V. Augugliaro, A. D. Paola, E. G. Lopez, V. Loddo, G. Marci and L. Palmisano, Colloids Surf., A, 2005, 265, 23–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Paola, M. Bellardita, R. Ceccato, L. Palmisano and F. Parrino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15166–15174 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, N. H. Lee, E. G. Lee, J. S. Song and S. J. Kim, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 389, 124–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang, K. Deng, X. Chen and Z. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2709–2714 CAS .
G. Li, L. Li, B. Goates and B. F. Woodfield, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8659–8666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Zhang, C. Gao and L. Cao, J. Mater. Sci., 2000, 35, 4049–4054 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Nolph, D. E. Sievers, S. Kaewgun, C. J. Kucera, D. H. McKinney, J. P. Rientjes, J. L. White, R. Bhave and B. I. Lee, Catal. Lett., 2007, 117, 102–106 CrossRef CAS .
R. Boppella, P. Basak and S. V. Manorama, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1239–1246 CAS .
R. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Wei and D. Hou, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 42, 7141–7146 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, C. Xie, Z. Xu, Z. Gao and Y. Du, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 5554–5560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Beukenkamp and K. D. Herrington, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1960, 82, 3025–3031 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cassaignon, M. Koelsch and J. P. Jolivet, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 42, 6689–6695 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Sun, P. J. Guo, Z. X. Li, Y. Li and P. Cui, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 481, 605–609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cassaignon, M. Koelsch and J. P. Jolivet, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68, 695–700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kanna and S. Wongnawa, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 110, 166–175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. I. Hsiang and S. C. Lin, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2004, 380, 67–72 CrossRef PubMed .

          C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, Sol-Gel Science: The physics and Chemistry of Sol-Gel Processing, Academic Press, San Diego,  1990, pp. 357–405 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, N. H. Lee, J. S. Song, E. G. Lee and S. J. Kim, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2005, 31, 309–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Ding and Y. Z. He, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1996, 15, 320–322 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bosc, A. Ayral, P. A. Albouy and C. Guizard, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2463–2468 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sanz, J. Soria, I. Sobrados, S. Yurdakal and V. Augugliaro, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5110–5115 CAS .
W. Ostwald, Z. Phys. Chem., 1897, 22, 289–330 CAS .
G. Palmisano, S. Yurdakal, V. Augugliaro, V. Loddo and L. Palmisano, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2007, 349, 964–970 CrossRef CAS .
V. Augugliaro, H. Kisch, V. Loddo, M. J. L. Munoz, C. M. Alvarez, G. Palmisano, L. Palmisano, F. Parrino and S. Yurdakal, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 349, 182–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Kandiel, A. Feldhoff, L. Robben, R. Dillert and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2050–2060 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kobayashi, K. Tomita, V. Petrykin, M. Yoshimura and M. Kakihana, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 2158–2162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hanprasopwattana, T. Rieker, A. G. Sault and A. K. Datye, Catal. Lett., 1997, 45, 165–175 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Y. Zhao, H. Liu, H. Kou and Y. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5046–5050 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dambournet, I. Belharouak and K. Amine, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1173–1179 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Sullivan and S. S. Cole, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1959, 42, 127–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Colon, M. C. Hidalgo, J. A. Navio, A. Kubacka and M. F. Garcia, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 90, 633–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. P. Jolivet, Metal oxide chemistry and synthesis: From solution to solid state, Wiley, New York,  2000 Search PubMed .
C. Boudaren, T. Bataille, J. P. Auffredic and D. Louer, Solid State Sci., 2003, 5, 175–182 CrossRef CAS .
S. Perera and E. G. Gillan, Solid State Sci., 2008, 10, 864–872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Hwang, N. H. Lee, D. Y. Lee, J. S. Song, S. H. Shin and S. J. Kim, Smart Mater. Struct., 2006, 15, S74–S80 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kong, I. Karatchevtseva, M. Blackford, I. Chironi and G. Triani, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 95, 816–822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yin, R. Li, Q. He and T. Sato, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2002, 75, 76–80 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawahara, T. Ozawa, M. Iwasaki, H. Tada and S. Ito, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 267, 377–381 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nad, P. Sharma, I. Roy and A. Maitra, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 264, 89–94 CrossRef CAS .
K. Haouemi, F. Touati and N. Gharbi, Chem. Pap., 2012, 66, 202–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, X. Shen and H. Gao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 312, 272–278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Andersson, L. Osterlund, S. Ljungstrom and A. Palmqvist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10674–10679 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharma and A. K. Ganguli, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 4122–4131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 6961–6973 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Ganguli, A. Ganguly and S. Vaidya, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 474–485 RSC .

          V. Pillai and D. O. Shah, in Industrial Application of Microemulsion, ed. C. Soalns and H. Kunieda, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1997, p. 227 Search PubMed .
N. Munshi, T. K. De and A. N. Maitra, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1997, 190, 387–391 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Q. Yu, Z. Chen, Y. Li and Y. You, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 4839–4842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, T. Li, C. Wu and Z. Zhang, J. Nanopart. Res., 2007, 9, 1081–1086 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Lee, S. S. Park, G. D. Lee, C. S. Ju and S. S. Hong, Catal. Today, 2005, 101, 283–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Chhabra, V. Pillai, B. K. Mishra, A. Morrone and D. O. Shah, Langmuir, 1995, 11, 3307–3311 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, J. Zhang and B. Tian, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 192, 651–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kavan, O. Regan, A. Kay and M. Gratzel, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1993, 346, 291–307 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Rotzinger and M. Gratzel, Inorg. Chem., 1987, 26, 3704–3708 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, J. Long, A. Huang, Y. Luo, S. Feng and R. Xu, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 8822–8825 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Wang, A. Zhou and Z. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 1930–1932 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Yu and J. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 5860–5867 RSC ; 
  (c) J. Yu and X. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4902–4907 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Yu and G. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 1147–1151 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) J. Yu, X. Yu, B. Huang, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 1474–1480 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhong, D. A. Steinhurst, E. E. Carpenter and J. C. Owrutsky, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 7401–7408 CrossRef CAS .
V. Uskoković and M. Drofenik, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 133, 23–34 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yamabi and H. Imai, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 609–614 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tomita, M. Kobayashi, V. Petrykin, S. Yin, T. Sato, M. Yoshimura and M. Kakihana, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 2217–2221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, H. G. Yang, C. Sun, L. Cheng, L. Wang, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, CrystEngComm, 2009, 11, 2677–2682 RSC .
H. G. Yang and H. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3492–3495 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lv, J. Yu, L. Cui, S. Shen and M. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 4557–4562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lv, L. Yu, H. Huang, H. Liu and Y. Feng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 9548–9552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. V. Sofianou, V. Psycharis, N. Boukos, T. Vaimakis, J. Yu, R. Dillert, D. Bahnemann and C. Trapalis, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 761–768 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) K. Lv, Q. Xiang and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 104, 275–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Yu and S. T. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 492, 695–700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Komarneni, R. Roy and Q. H. Li, Mater. Res. Bull., 1992, 27, 1393–1405 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Corradi, F. Bondioli, B. Focher, A. M. Ferrari, C. Grippo, E. Mariani and C. Villa, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 2639–2641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Kinsinger, A. Wong, D. Li, F. Villalobos and D. Kisailus, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 5254–5261 CAS .
W. H. Casey, B. L. Phillips, J. P. Nordin and D. J. Sullivan, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1998, 62, 2789–2797 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mockel, M. Giersig and F. Willig, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 3051–3056 RSC .

          H. Colfen and M. Antonjeiti, Mesocrystals and Nonclassical Crystallization, CPI Antony Rowe, Chippenilam, Wiltshire,  2008 Search PubMed .
G. Liu, X. Yan, Z. Chen, X. Wang, L. Wang, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6590–6596 RSC .
Q. Tay, X. Liu, Y. Tang, Z. Jiang, T. C. Sum and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14973–14982 CAS .
W. Hu, L. Li, G. Li, C. Tang and L. Sun, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3676–3682 CAS .
E. M. Wong, J. E. Bonevich and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 7770–7775 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. Menon, F. D. Blum and L. R. Dharani, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1994, 54, 113–123 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Xing, J. Zhang and F. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12848–12853 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. D. Tu, Z. Zhou, R. J. Yan, Y. P. Gan, W. Z. Huang, X. X. Weng, H. Huang, W. K. Zhang and X. Y. Tao, RSC Advances, 2012, 2, 10585–10591 RSC ; 
  (d) J. Yu, M. Zhou, B. Cheng and X. Zhao, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 246, 176–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) M. Nasir, J. Zhang, F. Chen and B. Tian, Res. Chem. Intermed. DOI:10.1007/s11164-013-1297-7 ; 
  (f) M. Y. Xing, D. Y. Qi, J. Zhang and F. Chen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 11432–11436 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (h) H. K. Park, Y. T. Moon, D. K. Kim and C. H. Kim, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1996, 79, 2727–2732 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) Q. Yang, C. Xie, Z. Xu, Z. Gao and Y. Du, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 5554–5560 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (j) X. Lu, D. Mao, X. Wei, H. Zhang, J. Xie and W. Wei, J. Mater. Res., 2013, 28, 400–404 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (k) Q. D. Truong, T. S. Le and H. T. Hoa, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 4274–4278 RSC ; 
  (l) J. Cai, Z. Wang, K. Lv, Y. Zheng, J. Yu and M. Li, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 15273–15281 RSC ; 
  (m) K. Lv, J. Yu, J. Fan and M. Jaroniec, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 7044–7048 RSC .
N. Bao, L. Shen, X. Feng and X. Lu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87, 326–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bao, X. Feng, X. Lu, L. Shen and K. Yanagisawa, AIChE J., 2004, 50, 1568–1577 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sasaki, M. Watanabe, Y. Fujiki and Y. Kitami, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 1749–1756 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yin and T. Sato, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2000, 39, 4526–4530 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bao, L. Shen and K. Yanagisawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 16739–16745 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bao, X. Feng, Z. Yang, L. Shen and X. Lu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 2729–2736 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Feng, M. Hirasawa and K. Yanagisawa, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohara, K. Koumoto and H. Yanagida, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1994, 77, 2327–2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Feng, M. Hirasawa, K. Kajiyoshi and K. Yanagisawa, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 1415–1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Yang, Q. Li and D. Xu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3019–3026 RSC .
J. Li, Y. Yu, Q. Chen, J. Li and D. Xu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 2111–2115 CAS .
J. Li, W. Wan, H. Zhou, J. Li and D. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3439–3441 RSC .
N. Murakami, T. Kamai, T. Tsubota and T. Ohno, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 532–537 RSC .
C. C. Tsai and H. Teng, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 367–373 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Zhu, Y. Lan, X. P. Gao, S. P. Ringer, Z. F. Zheng, D. Y. Song and J. C. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6730–6736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Wang, Q. Deng, S. Kang, D. H. L. Ng and H. Zhao, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 3091–3096 RSC .
T. Sasaki, Y. Komatsu and Y. Fujiki, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 894–899 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, B. Zhao, F. Chen and J. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 4167–4173 RSC .
B. Zhao, F. Chen, Y. Jiao and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7990–7997 RSC .
X. Shen, B. Tian and J. Zhang, Catal. Today, 2013, 201, 151–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, F. Chen, X. Gu and J. Zhang, Chem.–Asian J., 2010, 5, 1546–1549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, F. Chen, Q. Huang and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5115–5117 RSC .
R. A. V. Santen, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 5768–5769 CrossRef .
Y. Mao and S. S. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8217–8226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Buonsanti, V. Grillo, E. Carlino, C. Giannini, T. Kipp, R. Cingolani and P. D. Cozzoli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11223–11233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, M. Xing, J. Zhang and F. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 97, 182–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, F. Chen, Y. Jiao and J. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 214, 229–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dishon, O. Zohar and U. Sivan, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2831–2836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Minero, G. Mariella, V. Maurino and E. Pelizzetti, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 2632–2641 CrossRef CAS .
C. Minero, G. Mariella, V. Maurino, D. Vione and E. Pelizzetti, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 8964–8972 CrossRef CAS .
S. Andersson and A. D. Wadsley, Nature, 1960, 187, 499–500 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Q. Wang, Z. Guo and J. S. Chung, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5284–5286 RSC ; 
  (b) Z. Zheng, H. Liu, J. Ye, J. Zhao, E. R. Waclawik and H. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 316, 75–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Andersson and A. D. Wadsley, Acta Chem. Scand., 1961, 15, 663–669 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) J. N. Nian and H. S. Teng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 4193–4198 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) W. Li, C. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Bai, X. Feng, Z. Yang, L. Lu, X. Lu and K. Y. Chan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 20539–20545 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Y. Bai, C. Liu, Z. Yang, X. Feng, X. Lu, N. K. V. Laak and K. Chan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 5423–5428 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, N. Bao, Y. Zheng, A. Gupta, T. An and K. Yanagisawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8809–8818 CAS .
H. Izawa, S. Kikkawa and M. Koizumi, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 5023–5026 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sasaki, M. Watanabe, Y. Komatsu and Y. Fujiki, Inorg. Chem., 1985, 24, 2265–2271 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, H. Yu, B. Cheng and C. Trapalis, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 249, 135–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Kuo, C. Y. Kuo, C. H. Liu, J. H. Chao and C. H. Lin, Catal. Lett., 2007, 113, 7–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, S. Yin, V. Petrykin, M. Kakihana and T. Sato, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2009, 309, 50–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tournoux, R. Marchand and L. Brohan, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1986, 17, 33–52 CrossRef CAS .
S. Andersson and A. D. Wadsley, Acta Crystallogr., 1962, 15, 194–201 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, E. Shi, W. Li, Z. Chen, W. Zhong and X. Hu, Sci. China, Ser. E: Technol. Sci., 2002, 45, 120–129 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chung, T. W. Chung and T. C. K. Yang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 2301–2307 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ribbens, I. Caretti, E. Beyers, S. Zamani, E. Vinck, S. V. Doorslaer and P. Cool, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2302–2313 CAS .
Y. Gao, Y. Masuda, Z. Peng, T. Yonezawa and K. Koumoto, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 608–613 RSC .
Y. F. Gao, M. Nagai, W. S. Seo and K. Koumoto, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 4712–4714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, H. Luo, S. Mizusugi and M. Nagai, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 1804–1807 CAS .
S. I. Seok, B. Y. Ahn, N. C. Pramanik, H. Kim and S. I. Hong, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 1147–1149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Chang, M. Vithal, I. C. Baek and S. I. Seok, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 182, 749–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Baek, M. Vithal, J. A. Chang, J. H. Yum, M. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel, Y. C. Chung and S. I. Seok, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 909–912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Liu, M. Aizawa, Z. M. Wang, H. Hatori, N. Uekawa and H. Kanoh, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 322, 497–504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Schwarzenbach, J. Muehlebach and K. Mueller, Inorg. Chem., 1970, 9, 2381–2390 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dakanali, E. T. Kefalas, C. P. Raptopoulou, A. Terzis, G. Voyiatzis, I. Kyrikou, T. Mavromoustakos and A. Salifoglou, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 4632–4639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Bahnemann, A. Henglein and L. Spanhel, Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc., 1984, 78, 151–163 RSC .
V. Etacheri, M. K. Serry, S. J. Hinder and S. C. Pillai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3744–3752 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Kumar, S. Badrinarayanan and M. Sastry, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 358, 122–130 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Seok, M. Vithal and J. A. Chang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 346, 66–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ribeiro, C. Vila, J. M. E. D. Matos, J. Bettini, E. Longo and E. R. Leite, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 5798–5803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Stengl and D. Kralova, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 129, 794–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Murakami, Y. Kurihara, T. Tsubota and T. Ohno, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3062–3069 CAS .
R. S. Sonawane and S. Ramakrishna, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2012, 177, 652–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ichinose, M. Terasaki and H. Katsuki, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2001, 22, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Piquemal, E. Briot and J. M. Bregeault, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 29–45 RSC .
E. Hosono, S. Fujihara, K. Kakiuchi and H. Imai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7790–7791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Liu and Z. Jia, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 1753–1757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schwarzenbach, Inorg. Chem., 1970, 9, 2391–2397 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) I. Djerdj, D. Arcon, Z. Jaglicic and M. Niederberger, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1571–1581 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Wang, Z. X. Deng, G. Zhang, S. Fan and Y. D. Li, Powder Technol., 2002, 125, 39–44 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G. V. Jensen, M. Bremholm, N. Lock, G. R. Deen, T. R. Jensen, B. B. Iversen, M. Niederberger, J. S. Pedersen and H. Birkedal, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6044–6055 CrossRef ; 
  (d) G. Garnweitner and M. Niederberger, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1171–1182 RSC .
M. Niederberger, M. H. Bartl and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4364–4370 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Collins, C. Spickermann and S. Mann, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1112–1114 RSC .
G. Guo, J. K. Whitesell and M. A. Fox, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18781–18785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Arnal, R. J. P. Corriu, D. Leclercq, P. H. Mutin and A. Vioux, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 694–698 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Trentler, T. E. Denler, J. F. Bertone, A. Agrawal and V. L. Colvin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 1613–1614 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, B. Yao, Y. Cao and K. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11849–11853 CAS .
A. Vioux, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2292–2299 CrossRef .
J. Blanchard, F. Ribot, C. Sanchez, P. V. Bellot and A. Trokiner, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2000, 265, 83–97 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. A. S. Illa and C. Sanchez, New J. Chem., 2000, 24, 493–499 RSC .
R. Petrovic, N. Tanaskovic, V. Djokic, Z. Radovanovic, I. J. Castvan, I. Stamenkovic and D. Janackovic, Powder Technol., 2012, 219, 239–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tanaskovic, Z. Radovanovic, V. Dokic, J. Krstic, S. Drmanic, Dj. Janackovic and R. Petrovic, Superlattices Microstruct., 2009, 46, 217–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zimmermann and G. Garnweitner, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 8562–8568 RSC .
M. Hu, J. Xu, J. Gao, S. Yang, J. S. P. Wong and R. K. Y. Li, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 9777–9784 RSC .
Y. C. Hsu, H. C. Lin, C. H. Chen, Y. T. Liao and C. M. Yang, J. Solid State Chem., 2010, 183, 1917–1924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Zhu, J. Yang, Z. F. Bian, J. Ren, Y. M. Liu, Y. Cao, H. X. Li, H. Y. He and K. N. Fan, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 76, 82–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) N. D. Abazovic, M. I. Comor, M. D. Dramicanin, D. J. Jovanovic, S. P. Ahrenkiel and J. M. Nedeljkovic, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25366–25370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Garnweitner, N. Tsedev, H. Dierke and M. Niederberger, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 890–895 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garnweitner, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, Chem. Commun., 2005, 397–399 RSC .
P. Arnal, R. J. P. Corriu, D. Leclercq, P. H. Mutin and A. Vioux, J. Mater. Chem., 1996, 6, 1925–1932 RSC .
N. Avci, P. F. Smet, H. Poelman, N. V. D. Velde, K. D. Buysser, I. V. Driessche and D. Poelman, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2009, 52, 424–431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cao, Y. Li, C. Wang, C. Shao and Y. Liu, J. Nanomater., 2011, 267415 Search PubMed .
C. S. Kim, I. M. Kwon, B. K. Moon, J. H. Jeong, B. C. Choi, J. H. Kim, H. Choi, S. S. Yi, D. H. Yoo, K. S. Hong, J. H. Park and H. S. Lee, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2007, 27, 1343–1346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Boury, R. G. Nair, S. K. Samdarshi, T. Makiabadi and P. H. Mutin, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 2196–2200 RSC .
J. Joo, S. G. Kwon, T. Yu, M. Cho, J. Lee, J. Yoon and T. Hyeon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15297–15302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. L. James, C. J. Adams, C. Bolm, D. Braga, P. Collier, T. Firscic, F. Grepioni, K. D. M. Harris, G. Hyett, W. Jones, A. Krebs, J. Mack, L. Maini, A. G. Orpen, I. P. Parkin, W. C. Shearouse, J. W. Steed and D. C. Waddell, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 413–447 RSC ; 
  (b) V. Sepelak, A. Duvel, M. Wilkening, K. D. Becker and P. Heitjans, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7507–7520 RSC .
W. Ao, J. Li, H. Yang, X. Zeng and X. Ma, Powder Technol., 2006, 168, 148–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) V. Brezova, Z. Vreckova, P. Billik, M. Caplovicova and G. Plesch, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2009, 206, 177–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) V. Brezova, P. Billik, Z. Vreckova and G. Plesch, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 327, 101–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. U. Bujnova, D. Dimitrov, D. Radev, A. Bonjinov and D. Todorovsky, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 110, 291–298 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Billik, G. Plesch, V. Brezova, L. Kuchta, M. Valko and M. Mazur, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68, 1112–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Billik and G. Plesch, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 1183–1186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rezaee and S. M. M. Khoie, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 507, 484–488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Delogu, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 468, 22–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Suryanarayana, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2001, 46, 1–184 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan and X. Ma, Mater. Lett., 2004, 58, 513–515 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schulz, M. Trudeau, J. Y. Huot and A. V. Neste, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1989, 62, 2849–2852 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. Palumbo, S. J. Thorpe and K. T. Aust, Scr. Metall. Mater., 1990, 24, 1347–1350 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. C. Parker and R. W. Siegel, J. Mater. Res., 1990, 5, 1246–1252 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Colin, T. Girot, G. L. Caer and A. Mocellin, J. Solid State Chem., 2000, 149, 41–48 CrossRef .
Kh. Gheisari, S. Javadpour, J. T. Oh and M. Ghaffari, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 472, 416–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chaudhuri, M. L. Ram and B. K. Sarkar, J. Mater. Sci., 1994, 29, 3484–3488 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dutta, P. Sahu, S. K. Pradhan and M. De, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2002, 77, 153–164 CrossRef .
X. Y. Pan, Y. Chen, X. M. Ma and L. H. Zhu, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2003, 13, 271–275 CAS .
R. Ren, Z. Yang and L. L. Shaw, J. Mater. Sci., 2000, 35, 6015–6026 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan and X. Ma, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 4098–4103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gajovic, K. Furic, N. Tomasic, S. Popovic, Z. Skoko and S. Music, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 398, 188–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rezaee, S. M. M. Khoie, D. H. Fatmehsari and H. K. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 8912–8916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ralphs, C. Hardacre and S. L. James, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7701–7718 RSC .
M. Salari, M. Rezaee, S. P. H. Marashi and S. H. Aboutalebi, Powder Technol., 2009, 192, 54–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Salari, S. M. M. Khoie, P. Marashi and M. Rezaee, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 469, 386–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Farbod and M. Khademalrasool, Powder Technol., 2011, 214, 344–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Welham, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 1998, 255, 81–89 CrossRef .
N. J. Welham, J. Mater. Res., 1999, 14, 619–627 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Welham and D. J. Llewellyn, Miner. Eng., 1998, 11, 827–841 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
S. Girish Kumar	Dr S. Girish Kumar is a native of Karnataka (Kolar District, Malur Taluk) and has obtained his M.Sc. degree in Physical Chemistry (2005) and Ph.D. (2012) degree in the area of photocatalysis from Bangalore University, Bangalore. He is the recipient of India's most prestigious Dr D. S. Kothari Post Doctoral Fellowship (2012) and works under the supervision of Prof. Rao in the Department of Physics, I.I.Sc., Bangalore, in the field of CdTe/CdS thin film heterojunction solar cells. The study of phase transition and photoluminescence properties of mixed phase titania and other heterojunctions are his present interests.
K. S. R. Koteswara Rao	Dr K. S. R. Koteswara Rao is an associate professor at the Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. He works in the field of semiconductors. His research interests include understanding the defects in semiconductor materials and their heterostructures by optical methods (such as photoluminescence, and optically induced conductivity modulation) and electrical methods. The growth and study of III–V- and II–VI-based binary, ternary and quaternary compound semiconductor nano- and micro-structures and their utility for device applications are his current research studies.

 	Fig. 1  Arrangement of [TiO6] in titania polymorphs (reprinted with permission from ref. 1e; Copyright @ 2013 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 2  Growth of rutile particles during sintering (reprinted with permission from ref. 129; Copyright @ 2001 John Wiley and Sons).	 

 	Fig. 3  Orientation of the third [TiO6] in linear and zigzag fashion.	 

 	Fig. 4  The formation of rutile under acidic conditions (reprinted with permission from ref. 139; Copyright @ 2006 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 5  Growth of nanoparticles by OR and OA mechanisms (reprinted with permission from ref. 166; Copyright @ 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 
–Ti–Cl + BuOH → Ti–OH + BuCl	(1)

 	Fig. 6  Influence of tartaric acid on brookite content (reprinted with permission from ref. 192; Copyright @ 2012 Springer).	 
	(2)
Anatase ↔ dissolved species ↔ rutile	(3)
M–OR + H2O → M–OH + R–OH	(4)
M–OH + M–OR → M–O–M + R–OH	(5)
M–OH + M–OH → M–O–M + H2O	(6)

 	Fig. 7  XRD profile for (a) water washed sample; (b) alcohol washed sample calcined at different temperatures (reprinted with permission from ref. 236; Copyright @ 1999 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 8  Fraction of rutile for the powder washed with water (PW) and butanol (PB) after thermal treatment (reprinted with permission from ref. 237; Copyright @ 2000 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 9  Kinetics of ART for the powders precipitated at different pH conditions and the fraction of rutile is denoted as X (reprinted with permission from ref. 242a; Copyright @ 2003 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 10  Chelation of formate ion to Ti4+via (a) syn–syn mode; (b) syn–anti mode (reprinted with permission from ref. 277; Copyright @ 2009 American Chemical Society).	 
Ti(OBu)4 + 2OHCH2CH2OH → Ti(OCH2CH2O)2 + 4BuOH	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 11  Ligation of sulfate anion on [TiO6] to facilitate anatase formation (reprinted with permission from ref. 340; Copyright @ 2005 American Chemical Society).	 
	(10)

 	Fig. 12  XRD profile of powder with (a) and without (b) UV illumination followed by calcination at different temperatures (reprinted with permission from ref. 307; Copyright @ 2003 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 13  Anchoring of [emim]+ on rutile {110} crystal planes (reprinted with permission from ref. 333; Copyright @ 2009 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 14  Tuning of crystal phase with IL by varying the reaction parameters using ultrasonication (US) (reprinted with permission from ref. 354; Copyright @ 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 
D2 = D02 + 3.86 × 104 × t0.286(9)e−32(2)/RT	(11)

 	Fig. 15  Formation of brookite from [Ti(OH)2Cl2(OH2)2]0 precursor (reprinted with permission from ref. 86; Copyright @ 2001 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 
	(12)

 	Fig. 16  Nucleation mechanism for brookite NRs and anatase nanoparticles from TiBALDH precursor (reprinted with permission from ref. 380; Copyright @ 2010 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 17  TiO2 formation pathway from TiBr4/Na2O2 solvothermal system (reprinted with permission from ref. 389; Copyright @ 2008 Elsevier).	 
[Ti(H2O)6]3+ + H2O → [Ti(OH)(H2O)5]2+ + H3O+	(13)
[Ti(OH)(H2O)5]2+ + O2 → Ti(IV) oxo species → TiO2	(14)
[Ti(H2O)6]3+ + HO− → [Ti(OH)x(H2O)6−x]3−x → [Ti(OH)3(H2O)3]0 → [Ti(OH)4(H2O)2]0 → TiO2	(15)
TiS2 + 4NaOH → Ti4+ + 4OH− + 2Na2S	(16)
Ti4+ + xOH− → Ti(OH)x4−x	(17)

 	Fig. 18  (A) Structure of TiBALDH with dashed lines demonstrating its octahedral structure. (B) Illustration of the TiBALDH precursor with hydrolytically stable lactate ligands, forcing condensation along the z-axis. (C) Illustration of TiBALDH cleavage by nucleophilic attack by the OH– at the (a) Ti metal center and at (b) bidentate ligands (shown by blue lines), which allows for two condensation reactions in the x–y plane of the coordination sphere to occur simultaneously, yielding edge-sharing bonds (reprinted with permission from ref. 424; Copyright @ 2010 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 19  Synthesis of rutile–anatase core–shell structure (reprinted with permission from ref. 428; Copyright @ 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 20  Variation in anatase and brookite contents with hydrothermal reaction time from TiS2 precursor with NaOH (reprinted with permission from ref. 429; Copyright @ 2013 American Chemical Society).	 
Ti(SO4)2 + H2O2 → [H2TiO2(SO4)2] + H2O → (TiO2)m⋯O–O⋯(TiO2)n	(18)

 	Fig. 21  Phase composition of titania with different acid concentrations from H/K titanate (reprinted with permission from ref. 442; Copyright @ 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 22  Relative fractions of titania phases with various kinds of additives: (a) 2 M NaClO4; (b) 2 M HClO4; (c) 2 M HClO4 + 2 M NaCl; (d) 2 M NaClO4 + 2 M HCl; (e) 2 M HCl; (f) 2 M NaCl (reprinted with permission from ref. 445; Copyright @ 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 23  Variations of anatase (A) and rutile (R) with hydrothermal aging time (reprinted with permission from ref. 128; Copyright @ 2010 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 24  Formation of anatase and brookite from ammonium titanate (reprinted with permission from ref. 450; Copyright @ 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 25  Change in phase compositions with varied concentrations of NH4F with 0.25 M NaF (reprinted with permission from ref. 459; Copyright @ 2013 Elsevier).	 
	(19)

 	Fig. 26  Relation between titanate and other phases of titania in wet chemical approaches (reprinted with permission from ref. 447; Copyright @ 2005 American Chemical Society).	 
H2O2 → −OOH + H+ → O22− + 2H+	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
TTIP + H2O2 + 3H2O → [Ti(OH)3(OOH)] + 4IPA	(23)
[Ti(OH)3(OOH)] → [OTi(OH)(OO)]− + H+ + H2O	(24)

 	Fig. 27  Nucleation of different phases from PTC under different pH conditions (reprinted with permission from ref. 32; Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag).	 
TiX4 + Ti(OR)4 → 2TiO2 + 4RX	(25)
TiX4 + 2ROR → TiO2 + 4RX	(26)

 	Fig. 28  Proposed mechanism pathway for TiO2 in acetone (reprinted with permission from ref. 518; Copyright @ 2005 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 29  Variation of phase contents with milling time (reprinted with permission from ref. 539; Copyright @ 2002 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 30  TiO2 transformations under ball milling conditions. Solid arrow(s) indicate the most possible transformation, while dashed arrow(s) presenting the possible or negligible transformation (reprinted with permission from ref. 541; Copyright 2000 Springer).	 
	(27)
TiOSO4·xH2O + Na2CO3 → TiO2 + Na2SO4·xH2O + CO2	(28)
TiOSO4·xH2SO4·yH2O → TiO2 + (x + y)H2O + (x + 1)SO3	(29)



Hydrothermal/solvothermal method

Ti(OBu)4	Polar water at HCl–toluene interface hydrolyzed titanium precursor to give anatase–brookite NPs decorated on rutile NRs	
49

TiCl3	Pure anatase was synthesized from (NH4)2S2O8 irrespective of pH and initial precursor concentration, while rutile was observed at pH 0.44 and brookite at pH 1.32 with oxidants like H2O2, HNO3 and HClO4	
67

A unique transformation sequence was observed by changing the precursor concentration from 0.9 to 0.05 M and pH < 0–1.68
Rutile → anatase–brookite–rutile → anatase–brookite → brookite → anatase–brookite
TiCl4	Anatase–rutile was observed at concentrations < 0.5 M	
79

Brookite coexisted at an intermediate concentration of 1 M
Pure rutile at 2 M
The complex [Ti(OH)2(OH2)4]2+ favored anatase–brookite, [TiO(OH)5]2+promoted rutile nucleus
TTIP	Anatase was crystallized under the acid free condition and rutile with HNO3	
120

Anatase (10 nm) was thermally stable up to 800 °C compared to the samples with 6 and 28 nm particle sizes prepared at 80 and 240 °C, respectively
TiCl4	HF and HNO3 resulted in poor crystallization of anatase compared to HCl	
141

The addition of citric acid facilitated the formation of pure rutile with rod-like morphology (pH 0.8) and anatase–rutile at pH 1.09
The chelation of citrate on amorphous titania was found to be dependent on pH, which influences the phase transformations
Ti(OBu)4	Peptizing with TEAOH promoted rutile formation at a faster rate compared to TMAOH and TBAOH	
156

TiCl4	Spherical brookite–rutile NPs were observed at 1 M, while pure rutile NRs with {101} facet were obtained at 0.3 M	
180

The addition of NaCl facilitated the NRs with an aspect ratio close to 10
TiCl4	The in situ generation of water via the esterification of alcohol and AcOH gave anatase with ethylene glycol and rutile with ethanol	
182

In the absence of acid, no product formed with the former and anatase crystallized with the latter solvent
TiCl3	Anatase–brookite observed with propanol	
183

Brookite–rutile observed with butanol
Anatase–rutile observed with octanol
TiCl4	Single phase anatase with propanol and butanol
Rutile with octanol
TiCl3	Anatase, rutile and anatase–rutile were observed with ethanol, water and water–ethanol systems, respectively, in the presence of urea and HNO3	
185

Ti(OC2H5)4	Anatase was observed with K2SO4, Na2SO4, KCl, NaCl, while different products were observed for NaF salt solutions. The crystallinity was very poor due to the adsorption of these ions on the titania surface, which hinders structure reorganization	
187

TiCl4	The in situ generation of water from the dehydration of acetone oligomers initiated hydrolysis to form anatase and rutile at precursor/acetone ratio of 1:15 and 1:10, respectively	
188

TiCl3	The addition of tartaric acid promoted BAT and morphology changed from spindle-like structures to nanorods	
192

TiCl3	Anatase–brookite–rutile was transformed to pure anatase with the exposed {001} facets via the addition of ascorbic acid	
194

Ti(OC2H5)4	Powder with a very small crystallite size and trace brookite content along with anatase promoted ART at a faster rate as compared to the sample with only anatase	
195

TiCl4	Pure rutile NRs were observed with water, while the addition of TEA as a selective adjusting agent promoted brookite formation	
202

TiCl3	Anatase–brookite–rutile was observed at pH 1, which transformed to rutile accompanied by the formation of a new corundum-like titania phase that was stable up to 900 °C	
206

Ti(OBu)4	Anatase formed with n-butanol was stable even after calcination (800 °C) due to the capping action of butoxy groups, which inhibited aggregation and reduced interparticle contact area	
207a

TTIP	Mesoporous anatase titania was obtained with triblock co-polymer and AcAc and was thermally stable even after calcination (700 °C)	
207b

Ti(OBu)4	Pure rutile microspheres were obtained on a glass substrate in an HCl–toluene suspension	
209

Ti(OBu)4	Pure anatase and rutile with a very small crystallite size was observed from alkaline and from acid peptized gel, respectively	
211

TTIP	
It was shown for the first time that rutile content does not monotonically increase with increase in acidity
	
212

Rutile content initially increased with an increase in the HCl/Ti ratio and decreased thereafter accompanied by the formation of brookite
TTIP	Anatase was observed with 1.5 M AcOH, while pure rutile and brookite were observed at 4 M and 3 M HCl, respectively	
213

Brookite was formed from unsymmetric [Ti(OH)2Cl(OH2)3]+ and rutile nucleated from symmetric [Ti(OH)2Cl4]2− complexes
TTIP	Anatase with smaller particle sizes (3.1 and 3.7 nm) underwent ART at a faster rate compared to the other sample (6.0 and 12.7 nm)	
214

ART via the dissolution of anatase and the precipitation of rutile were observed at pH 1, while partial ART was found at pH 3
Ti(OBu)4	
After the hydrothermal treatment, the synthesis step was followed by refluxing with ED
	
222

The synergistic interaction between CTAB with TiO2 surface, as well as amine groups of ED and TiO2, stabilized brookite up to 800 °C
 

Sol–gel hydrolysis

Ti(OBu)4	Hydrolysis with HNO3 favored ABT in preference to ART, while BAT dominated under the acid free condition	
27

TiCl4	The Ea values of ART for aged and unaged samples were 426–506 and 205 kJ mol−1, respectively. The large agglomeration number for unaged samples induces interparticle contact to promote rutile	
31

TiCl4	Brookite precipitated along with anatase at pH 5 to promote ART during calcination, due to high density of potential nucleation sites at the anatase–brookite interface	
96 and 242a

TiCl4	The alcohol washing of precipitated powders suppressed anatase crystallization from amorphous, but promoted ART during thermal treatment, as organic impurities on the particle surface served as nucleation sites and also created surface oxygen vacancies	
236 and 237

TTIP	The slow hydrolysis of the precursor with IPA prevented rutile precipitation	
245

TTIP	Acidic hydrolysis promoted amorphous to anatase and ART, while both these transformation pathways were inhibited under basic conditions	
248

Ti(OBu)4	Gel obtained at pH 5 (or 9) was anatase, while anatase–brookite–rutile and anatase–brookite were formed at pH 3 and 7, respectively, after calcination	
253

Ti(OBu)4	Mesoporous anatase was observed using triblock co-polymer EO20PO70EO20 as a structure-directing agent	
254

TTIP	The addition of Pluronic F127 promoted ABT, while the addition of DEA suppressed brookite formation	
256

TTIP	Hydrolysis with ethanol and cellophane membrane resulted in thermally stable anatase up to 900 °C, despite its large grain size (108 nm)	
257

TiCl4	Low and high titanium concentrations favored rutile and anatase due to an ordered arrangement and increased random organization of octahedral units, respectively	
259

TTIP	Anatase–rutile core–shell structure was formed with PEO and AcAc, in which the latter slowed down the hydrolysis rate of the precursor and the former induced nanoporosity	
263

Ti(OBu)4	The increase of water content in the hydrolysis step favored rutile with larger particle sizes during calcination	
61 and 269

TTIP	The increase of hydrolysis temperature from 0–80 °C shifted the crystallization and ART temperatures to higher values	
271

TTIP	Hydrolysis with AcOH at pH 3–4 stabilized anatase due to the chelation of the acetate group on the titania surface, while rutile was favored at pH 5–6	
274

TTIP	The chelation of formate via the syn–syn mode stabilized anatase even at high temperatures, while the addition of water changed the binding mode to syn–anti to produce rutile at low temperatures	
277

TTIP	The addition of butyric acid in the hydrolysis step accelerated the crystallization of anatase from amorphous and ART compared to AcOH and propanoic acid	
278

TTIP	A Mixed complexing agent like DEA–polyethylene glycol in the hydrolysis promoted brookite, while AcAc–polyethylene glycol and AcAc–AcOH showed anatase after calcination (600 °C)	
279

Ti(OBu)4	
In situ generated water via esterification promoted the formation of Anatase–TiO2(B)	
280

Ti(OBu)4	The hydrolysis of titanium glycolate with acetone transformed to rutile at 850 °C. The water content in acetone was the decisive factor in tuning the final size of the particles	
281

 

Ultrasonication and photo-illumination assisted sol–gel hydrolysis

Ti(OBu)4	Anatase and rutile were obtained with H2SO4 and HCl, respectively	
139

Anatase–brookite–rutile was obtained for 1 M HNO3 and only rutile at 2 M HNO3
TTIP–TiCl4	Anatase, rutile and anatase–rutile were obtained with alkoxide, halide and halide–alkoxide precursors, respectively	
174

TTIP	Anatase–brookite was observed in ethanol–water systems	
297

TTIP	Mesoporous titania with anatase crystal structure having a worm-like framework was observed using long chain organic amines as a structure-directing agent	
298

TTIP	Mesoporous anatase was obtained under template free conditions, using AcOH as a modifying agent	
299

TTIP	Anatase–brookite was observed using triblock copolymer at neutral pH conditions	
300

TTIP	Anatase–brookite was observed with pure water, while ethanol inhibited brookite nucleation	
302

TTIP	ABT and ART dominated during the initial stages (60 min), followed by BAT (90 min) and BRT (120 min) for Tip-type ultrasonication, while bath-type induced only ABT (60–120 min)	
304

TTIP	Rutile fraction increased with an increase in the ultrasonic irradiation amplitude (40%) and decreased thereafter	
305

TTIP	Photo-illumination during the hydrolysis with HCl promoted anatase crystallization and ART at low temperature	
306 and 307

Ti(OBu)4	Photo-illumination during the sol–gel hydrolysis produced Ti3+ resulting in the formation of anatase TiO2–Ti2O3 binary system	
312 and 313

TTIP	Rutile was observed for high water content for photoassisted sol–gel method, while it was obtained for intermediate water content via the conventional route	
314

TiCl4	Anatase was obtained at a very low temperature (80 °C) with t-butylalcohol via alkyl halide elimination	
323

 

IL-assisted sol–gel hydrolysis

TTIP	An increase in the volume of IL during the precursor hydrolysis enhanced the anatase crystal growth, due to the increased viscosity and decreased diffusion co-efficient	
330

TTIP	The addition of [cmim][HSO4] changed the morphology from rutile NRs to nanoflowers	
331

TiCl4	The addition of [emim][Br] favored rutile formation, as it anchored on rutile {110} plane due to favorable geometry	
333

TiCl4	The addition of [bmim][Cl] in water promoted ART, while the presence of fluoride or sulfate anions stabilized anatase	
337

Ti(OBu)4	Mesoporous anatase was observed with [bmim][BF4] at very low temperatures (60–100 °C) and was stable up to 900 °C	
339

TTIP	The IL/Ti4+ ratio of 3:1 was necessary to form crystalline titania	
344

Porous anatase with [bmim][PF6] that served as self-assembling templates like long chain surfactants
Other ILs like [bmim][BF4], [bmim][CF3SO3] and [hmim][PF6] were not effective to induce mesoporous structures
TTIP	Pure anatase was formed with [C3mimOH][Tf2N], while anatase–brookite was obtained for [P66614][Tf2N], [N1888][Tf2N], [C4Py][Tf2N] and [C4mim][Tf2N]	
354

TiCl4	TiO2(B) was observed only with ILs based on imidazolium moieties	
355

 

Thermolysis/thermohydrolysis

Ti powder	Brookite flowers obtained were stable up to 500 °C	
46

TiCl4	Anatase–brookite–rutile was observed with HClO4 (1–5 M), while brookite–rutile with 3 M HCl	
86

Brookite was formed by lowering the concentration of precursor to 0.05 M and [Ti(OH)2Cl2(OH2)2]0 was solely responsible for its formation
TTIP	Anatase–brookite was obtained in hot water	
256

TiCl4	Pure rutile was observed with ≤2 M HCl and anatase above it	
333

TiCl4	Anatase–brookite–rutile, anatase–brookite, and anatase–rutile were observed in the region of 0.25–0.09, 0.06 and 0.81–0.34 M TiCl4, respectively	
357

Brookite content was scarcely affected with water, but increased with increase in aging time (48–76 h)
TiCl4	Mesoporous rutile titania was obtained using ocytl phenol (polyethylene oxide) as the surfactant	
358

TiCl4	Pure rutile NRs were obtained with ethanol, while rod-like nanoparticles were obtained with water	
359

TiCl4	Water to ethanol ratio	
363

Anatase–rutile 70:0
Brookite–rutile 50:20
Anatase–brookite 20:50
Anatase 10:60
TiCl4	Anatase–brookite–rutile was synthesized with 1 M HNO3 and aging favored ABT and ART	
367

TiCl3	Phase transition pathways with increase in pH (1–7) followed the order:	
369

Rutile → brookite–rutile → anatase–brookite–rutile → anatase–brookite
TiCl4	Anatase with H2SO4 or H3PO4, while anatase–rutile with HCl/CH3COOH/HNO3	
370

TiCl4	Aging the gel by simple boiling for 12–48 h promoted anatase crystallinity and shifted ART to higher temperatures	
371

TiCl4	Anatase–brookite was observed after aging in the pH range of 2.7–4.0 via the addition of NH4HCO3	
373

TiBALDH	The in situ generation of hydroxide ion from ≥6.0 M urea facilitated high quality brookite NRs	
380

TiOSO4	Ti2O3(H2O)2(C2O4)·H2O was obtained through the addition of oxalic acid and mesoporous brookite with high surface area was obtained from the oxalate precursor	
384

TiBr4	Anatase–rutile and pure anatase was obtained with Na2O2 depending on the refluxing conditions	
389

TiOCl2	The addition of NbCl5, NiCl2 and FeCl3 stabilized rutile, ZrOCl2 favored anatase and AlCl3 promoted anatase–rutile	
390

 

Microemulsion method

TiCl4	An unusual orthorhombic crystal structure was formed	
394

Ti(OBu)4	Finely dispersed anatase (15 nm) nanoparticles were obtained	
403

TiCl4	By changing the volume ratio of oil to water in reverse microemulsion, rutile changed its morphology from nanoclusters to nanospherules, and then grew into nanodumb bells and finally nanorods were obtained	
404

TiCl3	Pure anatase was obtained with urea dissolved in water, while anatase–rutile for urea dissolved in HCl	
407

Ti(OBu)4	Anatase 0.5 M HNO3	
410

Rutile ≥1.0 M HCl
Anatase–rutile 1 M HNO3 and ≤0.5 M HCl
TiCl4	Anatase hollow spheres were obtained and their thicknesses were directly proportional to the precursor concentration	
411a

 

Preparation with different titanium precursors

[N(CH2CH2O)3Ti–OiPr]	Rutile was directly formed from this precursor without anatase	
391

Water soluble titanium complexes	Anatase was selectively synthesized from citric acid, tartaric acid and malic acid, while rutile with glycolic acid and anatase–rutile with lactic acid	
415

TiB2	Nanocone rutile was obtained at 1 M HCl and 3 mM Na2SO4 and anatase with 0.5 M HCl, while brookite was observed with HNO3	
416

TiOF2	Anatase formed was stabilized up to 900 °C due to the adsorption of fluoride ions	
418

TiBALDH	The complete hydrolysis of the precursor (pH 10–11) resulted in anatase, partial hydrolysis (pH 9) showed anatase–rutile, and extreme stability at neutral pH lead to the formation of rutile	
424

TiOxCy/C	Rutile–anatase core–shell structure was obtained	
428

TiS2	Layered titanate was obtained at very low concentrations of NaOH (1–2 M) owing to the low bond strength of Ti–S	
429

ABT was favored at a very low concentration of NaOH (0.5 M) and pure brookite was observed at 1.2 M NaOH
TiOSO4	Pure anatase was observed at pH < 7, layered titanate at neutral pH and pure brookite at alkaline conditions using 0.21 M NaOH. In contrast, anatase–rutile was observed with LiOH and KOH. The as obtained brookite flowers were thermally stable up to 900 °C	
430

Ti(SO4)2	Pure rutile was observed after peptizing the precipitate with HNO3 at room temperature	
432i

Ti(SO4)2	Anatase, anatase–brookite and brookite was obtained at pH 5, 6–9 and 10–11, respectively	
432j

Ti(SO4)2	Anatase–rutile hollow spheres were observed with H2O2 at pH 1	
432k

Ti(SO4)2	Pure anatase hollow spheres were obtained with NH4F–H2O2 system	
432l

 

Preparation of titania from layered titanate precursors

H2Ti5O11·3H2O	Unique phase transition sequence: anatase to rutile to anatase was observed via increasing the hydrothermal aging time under acidic peptized conditions	
128

H/K titanate	Brookite–rutile–TiO2(B) was observed with 0.2–2.0 M HCl and 0.5–0.15 M HNO3	
442

Pure TiO2(B) was formed for 0.1 and 1 mM HNO3
H2TinO2n+1	ABT was preferred with HClO4 and HNO3	
445

H2Ti3O7·xH2O	Anatase and rutile was observed with 0.05 M and 2 M HNO3, respectively, at 30 °C	
447

Titanates prepared at low temperatures (≤100 °C) transformed to anatase at 400–500 °C, while those prepared at 200 °C were thermally stable up to 650 °C
(NH4)2Ti2O5·H2O	Anatase was formed in an alkaline medium due to the deintercalation of NH4+ ions	
450–454

The presence of NaCl (or NaF) results in brookite	

The presence of NaNO3, Na2B4O7 and CH3COONa also favored brookite depending on its concentration and hydrothermal aging time	

The mixture of NH4F and NaF favored pure anatase, although it was not observed with only NH4F or NaF	
459

K2Ti2O5	Anatase core was stabilized up to 900 °C, due to the presence of the TiO2(B) shell	
467

H2Ti4O9·1.2H2O	Anatase–rutile was observed with different concentrations of mineral acids	
468

H2Ti4O9·nH2O	Pure anatase was observed with water and TiO2(B)–Anatase with methanol and ethanol	
473

 

Preparation of titania from PTC

PTC	Pure rutile at pH 0, anatase in wide pH range of 2–12 and lamellar hydrogen titanate was formed at pH 14	
32

PTC	Brookite–anatase was observed at pH 1	
33

PTC	The addition of AcOH yields anatase–rutile	
483

PTC	Modification with H2O2 resulted in thermally stable anatase up to 900 °C because of the increased Ti–O–Ti bond strength	
489

PTC	PTC derived from TiCl4 showed anatase, while anatase–rutile from TTIP	
491

PTC	Pure brookite was obtained with glycolic acid and transformed to rutile at 1125 °C, while the critical size for BRT was found to be 24 nm	
493

PTC	Rice like rutile was observed via the addition of CF3COOH	
495

 

Preparation of titania via non-aqueous route

TiX4	Rutile was favored with increase in the nucleophilicity of halide in the precursor	
506

TiCl4–Ti(OBu)4	Mesoporous anatase–rutile was obtained and anatase content decreased with an increase in [TiCl4]	
507

TiCl4–TTIP	The gel obtained with CCl4 at a low hydrothermal temperature (140 °C, 3 h) showed maximum rutile content as compared to the sample obtained at a higher temperature (160 °C, 3 h) after thermal treatment	
511

TiCl4	The in situ generation of water due to the condensation of BA at Ti centers initiates the nucleation and growth of titania NPs	
513 and 514

The reaction was illustrated from the prospect of the SN1 mechanism
TiCl4	Reaction medium containing TiCl4 and BA seeded with ST21 (commercial anatase) resulted in anatase–rutile	
515

TTIP	Anatase nanoplatelets were observed with benzyl amine or m-xylylene diamine	
517

TTIP	Anatase was observed in the presence of various ketones as oxygen donors	
518

TiCl4	Rutile content decreased with an increase in carbon chain lengths of primary alcohols, while anatase–rutile and brookite–rutile were observed for secondary and tertiary butanol, respectively	
519

TiCl4	Anatase NPs and rutile NRs were obtained at high and low molar ratios of TiCl4–n-butanol, respectively, while only anatase was observed with ethanol irrespective of the concentration	
521

TiCl4	Anatase was obtained with natural cellulosic material as oxygen donors	
523

 

Preparation of titania via mechanical activation (ball milling method)

Anatase (70 nm)	ABT dominated at the milling speed of 500 rpm, while ART and BRT prevailed at 600 rpm	
109

TiOSO4·xH2O	Rutile was observed with Na2CO3	
529

Anatase	Smaller particle size (22 nm) transformed to srilankite and rutile at a faster rate as compared to large crystallites (96 nm)	
533

Anatase (270 nm)	A High pressure polymorph of titania (orthorhombic; α-PbO2) was observed	
538

Anatase–rutile (34.3:43.1 nm)	Anatase–rutile–srilankite was observed at the initial stages of ball milling	
539

Anatase transformed to srilankite rather than to rutile
Anatase–rutile (17 nm)	Anatase–rutile transformed to srilankite or became amorphous at later stages of milling	
541

An increase of temperature during milling under air cooled conditions destabilized anatase, while milling under water cooled conditions inhibited rutile
Anatase (30 nm)	The transformation rate of anatase to srilankite and rutile increased with a decrease in the oxygen partial pressure of milling atmosphere	
542

Anatase (136 ± 51 nm)	Anatase to TiO2II phase transformation rate was faster for high powder to ball weight ratio	
543

Anatase (70 nm)	Increasing the milling time did not affect phase transformation, but milling speed and ball to powder ratio lead to high energy release for each particle to facilitate phase transition	
544

(TiOSO4·xH2O·yH2SO4)	Rutile formation was suppressed in the presence of NaCl as the diluents phase	
546


 	Fig. 31  Transformation of precursor into various titania polymorphs in solution based approach. Mineral acids = HCl, HNO3 and H2SO4.	 
AcAc	Acetylacetone
AcOH	Acetic acid
ART	Anatase to rutile phase transition
ABT	Anatase to brookite phase transition
BA	Benzyl alcohol
BAT	Brookite to anatase phase transition
BRT	Brookite to rutile phase transition
CB	Conduction band
CTAB	Cetyltriethylammonium bromide
CTAC	Cetyltrimethylammonium chloride
CMC	Critical micellar concentration
DEA	Diethanolamine

E
a
	Energy of activation
DSC	Differential scanning calorimetry
ED	Ethylenediamine
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared
ILs	Ionic liquids
IPA	Isopropyl alcohol
JMAK	Johnson–Mehl–Avrami–Kolmogorov
LAHC	Luarylamine hydrochloride
MC	Methyl cellulose
NPs	Nanoparticles
NRs	Nanorods
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
OA	Oriented attachment
OR	Ostwald ripening
PEO	Polyethylene oxide
PPO	Polypropylene oxide
PTC	Peroxo titanate complex
PVP	Polyvinylpyrrolidone
PZC	Point of zero charge
RT	Room temperature
RTILs	Room temperature ionic liquids
TiBALDH	Titanium(IV) bis(ammonium lactate)dihydroxide complex
TEA	Triethyl amine
TBAOH	Tetrabutylammonium hydroxide
TEAOH	Tetraethylammonium hydroxide
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
Ti(OBu)4	Titanium n-butoxide
TTIP	Titanium tetraisopropoxide
[TiO6]	TiO6 octahedra
TMAOH	Tetramethylammonium hydroxide
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
VB	Valence band

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
