Increasing the active sites and intrinsic activity of transition metal chalcogenide electrocatalysts for enhanced water splitting  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA08802A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA08802A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25465-25498Increasing the active sites and intrinsic activity of transition metal chalcogenide electrocatalysts for enhanced water splitting

        
          
            Jingbin 
            Huang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Jiang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tianyun 
            An
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Minhua 
            Cao
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Cluster Science, Ministry of Education of China, Beijing Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic/Electrophotonic Conversion Materials, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P. R. China. E-mail: caomh@bit.edu.cn
Received 
      7th September 2020
    , Accepted 30th October 2020First published on 16th November 2020AbstractElectrochemical water splitting has been regarded as a promising technique for facilitating the conversion of sustainable energy. To realize the large-scale application of water electrolysis, it is urgent and imperative to develop low-cost, earth-abundant, high-efficient, and stable electrocatalysts to substitute noble-metal-based catalysts. Among the various nonnoble-metal-based electrocatalysts, transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) have attracted considerable attention in recent years in the field of electrochemical water splitting because of their unique structural and electronic properties. Nevertheless, the limited number of active sites as well as sluggish electrochemical kinetics severely impede their electrochemical performances. Some valid strategies, such as increasing the number of active sites and enhancing the intrinsic activity of each active site via extrinsic and intrinsic modifications, have been consequently adopted to enhance electrochemical activities. Herein, a comprehensive overview of the developed strategies in optimizing the electrocatalytic activities of TMCs is reviewed. A unique emphasis is placed on the promising strategies to regulate the electronic structures of TMCs by surface vacancy/defect, heteroatom doping, strain regulation, phase transition, and heterostructure engineering. Moreover, the intrinsic mechanistic analyses of the electronic structure, intermediate adsorption, and coordination environment are also presented via theoretical simulation and advanced characterization techniques. Remaining challenges and future perspectives for the further development of promising water-splitting systems are discussed, too.
1. Introduction
Over the past several decades, the global energy demand has rapidly increased with the development of society and the growth of population. The energy demand is expected to further increase from 16 terawatt (TW) in 2010 to 30 TW in 2050.1 On the basis of current statistics, 80% of the total energy consumed was from conventional fossil resources (such as oil, coal, and gas), whereas renewable energy sources including solar, wind, and hydroelectric power have fulfilled only 20% of the global energy consumption in 2016.2 The heavy dependence on fossil fuels has inevitably resulted in their rapid exhaustion, as well as the accompanying serious environmental issues such as global warming. Therefore, it has become urgent to develop sustainable and renewable energy sources to resolve serious ecological deterioration and sustain long-term development.3 Hydrogen (H2), a zero-carbon and clean energy carrier with sufficient availability and high gravimetric energy density (142 MJ kg−1), is widely considered as a promising candidate for clean energy supply to replace fossil fuels.4 Unfortunately, most of the H2 is currently generated mainly by the steam reforming of fossil resources,5 and this route not only consumes fossil fuels at a lower conversion rate but also produces CO2 as a byproduct, which, in turn, aggravates the problem of global warming.6 For this purpose, a clean, renewable, and efficient strategy for H2 generation without further deteriorating the environmental problems is crucial for the successful realization of hydrogen economy. Electrochemical water splitting to produce H2 has been considered to be a clean, efficient, and sustainable technique, because water is both the sole starting material and the byproduct in the cycle of hydrogen economy, where H2 combustion releases energy and simultaneously reproduces water.7 To date, noble-metal-based materials (such as Pt, IrO2, and RuO2) have been regarded as the most efficient catalysts for water splitting.8,9 Nevertheless, the utilization of noble-metal-based catalysts seriously prevents large-scale applications owing to their high cost and low abundance.10 Hence, low-cost and earth-abundant nonnoble-metal-based alternatives with high catalytic activity and long-term durability are urgently required, which is vital for the realization of clean energy conversion.
Recently, great efforts have been devoted toward the development of nonnoble-metal-based electrocatalysts based on earth-abundant transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs), transition metal phosphides (TMPs), transition metal carbides, transition metal nitrides (TMNs), transition metal oxides, transition metal hydroxides/oxyhydroxides, transition metal phosphates, etc., which have led to tremendous breakthroughs in the field of water-splitting technology.11,12 Among these materials, TMCs have attracted considerable attention owing to their unique electronic properties, structural configuration, and excellent catalytic activity.13,14 In particular, TMCs possess a broad range of electronic properties ranging from insulators (e.g., HfS2), semiconductors (e.g., MoS2 and WS2), and semimetals (e.g., WTe2 and TiSe2) to metals (e.g., NbS2 and VSe2),15 and hence, they exhibit a variety of interesting properties such as metallicity, superconductivity, magnetism, and charge density waves, making them versatile for a wide range of applications. Moreover, most TMCs include three polymorphs: trigonal (1T), hexagonal (2H), and rhombohedral (3R) phases; further, phase transformation can occur under certain conditions. For instance, MoS2 usually crystallizes in a semiconducting 2H phase consisting of edge-sharing MoS6 trigonal prisms with two layers per unit cell, but it can be converted into the metastable metallic 1T phase with one layer per unit cell by lithium intercalation,16 where the coordination of molybdenum is octahedral. Among the three phases of MoS2, the 2H and 1T phases are widely used in HER because of their unique structural configuration. Besides, recent studies have shown that TMCs exhibit excellent catalytic properties compared with other transition metal catalysts, which may be due to the fact that TMCs have thermo-neutral H-binding energy, large surface area, and higher percentage of exposed atoms.17 Earth-abundant TMCs with the general formula MmXn (M: transition metal; X: chalcogen) include two-dimensional (2D) layered (MX2) and nonlayered structural materials.18–21 The 2D layered MX2 nanosheets generally exhibit unusual physical, chemical, and electronic properties compared with their bulk counterparts.22–24 Experimental studies have demonstrated that the edges of 2D MX2 (e.g., MoS2 and MoSe2) are electrocatalytically active sites for H2 production.25 Moreover, the Gibbs free energy for hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH*) of MoS2 for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is comparable to that of Pt as per density functional theory (DFT) calculations, suggesting its promising potential toward HER.26 Unlike the 2D layered MX2, nonlayered TMCs materials have been widely adopted as electrocatalysts for both HER and oxygen evolution reaction (OER).27–29 It has been proven that a partially filled eg band contributes toward the superior OER activity. Despite remarkable advances achieved in TMC-based electrocatalytic materials, their electrocatalytic activities remain largely limited by the low electrical conductivity, poor stability, serious aggregation or restacking, inert basal plane, and unfavorable water adsorption and dissociation abilities.30–33
Currently, remarkable strategies have been developed to enhance the activity of TMC electrocatalysts, which are primarily divided as follows: (i) increasing the number of active sites via structural engineering (e.g., vertical alignment, porous structures, stepped surface structure, nanostructuring, and so on) or increasing the loading of catalysts to ensure more active sites. Nevertheless, by this way, their overall activities still show limited enhancement, because only a small fraction of active sites contribute to the electrocatalytic reaction rate.25 Moreover, there are some physical limits to increase the loading of catalysts onto an electrode and further loading would eventually cause limitations on mass/charge transport,3 thereby resulting in a plateau effect observed in practice at higher catalyst loadings. Therefore, these shortcomings have inspired the development of other strategies, i.e., (ii) increasing the intrinsic activity of each active site by regulating the electronic structure (such as surface vacancy/defect, heteroatom doping, strain regulation, phase transition, and heterostructure engineering). Such an approach depends on regulating the energy band structure and electron distribution to optimize the electrocatalytic performances.34 Furthermore, increasing the intrinsic activity leads to a significant enhancement in the electrode activity, meanwhile mitigating the mass/charge transport issues arising from high catalyst loadings; with improved intrinsic activity, the catalyst loadings can be decreased, which also reduces the catalyst costs. It has been reported that the difference in the intrinsic activity between a good and a poor catalyst can be more than 10 orders of magnitude, whereas the difference between a high-loading and low-loading catalyst is usually only one to three orders of magnitude.35 Therefore, increasing the intrinsic activity via electronic structure regulation has a broader space for promoting the electrocatalytic activities of TMCs.
Several studies have been recently attempted to reveal the relationship between electronic structure regulation and electrochemical performance.36,37 Since the adsorption strength of the intermediates as an intuitionistic behavior of the electronic structure directly determines the reaction kinetics, the Gibbs free energy for intermediate adsorption has been identified as a crucial parameter to explain the corresponding catalytic behavior.38 Notably, Xie et al. emphasized the charge modulation and spin ordering of 2D ultrathin solids and clarified the electronic structure–performance relationship.39 This work considers the electronic structure regulation as an original illustration of catalytic activity. The spin ordering, energy band structure, and density of states (DOSs) intrinsically characterize the electronic behaviors. Combining the advanced operando characteristics and powerful simulation methods, clear images of the electronic structure can be obtained by detecting and simulating these characteristics.40 On the basis of this, these methods provide a platform to understand the electronic structure regulation. The derived principles, in turn, show an instructive significance to design highly efficient electrocatalysts for water splitting.
In this comprehensive review, the fundamental principles of electrocatalytic water splitting are first summarized. Subsequently, we mainly review the state-of-the-art strategies to optimize the electrocatalytic activities of TMCs, including increasing the number of active sites and intrinsic activity. Uniquely, we focus on strategies to modify the electronic structure for enhancing the intrinsic electrocatalytic activities of TMCs. Further, we systemically discuss the relationship between the electronic structure and catalytic activity. Notably, the intrinsic mechanism analyses of the electronic structure and intermediate adsorption have also been discussed. Finally, the challenges, perspectives, and research trends for future TMC-based catalysts for developing sustainable and clean hydrogen energy are featured. The rational design strategies summarized here should provide valuable guidelines for intricately fabricating the desirable electrocatalysts and the possibility of making a future breakthrough in electrocatalytic water-splitting development.
2. Principles of electrocatalytic water splitting
2.1. HER
HER with two-electron transfer is generally recognized as an adsorption–desorption process of the intermediates,10 possibly involving three principal steps for the reduction of protons in acidic media or water molecules in alkaline media (Fig. 1a) to produce H2.41 The first step is the Volmer reaction (eqn (1) and (2)), where one proton adsorbed on the catalytic sites (M) reacts with an electron to form an adsorbed hydrogen atom (Hads) on the surface of the electrocatalyst. The proton sources are the hydronium cation (H3O+) and the water molecule in acidic and alkaline electrolytes, respectively. Subsequently, H2 is formed either via the Heyrovsky reaction at low coverage of Hads (eqn (3) and (4)) or the Tafel reaction (eqn (5)) in the case of high Hads coverage on the catalyst surface. In the Heyrovsky step, another proton diffuses to the Hads and then reacts with a second electron to evolve H2. In the Tafel step, two adjacent Hads atoms combine on the surface of the electrode to produce H2. Mechanistic studies have suggested that H2 forms via the Volmer–Heyrovsky or Volmer–Tafel pathway. The HER process can be described on the basis of the following elementary steps:11,42
 Fig. 1  (a) Mechanism of hydrogen evolution in acidic (left) and alkaline (right) media. (b) Relationship between j0 and ΔGH* under the assumption of a Langmuir adsorption model. (c) Schematic of the electrocatalytic water splitting for HER and OER. Reproduced with permission.2 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) HER volcano plot for various metals and MoS2. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2017, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
(1) Electrochemical hydrogen adsorption (Volmer reaction) H3O+ + M + e− → M–Hads + H2O (in acidic medium)(1) H2O + M + e− → M–Hads + OH− (in alkaline medium)(2)
(2) Electrochemical desorption (Heyrovsky reaction) H3O+ + M–Hads + e− → M + H2 + H2O (in acidic medium)(3) H2O + M–Hads + e− → M + H2 + OH− (in alkaline medium)(4)
(3) Chemical desorption (Tafel reaction) 2M–Hads → 2M + H2 (both acidic and alkaline mediums)(5)
Both Volmer–Heyrovsky and Volmer–Tafel pathways involve the formation of an H intermediate (H*). Therefore, ΔGH* is an important criterion to estimate the activities of HER catalysts. An active catalyst should bind the reaction of H* neither too strongly nor too weakly. If H* binds to the surface too weakly (ΔGH* > 0), the adsorption (Volmer) step limits the overall reaction rate; if the H* binding is too strong (ΔGH* < 0), the desorption (Heyrovsky/Tafel) step limits the reaction rate (Fig. 1b). Therefore, an ideal catalyst for the HER should have ΔGH* near zero.43,44 Given that ΔGH* is one of the key parameters to evaluate the HER activity of a catalyst, it is very important to develop facile ways to assess the ΔGH* value. Recently developed computational quantum chemistry provides a reasonable method to calculate the ΔGH* value on the basis of DFT calculations. By modeling the possible intermediates formed on the surface of the electrocatalysts during the HER process, the ΔGH* value can be obtained by ΔGH* = ΔEH* + ΔEZPE − TΔSH, where ΔEH* (the differential hydrogen adsorption energy) can be calculated by taking the separated H2 as the reference state, the zero-point energy change (ΔEZPE) for the adsorbed H* and isolated H2 could be obtained by the vibrational frequency calculation, and ΔSH is the entropy difference between the adsorbed state and gas phase (T is set as 300 K).25 With the development of computational science and theoretical calculations, DFT calculations play an increasingly important role in evaluating the ΔGH* values, and therefore, the construction of a volcano relationship for various catalysts can be achieved. Fig. 1d shows the volcano-type trend of the relationship between the DFT-derived ΔGH* value and the measured current density (j0), which can guide the adjustment of binding energies of reactive H* on an electrode surface to design materials with enhanced performance.
2.2. OER
Similarly, the OER can take place in either acidic or alkaline conditions, and it involves a four-step electron transfer process with multiple intermediates (i.e., *OOH, *O, and *OH) in the mechanism, as shown in eqn (6)–(13).45,46
In acidic media, 2H2O → *OH + H2O + H+ + e−(6) *OH + H2O → *O + H2O + H+ + e−(7) *O + H2O → *OOH + H+ + e−(8) *OOH → O2 + H+ + e−(9)
In alkaline media, 4OH− → *OH + 3OH− + e−(10) *OH + 3OH− → *O + 2OH− + H2O + e−(11) *O + 2OH− + H2O → *OOH + OH− + H2O + e−(12) *OOH + OH− + H2O → O2 + 2H2O + e−(13)
Compared with HER, OER is much more sluggish with regard to kinetics. Although it is an indispensable half-reaction for water splitting, OER includes four-electron transfer and O–O bond formation. Generally, the multiple electron transfer at the same time is not kinetically favorable, and some results have revealed that the OER involves multiple steps with one electron transfer per step. The total free energy variation in the OER is determined to be 4.92 eV, which can be equally distributed among the four elemental steps with different adsorbates (*OH, *O, *OOH, and O2) for thermodynamically ideal electrocatalysts.47 For OER, one universal parameter is the difference in the adsorption free energy change between the reaction intermediates of *O and *OH.48 The desirable placement of *O between *OH and *OOH can lower the free energy variation.
2.3. Overall water splitting
Overall water splitting refers to the simultaneous occurrence of HER and OER (Fig. 1c; η represents the potential difference between the required and thermodynamic values determined from a given electrochemical reaction). Unlike separate HER or OER, which is performed in a three-electrode system to evaluate the half-reaction activities of the water-splitting reaction, a two-electrode system with a cathode and an anode is assembled to form one integrated circuit for testing the overall water splitting, where HER and OER can be catalyzed by the cathode and anode, respectively. To actualize the overall water splitting, a sufficient applied voltage is required to overcome the overpotential summation of the cathode and anode. Hence, an elaborate selection of superior HER and OER electrocatalysts plays a dominant role in lowering the electricity consumption of the overall water splitting. In particular, there are some unique electrocatalysts that are competent to efficiently catalyze both HER and OER, which are defined as bifunctional electrocatalysts. These types of catalysts can function as both cathode and anode for integrating the entire overall water-splitting system, which are not only for optimizing the conversion efficiency but also for large-scale and cost-effective employment. Therefore, it is urgent to simultaneously develop efficient electrocatalysts for both HER and OER, which is promising to realize large-scale H2 fuel production in the future.
3. Increasing the number of active sites
As discussed above, TMCs can be divided into two categories: 2D layered (MX2) and nonlayered structural materials. In particular, MX2 materials such as MoS2/MoSe2 feature a sandwich structure, which comprises three stacked X–Mo–X (X: S/Se) atom layers bonded together by weak van der Waals interactions.49 In view of this unique structure, layered TMCs have been extensively regarded as one of the most promising HER electrocatalysts. Studies have shown that the basal plane of layered TMCs is inert and the catalytic activity mainly depends on the exposed edge sites, which are highly catalytically active owing to the hydrogen atom mainly adsorbed on the chalcogen edge sites. However, thermodynamics favors the presence of the basal plane, which severely impedes the electrocatalytic activity because of the limited number of active sites at the edges. Hence, it is desirable to design and modulate TMC catalysts with increased exposed active sites by tailoring the structure, such as vertical alignment, porous structure, stepped surface structure, hollow structure (HS), and nanostructuring for improving the activities of TMCs.
In this regard, Cui's group prepared MoS2 and MoSe2 thin films with vertically aligned layers grown on a flat Mo substrate,50 thereby maximally exposing the edges on the film surface (Fig. 2a). The chalcogenide films are stable HER catalysts with large exchange current densities, which directly correlate with the high density of exposed edge sites. Hence, the obtained edge-terminated MoS2 and MoSe2 catalysts with rich exposed edge sites show excellent HER catalytic activity. Subsequently, they also reported vertically oriented MoSe2 and WSe2 on curved and rough surface substrates, such as Si nanowires and carbon microfibers, by a rapid selenization process (Fig. 2b).51 Such structures can increase the surface area and maximize the exposed edge sites while maintaining the perpendicular orientation of the layers. More interestingly, strain may also be induced, expanding or squeezing the molecular layers and therefore changing the electronic structures of the films, which may be beneficial for enhancing the HER catalytic activities. Therefore, MoSe2 and WSe2 nanofilms on curved substrates are highly efficient electrocatalysts for HER compared with flat substrates. Thereafter, MoS2 nanosheet arrays vertically aligned on nickel foam (NF) and edge-oriented MoS2 films loaded on Mo substrates were also developed as excellent HER catalysts.52,53 Furthermore, Xiang and co-workers have reported single-crystal MoS2 nanobelts with the top surface fully covered by edge sites. The nanobelt structure comprises parallel-stacked atomic layers with the basal plane vertical to the substrate, and these layer edges form the top surface of the nanobelt. The top surface is highly active, leading to a high electrocatalytic HER efficiency (a low overpotential of 170 mV at a current density of −20 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 70 mV dec−1).54
 Fig. 2  (a) Idealized structure of edge-terminated MoS2 films with layers aligned vertically to the flat Mo substrate and the corresponding HRTEM image. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) MoSe2 nanofilm with molecular layers perpendicular to a curved substrate and the corresponding HRTEM image. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic for the synthesis of double-gyroid mesoporous MoS2 (and the corresponding HRTEM image) engineered to preferentially expose the edge sites. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Idealized structure of vertically aligned, stepped-edge surface-terminated MoS2 nanosheet arrays and the corresponding SEM image. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Low- and high-magnification TEM images of MoSe2 hollow spheres. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic of CoS2 arrays with different morphologies. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The report by Lewis et al.55 is also exemplary with regard to investigating active sites. They directly prepared a macroporous MoSe2 film on a glassy carbon electrode via an operando method under the conditions of HER. The initial film prepared from the precipitate was smooth, but the converted MoSe2 film was completely covered with pores (diameter: ∼200 nm). This porous MoSe2 film shows better HER performance than the smooth film, which requires only ∼250 mV of overpotential to reach −10 mA cm−2. The improvement in catalytic activity occurred because, under HER conditions, the catalytically inactive components of the film are reductively converted to amorphous, macroporous MoSe2 framework, increasing the number of exposed edge sites. In addition, Jaramillo and co-workers engineered a mesoporous MoS2 with a double-gyroid (DG) morphology to preferentially expose the active edge sites of MoS2 to obtain an improved catalytic activity. Owing to the bicontinuous network with nanopores and a high surface curvature (Fig. 2c), the DG MoS2 film catalyst possesses a large portion of active edge sites along with its high surface area, leading to excellent HER performance with an onset potential of 150 mV and a small Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1.56
In addition to simply increasing the number of exposed edge sites, attention was also paid to tailoring the edge surface. Recently, stepped-edge surface-terminated MoS2 nanosheet vertical arrays (se-MoS2) were fabricated on carbon fiber (CF) paper by using a microwave hydrothermal method (Fig. 2d).57 Compared with flat-edge surface-terminated sheet arrays and randomly grown MoS2, the vertical arrays of MoS2 sheets terminated with a stepped surface structure have proven to be an outstanding HER electrocatalyst with an overpotential of 104 mV at −10 mA cm−2 and high stability. Experimental and theoretical results have indicated that the enhanced electrocatalytic activity of the vertical MoS2 arrays is associated with a unique vertically terminated stepped surface structure and many more edge sites, which ensure an optimal ΔGH* (0.02 eV) compared with that of a flat-edge MoS2 surface and therefore faster HER kinetics. This stepped-edge engineering strategy provides a new insight according to which tailoring the edge active sites can modulate the HER performance.
Besides, the effect of the TMC morphology on the catalytic activity has also been studied. For example, our groups prepared interior-space-tunable MoSe2 structures toward HER (Fig. 2e). The results show that MoSe2 HSs require an overpotential of 153 mV to reach −10 mA cm−2, which is far smaller than those of yolk–shell-III (172 mV), yolk–shell-II (188 mV), yolk–shell-I (213 mV), core–shell (268 mV), and solid (342 mV) spheres. Moreover, the MoSe2 HSs possess the smallest Tafel slope (53.3 mV dec−1) among all the tested samples. The high activity and fast reaction kinetics of MoSe2 HSs can be attributed to the unique hollow sphere structure with a large surface area (58.3 m2 g−1) compared with those of solid (26.5 m2 g−1), core–shell (34.4 m2 g−1), and yolk–shell (43.2 m2 g−1) spheres. The HS can not only expose a larger number of catalytically active edge sites for the adsorption of ions (thereby allowing higher electrical double-layer capacitances to be achieved) but only provide a sufficient surface area for contact between the electrolyte and electrode material.58 Additionally, the hollow sphere structure can promote electron/mass transfer and facilitate the migration of charge carriers, all of which are beneficial for the HER catalytic process.59 Furthermore, Jin's group synthesized metallic pyrite-phase CoS2 with different morphologies of the film, microwire, and nanowire on graphite disk/glass substrates by adjusting the synthesis parameters for HER catalysis (Fig. 2f), and they demonstrated that the morphology plays a crucial role in determining the overall catalytic efficacy of the materials.60 Compared with film electrodes, micro- and nanostructured CoS2 materials exhibit substantially boosted HER catalytic performance due to the increased effective electrode surface area. In particular, CoS2 nanowire electrodes achieves a geometric current density of −10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 145 mV. Simultaneously, the micro- and nanostructured CoS2 materials have increased the operational stability, cyclability, and maximum achievable rate of hydrogen generation due to the more effective release of gas bubbles from the electrode surface, which can prevent the H2 bubbles from accumulating; therefore, the effective electrode surface area can be retained and the integrity of the solid–liquid interface can be maintained.
4. Increasing the intrinsic activity
Although the active-site engineering of TMC-based catalysts has achieved remarkable progress, their overall electrode activities are still limited, as generally only a small fraction of active sites contribute to the reaction rate. This has spurred the development of TMC catalysts with higher intrinsic activities. In general, the intrinsic catalytic activity is determined by the adsorptivity of the active sites of the electrocatalysts. For adsorptivity, an appropriate adsorption energy can effectively reduce the overpotential of the catalytic process. The tailored electron density at the active sites, which could be caused by the polarization effect in the orbital coupling, results in the enhanced chemical adsorptivity. This section emphasizes the electron configuration and energy band structure toward explaining the optimized intrinsic activity.
4.1. Surface vacancy/defect
TMCs are promising noble-metal-free electrocatalysts for water splitting, which possess greater plasticity for further activity improvement.61,62 Considering limiting the number of active sites, the introduction of artificial vacancy/defects is regarded as an effective strategy to boost the electrochemical performance of TMCs, which aims to create more active sites and tune the surface charge transfer property.63 Artificial defects can optimize the surface adsorption ability for reaction intermediates and simultaneously tailor the surface hydrophilic property for superior electrolyte contact, thereby significantly promoting the electrocatalytic activity.

4.1.1. Cation vacancy. 
According to a previous study, the activity of the reaction sites can be effectively tailored by vacancy-induced eg-electron configuration regulation of the active atoms. For instance, Xie et al. synthesized CoSe2 ultrathin nanosheets with Co vacancy (VCo) by a liquid exfoliation process for OER (Fig. 3a).27 After VCo introduction, the octahedron coordination field induces the splitting of electron orbits of the Co cation into the eg- and t2g-degenerate states, accompanied by a single-electron-occupied state of the eg orbit (Fig. 3b). In order to provide visual images of the electronic structure at the vacancy area, Xie et al. confirmed a large number of VCo formed in the ultrathin CoSe2 nanosheets by the positron annihilation spectrum (PAS) technique. From the PAS results, it is evident that the shorter position lifetime of the positron at the VCo site suggests higher adsorption activity for the protons (Fig. 3c). That is, the VCo on the CoSe2 nanosheets has superior hydrion adsorption capacity (Fig. 3d). First-principles calculations were used to determine the H2O adsorption energies (ΔEH2O) on cobalt sites and VCo sites. It is clear that the surface cobalt sites and VCo sites of ultrathin CoSe2 nanosheets possess ΔEH2O values of −0.63 and −0.85 eV (Fig. 3f), respectively, which are obviously higher than that (−0.38 eV) of cobalt sites in bulk CoSe2 (Fig. 3e), indicating that the VCo in ultrathin CoSe2 nanosheets is more favorable for adsorbing H2O molecules and serves as the active sites to significantly improve the OER performance of CoSe2, resulting in ultrathin CoSe2 nanosheets with a low overpotential of 320 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 3g), small Tafel slope of 44 mV dec−1, and large turnover frequency of 0.33 s−1 at an overpotential of 0.5 V, which are superior to those of bulk CoSe2 and CoSe2/DETA. Besides providing additional reactive sites, the enriched Co vacancies can also accelerate electron transfer, which is further confirmed by the increased DOSs near the Fermi level that modulate the surface electronic state of the catalyst to significantly enhance the intrinsic electrical conductivity, as well as the corresponding electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analyses. The same conclusions were also achieved by Huang's group on the investigation of ion-vacancy effects of ReS2 nanosheets.64
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the formation of Co vacancies in CoSe2 nanosheets. (b) Schematic of the spin structure of the Co cation. (c) Positron lifetime spectrum of CoSe2 nanosheets and bulk CoSe2. (d) PAS data at the Co vacancies. (e and f) Geometries and binding energies of H2O molecules at the Co sites and Co vacancies. (g) LSV curves for different electrocatalysts in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic of the formation of S vacancies in MoS2 nanosheets. (i) Comparison of ΔGH of MoS2 basal planes and 6.25% Zn-doped planes. (j) Comparison of the total DOS for MoS2 basal planes, plane with 3.12% S vacancies, and with both 6.25% Zn doping and 3.12% S vacancies. Here, Sv-n and Sv-nn denote the S vacancies near and next-near the Zn atom. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 


4.1.2. Anion vacancy. 
Beyond cation vacancies, there is another promising way to regulate the activities of electrocatalysts by introducing anion vacancies in TMCs. For instance, Xu et al. reported that MoS2 nanosheets with the S vacancy can be obtained by the Zn-reducing strategy (Fig. 3h), and the concentration of S vacancy in MoS2 could be tuned by the Zn dosage.65 The in-plane S-vacancy active sites further activate the basal plane of MoS2, which contribute to the HER activity. The DFT calculations revealed that for the basal plane of pristine 2H-MoS2, the ΔGH* is calculated to be 2.24 eV. When the S vacancy is introduced into MoS2, which acts as a new catalytic site in the basal plane of MoS2 that allows favorable hydrogen adsorption, the gap states around the Fermi level allow hydrogen to directly bind with the exposed Mo atoms.66 Moreover, the ΔGH* values of different amounts of S vacancies were determined; with an increase in the S vacancy, the band moves closer to the Fermi level and increases the number of gap states, which leads to the gradual strengthening of the H-binding energy. Therefore, when 3.12% S vacancy is introduced, hydrogen is stabilized on the exposed Mo atoms and ΔGH* decreases to 0.24 eV, and ΔGH* continues to decrease with an increase in the number of S vacancies. Moreover, the optimal S-vacancy concentration can be found in the range of 12.5–15.75%, matching the value of ΔGH* from −0.05 to −0.08 eV; further, it is very comparable to the value of −0.09 eV for the Pt surface (Fig. 3i). The effect of S vacancies on H adsorption can be revealed by determining the total DOSs (Fig. 3j). The new DOSs appear in the gap near the Fermi level as the S vacancy is introduced. Apparently, it enhances the hydrogen adsorption on the S vacancy. The optimal Zn-reduced MoS2 with an S-vacancy concentration of 13% exhibits an obviously enhanced electrochemical HER performance (194 mV at −10 mA cm−2) compared with the unreduced MoS2 nanosheets, as well as a low Tafel slope of 78 mV dec−1. The similar surface S-vacancy engineering has also been reported for multilayered MoS2.67


4.1.3. Other structural defects. 
Based on the abovementioned analyses, the cation and anion vacancies with unsaturated sites could enhance the electrical conductivity and charge transfer, as well as optimize the water adsorption, thereby improving the electrocatalytic performance. Apart from cation and anion vacancies, other structural defects, such as lattice dislocations, expansion and distortion, grain boundaries, and edges may also be favorable for enhancing the HER electrocatalytic performance by introducing additional active sites and activating the inert basal planes.68–76 For example, Xie et al. proposed a novel strategy to introduce defects into MoS2 ultrathin nanosheets.68 The existence of rich defects results in the partial cracking of the catalytically inert basal planes. A disordered atomic arrangement leads to the exposure of additional active edge sites. With the merits of defect-induced additional active edge sites, the defect-rich MoS2 ultrathin nanosheets exhibit excellent HER activity with a small onset overpotential of 120 mV, a large cathodic current density, and a small Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1. Later, Hu et al. found that the large lattice mismatch between MoO2 and MoSe2 in MoO2@MoSe2 nanosheet arrays could generate rich structural defects and disorders in MoSe2, thereby providing many active sites for HER.69 The average degree of disorder is determined to be 53.8% according to fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns. As a result, the MoO2@MoSe2 arrays show a low onset potential of 63 mV and a small Tafel slope of 49.1 mV dec−1. The same results were achieved in heterogeneous MoS2/NiS2 nanosheets, where the structural defects and disorders formed are responsible for the significantly improved HER performances.70

4.2. Heteroatom doping
Heteroatom doping is an inspiring motivation for electrocatalytic activity enhancement.77–79 The introduction of heteroatoms can destroy the periodicity of the lattice, thereby leading to a local change in the electronic structure.80 This change can effectively modify the adsorption abilities for the reaction intermediates and therefore enhance the electrocatalytic efficiency.81 In this section, the relationships among the different doping types, electronic structure, and electrocatalytic performance are discussed.

4.2.1. Single-/dual-metal atom dopants. 
According to the different doping types, heteroatom doping can be divided into three groups: single-/dual-metal atom doping, single-/dual nonmetal atom doping, and metal atom and nonmetal atom double doping. Due to the differences in the atomic radii and electronic configuration of the substituted atoms, the original lattice tends to distort, which induces local electron redistribution. These changes can activate the dopants or neighboring atoms to be the active sites. Meanwhile, the electron redistribution is beneficial for charge transfer on the active sites from the electrode interface to the adsorbed reactants.82,83
In the case of TMC-based materials, doping by single nonnoble metal atoms is one of the most common strategies. For example, Xie et al. reported V-doped MoS2 with a modified energy band structure (Fig. 4a).82 As shown in the DOSs pattern, the V-atom dopant creates a new defect level in the bandgap of MoS2 accompanied by a narrow energy gap when the dopant concentration is increased to 8% (Fig. 4b). The intralayer V doping in the MoS2 system can introduce defect states, which is close to the valence band owing to the small energy difference between the defect states and the top of the valence band, easily activating the valence electrons into the defect states behaving as a semimetal. The corresponding isosurface of the empty-state distribution revealed that the interaction between the V dopant and neighboring Mo atoms could increase the in-plane conductivity for better charge transport. Therefore, V-doped MoS2 nanosheets show enhanced catalytic performance with an overpotential of 130 mV and a smaller Tafel slope compared with that of a pure MoS2 system. Recent studies have demonstrated that doping with various heteroatoms (e.g., Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Cu)84–87 can effectively alter the electronic structure of MoS2 and tune the electron density of Mo to decrease ΔGH* for achieving higher HER performance. Bao's group confirmed that the HER activity could be enhanced, which can be attributed to the increased intrinsic conductivity and significantly decreased ΔGH* resulting from the induced electronic structure changes by covalently doping Co into mesoporous MoS2 foam (mPF-Co-MoS2).84 When doping Co into the in-plane MoS2, the number of electrons at the S atom decreases (Fig. 4c) to offset the energy-level mismatch necessary for enhancing the H adsorption and HER activity. Moreover, different metal atoms show different capabilities to modify the electron density on S atoms, and the Co-atom dopants can tune the ΔGH* to 0 eV (Fig. 4d). As a result, mPF-Co-MoS2 with an optimized Co content of 16.7% exhibits a Tafel slope of 74 mV dec−1 and a small overpotential of 156 mV at a current density of −10 mA cm−2. Moreover, Zhao's group demonstrated that Co covalently doped in MoS2 not only dramatically enhanced the HER performance but also induced superior OER activity. More specifically, the Co covalent doping, on one hand, leads to the formation of the Co–S covalent bond; on the other hand, it changes the electronic structure of MoS2. Further theoretical calculations also revealed that pristine MoS2 is a semiconductor with a bandgap of ∼1.70 eV, while the Co-doped MoS2 slab shows metallic characteristics with a bandgap of ∼0 eV, which facilitates electrocatalysis. Hence, the catalyst with the optimal cobalt doping concentration can readily deliver high current densities of 10, 100, and 200 mA cm−2 at low overpotentials for HER (48, 132, 165 mV) and OER (260, 350, 390 mV), respectively.85 Recently, Cui and co-workers incorporated various transition metal atoms (Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) into the edge sites of vertically aligned MoS2 films to enhance the HER activity of the S-edge sites of MoS2. They found that Fe- and Co-doped MoS2 films have much larger exchange current densities and turnover frequencies because of their lower ΔGH* values.86 Similarly, Chen et al. reported MoS2 doped with different transition metal atoms (Zn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu), and they found that Zn-doped MoS2 (Zn-MoS2) exhibits superior electrochemical activity toward HER with an onset potential of 130 mV and Tafel slope of 51 mV dec−1. This large enhancement can be attributed to the synergy between the electronic effect (energy-level matching) and morphological effect (rich active sites) via thermodynamic and kinetic acceleration, respectively.87 In addition to single nonnoble metal atoms, noble-metal Pt atom is also used as a dopant to tune the catalytic activity. Bao et al. reported the Pt-doped MoS2 (Pt-MoS2) with the η10 value decreasing from 390 to 140 mV. The corresponding calculated results demonstrate that Pt-MoS2 shows a significantly enhanced HER activity compared with pure MoS2 due to the tuned adsorption behavior of H atoms on the in-plane S sites neighboring the doped Pt atoms, which originates from the novel electronic states of Pt-MoS2. As a result, these reconstructed electronic configurations of Pt-MoS2 considerably reduce ΔGH* from ∼1.83 to ∼0 eV and consequently boost the HER activity.88
 Fig. 4  (a) Empty-state isosurface above the Fermi level and (b) DOSs diagram of V0.08Mo0.92S2 nanosheet. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Differential charge density of Co-doped MoS2. Red and green contours represent electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. (d) ΔGH* on S atoms vs. the Bader charge of S atoms for different structures. Insets show the atomic configurations of one S atom bonding with three Co, two Co, and one Mo; one Co and two Mo; and three Mo atoms. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (e) DOSs of the oxygen-incorporated MoS2 slab (top) and pristine 2H-MoS2 slab (bottom). (f) Charge density distributions of the valence band (left) and conduction band (right) near the oxygen atom. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (g) Calculated DOSs and bandgap of MoSe2 (top) and N-doped MoSe2 (bottom). Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (h) ΔGH* for the P and S sites in the basal plane of pristine and P-doped MoS2. Insets show the P-doped MoS2 basal plane with an Had atom on the most active site, the P site. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (i) Calculated free energy diagram of different catalysts for alkaline HER. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (j) DFT calculations of the energy barrier of HER on the (001) facet models of various catalysts. The acronyms IS, TS, and FS represent the initial, transition, and final states, respectively. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
In contrast with single-metal-atom doping, dual-metal-atom doping has proven to be more impactful in tailoring the water dissociation process.89,90 For instance, Co,Fe-codoped porous NiSe2 (CoFe-NiSe2) nanosheets exhibited efficient activity for overall water splitting. The crystal distortion of CoFe-NiSe2 from external Co,Fe incorporation may result in increased active site exposure and accordingly expedite the electrocatalysis. Meanwhile, stronger electronic interaction was verified, and it may regulate the electronic framework of the metal center, thereby resulting in the optimized adsorption energy of the reaction intermediates compared with single-metal-doped or pure NiSe2. The optimal Co0.13Fe0.09-NiSe2 arrays deliver low overpotentials of 251 and 92 mV for OER and HER at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, respectively. When it was used as bifunctional electrodes for overall water splitting, a current density of 10 mA cm−2 was achieved at a low cell voltage of 1.52 V, which is much superior to undoped and mono-doped NiSe2, indicating the synergism of Co,Fe-codoping for activity promotion. Furthermore, the acceleration of hydrogen evolution was well interpreted by DFT calculations; a significant reduction in the intermediate absorption energy was observed under circumstances of Co,Fe-codoping owing to the strong electronic interaction in Co,Fe-NiSe2 electrocatalyst.89 Besides, Paik and co-workers reported a novel metal–organic framework (MOF)-engaged strategy to synthesize Ni,Co-codoping MoS2 nanoboxes under solvothermal conditions. The obtained hollow Ni-Co-MoS2 nanoboxes exhibit enhanced electrochemical activity as an electrocatalyst for HER with an onset potential of 125 mV and a small Tafel slope of 51 mV dec−1. This enhanced HER performance can be attributed to the doping of transition metal atoms, which could further optimize the electronic structure and the synergistic effect between various metal sulfide phases (NiSx, CoSx, NiMoS, and CoMoS) and MoS2.90


4.2.2. Single-/dual-nonmetal atom dopants. 
Nonmetal atom dopants can be used to either directly introduce active sites or activate the nearby atoms to be the active sites. With regard to doping nonmetal atoms into transition metal compounds, the native nonmetal atoms are usually substituted, which could result in charge density redistribution at the doping sites due to the different bonding lengths and electronegativities. For example, Xie's group reported that O dopants could drastically improve the HER performance of 2H-MoS2 nanosheets.91 As shown in the calculated DOSs (Fig. 4e), the oxygen-incorporated MoS2 possesses a much narrower bandgap of 1.30 eV with respect to that of pristine 2H-MoS2 (1.75 eV), indicating that oxygen incorporation in MoS2 ultrathin nanosheets could lead to more charge carriers and higher intrinsic conductivity. Moreover, doped O atoms redistribute the charge densities in both conduction and valence bands in sharp contrast to that of original 2H-MoS2 (Fig. 4f), verifying the significant effect of oxygen incorporation on the electronic structure. Further DFT calculations demonstrated that the doped O could significantly reduce the energy barrier of 2H-MoS2 nanosheets for hydrogen adsorption from 0.81 to 0.32 eV, along with an increase in charge transfer. These were experimentally reflected by a reduced Tafel slope from 81 to 55 mV dec−1. Additionally, Li et al. studied the effect of coordination structures on the ΔGH* on the surface sites of N-doped Ni3S2.92 It was found that the stronger coordination capability of N than S along with the larger charge difference between the bulk and surface Ni atoms leads to a lower ΔGH* value. In their experiments, the higher electronegativity of N (3.04) over S (2.58) could generate a stronger ΔGH* (ΔGH* decreases from 1.086 to 0.036 eV). Besides, the lower coordination number of surface S atoms in Ni3S2 nanosheets with more dangling bonds was also found to contribute to reduce ΔGH*. Deng et al. also reported N-doped MoSe2/vertical graphene (N-MoSe2/VG) with the best HER activity, which can deliver −10 mA cm−2 at a low overpotential of 98 mV, outperforming MoSe2/VG. DFT calculations indicated that the bandgap of original MoSe2 (1.22 eV) was considerably decreased to 0.51 eV after N incorporation (Fig. 4g), indicating the metallic property of N-doped MoSe2.93 Consequently, N-doped MoSe2 can facilitate the exposure of active sites as well as electron transfer, endowing the prominent optimization of HER performance. Besides, the intentional introduction of nonmetal P dopant can also greatly improve the electrocatalytic performance.94,95 For example, Xue et al. doped P into MoS2 to obtain excellent electrocatalytic activity with an overpotential of ∼43 mV at −10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 34 mV dec−1. The DFT calculations indicated that P dopants could modulate the surface electronic state of MoS2 to improve the intrinsic electrical conductivity, which facilitates faster electron transfer between the active sites at the basal plane. Furthermore, P dopants can act as the new active sites with ΔGH* of 0.04 eV to increase the quantity of intrinsic active sites at the basal plane (S atoms in the basal plane and dopant P atoms). At the same time, the P dopants could cause a significant decrease in ΔGH* for the neighboring S atoms to 0.43 eV compared with ΔGH* of pristine MoS2 (2.20 eV), indicating that MoS2 becomes in-plane active (Fig. 4h). These multifunctions of P dopants in MoS2 nanosheets result in the significantly improved activity for HER.94 Qian et al. reported C-doped MoS2 that displays an unprecedented overpotential of 45 mV at −10 mA cm−2, which is substantially lower than that of pristine MoS2 (228 mV). An intricate structural analysis indicated that the electronic and coordination structures of MoS2 were significantly changed with C incorporation. Moreover, theoretical calculations revealed that C doping could create empty 2p orbitals perpendicular to the basal plane, enabling energetically favorable water adsorption and dissociation.96
In contrast to single-nonmetal-atom doping, O and P dual-doped MoS2 nanosheets (O,P-MoS2) exhibit superior electrocatalytic performances compared with those of O single-doped MoS2 nanosheets (O-MoS2). In particular, a low HER onset overpotential of 150 mV with a small Tafel slope of 53 mV dec−1 and excellent conductivity make it an efficient HER electrocatalyst for water electrocatalysis. It has been shown that the introduced O and P atoms could effectively tune the resultant morphology and structure by linking MoS2 nanocrystallites by P–O bonds; due to the existence of P–O bonds, agglomeration and restacking are deliberately avoided to expose as many edge sites as possible. In addition, the interlinked MoS2 network with high electronic conductivity could accelerate the charge transfer.97


4.2.3. Metal atom and nonmetal atom double dopants. 
From the above, many works have shown that the HER performance can be improved by metal or nonmetal doping into the crystal lattice of materials. However, the synergistic effect of metal and nonmetal double doping for an overall enhancement in the catalytic activity remains questionable. For example, Cao et al. reported Co,O dual-doped MoS2 (Co-O-MoS2), and the result indicated that the Co-O-MoS2 catalyst has a distorted zigzag-chain superlattice in the metallic phase, while its in-plane structure is engineered via the incorporation of cobalt and oxygen species. The optimal Co-O-MoS2 electrocatalyst shows a significantly enhanced HER activity with a low overpotential of 113 mV at −10 mA cm−2 and a corresponding small Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1. First-principles calculations revealed that the Co and O dual dopants could largely inherit the catalyst's electronic structure, which results in the activated Co–O–Mo species for rapid kinetics of the initial water dissociation step and fast electron transfer of the catalyst. Further, Co-O-MoS2 has a significant decrease in the Gibbs free energy of the water dissociation step (0.94 eV) as compared to the value of the pristine MoS2 (1.84 eV) (Fig. 4i). In addition, the absolute value of ΔGH* is almost identical for the as-built catalyst model and close to 0 eV, indicating a favorable H* adsorption and desorption behavior.98 In addition, Lee et al. simultaneously incorporated V and P into CoS2 to prepare Co1−xVxSP. They demonstrated that the higher catalytic activity of CoS2 after V incorporation could be mainly attributed to the abundant active sites, whereas P substitution is responsible for improving the HER kinetics and intrinsic catalyst activity. Interestingly, due to the synergistic effect of P and V double substitution, the optimal Co0.97V0.03SP shows superior electrocatalysis toward HER with a very small overpotential of 55 mV at −10 mA cm−2, a small Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1, and a high turnover frequency of 0.45H2 s−1. DFT calculations revealed that Co0.97V0.03SP exhibits the lowest activation energy barrier to form Hads and a larger desorption energy (Fig. 4j). Therefore, the superior intrinsic HER catalytic activity of Co0.97V0.03SP could be primarily attributed to the fast catalytic kinetics, low kinetic energy barrier of hydrogen adsorption, and the acceleration of the desorption of H2 gas.99 A similar strategy was used to boost the HER activity of CoS2 with the dual doping of Fe and P. Systematic investigations revealed that Fe doping enhanced the HER active sites and facilitated charge transfer, while P substitution significantly accelerated the reaction kinetics, thereby boosting the intrinsic HER activity. Hence, Fe,P dual doping further enhanced the HER activity by synergistically promoting the intrinsic activity and offering multiple, accessible active sites. As a result, Fe-P-CoS2 exhibits excellent HER performance with a low overpotential of 80 mV at −10 mA cm−2 in acidic media.100

4.3. Strain regulation
The lattice strain—either compressive or tensile—can tailor the surface electronic structure by changing the dispersion of surface atoms and their bond lengths. According to all the reported strategies that have investigated lattice strain, strains can be classified as inherent strain and acquired strain. The inherent strain is spontaneously generated during the material preparation process,66,101–109 while the acquired strain is introduced under an external operation. Further, the induced changes in the energy band structure and atomic structure can lead to the optimization of electrocatalytic performances. Notably, tailoring the acquired strain is more flexible than the inherent strain.110–112

4.3.1. Inherent strain. 
With regard to nonnoble TMC-based materials, there are various strategies to introduce the inherent strain, such as local phase transition,101–103 vacancy introduction,66,104,105 heteroatom doping,106 lattice mismatch,107,108 core–shell structure, etc.109
The local phase transformation can produce the inherent strain, which induces band distortion in the electrocatalysts that eventually affects the electrocatalytic performance. For example, the synergistic effect of the inherent strain and phase transition can tailor the thermodynamic adsorption processes of the intermediates in 1T-WS2.101 By calculating the DOSs evolution process of 1T-MoS2 before and after hydrogen adsorption under different inherent strains, Kuo et al. found that the positions of the bonding and antibonding states were not apparently shifted under the inherent strain, even when the DOSs were enhanced to the Fermi level. Although it could not be explained by the d-band theory, from the perspective of better conductivity, the calculated reaction barrier dropped from ∼0.75 to ∼0.25 eV.102 A similar work focusing on the conduction band movements of monolayer MoS2 and NbS2 was also reported by Wang's group. They deduced a proportional relationship between the free energy change and electron affinity (Eea) via a thermodynamic analysis. The tensile-strain-derived downward shift in the conduction band minimum could directly result in an increase in the Eea value, which further strengthened the weak hydrogen adsorption of pristine materials and reduced the reaction barriers of HER.103
In order to further enhance the HER activity of MoS2, Zheng et al. reported the activation and optimization of the inert basal plane of 2H-MoS2 by creating and further straining the S vacancy.66 The DFT calculations indicated that the S vacancy is a new catalytic site in the basal plane, where the gap states around the Fermi level allowed H* to directly bind to the exposed Mo atoms. Increasing the number of S-vacancy sites could strengthen hydrogen adsorption, allowing the simultaneous manipulation of ΔGH* and the active site density. Straining the S-vacancy sites can shift the gap states even closer to the Fermi level, thereby leading to the optimal ΔGH* value (0 eV). Assuredly, the optimized monolayers of strained MoS2 with the S vacancy exhibit unprecedentedly high intrinsic HER activity with a turnover frequency of 0.31H2 s−1. Other similar reports from TMCs further verified that the S vacancy introducing the inherent strain is an effective way to enhance the HER performance.104,105
The combination of doping and strain engineering is an effective strategy to activate the inert basal plane of MoS2 for achieving higher HER performance.106 Du and co-workers proposed that the HER activity of the inert in-plane S sites on the MoS2 surface can be activated and optimized by doping heteroatoms (Rh, Pd, and Ag). The DFT calculations demonstrated that doping a heteroatom into MoS2 could trigger the HER activity of the S atoms next to the doping atoms, with a negative ΔGH*, and the doped heteroatom acted as the catalytically active site for the HER. The negative ΔGH* can be further significantly optimized to an ideal value under a small compressive strain. Therefore, the combination of heteroatom doping and a small compressive strain can yield an ideal ΔGH* value of 0 eV for HER.
Moreover, lattice mismatch is also an effective, commonly used strategy to introduce the inherent strain for further enhancing the HER activity of TMCs.107,108 For example, Chen et al. adjusted the inherent strain of MoS2 by lattice mismatch between MoS2 and the Au substrate, and they found that the inherent strain improved the HER performance of MoS2.107 They employed chemical vapor deposition (CVD) to grow a monolayer MoS2 film on the curved internal surface of 3D nanoporous gold (MoS2-NPG) (Fig. 5a). Based on the results of the scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) images (Fig. 5b), it is evident that the MoS2 film with a single-unit-cell thickness uniformly sits on the top of a curved gold ligament. The high-resolution STEM (HRSTEM) image from a flat region shows that the MoS2 monolayer is approximately parallel to the gold surface (Fig. 5c), which is in accordance with the simulated image (Fig. 5c, inset) based on the standard 2H structure of MoS2 (Fig. 5d). However, the annular bright-field STEM image (Fig. 5e) reveals significant lattice distortion in the monolayer MoS2, particularly at the curved regions of the NPG substrate. They calculated the S–Mo–S bonding angle for the MoS2 monolayer and proved that there are serious out-of-plane lattice strains in the MoS2 monolayer. Meanwhile, they found that the charge density distribution is regulated by the existence of the lattice strain, atom migration, and ohmic contact between MoS2 and the Au substrate (Fig. 5f and g). The DFT calculations showed that the out-of-plane lattice bending could gradually decrease the bandgap of the monolayer MoS2 from 1.8 to 0 eV, thereby resulting in a local semiconductor-to-metal transition (Fig. 5h). Moreover, the out-of-plane strains can also reduce ΔGH* on the MoS2 from ∼0.5 to ∼0.2 eV (Fig. 5i) and enrich the charge density of S atoms, which is analogous to that of the edge S atoms with dangling bonds. All these factors contribute to the superior HER activity of monolayer MoS2. As a result, the MoS2-NPG electrode exhibits superior catalytic activity with a small Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1 and an onset potential of 118 mV. Similar results from other TMCs (such as W(SexS1−x)2) also verified that the lattice mismatch to introduce the inherent strain is a fruitful way to enhance the HER performance.108
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the formation of MoS2@NPG. (b) Cross-sectional HAADF-STEM, (c) HRSTEM, and (e) annular bright-field STEM images of monolayer MoS2@NPG. (b, c, e) Scale bars: 1 nm. (d) Standard structure model of 2H-MoS2. (f) Distorted lattice structures with S translation (upper panel), Mo translation (medium panel), and S and Mo translations (bottom panel). (g) Charge density distributions in pristine and bent monolayer MoS2. (h) DOSs distribution and (i) ΔGH* for a series of bond angles. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
Besides, the core–shell structure can also induce the inherent strain, which can facilitate an upshift in the d-band center, thereby enhancing the electrocatalytic activity.109 For instance, Guo et al. reported a precise and tunable tensile surface strain on Co9S8/nL MoS2 (n = 1–5) core–shell nanocrystals for boosting the HER activity by controlling the number of MoS2 shell layers. They found that the tensile surface strain of Co9S8/MoS2 core–shell nanocrystals could be precisely tuned from 3.5% to 0% by changing the MoS2 shell layer from 1L to 5L (Fig. 6a), significantly regulating the adsorption property of the rate-limiting intermediates, eventually determining the catalytic performances. The strained Co9S8/1L MoS2 (3.5%) exhibited superior HER performance with an overpotential of only 97 mV (−10 mA cm−2) and a Tafel slope of 71 mV dec−1. The DFT calculations revealed that a heteroepitaxial lattice strain could be used to tune the charge transfer, energy barrier of hydrogen atom absorption (ΔEH), and energy barrier for the transition state (ΔE2H). The Co9S8/1L MoS2 core–shell nanostructure with a tensile strain of 3.5% yielded the optimized bandgap (closer to the Fermi level), thereby leading to the lowest ΔEH of −1.03 eV and ΔE2H of 0.29 eV (Fig. 6e and f) compared with Co9S8/2L MoS2 and Co9S8/3L MoS2 (Fig. 6b), as well as bare MoS2 (Fig. 6c and d), which is the key in boosting the HER activity by stabilizing the HER intermediate, seizing H ions, and releasing H2.
 Fig. 6  (a) Synthesis of Co9S8/MoS2 core–shell nanocrystals with different number of shells (1–5 layers). (b) Reaction pathways of H-atom adsorption and H2 desorption on Co9S8/1L MoS2, Co9S8/2L MoS2, and Co9S8/3L MoS2. (c) ΔEH and (d) ΔE2H* for the strained MoS2vs. ε% strain. (e) ΔEH and (f) ΔE2H* for strained Co9S8/1L MoS2 core–shell vs. the τ% strain. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 


4.3.2. Acquired strain. 
The acquired strain is admirable in electrocatalytic process owing to its feasible controllability and operability. In recent years, different methods have been proposed to induce and tailor the acquired strain from external operations,110–112 such as external electric field and magnetic field. For example, Frauenheim's group investigated the relationships among the external electric field, magnetic moment, and in-plane strain in MoS2 nanoribbons.110 The DFT calculations indicated that the magnetic and electronic properties of MoS2 nanoribbons exhibited a sensitive response to the applied strain and electric field. Tensile strain in the zigzag direction produces the reversible modulation of magnetic moments, which stem from energy-level shifts induced by an internal electric polarization and competing covalent/ionic interactions. A simultaneously applied electric field further enhances or suppresses the strain-induced modulations depending on the direction of the electric field relative to internal polarization.
Furthermore, the effect of the introduced electric field on the HER activity for MoS2 and VSe2 was experimentally verified by Mai's group. For example, they successfully fabricated an individual MoS2 nanosheet and explored the impact of the field effect on the catalytic performance of individual MoS2 nanosheet. The catalytic property of MoS2 nanosheets can be dramatically improved by the addition of an electric field. A low overpotential of only 38 mV could be obtained at the current density of −100 mA cm−2. This outstanding performance can be mainly attributed to the increased channel conductance of the MoS2 nanosheet, which can be understood via the energy-band theory.111 Meanwhile, they improved the HER performance by using the back-gate voltage to tune the distribution of ions in the electrolyte and on the surface of the VSe2 nanosheet, which realizes an enhanced electron transport process and facilitates the rate-limiting step under the HER condition. A considerable low onset overpotential of 70 mV and a Tafel slope of 59 mV dec−1 could be achieved in VSe2 nanosheets. Such an unexpected improvement can be attributed to the field-tuned adsorption dynamics of the VSe2 nanosheet, which can be demonstrated by the considerably optimized charge transfer resistance.112

4.4. Phase transition
The property of the electronic structure is highly dependent on the crystal phases of the materials, since different charge distributions lead to various atomic configurations. The adjustment of the crystal phase can usually tailor the surface adsorption properties and charge states, which can lead to better conductivity and higher surface activity. Therefore, phase transition engineering is usually identified as a promising method to enhance the electrocatalytic activity.

4.4.1. Molybdenum-dichalcogenide-based electrocatalysts. 
In order to modify the surface and electronic structure of MoS2, the metallic-phase 1T-MoS2 nanosheet was prepared as the HER electrocatalyst, which provides facile electron kinetics due to excellent electrical transport and spread of catalytically active sites, and therefore, the HER performance of metallic 1T-MoS2 is better than that of the semiconducting 2H-MoS2. It suggests that the edge sites are not the only active sites in 1T-MoS2 unlike the thermodynamically favored 2H-MoS2. Meanwhile, partial oxidation of the edges is conducted to confirm the fact that the HER catalytic activity of 1T-MoS2 relies on the basal plane unlike that of 2H-MoS2. The edges become highly disordered on oxidation, while the basal plane of the nanosheets remains unaffected. Accordingly, the electrochemical oxidation of the edges leads to a dramatic reduction in the catalytic activity for 2H-MoS2 nanosheets, but the catalytic performance for 1T-MoS2 nanosheets is unaffected by oxidation. The overall performance of oxidized 2H-MoS2 can be improved after volumetric cycling, signifying that the catalytic activity from the edges of 2H-MoS2 is partially reestablished. Based on these facts, it can be concluded that the basal plane is catalytically active for 1T-MoS2.113
In addition, Cui and co-workers successfully tuned the phase structure of MoS2 from 2H to 1T via lithium electrochemical intercalation, demonstrating a facile way for the phase engineering of MoS2.114,115 For example, they assembled a vertically aligned 2H-MoS2 film into a pouch battery with Li foil to perform electrochemical Li intercalation (Fig. 7a and b).115 By controlling Li intercalation at different voltages, the layer spacing, oxidation state, and ratio of the 2H to 1T phase of MoS2 can be tuned (Fig. 7c). During the phase transition from the 2H to 1T phase in LixMoS2, the incoming electrons accumulate in the MoS2 layers and increase the d-band filling degree for the Mo atom. Meanwhile, the oxidation state of the Mo element is reduced, thereby decreasing the reaction barrier for HER. Therefore, all the lithiated MoS2 samples prepared with different lithiation voltages show improved HER catalytic activity relative to the pristine 2H-MoS2 film. The 1T-MoS2 film with lithiation at 1.1 V affords the smallest Tafel slope of 44 mV dec−1. These results indicate that the HER activity of MoS2 has already been improved compared with that of the 2H-MoS2 even before the 2H-to-1T phase transition occurs since the electronic structure of MoS2 can be continuously tuned by Li intercalation. In addition to the Li intercalation and exfoliation method, Qu and co-workers recently developed a plasma-induced process to directly grow 1T-MoSe2 on a Mo substrate (1T-MoSe2/Mo). The high conductivity of Mo and 1T-MoSe2, together with the high density of exposed edge sites and fast charge transfer, lead to optimized ΔGH*, resulting in a low overpotential of 166 mV at −10 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slope of 34.7 mV dec−1.116 Besides, molybdenum-dichalcogenide-based hybridized composites, such as MoSe2&La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ117 and MoS2/Ni–Co complexes118 have shown that the electrochemical activities are significantly improved by an in situ local/complete phase transition from the 2H to 1T phase in MoSe2 and MoS2.
 Fig. 7  (a) Crystal structure of 2H-MoS2. (b) Schematic of the battery testing system. An MoS2 nanofilm with molecular layers perpendicular to the substrate acts as the cathode, and a Li foil is the anode. (c) Galvanostatic discharge curve of electrochemical Li intercalation into MoS2 film. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2013, National Academy of Sciences. (d) Fourier transforms of the X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) of simple c-CoSe2 and o-CoSe2. (e) Calculated HER free energy change and (f) water adsorption energy for o-CoSe2 and c-CoSe2. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (g) Surface/interfacial energy diagram of c-CoSe2, o-CoSe2, and m-CoSe2. Insets in (g) show the corresponding crystal structures. (h) Calculated free energy of the c-, o-, and m-CoSe2 unit cells. Insets show the corresponding unit cell structures. (i) DOSs of c-CoSe2 and m-CoSe2 with the Fermi level aligned at 0 eV. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 


4.4.2. Tungsten-dichalcogenide-based electrocatalysts. 
Similar to MoS2, metallic 1T-WS2 nanosheets have different atomic arrangements and electronic structures compared with 2H-WS2, thereby resulting in diverse HER activity. The high concentration of the metallic 1T phase is associated with an enhanced electrocatalytic ability. The partially filled d orbit of the 1T phase makes it easy to accommodate the electron from hydrogen to form the H–S bond, thereby improving the HER performance. For example, Chhowalla et al. and Lukowski et al. reported 1T-WS2 nanosheets transformed from 2H-WS2 prepared using the Li intercalation and exfoliation methods, respectively, and the dramatically improved HER activity can be attributed to the fast electrode kinetics, excellent electron transfer, enhanced DOSs near the Fermi level, and reduced ΔGH* on 1T-WS2.101,119 Later, Qiao and co-workers directly used the chemically exfoliated 1T-WS2 nanolayers to assemble a composite film by coupling P-, N-, and O-doped graphene sheets.120 The composite film shows a low overpotential of 125 mV at −10 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slope of 52.7 mV dec−1. This superior performance can be attributed to the high HER activity of 1T-WS2 as well as the synergistic effect between the 1T-WS2 nanolayers and the heteroatom doping of graphene. Recently, He's group also realized the phase conversion from the 2H to 1T phase of ultrathin ternary WS2(1−x)Se2x by the lithium intercalation reaction. The obtained 1T-WS2(1−x)Se2x afforded a low overpotential of 170 mV at −10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 68 mV dec−1.121 In addition, Pumera et al. also found that 3R-WS2 was a better catalyst compared with 2H-WS2, but it was a poorer catalyst than 1T-WS2.122


4.4.3. Pyrite-phase-structured transition-metal-dichalcogenide-based electrocatalysts. 
Besides Mo-/W-dichalcogenide-based electrocatalysts, the family of pyrite-phase transition metal dichalcogenides (MX2; M: Fe, Co, Ni; X: S, Se) have been widely identified as excellent electrocatalysts for water splitting. They usually appear in the cubic-pyrite-type or orthorhombic-marcasite-type structures, where the metal atoms are octahedrally bonded to adjacent chalcogen atoms (S/Se). As a typical pyrite phase, CoSe2 has attracted extensive attention, and it has been frequently reported for both HER123 and OER27,124 because of its superior catalytic activity and higher chemical stability. The electrocatalytic activity of CoSe2 for HER can be dramatically enhanced by the phase transformation strategy. For instance, Xie et al. successfully synthesized two different CoSe2 phases, namely, orthorhombic-marcasite-type (o-CoSe2) and cubic-pyrite-type (c-CoSe2) structures.125 The DFT calculations showed different ΔGH* and ΔEH2O values for the o-CoSe2 and c-CoSe2 phases, and they revealed the relationship among the different Co–Se bond lengths with Hads and ΔEH2O, providing an in-depth understanding of the close relationship between the crystal structure and intrinsic HER electrocatalytic activity. It is found that c-CoSe2 has a larger Co–Se bond length (2.13 Å) than that of o-CoSe2 (2.08 Å) (Fig. 7d). Notably, the larger bond length could boost the local electron density around the Se atoms. As a result, c-CoSe2 shows smaller reaction barriers (ΔGH*, 0.05 eV; ΔEH2O, −0.163 eV) (Fig. 7e and f), thereby leading to considerably enhanced HER electrocatalytic activity over o-CoSe2. The alkaline water-splitting electrolyzer constructed by this c-CoSe2 catalyst shows a very low voltage of 1.63 V to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2. In addition, Yu et al. and Zhang et al. reported that polymorphic CoSe2 (m-CoSe2) with mixed orthorhombic and cubic phases exhibited a much higher HER performance compared with cubic CoSe2 (c-CoSe2) and orthorhombic CoSe2 (o-CoSe2).126,127 The DFT calculations (Fig. 7g) revealed that the interfacial energy of m-CoSe2 is lower than those of c-CoSe2 and o-CoSe2, suggesting that the epitaxial growth of o-CoSe2 is thermodynamically favored.
Meanwhile, it shows that the epitaxial growth of m-CoSe2 can significantly reduce the free energy of unit cells compared with c-CoSe2 and o-CoSe2, suggesting that the formation of m-CoSe2 is thermodynamically favorable (Fig. 7h). Moreover, the DOS results revealed that the m-CoSe2 catalyst exhibits lower states in the characteristic low-DOS region close to the Fermi level (Fig. 7i). The lower electronic states near the Fermi level imply the superior stability of m-CoSe2. The significantly increased HER catalytic performance for m-CoSe2 can be ascribed to the lower work function (3.7 eV) compared with those of c-CoSe2 (3.9 eV) and o-CoSe2 (4.6 eV), indicating the optimized electronic structure of m-CoSe2 originating from the unique phase-mixed structure that enables a faster electron transfer, as well as the large number of nanopores that offer greater accessibility to the active sites. Hence, m-CoSe2 has an overpotential of 124 mV at −10 mA cm−2, which is considerably better than those of c-CoSe2 (226 mV) and o-CoSe2 (273 mV). Meanwhile, m-CoSe2 shows a Tafel slope of 37 mV dec−1, which is much lower than those of o-CoSe2 (60 mV dec−1) and o-CoSe2 (70 mV dec−1).127 The above results suggest that the phase transformation engineering is also an effective route to selectively design highly efficient electrocatalysts.

4.5. Heterostructure engineering
Design of the heterostructure is an important strategy to construct active interfaces for electrocatalysis, which can create new catalytic sites by tailoring the interfacial electronic structure as well as enhancing the interfacial charge transfer kinetics.128–130 For a deeper insight into the heterostructure strategy, worthwhile experimental and theoretical efforts have been expended toward clarifying the relationship between the heterointerfaces and catalytic activity. Generally, the high-quality heterointerfaces unavoidably induce electronic structure reconfiguration due to their different Fermi-level energies, which evidently affects the H*-binding energy, thereby optimizing the H* absorption behavior of the active materials and remarkably enhancing the catalytic activity.131,132 In this section, the relationship can be summarized from the perspective of interface-induced electronic structural changes.

4.5.1. TMC/metal heterostructures. 
It has been extensively reported that TMC/metal heterostructures can largely facilitate the adsorption of intermediates due to the electronic interaction of interfaces in the heterostructures and synergistic effect of diverse components.133 Notably, the superior electrical conductivity of the metal is capable of accelerating the electron transfer.134,135 Therefore, the electrocatalytic activity can be considerably enhanced by means of TMC/metal heterostructure construction. Due to the excellent HER activity of Pt metal, Pt has been widely utilized for fabricating composite electrocatalysts. For instance, Pt nanoparticles of several nanometers were implanted in a CoS2 nanoarray (Pt-CoS2).136 The charge density calculations of the interface showed that electrons tend to accumulate on the surface of Pt, resulting in the generation of electron-deficient CoS2 and electron-rich Pt in the interfacial region (Fig. 8a), which was further proven by the d-band center downshift in the Pt in Pt-CoS2 heterostructures compared with single Pt (Fig. 8b). Consequently, ΔGH* is optimized by virtue of electron-rich Pt. Meanwhile, electron-deficient CoS2 facilitates the formation of oxide species on the surface, which is responsible for expediting the water oxidization kinetics. Therefore, the Pt-CoS2 heterostructure not only exhibits excellent HER performance corresponding to an overpotential of 24 mV to deliver −10 mA cm−2 but also exhibits remarkable OER activity, achieving the same current density at a low overpotential of 300 mV. Moreover, Zhang's group reported that a series of noble-metal-based (Pt, Pd, Ag) nanoparticles can be epitaxially grown on the surface of single-layer MoS2 nanosheets via a simple chemical reaction (Fig. 8c).137 In particular, the as-synthesized Pt-MoS2 hybrid exhibits excellent electrocatalytic activity toward HER with a near-zero overpotential and a Tafel slope of 40 mV dec−1, which is comparable with commercial Pt/C catalysts on the basis of the same Pt loading (Fig. 8d). Notably, Pt-MoS2 shows an even higher current density than commercial Pt/C under the same potential, which could be ascribed to the strong coupling effects between Pt and MoS2 nanosheets. The exposed high-index facets of Pt induced by epitaxial alignment on the MoS2 surface may also partially contribute to the high activity. Additionally, the large specific surface area of MoS2 makes the electron transfer efficient, further enhancing its catalytic activity. In addition to MoS2 nanosheets, they subsequently successfully loaded Pt nanoparticles on the surface of TiS2 and TaS2 nanosheets (Fig. 8e and f),138 which also exhibit excellent electrocatalytic activity toward HER, where the catalytic activity of Pt–TiS2 is close to that of commercial Pt/C catalysts (Fig. 8g). Similarly, Huang et al. demonstrated the spontaneous synthesis of Au nanoparticles on lithium-exfoliated MoS2 and WS2 nanosheets.139 By using the WS2–Au hybrid as the electrocatalyst, the optimized sample with 21.1 mol% Au exhibits the best electrocatalytic HER activity with an overpotential of 230 mV at −10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 57 mV dec−1.
 Fig. 8  (a) Differential charge density of the Pt/CoS2 system. (b) Projected DOSs onto Pt d orbitals of Pt(111) and Pt(111)/CoS2. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) TEM image and the corresponding SAED pattern (inset) of Pt-MoS2 hybrid nanosheet. (d) Polarization curves for Pt-MoS2, Pt–C, and MoS2. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. The TEM image of Pt NPs synthesized on (e) TiS2 and (f) TaS2 nanosheets. Inset: the SAED pattern. (g) Polarization curves of different catalysts. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) Charge density distributions on Cu/Ni3S2, Ni3S2, and Cu. (i) Calculated H2O adsorption free energy changes and (j) H-adsorption free energy profiles of Cu/Ni3S2 hybrid, Ni3S2, and Cu. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Notwithstanding the superior activities of noble-metal-based TMC heterostructures, the high cost and low abundance of noble metals largely limit their practical application. Hence, a lot of efforts have been devoted toward exploring other nonnoble-metal-based alternatives for constructing pragmatic composite electrocatalysts. For example, nonnoble metal Cu nanodots are embedded in Ni3S2 nanotube arrays, affording a low overpotential of 128 mV for HER at a current density of −10 mA cm−2, surpassing those of Cu nanodots and Ni3S2 nanotubes.140 The charge density distribution calculations demonstrated the remarkable increase in the positive charge of Cu after combining Cu nanodots with Ni3S2, implying that H2O molecules were prone to adsorb on the Cu surface in the Cu/Ni3S2 heterostructure owing to the electrostatic attraction between Cu and negatively charged oxygen atoms of H2O (Fig. 8h). The DFT calculations demonstrated that the combination of Cu and Ni3S2 contributes to the facilitation of ΔGH2O as well as the optimization of ΔGH*, thereby considerably promoting the HER performance of Cu/Ni3S2 (Fig. 8i and j).


4.5.2. Carbon-based TMC heterostructures. 
It is known that the intrinsic poor electrical conductivity of TMCs is a major obstacle to achieve an outstanding HER performance; therefore, coupling TMCs with a highly conductive substrate is critical to improve their catalytic activity. Further studies revealed that the coupled conductive materials can propel the overall HER activity of the hybrid electrocatalyst by improving the electronic conductivity and regulating the ΔGH* value.141,142 Carbon-based materials, such as porous carbon,143–146 graphene/reduced graphene oxide (RGO),147–159 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),160–168 CFs,171–175 and carbon cloth (CC),176–180 have shown great potential as carbon supports owing to their high conductivity and stability. Therefore, the hybridization of TMCs with carbon-based materials may be a feasible and promising strategy to improve their conductivity, which promotes the HER catalytic activity. In this section, various kinds of carbon-based TMC hybrid materials used as electrocatalysts will be discussed.
Graphene, a typical 2D nanosheet, has many outstanding properties such as remarkable electrical and thermal conductivities, excellent charge mobility, large specific surface area, and outstanding fracture strength, which has attracted a great deal of interest as a catalyst support. Recently, a considerable amount of effort has been dedicated to the synthesis of TMC/graphene or TMC/RGO composites. These hybrid composites exhibit outstanding catalytic activity toward HER. For example, Shi and co-workers reported a vertical heterojunction of graphene loaded with n-type MoS2 (n-MoS2). Since graphene has stronger electron affinity than n-MoS2, electron transfer spontaneously occurs from n-MoS2 to graphene, resulting in the formation of an internal electric field near the interface.153 Moreover, Dai et al. developed a solvothermal method to prepare highly dispersed MoS2 nanoparticles on the surface of the RGO nanosheets (Fig. 9a).154 Owing to the interaction between the Mo precursors and functional groups on graphene oxide (GO) sheets, MoS2 nanoparticles with abundant active edges could load onto RGO nanosheets (Fig. 9b). The obtained MoS2/RGO hybrid possesses a superior HER activity compared with pure MoS2 nanoparticles (Fig. 9c). A low Tafel slope of 41 mV dec−1 (Fig. 9d) and an onset overpotential of 100 mV can be obtained for the MoS2/RGO composite, which are lower than those of MoS2 catalysts. This improved activity can be assigned to two main reasons. First, the abundant edge sites of highly dispersed MoS2 nanoparticles are exposed and easily accessible in the solution. Second, the enhanced conductivity of RGO also contributes to the high catalytic activity.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of an MoS2/RGO hybrid. (b) SEM and TEM (inset) images of the MoS2/RGO hybrid. (c) Polarization curves and (d) corresponding Tafel plots of different electrodes. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (e) Fabrication procedure and hydrogen evolution process of the CoS2/RGO-CNT hybrid. (f) Polarization curves and (g) Tafel plots of bare CoS2, CoS2/RGO, and CoS2/RGO-CNT electrodes. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition, space-confined growth has provided an effective way to produce MoS2/RGO composites with controllable morphology and intimate contact with the supports. For example, Zheng et al. took advantage of the space between adjacent GO nanosheets as the reaction region155 and successfully prepared a nanosized MoS2/RGO composite, which shows better electrocatalytic activity with an overpotential of 140 mV at −10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 41 mV dec−1 toward HER than conventional MoS2 nanosheets supported on pre-exfoliated RGO. Similarly, the WS2-sheet-decorated RGO composite exhibits much higher activity for HER compared with pure WS2 sheets.152 The better performance of the WS2-RGO composite can be attributed to the formation of an interconnected conducting RGO network, leading to rapid electron transfer from the electrode to the catalyst. Another possible reason might arise from the random orientation of WS2 sheets aligned on the RGO surface, which can avoid the retaking of WS2 sheets during the electrode fabrication, eventually retaining the effective active sites of the catalyst. In a similar fashion, the functionalization of TMCs on conductive substrates to form TMC/graphene156,157 or TMC/RGO158,159 hybrid structures by enhancing the conductivity can be used to realize highly efficient HER performances.
CNTs, which are one-dimensional carbon materials, are also considered to be one of the most promising catalytic supports due to their high electrical conductivity, excellent chemical stability, large surface area, and unique hexagonally latticed carbon structure. In particular, the unique hexagonally latticed structure endows CNTs with other additional advantages such as good flexibility, corrosion resistance, extraordinary thermal property (3000 W m−1 K−1), high charge mobility (100000 cm2 V−1 s−1), and outstanding fracture strength (45 GPa).169 In addition, integrating/embedding electrocatalysts into a CNT support is not only beneficial for the fabrication of catalysts with small sizes but also effectively suppresses the agglomeration of catalysts at higher temperatures during the synthesis.170 Therefore, CNTs have received extensive attention as a distinguished catalytic support. For instance, the heterostructures composed of single-/few-layer MoSe2 flakes and single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) have been designed. The electrochemical coupling between the components in SWCNT/MoSe2 can effectively enhance the HER activity of the native MoSe2 flakes.166 In addition, Peng et al. reported a CoS2/RGO/CNTs composite, which has good flexibility and robustness (Fig. 9e). Owing to the large surface area, high electron conductivity, and nanoporous architecture, the CoS2/RGO/CNTs composite delivers a current density of −10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 142 mV as well as a low Tafel slope among all the samples (Fig. 9f and g).167 Similarly, MoS2/CNTs-graphene,160 MoS2/N-doped CNTs,163 and MoSe2/CNTs168 also exhibit superior electrocatalytic HER activity compared with single-component catalysts.
Besides graphene and CNTs, various other carbon materials, such as CFs and CC, have been considered as excellent supports to enhance the catalytic activity of TMCs due to their intrinsic benefits of low cost, high conductivity, and robustness. For instance, Zhu et al. prepared single-layer MoS2 nanosheets and embedded them in N-doped CFs by the electrospinning method. Importantly, the obtained hybrid exhibits extraordinary electrocatalytic HER activity, with a low onset overpotential of 30 mV and a Tafel slope of 38 mV dec−1, which is attributed to the synergistic effect of MoS2 and N-doped CFs. Furthermore, graphitic CFs act as fast electron transfer channels due to high conductivity.171 Besides, He's group controllably synthesized WS2(1−x)Se2x CNTs173 on CF substrates. The sulfurization and selenization processes lead to dislocations and defects, acting as active sites on the walls of CNTs. The HER performance is evidently higher than those of WS2 and WSe2 CNTs. The low Tafel slope is a characteristic of the fast HER rate at moderately increased overpotential. Similarly, CoSe2/CFs,174 MoS2/CFs,175 and MoSe2/CC176 have been prepared as highly efficient HER electrocatalysts.


4.5.3. Transition-metal oxide-based TMC heterostructures. 
Besides metals and carbon-based materials, recently, transition metal oxides (TMOs) hybridized with TMCs have been widely used in electrocatalysis because of their cost-effective, stable, accessible, and environmentally friendly characteristics. For example, Chen et al. prepared MoO3@MoS2 core–shell nanowire arrays by a two-step process (Fig. 10a).181 During the heating process, the outermost surface of the MoO3 nanorods is transformed into the MoS2 shell with a thickness of 2–5 nm (Fig. 10b). The MoO3@MoS2 core–shell architecture is designed to utilize the advantageous properties of each component while mitigating their deficiencies. More specifically, the MoO3 core provides a high aspect ratio and enables facile charge transport, while the MoS2 shell not only provides excellent catalytic activity but also serves as a protective layer to increase the composite stability under the acidic condition. Hence, the MoO3@MoS2 core–shell nanowire array shows excellent catalytic activity with an onset overpotential of 150–200 mV (Fig. 10c) and Tafel slope of 50–60 mV dec−1.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the MoO3@MoS2 core–shell nanowire array for HER. (b) TEM images of MoO3@MoS2 nanowire. (c) Polarization curves of nanowires sulfidized at 200 and 300 °C. The inset in (c) shows a comparison between nanowires sulfidized at 150 and 200 °C. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (d) Polyol synthesis of Mn3O4/CoSe2 hybrid. (e) TEM images and the corresponding SAED pattern and (f) HRTEM image of Mn3O4/CoSe2 hybrid. (g) Co2p XPS spectra for pure CoSe2 and Mn3O4/CoSe2 hybrid. Inset shows the electron donation from the Mn3O4 to CoSe2. (h) Polarization curves for OER comprising the Mn3O4, Pt/C, pure CoSe2, and Mn3O4/CoSe2 hybrid. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
In addition, the modification of CoSe2 with Mn3O4 nanoparticles182 was also developed for boosting the OER performance of CoSe2 by Yu's group. They first prepared ultrathin CoSe2/DETA nanobelts by a solvothermal reaction; then, Mn3O4 nanoparticles were anchored on the surface of CoSe2/DETA nanobelts via an effective polyol reduction approach (Fig. 10d). The TEM images show the uniform distribution of Mn3O4 nanoparticles on the surface of the CoSe2 nanobelts (Fig. 10e). The selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. 10e, inset) and HRTEM images (Fig. 10f) verify the coexistence of CoSe2 and Mn3O4 phases. Meanwhile, it has been reported183 that Co cations in high oxidation states (CoIV) were proposed as active centers. The CoIV species existing in CoSe2 nanobelts are believed to enhance the electrophilicity of the adsorbed O and accelerate the formation of intermediate products, such as O–OH and OOH species, to ultimately generate O2. Moreover, Fig. 10g shows that the electron-binding energy of Co2p decreases after decorating the CoSe2 with Mn3O4 nanoparticles. This phenomenon is induced by the electron transfer from Mn3O4 to CoSe2, which makes the Mn3O4 more acidic (Lewis acid). Therefore, Mn3O4 nanoparticles anchored on CoSe2 facilitate the activation of H2O (Lewis base) via a Lewis acid–base interaction. As a result, the Mn3O4/CoSe2 exhibits improved OER activity than the contrast samples (Fig. 10h). Analogously, various types of TMC/TMO hybrid structures such as MoSe2/MoO2,184,185 MoSe2/MoO3,186,187 Ni3S2/VO2,188 and Co3O4/MoS2189 have been synthesized to achieve highly efficient HER performances.
Besides, perovskite (ABO3) as a typical metal oxide has received significant attention due to its superior catalytic activity and robust stability. Therefore, great efforts have been devoted toward developing ABO3-based TMC heterostructures in order to further improve the catalytic activity of TMCs. For example, Park et al. synthesized heterogeneous La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ/MoSe2117 as an electrocatalyst for overall water splitting. Interestingly, the formation of the La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ/MoSe2 heterostructure induces a local phase transition in MoSe2 (from 2H to 1T phase) mainly owing to the spontaneous electron transfer from Co to Mo. This charge transfer is expected to increase the intrinsic conductivity of MoSe2 and the amount of Co–O and Co–OH in La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ, which can remarkably enhance the water-splitting catalytic activity. When La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ/MoSe2 heterostructure was used for overall water electrolysis, the obtained electrode shows excellent overall water electrolysis stability over 1000 h at a high current density of −100 mA cm−2, which is obviously superior to the stability of the state-of-the-art platinum and iridium oxide couple.


4.5.4. Transition-metal-hydroxide-/transition-metal-oxyhydroxide-based TMC heterostructures. 
It is noteworthy that hydroxides can also be promoters for facilitating the water adsorption and sequential dissociation, thereby engendering the significant exploration of HER kinetics. Consequently, constructing hydroxides-based TMC heterostructures makes a great contribution to optimize the HER activity of TMCs. For example, Ni(OH)2-nanoparticles-anchored ultrathin MoS2 nanosheet arrays with an intimate attachment between the different components have been designed as efficient HER catalysts.190 To explore the synergistic effect originating from Ni(OH)2 and MoS2 on the catalytic HER, the key HER reaction steps on the MoS2 catalyst and Ni(OH)2/MoS2 heterostructures were investigated by DFT calculations. As shown in Fig. 11a, the reaction pathways for alkaline HER, including prior water dissociation to form H* (Volmer step) and H2 generation (Tafel/Heyrovsky step), are constructed. The DFT calculations indicated that the ΔGH* value is −0.33 eV for MoS2, which is close to the optimal ΔGH* value (0 eV). Unfortunately, MoS2 exhibits rather high ΔGH2O (1.17 eV), which significantly hinders the water dissociation to generate H*, resulting in sluggish HER kinetics (Fig. 11b). However, the cleavage of the H–OH bond can be largely accelerated on highly active Ni sites, and the ΔGH2O (0.05 eV) of Ni(OH)2/MoS2 is much lower than those of Ni(OH)2 and MoS2, which can be ascribed to the strong synergistic effect between Ni(OH)2 and MoS2. Moreover, the charge transfer from Ni(OH)2 to MoS2 is confirmed by the DFT calculations, and a more optimal ΔGH* value of −0.06 eV is obtained (Fig. 11c). By this way, the Ni(OH)2/MoS2 heterostructures considerably stimulate the sequential H2 release on the S sites of MoS2. Furthermore, the reaction pathways on the single sides of Ni(OH)2 and MoS2 show much unfavorable energetics than that of the synergetic pathway on Ni(OH)2/MoS2 heterostructures. Therefore, the synergistic effect of Ni(OH)2 and MoS2 with favorable hydrogen and hydroxyl species energetics leads to reduced energy barriers for both the initial water dissociation step and the subsequent H2 generation. Therefore, Ni(OH)2/MoS2 heterostructures exhibit much higher HER activity than pristine MoS2, delivering a current density of −10 mA cm−2 at a low overpotential of 80 mV. Similarly, Co(OH)2-nanoparticles-intercalated 2D MoS2 nanosheets, where the confined Co(OH)2 nanoparticles could accelerate the water dissociation kinetics, also boost the HER performance of MoS2.191
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the HER processes on MoS2 and Ni(OH)2/MoS2 hybrid. (b) The corresponding free energy diagram for HER on the MoS2 edge and (c) Ni(OH)2/MoS2 interface. The surface structures of the catalysts at different stages are shown in the inset. The S, Mo, H, O, and Ni atoms are represented by orange, gray, white, red, and blue spheres, respectively. Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Inc. (d) HRTEM image of the MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite and schematic of the MoS2/NiCo-LDH heterostructure (inset). (e) Free energy diagram for HER in an alkaline electrolyte for bare MoS2 and MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite. (f) Schematic of the HER in the MoS2/LDH interface in an alkaline environment. (g) Polarization curves of the MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite and the reference samples. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Inc. (h) Schematic of the fabrication processes for NiSe@NiOOH/NF core–shell nanostructures. (i) Comparison of LSV curves on NiSe/NF and bare NF under in situ electrochemical oxidation (ISEO) in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.195 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In addition, layered-double-hydroxides-based TMC heterostructures have been widely studied for water splitting due to their favorable adsorption of oxygenated intermediates. For example, Hu et al. demonstrated a dramatic enhancement in the HER kinetics by hybridizing the vertical MoS2 nanosheets with NiCo layered double hydroxide (NiCo-LDH).192 The HRTEM (Fig. 11d) image shows the formation of an interface between the (002) facet of MoS2 and the neighboring (015) facet of NiCo-LDH in the MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite. A schematic of the designed MoS2/NiCo-LDH heterostructure is shown in the inset of Fig. 11d. The DFT calculations reveal that the activation energy for the MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite is lower for the Heyrovsky and Volmer steps than that of bare MoS2, demonstrating that the hybridization of MoS2 with NiCo-LDH accelerates the rate-determining water dissociation step of HER in the alkaline condition. Moreover, the nearly optimized ΔGH* on MoS2/NiCo-LDH interfaces considerably stimulates the subsequent H2 generation (Fig. 11e). Consequently, the operating mechanism of the MoS2/NiCo-LDH hybrid is schematically shown in Fig. 11f. More specifically, the elaborate hybridization of MoS2 and OER-efficient NiCo-LDH, which synergistically favors the chemisorption of H (on MoS2) and OH (on NiCo-LDH) near the heterointerfaces, which dramatically facilitates the rate-determining water dissociation step of HER and therefore improving the overall HER kinetics in alkaline media, accordingly leading to an extremely low HER overpotential of 78 mV at −10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 11g). Besides, Zou's group reported the ultrafast synthesis of amorphous Ni–Fe hydroxide films on NF-supported Ni3S2 nanosheet arrays (Ni–Fe–OH@Ni3S2) through an interfacial reaction.193 Advantageous structural features including high intrinsic activity of amorphous Ni–Fe hydroxide, high conductivity of the Ni3S2 arrays, and their strongly coupled interfaces endow the self-supported Ni–Fe–OH@Ni3S2 electrode with superior and stable OER activity (165 mV at 10 mA cm−2).
Besides transition metal hydroxides, hybridizing oxyhydroxides with TMCs might be a promising strategy for preparing high-performance electrocatalysts. For example, hierarchical Ni3S2–NiOOH composite on NF (NF@Ni3S2–NiOOH) was synthesized for water electrolysis to produce H2. The NF@Ni3S2–NiOOH catalyst demonstrates superior HER performance with a low overpotential of 160 mV at a current density of −10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M NaOH. Such an excellent HER performance can be attributed to the unique intrinsic characteristic of the hierarchical NF@Ni3S2–NiOOH composite.194 Moreover, Liu et al. synthesized NiSe@NiOOH core–shell nanostructures supported on NF for fabricating a highly efficient OER electrocatalyst (Fig. 11h). The NiSe@NiOOH/NF exhibits an obviously enhanced OER activity with a much low overpotential of 332 mV at 50 mA cm−2 (Fig. 11i), which can be ascribed to the large number of active sites derived from the amorphous NiOOH shell, as well as the excellent conductivity and stability derived from the NiSe core. In addition, the synergistic effect between the NiSe core and NiOOH shell might play an important role in enhancing the OER activity.195


4.5.5. Transition-metal-carbide-based TMC heterostructures. 
Transition metal carbides have received huge attention as promising electrocatalysts for HER because of their desirable characteristics, such as low cost, outstanding electrical conductivity, superior chemical and thermal stabilities, and electrochemical features similar to those of Pt-based catalysts.196–198 The Pt-like electronic configuration renders transition metal carbides with an intrinsic electrocatalytic activity.199
As a typical transition metal carbide, Mo2C has been demonstrated that it possesses noble-metal-like features for catalyzing many chemical reactions. The DFT calculations attributed this catalytic property to the hybridization between the d orbit of molybdenum and the s and p orbits of carbon, which can broaden the d-band structure of Mo2C,200 thereby leading to a similar d-band structure to Pt.201,202 Hence, coupling Mo2C with TMCs to form hybrid catalysts is demonstrated as an effective approach to improve the HER performance of TMCs. For instance, Bao and co-workers reported a vertically aligned MoS2/Mo2C hetero-array for achieving enhanced HER.203 MoS2/Mo2C exhibits considerably higher HER activity than the constituent components, realizing a low overpotential of 63 mV at −10 mA cm−2. The DFT calculations indicated that the outstanding performance of MoS2/Mo2C heterostructures can be assigned to the dynamically desirable Mo–S–C sites with near-optimal ΔGH*. Subsequently, radially aligned nanosheet-assembled MoS2 microspheres decorated by Mo2C (MoS2/Mo2C) were also synthesized by Liu et al. as an efficient HER catalyst (Fig. 12a).204 The HRTEM image (Fig. 12b) shows that the Mo2C nanoparticles are mainly grown on the edges of the MoS2 nanosheets. Experimental investigations indicated that as the current density increases, H2 bubbles firmly adhere to the Pt surface and grow to a very large size (∼50% are larger than 0.5 mm), which covers many catalytic sites on the Pt surface. In contrast, H2 bubbles smaller than 0.2 mm easily leave the MoS2/Mo2C surface, leading to the constant exposure of catalytic sites to the ambient electrolyte (Fig. 12c). The DFT calculations investigated the adsorption energies for H on the –OH-terminated surface (Fig. 12d) and disassociated H2O on the –O-terminated surface (Fig. 12e) of Mo2C. It is clear that a ΔGH* of ∼0.1 eV and a small energy barrier for water dissociation (∼0.25 eV) are achieved, corresponding to the fast hydrogen absorption/desorption and water dissociation kinetics. Experimental and theoretical investigations revealed that Mo2C modified by the surface oxygen groups formed during the HER process not only promotes the interfacial mass transfer of the reactants and H2 bubbles on MoS2 because the oxygen terminations have stronger affinity to water and weaker affinity to H2 bubbles but they also expedite the water dissociation and hydrogen absorption kinetics, resulting in excellent HER performance at a higher current density. The MoS2/Mo2C catalyst is highly active for HER with low overpotentials of 227 mV in an acidic medium and 220 mV in an alkaline medium at a high current density of −1000 mA cm−2 (Fig. 12f). In addition, other Mo2C-based TMC heterostructures such as MoS2/Mo2C205,206 and MoSe2/Mo2C207 have also been developed as highly efficient HER catalysts.
 Fig. 12  (a) Design schematic of the MoS2/Mo2C. (b) HRTEM images of the MoS2/Mo2C. (c) Size distributions of H2 bubbles on the surfaces of Pt foil and MoS2/Mo2C. DFT calculations showing the adsorption energies for (d) H on –OH-terminated and (e) disassociated H2O on –O-terminated Mo2C (101) as a function of the adsorbed species. (f) Overpotentials at 1000 mA cm−2 for Pt foil, MoS2, and MoS2/Mo2C in both acidic and alkaline media. Reproduced with permission.204 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (g) SEM and TEM images and a schematic of the HER process in an MoS2/Ti3C2Tx hybrid. (h) Polarization curves of MoS2/Ti3C2Tx hybrid, pure MoS2, and Ti3C2Tx. Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. 
Further, 2D MXene materials, such as typical Ti3C2Tx, are important members of transition metal carbides, which have attracted much attention owing to their hydrophilic surfaces and good electrical conductivity. Therefore, they may be used as promising coupling agents to improve the HER activity of TMCs. For example, Tu et al. reported the hybridization of MoSe2 nanosheets with highly conductive TiC–C nanorods showed significant improvement in the HER activity. Benefiting from high conductivity, abundant catalytically active sites, and lower desorption energy, the fabricated MoSe2/TiC–C arrays exhibit a low overpotential of 137 mV at a large current density of −100 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slope of 32 mV dec−1, which is better than MoSe2 counterparts.208 Besides, Fan et al. reported a simple strategy to synthesize a hierarchical MoS2/Ti3C2Tx hybrid (Fig. 12g). Notably, the MoS2/Ti3C2Tx hybrid exhibits excellent HER activity with a small overpotential of 152 mV to deliver a current density of −10 mA cm−2, while MoS2 requires a much larger overpotential of 337 mV (Fig. 12h). Moreover, it is observed that the exchange current density increases more than 25-fold compared with MoS2.209


4.5.6. TMC-based TMC heterostructures. 
To date, TMCs have remained one of the largest groups of materials engaged in water electrolysis due to their fascinating structural and electronic properties. Constructing heterogeneous double TMC heterostructures has been proven to play a pivotal role in kinetics acceleration, electronic structure optimization, and conductivity amelioration, all of which contribute to the enormous improvement in electrocatalytic activity.210 In this section, three different types of double TMC heterostructures, namely, transition metal sulfide/transition metal sulfide, transition metal sulfide/transition metal selenide, and transition metal selenide/transition metal selenide, have been discussed in detail.
4.5.6.1. Transition metal sulfides and transition-metal-sulfide-based heterostructures. 
Transition metal sulfides are the most extensively investigated TMCs for HER because of their unique structural and electronic properties. Tremendous progress has been achieved by building two types of transition metal sulfide heterostructures to effectively enhance the HER electrocatalytic activity of single-metal sulfides. For example, Wang et al. combined 1T-MoS2 with Fe,Co,Ni-based sulfides (FeCoNi-HNTAs) for exceptionally efficient overall water splitting.211 The aberration-corrected TEM reveals the atomic arrangement of 1T-MoS2 with the tetragonal symmetry as well as the presence of (Co,Fe,Ni)9S8. The obtained heterostructures show extraordinary performance with overpotentials of 58 and 184 mV for HER and OER, respectively, to deliver 10 mA cm−2, which can be attributed to rapid electron and mass transfer elicited by the architectural nanotube configuration, synergistic effect among the active centers of (Co,Fe,Ni)9S8, and metallic 1T-MoS2 with enormous number of active edge sites. Moreover, Sun's group reported oxygenated CoS2-MoS2 (O-CoMoS) vertically aligned nanosheet heteroarrays.212 Notably, the appreciable electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) signal of O-CoMoS is in sharp contrast with that of MoS2, implying the existence of vast sulfur vacancies induced by cobalt and molybdenum amalgamation. The O-CoMoS heterostructures achieve low overpotentials of 97 and 272 mV for HER and OER at 10 mA cm−2, respectively. The prominent enhancement in the electrocatalysis performance can be ascribed to the O-CoMoS heterostructures with disordered crystal configuration and rich vacancies, abundant active sites, large active area, and full exploitation of active interfaces. In addition, Feng et al. prepared novel MoS2/Ni3S2 heterostructures with abundant interfaces as bifunctional electrocatalysts, and the assembled alkali electrolyzer delivers a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a low cell voltage of 1.56 V.213 To confirm the effect of the constructed heterointerfaces on the chemisorption of hydrogen- and oxygen-containing intermediates, the DFT calculations were utilized to estimate the ΔGH* and chemisorption free energies of hydroxide (ΔGOH*) on the (101) surface of Ni3S2, (010) surface of NiO, and (002) surface of MoS2. As shown in Fig. 13a, compared with the ΔGH* of Ni3S2 (−1.81 eV) and MoS2 (−2.72 eV), H* is easier to adsorb on the edge sites of Ni-doped MoS2 model (Ni-MoS2) owing to a lower ΔGH* of −3.17 eV. As expected, the surface undercoordinated Ni sites of Mo-doped Ni3S2 model (Mo-Ni3S2) possesses a ΔGOH* of −2.92 eV, which is much lower than those of MoS2 (−1.68 eV) and Ni3S2 (−2.36 eV), and therefore, Mo-Ni3S2 exhibits superior binding activity toward oxygen-containing groups. Moreover, considering the formation of heterointerfaces between MoS2 and NiO during the OER process, the Mo-doped NiO model (Mo–NiO) shows a significantly decreased ΔGOH* of −5.12 eV. Therefore, a HER mechanism on MoS2/Ni3S2 heterostructures and an OER mechanism on MoS2/NiO heterostructures have been proposed, as shown in Fig. 13b. The DFT calculations demonstrated that the constructed interfaces between Ni3S2 and MoS2 as well as the in situ generated interfaces between NiO and MoS2 have the advantages of the H chemisorption of MoS2 and the HO chemisorption of Ni3S2 and NiO. As a result, the Gibbs free energies of the corresponding intermediates are efficiently decreased, facilitating the dissociation of the O–H bonds of H2O, OH, and OOH intermediates, thereby accelerating the overall electrochemical water splitting. Besides, various kinds of similar heterostructure materials, such as MoS2/Ni3S2,214 MoS2/Co9S8,215,216 MoS2/NiS2,217 (Ni,Fe)S2@MoS2,218 FeS2/CoS2,219 MoS2/NiS,220 and Ni3S2/NiS,221 have been reported with improved catalytic activity.
 Fig. 13  (a) Chemisorption models of H and OH intermediates on the surfaces of MoS2, Ni3S2, NiO, MoS2/Ni3S2, and MoS2/NiO heterostructures. (b) The proposed mechanism of the dissociation of H2O, OH, and OOH intermediates on the MoS2/Ni3S2 heterostructures. The S, Ni, Mo, H, and O atoms are represented by yellow, green, blue, white, and red, respectively. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
4.5.6.2. Transition metal selenides and transition-metal-selenide-based heterostructures. 
Generally, transition metal selenides have higher intrinsic catalytic activities compared with the corresponding sulfides.222 Accordingly, there has been an increasing interest to develop double transition-metal-selenide-based electrocatalysts. For example, Wang et al. reported a colloidal epitaxial growth strategy to synthesize MoSe2–NiSe nanohybrid with well-defined heterointerfaces, which was constructed by the in situ growth of metallic NiSe nanocrystallites on MoSe2 nanosheets.223 These high-quality heterointerfaces give rise to electron transfer from the metallic NiSe nanocrystallites to MoSe2 nanosheets, realizing the electronic modulation of the MoSe2–NiSe nanohybrid for efficient electrocatalytic activity. The MoSe2–NiSe nanohybrid exhibits excellent HER catalytic activity with a low onset potential of 150 mV and a small Tafel slope of 56 mV dec−1. The greatly enhanced electrocatalytic property can be attributed to the electronic structure modulation from the synergetic interactions between NiSe nanocrystallites and MoSe2 nanosheets. In addition, CoSe/MoSe2 heterostructures were also fabricated as OER catalysis. Due to the remarkable increase in the effective specific area and electron transfer ability caused by the formation of the heterointerfaces, the CoSe/MoSe2 hybrid shows superior OER performance (262 mV at 10 mA cm−2) and long-term stability compared with CoSe, MoSe2, and the physically mixed counterpart. The schematic energy band diagram derived from the ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) data further confirms the electronic modulation between CoSe and MoSe2 and reveals that the d-band center of CoSe/MoSe2 hybrid is closer to the Fermi level, causing high charge carrier density and low intermediate adsorption energy in contrast to CoSe and MoSe2.224 Besides, various kinds of similar double transition metal selenide heterostructures have been reported, such as MoSe2/NiSe,225,226 MoSe2/CoSe,227 MoSe2/CoSe2,228–231 NiSe2/Ni0.85Se,232 giving enhanced catalytic activities compared with the single components.
4.5.6.3. Transition-metal-sulfide-/transition-metal-selenide-based heterostructures. 
The construction of transition metal sulfide/transition metal selenide heterostructures is also very promising to boost the electrocatalysis activity because of the synergistic effect. For instance, small Co9S8 nanosheets densely aligned on the surface of Ni3Se2 nanoarrays with an intimate contact interface were supported on exfoliated graphene (Ni3Se2/Co9S8).233 As expected, in contrast to the activities of Ni3Se2 and Co9S8, the Ni3Se2/Co9S8 hybrid shows excellent catalytic activity with low potentials of 170 and 230 mV to achieve current densities of −20 and −50 mA cm−2, respectively (Fig. 14a), suggesting a synergic enhancement between Ni3Se2 and Co9S8 in this hybrid. The mechanism of considerable enhancement in the HER performance was elucidated by DFT calculations; Ni3Se2/Co9S8 heterostructures have a lower ΔGH* relative to Ni3Se2 and Co9S8, thereby leading to favorable dynamics performance. As shown in Fig. 14b, the ΔGH* values for the S site of Co9S8 and Ni site of Ni3Se2 are 0.42 and −0.31 eV, respectively. However, for the S and Ni sites on the Ni3Se2/Co9S8 hybrid, the ΔGH* values are calculated to be 0.28 and −0.12 eV, respectively, indicating higher catalytic activity than those of the S site of Co9S8 and Ni site of Ni3Se2 toward HER. The population distributions of the surface atoms of the Co9S8, Ni3Se2, and Ni3Se2/Co9S8 hybrid nanostructures are shown in Fig. 14c. For the S and Ni atoms of the Ni3Se2/Co9S8 hybrid, the electron acceptance is less than those of Co9S8 and Ni3Se2. The above results indicate that the ability of the surface reconstruction and the strong electron interaction between Ni3Se2 and Co9S8 could change the surface hybrid states, which are the main reasons for the modulation of ΔGH* of Ni3Se2/Co9S8. Next, the DFT-calculation-derived HER pathways are shown in Fig. 14d. The S site of the Ni3Se2/Co9S8 hybrid is the most energetically favorable site for the first H adsorption among the Ni3Se2, Co9S8, and Ni3Se2/Co9S8 hybrid.
 Fig. 14  (a) Polarization curves of different samples for HER. (b) DFT-calculated free energy diagrams of Co9S8, Ni3Se2, and Ni3Se2/Co9S8 (with S and Ni sites) for HER. (c) Population distributions on Co9S8, Ni3Se2, and Ni3Se2/Co9S8 hybrid. (d) Free energy pathways of Co9S8, Ni3Se2, and Ni3Se2/Co9S8 hybrid for HER. Reproduced with permission.233 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
The energy barriers for Co9S8 and Ni3Se2/Co9S8 hybrid from stage 1 to stage 2 are 1.11 and 0.62 eV, respectively, which are the overpotentials required to aid continuous H adsorption. For Ni3Se2, H is spontaneously adsorbed on the surface. During the desorption process, the energy barriers for Co9S8 and Ni3Se2 are 0.28 and 0.71 eV, respectively; however, H2 is spontaneously desorbed from the surface of the Ni3Se2/Co9S8 hybrid, indicating that the hybrid has a much lower energy barrier compared with those of Ni3Se2 and Co9S8 for the HER, leading to a dramatic enhancement in the electrocatalysis kinetics. Furthermore, Gao et al. constructed a hybrid structure by in situ growing MoS2 onto the CoSe2 nanobelt surface. This hybrid electrode affords an onset overpotential of only 11 mV and a Tafel slope of 36 mV dec−1, arising from the synergistic effect of MoS2 and CoSe2. The CoSe2 nanobelts not only enhance the HER activity by chemically coupling with MoS2 but also mediate the growth of MoS2 to form HER active terminals, namely, S22− and S2− ions. Meanwhile, MoS2 is believed to improve the active sites of CoSe2.234 A similar effect was also demonstrated by Wang et al., which realized an efficient hydrogen generation by preparing MoSe2/MoS2 heterojunctions. The abundant interfaces in the MoSe2/MoS2 heterostructures not only expose more active sites but also facilitate charge transport due to the open porous space within the interlaced nanosheet arrays, arising from the synergistic effect between MoS2 and MoSe2. As a result, the MoSe2/MoS2 heterostructures exhibit an excellent HER property with a small Tafel slope of 61 mV dec−1 and a low overpotential of 162 mV at −10 mA cm−2.235


4.5.7. TMP-based TMC heterostructures. 
TMPs have been demonstrated to possess favorable H binding as HER catalysts based on DFT calculations.236 The high thermostability, conductivity, and low cost make TMPs promising alternatives to noble-metal-based electrocatalysts. Moreover, unlike some transition metal sulfides, such as MoS2 and MoSe2, the electrocatalytic activity is limited to the edge sites. It has been found that TMPs are active in the bulk form,237 and therefore, hybridizing TMCs with TMPs has a huge advantage to enhance the HER activity. For example, Lee et al. reported that the MoS2 basal planes could be activated by growing Ni2P nanoparticles on them.238 Therefore, Ni2P/MoS2 heterostructures have been constructed via the in situ phosphidation of NiMoS4 as a single precursor (Fig. 15a). The TEM image of the Ni2P/MoS2 heterostructures (Fig. 15b) shows that the Ni2P nanoparticles are successfully grown on MoS2 sheets. The HRTEM images (Fig. 15c–e) clearly reveal the coexistence of Ni2P and MoS2 phases. Interestingly, the stacking of MoS2 sheets is restricted to only three to seven layers with enhanced interlayer spacing of 0.68 nm due to the presence of Ni2P species. Therefore, the Ni2P nanoparticles residing on the flat basal plane of MoS2 suppress the further growth of the MoS2 layers. As expected, the Ni2P/MoS2 heterostructures exhibit excellent HER activity and higher exchange currents than those of individual MoS2 and Ni2P components in both acidic and alkaline media (Fig. 15f and g). This improved performance is related to the activation of the basal plane of MoS2 by forming a widely cross and chemically connected heterostructure with the Ni2P nanoparticles. Until now, various TMPs (e.g., MoP and CoP) have been widely adopted to combine with TMCs as hybridization catalysts to enhance the HER performance of TMCs. For instance, Wang et al. prepared MoS2/MoP heterostructures as an efficient HER catalyst in an acid electrolyte, which exhibits predominant HER catalytic performance with a smaller Tafel slope of 58 mV dec−1 and an overpotential of 102 mV to deliver a current density of −10 mA cm−2. The excellent HER performance might be attributed to the electronic interaction between P and S, large specific surface area, characteristic nanosheet morphology, and high electrical conductivity.239 Similarly, Fu et al. reported flower-like MoS2/MoP core–shell heterojunction,240 which exhibits an excellent electrocatalytic activity for HER both in acidic and alkaline conditions. Besides, the hierarchical dodecahedral-structured CoP/CN@MoS2241 was prepared by growing MoS2 nanosheets on the surface of dodecahedral-structured CoP/CN. Benefiting from the synergistic coupling effect of CoP/CN and MoS2, the CoP/CN@MoS2 hybrid shows excellent HER activities both in acidic (η10 = 144 mV) and alkaline (η10 = 149 mV) solutions in addition to splendid OER performance (η10 = 289 mV) in an alkaline solution. Moreover, the coupling effect of CoP/CN and MoS2 is revealed by the DFT calculations to validate the increased HER activity.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the formation of the Ni2P/MoS2/N:CNT heterostructure. (b) TEM image; (c) HRTEM image; magnified images of the (d) MoS2 region and (e) Ni2P surface and the corresponding line profile and FFT patterns for the Ni2P/MoS2 catalyst. Comparison of η10 values (left) and exchange currents (right) for all the electrocatalysts in (f) 0.5 M H2SO4 and (g) 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.238 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 


4.5.8. TMN-based TMC heterostructures. 
TMNs are a family of interstitial compounds constructed by embedding N atoms into the interstices of parent metals. The intercalation of negatively charged N atoms into transition metals expands the metal lattice and broadens the d band of metals, which increases the contraction of the d band and the DOSs near the Fermi level.242–244 The redistribution of DOSs is beneficial for altering the electronic structure of TMNs to resemble that of noble metals such as Pt and Pd.245–247 Recently, the DOSs near the Fermi level, which mainly originate from the metal (M) d states, are widely applied to investigate the electronic interaction between the adsorbate valence states and the M d states,248 while the d-band center theory is well established largely by considering the binding energy of the adsorbed H* during the HER process. Therefore, by comparing the d-band center of a metal surface with its Fermi level, which is computed from the projected DOSs taking the mean energy of the occupied M d states, the ΔGH* of a given M-based catalyst could be qualitatively predicted and justified. Combining the merits of high electrical conductivity, better chemical stability, and distinct electronic structure, TMNs are considered as promising candidates to hybridize TMCs in electrocatalytic applications.
To date, a variety of TMN-based TMC electrocatalysts have been developed. For example, MoS2 nanoflakes were vertically grown on Mo2N nanoneedles prepared by Chu et al. The Mo2N can prevent the collapse of MoS2 during the fabrication and electrochemical processes. To understand the HER mechanism of MoS2–Mo2N, the DFT calculations were performed (Fig. 16a). The results indicate that the strong electronic interaction between MoS2 and Mo2N enhances the charge transfer, moderates the hydrogen binding energy, and thermodynamically decreases the reaction energy. As shown in Fig. 16b, the MoS2–Mo2N possesses ΔGH* of −0.079 eV that is close to 0 eV, which is much less than those of MoS2 (0.39 eV) and Mo–Mo2N (−3.59 eV). As a result, ΔGH* rebalances and optimizes the electronic environment, resulting in better synergy between the adsorption of H* and fast H2 desorption, as well as further enhancing the HER activity. Owing to the optimized hybrid structure, MoS2–Mo2N exhibits a small overpotential of 121 mV at −10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 16c) and a low Tafel slope of 49.6 mV dec−1.249 Besides, an advanced electrocatalyst based on vertically aligned MoS2-nanosheet-encapsulated Mo–N/C framework with interfacial Mo–N coupling centers was also reported by Mu et al. To determine the interlayer electron-coupling effect of the three phases, the band structure and DOS-based descriptors were first probed. As shown in Fig. 16d, compared with the pure semiconductor behavior of MoS2, both N/C and Mo–N/C@MoS2 exhibit no bandgaps owing to a downshift in the Dirac cone to afford fast electron transfer, which enhances the electrical conductivity of Mo–N/C@MoS2, thereby benefiting the HER and OER electrocatalytic performances. Further, the corresponding structural models of MoS2 (i), N/C (ii), and Mo–N/C@MoS2 (iii) are shown in Fig. 16e. The DOSs of the Mo 3d and N 2p orbits (Fig. 16f) also indicate the Mo–N coordination as an active phase in the Mo–N/C@MoS2 heterostructures. The DFT calculations further investigated the activity origin of Mo–N/C@MoS2. As shown in Fig. 16g, the N/C, MoS2, and N/C@MoS2 with the calculated ΔGH* values of 1.70, 1.29, and 1.04 eV, respectively, indicate the weak hydrogen-binding strength on the catalyst surface. However, owing to the improved H* chemisorption strength, which is promoted by the highly active interfacial Mo–N coupling centers, Mo–N/C@MoS2 yields the smallest ΔGH* value of 0.236 eV, thereby boosting rapid H* adsorption and recombination. As a result, the Mo–N/C@MoS2 hybrid exhibits excellent electrocatalytic activity (η10 = 117 mV) (Fig. 16h) and a small Tafel slope of 64.3 mV dec−1 (Fig. 16i) toward HER.250 Similarly, MoS2–Mo2N and MoS2–MoN composites have been reported as highly efficient HER catalysts.251,252
 Fig. 16  (a) Adsorption of H atoms on the heterojunction of MoS2–Mo2N/CC. (b) Free energy diagram for H adsorption and (c) LSV curves of different electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.249 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d and e) Band structures and corresponding structural models of (i) MoS2, (ii) N/C, and (iii) Mo–N/C@MoS2. (f) Calculated partial DOSs. (g) Calculated free energy diagram of different catalysts. (h) HER polarization curves and (i) corresponding Tafel plots of Pt/C, N/C, C@MoS2, N–C@MoS2, and Mo–N/C@MoS2. Reproduced with permission.250 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 

5. Conclusion and outlook
TMCs are believed to have great potential to replace conventional noble-metal-based catalysts owing to their outstanding electrocatalytic performance in the energy conversion field. The current application requirements have also encouraged researchers to further optimize TMC-based catalysts with better performance for practical applications and explore a comprehensive understanding for the mechanism behind these achievements.
This review summarizes the recent progress in fabricating low-cost, high-performance TMCs for electrocatalytic water splitting. In particular, we highlight the strategies for enhancing the electrocatalytic activity of TMCs: (i) increasing the number of active sites through structural design (e.g., vertical alignment, porous structure, stepped surface structure, nanostructuring, and so on); (ii) improving the intrinsic activity of each active site through electronic structure modification (such as surface vacancy/defect, heteroatom doping, strain regulation, phase transition, and heterostructure engineering) to tune the electronic configuration and optimize the thermodynamic intermediate adsorption/desorption on the surface of the TMC catalysts.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that there is still a long way to go before electrochemical water splitting can be commercially applied for sustainable H2 generation, although tremendous promising advances and many achievements have been made so far. Despite the fact that numerous challenges remain, there are many opportunities for scientific researchers to explore this domain, which will help to provide more tangible guidelines for the future of this field.
First, although various synthesis strategies have been currently adopted to fabricate effective nonnoble-metal-based TMC catalysts, the yield of the catalysts is inadequate to meet industrial and commercial requirements. Therefore, great efforts should be devoted to the large-scale preparation of TMCs for practical applications.
Second, although remarkable progress and breakthroughs have been achieved in the development of high-efficiency, stable nonnoble-metal-based TMC electrocatalysts, the catalytic activity and stability of TMC catalysts can hardly meet the requirement of practical electrolyzers. Catalysts in practical large-scale applications usually need to maintain a large current density (above 500 mA cm−2) for thousands of hours compared with most catalysts with the catalytic activity being maintained only at a low current density (below 100 mA cm−2) for dozens of hours during basic research. Hence, improving the catalytic performance and durability at higher current density to meet the practical requirement of large-scale applications based on earth-abundant and low-cost nonnoble-metal-based TMC catalysts will be one of the central research issues in the future.
Third, from the perspective of the all-round development of water electrolysis, it is insufficient to simply develop novel catalysts. In-depth understanding of the catalytic mechanism over TMCs should be simultaneously explored. Although DFT calculations have been extensively employed to monitor the reaction intermediates and active sites of catalysts for designing high-efficiency HER catalysts, most of the theoretical models may not simulate the actual catalytic environment except for the limited number of reports in the literature (the theoretical model systems based on the actual electrochemical environment in the presence of liquid water).253 Moreover, the fundamental catalytic mechanisms of nonnoble-metal-based HER electrocatalysts are still debatable, since most of the current interpretations are based on the classic theory of noble-metal-based catalysts. Although the HER process for noble-metal-based catalysts such as Pt is relatively understood in the acidic condition, the mechanism of HER in alkaline media is very ambiguous so far. The argument of mechanism for alkaline HER is still not settled due to the lack of effective means to identify the reaction active sites and key intermediates. For example, Yan et al. argued that the hydrogen-binding energy theory, which is proposed to lie at the heart of pH-dependent kinetics, is the sole descriptor of alkaline HER.254 However, Koper et al. proposed another viewpoint that hydroxyl (OH*) is also a descriptor of alkaline HER; they argued that the shift in the potential of zero free charge with pH influences the shuffling of OH− from the catalyst surface to the bulk solution and therefore the energetic barrier for the Volmer step.255 Instead, Markovic et al. developed the bifunctional theory according to which the involved components promote different parts of the multistep alkaline HER process.256 Besides, Liu et al. reported that the fast transfer from OHad to OH− is beneficial to facilitate the HER,257 and Sun et al. addressed that the oxophilic effect that determines the surface charge of catalysts is crucial to alkaline HER.258 Therefore, the mechanism of HER in alkaline media is very ambiguous due to the lack of a uniform standard. Hence, it is imperative to perform in-depth and systematical investigations toward the HER mechanism in alkaline media, such as the catalytic behavior of authentic active atoms, electrode–electrolyte interfacial characteristics, and the precise capture of reaction intermedia. Therefore, a more perfect theoretical system based on the actual electrochemical condition is needed to gain further insights into the alkaline HER mechanism, which is not only of scientific significance but also beneficial for rationally guiding the design of high-efficiency HER catalysts. Besides, the working mechanisms for OER and bifunctional catalysts toward water splitting are still preliminary, particularly for the problem of activity origin from the conversion to metal hydroxides/oxides on the surface of most OER catalysts. It cannot be simply defined as the real electrochemical property of the catalyst itself. Nevertheless, in most cases, structural reconstruction has not been involved and theoretically simulated when we illustrate the activity origin of OER catalysts. Calculations are required to track the complete process of catalytic reactions and reveal the activity evolution with rational theoretical model modification, which displays practical significance for theory-guided material synthesis.
Fourth, most of the currently used characterizations are ex situ techniques for HER catalysts, which can only provide information before and after HER measurements, but miss important information such as the microstructural evolution of the surface atomic layers and the reaction intermediates absorbed on the surface of the catalysts during the HER process, which are essential for understanding the working mechanism. Hence, the development of more in situ/operando characterization techniques to probe the real catalytically active sites and the structure of the catalysts is highly desirable to unravel the catalytic mechanism. For example, Ito et al. verified that graphene edges with chemical dopants (N, P) are electrochemically active during the HER process by in situ/operando scanning electrochemical cell microscopy (SECCM) techniques.259 Besides, in situ/operando characterization techniques can provide direct evidence for understanding the electronic behavior and constructing theoretical models.
Fifth, for electrochemical water splitting, the efficiency is determined by both HER and OER electrocatalysts. From the perspective of practical devices and wider application, developing a two-electrode configuration is essential to guarantee the efficient catalysis for the HER and OER half-reactions. Nevertheless, few nonnoble-metal-based catalysts could efficiently and simultaneously catalyze both HER and OER under identical experimental conditions and most HER catalysts perform better under acidic conditions, while almost all the OER promotors prefer alkaline media. Therefore, it is extremely crucial to develop highly efficient HER catalysts in alkaline media in the next stage of water electrolysis.
Sixth, it is necessary to establish a uniform standard to evaluate the performance of electrocatalysts.2 A comparison of the catalytic performance under standardized conditions is beneficial for selecting and optimizing the existing systems as well as estimating the feasibility of newly developed electrocatalysts. Owing to the significant difference in the preparation methods, mass loadings, catalyst supports, and reaction conditions, it is difficult to accurately compare and assess the performance of different electrocatalysts. A simple comparison of the current density based on the geometric electrode area might encompass some important influential factors such as catalyst size, mass loading, substrate effect, and testing condition. Therefore, the comprehensive assessment indexes on the electrocatalytic behavior, such as electrolyte, mass loading, overpotential, Tafel slope, exchange current density, durability, Faradaic efficiency, TOF, etc., should be taken into account; meanwhile, researchers are strongly encouraged to evaluate their HER behaviors under standard conditions for comparing the activity of newly developed electrocatalysts in the future.
Seventh, in addition to the cost of fabricating HER electrocatalysts, electricity consumption also seriously affects the wider application of water electrolysis for H2 generation. Integrating HER devices into a renewable electricity resource system, such as solar energy, wind, or tidal generator, can facilitate the industrial application of HER.
Eighth, further efforts are also needed to explain more details of the electrode–electrolyte interface in electrocatalytic water splitting that remain poorly understood till date. Current challenges include atomistic- and molecular-level descriptions of the solvents, cations, and anions near the interface, as well as the dynamics and reaction barriers of key fundamental steps involving proton/electron transfers under the related reaction conditions.35 This is the frontier of electrocatalysis research: with faster, more efficient strategies to capture this understanding by more advanced techniques both in theory and in experiment, more information will come to light that can further guide the delicate construction of catalysts that can operate with near-ideal efficiency and selectivity, which is vital for achieving future breakthroughs in electrocatalytic water-splitting development.
Above all, with joint efforts made by scientists all over the world, we have reasons to believe that the development of promising electrochemical water splitting will be faster in both theory and experiment. Electrochemical water splitting to produce H2 will be a clean, efficient, and sustainable technique to replace the conventional fossil resources as the scaling-up commercialization of electrocatalysis, which can have a tremendous contribution to the advancement of the industrial utilization of H2 energy.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 21872008). The authors would like to thank the Analysis & Testing Center of Beijing Institute of Technology.
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, L. S. Hu, P. X. Zhao, L. Y. Lee and K. Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 851–918 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Benck, T. R. Hellstern, J. Kibsgaard, P. Chakthranont and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3957–3971 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schlapbach and A. Züttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
U. Gupta and C. N. R. Rao, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 49–65 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. H. Steele, Nature, 1999, 400, 619–621 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Gray, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 7 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cobo, J. Heidkamp, P. A. Jacques, J. Fize, V. Fourmond, L. Guetaz, B. Jousselme, V. Ivanova, H. Dau, S. Palacin, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 802–807 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4347–4357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
X. X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
H. I. Karunadasa, E. Montalvo, Y. J. Sun, M. Majda, J. R. Long and C. J. Chang, Science, 2012, 335, 698–702 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. J. Li, K. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10274–10277 CrossRef CAS .
Q. B. Yun, Q. P. Lu, X. Zhang, C. L. Tan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 626–646 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
M. R. Gao, M. K. Chan and Y. G. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7493 CrossRef .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
M. S. Faber and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3519–3542 RSC .
R. Kappera, D. Voiry, S. E. Yalcin, B. Branch, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1128–1134 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Z. Wang, X. Du, M. Safdar, C. Jiang and J. He, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 465705 CrossRef .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Hinnemann, J. Moses, K. P. Bonde, J. H. Jørgensen, S. Nielsen, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef .
Y. W. Liu, H. Cheng, M. J. Lyu, S. J. Fan, Q. H. Liu, W. S. Zhang, Y. D. Zhi, C. M. Wang, C. Xiao, S. Q. Wei, B. J. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15670–15675 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gao, X. Cao, Q. Gao, Y. F. Xu, Y. R. Zheng, J. Jiang and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3970–3978 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Zheng, M. R. Gao, Q. Gao, H. H. Li, J. Xu, Z. Y. Wu and S. H. Yu, Small, 2015, 11, 182–188 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Wang, L. Sun, Y. J. Sun, T. W. Hu, K. W. Xu and F. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19752–19759 RSC .
B. Qu, C. Li, C. Zhu, S. Wang, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16886–16893 RSC .
S. Mao, Z. Wen, S. Ci, X. Guo, K. K. Ostrikov and J. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 414–419 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qu, X. B. Yu, Y. J. Chen, C. L. Zhu, C. Y. Li, Z. X. Yin and X. T. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14170–14175 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, W. Liao, L. Sun and C. Chen, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2015, 10, 2467–2477 CAS .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, 146 CrossRef .
M. E. G. Lyons, R. L. Doyle, D. Fernandez, I. J. Godwin, M. P. Browne and A. Rovetta, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 45, 60–62 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, S. Gao, F. C. Lei and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 623–636 RSC .
M. Blasco-Ahicart, J. Soriano-Lopez, J. J. Carbo, J. M. Poblet and J. R. Galan-Mascaros, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 24–30 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Xiao, P. Huang, M. Cheng and Y. Xie, Chem, 2018, 4, 1263–1283 CAS .
S. Kaya, D. Friebel, H. Ogasawara, T. Anniyev and A. Nilsson, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2013, 190, 113–124 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L. A. Stern and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555–6569 RSC .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
H. M. Sun, Z. H. Yan, F. M. Liu, W. C. Xu, F. Y. Cheng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1806326 Search PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, 23–26 CrossRef .
J. S. Kim, B. Kim, H. Kim and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702774 CrossRef .
J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Phys., 2005, 319, 178–184 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, J. Rossmeisl and J. R. Kitchin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4827 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Man, H. Y. Su, F. Calle-Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martínez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. R. Chang, B. Zhou, Y. T. Cui, H. Yan, Z. Liu, F. Schmitt, J. Lee, R. Moore, Y. Chen, H. Lin, H. T. Jeng and Z. X. Shen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 111–115 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kong, H. Wang, J. J. Cha, M. Pasta, K. J. Koski, J. Yao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1341–1347 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, D. Kong, P. Johanes, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, K. Yan, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3426–3433 CrossRef CAS .
X. Geng, W. Wu, N. Li, W. Sun, J. Armstrong, A. Al-hilo, M. Brozak, J. Cui and T. P. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6123–6129 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Fei, G. Ruan, C. Xiang and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8163–8168 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, H. Hong, Q. Fu, Y. Huang, J. Zhang, X. Cui, Z. Fan, K. Liu and B. Xiang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6478–6483 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Saadi, A. I. Carim, J. M. Velazquez, J. H. Baricuatro, C. C. L. McCrory, M. P. Soriaga and N. S. Lewis, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2866–2873 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963–969 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, B. Huang, C. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. An, D. Zhou, H. Lin, M. K. Leung and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 593–603 RSC .
Z. W. Chen, W. W. Wang, S. S. Huang, P. Ning, Z. J. Hu and X. F. Qian, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 326–335 RSC .
B. G. Mao, D. L. Guo, J. W. Qin, T. Meng, X. Wang and M. H. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 446–450 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Faber, R. Dziedzic, M. A. Lukowski, N. S. Kaiser, Q. Ding and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10053–10061 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, Y. Yu, Q. Ma, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1917–1933 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, S. H. Liu, H. W. Liang, R. H. Dong and X. L. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7426–7431 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Shim, W. Hong, S. Y. Yang and S. Y. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14950–14968 RSC .
J. W. Huang, H. G. Gao, Y. F. Xia, Y. H. Sun, J. Xiong, Y. R. Li, S. Cong, J. Guo, S. Y. Du and G. F. Zou, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 305–313 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Wu, C. Y. Niu, C. Wei, Y. Jia, C. Li and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2029–2033 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. H. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Nørskov and X. L. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. D. Qin, L. Ries, S. Hong, T. Michel, J. Yang, C. Salameh, M. Bechelany, P. Miele, D. Kaplan, M. Chhowalla and D. Voiry, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 6824–6834 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. X. Wang, X. Sun, M. Zhou, J. F. Zhou, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5807–5813 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Chen, G. B. Liu, W. Zheng, W. Feng, W. W. Cao, W. P. Hu and P. A. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8537–8544 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lin, P. C. Wang, H. H. Wang, C. Li, X. Q. Si, J. L. Qi, J. Cao, Z. X. Zhong, W. D. Fei and J. C. Feng, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900246 CrossRef .
G. Ye, Y. Gong, J. Lin, B. Li, Y. He, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1097–1103 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, X. Zou, S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, Y. Shi, J. Kong, J. Lou, M. Ajayan, I. Yakobson and J. C. Idrobo, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2615–2622 CrossRef CAS .
S. Najmaei, J. Yuan, J. Zhang, P. Ajayan and J. Lou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 31–40 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hong, Z. Hu, M. Probert, K. Li, D. Lv, X. Yang, L. Gu, N. Mao, Q. Feng, L. Xie, J. Zhang, D. Wu, Z. Zhang, C. Jin, W. Ji, X. Zhang, J. Yuan and Z. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6293 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, Y. Pan, Y. Shen, Z. Wang, Z. Ong, T. Xu, R. Xin, L. Pan, B. Wang, L. Sun, J. Wang, G. Zhang, Y. W. Zhang, Y. Shi and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5290 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qiu, T. Xu, Z. Wang, W. Ren, H. Nan, Z. Ni, Q. Chen, S. Yuan, F. Miao, F. Song, G. Long, Y. Shi, L. Sun, J. Wang and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2642 CrossRef .
J. Huang, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, G. Zou, C. Yan, S. Cong, T. Lei, X. Dai, J. Guo, R. Lu, Y. Li and J. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705045 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, R. Nakamura, K. Kamiya, S. Nakanishi and K. Hashimoto, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2390 CrossRef .
T. Ma, J. Ran, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4646–4650 CrossRef CAS .
F. Calle-Vallejo, J. I. Martinez and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15639–15643 RSC .
G. Fazio, L. Ferrighi, D. Perilli and C. D. Valentin, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2016, 116, 1623–1640 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, J. Dai, Y. Guo, C. Wu, F. Hu, J. Zhao, X. Zeng and Y. Xie, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8359–8367 RSC .
D. He, G. He, H. Jiang, Z. Chen and M. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5132–5135 RSC .
J. Deng, H. B. Li, S. H. Wang, D. Ding, M. S. Chen, C. Liu, Z. Q. Tian, K. S. Novoselov, C. Ma, D. H. Deng and X. H. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14430 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Z. Xiong, Y. Wang, P. F. Liu, L. R. Zheng, G. Z. Wang, H. G. Yang, P. K. Wong, H. M. Zhang and H. J. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801450 CrossRef .
H. Wang, C. Tsai, D. Kong, K. Chan, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Nørskov and Y. Cui, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 566–575 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, Y. Zhou, D. R. Yang, W. X. Xu, C. Wang, F. B. Wang, J. J. Xu, X. H. Xia and H. Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15479–15485 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, H. B. Li, J. P. Xiao, Y. C. Tu, D. H. Deng, H. X. Yang, H. F. Tian, J. Q. Li, P. J. Ren and X. H. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594 RSC .
Y. Q. Sun, K. Xu, Z. X. Wei, H. L. Li, T. Zhang, X. Y. Li, W. P. Cai, J. M. Ma, H. J. Fan and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1802121 CrossRef .
X. Y. Yu, Y. Feng, Y. Jeon, B. Guan, X. W. Lou and U. Paik, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9006–9011 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, J. Zhang, S. Li, F. Grote, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, R. Wang, Y. Lei, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17881–17888 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kou, T. Smart, B. Yao, I. Chen, D. Thota, Y. Ping and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703538 CrossRef .
S. J. Deng, Y. Zhong, Y. X. Zeng, Y. D. Wang, Z. J. Yao, F. Yang, S. W. Lin, X. L. Wang, X. H. Lu, X. H. Xia and J. P. Tu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700748 CrossRef .
P. T. Liu, J. Y. Zhu, J. Y. Zhang, P. X. Xi, K. Tao, D. Q. Gao and D. S. Xue, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 745–752 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Ouyang, X. Wang and S. Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14160–14163 RSC .
Y. P. Zang, S. W. Niu, Y. S. Wu, X. S. Zheng, J. Y. Cai, J. Ye, Y. F. Xie, Y. Liu, J. B. Zhou, J. F. Zhu, X. J. Liu, G. M. Wang and Y. T. Qian, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1217 CrossRef .
J. L. Liu, Z. Y. Wang, J. Li, L. J. Cao, Z. G. Lu and D. D. Zhu, Small, 2019, 1905738 Search PubMed .
D. F. Cao, K. Ye, O. A. Moses, W. J. Xu, D. B. Liu, P. Song, C. Q. Wu, C. D. Wang, S. Q. Ding, S. M. Chen, B. H. Ge, J. Jiang and L. Song, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11733–11740 CrossRef CAS .
N. Q. Tran, V. Q. Bui, H. M. Le, Y. Kawazoe and H. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1702139 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Y. Wu, B. B. Zhang, Y. Zhang, W. J. Jiang, Y. G. Yang, Q. H. Kong and J. S. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5195–5200 RSC .
D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. W. Li, R. Silva, D. C. B. Alves, T. Fujita, M. W. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850–855 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Putungan, S. H. Lin and J. L. Kuo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 21702–21708 RSC .
X. B. Chen and G. J. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 9388–9395 RSC .
X. Y. Wang, X. Gan, T. Hu, K. Fujisawa, Y. Lei, Z. Lin, B. Xu, Z. H. Huang, F. Y. Kang, M. Terrones and R. Lv, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603617 CrossRef .
H. Li, M. S. Du, M. J. Mleczko, A. L. Koh, Y. Nishi, E. Pop, A. J. Bard and X. L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5123–5129 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Gao, Q. Sun and A. J. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16761–16766 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Tan, P. Liu, L. Y. Chen, W. T. Cong, Y. Ito, J. H. Han, X. W. Guo, Z. Tang, T. Fujita, A. Hirata and M. W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8023–8028 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liang, Y. Yan, L. Guo, K. Marcus, Z. Li, L. Zhou, Y. Li, R. Ye, N. Orlovskaya, Y. H. Sohn and Y. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1315–1320 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, G. H. Gao, M. L. Du, J. H. Zhou, K. Wang, W. B. Wu, X. Chen, Y. Li, P. M. Ma, W. F. Dong, F. Duan, M. Q. Chen, G. M. Wu, J. D. Wu, H. T. Yang and S. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707301 CrossRef .
L. Z. Kou, C. Tang, Y. Zhang, T. Heine, C. F. Chen and T. Frauenheim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2934–2941 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Wang, M. Y. Yan, K. N. Zhao, X. B. Liao, P. Y. Wang, X. L. Pan, W. Yang and L. Q. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604464 CrossRef .
M. Y. Yan, X. L. Pan, P. Y. Wang, F. Chen, L. He, G. P. Jiang, J. H. Wang, J. Z. Liu, X. Xu, X. B. Liao, J. H. Yang and L. Q. Mai, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4109–4115 CrossRef CAS .
D. Voiry, M. Salehi, R. Silva, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6222–6227 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Z. Lu, D. Kong, J. Sun, T. M. Hymel and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4940–4947 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Wang, Z. Y. Lu, S. C. Xu, D. S. Kong, J. J. Cha, G. Y. Zheng, P. C. Hsu, K. Yan, D. Bradshaw, F. B. Prinz and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2013, 110, 19701–19706 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, H. Medina, S. W. Wang, Y. C. Wang, C. W. Chen, T. Y. Su, A. Manikandan, K. Wang, Y. C. Shih, J. W. Chang, H. C. Kuo, C. Y. Lee, S. Y. Lu, G. Shen, Z. M. Wang and Y. L. Chueh, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9831–9838 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Oh, C. M. Kim, J. Lee, O. Kwon, Y. Choi, G. Y. Jung, H. Y. Lim, S. K. Kwak, G. Kim and H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1723 CrossRef .
H. Y. Li, S. M. Chen, X. F. Jia, B. Xu, H. F. Lin, H. Z. Yang, L. Song and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15377 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, C. R. English, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2608–2613 RSC .
J. J. Duan, S. Chen, B. A. Chambers, G. G. Andersson and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4234–4241 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, J. Li, F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, Z. Cheng, Z. Wang, K. Xu, X. Zhan, Q. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Jiang and J. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6077–6083 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Toh, Z. Sofer, J. Luxa, D. Sedmidubsky and M. Pumera, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3054–3057 RSC .
D. S. Kong, H. T. Wang, Z. Y. Lu and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4897–4900 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, H. Cheng, F. C. Lei, J. Han, S. Gao, C. M. Wang, Y. F. Sun, S. Qamar, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12004–12008 CrossRef CAS .
P. Z. Chen, K. Xu, S. Tao, T. P. Zhou, Y. Tong, H. Ding, L. D. Zhang, W. S. Chu, C. Z. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7527–7532 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Zhang, B. Yang, X. L. Wu, Z. J. Li, L. C. Lei and X. W. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1772–1779 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Zhang, S. J. Hu, Y. R. Zheng, R. Wu, F. Y. Gao, P. P. Yang, Z. Z. Niu, C. Gu, X. X. Yu, X. S. Zheng, C. Ma, X. Zheng, J. F. Zhu, M. R. Gao and S. H. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5338 CrossRef .
C. Huang, S. Wu, A. M. Sanchez, J. J. Peters, R. Beanland, J. S. Ross, P. Rivera, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1096–1101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, L. Z. Zhang, G. P. Gao, H. Chen, B. Wang, J. Z. Zhou, M. T. Soo, M. Hong, X. C. Yan, G. R. Qian, J. Zou, A. J. Du and X. D. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700017 CrossRef .
A. P. Wu, Y. Xie, H. Ma, C. G. Tian, Y. Gu, H. J. Yan, X. M. Zhang, G. Y. Yang and H. G. Fu, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 353–363 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, B. Lu, X. Qu, J. Ye, J. Z. S. Yin, Q. Wu, R. Wang, S. Shen, T. Sheng, Y. Jiang and S. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 601–609 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Feng, H. Xu, Y. T. Dong, X. F. Lu, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2960–2964 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Z. L. Zhao, S. Dong, D. He, M. J. Lawrence, S. Han, C. Cai, S. Xiang, P. Rodriguez, B. Xiang, Z. Wang, Y. Liang and M. Gu, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 458–467 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, H. Cheng, O. Takeda and H. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8480–8484 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Q. Li, R. Si, G. D. Li, W. Li, D. P. Liu, D. Wang, L. Sun, Y. Zhang and X. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606200 CrossRef .
X. Han, X. Wu, Y. Deng, J. Liu, J. Lu, C. Zhong and W. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800935 CrossRef .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng, S. Bao, M. Wang, X. Qi, Z. Fan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1444 CrossRef .
Z. Zeng, C. Tan, X. Huang, S. Bao and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 797–803 RSC .
J. Kim, S. Byun, A. J. Smith, J. Yu and J. X. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1227–1232 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Feng, J. Q. Wu, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 610–617 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, E. J. Santos, W. Zhu, E. Kaxiras and Z. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 509–514 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tsai, F. Abild-Pedersen and J. K. Nørskov, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1381–1387 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, Y. Liu, H. Jiang, Y. Hu, H. Liu and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802553 CrossRef .
J. Dolinska, A. Chidambaram, W. Adamkiewicz, M. Estili, W. Lisowski, M. Iwan, B. Palys, E. J. Sudholter, F. Marken and M. Opallo, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 1448–1457 RSC .
X. Bian, J. Zhu, L. Liao, M. D. Scanlon, P. Ge, C. Ji, H. H. Girault and B. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, H. Lu, J. Zhou, C. Ye, C. Shi, N. Zhao and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702909 CrossRef .
E. G. S. Firmiano, M. A. L. Cordeiro, A. C. Rabelo, C. J. Dalmaschio, A. N. Pinheiro, E. C. Pereira and E. R. Leite, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7687–7689 RSC .
C. Ma, X. Qi, B. Chen, S. Bao, Z. Yin, X. Wu, Z. Luo, J. Wei, H. Zhang and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5624–5629 RSC .
W. J. Zhou, K. Zhou, D. M. Hou, X. J. Liu, G. Q. Li, Y. H. Sang, H. Liu, L. G. Li and S. W. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21534–21540 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Smith, Y. Chang, K. Raidongia, T. Chen, L. Li and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400398 CrossRef .
H. Tang, K. Dou, C. C. Kaun, Q. Kuang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 360–364 RSC .
J. Yang, D. Voiry, S. J. Ahn, D. Kang, A. Y. Kim, M. Chhowalla and H. S. Shin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13751–13754 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, K. Yu, C. Li, Z. Tang, B. Guo, X. Lei, H. Fu and Z. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 18730 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, L. M. Xie, Y. Y. Liang, G. S. Hong and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Zheng, J. B. Xu, K. Y. Yan, H. Wang, Z. L. Wang and S. H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2344–2353 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liao, J. Zhu, X. Bian, L. Zhu, M. D. Scanlon, H. H. Girault and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5326–5333 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Park, D. Y. Chung, D. Ko, Y. E. Sung and Y. Piao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12720–12725 RSC .
L. P. Jia, X. Sun, Y. M. Jiang, S. J. Yu and C. M. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1814–1820 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Chen, S. M. Xu, Y. C. Li, R. J. Jacob, Y. D. Kuang, B. Y. Liu, Y. L. Wang, G. Pastel, L. G. Salamanca-Riba and M. R. Zachariah, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700482 CrossRef .
D. H. Youn, S. Han, J. Y. Kim, J. Y. Kim, H. Park, S. H. Choi and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5164–5173 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuan, J. Li, C. Yuan and Z. He, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1828–1833 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, X. Ge, Z. Liu, J. Wang, J. Lee and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7768–7771 RSC .
D. J. Li, U. N. Maiti, J. Lim, D. S. Choi, W. J. Lee, Y. Oh, G. Y. Lee and S. O. Kim, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1228–1233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, X. Yang, T. Liang, L. Dai, L. Ma, G. Huang, W. Chen, H. Chen, H. Su and M. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 465401 CrossRef .
D. McAteer, Z. Gholamvand, N. McEvoy, A. Harvey, E. O'Malley, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 672–683 CrossRef CAS .
L. Najafi, S. Bellani, R. Oropesa-Nunez, A. Ansaldo, M. Prato, A. E. D. Castillo and F. Bonaccorso, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703212 CrossRef .
S. J. Peng, L. L. Li, X. P. Han, W. P. Sun, M. Srinivasan, S. G. Mhaisalkar, F. Y. Cheng, Q. Y. Yan, J. Chen and S. Ramakrishna, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 12802–12807 CrossRef .
Y. P. Huang, H. Y. Lu, H. H. Gu, J. Fu, S. Y. Mo, C. Wei, Y. E. Miao and T. X. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18595–18602 RSC .
S. Y. Bae, I. Y. Jeon, J. Mahmood and J. B. Baek, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18158–18179 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, L. Li, X. Han, W. Sun, M. Srinivasan, S. G. Mhaisalkar, F. Cheng, Q. Yan, J. Chen and S. Ramakrishna, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12594 CAS .
H. Zhu, M. Du, M. Zhang, M. Zou, T. Yang, S. Wang, J. Yao and B. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15435 RSC .
A. P. Murthy, J. Theerthagiri, J. Madhavan and K. Murugan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 1988–1998 RSC .
K. Xu, F. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Zhan, Q. Wang, Z. Cheng, M. Safdar and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8468–8476 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Wang, M. Gong, H. L. Chou, C. J. Pan, H. A. Chen, Y. Wu, M. C. Lin, M. Guan, J. Yang, C. W. Chen, Y. L. Wang, B. J. Hwang, C. C. Chen and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1587–1592 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, B. Xia, N. Li, Z. Xu, A. Fisher and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 131–135 RSC .
Y. D. Liu, L. Ren, Z. Zhang, X. Qi, H. X. Li and J. X. Zhong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22516 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, S. Gan, T. Wu, W. Ma, D. Han and L. Niu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12193–12202 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiang, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, Q. Zhang and C. Yuan, Carbon, 2016, 98, 84–89 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. B. Yu, X. L. Yin, W. J. Jiang, Y. Jiang, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19277–19281 RSC .
Y. Yan, B. Xia, N. Li, Z. Xu, A. Fisher and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 131–135 RSC .
Z. Chen, D. Cummins, B. N. Reinecke, E. Clark, M. K. Sunkara and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4168–4175 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gao, Y. F. Xu, J. Jiang, Y. R. Zheng and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2930–2933 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Yeo and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5587–5593 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Jian, Q. Cai, W. T. Hong, J. Li and W. Liu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703798 CrossRef .
L. J. Yang, Y. Q. Deng, X. F. Zhang, H. Liu and W. J. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9268–9275 RSC .
Q. L. Feng, K. Y. Duan, H. Xie, M. Y. Xue, Y. L. Du and C. M. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 499–504 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Xia, C. M. Wang, L. Liu, Y. L. Du and W. C. Ye, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 444–454 RSC .
Q. L. Lv, L. Yang, W. Wang, S. Q. Lu, T. E. Wang, L. X. Cao and B. H. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1196–1205 RSC .
A. Muthurasu, V. Maruthapandian and H. Y. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 202–210 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, J. Liu, J. S. Wang, Y. J. Ruan, X. Ji, K. Xu, C. Chen, H. Z. Wan, L. Miao and J. J. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 74–80 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Luo, X. Li, X. K. Cai, X. L. Zou, F. Y. Kang, H. M. Cheng and B. L. Liu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4565–4573 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, C. X. Zhang, L. Jiang, H. Lin, Y. M. An, D. Zhou, M. K. H. Leung and S. H. Yang, Joule, 2017, 1, 383–393 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zou, Y. P. Liu, G. D. Li, Y. Y. Wu, D. P. Liu, W. Li, H. W. Li, D. J. Wang, Y. Zhang and X. X. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700404 CrossRef .
X. X. Wang, R. P. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. M. Zeng and A. H. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 456, 164–173 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, G. Q. Han, Y. R. Liu, B. Dong, W. H. Hu, X. Shang, Y. M. Chai and C. G. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20057–20066 CrossRef CAS .
R. Michalsky, Y. J. Zhang and A. A. Peterson, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1274–1278 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Fan, Z. W. Peng, R. Q. Ye, H. Q. Zhou and X. Guo, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7407–7418 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Weidman, D. V. Esposito, Y. C. Hsu and J. G. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 11–17 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, L. Peng, Y. Qian, X. Zhang, Y. Xie, J. J. Cha and G. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5241–5247 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kitchin, J. K. Nørskov, M. A. Barteau and J. G. Chen, Catal. Today, 2005, 105, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Esposito, S. T. Hunt, Y. C. Kimmel and J. G. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3025–3033 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Hunt, M. Milina, A. C. Alba-Rubio, C. H. Hendon, J. A. Dumesic and Y. Roman-Leshkov, Science, 2016, 352, 974–978 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Zhao, F. Qin, S. Kasiraju, L. X. Xie, M. K. Alam, S. Chen, D. Z. Wang, Z. F. Ren, Z. M. Wang and L. C. Grabow, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7312–7318 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Luo, L. Tang, U. Khan, Q. M. Yu, H. M. Cheng, X. L. Zou and B. L. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 269 CrossRef .
J. Jeon, Y. Park, S. Choi, J. Lee, S. S. Lim, B. H. Lee, Y. J. Song, J. H. Cho, Y. H. Jang and S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 338–346 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Liu, L. Fang, X. Yang, X. Gu and Y. Wang, J. Catal., 2019, 371, 20–26 CrossRef CAS .
L. Najafi, S. Bellani, R. Oropesa-Nuñez, M. Prato, B. Martín-García, R. Brescia and F. Bonaccorso, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3162–3176 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Deng, F. Yang, Q. H. Zhang, Y. Zhong, Y. X. Zeng, S. W. Lin, X. L. Wang, X. H. Lu, C. Z. Wang, L. Gu, X. H. Xia and J. P. Tu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802223 CrossRef .
J. P. Liu, Y. Z. Liu, D. Y. Xu, Y. Z. Zhu, W. C. Peng, Y. Li, F. B. Zhang and X. B. Fan, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 141, 89–94 CrossRef .
Z. M. Luo, J. W. Wang, J. B. Tan, Z. M. Zhang and T. B. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8231 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Jia, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Sun, L. Song and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2452 CrossRef .
J. Hou, B. Zhang, Z. Li, S. Cao, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, Z. Gao and L. Sun, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4612–4621 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, D. Pohl, B. Rellinghaus, R. Dong, S. H. Liu, X. D. Zhuang and X. L. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 6814–6819 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Yang, K. Zhang, H. L. Lin, X. Li, H. C. Chan, L. C. Yang and Q. S. Gao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2357–2366 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Bai, T. Meng, D. L. Guo, S. G. Wang, B. G. Mao and M. H. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1678–1689 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, J. F. Zhang, R. P. Yanzhang, M. L. Du, Q. F. Wang, G. H. Gao, J. D. Wu, G. M. Wu, M. Zhang, B. Liu, J. M. Yao and X. W. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4752–4759 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Kuang, M. He, H. Y. Zou, J. G. Yu and K. Fan, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 15–25 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Liu, S. Jiang, S. J. Li, L. Zhou, Z. H. Li, J. M. Li and M. F. Shao, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 247, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Li, J. Yin, L. An, M. Lu, K. Sun, Y. Q. Zhao, D. Q. Gao, F. Y. Cheng and P. X. Xi, Small, 2018, 14, 1801070 CrossRef .
Q. Qin, L. L. Chen, T. Wei and X. Liu, Small, 2018, 1803639 Search PubMed .
Y. F. Cao, Y. Y. Meng, S. C. Huang, S. M. He, X. H. Li, S. F. Tong and M. M. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15582–15590 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gong, L. Cheng, C. Liu, M. Zhang, Q. Feng, H. Ye, M. Zeng, L. Xie, Z. Liu and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2213–2219 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Zhou, Y. Liu, H. X. Ju, B. C. Pan, J. F. Zhu, T. Ding, C. D. Wang and Q. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1838–1846 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Yuan, S. Dipazir, M. Wang, Y. Sun, D. L. Gao, Y. L. Bai, M. Zhang, P. L. Lu, H. Y. He, X. Y. Zhu, S. W. Li, Z. J. Liu, Z. P. Luo and G. J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3317–3326 RSC .
C. H. Liu, K. Wang, X. R. Zheng, X. C. Liu, Q. Liang and Z. D. Chen, Carbon, 2018, 139, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, W. J. Jiang, Q. H. Zhang, Y. G. Yang, L. Gu, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Small Methods, 2018, 1800317 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, A. Q. Pan, Y. P. Wang, X. X. Cao, W. C. Zhang, X. Z. Kong, Q. Su, J. D. Lin, G. Z. Cao and S. Q. Liang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 21, 97–106 CrossRef .
X. Q. Wang, B. J. Zheng, B. Yu, B. Wang, W. Q. Hou, W. L. Zhang and Y. F. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7842–7850 RSC .
G. Q. Zhao, P. Li, K. Rui, Y. P. Chen, S. X. Dou and W. P. Sun, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 11158–11165 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, W. W. Wang, S. S. Huang, P. Ning, Y. Wu, C. Y. Gao, T. T. Le, J. T. Zai, Y. Jiang, Z. J. Hu and X. F. Qian, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 326–335 RSC .
X. Q. Wang, B. J. Zheng, B. Wang, H. Q. Wang, B. C. Sun, J. R. He, W. L. Zhang and Y. F. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 299, 197–205 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Hou, J. R. He, B. Yu, Y. J. Lu, W. L. Zhang and Y. F. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 291, 242–248 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, G. Nam, M. G. Kim, T. Zhang, K. J. Liu, X. D. Zhuang, J. Cho, C. Yuan and X. L. Feng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4202–4209 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gao, J. X. Liang, Y. R. Zheng, Y. F. Xu, J. Jiang, Q. Gao, J. Li and S. H. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5982 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Li, W. J. Zang, X. M. Liu, S. J. Pennycook, Z. K. Kou, C. H. Yang, C. Guan and J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 359, 1419–1426 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu and J. A. Rodriguez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14871–14878 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao, W. Chen and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500985 CrossRef .
M. Kim, M. A. R. Anjum, M. Lee, B. J. Lee and J. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1809151 CrossRef .
Z. X. Wu, J. Wang, K. D. Xia, W. Lei, X. Liu and D. L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 616–622 RSC .
A. P. Wu, C. H. Tian, H. J. Yan, Y. Q. Jiao, Q. Yan, G. Y. Yang and H. G. Fu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11052–11059 RSC .
J. G. Li, K. F. Xie, H. C. Sun, Z. S. Li, X. Ao, Z. H. Chen, K. K. Ostrikov, C. D. Wang and W. J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 36649–36657 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. C. Oyama, Catal. Today, 1992, 15, 179–200 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ham and J. J. E. Lee, Energies, 2009, 2, 873–899 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, X. Chen, X. Zhang and G. L. Cui, Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1946–1956 CAS .
Y. S. Jun, W. H. Hong, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4270–4274 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Chen, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8896–8909 RSC .
H. H. Hwu and J. G. G. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 185–212 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Chen, Y. Song, J. Y. Cai, X. Zheng, D. D. Han, Y. Wu, Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Liu, J. Zhu, X. Liu and G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5076–5080 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, Q. D. Ruan, H. Song, Y. Luo, H. Z. Bai, B. Gao and P. K. Chu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2201–2207 RSC .
I. S. Amiinu, Z. H. Pu, X. B. Liu, K. A. Owusu, H. G. R. Monestel, F. O. Boakye, H. Zhang and S. C. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 1702300 CrossRef .
K. Ojha, O. Saha, S. Banerjee and A. K. Ganguli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19455–19461 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Dai, K. L. Du, Z. Z. Li, H. Sun, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, X. S. Li and H. Wang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2015, 134, 572–580 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Yuwono, C. D. Taylor, G. S. Frankel, N. Birbilis and S. Fajardo, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 104, 106482 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, W. Sheng, Z. Zhuang, B. Xu and Y. Yan, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501602 CrossRef .
M. J. Van Der Niet, N. Garcia-Araez, J. Hernández, J. M. Feliu and M. T. Koper, Catal. Today, 2013, 202, 105–113 CrossRef CAS .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K. C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 CrossRef CAS .
E. Liu, J. Li, L. Jiao, H. T. T. Doan, Z. Liu, Z. Zhao, Y. Huang, K. M. Abraham, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3232–3239 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, B. Lu, X. Qu, J. Ye, J. Z. S. Yin, Q. Wu, R. Wang, S. Shen, T. Sheng, Y. Jiang and S. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 601–609 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumatani, C. Miura, H. Kuramochi, T. Ohto, M. Wakisaka, Y. Nagata, H. Ida, Y. Takahashi, K. Hu, S. Jeong, J. Fujita, T. Matsue and Y. Ito, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900119 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Mechanism of hydrogen evolution in acidic (left) and alkaline (right) media. (b) Relationship between j0 and ΔGH* under the assumption of a Langmuir adsorption model. (c) Schematic of the electrocatalytic water splitting for HER and OER. Reproduced with permission.2 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) HER volcano plot for various metals and MoS2. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2017, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
H3O+ + M + e− → M–Hads + H2O (in acidic medium)	(1)
H2O + M + e− → M–Hads + OH− (in alkaline medium)	(2)
H3O+ + M–Hads + e− → M + H2 + H2O (in acidic medium)	(3)
H2O + M–Hads + e− → M + H2 + OH− (in alkaline medium)	(4)
2M–Hads → 2M + H2 (both acidic and alkaline mediums)	(5)
2H2O → *OH + H2O + H+ + e−	(6)
*OH + H2O → *O + H2O + H+ + e−	(7)
*O + H2O → *OOH + H+ + e−	(8)
*OOH → O2 + H+ + e−	(9)
4OH− → *OH + 3OH− + e−	(10)
*OH + 3OH− → *O + 2OH− + H2O + e−	(11)
*O + 2OH− + H2O → *OOH + OH− + H2O + e−	(12)
*OOH + OH− + H2O → O2 + 2H2O + e−	(13)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Idealized structure of edge-terminated MoS2 films with layers aligned vertically to the flat Mo substrate and the corresponding HRTEM image. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) MoSe2 nanofilm with molecular layers perpendicular to a curved substrate and the corresponding HRTEM image. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic for the synthesis of double-gyroid mesoporous MoS2 (and the corresponding HRTEM image) engineered to preferentially expose the edge sites. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Idealized structure of vertically aligned, stepped-edge surface-terminated MoS2 nanosheet arrays and the corresponding SEM image. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Low- and high-magnification TEM images of MoSe2 hollow spheres. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic of CoS2 arrays with different morphologies. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the formation of Co vacancies in CoSe2 nanosheets. (b) Schematic of the spin structure of the Co cation. (c) Positron lifetime spectrum of CoSe2 nanosheets and bulk CoSe2. (d) PAS data at the Co vacancies. (e and f) Geometries and binding energies of H2O molecules at the Co sites and Co vacancies. (g) LSV curves for different electrocatalysts in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic of the formation of S vacancies in MoS2 nanosheets. (i) Comparison of ΔGH of MoS2 basal planes and 6.25% Zn-doped planes. (j) Comparison of the total DOS for MoS2 basal planes, plane with 3.12% S vacancies, and with both 6.25% Zn doping and 3.12% S vacancies. Here, Sv-n and Sv-nn denote the S vacancies near and next-near the Zn atom. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Empty-state isosurface above the Fermi level and (b) DOSs diagram of V0.08Mo0.92S2 nanosheet. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Differential charge density of Co-doped MoS2. Red and green contours represent electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. (d) ΔGH* on S atoms vs. the Bader charge of S atoms for different structures. Insets show the atomic configurations of one S atom bonding with three Co, two Co, and one Mo; one Co and two Mo; and three Mo atoms. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (e) DOSs of the oxygen-incorporated MoS2 slab (top) and pristine 2H-MoS2 slab (bottom). (f) Charge density distributions of the valence band (left) and conduction band (right) near the oxygen atom. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (g) Calculated DOSs and bandgap of MoSe2 (top) and N-doped MoSe2 (bottom). Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (h) ΔGH* for the P and S sites in the basal plane of pristine and P-doped MoS2. Insets show the P-doped MoS2 basal plane with an Had atom on the most active site, the P site. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (i) Calculated free energy diagram of different catalysts for alkaline HER. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (j) DFT calculations of the energy barrier of HER on the (001) facet models of various catalysts. The acronyms IS, TS, and FS represent the initial, transition, and final states, respectively. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the formation of MoS2@NPG. (b) Cross-sectional HAADF-STEM, (c) HRSTEM, and (e) annular bright-field STEM images of monolayer MoS2@NPG. (b, c, e) Scale bars: 1 nm. (d) Standard structure model of 2H-MoS2. (f) Distorted lattice structures with S translation (upper panel), Mo translation (medium panel), and S and Mo translations (bottom panel). (g) Charge density distributions in pristine and bent monolayer MoS2. (h) DOSs distribution and (i) ΔGH* for a series of bond angles. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Synthesis of Co9S8/MoS2 core–shell nanocrystals with different number of shells (1–5 layers). (b) Reaction pathways of H-atom adsorption and H2 desorption on Co9S8/1L MoS2, Co9S8/2L MoS2, and Co9S8/3L MoS2. (c) ΔEH and (d) ΔE2H* for the strained MoS2vs. ε% strain. (e) ΔEH and (f) ΔE2H* for strained Co9S8/1L MoS2 core–shell vs. the τ% strain. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Crystal structure of 2H-MoS2. (b) Schematic of the battery testing system. An MoS2 nanofilm with molecular layers perpendicular to the substrate acts as the cathode, and a Li foil is the anode. (c) Galvanostatic discharge curve of electrochemical Li intercalation into MoS2 film. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2013, National Academy of Sciences. (d) Fourier transforms of the X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) of simple c-CoSe2 and o-CoSe2. (e) Calculated HER free energy change and (f) water adsorption energy for o-CoSe2 and c-CoSe2. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (g) Surface/interfacial energy diagram of c-CoSe2, o-CoSe2, and m-CoSe2. Insets in (g) show the corresponding crystal structures. (h) Calculated free energy of the c-, o-, and m-CoSe2 unit cells. Insets show the corresponding unit cell structures. (i) DOSs of c-CoSe2 and m-CoSe2 with the Fermi level aligned at 0 eV. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Differential charge density of the Pt/CoS2 system. (b) Projected DOSs onto Pt d orbitals of Pt(111) and Pt(111)/CoS2. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) TEM image and the corresponding SAED pattern (inset) of Pt-MoS2 hybrid nanosheet. (d) Polarization curves for Pt-MoS2, Pt–C, and MoS2. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. The TEM image of Pt NPs synthesized on (e) TiS2 and (f) TaS2 nanosheets. Inset: the SAED pattern. (g) Polarization curves of different catalysts. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) Charge density distributions on Cu/Ni3S2, Ni3S2, and Cu. (i) Calculated H2O adsorption free energy changes and (j) H-adsorption free energy profiles of Cu/Ni3S2 hybrid, Ni3S2, and Cu. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of an MoS2/RGO hybrid. (b) SEM and TEM (inset) images of the MoS2/RGO hybrid. (c) Polarization curves and (d) corresponding Tafel plots of different electrodes. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (e) Fabrication procedure and hydrogen evolution process of the CoS2/RGO-CNT hybrid. (f) Polarization curves and (g) Tafel plots of bare CoS2, CoS2/RGO, and CoS2/RGO-CNT electrodes. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the MoO3@MoS2 core–shell nanowire array for HER. (b) TEM images of MoO3@MoS2 nanowire. (c) Polarization curves of nanowires sulfidized at 200 and 300 °C. The inset in (c) shows a comparison between nanowires sulfidized at 150 and 200 °C. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (d) Polyol synthesis of Mn3O4/CoSe2 hybrid. (e) TEM images and the corresponding SAED pattern and (f) HRTEM image of Mn3O4/CoSe2 hybrid. (g) Co2p XPS spectra for pure CoSe2 and Mn3O4/CoSe2 hybrid. Inset shows the electron donation from the Mn3O4 to CoSe2. (h) Polarization curves for OER comprising the Mn3O4, Pt/C, pure CoSe2, and Mn3O4/CoSe2 hybrid. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the HER processes on MoS2 and Ni(OH)2/MoS2 hybrid. (b) The corresponding free energy diagram for HER on the MoS2 edge and (c) Ni(OH)2/MoS2 interface. The surface structures of the catalysts at different stages are shown in the inset. The S, Mo, H, O, and Ni atoms are represented by orange, gray, white, red, and blue spheres, respectively. Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Inc. (d) HRTEM image of the MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite and schematic of the MoS2/NiCo-LDH heterostructure (inset). (e) Free energy diagram for HER in an alkaline electrolyte for bare MoS2 and MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite. (f) Schematic of the HER in the MoS2/LDH interface in an alkaline environment. (g) Polarization curves of the MoS2/NiCo-LDH composite and the reference samples. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Inc. (h) Schematic of the fabrication processes for NiSe@NiOOH/NF core–shell nanostructures. (i) Comparison of LSV curves on NiSe/NF and bare NF under in situ electrochemical oxidation (ISEO) in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.195 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Design schematic of the MoS2/Mo2C. (b) HRTEM images of the MoS2/Mo2C. (c) Size distributions of H2 bubbles on the surfaces of Pt foil and MoS2/Mo2C. DFT calculations showing the adsorption energies for (d) H on –OH-terminated and (e) disassociated H2O on –O-terminated Mo2C (101) as a function of the adsorbed species. (f) Overpotentials at 1000 mA cm−2 for Pt foil, MoS2, and MoS2/Mo2C in both acidic and alkaline media. Reproduced with permission.204 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (g) SEM and TEM images and a schematic of the HER process in an MoS2/Ti3C2Tx hybrid. (h) Polarization curves of MoS2/Ti3C2Tx hybrid, pure MoS2, and Ti3C2Tx. Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Chemisorption models of H and OH intermediates on the surfaces of MoS2, Ni3S2, NiO, MoS2/Ni3S2, and MoS2/NiO heterostructures. (b) The proposed mechanism of the dissociation of H2O, OH, and OOH intermediates on the MoS2/Ni3S2 heterostructures. The S, Ni, Mo, H, and O atoms are represented by yellow, green, blue, white, and red, respectively. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Polarization curves of different samples for HER. (b) DFT-calculated free energy diagrams of Co9S8, Ni3Se2, and Ni3Se2/Co9S8 (with S and Ni sites) for HER. (c) Population distributions on Co9S8, Ni3Se2, and Ni3Se2/Co9S8 hybrid. (d) Free energy pathways of Co9S8, Ni3Se2, and Ni3Se2/Co9S8 hybrid for HER. Reproduced with permission.233 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the formation of the Ni2P/MoS2/N:CNT heterostructure. (b) TEM image; (c) HRTEM image; magnified images of the (d) MoS2 region and (e) Ni2P surface and the corresponding line profile and FFT patterns for the Ni2P/MoS2 catalyst. Comparison of η10 values (left) and exchange currents (right) for all the electrocatalysts in (f) 0.5 M H2SO4 and (g) 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.238 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Adsorption of H atoms on the heterojunction of MoS2–Mo2N/CC. (b) Free energy diagram for H adsorption and (c) LSV curves of different electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.249 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d and e) Band structures and corresponding structural models of (i) MoS2, (ii) N/C, and (iii) Mo–N/C@MoS2. (f) Calculated partial DOSs. (g) Calculated free energy diagram of different catalysts. (h) HER polarization curves and (i) corresponding Tafel plots of Pt/C, N/C, C@MoS2, N–C@MoS2, and Mo–N/C@MoS2. Reproduced with permission.250 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
