Synthesis, purification, properties and characterization of sorted single-walled carbon nanotubes  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR07379A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR07379A
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22087-22139Synthesis, purification, properties and characterization of sorted single-walled carbon nanotubes

        
          
            Abdulaziz S. R. 
            Bati
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            LePing 
            Yu
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Munkhbayar 
            Batmunkh
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Joseph G. 
            Shapter
          
          
        
      *ab
aAustralian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia. E-mail: j.shapter@uq.edu.au
bCollege of Science and Engineering, Flinders University, Bedford Park, Adelaide, South Australia 5042, Australia
Received 
      11th September 2018
    , Accepted 14th November 2018First published on 15th November 2018AbstractSingle-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) have attracted significant attention due to their outstanding mechanical, chemical and optoelectronic properties, which makes them promising candidates for use in a wide range of applications. However, as-produced SWCNTs have a wide distribution of various chiral species with different properties (i.e. electronic structures). In order to take full advantage of SWCNT properties, highly purified and well-separated SWCNTs are of great importance. Recent advances have focused on developing new strategies to effectively separate nanotubes into single-chirality and/or semiconducting/metallic species and integrating them into different applications. This review highlights recent progress in this cutting-edge research area alongside the enormous development of their identification and structural characterization techniques. A comprehensive review of advances in both controlled synthesis and post-synthesis separation methods of SWCNTs are presented. The relationship between the unique structure of SWCNTs and their intrinsic properties is also discussed. Finally, important future directions for the development of sorting and purification protocols for SWCNTs are provided.Abdulaziz S. R. BatiAbdulaziz Bati obtained his Masters degree in Nanotechnology from the Flinders University of South Australia in 2017. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the Australian Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (University of Queensland) under the supervision of Professor Joe Shapter. His research interests mainly focus on carbon-based hybrid nanomaterials and their applications in photovoltaics, particularly perovskite solar cells.LePing YuLePing Yu received his Masters and Ph.D. degrees in 2014 and 2018, respectively under the supervision of Professor Joe Shapter from the Flinders University of South Australia. He did his early education in China and obtained “Bachelor of Science” degree from East China University of Science and Technology in 2012. His research interests include photovoltaics, nanomaterials, and characterization at the nanoscale.Munkhbayar BatmunkhMunkhbayar Batmunkh obtained his PhD from the University of Adelaide in 2017. He is currently a research fellow at the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN) at the University of Queensland, in Australia. Until recently, he was a postdoctoral researcher at the Flinders University of South Australia. His research interests focus on exploring the production of functional nanomaterials, especially nanocarbons and 2D materials, for photovoltaic applications.Joseph G. ShapterJoe Shapter obtained his Ph. D. from the University of Toronto in 1990. From 1990 to 1996, he worked at the University of Western Ontario (London, Ontario) and in 1996, he moved to Flinders University and became Professor of Nanotechnology and was Dean of the School of Chemical and Physical Sciences until the end of 2016. In early 2018, he took up a role as Pro Vice Chancellor (Research Infrastructure) at the University of Queensland and is a Senior Group Leader in the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology. Our group makes nanomaterials and uses physical techniques to examine the properties of these systems. Work with carbon nanomaterials is also an active area of research in our group. These materials have been used for applications in areas such as sensing and solar cells.
1. Introduction
In the past two decades, we have witnessed tremendous advances in developing new materials with tailored characteristics for advanced technologies. A vast amount of effort has focussed on research into one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials due to their unique structure and excellent properties. One such revolutionary material is carbon nanotubes (CNTs). Since their discovery in 1991,1 CNTs, especially single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), have attracted significant attention from both scientific and industrial communities, due to their excellent mechanical, electrical, thermal and optical properties.2 A typical cylindrically shaped 1D SWCNT can be regarded as a rolled-up graphene-sheet, while rolling up multiple sheets of graphene results in the structure of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). Their unique properties means they have been integrated in a variety of applications3 such as photovoltaics,4 sensing,5 drug delivery,6 and biological and medical applications.7,8 In addition, the remarkably improved performance of devices after the successful incorporation of SWCNTs could inspire the potential use of this promising material in other fields. However, in general, SWCNTs are a random mixture of different species, such as metallic (m-SWCNTs) and semiconducting (s-SWCNTs) types, with different chiralities and diameter distributions, which limits their successful use in some specific applications. Furthermore, the bandgaps of the s-SWCNTs are found to be inversely proportional to the tube diameter.9 Given well-defined structure and properties are crucial for various applications, the separation of the mixture into individual species with highly controllable properties is of great interest. A simple and effective method for separating SWCNTs with high purity and reasonable yield has long been a challenging task for scientists and researchers. Promisingly, in recent years, excellent progress has been made in the separation process and the sorted materials have been used in a comprehensive range of fields. Therefore it is necessary to highlight the recent advances that have been made in this rapidly booming research area.
This review is split into two main sections. In the first section, we explore the structures of the SWCNTs and highlight the factors that strongly influence their properties all of which are inextricably linked to their morphology, structure and further functionalization. In the second section, we provide an in-depth review of recent advances that have focused on both preparation of SWCNTs with specific properties via preferential growth and post-synthesis purification techniques. At the end of this review, some important future directions in the separation of nanotubes are also provided.
2. Structure and properties
SWCNTs have a unique structure and possess many excellent chemical, physical, optical and electronic properties. In the following section, we provide a detailed description of the SWCNTs and compare the properties of the well-defined nanotubes with both the as-produced form and other nanomaterials. Moreover, the related characterization methods and their roles in evaluating the purity and yield of CNTs are discussed.
2.1. Structural characteristics
CNTs are one or more layers of graphene sheets rolled-up to form a cylindrical 1D shape. The structure of SWCNTs shows a great deal of variation including length, diameter and chirality as a direct consequence of the fact that the graphene sheet can be rolled at many different angles (Fig. 1a). These various structures are characterized by a “chiral vector” as defined by eqn (1), Ch = na1 + ma2(1)where (n,m) is a pair of integers and (a1,a2) is a pair of basis vectors. Given the chiral vector, the diameter (dt) and chiral angle (θ) can be therefore determined using the following equations:10,11 dt = a(n2 + m2 + nm)1/2/π,(2)in which the lattice constant a = 0.246 nm. θ = tan−1[31/2m/(2n + m)](3)
 Fig. 1  (a) Representation of graphene sheet. (b) Schematic illustration of armchair, chiral and zigzag SWCNTs configurations. (c) Armchair, zigzag, and chiral SWCNTs. R and L describe the handedness of SWCNTs as defined in (d). (d) Chirality map illustrating the rolling up of graphene sheet to produce left-and right-handed armchair. (c, d) Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2010, MDPI. 
Hence, SWCNTs can be categorized into armchair (n = m), zigzag (m = 0), or chiral (n ≠ m ≠ 0) (see Fig. 1b). The electrical properties of the resulting nanotubes vary considerably depending on the chirality and diameter. SWCNTs exhibit metallic behaviour if |n − m| = 3i, whereas if |n − m| = 3i ± 1 they exhibit semiconducting behaviour. Recently, it has been realized that in addition to the classification by chirality, SWCNTs can also be categorized by the helical structures into left- and right-handedness (known as enantiomers or optical isomers).12 The non-chiral armchair and zigzag conformations have no optical isomers, while chiral SWCNTs have a pair of left- and right-handed spiral alignments of the hexagonal carbon rings along the nanotube axis (Fig. 1c and d).13 It is worth mentioning that chiral s-SWCNTs are classified into type-I and type-II depending on whether mod (2n + m,3) = 1 or 2 respectively.14 Both types exhibit opposite signs of circular dichroism (CD) values at the optical transition S22 which defines the left-handed nanotubes (L-SWCNTs) and right-handed nanotubes (R-SWCNTs). For type-I, the negative and positive CD peaks are associated with L- and R-SWCNTs respectively and vice versa for type-II.13
2.2. Fundamental properties of separated SWCNTs
Despite the fact that SWCNTs exhibit excellent properties, the existence of both metallic and semiconducting nanotubes in the as-produced samples limits their potential use in many advanced applications. The reported sorting methods have allowed the selection of nanotubes with desirable properties for each specific application. The electrical, optical, thermal and mechanical properties have been found to be dependent on the specific species present. These properties are described in detail in the following sub-sections.

2.2.1. Electrical properties. 
The variation of the nanotube types results in inconsistent electrical characteristics which play significantly important roles in many electronic and optoelectronic devices. Several studies have investigated the electronic properties (conductivity and resistivity) of individual SWCNTs species.16–19 For instance, Kataura et al.20 have studied the influence of varying metallic nanotube content on the resistance of thin films. Two thin films based on m-SWCNTs and a mixture of m- and s-SWCNTs (1:2 ratio) (denoted as a reference film) were fabricated. The film made with only m-SWCNTs showed extremely low resistance (∼1.03 kΩ sq−1) as compared to the reference film which exhibited a sheet resistance as high as 19.6 kΩ sq−1, despite the fact that the reference film was 1.4 times thicker than the m-SWCNTs film. Importantly, the films made of pure m-SWCNTs possess extremely high sheet resistance stability in comparison to the mixed SWCNT films upon exposure to air, chemical doping and annealing processes.21 Such a high sheet resistance stability is believed to be associated with the constant DOS near the Fermi level of m-SWCNTs due to the lack states close to the Fermi level making the m-SWCNTs less sensitive to the surrounding environment. On the contrary, in s-SWCNTs there are many states much closer to the Fermi level and hence the DOS shift has more pronounced effect leading to a variation in the carrier concentration and thus the resistivity upon exposure to ambient environment/chemical doping. The stability of the resistance is a crucial factor for practical applications particularly in transparent electrodes. Clearly, m-SWCNTs are promising candidates and expected to play a critical role in the next generation flexible devices.
It is worth mentioning that the reported resistance values of SWCNTs are higher than the theoretical resistance predicated to be 6.5 kΩ. This can be ascribed to the high contact ohmic resistance.22 The various bandgaps of the semiconducting nanotubes can lead to inhomogeneous contact between the Fermi level of the metal and conduction/valence band of the nanotubes.23 However, due to the absence of energy gaps between the conduction and valance bands in the m-SWCNTs, the devices based on this type of nanotubes have been reported with low resistance values of ∼7 kΩ.24 Blackburn and co-workers,25 for instance, investigated the optical and electrical properties of a number of films based on different ratios of highly pure m- and s-SWCNTs networks. The film resistivities were measured as a function of m-SWCNTs loadings. It has been observed that at low m-SWCNTs ratios, the resistance starts to decrease, however, ratios above 30% lead to an unexpected resistance increase. This was attributed to the high tube–tube junction resistances. It has been established that the resistance at the tube–tube junctions in SWCNTs networks is a significant source of the overall network resistance26 leading to poor film conductivities. Tunnelling barriers between the similar types of tubes (i.e. metallic–metallic nanotubes) have been reported, while Schottky barriers are confirmed between metallic-semiconducting junctions which have a significant impact on the electrical and optoelectronic properties.27 This was further investigated by Yanagi et al.28 who studied the transport mechanisms in the SWCNT networks composed of different m-, s-SWCNTs ratios. Increasing s-SWCNTs content causes transition of the conduction mechanism from the weak to strong localization regime. The strong localization is associated with the disordered nanotubes, which can be due to the Schottky barriers between metallic-semiconducting nanotubes or the different diameter distribution of s-SWCNTs and thus the large band-gap differences. The authors concluded that different conduction mechanisms were observed; in particular quantum transport and Coulomb-gap-type in highly pure m- and s-SWCNTs, respectively. The conduction in the mixed networks of different ratios of m- and s-SWCNTs has further been studied by Topinka and co-workers29 revealing the effects of the Schottky barrier on conductance. As can be seen in Fig. 2, by varying the ratio of s-SWCNTs in the simulation, the current flow through the nanotube films ranges from high and uniform current observed in the films containing only m- or s-SWCNTs (a and e) while combination of both types blocks the current (b–d).
 Fig. 2  Effect of varying the ratio of metallic (white) and semiconducting (green) networks on the current flow. (a–e) The ratio of s-SWCNTs was varied while the tube density, length, locations, and orientations in the networks were constant. (f) Expected conductance as a function of s-SWCNTs loading. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Energy band gap is one of the most important properties in the s-SWCNTs and is highly desirable in many applications. However, their high resistance (or low conductivity) as compared to the m-SWCNTs is an obstacle. Promisingly, this issue can be improved and/or addressed by treating the films using HNO3 or SOCl2 to induce doping effect.394 Chemical doping is a very promising strategy to enhance the electrical properties and has been well documented.25,31,32 The enhancement observed in the electrical conductivity of the s-SWCNTs after chemical doping is higher than that of the m-SWCNTs.19,33 Despite the fact that the conductivities can be largely enhanced, this approach suffers from several drawbacks such as thermal/chemical stability, complexity and reproducibility.34 In addition to the resistances at the inter-tube junctions, there are other factors that play some roles in influencing the films conductivities such as surface defects.35
In general, semiconducting nanotubes have been found to exhibit many unique properties including excellent field effect mobility (79000 cm2 V−1 s−1), the highest estimated intrinsic carrier mobility (>100000 cm2 V−1 s−1) among other available semiconducting materials at room temperature36 high hole motility of 20000 cm2 V−1 s−1,37 long free path exceeding ∼0.7 μm38 and high on/off ratios.39 On the other hand, metallic nanotubes have been reported to possess equal or even higher conductivities and current densities as compared to other metals,38 long free path ranging from hundred nm to several μm (ballistic transport)40 which make them an ideal candidate for high-performance interconnects.41 In addition, they have a Fermi velocity of νF = 8 × 105 m s−1 which is comparable to that of the traditional metals, and show room-temperature resistivity of ∼ρ = 106 Ω cm.42


2.2.2. Optical properties. 
The optical properties of the SWCNTs are also structure-dependent and can be tuned to obtain the desirable properties. Due to their quasi-1D structure, the optical absorption spectrum of SWCNTs show sharp peaks which correspond to the optical transitions resulting from so-called van Hove singularities (VHSs) in the density of states (DOS). The energy bandgap of the s-SWCNTs is inversely proportional to the tube diameter43 and both can be identified by the chiral vector (n,m). The energy bandgap can be described asEg = 2γ0aC–C/dt = 0.9 eV/dtwhere, γ0 is the nearest neighbour overlap energy, aC–C is the carbon–carbon bond length and dt is the nanotube diameter (Eg increasing with decreasing the diameter). It can be seen from Fig. 3a that the energy gap between the van Hove singularities S11 and S22 of the s-SWCNTs with small diameter ((6,5)) are larger than that of the species with larger diameters (10,5)). However, due to their zero band gap, the first optical transition M11 in the metallic species occurs at widely spaced VHS, and thus only M11 can be observed. Therefore by varying nanotube diameters, distinct colours can be observed (see Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  (a) Electronic properties of small diameter s-SWCNTs (6,5), large diameter s-SWCNTs (10,5) and m-SWCNTs (11,2). (b) Separated samples and their corresponding colours. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. 
High electrical conductivity and low optical absorption of the materials are highly desired in numerous applications such as photovoltaics, liquid crystal displays (LCDs) and organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). As such, SWCNTs with their capability to meet these requirements have been employed to fabricate optically transparent and electrically conductive thin films.45–49 However, the heterogeneous mixture of nanotubes is regarded as a real obstacle considering the strong and broad absorption of s-SWCNTs species in the critical positions of the absorption spectrum limiting their effectiveness. To this end, the optical properties of the thin films fabricated based on highly enriched nanotubes fractions have been investigated.33,50 Yang et al.51 studied the effect of unsorted, m- and s-SWCNTs on the transmittance (400–700 nm wavelength range) and sheet resistance of films coated on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates, as shown in Table 1. It is clear that m-SWCNTs exhibit the highest transmittance (85%) with the lowest values of sheet resistivity among the others types regardless of the number of coatings. There was a clear trade-off between the transparency and conductivity. Increasing the number of coatings increased the conductivity while decreasing the transmittance. Therefore high transmittance films are usually made solely from the m-SWCNTs.52,53
Table 1 The effect of CNT electrical type on the conductivity51




Sample
One coating
Double coatings
Triple coatings



T%

R
s (Ω sq−1)

T%

R
s (Ω sq−1)

T%

R
s (Ω sq−1)




Mixture
78
167 × 103
72
61 × 103
69
14 × 103


Semiconducting
82
175 × 103
79
95 × 103
75
1493


Metallic
85
403
82
262
80
130 ± 5






2.2.3. Thermal and thermoelectric properties. 
SWCNTs exhibit excellent thermal properties with a predicted thermal conductivity of 6600 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature.54 However, the thermal conductivity of the films has been shown to be severely compromized by the high inter-tube junction thermal resistance,55,56 resulting in low thermal conductivity. In contrast, individual nanotubes have been reported to have thermal conductivity as high as ∼3500 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature.57,58 Several theoretical studies confirmed the chirality-dependence of thermal conductivity.59,60 Pop et al.61 were able to experimentally measure the thermal conductivities of various SWCNT solution processed films which were fabricated based on highly pure samples of m-, s-, purified and as-produced SWCNTs. Thermal conductivities ranging from 80 to 370 W m−1 K−1 were recorded at near room temperature. Fig. 4a shows the comparison between the measured thermal conductivity values in this study and thermal conductivities reported in the literature for different types of CNTs. It has been shown that the m-SWCNTs based films exhibit higher electrical conductivity as compared to the s-SWCNTs films, however, the thermal conductivity of the film made with m-SWCNTs is typically lower due to the shorter tube lengths. Importantly, no correlation between the chirality-sorted SWCNT films and thermal conductivities was observed. Instead, the morphology of the networks (i.e. lengths, overall junction and mass density of the SWCNTs) was found to play an essential role in controlling the thermal conductivities.
 Fig. 4  (a) Thermal conductivities of different SWCNT films including values. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2016, American Institute of Physics. (b) Theoretical study on the thermopower as a function of the SWCNT diameter. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2015, American Physical Society. (c) Theoretical predicted thermopower of different SWCNTs chiralities. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Experimental and theoretical measurements of thermopowers as a function of different s-SWCNTs loadings from two studies. Adapted from ref. 81 and 63. (e) Experimental and calculated values of the Seebeck coefficients m- and s-SWCNTs/PANI composite as a function of different nanotubes contents. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (f) Young's modulus as a function of SWCNT diameter for armchair, zigzag and chiral. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
Thermoelectric materials (TE) have attracted a great deal of attention as promising candidates for use in several applications, such as cooling/heating systems and electrical power generation.62 The frequently used thermoelectric materials (Bi2Te3 and its alloys) generally suffer from several disadvantages such as toxicity, the use of heavy rare earth elements, poor processability and high cost.63,64 The performance of thermoelectric devices, defined as devices that can directly convert thermal energy from heat sources into electricity,65 can be evaluated by a figure of merit (ZT),ZT = (S2σ/k)T,where S is the Seebeck coefficient (also called the thermoelectric power (TEP) or thermopower), σ is the electrical conductivity, k is the thermal conductivity and T is the absolute temperature.66 Materials with high thermoelectric power coupled with high electrical and low thermal conductivities are highly desirable and but challenging to fabricate.67 The real difficulty lies in improving all parameters simultaneously since altering one parameter has a considerable impact on the rest of the parameters.68 It has been demonstrated that low dimensional thermoelectric materials exhibit better performance than bulk materials.69 To this end, SWCNTs with their excellent thermoelectric properties and low dimension are ideal thermoelectric materials and hence have been intensively investigated.70–76 However, the as-produced SWCNTs resulted in unsatisfying performance with a TEP ranging from 11 to 65 μV K−1,77 which is relatively low as compared to the required S values for good thermoelectric performance (believed to be at 150–250 μV K−1).78 Therefore, the effect of SWCNTs’ electrical type and chirality on the thermoelectric performance has been studied theoretically and experimentally. In one of the earlier theoretical studies, Hung et al.79 calculated the thermoelectric power of s-SWCNTs as a function diameter (0.5–1.5 nm) using the Boltzmann transport formalism combined with an extended tight-binding model. It was found that decreasing SWCNT diameter, which increases the band gap, increases the thermopower values to 2000 μV K−1 at room temperature for SWCNTs such as (5,3) and (6,1) with a diameter of less than 0.6 nm (see Fig. 4b). Another recent theoretical and experimental study was reported by Ferguson and co-workers80 to get insight into the influence of controlled chirality nanotubes on the thermoelectric power. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations have been performed to study the influence of SWCNT diameter, bandgap and carrier density on thermopowers using five SWCNTs species. It was revealed that the peak of the intrinsic thermopower of (7,5) and (10,0) (both are s-SWCNTs) is nearly an order of magnitude higher than that of the m-SWCNTs species (9,9) (Fig. 4c). The results indicate that the thermopower increases with increasing nanotube bandgap, which is in agreement with the finding reported by Hung et al.79 Interestingly, it was found that a small change in the Fermi level ΔEf (60 meV) either up or down reflects positively on the S value, highlighting the useful role of controlled doped s-SWCNTs. Based on this promising predication, highly enriched s-SWCNTs films were fabricated and high thermopower values exceeding 100 μV K−1 were obtained.
In addition to the chirality separated nanotubes, a few groups have also focused on the effect of pristine, m- and s-SWCNTS networks on the thermoelectric properties. It is worth noting that individual nanotubes possess high electrical conductivity which is advantageous in thermoelectric applications, but their high thermal conductivities limit their effective use. Therefore, nanotubes sheets which showed lower thermal conductivity are more attractive. Kim et al.81 systematically compared TEP of pure m-, s- and mixed SWCNTs thin films prepared using vacuum filtration-based method. The authors showed that the s-SWCNTs films possess higher TEP (88 μV K−1) than that of m-SWCNTs based films which exhibited only 13 μV K−1. Furthermore, the result suggests that increasing s-SWCNTs content in the mixture improves TEP values (Fig. 4d). The effect of Schottky junction between m- and s-SWCNTs on the thermoelectric properties has also been investigated theoretically. It was found that inter-tube junctions in the SWCNTs networks play a significant role in the overall TEP which was found in a previous study to represent 97–99% of the total thermal resistance.82 A very large Seebeck coefficient of 170 μV K−1 at 300 K was reported by Maniwa et al.63 who used sorted s-SWCNT film (Fig. 4d). Despite the large Seebeck coefficient, the electrical conductivity was relatively low. This issue has been addressed by using various types of chemical doping approaches.25,83 Maniwa et al.84 studied the doping effect on the thermoelectric properties. The as-produced SWCNTs and enriched s-SWCNTs films were p-doped using HNO3, and compared them as a function of the electrical resistivity or alternatively electrical conductivity. The result suggests that decreasing the electrical resistivity (by doping) increases S value due to the increase in the charge carrier concentration. However, this behaviour was much more evident for the enriched s-SWCNTs films as compared to the mixed SWCNTs film. This can be attributed to the presence of m-SWCNTs content in the mixed film. Increasing charge carrier concentration results in Fermi energy level (EF) shifts toward the valance or conduction bands and hence changes the density of states (DOS). Considering the presence of VHSs in the DOS near EF for s-SWCNTs, low amounts of carrier doping can move EF to the van Hove singularity and thus a significant change is observed as compared to the larger spacing between the van Hove singularities in m-SWCNTs.63 The influence of nanotube electronic type on the thermoelectric properties has also been investigated by Wang and co-workers.85 SWCNTs/polyaniline nanocomposite films were fabricated based on m- and s-SWCNTs with different ratios. Similar to previous observations, s-SWCNTs/PANI achieved an S value three times larger than that of m-SWCNTs/PANI films (Fig. 4e). These studies clearly indicate the high potential of the separated SWCNTs, particularly s-SWCNTs, to be used effectively as emerging material in thermoelectric devices.


2.2.4. Mechanical properties. 
One of the most promising features of SWCNTs is their remarkable mechanical properties (i.e. stiffness and bending strength) due to the sp2 carbon–carbon bonding between the individual carbon atoms, which makes them potential candidates as reinforcements in nanocomposite materials. This has been experimentally confirmed by Qian et al.86 who reported a significant enhancement of up to 42% and 25% in the elastic stiffness and tensile strength of the CNTs–polystyrene composites, respectively after the addition of low content of CNTs (1 wt%). Tremendous efforts have been made to understand and evaluate the mechanical properties of CNTs and hence there are several theoretical and experimental studies available. A variety of techniques have been employed to experimentally measure the mechanical properties of SWCNTs. In early experiments, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) have been utilized by Treacy et al.87 and Wong et al.88 reporting the first experimental measurements for MWCNTs, and high Young's modulus values of 1.8 and 1.28 TPa, respectively were obtained. Krishnan et al.89 investigated Young's modulus using TEM on 27 isolated SWCNTs with diameter ranging from 1 to 1.5 nm yielding an average Young's modulus of 1.25 TPa. Raman spectroscopy was also employed and values as high as 2.8–3.6 TPa for SWCNTs were obtained.90 Other experimental studies on the mechanical properties of SWCNTs have also revealed high Young's modulus values of 0.8191 and 1.20 TPa.92 Tensile strength measurements have also shown similar variations in the reported values. Tensile strength of 11–63 GPa395 for MWCNTs was reported, while the tensile strength of SWCNTs has been found to be 13–52 GPa (mean: 30 GPa)396 and 45 ± 7 GPa93 in different reports. Despite the success of the previous experiments, there is a large discrepancy in the reported values reflecting the difficulty and complexity of characterizing CNTs at the atomic scale. Besides, the high cost associated with experimental studies makes computational and theoretical methods more favourable and straightforward tools to estimate Young's modulus values. Numerous theoretical and numerical studies concerning the mechanical properties of CNTs have been conducted.94–96 In addition, the effects of structural details on the mechanical properties of SWCNT have also been investigated. Hernández et al.97 applied a tight-binding approach to investigate the effect of CNT diameter and chirality on Young's modulus reporting values ranging from 1.22 TPa to 1.26 TPa. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were employed by WenXing et al.98 to calculate the Young's moduli of different chiralities and values of 0.904 to 0.939 TPa were reported. The authors concluded that tube chirality and radius weakly affect the Young's moduli of SWCNTs, and that is in an agreement with Nakayama et al.'s99 observation. However, in Nakayama's investigation, the critical tensile strain for breaking has shown a chiral dependence. Meo and Rossi100 observed a significant influence of chirality on the mechanical properties of SWCNTs using a Finite Element Model based on molecular mechanics theory. Li and Chou101 reported that Young's moduli of armchair and zigzag SWCNTs increases with increasing tube diameter. This increase can be attributed to the effect of nanotube curvature as decreasing tube diameter results in higher curvature and therefore more significant distortion of C–C bonds. This finding was also reported by Tserpes and Papanikos.102 In addition, the Young's modulus of chiral nanotubes has been found to be larger than that of armchair and zigzag. Conversely, Ávila and Lacerda103 have reported that Young's modulus of zigzag is larger than that of armchair and chiral (Fig. 4f-black). In 2012, Lu and Hu104 developed an improved 3D finite element (FE) model to study the effect of chirality on the mechanical properties of SWCNTs. They revealed that the Young's modulus of zigzag and chiral increases with increasing CNT diameter with no significant changes for armchair (Fig. 4f-blue). Furthermore, the largest Young's modulus was found for zigzag followed by chiral and armchair respectively. It was also found that Young's modulus increases as the chiral angle decreases. Typical values of the mechanical properties for different CNTs are summarized in Table 2. Nevertheless, the above-mentioned investigations can clearly demonstrate the significant effect of SWCNT structure on the mechanical properties. The present tools and approaches need to be further developed in order to provide an in-depth examination into the mechanical behaviour of CNTs and nanocomposite materials. In addition, typically large variations in the values of the mechanical properties are reported. Experimentally, this arises from the inherent limitation of the experimental methods or structural defects in CNT samples while theoretically this results from the different definitions and constants used to conduct the studies.105
Table 2 Prediction of SWCNT Young's modulus, tensile strength, and strain experimentally and using different theoretical methods. (MM): molecular mechanics simulations (MD): molecular dynamics simulations




CNT type
Method
Young's modulus [TPa]
Tensile strength [GPa]
Strain




SWCNTs
Experimental396
320–1470 (mean: 1006)
13–52 (mean: 30)
<0.053



Armchair



5,5100
MM
0.894
123.0
0.216


5,5106
MM
0.920
117.3
0.199


10,10106
MM
0.920
117.2
0.200


10,1094
MD
1.043
140.4
0.280



Zigzag



9,0100
MM
0.939
94.0
0.164



Chiral



12,8107
MD
0.966
117.098 ± 1.377
0.176





2.3. Evaluation and characterization
The optimization of CNT properties is crucial for many applications. Therefore, the quality, diameter distribution, purity, length, electronic type and chirality of the obtained nanotubes should be precisely evaluated. Due to the rapid development in the controlled synthesis and post-purification protocols of SWCNTs, various effective characterization techniques have been developed and utilized in order to investigate the morphological, structural characteristics and properties of the nanotubes either during the synthesis or after the production/purification processes. The following sections discuss the range of techniques that have been adapted and used for characterizing the chirality and electronic properties of the sorted SWCNTs.

2.3.1. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM). 
SEM is one of the most frequently used tools to visualize various nanomaterials including CNTs providing a detailed insight into the sample morphology. However, only SWCNT bundles can be imaged which limits the use of SEM to characterize the separated individual nanotubes. Interestingly, by taking advantage of the contrast differences arising from the variation of conductivities between m- and s-SWCNTs, Jiang et al.108 reported a successful identification method of m- and s-SWCNTs via SEM, demonstrating the high potential of SEM to provide a rapid and large-scale approach to discriminate between m- and s-SWCNTs. Despite these advantages, this method exhibits several drawbacks which can be described as follows: (i) the identification process is only valid if both SWCNTs types appear in the same image, otherwise no contrast difference can be distinguished, and thus the individual SWCNTs type appearing will be unknown. (ii) The nanotubes should be prepared in well-dispersed form, as the bundle contains both s- and m-SWCNTs, resulting in no difference in the contrast.108
Future studies on the contrast differences particularly between s-SWCNTs species are expected to bring a significant step forward for the realization of a powerful and direct characterization tool for chirality assignment.


2.3.2. Transmission electronic microscopy (TEM). 
TEM is a powerful tool to visualize SWCNTs using a high energy electron beam based on electron transmission. The SWCNT characteristics such as lengths, diameters,109 purity and m-, s-SWCNTs ratios and chirality can be revealed by TEM. For example, using an aberration-corrected TEM, Sato et al.110 reported a successful determination of the chirality population in an enriched sample that was obtained via the density-gradient ultracentrifugation method. For better resolution, high resolution TEM (HR-TEM) can be used which allows the imaging of the atomic structure of the SWCNTs. HR-TEM and electron diffraction patterns (EDP) were employed to visualize the atomic structure of the individual nanotubes.111–114 For example, Tian et al.115 utilized both HR-TEM and EDP simultaneously in order to validate the absorption spectrum measurements of the chirality population in SWCNTs sample. Beside its role in characterizing CNTs after the growth, TEM has also been used in situ to monitor the nucleation and growth processes and the catalyst particles formation which is of paramount importance to obtain chirally pure SWCNTs (see section 3.1).


2.3.3. Scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM). 
STM is employed to characterize SWCNTs at the individual nanotube level. The atomic resolution enables probing of the SWCNT surface structure and hence the determination of CNT chirality is realized. The proposed strategy is to identify (n,m) indices using STM by measuring the chiral angle and diameter of a specific nanotube. The chiral angle can easily be determined from the angle (ϕ) between the zigzag tube axis direction and the tube axis direction.116 The successful determination of various chiralities utilizing STM have been reported by several groups.116–119 However, the complicated sample preparation and high conductivity requirements may restrict its effective use.


2.3.4. Resonance Raman spectroscopy (RRS). 
Resonance Raman spectroscopy is a versatile method for assigning the chirality distribution for a given SWCNTs sample. This technique is widely used for the characterization of individual SWCNTs due to its simplicity, non-destructive nature, availability, short experimental time and easy sample preparation process.120,121 The assignment of each (n,m) can be carried out by combining RRS experimental measurements with the calculated electronic transition energies for all (n,m) species (known as Kataura plot).122 Due to the unique transition patterns of each species between VHS in the very large DOS, a well-defined expected spectrum of each individual SWCNT is known. Experimentally, there are two main features which can be utilized to identify the chirality/electrical type of SWCNTs: tangential mode (G band) defined from graphite (occurs at ∼1560 cm−1) and the radial breathing mode (RBM) associated with the vibration of the carbon atoms in radial direction (observed at 100–300 cm−1) (Fig. 5a). The tangential G mode in SWCNTs usually splits into two intense peaks due to quantum confinement and the resulting submodes are commonly labelled as G− and G+. Compared to s-SWCNTs, the shape of G− peak of m-SWCNTs is broadened and this is mainly due to the presence of high fractions of metallic nanotubes which possess high number of free electrons123 (Fig. 5b). The positions as well as the intensities of G− and G+ peaks have been found to be a useful tool to determine the diameter and chiral indices of SWCNTs. Telg, Doorn et al.124 conducted resonant Raman studies on 14 highly purified single chirality samples obtained using a selective polymer wrapping technique. A strong correlation was observed between (i) the diameter and chiral angle, and (ii) the position and frequency of the G mode features. This allowed the successful chirality assignment of the purified nanotubes having a diameter of <1.1 nm. Such a technique is useful for (n,m) assignment considering the high signal of G mode as compared to the RBM. Therefore, no high excitation laser energies are required which implies that Raman with a fixed energy source accessible to a wide variety of laboratories can easily be used to accomplish such task. However, the disadvantage of this method is the fact that only small diameter nanotubes can be chirally assigned as significant peak overlap occurs with the large diameter nanotubes leading to difficult and inaccurate chirality assignment.
 Fig. 5  (a) Typical Raman spectra of SWCNTs. Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) G band split of semiconducting and metallic nanotubes. Adapted from ref. 143. Copyright 2005, American Physical Society. (c) Kataura plot. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2007, American Physical Society. (d) Near-field Raman image. (e) Corresponding topography image of an isolated SWCNT, where the optical resolution was determined to be 40 nm (the inset displays two cross-sectional profiles acquired from both the upper and lower sections). (f) Shows a series of tip-enhanced Raman spectra acquired along the length of the SWCNT. Figures d–f reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (g) RBMs of IPA-synthesized SWCNTs and (h) RBMs of ethanol-synthesized SWCNTs using a 533 nm laser. (g and h) Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
It has been established that RBM frequency is inversely proportional to the tube diameter.125,126 This is only applicable for SWCNTs having diameter <2 nm as larger diameter nanotubes cannot be detected. Since only nanotubes species with electronic transition energy in resonance with the laser power can appear in the spectrum, the diameter distribution and the population of all nanotubes presented in the sample cannot be obtained. This has been overcome by using tunable resonance laser energies.127,128 For instance, Araujo et al.129 utilized 125 excitation laser energies ranging from 1.26 eV to 2.71 eV to generate 2D plot showing the RBM frequency (ωRBM) as a function of excitation laser energy. Given the RBM frequency, nanotube diameter (dt) can be calculated from the relationship:  and the (n,m) assignment of SWCNTs can be therefore determined from Kataura plot (Fig. 5c). By using near-field Raman spectroscopy, Novotny et al.130 were able to directly visualize the chirality changes in SWCNTs via mapping local changes in resonant RBM frequencies (Fig. 5d–f).

In situ Raman spectroscopy for monitoring the electrical properties of as-grown SWCNTs has also been reported.127,131–133 The semiconducting to metallic nanotubes ratio can easily be distinguished from the RBMs, as seen in Fig. 5g and f.108
It is worth mentioning that despite the many advantages of Raman spectroscopy, this technique has some limitations such as the difficulty in obtaining quantitative chirality assessment of each individual nanotube presented in the sample and the extremely time-consuming mapping of large sample areas. In addition, the validity of Raman spectroscopy for quantitative evaluation the metallic fractions in a given sample has recently been questioned.134 As such, further development of this technique is needed for more accurate and reliable chiral SWCNTs characterization.
Raman spectroscopy has also emerged as a powerful tool for the discrimination of empty and water-filled SWCNTs.135,136 Determining whether SWCNTs are empty (closed) or water filled (opened) is crucial since it affects the density of the dispersed CNTs, hence the separation process.137,138 The RBM peak features (position, width and intensity) can be used to identify whether the CNTs is empty or filled. Fagan et al.,138 for instance, showed that (15,2) and (16,4) – water filled SWCNTs were red-shifted with a broader peaks as compared to that of the empty (15,2) and (16,4)-SWCNTs.
Raman optical activity (ROA) is one of the latest techniques that has emerged for chirality characterization of SWCNTs. To date, only a limited number of theoretical studies on the SWCNTs resonance ROA (RROA) have been published.139,140 In addition, to the best of our knowledge, the first experimental work in this field was reported in 2015 by Bürgi et al.141 who were able to measure the first ROA spectra of SWCNTs. The samples enantiomerically enriched with (6,5) SWCNTs were prepared using a nonlinear density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGU) sorting method. An enhancement of the ROA intensity was realized which is believed to be due to the near-resonance of Raman-scattered photons with the second electronic transition of the (6,5) SWCNTs. As such, the measurement of ROA spectra was possible despite the low concentration. Although this technique is a promising tool to investigate the handedness of the separated samples, further development is still required.


2.3.5. UV–Vis–NIR absorption spectroscopy. 
UV–vis–NIR absorption spectroscopy is one of the most widely used and easily accessible techniques to determine the concentration, purity and chirality of enriched SWCNT samples.145 On the basis of the transitions between the first and second pairs of VHSs in the DOS (explained earlier), several sharp peaks are expected to appear in the optical absorption spectrum of a particular SWCNT species.146 Here, the optical absorption spectrum can be used to determine the chirality of each individual (n,m) SWCNT as they possess different sets of inter-band transitions between VHSs. For s-SWCNTs species, four inter-band transitions peaks (S11, S22, S33, and S44) can be discerned in the UV–Vis–NIR spectrum. Whereas, only one inter-band transition for m-SWCNTs can be detected (M11) in the UV–Vis–NIR with other transitions outside this range. It is worth noting that S33 and S44 are regarded as one group since they are often heavily overlapped. The variations in the peak intensities arise from the different abundance and absorption cross-sections of individual nanotubes. The latter is an important optical parameter allowing the determination of the sample concentration through the absorption spectroscopy.147 However, a quantitative evaluation of the concentration for a sample containing different SWCNTs species with unknown abundance has long been a real challenge. Owing to the recent advances in the separation methods, a number of studies on measuring the absorption cross sections for different (n,m) species have been reported.147,148


2.3.6. Photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL). 
PL has become an indispensable tool for reliable (n,m) assignments, especially for s-SWCNTs. Highly structured PL in the NIR was observed for the first time by Weisman et al. in 2002.149 Over 30 different s-SWCNTs species have shown distinct electronic absorption and emission transitions. Since then, this technique has been adapted to provide a rapid determination and the detailed composition of bulk SWCNT samples. The PL process involves; (i) an induced absorption of light at ES22, (ii) relaxation from ES22 to ES11 by an electron–phonon interaction, and (iii) spontaneous emission at ES11.150 Since ES11 and ES22 of each chirality are unique, the structure of individual SWCNTs can be rapidly identified.149 The fluorescence intensity of each (n,m) is directly proportional to their concentration.149 Each bright spot corresponds to a specific chirality. Hence, PL has been used to evaluate the separation efficiency and the population of each nanotubes species in the separated samples. It is worth noting that de-bundling of nanotubes is required as big bundles do not emit. This is due to the PL quenching caused by the m-SWCNTs when present in the bundles.151 In addition, the PL intensity is also correlated with the degree of isolation of s-SWCNTs species.152 A reduced nanotube aggregation yields brighter PL emission.
In a recent study, NIR PL spectroscopy was used to investigate two enantiomers; (+) (6,5) and (−) (6,5) -SWCNTs.153 From the E11 fluorescence emission peak, it was observed that (−) (6,5) enantiomer exhibited 1.7 times higher brightness than that of the (+) (6,5) enantiomer. In addition, the peak was blue-shifted by 5 nm and narrower by 6 nm. This phenomenon was observed with enantiomeric samples prepared by either DNA or coated by surfactants (sodium cholate hydrate (SC) and sodium deoxycholate (SDS)) indicating the possibility to identify and distinguish between a pair of enantiomers using PL. However, when sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate (SDBS) was used to prepare (6,5) enantiomers, the emission spectra were identical and no differences were observed. This implies that surface coating of SWCNTs plays an important role in not only controlling the helicity of nanotubes but also in their recognition process.


2.3.7. Circular dichroism (CD). 
Circular dichroism (CD) is an effective tool to distinguish between the right and left-handedness of the nanotubes.154–156 CD is a technique used to implement a direct measurement of the differential absorption of right- and left-handed circularly polarized light as a function of wavelength.13Several early studies have been conducted in which CD was used to characterise the preferentially extracted R- and L-SWCNTs. However, due to the presence of a number of chirality species in the sample, the assignment of CD peaks was difficult.13,157 Considering the fact that the intensity of CD is proportional to the differential ratios between left- and right-handed SWCNT,158 highly pure single chirality with high enantiomeric purity are of the great importance to generate an improved CD signal which can facilitate the analysis of the CD spectrum. Recently, Wei et al.159 were able to separate different single-chirality enantiomers with high purity which did not only allow for a reliable analysis of the CD spectra, but also the assignment of Sii and Sij optical transitions.


2.3.8. Other novel techniques. 
In addition to the conventional characterization methods, some other novel techniques have been developed to characterize the structure and properties of sorted nanotubes. Wang et al.160 introduced polarization-based microscopy combined with supercontinuum laser illumination. When a SWCNT is illuminated with a laser light on a substrate, an interference occurs between the nanotube-scattered electric field and the substrate-reflected electric field at the detector which derives the optical contrast of a nanotube in a reflection configuration. By manipulating the polarization, the optical contrast can be significantly enhanced. This strategy enabled high-throughput real-time optical imaging and broadband in situ spectroscopy of individual CNTs on various substrates and in FET devices. As such, complete chirality profiling of hundreds of individual CNTs including semiconducting and metallic once on a growth substrate was obtained. In addition, unlike other techniques, this technique has shown great promise for improving SWCNTs growth as it is capable of reliably and accurately determining both SWCNTs chirality and abundance simultaneously which can contribute to a systematic optimization of SWCNTs growth conditions.
CNTs under white light illumination should appear colored due to resonance Rayleigh scattering which in turn could facilitate the chirality assignment of individual SWCNTs. However, due to the extremely low scattering intensity of SWCNTs and strong substrate scattering, true-colour imaging of SWCNTs on substrates is difficult to achieve. Recently, Jiang et al.161 reported that considerably enhanced Rayleigh scattering can be achieved by an interface dipole enhancement effect. This means SWCNTs can be colourful on substrates and hence be directly imaged under an optical microscope by wide field supercontinuum laser illumination. The colour differences in SWCNTs are the indication of diverse chiral indices. As such, this technique allows for high throughput chirality characterization of SWCNTs quickly and easily. In this approach, a number of interesting observations were revealed: (1) supercontinuum white laser with its higher intensity was used to illuminate individual SWCNTs, (2) water serving as the refractive index matching medium was found to play important roles in improving the image quality as it greatly reduces the scattering from the substrate, and (3) SWCNTs appear colored as a result of the resonance Rayleigh scattering peaks in the visible region.

3. Synthesis and purification
SWCNTs enriched with a specific chirality/electrical type has long been considered an emerging functional material due to the growing demand for pre-defined CNTs structures and properties in various applications. Excellent research efforts have been devoted to develop effective and viable methods to produce specific CNTs. This section covers the various mainstream approaches to control the structure of nanotubes. In general, the separation methods of SWCNTs can be classified into two main categories, namely “preferential growth”, which is achieved during the synthesis, and “post-synthesis purification”. This section further details and compares the approaches that have widely been used to purify the nanotubes, and highlights their strengths and weaknesses. Some alternative strategies with improved controllability over the purity and yield of the nanotubes are also proposed.
3.1. Preferential growth
Over the past few years, progress has been made toward achieving the ultimate goal of chirality/electrical type-specific growth of SWCNTs. Currently, there are three main approaches for controlling the chirality/electrical type of SWCNTs: (i) SWCNT growth from segment seeds or organic precursors as templates; (ii) design of catalyst systems with high activity and selectivity; and (iii) optimization of preferential synthesis conditions.

3.1.1. CNT growth from segment seeds or organic precursors as templates. 
The growth of SWCNTs from pre-defined segments as seeds is regarded as one of the successful strategies to control the chirality of SWCNTs. This approach is known as seeded growth, or nanotube cloning. In this approach, long SWCNTs are cut into short segments with open ends where catalysts can be docked. This short segment is then employed as a seed to grow longer SWCNTs preserving identical chirality and diameter. One noticeable advantage of this approach is that chemical vapor deposition (CVD) production is initiated from the pre-defined CNT structure contrary to the conventional catalyst-based CVD growth technique.162 This approach was first reported by Smalley et al.163 who demonstrated the continued growth of SWCNTs from an array of open-ended segments docked with metal nanoparticles as a catalyst. The regrown SWCNTs exhibited a diameter distribution and chirality similar to that of the original SWCNTs. This was confirmed via the closely matched positions and frequencies of RBMs in the Raman spectrum obtained before and after the growth using excitation lasers with 514.5, 633, and 780 nm wavelengths to cover a wide range of (n,m) SWCNTs. Motivated by this result, they further investigated the validity of this approach on individual SWCNTs in another study.164 A short SWCNT-docked-Fe seed as a template for vapor liquid solid (VLS) amplification was used to grow an individual long SWCNT. The short SWCNT seed was polymer-wrapped with Pluronic F87. As can be clearly seen from Fig. 6a and c the growth in nanotube length at the same location after the regrowth process indicates the successful amplification of the original tube. By measuring the height profiles using AFM, the identical diameter of the grown section to the original seed SWCNT was confirmed (Fig. 6a–e). Despite the increase in the nanotube's length to several micrometres, the yield of seeded growth nanotubes was estimated to be as low as ∼3% which can be increased by carefully controlling the catalyst concentration and size. In addition, further investigation to detect any chirality changes before and after the amplification process are needed.164
 Fig. 6  (a–e) AFM height images and analysis of a starting short SWCNT before and after its amplified growth. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic diagram illustrating the cloning process. (g) AFM height images and profiles of original SWCNT and the cloned ones. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic illustration of the VPE growth approach. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. (i and j) SEM images of the air plasma treated SWCNT (i) before regeneration (j) after regeneration, and (k) their corresponding RBM spectra. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. 
To avoid a sophisticated purification process and prevent introduction of contamination and defects upon the removal of metal catalyst residue,165 a metal-catalyst-free SWCNT cloning strategy was proposed. In this promising strategy, open-end SWCNTs as seeds can be duplicated without involving any metal catalyst. Zhang, Liu and co-workers reported the successful growth of SWCNTs with controlled chirality using this concept.165 Ultralong SWCNTs were cut into short segments via electron beam lithography (EBL) which were subsequently used as seeds for regrowth (Fig. 6f). Among 600 short seeds, around 9% were successfully regrown. However, a considerable improvement in the regrowth yield reaching 40% was achieved when the growth substrate was changed from SiO2/Si to quartz but the reason for this improvement was not clear. The diameter and chirality of the duplicated SWCNTs were confirmed to be nearly identical to the seed tubes as indicated by the AFM height profiles (Fig. 6g), and the same RBM was obtained from the Raman spectra. A significant improvement was later reported by Zhou et al. in two subsequent studies using the catalyst-free vapor-phase epitaxy (VPE) growth approach.166,397 Their strategy was as follows; firstly, different (n,m) species were sorted to provide high purity (∼90%) samples using a DNA-based chromatographic separation technique. Secondly, the obtained pre-selected chirality was then used as seeds for metal catalyst-free growth (Fig. 6h). In their first study, (7,6), (6,5) s-SWCNTs and (7,7) m-SWCNT were obtained and then employed as growth templates.166 Methane and ethanol were used as the carbon sources and both were found to be suitable for achieving chirality-controlled growth from the seeds used. The characterization of the extended portions of nanotubes were carried out via AFM, SEM, and Raman spectroscopy confirming that the length of the nanotubes significantly increased to 34.5 μm after cloning as compared to the average length of the as-purified nanotubes seeds at 0.34 μm and they exhibit the same chirality as seeds employed. It was also revealed that the yield of the cloning process was dependent on the air and water vapor annealing process. These annealing processes can alter the functional groups on nanotubes ends resulting in an activation of the CNT ends. In this way, CNTs are capable of incorporating incoming carbon atoms for further growth. In their second study and by using a VPE-based cloning platform, the group systematically investigated the chirality-dependent growth kinetics and termination behaviour of seven single-chirality nanotubes with similar diameters and different chiral angles including semiconducting nanotubes species (9,1), (6,5), (8,3), (7,6), (10,2), and metallic nanotubes species (6,6) and (7,7).397 It was found that the growth rates of nanotubes increase with the chiral angle, while the active lifetimes of the growth have a decreasing trend. With the aim of improving the carbon yield, Wang and co-workers further investigated the influence of the seed pre-treatment in air and water, growth substrate and carbon sources on the efficiency of the re-grown nanotubes.398 Short SWCNTs seeds were re-grown to longer nanotubes utilizing cold-wall and hot-wall acetylene–ethanol CVD. The SWCNT seeds pre-treatment including air oxidation and water treatment were found to activate the nanotube edges resulting in high yields of long re-grown nanotubes under optimized growth conditions. Raman analysis suggested that the chiralities of the seeds were preserved in the re-grown SWCNT. Despite the reported success in increasing the length of the nanotubes and confirming the chirality preservation of the elongated nanotubes, the yield obtained with the metal catalyst-free approach is still very poor. One of the critical obstacles that hinders the growth efficiency improvement of this approach is the activation of seed edge for the re-growth of the nanotubes. Nevertheless, an enhancement in terms of the growth yield can be observed after the pre-treatment of the nanotubes seeds. Despite this, more effective strategies need to be developed to further increase the total yield.
Very recently, Lin et al.167 reported a new strategy that is based on a combination of microwave treatment and CVD growth process. SWCNTs connected with carbon fragments were prepared using an air plasma exposure treatment from a long SWCNT directly grown on SiO2/Si substrate. By exposing the SiO2/Si substrate to microwave radiation under argon, an extremely high temperature can rapidly be achieved around the substrate. As a consequence, oxygen functional groups bonded to the edges of carbon fragment can be effectively removed and resulted in active edges. The as-obtained CNTs can then serve as the template for the regeneration growth. SEM and AFM confirmed that the efficiency of microwave-assisted regeneration can reach 100%. Raman spectroscopy confirmed that the chirality of the regenerated part of the nanotube has the same chirality as the template used (Fig. 6i–k).
It is well known that the structure of SWCNTs is determined by the structure of the “cap” formed during the nucleation stage.168 Hence, it is possible to control the chirality of SWCNTs during their growth by controlling the cap formation precisely.169 However, due to the use of metal nanoparticles as the catalyst in the CVD growth process, the carbon caps formed on the particle surface is stochastic due to the unavoidable thermal vibrations which makes the control of the SWCNT structure a real challenge.169 In recent years, much progress has been made to explore other nanocarbons systems as uniform templets for SWCNTs growth. Wang et al.170 reported the efficient growth of SWCNTs from fullerenes but no attention was paid to the nanotubes’ structure. In 2010, Liu et al.169 demonstrated that fullerendione can be opened by thermal oxidation to yield hemispherical caps which can be subsequently used to initiate SWCNT growth (Fig. 7a). The structure of the fullerene cap can be engineered by changing the temperature of thermal oxidation. At higher temperature (450 °C in air), the cage is largely opened and small diameter SWCNTs (<0.7 nm) are produced, while at lower temperature (350 °C in air), larger diameter SWCNTs (>1.4 nm) can be grown. The diameter distribution was measured using AFM on 100 SWCNTs of each sample, which was further confirmed using the RBM feature in Raman spectra. The diameter distribution of SWCNTs grown from the fullerene caps showed step-like features. Two drawbacks are apparent; the carbon caps are difficult to obtain with size uniformity by the thermal oxidation process, and the growth efficiency is low when the opened fullerene is used as the growth seed. Rümmeli et al.171 systematically investigated the growth of catalyst-free grown SWCNTs nucleated from C60. The role of the solvent used to disperse the fullerenes was found to be crucial in affecting the size of the C60 cluster. The larger the cluster size, the higher the SWCNTs yield. This was attributed to the fact that higher number of fullerenes can be provided from large clusters and hence more fullerenes can serve as seeds. Itami et al.172 identified cyclopar-aphenylenes (CPPs), acene-inserted CPPs, and cyclacenes as the shortened sidewall segments of armchair, chiral, and zigzag SWCNTs respectively (Fig. 7b). Motivated by these results, the same group later demonstrated the use of carbon nanorings namely cycloparaphenylenes (CPPS) as templets for the growth of SWCNTs using bottom-up organic chemistry approach.173 Despite the fact that the average diameters of the as-grown SWCNTs was close to that of CPP nanorings used as templates, poor controllability of the diameter and chirality of the grown CNTs was evident. Very recently, carbon nanobelts were synthesized with the great potential to be used as a seed for the growth of well-defined SWCNTs structures.174
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic showing the growth of SWCNT using fragmented C60 as an initiating cap. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) Structure of armchair, chiral, and zigzag SWCNTs and their shortest sidewall segments. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the two-step bottom-up synthesis of SWCNTs in which the first step involves the formation of singly capped ultrashort (6,6) seed and followed by epitaxial elongation of nanotubes. Reproduced with permission.179 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
Zhou et al.175 reported another promising strategy to obtain chirality-specific SWCNTs from seeds which was initially proposed by Scott et al.176 Corannulene (C20H10) was used as a starting material to synthesize the caps of (5,5) SWCNTs using bottom-up organic chemistry synthesis approach, aiming for chirality-controlled growth of SWCNTs via VPE growth technique. High-temperature air treatment, followed by water vapor treatment was found to be a very effective strategy to activate C50H10 for the SWCNTs growth. In particular, the highest nanotube yield was achieved with air oxidation at 500 °C followed by water vapor treatment at 900 °C. SEM confirmed the growth of SWCNTs from the pre-treated C50H10 molecules. However, Raman characterization revealed that the structure of as-grown SWCNTs and the molecular end-cap are not identical. The authors attributed the structure changes to the seed pre-treatments by oxygen and water. Raman and electrical measurements revealed that the as-grown nanotubes were >97% pure s-SWCNTs.
The use of an intramolecular cyclodehydrogenation (CDH) reaction on metal surfaces is another exciting approach to obtain well-defined SWCNT caps for single-chirality SWCNT synthesis. The precursors for the short CNTs and the large-diameter hemispherical buckybowls could be used for CNT growth initiation of single-chirality SWCNT on metal surfaces.177 In several studies, Mueller et al.177,178 reported the synthesis of a variety of precursor molecules to be used for the synthesis of isomerically pure armchair, zigzag, and chiral SWCNTs. Fasel et al.179 reported the use of a planar metal surface combined with the use of an end-cap precursor to synthesize single-chirality SWCNTs. A C96H54 precursor was initially synthesized and subsequently deposited on a Pt (111) surface (Fig. 7c). After a proper annealing under ultrahigh vacuum to allow surface-catalyzed CDH, (6,6) SWCNTs seeds were formed. The ultra-short (6,6) SWCNTs seeds were then epitaxially elongated by incorporating carbon atoms from the surface-catalyzed decomposition of ethylene or ethanol into CNTs. STM demonstrated that the structure of the elongated nanotubes were consistent with a (6,6) SWCNT. Raman spectroscopy was also employed to confirm the orientation of the SWCNTs revealing single RBM peaks at 295 cm−1 assigned to (6,6) SWCNTs which further proved the synthesis of single type SWCNTs. However, the authors pointed out that the laser excitation wavelength (532 nm) is not in resonance with the optical transition of (6,6) nanotubes. This implies that the single RBM peaks at 295 cm−1 might correspond to other species that have good resonance with the 532 nm laser wavelength and exhibit RBM peaks close to 295 cm−1 particularly (9,2) and (10,0) SWCNTs. Furthermore, the splitting of the G band into two peaks is not in agreement with the observed single G peak for armchair metallic SWCNTs in other studies.180,181 Further investigations are needed to confirm the growth of pure (6,6) SWCNTs.182 Despite this success, this approach has two practical limitations that may hinder its scalability; the growth yield of CNTs is low under high vacuum growth conditions, and the clean Pt surfaces required in the process.183
The same group later reported the successful conversion of two precursors into potentially singly capped (9,0) zigzag and (6,6) armchair SWCNT using surface-assisted cyclodehydrogenation on the Rh (111) surface.30 They found high conversion efficiency reaching nearly 100%, and more importantly, showed high thermal stability of CNT-caps on the Rh surface (∼500 °C) which is high enough for the required growth temperature for CNT synthesis. They have demonstrated that Rh (111) is a suitable catalyst for the controllable synthesis of SWCNTs by the surface assisted bottom-up approach. They recently reported a powerful strategy for preparing precursors that can be utilized for the growth of large-diameter chirality-pure SWCNTs including (6,6), (8,8), (10,10), and (12,12).30 The molecules showed a rigid and fully fused structure. This implies that highly efficient conversion to seeds as well as high yield of the chirality-pure SWCNT are expected. Due to the considerable progress in the state-of-the-art organic synthesis methods witnessed in recent years, it is expected that more controllable, large-scale production of chirality-specific SWCNTs via growth methods might be available in the near future.


3.1.2. Design of catalyst systems with high activity and selectivity. 
Catalyst nanoparticles are usually used as an essential component to initiate SWCNT growth. Various metal nanoparticles (NPs) have been explored as catalysts for SWCNT growth, including Fe, Co, Ni, Pt, Pd, Cu, Au, Ag, Mo, Mn, etc.184–187 It is well known that the nature and size of the metal NPs used to synthesize SWCNTs have a direct effect on the structures/chiralities of the SWCNTs product. Therefore, in order to achieve chirality-controlled growth of SWCNTs when using metal NPs catalysts, some major drawbacks need to be solved. Firstly, metallic NPs with homogenous composition, size and structure distribution are difficult to produce. In addition, the small diameter differences between the different SWCNT structures represent a real challenge to obtain a specific-chirality SWCNT by controlling the catalyst size. Furthermore, at high temperatures, catalyst NPs tend to aggregate which can significantly increase the primary size of the particles. Moreover, the considerable fluctuation of the NPs orientations leads to a great variability during the early stages of SWCNT nucleation and growth.188 Based on the afore-mentioned factors, the key factor for achieving high chiral selectivity in SWCNT growth is to effectively control the size and structure of those catalytic NPs in order to produce a uniform dispersion on the substrate. Therefore, intensive studies on the catalyst composition/size have been performed to control the structure of SWCNTs.
Resasco et al.189 reported the selective growth of (6,5) and (7,5) SWCNTs using a silica-supported Co–Mo (CoMoCAT) bimetallic catalyst. Using PL, the chiral enhancement was estimated to be 38% of the as-prepared sample (Fig. 8a). The high selectivity was ascribed to the uniform size of Co NPs resulting from the interaction between Co and Mo NPs which could stabilize the Co NPs against aggregation at high-temperature. The selectivity of (6,5) SWCNTs was further enhanced to 55% by optimizing the CVD process parameters including the gaseous feed composition (CO), synthesis temperature (800 °C), and the catalyst support (SiO2).190 Owing to its high selectivity, high yield, easy preparation method and low cost, this well-developed catalyst was an important step to the commercialization of the highly enriched (6,5) SWCNTs.399
 Fig. 8  (a) Contour plots of normalized PL intensities for the CoMoCAT sample (top frame) and the HiPco sample (bottom frame). Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. (b) HR-TEM image of the resulting lattice-mismatched epitaxy between Co NPs and MgO matrix. Reproduced with permission.188 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (c) The change of (n,m) abundance at different catalyst calcination temperatures. Reproduced with permission.207 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (d) A chiral map of nanotubes species identified in the PL plots. (e) UV–vis–NIR spectra of the dispersed SWCNTs in SDBS. (d and e). Reproduced with permission.208 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
Kauppinen et al.192 developed Fe–Cu bimetallic catalysts supported on a porous MgO that can grow predominantly (6,5) SWCNTs at 600 °C using CO as the carbon source. The role of Cu was found to promote the reducibility of Fe and inhibit the aggregation of Fe clusters. The large abundance of (6,5) SWCNTs in the prepared sample was confirmed via the absorption spectra and PL spectra. The selective growth of Co–Rh catalyst towards (7,5) and (7,6) SWCNTs, and Co–Mo catalysts towards (7,6) and (8,6) have also been reported.193 Fe–Ru catalyst for high selective growth of SWCNTs was demonstrated by Dai et al.194 using methane CVD. The preferential growth of (6,5) and (7,5) SWCNTs was observed at 600 °C, while (7,5), (7,6), and (8,4) SWCNTs becomes dominant at higher temperature (850 °C). It is worth mentioning that CNTs produced at such low growth temperatures to control the chirality distribution in the above studies usually suffers from low yield and poor quality since such temperature affects the SWCNTs growth efficiency.195 In addition, CNTs defect-healing during growth requires high temperature.196 Ren et al.197 reported the development of bimetallic Co–Pt catalysts which showed high selectivity toward (6,5) SWCNTs at high growth temperatures of 800 °C. The high-melting-point Co–Pt alloy is believed to provide an increased catalyst stability responsible for selective growth of SWCNTs with a narrow chirality distribution at such high temperature. Other catalysts with high chirality selectivity in SWCNT synthesis were also reported including Co–Mn,198 Co–Cr,199 FeMn–MgO200 and Fe–Cr.201
Alongside the use of porous substrates, the chirality-controlled growth of SWCNTs by catalysts supported on flat substrates such as Co–Mo on sapphire202 and Au/Al2Ox on SiO2/Si400 has also been considered. Fouquet et al.203 thermally evaporated an ultrathin layer of Co on SiO2-coated Si wafers. After annealing at 600 °C or 700 °C in vacuum, the nanotubes were grown in pure acetylene (C2H2). At 600 °C, a narrower chirality distribution of (6,5), (6,6) and (7,4) SWCNTs with the ratios of 27%, 19% and 19% respectively can be confirmed by Raman spectra. He et al.204 demonstrated the growth of SWCNTs with a narrow chirality distribution and high abundance of (6,5) SWCNTs using Co catalysts supported on SiO2. Later the same group developed a monometallic CoxMg1−xO catalyst to grow SWCNTs with a strong chiral selectivity by impregnating MgO with a Co(NO3)2 aqueous solution.188 Then, the calcination in air at high temperature (1000 °C) leads to the formation of the CoxMg1−xO solid solution. The CO reduction then took place to activate the catalyst which in turn resulted in an epitaxial formation of Co NPs on the surface of the MgO support. Consequently, Co NPs can catalyze the growth of small diameter SWCNTs with a narrow chirality distribution. The catalyst structure and the growth of SWCNTs in situ was monitored using a high-resolution TEM. On the basis of PL and electron diffraction analysis, 90% of the nanotubes in the as-prepared sample were s-SWCNTs with high chiral selectivity of (6,5) reaching up to 53% under the optimum growth temperature of 500 °C, while high enrichment in (7,6) and (9,4) was obtained at lower temperatures. The lattice-mismatched epitaxial relationship between Co and MgO, shown in Fig. 8b, is believed to be responsible for the structural uniformity and stability of the catalysts during the growth which led to the high selectivity growth of SWCNTs. These results shed some light on the high potential of catalyst NPs formed through lattice-mismatched epitaxy to be used as catalysts for efficient and controlled synthesis of single-chirality CNTs.
The catalysts formed through lattice-mismatched epitaxy can only facilitate the growth of small diameter nanotubes such as (6,5) and (7,3). However, for many potential applications, large diameter nanotubes with small bandgaps are needed. A series of Co catalysts supported on mesoporous silicates like including Co–TUD-1 and Co–SiO2 have been developed by Chen et al. to selectively grow large diameter (9,8) SWCNTs. In their primary work, a cobalt incorporated TUD-1 catalyst (Co–TUD-1) was designed that showed highly selective growth of (9,8) SWCNTs.205 The excellent selectivity towards (9,8) SWCNTs was ascribed to the strong interaction between metal NPs (Co) and support (TUD-1) which can stabilize Co clusters leading to the growth of (9,8) SWCNTs. In a subsequent study, the same group developed CoSO4/SiO2 catalyst for the growth of (9,8) SWCNTs reporting high abundance of the targeted species compared to other species.206 The UV–vis–NIR spectra showed that the abundance of (9,8) SWCNTs in the as-prepared sample was 33.5% over all nanotube species. A narrow chirality distribution was achieved after the catalyst was reduced in H2 at 540 °C. This clearly indicates the importance of H2 reduction in controlling the chirality selectivity. The catalyst's reduction at 540 °C resulted in the formation of Co NPs with a narrow size distribution that matches with the diameter of (9,8) SWCNTs. Moreover, there are two potential roles of the sulfur content in the catalyst which is decreased with increasing reduction temperature. Firstly, it limits the aggregation of Co atoms, and secondly, it forms Co–S compounds on Co NPs which enables the chirality selectivity of (9,8) SWCNTs. The group further studied the effect of catalyst calcination temperature on chirality selectivity.207 Large diameter (9,8) SWCNTs were produced after the catalyst is calcined in air at 400 °C. However, by calcination at 800 °C, selectivity towards small-diameter nanotubes were observed (Fig. 8c). The authors attributed this shift to the formation of surface cobalt oxides and silicates resulting from the removal of sulfur at higher temperature. The abundance of (9,8) (50.52% among all s-SWCNTs) was confirmed from PL spectra. Very recently, Wang et al.208 investigated the influence of three metal sulfate-based catalysts; MSO4/SiO2, M = Fe, Ni, or Co on the chirality distribution of the SWCNT growth. The results suggested that small diameter nanotubes particularly (6,5) SWCNTs were produced with Fe2(SO4)3/SiO2 catalyst, while medium and large diameter nanotubes dominated by (8,7) and (9,8) were grown on NiSO4/SiO2 and CoSO4/SiO2 catalysts respectively (Fig. 8d and e). The thermal decomposition of the three metal sulfates into different compounds has a considerable impact on the resulting catalytic activity. Sulfur maintained on the catalysts influences the selectivity toward relatively large diameter SWCNTs. These studies indicated the potential of developing metal sulfates with proper decomposition temperatures in order to control the growth of SWCNTs with a specific structure. An exciting approach called “smart poisoning” has been recently proposed by Chen et al.209 In this approach, sulfidation of Co/SiO2 catalysts was firstly carried out in a mixture of H2S and H2 to form Co9S8 NPs which were subsequently used to grow SWCNTs by CVD using CO as the carbon precursor. The chirality selectivity toward (9,8) nanotubes was demonstrated to be ∼38% among the s-SWCNTs species by PL peak intensities. Importantly, the carbon yield of sulfided catalyst (2.5 wt%) was found to be comparable to that of the non-sulfided one (2.7 wt%). The successful chirality-selective synthesis of (9,8) alongside the high carbon yield reported here provides a distinct advantage over other studies that showed a trade-off between the chiral selectivity and the growth yield. This promising method opens a new avenue to designing chirality-selective catalysts with high activity for scalable synthesis.
Solid state catalysts NPs are promising for chirality-selective synthesis since they maintain their morphology during the SWCNTs growth. This implies that the structure of SWCNTs can be effectively well-defined by epitaxial growth. Sankaran et al.210 compared the chirality distribution of the grown SWCNTs after solely tuning the composition of NixFe1−x NPs. The catalyst size and other process parameters were kept constant to decouple their influence. Consequently, a narrow chirality distribution dominated by (8,4) SWCNTs was observed with the catalyst Ni0.27Fe0.73. The shifts in the chirality distribution were attributed to the effect of altering NPs composition, which changes their crystal structure, on the lattice match of the catalyst with certain chiralities. Zhang et al.211 developed a straightforward and effective method to selectively synthesize small-diameter nanotubes arrays with narrow chirality distribution. The SWCNTs were grown on quartz substrates utilizing solid Mo2C catalysts at a proper growth parameters including low carbon feeding rate (20 sccm) for short-time growth (2 min) in hydrogen-free CVD environment. Under these conditions, only small-size Mo NPs are carbonized into stable Mo2C and can efficiently catalyze the growth of small-diameter SWCNTs arrays with a narrow chirality distribution and a density of 0.3–0.5 tubes per μm. Meanwhile, larger catalysts are inactive due to underfeeding. As a result, three major chiralities were obtained including (8,4), (8,5) and (7,6) with estimated abdundances of 46.6%, 17.5% and 8.9% respectively. Interestingly, the density of SWCNTs was considerably improved to ∼15 tubes per μm while preserving the small diameter and narrow chirality distribution when the catalyst was loaded on the sapphire substrate followed by annealing process. Later, by controlling the crystal symmetry of the catalyst surface to match with the desired chiralities, the same group was able to grow horizontal semiconducting (8,4) and metallic (12,6) SWCNTs arrays using uniform size WC and Mo2C solid catalysts respectively.212Fig. 9a shows the two steps that were proposed by the authors (a thermodynamically controlled step and a kinetically controlled step) to tune the chirality of the as-grown SWCNTs. To form uniform catalysts, a two-step process was carried out: (i) the catalyst precursors were dispersed on the pre-annealed sapphire substrates and annealed at 1100 °C for 8 h in air to transfer the aggregate precursors into monodispersed MoO3 and WO3 (ii) after reducing temperatures starting at 450 °C for MoO3 and 850 °C for WO3 were used, uniform-sized catalysts NPs of 1.36 ± 0.23 nm and 1.09 ± 0.46 nm were obtained respectively. As a comparison, when the initial temperature of MoO3 was increased to 800 °C, a broader particle size distribution of 1.59 ± 0.65 nm was observed. The average density and the abundance of (8,4) in the as-grown sample were estimated to be more than 10 tubes per micrometer and 80% respectively while the surface densities of (12,6) were found to be more than 20 tubes per micrometer with the chiral purities of 90%. This work clearly demonstrated that selective growth of SWCNTs from symmetry matching between the CNTs and the solid catalysts provide potential control over the chirality of as-grown SWCNTs, with the highest reported purity of single-chirality s-SWCNTs in a horizontal array. Further control of the catalyst size and the reducing temperature is expected to result in an increase in the purity.
 Fig. 9  (a) Two-step controlled growth of SWCNTs chirality in ethanol by CVD. Reproduced with permission.212 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Illustration of the preparation of W–Co catalyst and the templated growth of a SWCNT with specified (n,m). (c) In situ HR-TEM images of W–Co catalyst taken at 1100 °C in vacuum. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (d) DFT simulation used to fit SWCNTs on W6Co7 nanocrystal. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) DFT simulation of interfaces between (14,4) SWCNT and the (1 0 10) plane of W6Co7 (top view, right; side view, left). (f) Relative abundances of various nanotube species from Raman measurements. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (g) Abundance of (14,4) SWCNTs as a function of W/Co ratios (estimated by Raman measurements). Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Maintaining the crystal structure of the catalysts used to grow SWCNTs is very critical to realize the preferential growth of a specific chirality. Achieving this is not feasible if the catalysts with low melting point are used as high temperature process is required during the CVD process to synthesize high-quality nanotubes. Using high melting point tungsten-based bimetallic alloy as catalysts, Li et al.213 were able to produce (12,6) SWCNTs with an impressive abundance of higher than 92% (Fig. 9b), which was verified by micro-Raman measurements, UV–vis–NIR absorption spectra and the electron diffraction measurements. Due to the high melting point of W6Co7 NPs (∼2400 °C), their crystal structure and solid state were successfully maintained during the heating in vacuum to 1100 °C, as revealed by in situ TEM (Fig. 9c). HR-TEM revealed that the axis of (12,6) SWCNTs is perpendicular to the (0 0 12) planes of W6Co7 NPs. The density functional theory simulation (DFT) analysis showed the structural matching between (0 0 12) plane and (12,6) tube and poor matching with other nanotubes species which therefore resulted in the predominant growth of (12,6) SWCNTs. In a follow up study, the same group reported the selective growth of (16,0) SWCNTs in the proportion of ∼80% using intermetallic W6Co7 catalysts with high abundance of (116) planes under the optimized growth conditions (1050 °C, 150 cm3 min−1 H2 flow rate, and 200 cm3 min−1 Ar through an ethanol bubbler as carbon feeding stock).191 They attributed the highly selective growth of zigzag (16,0) SWCNTs to their structural match with the atomic arrangements of the (116) planes in W6Co7 which therefore can act as the structure templates for (16,0) SWCNTs growth (Fig. 9d). The same group introduced H2O vapor during the reduction and crystallization process of W6Co7 nanocrystals.214 This resulted in a structural modulation of W6Co7 with a large presence of (1 0 10) planes which were subsequently used as structural templates to grow (14,4) SWCNTs recording a noticeably high purity of ∼97% (Fig. 9e and f). Very recently, the effect of the W/Co ratio on the selective growth of SWCNTs has been systematically investigated by the same group.215 The W–Co bimetallic catalysts were prepared by mixing two available salts that contain tungsten and cobalt namely (NH4)6W7O24·6H2O and Co (CH3COO)2·4H2O as the catalyst precursors. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and TEM measurements confirmed the formation of W6Co7 catalysts in the W–Co bimetallic catalyst. The as-prepared catalysts were subsequently used to perform CVD of SWCNTs. The W–Co ratio has been found to be critical in controlling the selective growth of SWCNTs. By optimizing the W/Co ratio and CVD conditions, the group was able to obtain s-SWCNTs with a purity of ∼96% in which (14,4)-chirality enriched represented 62% of the content (Fig. 9g).
3.1.2.1 Controlled growth of semiconducting and metallic SWCNTs. 
In recent years, great effort has focussed on developing large scale, direct selective growth of pure s-SWCNTs and m-SWCNTs for their potential use in various applications. This seems to be less challenging than the single-chirality selective synthesis. The separation of SWCNTs based on their electrical type has been reported through both controlled synthesis and post-synthesis approaches. However, since the post-synthesis approach involves sophisticated physical and chemical treatments, and the use of chemicals to disperse/separate SWCNTs (e.g. surfactants), the separated nanotubes from this approach suffer from several drawbacks including low yields, contamination, defects and length shortening which in turn can negatively affect the device performance. Therefore, direct growth of single electrical type is a more favourable approach since no additional treatments and chemicals are involved.
Generally, two strategies to directly synthesize pure s-SWCNTs have been developed, namely in situ growth selective etching and catalyst engineering. The selective removal of m-SWCNTs via in situ growth selective etching is a successful strategy based on the higher chemical reactivity of m-SWCNTs as compared to the s-SWCNTs when they have identical diameters.216 Several etchants have been reported including oxygen,292 water vapor,131,217,218 hydrogen,219,220 and hydrogen peroxide. For instance, Cheng et al.221 reported the preferential etching of m-SWCNTs by introducing oxygen during the synthesis process through the floating catalyst CVD. The growth parameters involved in the synthesis were a H2 flow of 500 sccm, CH4 flow of 3 sccm, and growth temperature of 1100 °C. The oxygen flows were varied from 0 to 0.4 sccm. The optimal oxygen flow rate was found to be 0.2 sccm. The oxidation process is crucial as introducing a proper amount of oxygen can remove the m-SWCNTs mainly due to their smaller ionization potential. However, too much oxidation can result in etching and removing s-SWCNTs which may affect the selective synthesis growth. After optimizing the growth conditions, a sample with ∼90% s-SWCNTs was obtained. Liu et al.222 introduced an appropriate amount of water in the CVD growth process to remove the m-SWCNTs obtaining >97% s-SWCNTs in the as-grown sample. Although highly selective horizontally aligned s-SWCNTs arrays can be achieved using this etching approach, the diameter distribution of the as-grown SWCNTs must be very narrow to obtain highly pure s-SWCNTs samples. In a follow up study, Liu et al.217 grew s-SWCNTs by firstly controlling the diameter of the SWCNTs using uniform and stable Fe–W nanoclusters as the catalyst precursors followed by the introduction of water vapor as the etchant. As a result, a population of ∼95% s-SWCNTs was realized. To understand the etching mechanism, several reports investigating the SWCNTs etching process have been published employing various in situ techniques such as in situ Raman spectroscopy,223–225in situ environmental TEM,226 and environmental SEM.227 Zhang et al.,228 for instance, investigated the dynamic of SWCNTs etching process in real time by combining polarized optical microscope with hot-wall chemical reactor. The former was used for in situ real-time imaging tracking of the process as well as chirality identification. The latter was employed to initiate the etching process by providing high temperature (1300 K). It has been revealed that the etching sites, etching termination sites, and nanotubes structure dependence exhibited a random behaviour in air. Later, systematic research in which three chemicals (O2, H2O, and CO2) were used as the etchants was performed by the same group to study the nature of dynamic process.229 The optimum etching temperatures, etching times and flow rates were found to be 610–690 °C, 10 min in air for O2, 750–850 °C, 60 min, 200 sccm for H2O, and 830–870 °C, 30 min, 200 sccm for CO2. The chirality assignment was carried out using optical spectroscopy. The highest s-SWCNTs selectivity was achieved when the nanotubes were etched with H2O followed by CO2 and O2 respectively. This was further evidenced from the field effect transistors (FETs) fabricated based on the etched CNTs. The DOS of SWCNTs at the Fermi level has been found to play a major role in identifying the CNTs reactivity behaviour with three possible scenarios. s-SWCNTs are more reactive than the counterpart m-SWCNTs in H2O2 due to their higher DOS near the Fermi level as compared to the m-SWCNTs.230 On the contrary, m-SWCNTs become more reactive in CO2 and H2O than s-SWCNTs and thus are easily removed owing to the doping effect which leads to an up-shifting of EF position to the top of the valence band of m-SWCNTs. As such, the DOS of m-SWCNTs is higher than that of s-SWCNTs at the Fermi level. Lastly, poor selectivity is achieved in O2 as a consequence of the DOS of s-, and m-SWCNTs sitting at the same energy resulting in the strong doping effect.
Catalyst engineering is another approach to selectively synthesize s-SWCNTs since they play a critical role in the nucleation and growth of SWCNTs. Sankaran et al.231 synthesized Ni0.27Fe0.73 catalysts with precise size and composition which subsequently were used to catalyze SWCNT growth with a predominant growth of s-SWCNTs (90%). Using ceria with its ability to store oxygen that can provide an oxidative environment as a catalyst support, Li et al.232 were able to eliminate m-SWCNTs during SWCNTs growth process producing s-SWCNTs with high purity reaching an average of 98% as compared with only 65% for samples produced with silica supported catalysts. Oxygen-deficient TiO2 NPs as catalysts were also reported for enrichment of s-SWCNTs with a purity of greater than 95%.233 The selective growth of s-SWCNTs was attributed to the formation energy between s-SWCNT and TiO2 NPs which is lower than that of m-SWCNT. This formation energy can be achieved at a suitable concentration of oxygen vacancies in TiO2 NPs which in turn can be controlled by optimizing the flow rate of H2 and carbon source during the growth process. In a recent study, Cheng et al.234 reported the synthesis of s-SWCNTs with a noticeably high purity. An acorn-like, partially carbon-coated cobalt nanoparticle catalyst was designed and prepared with a uniform size (mean diameter of 3.1 nm). SWCNTs grown from these catalysts possessed a very narrow diameter distribution and small bandgap difference of ∼0.08 eV. The introduction of H2 as an etchant during the CVD growth further resulted in preferential removal of m-SWCNTs. Consequently, a s-SWCNT purity of greater than 95% was obtained. Recently, metal-free s- and m-SWCNTs were selectively synthesized using SiOx nanoparticles as a catalyst with various oxygen content.235 The oxygen deficiency in the SiOx catalyst can be controlled by altering the catalyst preparation method, heat treatment process and the ambient atmosphere during the CNTs growth. The nanoparticle size and oxygen content in the SiOx have been found to play a critical role in the selective growth of m- and s-SWCNTs. Under the optimized conditions, samples with purity of 80% and 91% m- and s-SWCNTs were obtained respectively. The purity was estimated from RBM Raman peaks using two laser excitation wavelengths (785 and 633 nm). In another study, an electro-renucleation (ERN) approach has been developed by Jiang et al.236 for the production of s-SWCNT arrays. By switching the direction of an applied electric field during the growth, m-SWCNTs can be twisted into s-SWCNTs which resulted in the production of highly pure s-SWCNT arrays with less than 0.1% residual m-SWCNTs as estimated from SEM images. Fig. 10a and b show the steps involved in the twisting process of m-SWCNTs into s-SWCNTs. According to the authors, the amount of m-SWCNTs can be further reduced to be less than 1 ppm by tuning the nanotube diameters to ∼1.3 nm. These results indicate the promising potential of this approach for practical applications of CNT electronics in which such extraordinary purity is indeed required. Cheng et al.237 reported the selective growth of s-SWCNTs from SiC NPs as a catalyst on SiO2/Si substrate using ethanol CVD. After the Si atoms at the surface of the SiC NPs were depleted during the thermal treatment (900 °C), carbon nanocaps were formed on the SiC NPs. In order to selectively etch the m-SWCNTs caps, 200 sccm H2 was introduced. The remaining s-SWCNTs caps were then grown by CVD using ethanol. Fig. 10c–f show a schematic illustrating the nucleation and growth stages for growing s-SWCNTs. On the basis of the Raman spectroscopy (with wavelengths of 532, 633, and 785 nm) and the absorption spectroscopy, s-SWCNTs contents were calculated to be 95% and 97% respectively. The high purity s-SWCNTs obtained were further used to fabricate high performance thin film FETs.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the ERN system. (b) Steps involved in twisting metallic SWCNTs by reversing the electric field into semiconducting SWCNTs. Reproduced with permission.236 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (c–h) Schematic representation of the s-SWCNTs grown from a SiC catalyst. Reproduced with permission.237 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
To date, very few studies on the selective growth of m-SWCNTs have been reported which is possibly due to the limited number of applications of this electronic type of nanotubes as compared to the s-SWCNTs. Harutyunyan et al.238 reported that the ratio of m- and s-SWCNTs was sensitive to the noble gas ambient used during the thermal annealing of the catalyst. The presence of H2O in He ambient favoured the growth of m-SWCNTs while the same amount of H2O in Ar ambient promoted the growth of s-SWCNTs. After the growth conditions were optimized, the content of m-SWCNTs was characterized to be 91% by Raman spectroscopy. By injecting sulfur containing-compounds (thiophene or carbon disulphide) with ferrocene into a CVD reactor, Windle et al.239 successfully achieved the direct synthesis of m-SWCNT with 95% of the tubes having a diameter of 1.1–2.0 nm. It was observed that the presence of sulfur was responsible for the retardation of the growth of Fe catalyst NPs at ∼1.6 nm enabling the selective growth of m-SWCNTs species particularly (9,9) and (12,12). By controlling the nature of substrate, Wei et al.240 successfully synthesized short aligned (<1 μm), metallic-rich SWCNTs using perpendicular Mo-containing FeMgAl layered double hydroxide (LDH) films and CH4 as the carbon source within a short growth time (15 min). The diameter of the grown nanotubes was found to be in the range of 2.0–3.0 nm which was closely matched with the mean size of the catalysts NPs at 2.7 nm. Large diameter m-SWCNTs (3.2 ± 1 nm) were produced by Liu et al. using a sulfur-containing compound (thiophene).241 As a comparison, with the absence of thiophene and under the same growth conditions, SWCNTs with an average diameter of 1.43 ± 034 nm were obtained. The selectivity towards m-SWCNTs was ascribed to the reverse relationship between the sensitivity of m-SWCNTs to oxidant and the diameter due to the lower strain. In addition, large diameter s-SWCNTs with their small band gaps behave as metals at room temperature. The electronic properties of the as-synthesized SWCNTs were evaluated using the electrical measurements of the fabricated FETs. It was demonstrated that 95% of the as-synthesized CNTs have low on/off ratios (<100) indicating the high conductivity and hence the metallic behaviour of the obtained CNTs. Using hydrogen as an etchant gas, Cheng et al.242 reported the selective removal of small-diameter s-SWCNTs from large-diameter m-SWCNTs. On the basis of absorption spectroscopy characterization, the as-grown sample contained 88% m-SWCNTs. Zhang et al.243 reported the use of SO3 as a gas-phase etchant at a temperature of 400 °C to eliminate s-SWCNTs. This method allows for large-quantity etching of s-SWCNTs (>5 mg) in a relatively shorty time (2 h). The growth of m-SWCNTs using a solid supported catalyst such as FePt NPs on a MgO substrate and FePt–Au catalyst on a MgO substrate has also been reported.244,245 Despite all these studies, the mechanism behind the preferential growth of m-SWCNTs still remains unclear. The preparation of directly grown SWCNTs with a uniform electrical type and high purity and yield has been one of the main aims of CNT research in recent years.


3.1.3. Optimization of preferential synthesis conditions. 
In addition to controlling the chirality of SWCNTs through the size/chemical composition of catalytic NPs, the parameters involved in CNTs growth have been found to be very important as they can significantly influence the chirality distribution. To date, the influence of several growth parameters such as feed carbon, growth temperatures and system pressure on the structure of the grown CNTs have been investigated.190 For instance, Chen et al.246 was able to compare the effect of four different carbon precursors including CO, C2H5OH, CH3OH, and C2H2 on the chirality distribution when grown on Co–Mo catalysts. When CO was used, the narrowest chirality distribution dominated by (7,6), (7,5), and (8,4) was obtained. On the other hand, C2H5OH and CH3OH produced more larger diameter tubes including (8,6), (9,5), and (8,7). This demonstrates the considerable variations of (n,m) distribution when using different carbon precursors. High growth selectivity of 95% aligned s-SWCNTs has been reported by Liu et al.247 when methanol was introduced to the growth process. This was due to the OH radical from methanol which can selectively etch m-SWCNTs because of their relatively smaller ionization potential as compared to s-SWCNTs counterpart. Kauppinen et al.195 studied the effect of introducing a small amount of ammonia (500 ppm, NH3) as an additive into floating catalyst CVD process (FC-CVD) at 880 °C. A narrow chirality distribution dominated by (13,12) SWCNTs was realized with over 90% of as-grown nanotubes having a chiral angle in the range of 20°–30° and ∼50% in the range of 27°–29°. The introduction of NH3 is believed to result in etching away of small chiral angles SWCNTs due to their high reactivity and lower stability. Very recently, the same group achieved a direct growth of SWCNTs using CO as a carbon source and introducing various amount of CO2 in FC-CVD process.248 SWCNTs films exhibiting tunable narrow chirality distribution and for the first time various colours were produced. The flow rate of CO2 introduced was adjusted to 0.0, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 and 5.0 sccm. This corresponded to CO2 concentration of 0, 0.25, 0.37, 0.50, and 1.23 vol%, respectively. At a concentration of 0.25 vol%, a green colour thin film was obtained, while a brown colour was displayed at 0.37 vol% indicating the changes in the diameter and chirality distribution. Upon increasing the CO2 concentration, S11 and S22 peaks were red-shifted, the nanotubes diameters increased from 1.1 to 1.9 nm, and the percentage of metallic nanotubes increased from 29.8 to 46.3%. The narrowest diameter (1.0–1.5 nm) and chirality distribution (evident from the green colour of the film) were obtained at 0.25 vol% CO2. The chirality distribution became much narrower when the temperature was increased from 850 to 880 °C leading to the growth of CNTs with chirality distribution centred around (11,9) (∼17%) and narrow diameter of 1.2–1.5 nm (>98%). The role played by CO2 in the process is not clear and cannot be ascribed to the CO2 preferential etching of small diameter CNTs as proposed by other studies since the ratio of metallic nanotubes increased after the introduction of CO2. It is well known that metallic nanotubes are more reactive than semiconducting nanotubes, therefore one should expect the ratio of metallic nanotubes to decrease when etched with CO2 instead of increasing as observed here. As such, further investigation is required to understand the role of CO2 which in turns might further tailor the chirality distribution.
In addition to the carbon source and additives, the flow rate has also been found to affect the diameter249,250 and the selective enrichment of SWCNTs.251 To explain the relationship between carbon flow rates and the diameter distribution, a hypothesis has been proposed. At a fixed carbon source flow, there is an optimal diameter of catalyst NPs to nucleate SWCNTs. The larger the size variation between this optimal size and the catalyst diameter, the less likely such NPs will catalyze the growth of SWCNTs. Smaller NPs are poisoned due to “overfeeding” and larger NPs are inactive due to “underfeeding”.249 Therefore, it is critical to adjust the carbon flow rate in order to match the optimum diameter of NPs.
The pressure of the carbon source has also been reported to influence the growth of SWCNTs. Chen et al.252 designed a special CVD reactor that allows an increase of the pressure from 1 bar to 19 bar in less than 3 s resulting in identifying pressure-induced chiral selectivity. On the basis of the analysis of PL and absorption spectra, (6,5) SWCNTs had the highest abundance under 18 bar CO (48% among other s-SWCNTs species). However, when the CO pressure decreased from 18 to 2 bar, the (6,5) abundance decreased to less than 2%. In contrast, (7,6) SWCNTs were present in an abundance of 26% under 2 bar CO and decreased to 7% with increasing CO pressure, whereas the greatest abundance of (7,5) SWCNTs was found to be 28% at around 12 bar CO pressure (Fig. 11a). An increase of CO pressure increases the striking coefficient of the CO molecules on the Co NPs. Therefore, under higher CO pressure, SWCNT growth may be initiated faster due to the higher concentration of active carbon atoms available, which results in the growth of smaller diameter CNTs. On the other hand, when CO pressure is lower, the formation of a stable carbon cap is slower and catalyst aggregation during SWCNT growth is increased. This results in the growth of larger-diameter SWCNTs.
 Fig. 11  (a) Normalized PL map for SWCNTs produced under CO pressure from 2 to 18 bar. Reproduced with permission.252 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (b) Normalized PL emission intensities of SWCNTs grown at temperatures of 600, 750, and 800 °C. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the tandem plate CVD method. (d) DFT calculation of the interfacial formation energy between SWCNT and a series of catalysts (Fe, Co, and Ni). Reproduced with permission.254 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The growth temperature is another obvious parameter that was found to affect the diameter and chirality distribution of the as-produced SWCNT.190,192,197,203,253 This is due to the strong impact of the growth temperature on the size of the catalyst NPs and the decomposition of the carbon source. On the basis of these studies, it was observed that an increase in the growth temperature results in broadening of chirality distribution in the as-grown sample. For example, Resasco et al.190 systematically investigated the effect of changing synthesis temperature, catalyst support, and the composition of the gaseous feed. Considerable changes in the dominating chirality species grown with CoMo–SiO2 were observed as a function of growth temperature. At low synthesis temperature (700 °C), (6,5) SWCNTs were the dominant species with a purity of 54%, while this selectivity shifted towards larger diameter species particularly (7,6) and (8,7) SWCNTs at higher growth temperature (850 °C) with an estimated population of 15% and 13% respectively. Therefore, it can be concluded that changing the growth temperature led to an increase in CNT diameter, while no change in the chiral angle was observed. In contrast, it turned out that changing the catalyst support from SiO2 to MgO resulted in nanotubes with different chiral angles but comparable diameters. Moreover, different chirality distribution can be realized by varying the composition of the gaseous feed. Kauppinen et al.192 reported high selectivity toward (6,5) SWCNTs when the synthesis temperature was 600 °C.192 However, when the temperature increased to 750 °C, (7,5) SWCNTs became the predominant species (Fig. 11b). More recently, a new CVD approach, named “tandem plate CVD” has been developed by Zhang et al.254 By varying the temperature of growth periodically, the enrichment of SWCNTs towards small chiral angle (<10°) nanotubes, which are anticipated to have a lower interfacial formation energy than larger chiral angle tubes, was increased to up to ∼72% (Fig. 11c). DFT calculations of the interfacial formation energy between SWCNTs (with identical diameter and different chiral angles) and different catalysts (Fe55, Co55, or Ni55) are in excellent agreement with the experimental results, confirming the considerably lower interfacial formation energy of the small angle nanotubes (Fig. 11d). This method opens a new way to achieve direct growth of chirality-selected SWCNTs by designing a catalyst with low SWCNT-catalyst interfacial formation energy. Thus from the growth parameters, it is feasible that optimization of the growth conditions is the first step towards synthesizing SWCNTs in a controlled manner.

3.2. Post-synthesis purification
As mentioned in the section 3.1, direct growth is an effective way to preferentially synthesize SWCNTs enriched with semiconducting (and metallic) species of a purity above 95%222 (and 85%)242 as well as single chiral species (12,6) with a purity higher than 90%.213 Nevertheless, the impurities appear to be unavoidable in the products from selective synthesis. Given that, it has been shown that the purity of SWCNTs can be further improved via the combination of controlled synthesis with post-synthesis separation, such as ion exchange chromatography (IEX).194 Over the last two decades, a large number of efforts have been made on the post-synthesis separation techniques to prepare SWCNT species with supreme purity.255 In the following sections, the details of each individual mainstream purification approach will be presented, and their advantages and disadvantages will also be discussed.

3.2.1 Preferential destruction. 
After the synthesis of a mixed SWCNTs soot, SWCNTs with a certain type of electronic properties can be achieved either by liquid-processed approaches,256–261 (refer to sections from 3.2.2 to 3.2.7) or selective destruction. The latter is simpler to carry out due to the nature of a dry process. There are several well-developed techniques available, including electrical breakdown,262 gas-phase etching263 and others. However, the processed SWCNTs generally have low purity because of the limited etching precision. In most cases, these methods are appropriate in selectively destroying either metallic or semiconducting SWCNTs.
3.2.1.1 Electrical destruction. 
It is well known that the breakdown current density of SWCNTs is extremely high (4 × 109 A cm−2,264 about 3 orders of magnitude higher than that of metals) due to the strength of C–C bonds.265 However, the SWCNTs do breakdown when an excessive amount of current is applied. This strategy was employed in the selective modification of the SWCNT structure in the fabrication of FETs, gas sensors and so on.262,266–275Table 3 lists some of the important reports in this field.
Table 3 The details of electrical destruction from different studies. M: m-SWCNTs; S: s-SWCNTs




Propertya
Purity
Characterization
Important findings
Ref.





a The separated SWCNTs are labelled in bold.





M/S
N/A
SEM; transistor properties
The on/off ratio of the resulting devices is up to above 104.

266



M/S
N/A
SEM; transistor properties
The application of the electrical breakdown in the assessment of metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs contents.

268



M/S
N/A
SEM; transistor properties
The application of the electrical breakdown in the fabrication of sensors for NH3.

270



M/S
N/A
SEM; AFM; Raman; transistor properties
Long distance removal (up to 16.4 μm) of metallic SWCNTs has been realized.

271



M/S
N/A
SEM; transistor properties
Gate-free electrical breakdown is realized.

273



M/S
N/A
SEM; transistor properties
Electrical breakdown is applied in the fabrication of suspended SWCNT arrays in a wafer scale.

262



M/S
99.8% by calculation
SEM; transistor properties
A fast burning rate of approximately 1000 m s−1 is achieved by water and polymer assisted electrical breakdown.

275



M/S
N/A
SEM; Raman; transistor properties
Full-length removal (up to 16.4 μm) of metallic SWCNTs was achieved with the estimated packing density to be about 100 SWCNTs μm−1.

274





One of the earliest reports in this field was published by Avouris et al.266 in which the current-induced electrical breakdown was shown to effectively remove the individual shells of MWCNTs due to the rapid oxidation and the defects formed at the outermost shell when the threshold power (280–350 μW) was reached. In the same report, it was demonstrated that a gate electrode can be used to selectively deplete charge carriers from the semiconducting SWCNTs in an electrostatic manner in a SWCNT rope and thus protect them from oxidation, while metallic SWCNTs are oxidized by high electrical current density in the fabrication of FETs. A clear thinning of the SWCNT rope diameter was observed after applying several volts across it with a simultaneous gate voltage of less than 10 volts (Vg) to deplete the semiconducting SWCNTs, as shown in Fig. 12a. The relationship between the conductance (G) and Vg was monitored for both initial and thinned SWCNT ropes to further study their difference in the electrical behaviour, as shown in Fig. 12b. The initial sample (the blue trace) shows typical characteristics of short circuits due to the existence of metallic SWCNTs. After damaging the metallic SWCNTs (the red trace), the modulation of the current is entirely due to the semiconducting SWCNTs since the contribution of the metallic SWCNTs to the conductance is decreased to 0. The similar shape of the blue and red curves indicates that the electrostatic depletion of the carriers can protect the most semiconducting SWCNTs.
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM images and schemes and (b) conductance (G in μS) versus gate voltage (Vg in V) of SWCNT ropes before and after electrical breakdown. Reproduced with permission.266 Copyright 2001, AAAS. (c) The process of junction-based electrical breakdown. Reproduced with permission.273 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of full-length removal of metallic SWCNTs in an array. Reproduced with permission.274 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
The application of the gate electrode, as shown in Fig. 12a and b, in most cases, requires the utilization of traditional substrates (for example, an oxide layer coated silicon wafer). In 2015, a junction-based electrical breakdown approach was developed and designed with the amplification of the different resistance of SWCNT pathway formed by various combinations of semiconducting and/or metallic SWCNTs (process shown in Fig. 12c).273 In detail, a voltage across the source and drain is applied and maintained between electrodes E1 and E2 in order to selectively breakdown SWCNTs stepwise. Obviously, charge carriers are required to cross at least one junction to travel from E1 to E2. The current density of pathways consisting of two metallic SWCNTs is much higher than that of those formed with at least one semiconducting SWCNT.28 As a result, metallic SWCNTs tend to be damaged more easily than semiconducting species. Improved selectivity of such breakdown is realized by applying the voltage (1 V) across electrodes E2 and E3, E3 and E4, and E1 and E4 electrodes repetitively. The transistor fabricated with this approach has a superb switching behaviour with an on/off ratio of about 1.4 × 106, which indicates the elimination of metallic SWCNTs.
Based on the previous examples, it is worth noting that the major disadvantages of the traditional selective electrical breakdown is that the broken metallic SWCNTs cannot be removed completely because the Joule heating process stops right after the breakdown of the metallic SWCNTs at their highest-temperature.276 Recently, Chiashi and colleagues designed several strategies to tackle this problem. Their first report published in 2014 involved the application of a polymer layer (α,α,α′-tris(4-hydroxyphenyl)-1-ethyl-4-isopropylbenzene and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)) covering the aligned SWCNT arrays.271 The polymer layer had an exothermic oxidation during the electrical breakdown, and the generated heat resulted in the propagation of the oxidation and long-length removal metallic SWCNTs up to 16.4 μm rather than a simple breakdown gap (about 100 nm in length).271 The self-sustained oxidation rate of the metallic SWCNTs was further increased to about 1000 m s−1 (estimated by simulation) by the introduction of oxygen gas saturated with water vapor to the system, in which the water droplets adsorbed/encapsulated on/in the SWCNTs act as oxidizers in the water and polymer assisted (WPA) burning.275,277
Given that the position of the breakdown points is formed randomly and the oxidation during WPA process only propagates along one direction,275 additional efforts were made by the same group to overcome the shortcomings and realize full-length removal of metallic SWCNTs in an array.274 As shown in Fig. 12d, an additional Au electrode was placed between the top and bottom ones by thermal evaporation. A small gap (about 1.5 μm) was thus formed between the middle and bottom electrodes, where the conventional electrode breakdown was performed in air at first. As a result, some gaps (about 100 nm in length) in the metallic SWCNTs were created close to the bottom electrode. The middle contact was then removed by iodine-based etchant. After the application of PMMA layer and introduction of water vapor-saturated oxygen atmosphere, the full-length removal of metallic SWCNTs was achieved consistently from the initial breakdown points with the help of WPA approach. Multiple transistors were established with the removal of polymer residue and deposition of several parallel electrodes along the array containing purely semiconducting SWCNTs.274
Recent progress in this field reveals several advantages of electrical breakdown, including the easy nature of the process in the fabrication of transistors, limited level of impurities in the purified product (the process is generally performed without dispersing agents), and the ability to prepare high-density arrays of semiconducting nanotubes.278 However, there are still some shortcomings. Firstly, full-length removal of metallic SWCNTs is difficult to realize without additional measures, which complicates the purification. Secondly, the limited choices of substrates (for the application of gate voltage especially in the case of full-length destruction) might hinder its practical application. Thirdly, destruction of semiconducting SWCNTs is challenging due to their less reactive nature. Fourthly, semiconducting SWCNTs might be sacrificed when they are bundled with/close to the “burning” metallic counterparts due to the local excessive heat produced by the oxidation. Fifthly, the process is not efficient in the fabrication of many transistors since each one has to be treated individually.
3.2.1.2 Laser-assisted selective destruction. 
Apart from electrical breakdown, selective destruction of SWCNTs can also be achieved by laser irradiation under appropriate conditions, as shown in Table 4. One of the earliest reports was published by Iijima et al. in 2003, in which laser irradiation (488 and 515 nm) was introduced during the oxidation of SWCNTs in 25.5 wt% H2O2.279 The analysis of the Raman spectra showed that semiconducting SWCNTs with specific diameters were selectively removed when the wavelength of incident light is close to the gap energy. For example, when a 515 nm laser was used for 5 min to irradiate the SWCNT/H2O2 suspension, the BWF feature (at the lower wavenumber region of G band) became more distinct as the intensity of the RBM peak at 184 cm−1 decreased. This suggested that the metallic content in the SWCNT mixture was increased by the removal of the semiconducting SWCNTs with a diameter of 1.33 nm (the S33 of such SWCNTs is close to 2.41 eV (∼515 nm)).280 One year later, a similar technique (Laser Resonance Chirality Selection, LARCS) was developed based on the identical principle (resonant effect: absorption of the energy from the incident beam is dramatically enhanced for certain type of SWCNTs when the electronic transitions are matched with the exciting photon energy) to selectively remove SWCNTs with specific chiral index via intense laser irradiation.281
Table 4 Development of laser irradiation in selective destruction of SWCNTs




Propertya
Purity
Light intensity (W cm−2)
Wavelength (nm)
Characterization
Ref.





a The separated SWCNTs are labelled in bold.





Diameter
N/A
3 × 105
488
Raman

279




M/S
515


Chirality
N/A
2 × 104
514.5
Raman

281




M/S
N/A
3 × 105 (1 × 105)
514.5 (632.8)
Raman

282





94%
7.5 × 107
180–11000
AFM

283



Diameter
Raman


M/S
Transistor properties


M/S
N/A
4 × 107–9 × 107
532
AFM

284



8 × 106
Raman


M/S
N/A
1.8 × 108
2000
SEM

285



Raman


Transistor properties



M/S

N/A
3.5 × 105
473



286



514
UV–Vis–NIR


632
Raman


785






Apart from preferential removal of semiconducting SWCNTs, it has been found that the metallic SWCNTs are more sensitive to the incident laser when they are selectively functionalized with 4-brominebenzenediazonium.282 Briefly, a SWCNT dispersion was prepared by a typical sonication/centrifugation processes with the presence of dispersing agent (Triton X-405), and then the mixture was treated with 4-brominebenzenediazonium which selectively binds to metallic SWCNTs because of the presence of electrons near the Fermi level.287 The treated SWCNTs were deposited on a substrate before laser irradiation. The intensity of the metallic species in RBM region, (12,0), (8,5) and (9,3), decreased significantly (by 85% after 80 min) while the signal for (16,0) remained constant during the irradiation period. In addition, the BWF feature (due to the electron–phonon interaction of metallic species) at the tangential region (G band) of Raman spectra became less obvious, which indicates a preferential removal of metallic SWCNTs as well. This result suggested that the functionalized metallic species are more reactive than semiconducting counterparts. The removal of metallic species was also achieved without the addition of small molecules by the application of xenon-lamp irradiation.283 It was observed that smaller diameter (d < 1 nm) semiconducting and metallic SWCNTs were removed after 60 min irradiation (500 W) and the final purity of the semiconducting SWCNTs approached 95%.
The relationship between the laser intensity and the reaction time was first investigated by Zandian et al. in 2009.284 It was revealed that rapid burnout of the SWCNTs can occur with high laser intensity (4 × 107–9 × 107 W cm−2) within 2 minutes while a relatively gentle laser (8 × 106 W cm−2) requires tens of minutes to remove the SWCNTs. Given the higher energy photons of lower wavelengths, they tend to damage both semiconducting and metallic SWCNTs. In order to overcome this problem, a laser with a single wavelength of 2 μm was applied to perform irradiation on a mixture of SWCNTs on silicon substrates.285 When exposed to such low-energy photons (0.62 eV) for 20 s, metallic SWCNTs were completely damaged during laser irradiation. The authors attributed the removal of metallic SWCNTs to the different electronic properties of metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs, which results in the movement of free electrons with metallic species responding swiftly to the electromagnetic field oscillation while semiconducting counterparts are damaged only when the photon energy fits their band energy.285 However, a conflicting view on the relationship between the wavelength of the laser and the type of the removed SWCNTs was published recently,286 where 473 and 632 nm laser showed evidence of the removal of metallic SWCNTs while 785 and 1064 nm laser removed semiconducting species. The authors proposed that fitting of gap energy M11 (S11 and S22) to the incident photon energy enables the destruction of metallic (semiconducting) SWCNTs.286 Further efforts, including both experimental and the theoretical studies288 are required to confirm and reveal the science behind laser irradiation.
The major benefits of laser irradiation may involve the potential in performing large area purification, and the compatibility in both liquid and solid systems.279 However, the main disadvantages of this approach include the unclear working mechanism and high energy consumption.
3.2.1.3 Gas-phase etching. 
Before being applied to the preparation of SWCNTs with specific electronic properties, gas-phase etching was regarded as the general approach to remove impurities, such as amorphous carbon, in the synthesis process.289 In addition, this technique was previously combined with CVD to selectively synthesize highly pure s-SWCNTs (purity = 89.5%).290 Since Zhang et al. reported that m-SWCNTs were selectively removed during gas-phase etching with methane plasma as the etchant,291 much research progress in this area has been made (see Table 5).
Table 5 The details of reports in sorting SWCNTs by gas-phase etching




Propertya
Purity
Etchant
Temperature
Period
Characterization
Ref.





a The separated SWCNTs species are labelled in bold.





M/S
N/A
Methane
Etching: 400 °C
N/A
AFM

291



Diameter
Annealing: 600 °C
Raman






Transistor properties


M/S
N/A
Oxygen
400 °C
10 h
Differential thermogravimetry

292



Diameter
UV–Vis–NIR




Raman


M/S
N/A
Oxygen
300–600 °C
<2.5 h
SEM

224



Diameter
Raman


M/S
N/A
Oxygen
300–600 °C
<200 min
SEM

225



Diameter
Raman



M/S
>90%
Nitrogen dioxide
220 °C
16 h
SEM

293



Diameter
UV–Vis–NIR




Raman




Sheet resistance



M/S
M: 86%
Oxygen
480 °C
10 min
SEM

263



Diameter
S: 93%
AFM






Raman






Polarized optical microscope






Transistor properties




In this initial work, instead of using conventional hydrogen plasma, a methane plasma was applied to treat the as-synthesized SWCNTs on SiO2/O2 due to its mild reactivity and thus excellent controllability over the reaction.291 As shown in Fig. 13a, both metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs are etched when the diameter of the SWCNTs is below 1.4 nm. In contrast, both types of SWCNTs with diameter above 2 nm survive the plasma treatment. This is because the high radius of curvature and the resulting high strain in the C–C bonds make small-diameter SWCNTs more reactive and therefore easier to etch compared to large-diameter counterparts.294 When the diameter of SWCNTs is between 1.4 to 2 nm, s-SWCNTs remain while metallic species are removed. The authors attributed this to the higher formation energies of the m-SWCNTs with more delocalized electronic states as compared to that of semiconducting species with the identical diameter.295,296 In addition, vacuum annealing at 600 °C is necessary to eliminate the functional groups formed during the etching process and reduce the semiconducting SWCNTs to their original state.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic reaction of metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs with different diameter regimes during the etching and annealing process. Reproduced with permission.291 Copyright 2006, AAAS. (b) Schematic of the NO2 etching reaction for the purification of metallic SWCNTs and (c) optical images of the synthesized and NO2 treated SWCNTs in both solid and dispersed states. Reproduced with permission.293 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d–f) In situ AFM height images of (d) pristine, (e) 1% SDS treated and (f) gas-phase etched SWCNT array. Reproduced with permission.263 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry and Chinese Chemical Society. 
In addition to the selective removal of m-SWCNTs, the s-SWCNTs can also be etched by choosing a proper oxidant (NO2).293 In this work, pristine SWCNTs were stored in a U-type quartz tube under a NO2 atmosphere and the tube was then placed in an oil bath for the etching reaction (16 h at 220 °C), as shown in Fig. 13b. Under such reaction conditions, the semiconducting SWCNTs were dissociated into gaseous products, NO and CO and metallic species remained. The colour of the SWCNTs solid (dispersion) changed from black to gold (red) after the oxidation, which implies the enrichment of m-SWCNTs in the product, as shown in Fig. 13c. The authors proposed the selective absorption of NO2 on the walls of semiconducting SWCNTs. However, this is contradictory with previous theoretical calculations, which showed that NO2 can selectively be adsorbed on specific types of SWCNTs and may result in a severe structural deformation and dissociation of SWCNT walls.297,298 Further theoretical and experimental evidence is still required to determine the exact mechanism of this approach.
Recently, Zhao et al. developed an igniter-assisted gas-phase etching approach, by which both SWCNTs enriched with semiconducting or metallic species were prepared by choosing appropriate “igniter”.263 Briefly, after the initial growth of SWCNTs on quartz, the substrate was immersed in an “igniter” solution (1 wt%), sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) or 2,3,9,10-tetra-(5-hexyl-thiophen-2-yl)-1,4,6,8,11,13-hexaaza-pentacene (4HP), for 12 h at room temperature during which SDS and 4HP selectively adsorb on the metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs, respectively. After the immersion, as shown in Fig. 13d and e, the diameter of the m-SWCNT on the right side increased more than 0.7 nm while there was no obvious change in the diameter of s-SWCNT on the left. This implied that SDS molecules (igniter) selectively adsorbed on the surface of m-SWCNTs. As a result, the m-SWCNTs covered by SDS tended to be oxidized and removed after the gas-phase etching, as shown in Fig. 13f. During the process, since these small molecules have a lower oxidation temperature than that of the SWCNTs, they acted as an “igniter” to accelerate the oxidation of the wrapped SWCNTs via providing additional heat.263 In contrast, the bare SWCNTs with different electronic properties remained under the etching conditions.
It is worth mentioning that the chemical reactivity differences between SWCNTs with different chiralities were investigated. Kataura et al.299 compared the reactivity of SWCNTs during oxidation in air and hydrogen peroxide. PL and Raman spectra were recorded to monitor the chirality distribution before and after the oxidation process. Under air oxidation conditions, rapid decomposition of the nanotubes that had a higher chiral angle and smaller diameter was observed. This result suggests that small chiral angle SWCNT enrichment is possible by preferential combustion of large chiral-angle SWCNTs in air. Using individual suspended SWCNTs, Liu et al.300 further studied the relationship between nanotubes chirality and their chemical reactivity through TEM. The nanotubes chirality assignment was performed on the basis of nanobeam electron diffraction. The chemical stability of an individual nanotube was subsequently evaluated by TEM after an oxidation treatment in air at different temperatures (400, 450, 470, 490 °C) took place. The results suggest that diameter, metallicity and chirality of SWCNTs play an obvious role in their reactivity to O2. Unlike Kataura's observation, large diameter and higher chiral angle s-SWCNTs in this study exhibited more stability against the air treatment, suggesting that large diameter and high chiral angle s-SWCNTs can be selectively obtained.
The gas-phase etching provides several advantages, including the ability to purify both metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs and the potential for large-scale production. However, relatively lower purity compared to that of liquid processing techniques and the lack of purification of single chiral SWCNTs are the major shortcomings.
3.2.1.4 Microwave-assisted purification. 
Before being used as a purification method, microwave was applied as a solvent-free technique to purify the as-synthesized SWCNTs to remove impurities, such as amorphous carbon and metal catalysts at the beginning of the 2000s.301,302 It was first introduced in the separation of SWCNTs into different electronic properties by Song et al. in 2008.303 Several reports were published in the following years and further improved the process (see Table 6).
Table 6 Details of the separation of SWCNTs assisted by microwave




Propertya
Purity
Frequency (GHz)
Power (kW)
Characterization
Ref.





a The separated SWCNTs species are labelled in bold.





M/S
N/A
2.5
1.4
Raman

303



EDX


Sheet resistance


M/S
N/A
2.45
0.5
Raman

304



UV–Vis–NIR


SEM


M/S
N/A
2.45
0.9
Raman

305



UV–Vis–NIR


M/S
N/A
2.45
1.0
Raman

306



AFM


Transistor properties


Diameter
N/A
2.45
0.5
Raman

307



SEM


M/S
87%
2.45
0.5
Raman

308



UV–Vis–NIR


SEM




A standard microwave-assisted purification process is shown in Fig. 14a, in which the m-SWCNTs were removed after exposure to microwave radiation.303 Though the exact nature of the interaction between SWCNTs and microwaves is still not clear, the strong absorption of microwaves by SWCNTs is widely observed. Since the average power density of the irradiation absorbed increases with the dielectric constant of the materials, m-SWCNTs absorb more energy and can then be removed due to their high dielectric constant (>1000) which is a consequence of the availability of electrons at Fermi level.309 The sheet resistance of the thin film (with similar thickness) prepared with SWCNTs after different periods of exposure to microwaves was compared and it was found that it increased by about seven times after 60 s of radiation, which indicated the decreased content of metallic species in the material.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic process of the microwave-assisted purification of SWCNTs (M (blue) and S (red) stand for metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs respectively). Reproduced with permission.303 Copyright 2008, Elsevier. (b) Raman spectra of the pristine and annealed SWCNTs (excitation wavelength: 514.5 nm). The insets are the zoom-in plots for RBM and tangential area of the spectra. Reproduced with permission.304 Copyright 2008, Elsevier. (c and d) Optical absorbance spectra (fitted by dash-dot curves) of SWCNTs dispersion (c) before and (d) after separation. Reproduced with permission.308 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
This process was further improved by exfoliating SWCNT bundles and thus dispersing individual SWCNTs homogeneously in order to suppress the damage of semiconducting species closely bundled with the metallic counterparts.304 In that report, a mixture of acid (97% H2SO4 and 60% HNO3 are in a volume ratio of 1:1) was used to disperse SWCNTs firstly and a thermal annealing step (900 °C for 1 h under Ar followed by 350 °C for 30 min in the air) was performed to remove the adsorbates after the exposure of SWCNTs dispersion to microwave irradiation. The reduction in the peak intensity of metallic SWCNTs in the RBM region as well as the loss of the BWF feature at G band in the Raman spectra after annealing, as shown in Fig. 14b, indicates the successful selective removal.
Microwave has also been applied with solution based separation technique to purify the as-synthesized SWCNTs by Shen et al. in 2014.308 In detail, the SWCNTs were dispersed with a solution of nitronium tetrafluoroborate (NO2BF4, NTFB) by ultrasonication (10 min), which was followed by the exposure to microwave irradiation for 2 h at 60 °C. After centrifugation, the pellet at the bottom of the centrifuge tube was collected, washed and freeze-dried. A final thermal treatment was performed at 1000 °C in Ar atmosphere for 30 min to remove the adsorbates on the SWCNTs. As shown in Fig. 14c and d, the optical absorbance spectra show a decrease in the peak intensity for the metallic SWCNTs after the purification with the estimated purity of semiconducting species increasing from 62% to 87%. The selective removal of metallic SWCNTs results from the abundance of charge density at Fermi level, which makes them tend to donate electrons to an electron acceptor (NO2+) to form covalent bonds (as a result, the dispersibility of SWCNTs was enhanced and they could be easily removed as the supernatant by centrifuge) as well as have higher reactivity with microwave compared to semiconducting species.
High throughput and low power consumption are the most significant advantages of the microwave-assisted purification. Nevertheless, this method so far has only been applied to remove metallic and leave semiconducting SWCNTs, which makes it less competitive than other techniques. In addition, the selectivity (the purity is generally below 90%) is not as high as most of the solution-based processes.
3.2.1.5 Thermocapillary-assisted purification. 
Another technique regarding selective purification is based on the difference in the thermocapillary flows of SWCNTs for different electronic types. This method generally involves the use of a thermocapillary resist.310–313 In addition, different trigger sources for heating SWCNTs have been employed in this technique (see Table 7 for detail).
Table 7 The details of purification based on thermocapillary flow




Propertya
Purity
Heating trigger
Characterization
Ref.





a The separated SWCNTs species are labelled in bold.





M/S
∼100%
Transistor induced electricity
AFM

310



SEM


Transistor properties


M/S
>99.9925%
Microwave (12.2 cm)
AFM

313



SEM


Raman


Transistor properties


M/S
>99.8%
Near infrared laser (2500 nm)
AFM

311



SEM


Raman


Transistor properties


M/S
N/A
Direct current injection
Transistor properties

314





The first report in this field was published in 2013 by Jin et al.,310 where a transistor structure was introduced and used to selectively deliver heat to metallic SWCNTs. The general procedure of the process is shown in Fig. 15a, which consists of the synthesis of an aligned SWCNT array, inducing Joule heating selectively in m-SWCNTs after the deposition of thermocapillary resist and reactive ion etching (O2/CF4) before removing the residue of resist coating. The key step in this procedure is the formation of a 25 nm uniform and continuous thermocapillary layer by thermal evaporation on both quartz and SWCNTs surfaces. When the drain–source voltage is applied with the gate voltage, the selective heating of metallic SWCNTs by electricity can only increase the temperature of the resist in the vicinity, as shown in Fig. 15b. With the substrate being heated at 60 °C in vacuum (any oxygen in the system may cause electrical breakdown of the exposed SWCNTs), the physical mass transport of the resist occurs due to the gradients in the surface tension caused by the spatial difference of temperature in the local area.315 In addition, trenches are gradually formed with increasing drain–source voltages when the channel length (the distance between drain and source) is fixed, as shown in Fig. 15c. The exposed m-SWCNTs are then removed by reactive ion etching while the covered semiconducting species remain due to the protection from the thermocapillary resist. The same selectivity of the Joule heating effect on m-SWCNTs was triggered by microwave313 and NIR laser irradiation311 by the same group, and the purities of s-SWCNTs from both methods were very close to 100%, (see Table 7). In addition, it has been shown theoretically that better resolution can be achieved by reducing the thickness of thermocapillary resist film, but it is challenging to practically apply a continuous and conformal thin film of thermocapillary resist.311
 Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of the purification based on electricity-driven thermocapillary flow, (b) scanning Joule expansion microscope image of a SWCNT array under operation on quartz and (c) topology of the capillary resist coated surfaces after operation with different drain–source voltage. Reproduced with permission.310 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
Although the advances achieved in the research detailed in this section can produce s-SWCNTs with the purity of near 100%, the relatively complicated fabrication processes will need to be simplified before this can be introduced into practical applications. Recently, a direct current injection was developed by the same group, in which interdigitated electrodes were used to selectively inject current into metallic individuals in an array of SWCNTs.314 The process is composed of four major steps: (1) the growth of SWCNTs via CVD, (2) fabrication of interdigitated electrodes, (3) application of pulsed voltages to cause Joule heating selectively through metallic SWCNTs, and (4) reactive ion etching to remove exposed metallic SWCNTs and dissolving the residue of thermocapillary resist by acetone. Among the entire process, the choice of low work-function electrode material is crucial because it is important to obtain sufficiently high Schottky barrier between these metals and s-SWCNTs to block the current flow effectively and thus eliminate the dramatic heating in these SWCNTs.313 Typical materials can be used as electrodes include Ti, Al, and Mo.314
The most obvious advantage of thermocapillary-assisted purification is the ultrahigh purity of the sorted s-SWCNTs, which has the great potential to satisfy the technical requirements for low-power digital circuits (>99.9999%).316 However, there are several disadvantages as well, including the multistep fabrication, the possibility of residues and slow scanning speed of the light source (0.4 μm s−1).311


3.2.2 (Di)electrophoresis. 
The positive results of (di)electrophoresis in sorting SWCNTs based on the electronic properties was reported a few years after revealing the effectiveness of such techniques in removing carbon impurities and controlling the orientation of SWCNTs.317–319 (Di)electrophoresis involves the application of an electric field to manipulate the motion of small particles (in this case, SWCNTs) in a media, sometimes with a matrix.320 It can then be classified into two main categories: (1) matrix-free (di)electrophoresis where there is no matrix in the medium and (2) gel-based (di)electrophoresis in which a common gel, such as agarose, is used as a matrix to amplify the difference in the mobility of SWCNTs in the media, which may give rise to some side effects, such as the introduction of impurities in the separated SWCNTs fractions319,321
3.2.2.1 Matrix-free (di)electrophoresis. 
After the first report on the selective deposition of metallic SWCNTs by dielectrophoresis from aqueous media,319 a vast effort has been made to improve both the yield and feasibility of the process,322 as show in Table 8. The theoretical purity of the metallic SWCNTs prepared by this technique is about 99% based on simulation results.323
Table 8 Details of the purification of SWCNTs based on matrix-free (di)electrophoresis




Propertya
Purity
Frequency
Voltageb
Time
Dispersant
Characterization
Ref.





a The separated SWCNTs species are labelled in bold.
b When AC(DC) is applied in the system, the value in the table denotes peak-to-peak (constant) voltage.






M/S
80%
10 MHz
AC 10 V
10 min
SDS
Raman

319




M/S
N/A
30 kHz–30 MHz
AC 20 V
10 min
SDBS
Raman

324




M/S
N/A
10–70 MHz
AC 20 V
5 min
SC
UV–Vis–NIR

325




M/S
N/A
N/A
DC 100 V
2 h
Triton X-405
Raman

326



4-Hydroxybenzene diazonium salt
UV–Vis–NIR


M/S
92%
N/A
DC 300 V
24 h
SC
UV–Vis–NIR

327




M/S
M: 70%
N/A
DC 30 V
24 h
Polyoxyethylene
Raman

328



S: 95%
UV–Vis–NIR



M/S
N/A
10 MHz
AC 10 V
N/A
SDS
Raman

322



UV–Vis–NIR


Transistor properties




Krupke et al.319 first developed the purification of m-SWCNTs using the alternating current dielectrophoresis, which is mainly based on the striking difference in the dielectric constants of semiconducting and metallic SWCNTs (<10 versus >1000). Electron-beam lithography was used to define the interdigitated electrodes which were connected to a function generator, as shown in Fig. 16a. A SWCNT dispersion was placed on the apparatus after operating the generator and the droplet was blown off the chip after separation and deposition (10 min). The SWCNT film on the surface was then analysed by Raman spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 16b, there is a clear decrease in the semiconducting associated peak area in the RBM region for the sample after dielectrophoresis compared with that of the reference, which indicates the enrichment of metallic species on the chip during the process. The authors calculated the sign of the dielectrophoretic force for both metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs to be positive and negative, respectively. This explained the deposition of metallic SWCNTs on the chip while the semiconducting species remained in the dispersion.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the device and the operation for the separation and (b) the RBM region of the Raman spectra of both sample (the SWCNTs deposited on the electrodes) and the reference SWCNTs without the applied electric field. Reproduced with permission.319 Copyright 2003, AAAS. (c) Schematic of the improved design for dielectrophoresis separation of SWCNTs and (d) optical absorbance of the metal-enriched fraction and pristine SWCNTs. Reproduced with permission.322 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (e) Schematic of vertical electrophoresis unit, (f) partition process of SWCNTs under the influence of voltage (30 V) in vertical cell after 0, 4, 16 and 24 hours, and (g) optical absorbance of the pristine SWCNTs, cathode and anode fractions. Reproduced with permission.328 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic of the SWCNT separation based on agarose gel electrophoresis and (i) optical absorbance spectra of the reference, corresponding fraction of i and ii in the column. Reproduced with permission.321 Copyright 2008, The Japan Society of Applied Physics. 
This technique was further improved to achieve a higher resolution with the design of continuous-flow capillary dielectrophoresis by Kang et al.322 As shown in Fig. 16c, the SWCNT dispersion and the background surfactant solution were injected into a microchannel (height: 300 μm; width: 150 μm) at inlet 1 and 2, respectively. The m-SWCNTs were attracted from the SWCNTs stream to the channel of background solution under the influence of dielectrophoretic forces caused by the vertically aligned electrode on the sidewall. The m-SWCNTs moved with the continuous flow of the background solution without deposition on the electrode region. The selectivity and concentration of the separated metallic SWCNTs was estimated by optical absorbance, as shown in Fig. 16d. An obvious reduction in the signal intensity of S22 and S33 was observed after dielectrophoresis process, which indicates the effective purification of metallic SWCNTs. However, the peak intensity (at about 740 nm) of the metallic SWCNTs-enriched dispersion is low implying that the concentration of the purified SWCNTs is low though the exact concentration of the sorted species was not provided.
An approach based on free electrophoresis with a simple vertical column was developed by Ihara et al.,328 which has the potential to improve the yield significantly (to a few hundred micrograms from a single operation). As shown in Fig. 16e, platinum wires were connected to the top and bottom side of the tube which was used as the separation chamber. A constant voltage (30 V) was applied across the chamber. The homogeneously dispersed SWCNTs then began to accumulate at the top and bottom region of the chamber, as shown in Fig. 16f, and two layers of SWCNTs were separated by an intermediate layer. The optical spectra of cathode- and anode-fraction and reference SWCNTs are shown in Fig. 16g. The intensity of M11 (S11 and S22) of the cathode-fraction SWCNTs increases (decreases) after the electrophoresis. In contrast, the intensity of S11 and S22 (M11) of the anode-fraction SWCNTs increases (decreases), as shown in Fig. 16g. Both factors together indicate the successful separation of SWCNTs into different electronic properties. Though the exact nature of the process is not fully understood, the authors suggested that there may be a change in the specific gravity of metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs under the influence of an electric field and the semiconducting-enriched SWCNT layer has a larger specific gravity than that of metallic-enriched layer.
The advantage of the matrix-free dielectrophoresis is its simple procedure especially when a constant voltage is applied. In addition, it shows the ability to achieve both metallic and semiconducting enriched fractions. However, the experimental purity of these separated fractions is not high enough to be practically applied though the theoretical purity of the metallic species is 99%.323 Furthermore, it, so far, has not been shown that this technique is appropriate for targeting single-chiral species.
3.2.2.2 Gel-based (di)electrophoresis. 
Apart from the (di)electrophoresis based on free solutions, a matrix, such as agarose, was combined with this system to amplify the mobility difference of the SWCNTs with various electronic properties, as shown in Table 9. In addition, efforts have been made to remove the gel after purification by a multistep treatment, including chlorosulfonic acid wash, base wash and thermal annealing at 400 °C for 1 h.329
Table 9 Details of the SWCNTs separation based on gel-based (di)electrophoresis




Propertya
Purity
Voltage
Time
Dispersant
Characterization
Ref.





a The separated SWCNTs species are labelled in bold.





Length
N/A
100 V
30 min
SC
AFM

330



Diameter
Raman




UV–Vis–NIR


Length
N/A
N/A
70 min
Nucleic acids
AFM

331



Diameter
Raman


Length
N/A
N/A
30 min
SC
AFM

332 and 333



Diameter
Raman



M/S
M: 70%
50 V
20 min
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

321



S: 95%


M/S
95%
200 V
4 h
Chondroitin sulfate
Raman

334



UV–Vis–NIR


Transistor properties


M/S
98%
200 V
4 h
SC
AFM

335



Raman


UV–Vis–NIR


Transistor properties




The first work applying gel-based electrophoresis in sorting SWCNTs into different electronic properties was reported by Tanaka et al.321 in 2008. As shown in Fig. 16h, the SWCNT dispersion was first mixed with melted gel in a buffer solution (tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane) and the mixture was then added to a glass tube filled with agarose gel. After applying a constant voltage (50 V) for a period of time (from 0 to 42 minutes), semiconducting SWCNTs remained in the top area (fraction i) while the most of the metallic species were separated and moved along the glass tube (fraction ii). The purity of semiconducting and metallic SWCNTs were estimated as 95% and 70% based on the analysis of UV–vis–NIR spectra (as shown in Fig. 16i). Different combinations of dispersants for SWCNTs and gel (for example, SDS seems to have the best performance when agarose is used as the gel bed) were tested and the results showed the significance of proper choices for both, which was explained by the strength of the interaction between the surfactant-coated semiconducting SWCNTs and the gel. It was predicted that when the difference between the affinity of dispersed semiconducting and metallic SWCNTs to the gel is large enough, the separation occurs.321 It is worth noting that the melted agarose gel (instead of bundles of polymers)336 used in this study also contributes to the efficient separation by providing a much larger surface area for the adsorption of s-SWCNTs.
This technique was also combined with other separation methods to further improve the purity of the semiconducting SWCNTs to 98% by Mesgari et al.335 SWCNTs were pre-treated with metallic-selective ionic radials which are decomposed from an azo naphthalene compound. The generated radicals selectively react with m-SWCNTs due to their higher reactivity caused by the availability of electrons near the EF.337 As a result, the reacted m-SWCNTs have an increased surface charge and thus faster electrophoretic mobilities than that of s-SWCNTs, which induces a better separation efficiency in the electric field.
Gel-based (di)electrophoresis has a higher resolution for the separation of SWCNTs by electronic properties compared with that of matrix-free condition. In contrast, the tedious and nontrivial post removal of the gel is its main issue.


3.2.3 Polymer/small molecule-assisted isolation. 
One of the most widely used strategies in the purification of SWCNTs also involves the application of polymers or small organic molecules which selectively interact with SWCNTs with specific properties and thus result in their separation from the bulk mixture. A large number of efforts has been made in this technique in the past a few years and they have been summarized in Table 10.
Table 10 Details of the purification with the application of polymer and small molecules




Propertya
Purity
Polymer/small molecule
Solvent
Characterization
Ref.





a The separated SWCNTs species are labelled in bold.





M/S
N/A
Octadecylamine
THF
Raman

338




M/S
87%
1-Octylamine
THF
Raman

339



UV–Vis–NIR


Transistor properties


M/S
N/A
Poly(3-alkylthiophene)s
Toluene
Raman

340



UV–Vis–NIR


PL


Transistor properties



M/S
M: 92%
1,1′-Bis-purenebutyoxyl-p-xylen
THF/toluene (v/v 80/20)
Raman

341



S: 97%
UV–Vis–NIR


M/S
N/A
Polyfluorene derivatives
Toluene
UV–Vis–NIR

342



Diameter
PL




Transistor properties


M/S
N/A
Regioregular poly(3-dodecylthiophene)
Toluene
Raman

343



Diameter
UV–Vis–NIR




Transistor properties


M/S
N/A
Atactic poly(9-dodecyl-9-methyl-fluorene)
Toluene
UV–Vis–NIR

344



Transistor properties


M/S
N/A
Poly(2,7-carbazole)
THF
Raman

345



UV–Vis–NIR


PL



M/S
N/A
Poly-(fluorene-co-phenylene) derivatives
THF/toluene (v/v 50/50)
Raman

346



UV–Vis–NIR


PL


M/S
99.94%
Agarose
Triton X-405 aqueous solution
Raman

347



UV–Vis–NIR


Transistor properties


M/S
N/A
2,3,9,10-Tetra-(5-hexyl-thiophen-2-yl)-1,4,6,8,11,13-hexaaza-pentacene
Toluene
UV–Vis–NIR

348



Transistor properties


M/S
N/A
Poly(2-vinylpyridine)-co-poly(9,9-dihexyl-2-(4-vinylphenyl)-9H-fluorene)
Toluene
Raman

349



UV–Vis–NIR


Transistor properties


M/S
N/A
Poly[(E)-1,2-bis(4-dodecyl-50-methyl-30-octadecyl-[2,20-bithiophen]-5-yl)ethene]
Toluene
Raman

258



UV–Vis–NIR


PL


Transistor properties


M/S (10, 9)
S: 99%
9,9-Dialkylfluorene
Toluene
Raman

350



UV–Vis–NIR


PL


Transistor properties


(7, 5)
60%
Poly(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)
Toluene
Raman

152



UV–Vis–NIR


PL


Diameter
N/A
Poly[(m-phenylenevinylene)-alt(p-phenylenevinylene)]
Water
Raman

351



PL


Diameter
N/A
Poly(3-alkylthiophene)s
Toluene
Raman

352



UV–Vis–NIR


Transistor properties


Length
N/A
Polymethacrylate or polystyrene sulfonate
DOC aqueous solution
UV–Vis–NIR

353



AFM




As one of the pioneers in this field, Papadimitrakopoulos's group dispersed SWCNTs by octadecylamine (ODA) in tetrahydrofuran (THF) and found that the small molecule has a stronger affinity to the s-SWCNTs versus the metallic counterparts due to the existence of amine groups which tend to cause significant change in the electronic properties of s-SWCNTs.338 As a result, the s-SWCNTs have a higher dispersibility than the metallic ones; and the separation was carried out by filtering the suspension through a coarse filter paper. This technique was further improved by a sonication-centrifuge process with 1-octylamine in tetrahydrofuran to yield metallic SWCNTs with a purity of 87%.339
One of the landmarks in this field is the use of polyfluorenes in preferential dispersion containing a few types of s-SWCNTs with organic solvents.152 The parent SWCNTs were dispersed with poly(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl) (PFO) in toluene by mild and vigorous bath sonication and ultrasonication for 60 and 15 min respectively, followed by centrifugation at 9000g for 3 min. It was found that the centrifuge force and period were effective enough to prepare a well-dispersed SWCNTs suspension and were much lower than those of surfactant-based process (85000g, 4 h). As shown in Fig. 17a, the absorption peaks were clearly resolved with dramatically decreased peak width in the PFO dispersed sample. In addition, the spectrum of SWCNTs/PFO dispersion had a much lower background compared to that of aqueous dispersions. All of these observations indicated a significant reduction in the number of SWCNTs species in the PFO-dispersed sample. Since the deconvolution of the absorbance spectra is difficult, a PL map was used to measure the relative species abundance (though it is affected by quantum efficiencies). As shown in Fig. 17b, the PFO dispersed sample was enriched with (7,5). It was concluded by the authors that such selectivity was a result of the formation of self-assembled intermolecular structures as well as the electronic interaction between polymers and SWCNTs. Later, Gui et al.354 found the selectivity of this method is closely related to the redox condition of the SWCNTs. In detail, it could change the structure of the surfactant coating layer by affecting the electron-transfer between redox molecules and SWCNTs. In terms of PFO related polymers, the reducing condition could enhance the dispersion yield with a lowering of selectivity, whereas oxidizing conditions do the opposite.
 Fig. 17  (a) Absorbance spectra of CoMoCAT SWCNTs before and after the polymer treatment. The inset is a schematic of the repeating units of PFO, and (b) photoluminescence excitation map of PFO dispersed SWCNTs in toluene. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2007, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Optical absorbance spectra of pristine, and polythophenes (with side chains of different length) dispersed SWCNTs in toluene. The inset shows the schematic structures of the polymers. Reproduced with permission.352 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic process (forward sequential precipitation) of the length sorting of SWCNTs by PMAA or PSS (the inset shows the structure of both polymers), (e) the SWCNTs length distribution of 1% and 4% PMAA fraction and (f) correlation between the length of SWCNTs and PMAA concentration. (d)–(f) Reproduced with permission.353 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It is well known that the s-SWCNTs with small diameter and large bandgap are appropriate for photovoltaic devices. As reported by Wang et al.352 in 2014, poly(3-alkylthiophene) was used to disperse and purify SWCNTs in order to fulfil this requirement. The polythiophene-assisted separation was carried out using a probe sonication (for 30 min), followed by a centrifuge step (17000 rpm, 1 h). Due to the preferential interaction between the side chain of the polymer and SWCNTs, the semiconducting species with small diameter (<0.76 nm) were enriched in the dispersion, as shown in Fig. 17c. In addition, the yield of the SWCNTs was improved with the length of the alkyl side chain (from 4 to 31%) with no obvious loss in selectivity, which was mainly due to the flexible backbone, side chains and their regioregularity, and those factors together resulted in an increase in the contact area between the chain and the surface of SWCNTs.352
In addition to the purification associated with electronic properties and diameters, promising results of length sorting of SWCNTs using polymers have recently been reported by Gui et al.,353 where two different polymers, namely polymethacrylate (PMAA) and polystyrene sulfonate (PSS), were found to be effective in separating deoxycholate or cholate suspended SWCNTs aqueous dispersion. As shown in Fig. 17d, PMAA or PSS was added to the sodium deoxycholate SWCNT dispersion to a final concentration of 1 wt%, followed by incubation for 4 h at room temperature. Then, a mild centrifugation (5 min at 943 rad s−1) was applied to partially precipitate SWCNTs from the dispersion. The pellet was redispersed by sodium cholate (2 wt%) and labelled as the 1% sample. The same process was repeated several times to prepare more fractions. At each step, a certain amount of polymer was added to the supernatant to adjust the concentration to be 2, 4 and 6%. As shown in Fig. 17e, 4% PMAA sample was abundant in short SWCNTs (<0.4 μm) while the majority part of 1% sample was long SWCNTs. Statistically, the length of the SWCNTs in each fraction decreased from 650 to 250 nm with the PMAA concentration (Fig. 17f). The clear trend in the length sorting was attributed to phase separation (SWCNT enriched pellet phase versus aqueous polymer supernatant phase) that smaller SWCNTs contributed more entropy to the free energy of the pellet phase than longer ones with identical mass, and this resulted in an easier phase separation for the latter.353
The versatility in sorting SWCNTs (via electronic property, chirality, diameter or length) is the major advantage of the polymer/small molecule-assisted purification. However, as with many other additives, post removal of these polymers/small molecules is required for certain applications. In addition, it can be difficult to control the properties of the synthesized polymers, including the purity and the polydispersity.


3.2.4 Density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGU). 
DGU was initially a technique that was used to separate biomacromolecules, such as nucleic acids. This technique builds on the fact that SWCNTs with different electronic properties have different densities after the selective adsorption of dispersants. The general process of DGU includes three main steps: (a) dispersing SWCNTs with a simple sonication and ultracentrifugation step to remove metallic catalysts, amorphous carbon, bundles of SWCNTs and other impurities; (b) creating a density gradient by adding SWCNT suspension into DGU medium, such as iodixanol, and (c) performing DGU to distribute SWCNTs with dispersing agents into layers with different densities. Since the first report of this technique in separating SWCNTs based on the diameters in 2005 by Arnold et al.,355 several important studies further improved this technique and they have been summarized in Table 11.
Table 11 Details of purification of SWCNTS by DGU




Propertya
Purity
Dispersant
Medium
Characterization
Ref.





a The separated SWCNTs species are labelled in bold.





Diameter
N/A
ssDNA
Iodixanol
UV–Vis–NIR

355



Diameter
(6,5): 97%
SC
Iodixanol
UV–Vis–NIR

356




M/S (6,5)
PL


Enantiomer
N/A
SC
Iodixanol
UV–Vis–NIR

154



CD


Armchair
>50%
DOC
Iodixanol
Raman

357



UV–Vis–NIR


PL


Chirality
(6,4): 88%
SC
Iodixanol
Raman

157



Enantiomer
(7,3): 66%
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR




(6,5): 83%


PL




(9,1): 36%


CD




(8,3): 55%








(9,2): 47%








(7,5): 46%








(8,4): 34%








(10,2): 40%








(7,6): 48%






Empty/filled
N/A
SC
Iohexol in D2O
Raman

137



Diameter
UV–Vis–NIR




PL



M/S
99.9%
SC
Iodixanol
UV–Vis–NIR

358



Diameter


M/S
>99%
SC
Iodixanol
Raman

359



Diameter
UV–Vis–NIR


Diameter
(8, 6): 62%
Flavin mononucleotide
Iodixanol
UV–Vis–NIR

257



Chirality
PL




Apart from diameter-dependent separation, DGU was also applied in the separation of SWCNTs by electronic properties, chirality356 and even handedness.157 With appropriate choices of dispersing agents and pH environment of the medium, several clear colour bands were observed in the centrifuge tube while bundles and other impurities aggregated at a lower band, as shown in Fig. 18a. The optical absorbance spectra showed that the second band was enriched with (6,5) (Fig. 18b) and could further be enriched with several repetitive DGU processes, as shown in Fig. 18c. In the same report, enriched semiconducting or metallic SWCNTs fractions were achieved by introducing a second surfactant (SDS) in the system and finely tuning the relative ratio of surfactants. The authors anticipated that there are a large number of factors which determine the density of the specific type of SWCNTs, including the interaction between SWCNTs and surfactant, solvent and surfactant, and surfactant and surfactant, packing density, orientation, the hydration of the surfactants.356
 Fig. 18  (a) Photograph and (b) optical absorbance spectra after DGU of SWCNTs dispersed in 2% SC aqueous solution, and (c) PL map of the fractions enriched with (6,5) and (7,5) with 3 repeated DGU cycles. Reproduced with permission.356 Copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Comparison in the density profiles of linear and nonlinear DGU medium, (e) optical absorbance of the separated SWCNTs by DGU with nonlinear density medium, and (f) circular dichroism of two enantiomers of (6,5) with a photo of the centrifuge tube after DGU. (d)–(f) Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group. (g) Photograph of centrifuge tube showing the separation of SWCNTs by empty and filled state after DGU, (h) Raman spectra and (i) optical absorbance of different color bands after DGU as well as pristine SWCNTs. (g)–(i) Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
After a few years, DGU media with a nonlinear density profile was developed to improve the resolution of this technique.157 As shown in Fig. 18d, the key part of this innovation involved a more gradual increase of density with depth compared to that of previous linear profile. Because of such improved resolution in the densities along the depth, nonlinear DGU was able to separate 10 different chiralities, (see Table 11 and Fig. 18e). In addition, the use of a two-surfactant system (0.7% SC with 0.175% SDS) in nonlinear DGU successfully purified several pairs of enantiomers, including (+) (6,5)/(−) (6,5), (+) (8,3)/(−) (8,3), (+) (9,1)/(−) (9,1), (+) (7,3)/(−) (7,3), (+) (6,4)/(−) (6,4), (+) (8,4)/(−) (8,4), and (+) (7,5)/(−) (7,5). As shown in Fig. 18f, the opposite signs of S22 (569 nm) and S33 (348 nm) peaks in CD spectra clearly indicated the enrichment of (+) (6,5) and (−) (6,5).157
In addition to the separation by electronic properties and enantiomers, DGU is shown to be effective in separating SWCNTs into empty and filled individuals.137 Briefly, arc-discharge SWCNTs were dispersed into D2O with SC via gentle sonication and centrifuge to remove bundles but leave both empty and filled individuals. After DGU with iohexol in D2O solution as gradient medium, two sets of colour bands (1A–1D and 1E–1H) were observed in the centrifuge tube, as shown in Fig. 18g. Analysis of high resolution Raman (Fig. 18h) shows that 1A–1D only contain empty SWCNTs while 1E–1H consist of D2O filled ones. In addition, the optical absorbance spectra imply a reverse correlation between diameter and density for empty and D2O filled SWCNTs (Fig. 18i). It was suggested that larger diameter empty SWCNTs have the lowest density while they have the highest density when they are filled with D2O. Since empty SWCNTs have higher quantum efficiency as well as narrower electronic transitions than those of filled individuals, this study paved the way to improving the quality of raw material for certain applications.137
It can be concluded based on these studies that DGU is a powerful technique in separating SWCNTs by diameter, electronic property, chirality, enantiomer as well as empty/filled state. However, this technique has several issues to be addressed before commercial application, including time and the energy intensive process of high-speed ultracentrifugation, difficulties in the preparation of density gradient media and low yield of CNTs obtained.


3.2.5 Gel chromatography (GC). 
The commercialization of sorted SWCNTs with specific properties requires large-scale production. Gel chromatography (GC) is commonly used strategy to separate biological and macromolecular samples based on their size. This is due to the way that molecules with different sizes and chemical interactions pass though the column by various paths and periods. The application of this technique in the separation of SWCNTs was first reported by Moshammer et al.360 where the separation based on electronic properties was achieved using Sephacryl gel filtration medium by tuning the type of the eluent passing through the gel column. In the same year, another group reported the first use of agarose gel to separate m- and s-SWCNTs with high purities and throughput.361 After these pioneering reports, this method was well studied and developed into an extremely powerful separation technique for SWCNTs by diameter, electronic property, chirality and enantiomer, as shown in Table 12. The working mechanism of the method is based on the difference in the interaction between SWCNTs with different structures and the stationary phase, namely the gel. Such differences are normally caused by the different coverage of dispersing agents on the wall of SWCNTs.
Table 12 Details of gel chromatography applied in the purification of SWCNTs




Propertya
Purity
Gel
Eluent
Characterization
Ref.





a The separated SWCNTs species are labelled in bold.






M/S
>87%
Sephacryl
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

360



SC


Chirality
(7,3): 89%
Sephacryl
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

44




M/S
(6,4): 46%
PL


Diameter
(6,5): 93%
Raman




(7,5): 88%






(8,3): 56%






(8,4): 63%






(7,6): 94%






(8,6): 89%






(9,4): 46%






(10,2): 39%






(10,3): 69%






(8,7): 68%






(12,1): 71%





M/S
N/A
Sephacryl
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

362



DOC
Raman


Chirality
(6,4): 66%
Sephacryl
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

363




M/S
(6,5): 91%
PL


Diameter
(7,5): 58%






(8,3): 52%






(8,4): 71%






(7,6): 73%






(8,6): 65%




Chirality
(8,3): 64%
Sephacryl
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

364




M/S
(6,5): 92%
PL


Diameter
(7,5): 61%






(9,4): 76%






(8,4): 76%






(7,6): 95%






(8,6): 88%






(8,7): 77%




Chirality
N/A
Sephacryl
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

365



Enantiomer
CD


Chirality
N/A
Sephacryl
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

366



Enantiomer
CD




Raman




PL



M/S
N/A
Sephacryl
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

367



Chirality
PL



M/S
(10,3): 96%
Sephacryl
SC + SDS + DOC
UV–Vis–NIR

368



Chirality
(9,4): 93%
PL


Diameter
N/A
Sephacryl
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

369



Raman


Diameter
N/A
Sephacryl
SC + SDS
Raman

370



TEM


M/S
UV–Vis–NIR




AFM




Transistor properties



M/S
(6,4) > 90%
Sephacryl
SC + SDS + DOC
UV–Vis–NIR

371



Diameter
(6,5) > 90%
PL


Chirality
(7,3) > 90%




Enantiomer







M/S, Chirality, Enantiomer
(6,4): 97%
Sephacryl
SC + SDS + DOC
UV–Vis–NIR

159



(9,1): 91%
PL


(8,3): 96%
CD


(6,5): 98%




(7,3): 93%




(7,5): 90%




(10,2): 90%




(9,4): 97%




(8,4): 80%




(7,6): 94%




(10,3): 94%




(11,1): 90%





M/S
M: 90%
Agarose
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

361



S: 95%
DOC
Raman


Diameter
N/A
Agarose
SDS
Raman

372




M/S
DOC
UV–Vis–NIR






PL






AFM



M/S
M: 90%
Agarose
SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

373



S: 95%
DOC
Raman



M/S
M: 70%
Agarose
SDS
Raman

374





S: 95%
SDC
UV–Vis–NIR








PL



M/S

(6,5): 90%
Sepharose
SDS + DOC
UV–Vis–NIR

375



Fluorescence spectroscopy


Flow cell



M/S
N/A
Guar gum
SC + SDS
UV–Vis–NIR

376



Diameter
DOC




In 2011, single surfactant multicolumn gel chromatography (SS-MUGEC) was developed by Liu et al.,44 where 13 different chiral species were separated. As shown in Fig. 19a, the SWCNT dispersion is loaded at the top of a series of vertically placed columns. SWCNTs with the strongest interaction with the gel gradually replace others with increasing the loading of the dispersion. The unbound SWCNTs then move to the second column and similar processes (that SWCNTs with the strongest affinity to the gel among the unbound species occupy all adsorption sites) occurs again. Following this rule, the SWCNTs are sorted based on the strength of their interaction with the gel bed. High-concentration surfactant eluent (5% SDS) is used to collect SWCNTs bound in each individual column. The unbound fraction is highly enriched with metallic SWCNTs while 13 fractions are enriched with different single chiral species (see Table 12 and Fig. 19b and c).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of single surfactant multicolumn gel chromatography, (b) optical absorbance and (c) PL maps of the pristine and single chirality enriched fractions. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. 
In addition to the exceptional ability of GC to sort SWCNTs by chirality, this technique was further improved and managed to isolate enantiomers for 9 different (n,m) species.365 Briefly, each collected semiconducting fractions in SS-MUGEC was collected and separated repeatedly by the identical process based on overloading of the dispersion. The key point in achieving separation of enantiomers is the sufficient amount of s-SWCNTs suspension.365 The existence of the peaks (S22, S33 and S44) reveals the enrichment of one enantiomer in each of these tested fractions. Because of the achiral nature of SDS, the SDS coatings on two enantiomers for one certain (n,m) species are regarded the same. Thus, the interaction difference between different enantiomers and the gel bed is not from the different SDS coverage. Simulations revealed that the difference in the adsorption energy of two (6,5) enantiomers on the gel is 0.519 kcal mol−1, which is attributed to the different nature of adsorption sites on SWCNT/SDS hybrids with different enantiomers.365
The most frequently used stationary phase in the GC sorting is Sephacryl gel. However, this is expensive and limits the commercialization of this technique. In order to tackle this problem and reduce the economic cost of the process, Wang et al.376 recently synthesized a new type of gel from guar gum powder, glutaraldehyde (cross-linker) and HCl (catalyst) with a facile, low cost method, which showed the potential to replace the expensive Sephacryl gel. Although a new method is required to realize the separation of SWCNTs by chirality or even handedness, there are many excellent results in sorting SWCNTs into fractions with different electronic properties. The m-SWCNTs have the lowest hydrophobic interaction with the gel bed and eluted out of the column while semiconducting species, especially large diameter counterparts, stay in the gel bed and can be collected by using 1 wt% DOC as the eluent.
There is no doubt that GC is a strong and powerful technique in separating SWCNTs in a preferential way. However, the current GC procedures still do not provide single metallic chiral species with high purity with the exception of (10,4). Additionally, the cost of the gel will need to be addressed without losing the effectiveness in purification.


3.2.6 Ion exchange chromatography (IEX). 
Ion exchange chromatography (IEX) is one of the most commonly used methods to separate ions based on the difference in the electrostatic interaction between ions and stationary phase. In the case of sorting ssDNA-SWCNTs, the anticipated mechanism is that the different adsorption/desorption behaviour with functionalized resins is caused by various wrapping manners of ssDNA sequences on the SWCNTs. During the elution by a salt gradient, the retention time of ssDNA-SWCNTs is highly dependent on whether the wrapping is in an ordered or disordered form.377,378 The initial success was reported in 2003 by Zheng et al.379 where colourful fractions of SWCNTs were first collected by this technique. Since then, a number of research papers have been published, as shown in Table 13, and the understanding of the technique has been further improved.
Table 13 Details in separation of SWCNTs by IEX




Propertya
Purity
ssDNA
Characterization
Ref.





a The separated SWCNTs species are labelled in bold.





Length
N/A
T30
UV–Vis–NIR

379



Diameter
PL




AFM


Diameter
M: 83%
(GT)n
UV–Vis–NIR

380




M/S
S: 90%

n = 10–45
Raman


Chirality
N/A
(GT)30
UV–Vis–NIR

381



AFM


Chirality
(9,1): 80% (TCC)10
UV–Vis–NIR

382



(8,3): 70% (TTA)3TTGTT
PL


(6,5): 90% (TAT)4




(7,5): 90% (ATT)4AT




(10,2): 90% (TATT)2TAT




(8,4): 90% (ATTT)3




(9,4): 60% (GTC)2GT




(7,6): 90% (GTT)3G




(8,6): 90% (GT)6




(9,5): 70% (TGTT)2TGT




(10,5): 90% (TTTA)3T




(8,7): 80% (CCG)2CC




Chirality
(6,6): A(TTAA)3T
UV–Vis–NIR

383



(7,7): (TTA)2C(TAT)2T
Raman




In 2007, it was reported that 3 types of chiral species, (6,4), (9,1) and (6,5) were successfully separated from a SWCNT dispersion which was pre-sorted by the length via size exclusion chromatography.381 After this work, 12 (n,m) semiconducting species were purified with the application of a series of ssDNA sequences, as shown in Fig. 20a.382 Once again, the same group managed to separate two armchair species, (6,6) and (7,7), from a synthetic mixture in a similar way.383 It was found that a periodic purine-pyrimidines pattern which can form a 2D sheet and fold around SWCNTs as a 3D barrel by hydrogen bonding. Such ordered 2D and 3D structures could minimize the van der Waals as well as hydrophobic interactions between ssDNA-SWCNTs and resin and lead to a reduced retention time.382
 Fig. 20  (a) Optical absorbance of semiconducting (n,m) chiral species. Reproduced with permission.382 Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Optical absorbance of SWCNTs separated by ssDNA-assisted ATPE. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
It is indisputable that IEX is an outstanding technique in purification of SWCNTs into different chiral species from a commercial starting material. However, the cost of the ssDNA might be the limiting factor to produce chiral species on a large scale. In addition, the post-processing removal of ssDNA is another issue to be addressed.


3.2.7 Aqueous two phase extraction (ATPE). 
ATPE is widely used in biotechnology and exploits the slight differences in the physical properties of two polymer aqueous solutions and creates two immiscible phases to separate analytes. The working principle of this technique in the separation of SWCNTs is proposed as the uneven distribution of dispersed SWCNTs in two similar phases because of the difference in their solvation energy (which is dependent on the diameter, length, chirality and the distribution of the surface functionalities of the SWCNTs) in each phase.260,384 It is the latest technique in purification of SWCNTs with a considerable number of reports published, as shown in Table 14.
Table 14 Recent development of ATPE in separation of SWCNTs




Propertya
Purity
Dispersant
ATPE systemb (top/bottom)
Characterization
Ref.





a The separated SWCNTs species are labelled in bold.
b PEG: polyethylene glycol; DX: dextran; PAM: polyacrylamide; PEG-DA: poly(ethylene glycol) diamine and PVP: poly(vinylpyrrolidone)





M/S
N/A
SC; SDS
PEG/DX
UV–Vis–NIR

354



Raman


M/S
N/A
SC
PEG/DX
UV–Vis–NIR

385



Diameter


Chirality
N/A
DOC
PEG/DX
UV–Vis–NIR

386



PL


Raman


Chirality
(6,6): >85%
DOC
PEG/DX
UV–Vis–NIR

387



Raman


Diameter
N/A
DOC
PEG/DX
UV–Vis–NIR

388



Chirality
PL


Enantiomer
CD


Diameter
N/A
DOC
PEG/DX
UV–Vis–NIR

389



Chiral
PL




Raman


M/S
99.56%
SC
PEG/DX
UV–Vis–NIR

390



Transistor properties


M/S
98%
SC
PEG/DX
UV–Vis–NIR

391



Chirality
N/A
ssDNA
PEG/DX
UV–Vis–NIR

392



PEG/PAM


(PEG + PEG-DA)/DX


PVP/DX


Chirality
N/A
ssDNA
PEG/DX
UV–Vis–NIR

153



Enantiomer
PEG/PAM
PL




(PEG + PEG-DA)/DX
CD


Chirality
N/A
DOC
PEG/PAM
UV–Vis–NIR

393



Enantiomer
ssDNA
PL






CD




The selective partition of SWCNTs in an aqueous two-phase system was initially observed by Khripin et al. in 2013.385 PEG/DX was the first polymer two-phase system used in this field. It was observed that the partition behavior of SWCNTs is highly related to the diameter. When small-diameter CoMoCAT SWCNTs (∼0.8 nm in diameter) were subjected to the PEG/DX system, SWCNTs with smaller-diameter tended to move to the more hydrophilic PEG-enriched top phase while larger-diameter SWCNTs were observed in the more hydrophobic DX-enriched bottom phase. However, separation based on electronic properties was observed when large-diameter arc discharge SWCNTs (∼1.35 nm in diameter) was used as the parent material. In this case, metallic/semiconducting SWCNTs partitioned into more hydrophilic/hydrophobic phase enriched with DX/PEG. Though there was no chirality separation observed at that time, it built the foundation of later advances in this technique.
Just one year later, several papers reported the successful sorting of SWCNTs into highly pure chiral species, including both metallic (such as (5,5) and (6,6)) and semiconducting species (such as (6,5), (7,5) and several others).386,387 With the assistance of counter-current chromatography, fractions enriched with enantiomers ((+)(7,5) and (−)(7,5)) were also achieved388 In addition, some larger diameter metallic species ((10,10), (9,9) and (8,8)) were obtained by Fagan et al. though multistep ATPE.389
In addition to the surfactants, ssDNA sequences have also been used as dispersing agents in the separation of SWCNTs by ATPE.392 As shown in Fig. 20b, 23 types of (n,m) species were isolated with the aid of ssDNA, including armchair, zigzag and chiral SWCNTs. In addition, CD spectra shows that the application of ssDNA in ATPE has the ability to isolate SWCNTs by handedness. It is worth noting that this technique achieved the wildest coverage in chirality as well as enantiomers with exceptional level of purity (see Table 14).153 Recently, Streit et al.393 exchanged strong binding bile salt on SWCNTs with ssDNA in a mixture of methanol and water, followed by precipitation with isopropanol. The methods take only 10 minutes with above 90% conversion in the replacement of dispersing agent. It was shown that subsequent ATPE on such dispersant-exchanged dispersion maintained the sorting ability of ssDNA in terms of chirality and handedness. It is anticipated that such an exchange process paves the way for the commercial application of ssDNA-assisted ATPE since the original bile salt-dispersed SWCNTs dispersion has very high concentration (10 mg mL−1).
ATPE is regarded as one of the potential techniques appropriate for future commercial applications because of high selectivity in chirality and handedness, broad coverage of diameter separation, and facile process. However, the removal of the polymers as well as other additives used in the process has been proven to be nontrivial.393
Among all of the post-synthesis techniques in purification of SWCNTs, GC and ATPE seem to have the highest selectivity and greatest potential to be applied on an industrial scale. Overall, liquid processing-based techniques generally provide high yield of separated SWCNTs as compared to the selective breakdown. However, the removal of the introduced additives could be time consuming and complicated. In addition, the preparation of SWCNTs normally include labour-intensive sonication and centrifugation processes. Such processes usually reduce the length of pristine SWCNTs, which is known to show adverse influence on the properties of the materials.

4. Conclusion and perspectives
Single electronic type/chirality pure nanotubes are of paramount importance for their wide-ranging advanced applications. Great efforts have been devoted to obtain samples with highly enriched nanotubes species through both direct controlled synthesis and post-synthesis separation approaches. To this end, several critical parameters have been identified to play critical roles in controlling the chirality selection and recognition during the growth/separation process. This includes CVD conditions (i.e. growth temperature, carbon source feeding, system pressure), substrates, size, chemical nature and structure of the catalysts, polymer/surfactant type, centrifugation parameters, etc. Significant progress has been made in understanding the relationship between those parameters and the chirality selectivity in SWCNTs which has undoubtedly resulted in considerable improvements toward the realization of nanotubes with well-defined properties. Up-to-now, a variety of seeds and templets such as fullerenes for the structure-controlled growth of SWCNTs have been intensively explored. In addition, several approaches have also been proposed and implemented such as cloning and organic synthesis routes (i.e. cap formation and carbon nanorings). Moreover, a number of strategies have been developed in which high selectivity towards specific type/chirality has been achieved such as growth selective etching and catalyst engineering.
On the other hand, intensive studies have been performed to develop a simple, rapid and effective post purification methods to achieve high-throughput SWCNTs separation with reasonable purity and yield. Indeed, these efforts have seen the development of various promising separation techniques such as those based on solution processed approaches (e.g. ion exchange chromatography and density gradient ultracentrifugation) and selective destruction (e.g. electrical breakdown and laser irradiation).
Despite these achievements, many challenges still remain. First, the low yield obtained from seeded growth methods is a clear limitation that can be solved by optimizing the growth and pre-treatments conditions to effectively activate ends of seeds. Second, catalysts have been found to be very crucial for controlled growth of SWCNTs. The selectivity of catalysts relies on several factors including diameter, composition, morphology and properties (i.e. melting point). Therefore, it is important to design catalysts with controlled diameter and structure that match with the desired nanotube species and most importantly with high melting point to maintain their structure fixed at high temperatures during the epitaxial growth of chirality-pure SWCNTs. Tungsten-based bimetallic compounds (e.g. W6Co7) used as catalysts are suitable candidates for chirality-controlled growth of nanotubes, since they possess high melting points and unique atomic arrangements. Nevertheless, while these catalysts showed excellent selectivity towards large diameter nanotubes, other solid-state catalysts with high melting points and various structures are needed to grow various chiral species required for many applications. Third, the CVD conditions need also to be taken into consideration. Optimization of CVD parameters is critical to obtain the proper environment that is suitable for the nucleation and growth. The required properties of the catalysts for selective should also be explored further. Fourth, in spite of the current characterization techniques used to determine the abundance of chiral species in the resulting samples such as Raman spectroscopy, TEM, absorption spectroscopy, PL, and electron diffraction, there is a real necessity for developing other techniques that are more reliable, accurate, convenient and fast, particularly for large diameter species. Fifth, it is noted that recent efforts have focused on the s-SWCNTs fractions for their wide range of applications, however, m-SWCNTs are of great importance for other applications such as interconnects. Sixth, despite the considerable achievements and progress in separating SWCNTs based on their electrical type, diameter, length, chirality and even handedness using the various post-synthesis purification techniques, the underlying mechanisms behind the selectivity of the nanotubes targeted and the parameters involved in the process are not fully understood. Further investigations with profound insights into the mechanism of these techniques are required to simplify the separation protocols, enhance the purity and yield of the separated nanotubes and to extend the functionality of these methods to chirally separate the nanotubes instead of only being able to separate them on the basis of their electrical type (e.g. gas phase etching and microwave-assisted purification). Seventh, despite the exceptional purity and large-scale capability of several post-synthesis methods such as gel chromatography and polymer-wrapping, the high cost associated with their chemicals and their relatively low yield (well below the industrial level: 1 mg mL−1) make them scientifically and commercially inapplicable. As such, scalable and high yield methods are still need to be developed.
While SWCNTs-based applications have undoubtedly experienced dramatic advances in recent years, it is likely to see further improvements in the near future as a result of the increased availability of single type/chirality nanotubes with high purity, yield and low-cost.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Abdulaziz Bati acknowledges Saudi Arabian Cultural Mission (SACM) and the Ministry of Education of Saudi Arabia for their financial support during his study in Australia. The support of the Australian Research Council Discovery Program (DP160101301) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, X. Bai, E. Wang and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4565–4583 CrossRef CAS .

          M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus and P. C. Eklund, Science of fullerenes and carbon nanotubes: their properties and applications, Academic Press,  1996 Search PubMed .
N. Martín, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601102 CrossRef .
C. B. Jacobs, M. J. Peairs and B. J. Venton, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2010, 662, 105–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, K. Chen, C. Davis, S. Sherlock, Q. Cao, X. Chen and H. Dai, Cancer Res., 2008, 68, 6652–6660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Heister, E. W. Brunner, G. R. Dieckmann, I. Jurewicz and A. B. Dalton, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1870–1891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, P. Thordarson, J. J. Gooding, S. P. Ringer and F. Braet, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 412001 CrossRef .
L. Hu, D. S. Hecht and G. Gruner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5790–5844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dillon, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6856–6872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ouyang, J.-L. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1018–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Samsonidze, A. Grüneis, R. Saito, A. Jorio, A. Souza Filho, G. Dresselhaus and M. Dresselhaus, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 205402 CrossRef .
X. Peng, N. Komatsu, S. Bhattacharya, T. Shimawaki, S. Aonuma, T. Kimura and A. Osuka, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sato, Y. Tatsumi and R. Saito, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95, 155436 CrossRef .
N. Komatsu and F. Wang, Materials, 2010, 3, 3818–3844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kong, E. Yenilmez, T. W. Tombler, W. Kim, H. Dai, R. B. Laughlin, L. Liu, C. Jayanthi and S. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 106801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Javey, J. Guo, Q. Wang, M. Lundstrom and H. Dai, Nature, 2003, 424, 654–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Green and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1417–1422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Jackson, A. Munro, K. Nebesny, N. Armstrong and S. Graham, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1377–1384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Miyata, K. Yanagi, Y. Maniwa and H. Kataura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3591–3596 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Tey, X. Ho and J. Wei, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 548 CrossRef PubMed .
P. R. Bandaru, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 1239–1267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, J. Appenzeller, J. Knoch, Y.-m. Lin and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1497–1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liang, M. Bockrath, D. Bozovic, J. H. Hafner, M. Tinkham and H. Park, Nature, 2001, 411, 665–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Blackburn, T. M. Barnes, M. C. Beard, Y.-H. Kim, R. C. Tenent, T. J. McDonald, B. To, T. J. Coutts and M. J. Heben, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1266–1274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Grüner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 133112 CrossRef .
M. Fuhrer, J. Nygård, L. Shih, M. Forero, Y.-G. Yoon, H. J. Choi, J. Ihm, S. G. Louie, A. Zettl and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2000, 288, 494–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yanagi, H. Udoguchi, S. Sagitani, Y. Oshima, T. Takenobu, H. Kataura, T. Ishida, K. Matsuda and Y. Maniwa, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4027–4032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Topinka, M. W. Rowell, D. Goldhaber-Gordon, M. D. McGehee, D. S. Hecht and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1866–1871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Abdurakhmanova, A. Mueller, S. Stepanow, S. Rauschenbach, M. Jansen, K. Kern and K. Y. Amsharov, Carbon, 2015, 84, 444–447 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Xu, R.-X. Dai, Y. Xin, Y.-L. Sun, X. Li, Y.-X. Yu, L. Xiang, D. Xie, S.-D. Wang and T.-L. Ren, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 6751 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Puchades, C. C. Lawlor, C. M. Schauerman, A. R. Bucossi, J. E. Rossi, N. D. Cox and B. J. Landi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10256–10266 RSC .
T. M. Barnes, J. L. Blackburn, J. van de Lagemaat, T. J. Coutts and M. J. Heben, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jackson, B. Domercq, R. Jain, B. Kippelen and S. Graham, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2548–2554 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Choi, J. Ihm, S. G. Louie and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 2917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Dürkop, S. Getty, E. Cobas and M. Fuhrer, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 35–39 CrossRef .
T. Dürkop, T. Brintlinger and M. Fuhrer, AIP Conf. Proc., 2002, 633, 242–246 CrossRef .
P. L. McEuen, M. S. Fuhrer and H. Park, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2002, 99, 78–85 CrossRef .
M. C. LeMieux, M. Roberts, S. Barman, Y. W. Jin, J. M. Kim and Z. Bao, Science, 2008, 321, 101–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. McEuen, M. Bockrath, D. H. Cobden, Y.-G. Yoon and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 5098–5101 CrossRef CAS .
P. Avouris, Z. Chen and V. Perebeinos, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 605–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. McEuen and J.-Y. Park, MRS Bull., 2004, 29, 272–275 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saito, M. Fujita, G. Dresselhaus and u. M. Dresselhaus, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1992, 60, 2204–2206 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, D. Nishide, T. Tanaka and H. Kataura, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 309 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Ng, L. T. Hartadi, H. Tan and C. P. Poa, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 205703 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-Z. Geng, K. K. Kim, K. P. So, Y. S. Lee, Y. Chang and Y. H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7758–7759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gruner, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3533–3539 RSC .
D. S. Hecht, A. M. Heintz, R. Lee, L. Hu, B. Moore, C. Cucksey and S. Risser, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 075201 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Lu, W. Wang, K. S. Fernando, M. J. Meziani, E. Myers and Y.-P. Sun, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 497, 57–61 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rahy, P. Bajaj, I. H. Musselman, S. H. Hong, Y.-P. Sun and D. J. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 7084–7089 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Fedotov, V. A. Eremina, A. A. Tonkikh, A. I. Chernov and E. D. Obraztsova, Phys. Status SolidiB, 2016, 253, 2400–2405 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Maeda, M. Hashimoto, S. Kaneko, M. Kanda, T. Hasegawa, T. Tsuchiya, T. Akasaka, Y. Naitoh, T. Shimizu and H. Tokumoto, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4189–4192 RSC .
S. Berber, Y. K. Kwon and D. Tománek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 4613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong and J. R. Lukes, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 125403 CrossRef .
D. Estrada and E. Pop, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 073102 CrossRef .
A. M. Marconnet, M. A. Panzer and K. E. Goodson, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2013, 85, 1295 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pop, D. Mann, Q. Wang, K. Goodson and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 96–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Z. Zhu, F. Wang, T. Wang, L. Sun and Z. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 936 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Imtani, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2013, 74, 1599–1603 CrossRef .
F. Lian, J. P. Llinas, Z. Li, D. Estrada and E. Pop, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 103101 CrossRef .
L. E. Bell, Science, 2008, 321, 1457–1461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nakai, K. Honda, K. Yanagi, H. Kataura, T. Kato, T. Yamamoto and Y. Maniwa, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 025103 CrossRef .
K. Sun, S. Zhang, P. Li, Y. Xia, X. Zhang, D. Du, F. H. Isikgor and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 4438–4462 CrossRef CAS .
B. Roche, P. Roulleau, T. Jullien, Y. Jompol, I. Farrer, D. A. Ritchie and D. Glattli, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Poudel, Q. Hao, Y. Ma, Y. Lan, A. Minnich, B. Yu, X. Yan, D. Wang, A. Muto and D. Vashaee, Science, 2008, 320, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Harman, P. Taylor, M. Walsh and B. LaForge, Science, 2002, 297, 2229–2232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Snyder and E. S. Toberer, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus, X. Sun, Z. Zhang, S. Cronin and T. Koga, Phys. Solid State, 1999, 41, 679–682 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nonoguchi, K. Ohashi, R. Kanazawa, K. Ashiba, K. Hata, T. Nakagawa, C. Adachi, T. Tanase and T. Kawai, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3344 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yu, K. Choi, L. Yin and J. C. Grunlan, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7885–7892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hone, M. Llaguno, N. Nemes, A. Johnson, J. Fischer, D. Walters, M. Casavant, J. Schmidt and R. Smalley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 666–668 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bradley, S.-H. Jhi, P. G. Collins, J. Hone, M. L. Cohen, S. Louie and A. Zettl, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 4361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hone, I. Ellwood, M. Muno, A. Mizel, M. L. Cohen, A. Zettl, A. G. Rinzler and R. Smalley, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 1042 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Zhang, J.-F. Li, B.-P. Zhang, K.-F. Yao, W.-S. Liu and H. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 205407 CrossRef .
H. Romero, G. Sumanasekera, G. Mahan and P. Eklund, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 205410 CrossRef .
J. L. Blackburn, A. J. Ferguson, C. Cho and J. C. Grunlan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704386 CrossRef PubMed .
T. M. Tritt and M. Subramanian, MRS Bull., 2006, 31, 188–198 CrossRef .
N. T. Hung, A. R. Nugraha, E. H. Hasdeo, M. S. Dresselhaus and R. Saito, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 165426 CrossRef .
A. D. Avery, B. H. Zhou, J. Lee, E.-S. Lee, E. M. Miller, R. Ihly, D. Wesenberg, K. S. Mistry, S. L. Guillot, B. L. Zink, Y.-H. Kim, J. L. Blackburn and A. J. Ferguson, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16033 CrossRef CAS .
M. Piao, M.-K. Joo, J. Na, Y.-J. Kim, M. Mouis, G. r. Ghibaudo, S. Roth, W.-Y. Kim, H.-K. Jang and G. P. Kennedy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26454–26461 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Itkis, F. Borondics, A. Yu and R. C. Haddon, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 900–904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Dettlaff-Weglikowska, V. Skákalová, R. Graupner, S. H. Jhang, B. H. Kim, H. J. Lee, L. Ley, Y. W. Park, S. Berber and D. Tománek, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5125–5131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hayashi, T. Ueda, Y. Nakai, H. Kyakuno, Y. Miyata, T. Yamamoto, T. Saito, K. Hata and Y. Maniwa, Appl. Phys. Express, 2016, 9, 025102 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Q. Yao, S. Qu, W. Shi and L. Chen, Org. Electron., 2016, 39, 146–152 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qian, E. C. Dickey, R. Andrews and T. Rantell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2868–2870 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Treacy, T. Ebbesen and J. Gibson, Nature, 1996, 381, 678 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Wong, P. E. Sheehan and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1997, 277, 1971–1975 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krishnan, E. Dujardin, T. Ebbesen, P. Yianilos and M. Treacy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 14013 CrossRef CAS .
O. Lourie and H. Wagner, J. Mater. Res., 1998, 13, 2418–2422 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Salvetat, J.-M. Bonard, N. Thomson, A. Kulik, L. Forro, W. Benoit and L. Zuppiroli, Appl. Phys. A, 1999, 69, 255–260 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Tombler, C. Zhou, L. Alexseyev, J. Kong, H. Dai, L. Liu, C. Jayanthi, M. Tang and S.-Y. Wu, Nature, 2000, 405, 769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Walters, L. Ericson, M. Casavant, J. Liu, D. Colbert, K. Smith and R. Smalley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 3803–3805 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liew, X. He and C. Wong, Acta Mater., 2004, 52, 2521–2527 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Xiao, B. A. Gama and J. W. Gillespie, Int. J. Solids Struct., 2005, 42, 3075–3092 CrossRef .
G. Giannopoulos, P. Kakavas and N. Anifantis, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2008, 41, 561–569 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hernández, C. Goze, P. Bernier and A. Rubio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 4502 CrossRef .
B. WenXing, Z. ChangChun and C. WanZhao, Phys. B, 2004, 352, 156–163 CrossRef .
H. Mori, Y. Hirai, S. Ogata, S. Akita and Y. Nakayama, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, L1307 CrossRef CAS .
M. Meo and M. Rossi, Eng. Fract. Mech., 2006, 73, 2589–2599 CrossRef .
C. Li and T.-W. Chou, Int. J. Solids Struct., 2003, 40, 2487–2499 CrossRef .
K. Tserpes and P. Papanikos, Composites, Part B, 2005, 36, 468–477 CrossRef .
A. F. Ávila and G. S. R. Lacerda, Mater. Res., 2008, 11, 325–333 CrossRef .
X. Lu and Z. Hu, Composites, Part B, 2012, 43, 1902–1913 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Awang, E. Mohammadpour and I. D. Muhammad, in Finite Element Modeling of Nanotube Structures, Springer,  2016, pp. 133–155 Search PubMed .
M. Rossi and M. Meo, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2009, 69, 1394–1398 CrossRef CAS .
Y. I. Jhon, C. Kim, M. Seo, W. J. Cho, S. Lee and Y. M. Jhon, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. He, Y. Han, K. Liu, J. Wang, Q. Li, S. Fan and K. Jiang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Qin and L.-M. Peng, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 155431 CrossRef .
Y. Sato, K. Yanagi, Y. Miyata, K. Suenaga, H. Kataura and S. Iijima, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3151–3154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-C. Qin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 31–48 RSC .
A. Hashimoto, K. Suenaga, A. Gloter, K. Urita and S. Iijima, Nature, 2004, 430, 870–873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu and L.-C. Qin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 412, 399–405 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, A. G. Nasibulin, D. P. Brown and E. I. Kauppinen, Carbon, 2007, 45, 662–667 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, H. Jiang, I. V. Anoshkin, L. J. Kauppinen, K. Mustonen, A. G. Nasibulin and E. I. Kauppinen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 102974–102980 RSC .
T. W. Odom, J.-L. Huang, P. Kim and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 1998, 391, 62–64 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Wilder, L. C. Venema, A. G. Rinzler, R. E. Smalley and C. Dekker, Nature, 1998, 391, 59 CrossRef .
L. Venema, V. Meunier, P. Lambin and C. Dekker, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 2991 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Odom, J. L. Huang, P. Kim and C. M. Lieber, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2794–2809 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Lim, A. R. Nugraha, S.-J. Cho, M.-Y. Noh, E.-J. Yoon, H. Liu, J.-H. Kim, H. Telg, E. H. Hároz and G. D. Sanders, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1426–1432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gao, X. Duan, J. Zhang, T. Wu, H. Son, J. Kong and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 750–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fantini, A. Jorio, M. Souza, M. Strano, M. Dresselhaus and M. Pimenta, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 147406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Singh, S. Campidelli, S. Giordani, D. Bonifazi, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2214–2230 RSC .
H. Telg, J. G. Duque, M. Staiger, X. Tu, F. Hennrich, M. M. Kappes, M. Zheng, J. Maultzsch, C. Thomsen and S. K. Doorn, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 904–911 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Dresselhaus and P. Eklund, Adv. Phys., 2000, 49, 705–814 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Sauvajol, E. Anglaret, S. Rols and L. Alvarez, Carbon, 2002, 40, 1697–1714 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lei, K. Ryu, L. G. De-Arco, S. Han, A. Badmaev, D. Farmer, K. Kim, R. Gordon, K. L. Wang and C. Zhou, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 02BC02 Search PubMed .
J. Maultzsch, H. Telg, S. Reich and C. Thomsen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 205438 CrossRef .
P. Araujo and A. Jorio, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2008, 245, 2201–2204 CrossRef CAS .
N. Anderson, A. Hartschuh and L. Novotny, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 577–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, K. Liu, S. Liang, W. Zhou, M. Pierce, F. Wang, L. Peng and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2013, 8, 554–562 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Doorn, L. Zheng, M. J. O'Connell, Y. Zhu, S. Huang and J. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3751–3758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-M. Yang, J. S. Park, K. H. An, S. C. Lim, K. Seo, B. Kim, K. A. Park, S. Han, C. Y. Park and Y. H. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19242–19248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, H. Jiang, P. Laiho and E. I. Kauppinen, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 2517–2525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wenseleers, S. Cambré, J. Čulin, A. Bouwen and E. Goovaerts, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2274–2278 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cambré, B. Schoeters, S. Luyckx, E. Goovaerts and W. Wenseleers, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 207401 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cambre and W. Wenseleers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2764–2768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Fagan, J. Y. Huh, J. R. Simpson, J. L. Blackburn, J. M. Holt, B. A. Larsen and A. R. H. Walker, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3943–3953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Nagy, L. Biró, J. Koltai, P. R. Surján, Á. Szabados and J. Kürti, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2014, 251, 2451–2456 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Nagy, J. Koltai, P. R. Surján, J. Kürti and Á. Szabados, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 5527–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Magg, Y. Kadria-Vili, P. Oulevey, R. B. Weisman and T. Bürgi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 7, 221–225 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Basu-Dutt, M. L. Minus, R. Jain, D. Nepal and S. Kumar, J. Chem. Educ., 2011, 89, 221–229 CrossRef .
M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus, R. Saito and A. Jorio, Phys. Rep., 2005, 409, 47–99 CrossRef .
P. T. Araujo, S. K. Doorn, S. Kilina, S. Tretiak, E. Einarsson, S. Maruyama, H. Chacham, M. A. Pimenta and A. Jorio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 067401 CrossRef PubMed .
M. E. Itkis, D. E. Perea, R. Jung, S. Niyogi and R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3439–3448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, T. Pichler, M. Knupfer, M. Golden, J. Fink, H. Kataura and Y. Achiba, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 045411 CrossRef .
S. R. Sanchez, S. M. Bachilo, Y. Kadria-Vili, C.-W. Lin and R. B. Weisman, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6903–6909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Attal, R. Thiruvengadathan and O. Regev, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 8098–8104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Bachilo, M. S. Strano, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley and R. B. Weisman, Science, 2002, 298, 2361–2366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Oyama, R. Saito, K. Sato, J. Jiang, G. G. Samsonidze, A. Grüneis, Y. Miyauchi, S. Maruyama, A. Jorio and G. Dresselhaus, Carbon, 2006, 44, 873–879 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. O'connell, S. M. Bachilo, C. B. Huffman, V. C. Moore, M. S. Strano, E. H. Haroz, K. L. Rialon, P. J. Boul, W. H. Noon and C. Kittrell, Science, 2002, 297, 593–596 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Nish, J. Y. Hwang, J. Doig and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 640–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Ao, J. K. Streit, J. A. Fagan and M. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16677–16685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Green, M. C. Duch and M. C. Hersam, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 69–77 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, N. Komatsu, T. Kimura and A. Osuka, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2045–2050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dukovic, M. Balaz, P. Doak, N. D. Berova, M. Zheng, R. S. Mclean and L. E. Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9004–9005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, S. M. Bachilo and R. B. Weisman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wei, T. Tanaka, T. Hirakawa, Y. Yomogida and H. Kataura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16068–16071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wei, T. Tanaka, Y. Yomogida, N. Sato, R. Saito and H. Kataura, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, X. Hong, Q. Zhou, C. Jin, J. Li, W. Zhou, J. Liu, E. Wang, A. Zettl and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, J. Yue, X. Lin, D. Li, F. Zhu, X. Yin, J. Zhu, J. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Chen, X. Wang, T. Li, Y. He, X. Dai, P. Liu, Y. Wei, J. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Huang, L. Fan, L. Zhang, Q. Li, S. Fan and K. Jiang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 2721 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, X. Wang, M. Li, X. Liu, X. Zhao, D. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Yang and Y. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 606–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. J. Kim, H. Shan, C. Kittrell, H. Fan, L. M. Ericson, W.-F. Hwang, S. Arepalli, R. H. Hauge and R. E. Smalley, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 997–1002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Smalley, Y. Li, V. C. Moore, B. K. Price, R. Colorado, H. K. Schmidt, R. H. Hauge, A. R. Barron and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15824–15829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, C. Feng, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1673–1677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, C. Wang, X. Tu, B. Liu, L. Chen, M. Zheng and C. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1199 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lin, S. Zhang, Z. Zheng, W. Hu and J. Zhang, Small, 2018, 14, 1800033 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Reich, L. Li and J. Robertson, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2006, 243, 3494–3499 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, J. Zhang, W. Choi, J.-Y. Choi, J. M. Kim, L. Gan and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3343–3349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Rao, T. Li and Y. Wang, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3580–3584 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ibrahim, A. Bachmatiuk, D. Grimm, A. Popov, S. Makharza, M. Knupfer, B. Büchner, G. Cuniberti and M. H. Rümmeli, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10825–10834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Omachi, Y. Segawa and K. Itami, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1378–1389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Omachi, T. Nakayama, E. Takahashi, Y. Segawa and K. Itami, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Povie, Y. Segawa, T. Nishihara, Y. Miyauchi and K. Itami, Science, 2017, 356, 172–175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, J. Liu, H.-B. Li, R. Bhola, E. A. Jackson, L. T. Scott, A. Page, S. Irle, K. Morokuma and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2014, 15, 586–595 CrossRef PubMed .
L. T. Scott, E. A. Jackson, Q. Zhang, B. D. Steinberg, M. Bancu and B. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 134, 107–110 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mueller, K. Y. Amsharov and M. Jansen, Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Carbon Nanostruct., 2012, 20, 401–404 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mueller, K. Y. Amsharov and M. Jansen, Tetrahedron Lett., 2010, 51, 3221–3225 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Sanchez-Valencia, T. Dienel, O. Gröning, I. Shorubalko, A. Mueller, M. Jansen, K. Amsharov, P. Ruffieux and R. Fasel, Nature, 2014, 512, 61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tu, A. R. Hight Walker, C. Y. Khripin and M. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12998–13001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Hároz, J. G. Duque, E. B. Barros, H. Telg, J. R. Simpson, A. R. H. Walker, C. Y. Khripin, J. A. Fagan, X. Tu and M. Zheng, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 205446 CrossRef .
B. Liu, F. Wu, H. Gui, M. Zheng and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 31–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Yuan, L. Wei, K. Goh, D. Yu and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2015, 81, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
D. Takagi, Y. Homma, H. Hibino, S. Suzuki and Y. Kobayashi, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2642–2645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yuan, L. Ding, H. Chu, Y. Feng, T. P. McNicholas and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2576–2579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, Z. Han, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Jin, X. Sun, Y. Zhang, C. Yan and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2987–2990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhaviripudi, E. Mile, S. A. Steiner, A. T. Zare, M. S. Dresselhaus, A. M. Belcher and J. Kong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1516–1517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, H. Jiang, B. Liu, P. V. Fedotov, A. I. Chernov, E. D. Obraztsova, F. Cavalca, J. B. Wagner, T. W. Hansen and I. V. Anoshkin, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1460 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Bachilo, L. Balzano, J. E. Herrera, F. Pompeo, D. E. Resasco and R. B. Weisman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11186–11187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lolli, L. Zhang, L. Balzano, N. Sakulchaicharoen, Y. Tan and D. E. Resasco, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2108–2115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, X. Wang, D. Zhang, K. Qi, J. Yang, Z. Xu, M. Li, X. Zhao, X. Bai and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8688–8691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, A. I. Chernov, P. V. Fedotov, E. D. Obraztsova, J. Sainio, E. Rikkinen, H. Jiang, Z. Zhu, Y. Tian and E. I. Kauppinen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13994–13996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Thurakitseree, E. Einarsson, R. Xiang, P. Zhao, S. Aikawa, S. Chiashi, J. Shiomi and S. Maruyama, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 370–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Tu, S. Zaric, K. Welsher, W. S. Seo, W. Zhao and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15770–15771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, H. Jiang, T. Susi, A. G. Nasibulin and E. I. Kauppinen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 133, 1224–1227 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Mora, J. M. Pigos, F. Ding, B. I. Yakobson and A. R. Harutyunyan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11840–11841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, W. Ren, S. Li, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2409–2411 RSC .
C. Z. Loebick, S. Derrouiche, N. Marinkovic, C. Wang, F. Hennrich, M. M. Kappes, G. L. Haller and L. D. Pfefferle, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21611–21620 CrossRef .
C. Z. Loebick, S. Derrouiche, F. Fang, N. Li, G. L. Haller and L. D. Pfefferle, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 368, 40–49 CrossRef .
M. He, P. V. Fedotov, A. Chernov, E. D. Obraztsova, H. Jiang, N. Wei, H. Cui, J. Sainio, W. Zhang and H. Jin, Carbon, 2016, 108, 521–528 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, P. V. Fedotov, E. D. Obraztsova, V. Viitanen, J. Sainio, H. Jiang, E. I. Kauppinen, M. Niemelä and J. Lehtonen, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4294–4297 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ishigami, H. Ago, K. Imamoto, M. Tsuji, K. Iakoubovskii and N. Minami, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9918–9924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fouquet, B. C. Bayer, S. Esconjauregui, R. Blume, J. Warner, S. Hofmann, R. Schlögl, C. Thomsen and J. Robertson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 235411 CrossRef .
M. He, A. I. Chernov, P. V. Fedotov, E. D. Obraztsova, E. Rikkinen, Z. Zhu, J. Sainio, H. Jiang, A. G. Nasibulin and E. I. Kauppinen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1219–1221 RSC .
H. Wang, B. Wang, X.-Y. Quek, L. Wei, J. Zhao, L.-J. Li, M. B. Chan-Park, Y. Yang and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16747–16749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Wei, F. Ren, Q. Wang, L. D. Pfefferle, G. L. Haller and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 7, 614–626 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, F. Ren, C. Liu, R. Si, D. Yu, L. D. Pfefferle, G. L. Haller and Y. Chen, J. Catal., 2013, 300, 91–101 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Yang, X. Sui, H. E. Karahan, X. Wang and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2018, 129, 128–136 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, H. E. Karahan, C. Yıldırım, L. Wei, Ö. Birer, S. Zhai, R. Lau and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17705–17713 RSC .
W.-H. Chiang and R. M. Sankaran, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kang, S. Deng, S. Zhang, Q. Li and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12723–12726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, L. Kang, X. Wang, L. Tong, L. Yang, Z. Wang, K. Qi, S. Deng, Q. Li and X. Bai, Nature, 2017, 543, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, X. Wang, D. Zhang, J. Yang, D. Luo, Z. Xu, J. Wei, J.-Q. Wang, Z. Xu, F. Peng, X. Li, R. Li, Y. Li, M. Li, X. Bai, F. Ding and Y. Li, Nature, 2014, 510, 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, X. Wang, J. Si, X. Zhao, K. Qi, C. Jin, Z. Zhang, M. Li, D. Zhang and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 11, 186–193 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhao, F. Yang, J. Chen, L. Ding, X. Liu, F. Yao, M. Li, D. Zhang, X. Liu and J. Yang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6922–6927 RSC .
G. Zhang, P. Qi, X. Wang, Y. Lu, X. Li, R. Tu, S. Bangsaruntip, D. Mann, L. Zhang and H. Dai, Science, 2006, 314, 974–977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, C.-T. Ke, K. Liu, P. Li, S. Liang, G. Finkelstein, F. Wang and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8564–8572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11815–11821 RSC .
W.-S. Li, P.-X. Hou, C. Liu, D.-M. Sun, J. Yuan, S.-Y. Zhao, L.-C. Yin, H. Cong and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6831–6839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, P. Qi, X. Wang, Y. Lu, D. Mann, X. Li and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6026–6027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yu, C. Liu, P.-X. Hou, Y. Tian, S. Li, B. Liu, F. Li, E. I. Kauppinen and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5232–5235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, S. Zhan, L. Ding and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14019–14026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rao, D. Liptak, T. Cherukuri, B. I. Yakobson and B. Maruyama, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Li-Pook-Than, J. Lefebvre and P. Finnie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6507–6521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Li-Pook-Than and P. Finnie, Carbon, 2015, 89, 232–241 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Koh, E. Gidcumb, O. Zhou and R. Sinclair, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2566–2572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ravaux, K. Yazda, T. Michel, S. Tahir, M. Odorico, R. Podor and V. Jourdain, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 517–529 CrossRef .
Q. Zhao, F. Yao, Z. Wang, S. Deng, L. Tong, K. Liu and J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701959 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, Q. Zhao, L. Tong and J. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 27655–27663 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miyata, Y. Maniwa and H. Kataura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Chiang, M. Sakr, X. P. Gao and R. M. Sankaran, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4023–4032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qin, F. Peng, F. Yang, X. He, H. Huang, D. Luo, J. Yang, S. Wang, H. Liu, L. Peng and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kang, Y. Hu, L. Liu, J. Wu, S. Zhang, Q. Zhao, F. Ding, Q. Li and J. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2014, 15, 403–409 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, P.-X. Hou, C. Liu, B.-W. Wang, H. Jiang, M.-L. Chen, D.-M. Sun, J.-C. Li, H.-T. Cong, E. I. Kauppinen and H.-M. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, D. M. Sun, P. X. Hou, C. Liu, T. Liu, J. Wen, N. Tang, J. Luan, C. Shi and J. C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605719 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Jin, Z. Liu, G. Yu, Q. Ji, H. Wei, J. Zhang, K. Zhang, D. Li, Z. Yuan, J. Li, P. Liu, W. Yang, Y. Wei, J. Wang, Q. Li, L. Zhang, J. Kong, S. Fan and K. Jiang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 326–331 CrossRef .
M. Cheng, B.-W. Wang, P.-X. Hou, J.-C. Li, F. Zhang, J. Luan, H.-T. Cong, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2018, 135, 195–201 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Harutyunyan, G. Chen, T. M. Paronyan, E. M. Pigos, O. A. Kuznetsov, K. Hewaparakrama, S. M. Kim, D. Zakharov, E. A. Stach and G. U. Sumanasekera, Science, 2009, 326, 116–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Sundaram, K. K. Koziol and A. H. Windle, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5064–5068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Q. Zhao, G.-L. Tian, Q. Zhang, J.-Q. Huang, J.-Q. Nie and F. Wei, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2470–2477 RSC .
J. Li, K. Otsuka, X. Zhang, S. Maruyama and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14156–14162 RSC .
P.-X. Hou, W.-S. Li, S.-Y. Zhao, G.-X. Li, C. Shi, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7156–7162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Cao, D. Wei, Y. Wang, H. Kajiura, Y. Li, K. Noda, G. Luo and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 813–816 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohashi and T. Shima, Carbon, 2015, 87, 453–461 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohashi, H. Iwama and T. Shima, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 084303 CrossRef .
B. Wang, C. H. P. Poa, L. Wei, L. Li, Y. Yang and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9014–9019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ding, A. Tselev, J. Wang, D. Yuan, H. Chu, T. P. McNicholas, Y. Li and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 800–805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liao, H. Jiang, N. Wei, P. Laiho, Q. Zhang, S. A. Khan and E. I. Kauppinen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lu and J. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20254–20257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qi, D. Yuan and J. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6158–6160 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Li, L. Cao, D. Wei, H. Zhang, D. Shi, G. Yu, H. Kajiura and Y. Li, Small, 2007, 3, 1486–1490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, L. Wei, L. Yao, L.-J. Li, Y. Yang and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14612–14616 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, D. Ciuparu, S. Lim, Y. Yang, G. L. Haller and L. Pfefferle, J. Catal., 2004, 225, 453–465 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, Z. Xu, Y. Hu, F. Ding and J. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501729 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Janas, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 36–63 RSC .
P. L. He, B. Meany, C. Y. Wang, Y. Piao, H. Kwon, S. L. Deng and Y. H. Wang, Electrophoresis, 2017, 38, 1669–1677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jang, S. Kim, H. Jeong and S. Y. Ju, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 41LT01 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Lee, S. H. Lee, J. Kim, S. Y. Lee, D. H. Lim, K. Hwang, H. Hwang, Y. C. Jung, Y. Y. Noh and D. Y. Kim, Carbon, 2017, 125, 571–581 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wei, T. Tanaka, T. Hirakawa, Y. Yomogida and H. Kataura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16068–16071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zheng, Top. Curr. Chem., 2017, 375, 13 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Penzo, M. Palma, D. A. Chenet, G. Y. Ao, M. Zheng, J. C. Hone and S. J. Wind, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2975–2981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Y. Liu, J. P. Nshimiyimana, Y. Deng, G. Hou, X. N. Chi, X. Hu, Z. Z. Zhang, P. Wu, G. T. Wang, W. G. Chu and L. F. Sun, Small, 2017, 13, 1701218 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. C. Zhao, Z. Q. Wang, L. M. Tong, Z. Zheng, W. P. Hu and J. Zhang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 157–162 RSC .
A. Javey, P. F. Qi, Q. Wang and H. J. Dai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 13408–13410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Murali, Y. X. Yang, K. Brenner, T. Beck and J. D. Meindl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 243114 CrossRef .
P. C. Collins, M. S. Arnold and P. Avouris, Science, 2001, 292, 706–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Radosavljević, J. Lefebvre and A. T. Johnson, Phys. Rev. B, 2001, 64, 241307 CrossRef .
R. V. Seidel, A. P. Graham, B. Rajasekharan, E. Unger, M. Liebau, G. S. Duesberg, F. Kreupl and W. Hoenlein, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 6694–6699 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Buh, J. H. Hwang, E. K. Jeon, H. M. So, J. O. Lee, K. J. Kong and H. Chang, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2008, 7, 624–627 Search PubMed .
J. H. Lim, N. Phiboolsirichit, S. Mubeen, Y. Rheem, M. A. Deshusses, A. Mulchandani and N. V. Myung, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 99–105 CrossRef CAS .
K. Otsuka, T. Inoue, S. Chiashi and S. Maruyama, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8831–8835 RSC .
B. Aissa, M. Nedil, M. A. Habib, E. H. Abdul-Hafidh and F. Rosei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 328, 349–355 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Li, A. D. Franklin and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6058–6065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Otsuka, T. Inoue, E. Maeda, R. Kometani, S. Chiashi and S. Maruyama, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11497–11504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Otsuka, T. Inoue, Y. Shimomura, S. Chiashi and S. Maruyama, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3248–3260 CrossRef CAS .
N. Patil, A. Lin, J. Zhang, H. Wei, K. Anderson, H. S. P. Wong and S. Mitra, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2011, 10, 744–750 Search PubMed .
K. Matsui, H. Tsuji and A. Makino, Combust. Flame, 1986, 63, 415–427 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Shulaker, J. Van Rethy, G. Hills, H. Wei, H. Y. Chen, G. Gielen, H. S. P. Wong and S. Mitra, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, 2014, 49, 190–201 Search PubMed .
M. Yudasaka, M. Zhang and S. Iijima, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 374, 132–136 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kataura, Y. Kumazawa, Y. Maniwa, I. Umezu, S. Suzuki, Y. Ohtsuka and Y. Achiba, Synth. Met., 1999, 103, 2555–2558 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maehashi, Y. Ohno, K. Inoue and K. Matsumoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 858–860 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Huang, R. Maruyama, K. Noda, H. Kajiura and K. Kadono, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7316–7320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. J. Xian, J. Zhang and Z. F. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3849–3856 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zandian, R. Kumar, J. Theiss, A. Bushmaker and S. B. Cronin, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1292–1296 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mahjouri-Samani, Y. S. Zhou, W. Xiong, Y. Gao, M. Mitchell and Y. F. Lu, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 495202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Roch, T. Roch, E. R. Talens, B. Kaiser, A. Lasagni, E. Beyer, O. Jost, G. Cuniberti and A. Leson, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2014, 45, 70–75 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Strano, C. A. Dyke, M. L. Usrey, P. W. Barone, M. J. Allen, H. W. Shan, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, J. M. Tour and R. E. Smalley, Science, 2003, 301, 1519–1522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Song, Y. H. Li, F. Du, X. Xie, Y. G. Huang and J. A. Rogers, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 165102 CrossRef .
S. M. Huang and L. M. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3543–3545 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Li, D. Mann, M. Rolandi, W. Kim, A. Ural, S. Hung, A. Javey, J. Cao, D. W. Wang, E. Yenilmez, Q. Wang, J. F. Gibbons, Y. Nishi and H. J. Dai, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 317–321 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Zhang, P. F. Qi, X. R. Wang, Y. R. Lu, X. L. Li, R. Tu, S. Bangsaruntip, D. Mann, L. Zhang and H. J. Dai, Science, 2006, 314, 974–977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yu, P.-X. Hou, F. Li, B. Liu, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2941–2947 CrossRef CAS .
Q. M. Yu, C. X. Wu and L. H. Guan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4470–4474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, Y. H. Ooi, R. Russo, P. Papanek, D. E. Luzzi, J. E. Fischer, M. J. Bronikowski, P. A. Willis and R. E. Smalley, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 350, 6–14 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, J. J. Zhao and J. P. Lu, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 635–638 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Li, S. Peng, D. Mann, J. Cao, R. Tu, K. J. Cho and H. J. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6968–6971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Seo, K. A. Park, C. Kim, S. Han, B. Kim and Y. H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15724–15729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Herrera and D. E. Resasco, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 376, 302–309 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miyata, T. Kawai, Y. Miyamoto, K. Yanagi, Y. Maniwa and H. Kataura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9671–9677 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, H. Jiang, A. V. Krasheninnikov, A. G. Nasibulin, W. Ren, C. Liu, E. I. Kauppinen and H. M. Cheng, Small, 2013, 9, 1379–1386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Harutyunyan, B. K. Pradhan, J. P. Chang, G. G. Chen and P. C. Eklund, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8671–8675 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vazquez, V. Georgakilas and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2308–2309 RSC .
J. W. Song, H. W. Seo, J. K. Park, J. E. Kim, D. G. Cho and C. S. Han, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2008, 8, 725–728 CrossRef .
H. X. Qiu, Y. Maeda and T. Akasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16529–16533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Priya and H. J. Byrne, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7134–7138 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Shim, J. W. Song, Y. K. Kwak, S. Kim and C. S. Han, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 065707 CrossRef PubMed .
H. X. Qiu, Y. Maeda, T. Akasaka and J. H. Yang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 96, 182–186 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, H. X. Qiu, J. Li, H. J. Zhang, B. Zhao and J. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11222–11228 RSC .
L. X. Benedict, S. G. Louie and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 52, 8541–8549 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Jin, S. N. Dunham, J. Z. Song, X. Xie, J. H. Kim, C. F. Lu, A. Islam, F. Du, J. Kim, J. Felts, Y. H. Li, F. Xiong, M. A. Wahab, M. Menon, E. Cho, K. L. Grosse, D. J. Lee, H. U. Chung, E. Pop, M. A. Alam, W. P. King, Y. G. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 347–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Du, J. R. Felts, X. Xie, J. Z. Song, Y. H. Li, M. R. Rosenberger, A. E. Islam, S. H. Jin, S. N. Dunham, C. X. Zhang, W. L. Wilson, Y. G. Huang, W. P. King and J. A. Rogers, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12641–12649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Song, C. F. Lu, S. H. Jin, S. N. Dunham, X. Xie, J. A. Rogers and Y. G. Huang, J. Appl. Mech., 2015, 82, 071010 CrossRef .
X. Xie, S. H. Jin, M. A. Wahab, A. E. Islam, C. Zhang, F. Du, E. Seabron, T. Lu, S. N. Dunham, H. I. Cheong, Y.-C. Tu, Z. Guo, H. U. Chung, Y. Li, Y. Liu, J.-H. Lee, J. Song, Y. Huang, M. A. Alam, W. L. Wilson and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, M. A. Wahab, Y. Li, A. E. Islam, B. Tomic, J. Huang, B. Burns, E. Seabron, S. N. Dunham and F. Du, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 134303 CrossRef .
S. H. Davis, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 1987, 19, 403–435 CrossRef .
A. D. Franklin, Nature, 2013, 498, 443–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamamoto, S. Akita and Y. Nakayama, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 1996, 35, L917–L918 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamamoto, S. Akita and Y. Nakayama, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1998, 31, L34–L36 CrossRef CAS .
R. Krupke, F. Hennrich, H. von Lohneysen and M. M. Kappes, Science, 2003, 301, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Viefhues and R. Eichhorn, Electrophoresis, 2017, 38, 1483–1506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tanaka, H. H. Jin, Y. Miyata and H. Kataura, Appl. Phys. Express, 2008, 1, 114001 CrossRef .
H. Kang, B. Wang, S. Hong, J. J. Bae, D. Kim, C. S. Han, Y. H. Lee and S. Baik, Synth. Met., 2013, 184, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Mendes, H. K. Schmidt and M. Pasquali, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 7467–7477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Krupke, F. Hennrich, M. M. Kappes and H. V. Lohneysen, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1395–1399 CrossRef CAS .
R. Krupke, S. Linden, M. Rapp and F. Hennrich, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1468–1470 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Kim, M. L. Usrey and M. S. Strano, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1571–1576 CrossRef CAS .
B. Scheibe, M. H. Rummeli, E. Borowiak-Palen and R. J. Kalenczuk, Cent. Eur. J. Phys., 2011, 9, 325–329 CAS .
K. Ihara, H. Endoh, T. Saito and F. Nihey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22827–22832 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mesgari, Y. F. Poon, Y. L. Wang, Y. X. Thong, J. Wang and M. B. Chan-Park, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6813–6823 RSC .
D. A. Heller, R. M. Mayrhofer, S. Baik, Y. V. Grinkova, M. L. Usrey and M. S. Strano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14567–14573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Vetcher, S. Srinivasan, I. A. Vetcher, S. M. Abramov, M. Kozlov, R. H. Baughman and S. D. Levene, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4263–4269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Oh, J. Choi, Y. Kim, K. Kim and S. Baik, Scr. Mater., 2007, 56, 741–744 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, D. Lee, Y. Oh, J. Choi and S. Baik, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 999–1003 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mesgari, Y. F. Poon, L. Y. Yan, Y. Chen, L. S. Loo, Y. X. Thong and M. B. Chan-Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10266–10273 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mesgari, A. K. Sundramoorthy, L. S. Loo and M. B. Chan-Park, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 173, 351–363 RSC .
S. Arnott, A. Fulmer, W. E. Scott, I. C. M. Dea, R. Moorhouse and D. A. Rees, J. Mol. Biol., 1974, 90, 269–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dai, L. Y. Yan, S. M. Alam, J. L. Feng, P. R. D. Mariathomas, Y. A. Chen, C. M. Li, Q. Zhang, L. J. Li, K. H. Lim and M. B. Chan-Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21035–21041 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chattopadhyay, L. Galeska and F. Papadimitrakopoulos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3370–3375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Maeda, S. Kimura, M. Kanda, Y. Hirashima, T. Hasegawa, T. Wakahara, Y. F. Lian, T. Nakahodo, T. Tsuchiya, T. Akasaka, J. Lu, X. W. Zhang, Z. X. Gao, Y. P. Yu, S. Nagase, S. Kazaoui, N. Minami, T. Shimizu, H. Tokumoto and R. Saito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10287–10290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Lee, Y. Yoon, S. Park, J. H. Oh, S. Hong, L. S. Liyanage, H. Wang, S. Morishita, N. Patil, Y. J. Park, J. J. Park, A. Spakowitz, G. Galli, F. Gygi, P. H. S. Wong, J. B. H. Tok, J. M. Kim and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 541 CrossRef PubMed .
F. C. Yang, P. Anilkumar, A. Anderson, L. Cao, M. J. Meziani, A. Parenzan and Y. P. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6800–6804 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gomulya, G. D. Costanzo, E. J. F. de Carvalho, S. Z. Bisri, V. Derenskyi, M. Fritsch, N. Frohlich, S. Allard, P. Gordiichuk, A. Herrmann, S. J. Marrink, M. C. dos Santos, U. Scherf and M. A. Loi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2948–2956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, L. Qian, W. Y. Xu, S. H. Nie, W. B. Gu, J. H. Zhang, J. W. Zhao, J. Lin, Z. Chen and Z. Cui, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4156–4161 RSC .
S. P. Schiessl, N. Frohlich, M. Held, F. Gannott, M. Schweiger, M. Forster, U. Scherf and J. Zaumseil, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 682–689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Rice, A. V. Subrahmanyam, S. E. Laengert and A. Adronov, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015, 53, 2510–2516 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Rice, A. V. Subrahmanyam, B. R. Coleman and A. Adronov, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 5155–5161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, T. D. Nguyen, Q. Cao, Y. Wang, M. Y. Tan and M. B. Chan-Park, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3222–3232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, Q. Ji, H. Li, G. Li, S. Qiu, H.-B. Li, Q. Zhang, H. Jin, Q. Li and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 7683–7686 RSC .
H. C. Chang, J. T. Wang, D. H. Li, C. Lu, H. W. Hsu, H. C. Wu, C. L. Liu and W. C. Chen, Polym. J., 2016, 48, 421–429 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Ding, Z. Li, J. Lefebvre, F. Y. Cheng, G. Dubey, S. Zou, P. Finnie, A. Hrdina, L. Scoles, G. P. Lopinski, C. T. Kingston, B. Simard and P. R. L. Malenfant, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2328–2339 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Xu, K. Perry, A. P. Sokolov, K. More and Y. Pang, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 701–705 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, G. I. Koleilat, P. Liu, G. Jimenez-Oses, Y. C. Lai, M. Vosgueritchian, Y. Fang, S. Park, K. N. Houk and Z. N. Bao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2609–2617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gui, H. T. Chen, C. Y. Khripin, B. L. Liu, J. A. Fagan, C. W. Zhou and M. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3467–3473 RSC .
H. Gui, J. K. Streit, J. A. Fagan, A. R. Hight Walker, C. Zhou and M. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1642–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Arnold, S. I. Stupp and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 713–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Arnold, A. A. Green, J. F. Hulvat, S. I. Stupp and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 60–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Haroz, W. D. Rice, B. Y. Lu, S. Ghosh, R. H. Hauge, R. B. Weisman, S. K. Doorn and J. Kono, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1955–1962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Tyler, T. A. Shastry, B. J. Leever and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4765–4768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. T. Seo, N. L. Yoder, T. A. Shastry, J. J. Humes, J. E. Johns, A. A. Green and M. C. Hersam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2805–2810 CrossRef CAS .
K. Moshammer, F. Hennrich and M. M. Kappes, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 599–606 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanaka, Y. Urabe, D. Nishide and H. Kataura, Appl. Phys. Express, 2009, 2, 125002 CrossRef .
A. J. Blanch, J. S. Quinton and J. G. Shapter, Carbon, 2013, 60, 471–480 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Liu, T. Tanaka, Y. Urabe and H. Kataura, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1996–2003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Flavel, K. E. Moore, M. Pfohl, M. M. Kappes and F. Hennrich, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1817–1826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Liu, T. Tanaka and H. Kataura, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6237–6243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tanaka, Y. Urabe, T. Hirakawa and H. Kataura, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 9467–9472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zeng, J. W. Hu, X. Zhang, N. G. Zhou, W. Y. Zhou, H. P. Liu and S. S. Xie, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16273–16281 RSC .
Y. Yomogida, T. Tanaka, M. Zhang, M. Yudasaka, X. Wei and H. Kataura, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, J. Hu, H. Liu, S. Li, W. Su, Q. Li, N. Zhou, Y. Wang, W. Zhou, S. Xie and H. Kataura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700278 CrossRef .
B. Thendie, H. Omachi, J. Hirotani, Y. Ohno, Y. Miyata and H. Shinohara, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 56, 065102 CrossRef .
X. Zeng, D. Yang, H. Liu, N. Zhou, Y. Wang, W. Zhou, S. Xie and H. Kataura, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1700727 CrossRef .
H. Liu, Y. Feng, T. Tanaka, Y. Urabe and H. Kataura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9270–9276 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanaka, Y. Urabe, D. Nishide, H. Liu, S. Asano, S. Nishiyama and H. Kataura, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2010, 247, 2867–2870 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yahya, F. Bonaccorso, S. K. Clowes, A. C. Ferrari and S. Silva, Carbon, 2015, 93, 574–594 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. G. Clar, L. Li, J. Xu, T. Yuan, J.-C. J. Bonzongo and K. J. Ziegler, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2928–2931 RSC .
G. Wang, X. Wei, T. Tanaka and H. Kataura, Carbon, 2018, 129, 745–749 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Lustig, A. Jagota, C. Khripin and M. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2559–2566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Tu and M. Zheng, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 185–194 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, A. Jagota, E. D. Semke, B. A. Diner, R. S. McLean, S. R. Lustig, R. E. Richardson and N. G. Tassi, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 338–342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zheng, A. Jagota, M. S. Strano, A. P. Santos, P. Barone, S. G. Chou, B. A. Diner, M. S. Dresselhaus, R. S. Mclean and G. B. Onoa, Science, 2003, 302, 1545–1548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zheng and E. D. Semke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6084–6085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Tu, S. Manohar, A. Jagota and M. Zheng, Nature, 2009, 460, 250–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Tu, A. R. H. Walker, C. Y. Khripin and M. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12998–13001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shankar, M. Zheng and A. Jagota, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 17479–17487 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Khripin, J. A. Fagan and M. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6822–6825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Subbaiyan, S. Cambre, A. N. G. Parra-Vasquez, E. H. Haroz, S. K. Doorn and J. G. Duque, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1619–1628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Fagan, C. Y. Khripin, C. A. S. Batista, J. R. Simpson, E. H. Haroz, A. R. H. Walker and M. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2800–2804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, C. Y. Khripin, J. A. Fagan, P. McPhie, Y. Ito and M. Zheng, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 3980–3984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Fagan, E. H. Haroz, R. Ihly, H. Gui, J. L. Blackburn, J. R. Simpson, S. Lam, A. R. H. Walker, S. K. Doorn and M. Zheng, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5377–5390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wei, B. S. Flavel, W. S. Li, R. Krupke and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 11640–11646 RSC .
V. A. Eremina, P. A. Obraztsov, P. V. Fedotov, A. I. Chernov and E. D. Obraztsova, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2017, 254, 1600659 CrossRef .
G. Y. Ao, C. Y. Khripin and M. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10383–10392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Streit, J. A. Fagan and M. Zheng, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 10496–10503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zaumseil, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2015, 30, 074001 CrossRef .
M.-F. Yu, O. Lourie, M. J. Dyer, K. Moloni, T. F. Kelly and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2000, 287, 637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-F. Yu, B. S. Files, S. Arepalli and R. S. Ruoff, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, J. Liu, X. Tu, J. Zhang, M. Zheng and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, C. Yamada, J. Liu, B. Liu, X. Tu, M. Zheng, C. Zhou and Y. Homma, Carbon, 2015, 95, 497 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Yuan, L. Wei, K. Goh, D. Yu and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2015, 81, 1 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ghorannevis, T. Kato, T. Kaneko and R. Hatakeyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Abdulaziz S. R. Bati	Abdulaziz Bati obtained his Masters degree in Nanotechnology from the Flinders University of South Australia in 2017. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the Australian Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (University of Queensland) under the supervision of Professor Joe Shapter. His research interests mainly focus on carbon-based hybrid nanomaterials and their applications in photovoltaics, particularly perovskite solar cells.
LePing Yu	LePing Yu received his Masters and Ph.D. degrees in 2014 and 2018, respectively under the supervision of Professor Joe Shapter from the Flinders University of South Australia. He did his early education in China and obtained “Bachelor of Science” degree from East China University of Science and Technology in 2012. His research interests include photovoltaics, nanomaterials, and characterization at the nanoscale.
Munkhbayar Batmunkh	Munkhbayar Batmunkh obtained his PhD from the University of Adelaide in 2017. He is currently a research fellow at the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN) at the University of Queensland, in Australia. Until recently, he was a postdoctoral researcher at the Flinders University of South Australia. His research interests focus on exploring the production of functional nanomaterials, especially nanocarbons and 2D materials, for photovoltaic applications.
Joseph G. Shapter	Joe Shapter obtained his Ph. D. from the University of Toronto in 1990. From 1990 to 1996, he worked at the University of Western Ontario (London, Ontario) and in 1996, he moved to Flinders University and became Professor of Nanotechnology and was Dean of the School of Chemical and Physical Sciences until the end of 2016. In early 2018, he took up a role as Pro Vice Chancellor (Research Infrastructure) at the University of Queensland and is a Senior Group Leader in the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology. Our group makes nanomaterials and uses physical techniques to examine the properties of these systems. Work with carbon nanomaterials is also an active area of research in our group. These materials have been used for applications in areas such as sensing and solar cells.
Ch = na1 + ma2	(1)
dt = a(n2 + m2 + nm)1/2/π,	(2)
θ = tan−1[31/2m/(2n + m)]	(3)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Representation of graphene sheet. (b) Schematic illustration of armchair, chiral and zigzag SWCNTs configurations. (c) Armchair, zigzag, and chiral SWCNTs. R and L describe the handedness of SWCNTs as defined in (d). (d) Chirality map illustrating the rolling up of graphene sheet to produce left-and right-handed armchair. (c, d) Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2010, MDPI.	 

 	Fig. 2  Effect of varying the ratio of metallic (white) and semiconducting (green) networks on the current flow. (a–e) The ratio of s-SWCNTs was varied while the tube density, length, locations, and orientations in the networks were constant. (f) Expected conductance as a function of s-SWCNTs loading. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 
Eg = 2γ0aC–C/dt = 0.9 eV/dt

 	Fig. 3  (a) Electronic properties of small diameter s-SWCNTs (6,5), large diameter s-SWCNTs (10,5) and m-SWCNTs (11,2). (b) Separated samples and their corresponding colours. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group.	 


Mixture	78	167 × 103	72	61 × 103	69	14 × 103
Semiconducting	82	175 × 103	79	95 × 103	75	1493
Metallic	85	403	82	262	80	130 ± 5

 	Fig. 4  (a) Thermal conductivities of different SWCNT films including values. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2016, American Institute of Physics. (b) Theoretical study on the thermopower as a function of the SWCNT diameter. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2015, American Physical Society. (c) Theoretical predicted thermopower of different SWCNTs chiralities. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Experimental and theoretical measurements of thermopowers as a function of different s-SWCNTs loadings from two studies. Adapted from ref. 81 and 63. (e) Experimental and calculated values of the Seebeck coefficients m- and s-SWCNTs/PANI composite as a function of different nanotubes contents. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (f) Young's modulus as a function of SWCNT diameter for armchair, zigzag and chiral. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 
ZT = (S2σ/k)T,

SWCNTs	Experimental396	320–1470 (mean: 1006)	13–52 (mean: 30)	<0.053

Armchair

5,5100	MM	0.894	123.0	0.216
5,5106	MM	0.920	117.3	0.199
10,10106	MM	0.920	117.2	0.200
10,1094	MD	1.043	140.4	0.280

Zigzag

9,0100	MM	0.939	94.0	0.164

Chiral

12,8107	MD	0.966	117.098 ± 1.377	0.176

 	Fig. 5  (a) Typical Raman spectra of SWCNTs. Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) G band split of semiconducting and metallic nanotubes. Adapted from ref. 143. Copyright 2005, American Physical Society. (c) Kataura plot. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2007, American Physical Society. (d) Near-field Raman image. (e) Corresponding topography image of an isolated SWCNT, where the optical resolution was determined to be 40 nm (the inset displays two cross-sectional profiles acquired from both the upper and lower sections). (f) Shows a series of tip-enhanced Raman spectra acquired along the length of the SWCNT. Figures d–f reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (g) RBMs of IPA-synthesized SWCNTs and (h) RBMs of ethanol-synthesized SWCNTs using a 533 nm laser. (g and h) Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 6  (a–e) AFM height images and analysis of a starting short SWCNT before and after its amplified growth. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic diagram illustrating the cloning process. (g) AFM height images and profiles of original SWCNT and the cloned ones. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic illustration of the VPE growth approach. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. (i and j) SEM images of the air plasma treated SWCNT (i) before regeneration (j) after regeneration, and (k) their corresponding RBM spectra. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic showing the growth of SWCNT using fragmented C60 as an initiating cap. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) Structure of armchair, chiral, and zigzag SWCNTs and their shortest sidewall segments. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the two-step bottom-up synthesis of SWCNTs in which the first step involves the formation of singly capped ultrashort (6,6) seed and followed by epitaxial elongation of nanotubes. Reproduced with permission.179 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Contour plots of normalized PL intensities for the CoMoCAT sample (top frame) and the HiPco sample (bottom frame). Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. (b) HR-TEM image of the resulting lattice-mismatched epitaxy between Co NPs and MgO matrix. Reproduced with permission.188 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (c) The change of (n,m) abundance at different catalyst calcination temperatures. Reproduced with permission.207 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (d) A chiral map of nanotubes species identified in the PL plots. (e) UV–vis–NIR spectra of the dispersed SWCNTs in SDBS. (d and e). Reproduced with permission.208 Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Two-step controlled growth of SWCNTs chirality in ethanol by CVD. Reproduced with permission.212 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Illustration of the preparation of W–Co catalyst and the templated growth of a SWCNT with specified (n,m). (c) In situ HR-TEM images of W–Co catalyst taken at 1100 °C in vacuum. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (d) DFT simulation used to fit SWCNTs on W6Co7 nanocrystal. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) DFT simulation of interfaces between (14,4) SWCNT and the (1 0 10) plane of W6Co7 (top view, right; side view, left). (f) Relative abundances of various nanotube species from Raman measurements. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (g) Abundance of (14,4) SWCNTs as a function of W/Co ratios (estimated by Raman measurements). Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the ERN system. (b) Steps involved in twisting metallic SWCNTs by reversing the electric field into semiconducting SWCNTs. Reproduced with permission.236 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (c–h) Schematic representation of the s-SWCNTs grown from a SiC catalyst. Reproduced with permission.237 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Normalized PL map for SWCNTs produced under CO pressure from 2 to 18 bar. Reproduced with permission.252 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (b) Normalized PL emission intensities of SWCNTs grown at temperatures of 600, 750, and 800 °C. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the tandem plate CVD method. (d) DFT calculation of the interfacial formation energy between SWCNT and a series of catalysts (Fe, Co, and Ni). Reproduced with permission.254 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 


M/S	N/A	SEM; transistor properties	The on/off ratio of the resulting devices is up to above 104.	
266

M/S	N/A	SEM; transistor properties	The application of the electrical breakdown in the assessment of metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs contents.	
268

M/S	N/A	SEM; transistor properties	The application of the electrical breakdown in the fabrication of sensors for NH3.	
270

M/S	N/A	SEM; AFM; Raman; transistor properties	Long distance removal (up to 16.4 μm) of metallic SWCNTs has been realized.	
271

M/S	N/A	SEM; transistor properties	Gate-free electrical breakdown is realized.	
273

M/S	N/A	SEM; transistor properties	Electrical breakdown is applied in the fabrication of suspended SWCNT arrays in a wafer scale.	
262

M/S	99.8% by calculation	SEM; transistor properties	A fast burning rate of approximately 1000 m s−1 is achieved by water and polymer assisted electrical breakdown.	
275

M/S	N/A	SEM; Raman; transistor properties	Full-length removal (up to 16.4 μm) of metallic SWCNTs was achieved with the estimated packing density to be about 100 SWCNTs μm−1.	
274


 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM images and schemes and (b) conductance (G in μS) versus gate voltage (Vg in V) of SWCNT ropes before and after electrical breakdown. Reproduced with permission.266 Copyright 2001, AAAS. (c) The process of junction-based electrical breakdown. Reproduced with permission.273 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of full-length removal of metallic SWCNTs in an array. Reproduced with permission.274 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 


Diameter	N/A	3 × 105	488	Raman	
279


M/S	515
Chirality	N/A	2 × 104	514.5	Raman	
281


M/S	N/A	3 × 105 (1 × 105)	514.5 (632.8)	Raman	
282


	94%	7.5 × 107	180–11000	AFM	
283

Diameter	Raman
M/S	Transistor properties
M/S	N/A	4 × 107–9 × 107	532	AFM	
284

8 × 106	Raman
M/S	N/A	1.8 × 108	2000	SEM	
285

Raman
Transistor properties

M/S
	N/A	3.5 × 105	473	
	
286

514	UV–Vis–NIR
632	Raman
785	



M/S	N/A	Methane	Etching: 400 °C	N/A	AFM	
291

Diameter	Annealing: 600 °C	Raman

	
	Transistor properties
M/S	N/A	Oxygen	400 °C	10 h	Differential thermogravimetry	
292

Diameter	UV–Vis–NIR

	Raman
M/S	N/A	Oxygen	300–600 °C	<2.5 h	SEM	
224

Diameter	Raman
M/S	N/A	Oxygen	300–600 °C	<200 min	SEM	
225

Diameter	Raman

M/S	>90%	Nitrogen dioxide	220 °C	16 h	SEM	
293

Diameter	UV–Vis–NIR

	Raman

	Sheet resistance

M/S	M: 86%	Oxygen	480 °C	10 min	SEM	
263

Diameter	S: 93%	AFM

	
	Raman

	
	Polarized optical microscope

	
	Transistor properties

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic reaction of metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs with different diameter regimes during the etching and annealing process. Reproduced with permission.291 Copyright 2006, AAAS. (b) Schematic of the NO2 etching reaction for the purification of metallic SWCNTs and (c) optical images of the synthesized and NO2 treated SWCNTs in both solid and dispersed states. Reproduced with permission.293 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d–f) In situ AFM height images of (d) pristine, (e) 1% SDS treated and (f) gas-phase etched SWCNT array. Reproduced with permission.263 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry and Chinese Chemical Society.	 


M/S	N/A	2.5	1.4	Raman	
303

EDX
Sheet resistance
M/S	N/A	2.45	0.5	Raman	
304

UV–Vis–NIR
SEM
M/S	N/A	2.45	0.9	Raman	
305

UV–Vis–NIR
M/S	N/A	2.45	1.0	Raman	
306

AFM
Transistor properties
Diameter	N/A	2.45	0.5	Raman	
307

SEM
M/S	87%	2.45	0.5	Raman	
308

UV–Vis–NIR
SEM

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic process of the microwave-assisted purification of SWCNTs (M (blue) and S (red) stand for metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs respectively). Reproduced with permission.303 Copyright 2008, Elsevier. (b) Raman spectra of the pristine and annealed SWCNTs (excitation wavelength: 514.5 nm). The insets are the zoom-in plots for RBM and tangential area of the spectra. Reproduced with permission.304 Copyright 2008, Elsevier. (c and d) Optical absorbance spectra (fitted by dash-dot curves) of SWCNTs dispersion (c) before and (d) after separation. Reproduced with permission.308 Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 


M/S	∼100%	Transistor induced electricity	AFM	
310

SEM
Transistor properties
M/S	>99.9925%	Microwave (12.2 cm)	AFM	
313

SEM
Raman
Transistor properties
M/S	>99.8%	Near infrared laser (2500 nm)	AFM	
311

SEM
Raman
Transistor properties
M/S	N/A	Direct current injection	Transistor properties	
314


 	Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of the purification based on electricity-driven thermocapillary flow, (b) scanning Joule expansion microscope image of a SWCNT array under operation on quartz and (c) topology of the capillary resist coated surfaces after operation with different drain–source voltage. Reproduced with permission.310 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 



M/S	80%	10 MHz	AC 10 V	10 min	SDS	Raman	
319


M/S	N/A	30 kHz–30 MHz	AC 20 V	10 min	SDBS	Raman	
324


M/S	N/A	10–70 MHz	AC 20 V	5 min	SC	UV–Vis–NIR	
325


M/S	N/A	N/A	DC 100 V	2 h	Triton X-405	Raman	
326

4-Hydroxybenzene diazonium salt	UV–Vis–NIR
M/S	92%	N/A	DC 300 V	24 h	SC	UV–Vis–NIR	
327


M/S	M: 70%	N/A	DC 30 V	24 h	Polyoxyethylene	Raman	
328

S: 95%	UV–Vis–NIR

M/S	N/A	10 MHz	AC 10 V	N/A	SDS	Raman	
322

UV–Vis–NIR
Transistor properties

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the device and the operation for the separation and (b) the RBM region of the Raman spectra of both sample (the SWCNTs deposited on the electrodes) and the reference SWCNTs without the applied electric field. Reproduced with permission.319 Copyright 2003, AAAS. (c) Schematic of the improved design for dielectrophoresis separation of SWCNTs and (d) optical absorbance of the metal-enriched fraction and pristine SWCNTs. Reproduced with permission.322 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (e) Schematic of vertical electrophoresis unit, (f) partition process of SWCNTs under the influence of voltage (30 V) in vertical cell after 0, 4, 16 and 24 hours, and (g) optical absorbance of the pristine SWCNTs, cathode and anode fractions. Reproduced with permission.328 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic of the SWCNT separation based on agarose gel electrophoresis and (i) optical absorbance spectra of the reference, corresponding fraction of i and ii in the column. Reproduced with permission.321 Copyright 2008, The Japan Society of Applied Physics.	 


Length	N/A	100 V	30 min	SC	AFM	
330

Diameter	Raman

	UV–Vis–NIR
Length	N/A	N/A	70 min	Nucleic acids	AFM	
331

Diameter	Raman
Length	N/A	N/A	30 min	SC	AFM	
332 and 333

Diameter	Raman

M/S	M: 70%	50 V	20 min	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
321

S: 95%
M/S	95%	200 V	4 h	Chondroitin sulfate	Raman	
334

UV–Vis–NIR
Transistor properties
M/S	98%	200 V	4 h	SC	AFM	
335

Raman
UV–Vis–NIR
Transistor properties


M/S	N/A	Octadecylamine	THF	Raman	
338


M/S	87%	1-Octylamine	THF	Raman	
339

UV–Vis–NIR
Transistor properties
M/S	N/A	Poly(3-alkylthiophene)s	Toluene	Raman	
340

UV–Vis–NIR
PL
Transistor properties

M/S	M: 92%	1,1′-Bis-purenebutyoxyl-p-xylen	THF/toluene (v/v 80/20)	Raman	
341

S: 97%	UV–Vis–NIR
M/S	N/A	Polyfluorene derivatives	Toluene	UV–Vis–NIR	
342

Diameter	PL

	Transistor properties
M/S	N/A	Regioregular poly(3-dodecylthiophene)	Toluene	Raman	
343

Diameter	UV–Vis–NIR

	Transistor properties
M/S	N/A	Atactic poly(9-dodecyl-9-methyl-fluorene)	Toluene	UV–Vis–NIR	
344

Transistor properties
M/S	N/A	Poly(2,7-carbazole)	THF	Raman	
345

UV–Vis–NIR
PL

M/S	N/A	Poly-(fluorene-co-phenylene) derivatives	THF/toluene (v/v 50/50)	Raman	
346

UV–Vis–NIR
PL
M/S	99.94%	Agarose	Triton X-405 aqueous solution	Raman	
347

UV–Vis–NIR
Transistor properties
M/S	N/A	2,3,9,10-Tetra-(5-hexyl-thiophen-2-yl)-1,4,6,8,11,13-hexaaza-pentacene	Toluene	UV–Vis–NIR	
348

Transistor properties
M/S	N/A	Poly(2-vinylpyridine)-co-poly(9,9-dihexyl-2-(4-vinylphenyl)-9H-fluorene)	Toluene	Raman	
349

UV–Vis–NIR
Transistor properties
M/S	N/A	Poly[(E)-1,2-bis(4-dodecyl-50-methyl-30-octadecyl-[2,20-bithiophen]-5-yl)ethene]	Toluene	Raman	
258

UV–Vis–NIR
PL
Transistor properties
M/S (10, 9)	S: 99%	9,9-Dialkylfluorene	Toluene	Raman	
350

UV–Vis–NIR
PL
Transistor properties
(7, 5)	60%	Poly(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)	Toluene	Raman	
152

UV–Vis–NIR
PL
Diameter	N/A	Poly[(m-phenylenevinylene)-alt(p-phenylenevinylene)]	Water	Raman	
351

PL
Diameter	N/A	Poly(3-alkylthiophene)s	Toluene	Raman	
352

UV–Vis–NIR
Transistor properties
Length	N/A	Polymethacrylate or polystyrene sulfonate	DOC aqueous solution	UV–Vis–NIR	
353

AFM

 	Fig. 17  (a) Absorbance spectra of CoMoCAT SWCNTs before and after the polymer treatment. The inset is a schematic of the repeating units of PFO, and (b) photoluminescence excitation map of PFO dispersed SWCNTs in toluene. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2007, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Optical absorbance spectra of pristine, and polythophenes (with side chains of different length) dispersed SWCNTs in toluene. The inset shows the schematic structures of the polymers. Reproduced with permission.352 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic process (forward sequential precipitation) of the length sorting of SWCNTs by PMAA or PSS (the inset shows the structure of both polymers), (e) the SWCNTs length distribution of 1% and 4% PMAA fraction and (f) correlation between the length of SWCNTs and PMAA concentration. (d)–(f) Reproduced with permission.353 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


Diameter	N/A	ssDNA	Iodixanol	UV–Vis–NIR	
355

Diameter	(6,5): 97%	SC	Iodixanol	UV–Vis–NIR	
356


M/S (6,5)	PL
Enantiomer	N/A	SC	Iodixanol	UV–Vis–NIR	
154

CD
Armchair	>50%	DOC	Iodixanol	Raman	
357

UV–Vis–NIR
PL
Chirality	(6,4): 88%	SC	Iodixanol	Raman	
157

Enantiomer	(7,3): 66%	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR

	(6,5): 83%	
	PL

	(9,1): 36%	
	CD

	(8,3): 55%	
	


	(9,2): 47%	
	


	(7,5): 46%	
	


	(8,4): 34%	
	


	(10,2): 40%	
	


	(7,6): 48%	
	

Empty/filled	N/A	SC	Iohexol in D2O	Raman	
137

Diameter	UV–Vis–NIR

	PL

M/S	99.9%	SC	Iodixanol	UV–Vis–NIR	
358

Diameter
M/S	>99%	SC	Iodixanol	Raman	
359

Diameter	UV–Vis–NIR
Diameter	(8, 6): 62%	Flavin mononucleotide	Iodixanol	UV–Vis–NIR	
257

Chirality	PL

 	Fig. 18  (a) Photograph and (b) optical absorbance spectra after DGU of SWCNTs dispersed in 2% SC aqueous solution, and (c) PL map of the fractions enriched with (6,5) and (7,5) with 3 repeated DGU cycles. Reproduced with permission.356 Copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Comparison in the density profiles of linear and nonlinear DGU medium, (e) optical absorbance of the separated SWCNTs by DGU with nonlinear density medium, and (f) circular dichroism of two enantiomers of (6,5) with a photo of the centrifuge tube after DGU. (d)–(f) Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group. (g) Photograph of centrifuge tube showing the separation of SWCNTs by empty and filled state after DGU, (h) Raman spectra and (i) optical absorbance of different color bands after DGU as well as pristine SWCNTs. (g)–(i) Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 



M/S	>87%	Sephacryl	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
360

SC
Chirality	(7,3): 89%	Sephacryl	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
44


M/S	(6,4): 46%	PL
Diameter	(6,5): 93%	Raman

	(7,5): 88%	


	(8,3): 56%	


	(8,4): 63%	


	(7,6): 94%	


	(8,6): 89%	


	(9,4): 46%	


	(10,2): 39%	


	(10,3): 69%	


	(8,7): 68%	


	(12,1): 71%	


M/S	N/A	Sephacryl	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
362

DOC	Raman
Chirality	(6,4): 66%	Sephacryl	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
363


M/S	(6,5): 91%	PL
Diameter	(7,5): 58%	


	(8,3): 52%	


	(8,4): 71%	


	(7,6): 73%	


	(8,6): 65%	

Chirality	(8,3): 64%	Sephacryl	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
364


M/S	(6,5): 92%	PL
Diameter	(7,5): 61%	


	(9,4): 76%	


	(8,4): 76%	


	(7,6): 95%	


	(8,6): 88%	


	(8,7): 77%	

Chirality	N/A	Sephacryl	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
365

Enantiomer	CD
Chirality	N/A	Sephacryl	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
366

Enantiomer	CD

	Raman

	PL

M/S	N/A	Sephacryl	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
367

Chirality	PL

M/S	(10,3): 96%	Sephacryl	SC + SDS + DOC	UV–Vis–NIR	
368

Chirality	(9,4): 93%	PL
Diameter	N/A	Sephacryl	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
369

Raman
Diameter	N/A	Sephacryl	SC + SDS	Raman	
370

TEM
M/S	UV–Vis–NIR

	AFM

	Transistor properties

M/S	(6,4) > 90%	Sephacryl	SC + SDS + DOC	UV–Vis–NIR	
371

Diameter	(6,5) > 90%	PL
Chirality	(7,3) > 90%	

Enantiomer	
	


M/S, Chirality, Enantiomer	(6,4): 97%	Sephacryl	SC + SDS + DOC	UV–Vis–NIR	
159

(9,1): 91%	PL
(8,3): 96%	CD
(6,5): 98%	

(7,3): 93%	

(7,5): 90%	

(10,2): 90%	

(9,4): 97%	

(8,4): 80%	

(7,6): 94%	

(10,3): 94%	

(11,1): 90%	


M/S	M: 90%	Agarose	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
361

S: 95%	DOC	Raman
Diameter	N/A	Agarose	SDS	Raman	
372


M/S	DOC	UV–Vis–NIR

	
	PL

	
	AFM

M/S	M: 90%	Agarose	SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
373

S: 95%	DOC	Raman

M/S	M: 70%	Agarose	SDS	Raman	
374


	S: 95%	SDC	UV–Vis–NIR

	
	
	PL

M/S
	(6,5): 90%	Sepharose	SDS + DOC	UV–Vis–NIR	
375

Fluorescence spectroscopy
Flow cell

M/S	N/A	Guar gum	SC + SDS	UV–Vis–NIR	
376

Diameter	DOC

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of single surfactant multicolumn gel chromatography, (b) optical absorbance and (c) PL maps of the pristine and single chirality enriched fractions. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group.	 


Length	N/A	T30	UV–Vis–NIR	
379

Diameter	PL

	AFM
Diameter	M: 83%	(GT)n	UV–Vis–NIR	
380


M/S	S: 90%	
n = 10–45	Raman
Chirality	N/A	(GT)30	UV–Vis–NIR	
381

AFM
Chirality	(9,1): 80% (TCC)10	UV–Vis–NIR	
382

(8,3): 70% (TTA)3TTGTT	PL
(6,5): 90% (TAT)4	

(7,5): 90% (ATT)4AT	

(10,2): 90% (TATT)2TAT	

(8,4): 90% (ATTT)3	

(9,4): 60% (GTC)2GT	

(7,6): 90% (GTT)3G	

(8,6): 90% (GT)6	

(9,5): 70% (TGTT)2TGT	

(10,5): 90% (TTTA)3T	

(8,7): 80% (CCG)2CC	

Chirality	(6,6): A(TTAA)3T	UV–Vis–NIR	
383

(7,7): (TTA)2C(TAT)2T	Raman

 	Fig. 20  (a) Optical absorbance of semiconducting (n,m) chiral species. Reproduced with permission.382 Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Optical absorbance of SWCNTs separated by ssDNA-assisted ATPE. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 


M/S	N/A	SC; SDS	PEG/DX	UV–Vis–NIR	
354

Raman
M/S	N/A	SC	PEG/DX	UV–Vis–NIR	
385

Diameter
Chirality	N/A	DOC	PEG/DX	UV–Vis–NIR	
386

PL
Raman
Chirality	(6,6): >85%	DOC	PEG/DX	UV–Vis–NIR	
387

Raman
Diameter	N/A	DOC	PEG/DX	UV–Vis–NIR	
388

Chirality	PL
Enantiomer	CD
Diameter	N/A	DOC	PEG/DX	UV–Vis–NIR	
389

Chiral	PL

	Raman
M/S	99.56%	SC	PEG/DX	UV–Vis–NIR	
390

Transistor properties
M/S	98%	SC	PEG/DX	UV–Vis–NIR	
391

Chirality	N/A	ssDNA	PEG/DX	UV–Vis–NIR	
392

PEG/PAM
(PEG + PEG-DA)/DX
PVP/DX
Chirality	N/A	ssDNA	PEG/DX	UV–Vis–NIR	
153

Enantiomer	PEG/PAM	PL

	(PEG + PEG-DA)/DX	CD
Chirality	N/A	DOC	PEG/PAM	UV–Vis–NIR	
393

Enantiomer	ssDNA	PL

	
	CD

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
