New insights and perspectives into biological materials for flexible electronics  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00278E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00278E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6764-6815New insights and perspectives into biological materials for flexible electronics

        
          
            Lili 
            Wang†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Chen†
c, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Guozhen 
            Shen
          
          
        
      *be
aState Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China
bState Key Laboratory for Superlattices and Microstructures, Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: gzshen@semi.ac.cn
cSchool of Mathematics and Physics, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China
dInstitute & Hospital of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Key Laboratory of Digital Hepatobiliary Surgery of Chinese PLA, Chinese PLA Medical School, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China
eCollege of Materials Science and Opto-electronic Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100029, China
Received 
      22nd July 2017
    First published on 6th September 2017AbstractBiological materials have robust hierarchical structures capable of specialized functions and the incorporation of natural biologically active components, which have been finely tuned through millions of years of evolution. These highly efficient architectural designs afford remarkable transport and mechanical properties, which render them attractive candidates for flexible electronic sensing technologies. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the fundamental aspects and applications of biological materials for flexible electronic devices and discusses various classes of biological materials by describing their unique structures and functions. We discuss the effect of the biological activity of biological materials on the improved properties in detail, because this effect overcomes the limited bioavailability and restricted morphology of materials generally encountered in traditional flexible electronic devices. We also summarize various approaches for the design and functionalization of natural materials and their applications in flexible electronic devices for use in biomedical, electron, energy, environmental and optical fields. Finally, we provide new insights and perspectives to further describe trends for future generations of biological materials, which are likely to be critical components (building blocks or elements) in future flexible electronics.
Lili Wang
Lili Wang is an Associate professor at the College of Electronic Science and Engineering at Jilin University, China. She earned her PhD degree in Microelectronics and Solid State Electronics from Jilin University in 2014. Her current research interests focus on flexible and wearable sensors based on biological materials, 2D materials and metal oxide semiconductors.
Di Chen
Di Chen received her BS degree from Anhui Normal University (1999) and PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology of China (2005). Before joining the University of Science and Technology, Beijing, in 2014, she conducted her research at the National Institute for Materials Science and Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Her research interests focus on designing nanostructures for sustainable energy and embeddable electronic applications.
Kai Jiang
Kai Jiang received his MB/BS degree from Second Military Medical College, Shanghai, China, in 1991, and MD/PhD degrees from Chinese PLA Postgraduate Medical College, Beijing, China, in 1998. He further studied at the Queen Mary Hospital of University of Hong Kong in 2002, and Universitat de Barcelona, Spain, in 2008. He has been with the Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital since 1991, where he is currently a Professor of surgery and vice Dean of the Department. His current research interests focus on surgical operation and applications of nanotechnology in clinical medicine.
Guozhen Shen
Guozhen Shen received his BS degree (1999) in Chemistry from Anhui Normal University and PhD degree (2003) in Chemistry from the University of Science and technology of China. He joined the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, as a Professor in 2013. He has published more than 200 papers with a publication H-factor of 57. His current research focuses on flexible electronics and printable electronics, including transistors, photodetectors, sensors and flexible energy storage and conversion devices.
1 Introduction
Flexible electronic devices are of critical importance for medical devices, portable electronics, smart textiles, energy storage, communication and sensor systems.1–10 There is a growing demand for electronic devices that are highly flexible, lightweight, biocompatible, easy to fabricate and inexpensive. Particularly, attention is given to the flexibility and biocompatibility of sensing materials, because these materials are predicted to have widespread use in high performance and environmentally friendly practical applications.4,11–17 Current flexible electronic technologies are dominated by inorganic/organic compound-based materials, such as carbon materials,18–23 metal oxide semiconductors,2,24–27 and polymers.28–32 Despite significant developments over the past few decades, their intrinsic mechanical properties, high cost, and non-biocompatibility limit the widespread use of these materials.
Biological materials are complex actuators and possess beneficial characteristics,33 such as exceptional topographic features,17,34–39 satisfactory in situ tailorability of the chemical composition,39–43 and remarkable mechanical properties.17,35,43–51 In addition to the structural features, natural biological materials have superb biological characteristics (such as abundant and renewable supply, low cost, water solubility, biodegradability, self-adhesive and self-cleaning properties, anti-microbial activity, biocompatibility, renewability, non-toxicity and adsorption properties) beyond the limits of synthetic micro/nanomaterials, as these materials have been naturally optimized over millions of years of evolution to fulfill specific purposes and demands. For example, the immune system contains nano-biointerfaces that possess specific recognition ability for cancer cells.52,53 Butterfly wings have photonic crystal arrays supplying structural color and photonic crystals.54–57 And lotus leaves have superhydrophobic surfaces that provide self-cleaning properties and low water adhesion.58,59 The structures and performances of natural materials not only spark fascination, but also prompt the question as to why certain structures or surfaces exhibit outstanding properties, as well as encourage us to look for new insights from nature to design novel materials.
Inspired by their structures and properties, biological materials provide significant benefits and are attractive building blocks for developing environmentally friendly and biosustainable flexible electronic devices, such as sensors,18,43,48,50,60–64 transistors,48,65–68 display devices,69–71 supercapacitors,48,72–74 lithium-ion batteries,75–79 and solar cells.80–83 These benefits are as follows: (1) their natural 3D structure (such as in natural honeycomb and natural cellular materials) affords a tunable elastic modulus to provide excellent mechanical flexibility and robustness, such that the material can be effectively and congruently fit to various curved and dynamic surfaces and interfaces, such as human organs and biological organism. (2) Super-hydrophobic and self-cleaning surfaces can efficiently reduce the adhesion of dust particles and water as well as the contact area, which can aid in the anti-interference of devices with very precise performances in various environments. (3) Natural materials can afford a variety of functionalities (e.g., recognition, selective adsorption, and sensing) due to their specific compositions, which contain many functional groups, such as hydroxyl, carboxyl, amino, and amine groups, resulting in properties beyond those found in synthetic and man-made materials. (4) The non-toxic, low cost, and naturally abundant materials are biocompatible and can accommodate large-scale fabrication of flexible electronic devices, which makes these materials environmentally friendly. (5) Their lightweight features could reduce the discomfort of external devices meant for long-term integration with the human body and thus enable the long-term and continuous use of flexible sensing platforms for health-monitoring applications.
In addition, natural biological materials are easily functionalized by numerous synthetic methods due to their diverse chemical composition and structural features.18,39,43,50,89 As a result of their highly tailorable composition and structure, natural biofunctional surfaces can usually fulfill several functions.90 Modifying the chemical structure is a useful route to meet the demands of specialized applications by adjusting the mechanical properties, conductivity, electron transfer rates, solubility, capacity, and crystal structure. Thus, natural biocomposites are beneficial to obtain the optimized performance of a wide variety of flexible electronic devices. For example, multiple research groups have utilized natural biological materials to fabricate flexible devices, such as plants (wood,91,92 flower,93 leaf,94 pollen,18,39,50 and silk48,87), active organisms (butterfly,43,95 fish,96 insect,97 gecko,98 bacteria,77 peptide,99 and DNA100), and biological molecules (chitin,101,102 polydopamine,78,85,103,104 oligomeric proantho cyanidins,105 terpenes,40 and fatty acids106). Biological molecules were initially tested as the active component, followed by many other biological materials and biological composites. The properties and broad applications of biological materials have rapidly developed in recent years, as shown by the large number of publications from their advent as active components in 2000 to date (Fig. 1). This development distinctly suggests the significance of biological materials and the intense attention and interest for scientific research in various areas in electronic, optical and energy fields. Notably, early studies mainly focused on the design of biomaterials for use in medical devices, and several reviews have given a brief overviews of some biomedical applications of biological materials.99,107–109 Since 2012, biological materials have undergone significant expansion into various fields and become a hotspot research field. There was a dramatic increase in publications listed when searching for “biomaterials and application” as the key phrase in the “Web of Science” on 15 July 2017. Despite these advances, there is still a lack of systematic examination of the biological and physicochemical characteristics and broad applications of biological materials in other research fields. Herein, we provide an overview of the current state of natural biological materials in flexible electronic devices for applications in various fields (Fig. 2). Our goal is to highlight the importance and development of biological material-based flexible electronic devices in which biological materials derived from nature serve as biologically active components. First, the preparation and modification of active materials, developed through nature-inspired exploration, are introduced. In addition, we discuss the unique biological and physicochemical characteristics of biological materials as promising candidates for high-performance flexible electronic devices. Following this section, we detail some typical composite materials based on biological materials on the basis of their biological and physicochemical properties, with a focus on various biological-based composite materials, including carbon/biological composite materials, polymer/biological composite materials, metal oxide/biological composite materials and biological hydrogels. As this is an emerging nanoscience research field, we indicate the current limitations of conventional functional nanomaterial-based flexible electronic devices as well as the advantages of using biological materials and biocomposite-based flexible electronic devices for future advancements. Selected examples from a wide variety of application fields, mainly in the field of flexible electronics, indicate how such biological/biosynthetic materials can provide new and advanced solutions to diverse problems. In the last part, we describe future developments and trends of biological materials in flexible electronic devices.
 Fig. 1  (a) Number of publications in terms of biological materials sorted by year with the key phrase “biomaterials and application” searched in the Web of Science on 15 Jul 2017. (b) A brief timeline for the development and application of biological materials. Chitin/chitosan in biosensors; reproduced with permission from ref. 84 and Copyright 2000, Elsevier. A butterfly with structural color in an optical device; reproduced with permission from ref. 54 and Copyright 2002, Elsevier. Polydopamine used as the coating material for diverse surfaces; reproduced with permission from ref. 85 and Copyright 2007, Science. Cellulose applied in an electronic device; reproduced with permission from ref. 86 and Copyright 2008, John Wiley and Sons. Silk as a compatible transparent substrate or a self-sacrificing template used in a flexible and wearable electronic device; reproduced with permission from ref. 11 and 87 Copyright 2010 and 2012, Science and Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively. Nepenthes alata with hydrophobic/hydrophilic properties used in a fluid-transport system; reproduced with permission from ref. 88 and Copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers Limited. Sunflower pollen used in a biosensor and an e-skin sensor; reproduced with permission from ref. 50 and Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
 Fig. 2  Summary of biological material-based flexible devices for flexible substrate (wood-cellulose-based substrate and chitin-based substrate), flexible biosensor (sunflower pollen-based biosensor and chitosan-based biosensor), flexible electronic sensor (butterfly-based gas sensor and pollen-based electronic skin sensor), and energy conversion and storage device (Juglone-based battery and supercapacitor) applications. Images reproduced with permission: “wood-cellulose-based substrate”, ref. 69 Copyright 2009, Elsevier. “chitin-based substrate”, ref. 101 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons, “sunflower pollen-based biosensor”, ref. 18 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons, “chitosan-based biosensor”, ref. 110 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group, “butterfly-based gas sensor”, ref. 43 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry, “pollen-based electronic skin sensor”, ref. 50 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. “Juglone-based battery”, ref. 76 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. “Juglone-based supercapacitor”, ref. 73 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. Scale bar: 1 cm. 
2 Fundamental properties of biological materials
Biomaterials, which are conventionally described as materials utilized in medical devices, have been used since ancient times. However, in the recent time, their levels of complexity have been enhanced considerably. Biomaterials discussed currently are mostly rich in information and feature components that are biologically active and obtained from nature.111,112 Therefore, thorough comprehension of the physicochemical and biological properties of biological materials might inspire further developments in different research fields to hasten diversification and extension as well as expand the potential applications of biological materials in the future. Through natural selection, biological materials have developed remarkable functions that closely approach perfection to adapt to their surrounding environments (Fig. 3). In this section, we overview the fundamental characteristics of biological materials, while acknowledging that not all of the properties of biological materials have been completely defined.
 Fig. 3  Summary of the physicochemical and biological properties of biological materials. In general, these biological materials provide the main functionalities such as a 3D structure, biocomponents, biocompatibility, hydrophobic properties, mechanical properties, structural colors, adhesion properties, antimicrobial activity and so on. On the peripheral panel, various representative examples of biological materials are shown: dandelion, rose, lotus leaf, silk, butterfly, gecko, grape, wood, and mussels. Image “device” from ref. 113. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. Image “biocomponent” from ref. 89. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Image “3D structure” of National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) Biomass Surface/Structure Characterization Lab, USA. 
2.1 Hierarchical 3D biostructures
In nature, flora and fauna possess robust hierarchical structures capable of specialized functions. In particular, structure-driven properties serve important functions in nature and have inspired numerous technological innovations.50 Biological materials are complex composites that exhibit structural diversity spanning many orders of magnitude in length.114 Their exceptional properties are believed to be due to a functional adaptation of their structure at all hierarchical levels. Notably, hierarchical 3D structures show remarkable repetition formed from structural design elements such as small fibers, tubes, open- and closed-cell foams and plates. These structures can be classified into eight categories depending on their structural design elements, which have been thoroughly investigated and reviewed by Marc A. Meyers35 and Espionsa et al.:115,116 fibrous structures, helical structures, gradient structures, layered structures, tubular structures, cellular structures, suture structures, and overlapping structures. These categories and the SEM image of various multiscale structures are shown in Fig. 4. For example, wood, which is composed of open spaces (lumens) and interconnected cells (tracheids), is a composite material with a natural cellular structure.92,117 Due to the varied arrangement and interior structure of the spaces, various wood species possess different porous microstructures.118 For example, soft wood species (e.g., pine) are composed of uniform close-packed rectangular cells, which are beneficial to the infiltration of solutions through the uniform porous structure (Fig. 5a).91 In contrast, a large number of close-packed tubular cells with sizes of 1–100 μm, including growth ring boundaries (1), earlywood vessels (2), latewood vessels (3), fibers (4), rays (5), axial parenchyma cells in marginal bands (6), have been found in hard wood species (e.g., poplar) (Fig. 5b).119,120 As evidenced by the unique structural characteristics, biological materials have benefited from their numerous distinct architectural features, which adjust the transport and mechanical properties. Such structural features include their spatial and orientational distribution, their detailed 3D architecture, the geometry of building blocks and the number of hierarchical levels. Natural hierarchical materials (seashells, bones, wood, bamboo, arthropod exoskeletons, and glass sponge skeletons) with high pore volume ratios, large specific surface areas, excellent permeability, high storage capacities, and facile mass transport properties have been used in various applications in catalysis, adsorption, separation, sensors, energy, food, industry and life sciences. For example, a gecko foot is composed of a large number of well-arranged microsized hairs with a density of approximately 500 mm−2, exhibiting a unique multiscale hierarchical structure. Interestingly, these hairs are also composed of numerous smaller hairy nanoscale structures (100–1000 per single hair in density).121,122 The multiscale structural hierarchy in gecko feet allow them to exhibit multiple functions, including their excellent adhesive, superhydrophobic and self-cleaning properties.123–125 Therefore, the hierarchical structures of gecko feet act a strong, versatile and effective adhesive to enable the intriguing ability to run and climb freely on vertical walls (Fig. 5c).111,126,127
 Fig. 4  Macroscopic and microscopic structures and representative scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of natural 3D hierarchical structure materials. They are classified into eight categories depending on their structural design elements. (a) Fibrous structure: Spider (Arachnida) with a hierarchy of fibrous silk at multiple length scales. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128 and Copyright 2009, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Helical structure: Stomatopod (Malacostraca) with reinforcements aligned at sequential angles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129 and Copyright 2012, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Gradient structure: Crab (Malacostraca) displaying a gradient in its claws. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130 and Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (d) Layered structure: Abalone shell (Gastropoda) with layer-like structure integration by micrometer scaled aragonite platelets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115 and Copyright 2007, Elsevier. (e) Tubular structure: Human tooth (Mammalia) with dentin tubules or pores in a solid matrix. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131 and Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (f) Cellular structures: Pollen (lycopodium clavatum) with honeycomb or foam microstructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39 and Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (g) Suture structure: Boxfish (Actinopterygii) showing a compliant interface and the rigid sutures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 and Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (h) Overlapping structure: Shark (Chondrichthyes) with overlapping scales consisting of individual plates and allowing for flexing while ensuring full coverage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133 and Copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons. (Schemes a–h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 35 and Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 5  Examples of multiscale 3D hierarchical structures in nature. (a) Photograph (left) and SEM image (right) of trunk section from a pine tree. Images courtesy of National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) Biomass Surface/Structure Characterization Lab, USA. (b) Light micrographs with different magnifications and the SEM image (inset) of cross-section from poplar (Aspen) wood. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119 and Copyright 2016 and 2016, Elsevier. SEM images reproduced with permission from ref. 120 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Photograph, schematic diagram and SEM image of the lamellar structure of Gecko foot. The lamellae consist of keratinaceous filaments (setae) that split into finer, knob-like structures (spatulae) at their ends. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111, 126 and 127 and Copyright 2014, 2006 and 2010, by John Wiley and Sons, Nature Publishing Group and Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Photograph, schematic, and SEM image of a fracture surface in an abalone shell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134 and Copyright 2011, by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another prime example of a unique hierarchical structure can be found in seashells (e.g., abalone shells), which exhibit two layers with different microstructures (Fig. 5d).134 Such layers are capable of dividing into prismatic calcite layers and inner nacreous aragonite layers. The calcite layer is significantly harder and is more prone to brittle failures. It is also mostly applied in preventing infiltration of the shell. Contrastingly, the inner nacreous layer is softer, and is capable of withstanding larger inelastic deformations. Besides, it is capable of also dissipating considerable mechanical energy owing to the well-organized self-assembled layer on the higher mesoscale level. Its structure comprises a large number of microscopic aragonite polygonal tablets, of about 5–8 μm diameter and 400 μm thickness as well as a layer of organic materials with a thickness of about 20–30 nm.135 Due to its highly prearranged hierarchical structure as well as its mortar structure, the nacreous layer shows exceptional mechanical properties.136–138 As described above, owing to the specific functions of biological materials resulting from their various hierarchical structures, they are promising materials for various applications.
2.2 Biological activity
Biological materials have also attracted the interest of many researchers in the fields of nanomedicine and nanotechnology because of their distinctive biological properties. Materials in the relevant size range for biological activity exhibit novel, favorable properties compared with synthetic materials. Indeed, biological materials research has been one of the most productive subfields in nanobiotechnology and has generated a connection between the biological, physical, and chemical sciences for the progress of advanced tools with the potential to revolutionize wearable and flexible electronics. Some representative biological materials with multiscale hierarchical structures for integration of functions are listed in Table 1. The use of biological materials has been favorably expanded into various fields due to their many desirable biological properties, as listed below:
Table 1 Typical biological materials with function integration




Natural species
Biological materials
Functions
References




Fauna
Silk
Mechanical flexibility and optical functions

48 and 142–149



Water solubility, biodegradability, high adhesion, light-weight, elasticity


Butterfly/moth wing
Structural color, superhydrophobicity, self-cleaning, optical functions, directional adhesion, chemical sensing capability, fluorescence emission functions, light-weight, anti-reflection

43 and 150–156



Gecko foot
High adhesion, mechanical property, superhydrophobicity, self-cleaning, drag reduction, mechanical stability

123–125 and 157–159



Brid
Structural color, superhydrophobicity, anti-fogging

160–162



Peacock feather
Structural color, superhydrophobicity

163 and 164



Fish/brittlestar
Structural color, drag reduction, superoleophilicity in air, optical functions, superoleophobicity in water

96, 140, 141 and 165–168



Sea animals
Structural color, optical property

97 and 169



Inset
Structural color, superhydrophobicity, optical properties

165 and 170–173



Skin
Self-healing, mechanical flexibility, superhydrophobicity, drag reduction, extensibility

174–176



Mussel
Mechanical property, high adhesion

85 and 177–179



Nacre
Mechanical property, structural color

136–138



Mosquito compound eye
Superhydrophobicity, anti-reflection, anti-fogging, optical property

180 and 181



Bone/tooth
Robust mechanical strength

47 and 182–184



Chiton/Brachiopod shells
Robust mechanical strength, mechanical flexibility, structural color

185–187



Polar bear fur
Optical property, thermal insulation

188



Eggshell membrane
Mechanical flexibility, drag reduction, adhesion property

189







Flora
Pollen grain
Superhydrophobicity, mechanical property, adhesion property, light-weight

18, 39 and 190–196



Drag reduction, anti-radiation, antimicrobial activity


Lotus leaf
Superhydrophobicity, low adhesion, self-cleaning

197–201



Rose petal
Structural color, superhydrophobicity, self-cleaning, high adhesion

93 and 202–204



Flower
Superhydrophobicity and structural color, optical property

205 and 206



Bamboo
Superior flexibility and mechanical durability, light-weight

72, 207 and 208



Wood
Lightweight, mechanically roust, optical

47, 92 and 118



property, thermal property, biodegradable


Rice leaf
Superhydrophobicity, anisotropic wettability

58 and 209



Pomelo peel
Mechanical property, drag reduction

210 and 211



Diatom
High mechanical stability, biocompatibility, optical property

212 and 213



Plant/nepenthes alata
Directional hydrophobic and hydrophilic, directional adhesion

214 and 215



Vegetable
Natural color, biocompatibility, optical property

80 and 216



Fruits
Structural color and hydrophobic property, optical property

217–219



Mimosa
Highly dry adhesion, mechanical flexibility

94







Biological molecular
Chitin
Light-weight, high adhesion, mechanical flexibility, biodegradability, optical property

108, 220 and 221



Chitosan
Biodegradability, mechanical flexibility, chemical sensing capability, light-weight

108, 222 and 223



Cellulose
Mechanical property, light-weight, high adhesion, optical property, low-thermal expansion

75, 92 and 224



Polydopamine/melanin
Optical property, adhesive property, biocompatibility and biodegradation, hydrophilicity, antimicrobial activity, paramagnetism

89, 178, 225 and 226



Juglone
Lightweight, biocompatibility, structural flexibility

73 and 76



Oligo-proanthocyanidin
Antimicrobial activity, optical property

227 and 228



High adhesion, hydrophilic




Proteins
Mechanical strength, adhesion property, biodegradation, structural color

229–232



Peptide
Biodegradation, antimicrobial activity

233–236



Bacterial cellulose
Hydrophobic property, mechanical anisotropy, biodegradation

237



Viruses
Mechanical flexibility, adhesion property, lightweight

77 and 238



Immunocytes
Antimicrobial activity, chemical sensing capability, biodegradation, mechanical property

52



Tendon collagen/gelatin
Mechanical flexibility and strength, adhesive property, elasticity

223 and 228



DNA
High adhesive property, biocompatibility, optical functionalities

239–241



Opal
Structure color, mechanical property, optical property, chemical sensing capability

242–244



Fatty acids
Antimicrobial activity and adhesive property

106, 245 and 246



Cell
Adhesive property

165, 247 and 248



Lipid layer
Antimicrobial activity

249





(1) Their extraordinary mechanical strength and high flexibility make biological materials suitable for wearable electronics.
(2) The excellent structural colors of biological materials offer unique platforms for the development of optical devices including anti-forgery devices, optical gas sensors, cancer biosensors, and air pollutant sensors.
(3) The hydrophobicity of biological materials, characterized by self-cleaning properties and ultra-low water adhesion, provides an attractive platform for printing, oil/water separation, optical devices, high-sensitivity sensors and batteries.
(4) The extraordinarily robust adhesive properties of biological materials to various 3D surfaces offer a smart system for further bonding of conjugates with some alluring functionalities.
(5) Biological materials exhibit good antimicrobial activity, making them useful for antimicrobial treatments in medical devices (e.g., artificial electronic skin).

2.2.1 Mechanical properties. 
The mechanical properties of biological materials include flexibility, stiffness, strength, fracture toughness, etc., and are of importance for their applications in a variety of fields. In this section, we discuss and study the flexibility, toughness and tensile strength of biological materials that are very attractive for wearable “green electronics”. The remarkable characteristic of biological materials is that they display well-ordered 3D hierarchical structures from the nanoscale- to the microscale. Notably, such a unique structure possesses specific properties, among which the microstructure commonly has an important influence on the mechanical properties. This distinct mechanical character allows biological materials to act as active units to meet specific demands. Meyers and co-workers noted that different structural design elements led to different mechanical properties in biological materials.35 For example, chiton exoskeletons139 are composed of well-organized overlapping structures with remarkable mechanical flexibility, consisting of a number of individual scales (Fig. 6a). From a structural viewpoint, exoskeletons can be divided into a large number of small pieces. The combination of overlapping scales or plates in this case displays an improved mechanical property on the basis of the overall flexibility and natural motion.140,141 The overlapping structures dictate the continuous motion behavior, such as bending, deformation, and drape, which has motivated many researchers to design novel biological composites with remarkable mechanical flexibility for flexible green electronics.141 In addition to these natural functions, a theoretical model was derived by Meyers's group to express the normalized curvature of the entire overlapping structure as in eqn (1):35 (1)where  is the normalized curvature, ι is the projected length of a scale (given that all scales, in an undeformed state, are raised from the dermal surface by a small angle) and R is the radius of curvature of the entire articulated body.
 Fig. 6  Mechanical properties of biological materials with various structures in nature. (a) Overlapping structures from chiton (polyplacophora) representing a variety of biological classes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 and Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (b) SEM image and stretching of spider silk with a fibrous structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44 and 128 and Copyright 2013 and 2009, by Science and John Wiley and Sons. 
Actually, overlapping structures which are based on such features are frequent in several organisms, including shark skin, fish scales, butterfly wings, seahorse tails, as well as pangolin plates, among others. Even though the geometries as well as the resultant mechanics of the various overlapping structures are capable of varying considerably among species, these exceptional structures can offer all organisms a certain degree of joined potency as well as flexibility.141 For highly efficient flexible electronic devices, natural spider (Arachnida) silk (tens of microns in diameter) is a good example of a hierarchical structure composed of numerous aligned fibers.128 Fibrous structures exhibit a dichotomy of strength, high tension, and low to effectively no compression. Fig. 6b exhibits the schematic diagram of the molecular configurations of natural silk and the J-shaped stress–strain curve. At low stress levels, the main effect is entropic unfolding of the amorphous strands, that is, uncoiling and straightening of the protein strands. At high pressure, the major molecular interactions in the b sheets are weak hydrogen bonds that the crystalline parts sustain the load. The comprehensive stress–strain behaviour (include multiple processes) of fibrous structures under tension was described and summarized by Meyers's group, as follows (eqn (2)):35,44 σ = κ1εn+1 + H(εc)E(ε − εc)(2)where σ is the stress, κ1 is a material parameter, ε is the strain, n varies with the material, for example, with n = 1 associated with the mechanical behavior of aligned collagen, H is the Heaviside function, which is activated when the second regime is reached (ε = εc, where εc is the characteristic strain at which the fibers have become fully extended); and E is the elastic modulus. Thus, natural silk, as a typical fibrous structure, has high tensile strength or stiffness in a single direction, and its robust mechanical properties and insulating nature are crucial for its use as a biocompatible passive support and packaging material for flexible electronic devices. In addition, apart from the mechanical flexibility of silk fibers, their mechanical robustness has made them suitable as sutures for many years in lip and eye surgery. In fact, the mechanical properties of other biological materials have also been highlighted by Meyers' group, and constitutive equations that describe their structural advantages and/or basic mechanical were provided.35,44


2.2.2 Structural coloring. 
The various color features of biological organisms, generated via iridescence structural color, pigmentation color, or a superposition of the two classes of colors, have attracted extensive research interest. Among them, structural color is a typical natural characteristic caused by the interaction and transportation of highly precise and periodical hierarchical structures with light. As a result, structural color presents amazing functions and has much more efficient light use and energy consumption, which are unavailable when using pigmentation. Structural color also exhibits unlimited lightfastness and is environmentally friendly due to the lack of chemical dyes. In particular, tunable structural color is used by many living creatures as a natural signal to adapt to the surrounding environment, for example, through communication, predation, camouflage, etc.54,82,166,204,250
Beautiful examples can be found in various butterfly wings, some plant, flowers and leaves, birds, insects, fish, algae, berries, etc. (Fig. 7). Some butterfly wings possess various beautiful and amazing iridescence color due to their well-organized periodic and hierarchical structure. For example, the Morpho sulkowskyi butterfly possesses an alluring dual color on the top and underside surface of its wings that is brilliant blue coloration and camouflaged brown coloration, respectively.251 When they fly, the brilliant blue coloration on the top surface of the wings matches the color of the sky. Similarly, when they land, the ventral side of the wings exhibits a brown color to match their surroundings.126 Such structural color can efficiently avoid predators, such as some birds, snakes, frogs, geckosand lizards.160 Parker and co-workers first discovered that Aphrodite, a type of shallow tropical water worm, possesses bright structural colors. They determined that this color was derived from cylinders that collectively diffract light as the hair of Aphrodite possesses a large number of longitudinally oriented, close-packed and hollow cylinders 230 nm in diameter.97 Gu and co-workers found that some fish (such as paracheirodon innesi) provide another example of the utilization of structural color in response to the surrounding environment.166Paracheirodon innesi alter their structural colors in response to many different external stimuli (e.g., predators, flow fluid, and temperature, etc.), and the variation in the spacing of the platelets in their skin cells is responsible for their interference colors. Generally, Paracheirodon innesi exhibit a structural color of cyan. When chased by pursuers, the structural color of this fish rapidly changes from cyan to yellow due to the simultaneous change in the spacing of adjoining reflecting plates (Fig. 8a). Other external stimuli, such as water, can lead to a change in the structural color. The intense inflow of water on the surface of Paracheirodon innesi can cause the skin cells of the fish to swell, resulting in the increased spacing of adjacent platelets, prompting the swell-induced spacing variation mechanism.168 In addition to some fishes, other insects (e.g., Hercules beetle and tortoise beetle)173,252 also exhibit structural color changes through similar processes (Fig. 8b). Such natural structural color features combined with their special biological functions provide enormous potential for energy, optical and electronic applications.
 Fig. 7  Structural colours in nature. Image of butterflies, including Morpho sulkowskyi butterfly (a), Knight butterfly (b), and T. imperialis (Kaiseri-Hind) butterfly (c). Image of flowers and leaves, including Hibiscus trionum petal (d), Tulipa flower (e) and Mapania caudate plant (f). Image of birds, including Eastern Bluebird Sialia sialis (g), Plum-throated Cotinga maynana (h), and blue peacock Pavo cristatus (i). Images of insects, including the beetle C. gloriosa (j), the weevil Pachyrhynchus argus (k), and the neotropic weevil Entimus imperialis (l). Image of fish, including Paracheirodon innesi (m), the ctenophore Beroe cucumis (n), and the blue-ringed octopus Hapalochlaena lunulata (o). (a) Adapted with permission.251 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (b) adapted with permission.43 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) adapted with permission.151 Copyright 2016, Science; (d and e) adapted with permission.205 Copyright 2009, Science; (f) adapted with permission.206 Copyright 2014, Hindawi Publishing Corporation; (g and h) adapted with permission.160 Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry; (i) adapted with permission.163 Copyright 2003, National Academy of Sciences, USA. (j) Adapted with permission.171 Copyright 2009, Science; (k) adapted with permission.82 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (I) Adapted with permission.172 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (m) Adapted with permission.166 Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (n) Adapted with permission.169 Copyright 2006, The American Physical Society. (o) Adapted with permission.82 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 8  The change in structural colors of natural creatures. (a) The change in structural color of Paracheirodon innesi from cyan to yellow after the swelling of the oval iridophores. Adapted with permission.166 Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Change in structural color of Charidotella egregia from gold to red was triggered by touching its wings, resulting in a missed attempt at predation. Adapted with permission.173 Copyright 2007, American Physical Society. 


2.2.3 Hydrophobic properties. 
In general, hydrophobicity is the most common natural characteristic of biological materials and is extremely dependent on the topography and morphology of the surface, as defined by the Wenzel and Cassie–Baxter states (Fig. 9a). Superhydrophobic materials are in extreme demand due to their various potential applications, such as for printing, microfluidic devices, anti-corrosion coatings, nanoparticle assembly, waterproofing, oil/water separation, batteries, and high-sensitivity sensors and optical devices. Therefore, many synthetic materials have been generated to replicate the 3D hierarchical architecture and biological functions of biological materials over the past decades. Although great advancements have been made, key challenges remain, such as limitations in mimicking or accurately recreating biological materials. Therefore, feasible strategies to gradually replace traditional synthetic materials with biological materials are of extreme significance. Fig. 9b shows that many biological materials existing in nature possess superwettability. For example, lotus leaves show superhydrophobicity with water contact angles of approximately 150° and self-cleaning properties (Fig. 9c).198,199 The Cassie–Baxter equation (cosθ = ψs(cosθY + 1) − 1, where ψs and (1 − ψs) are the solid and air fractions, respectively) can be used to describe the self-cleaning properties, which remove dust and particles through the movement of water droplets.253,254 In addition to the self-cleaning properties, Mele209 and Feng58et al. reported that the surface of Strelitzia reginae and Oryza sativa (rice) leaves, which are composed of parallel microgrooves, exhibit superhydrophobic properties. Due to the anisotropy of superhydrophobic properties, the droplet could be displaced in the direction parallel to the microgrooves. This behavior could be used to develop fluid-transport systems with practical applications. In nature, biological materials always have unique superhydrophobic properties to meet or withstand various living environments.
 Fig. 9  Hydrophobic properties in nature. (a) Typical hydrophobic behavior of a droplet in the Wenzel and the Cassie–Baxter state. (b) Various typical natural hydrophobic surfaces: Salvinia molesta, butterfly wing, gecko toe, rose, mosquito eyes, and iridescent peacock. Adapted with permission.152,163,180,203,204,214 Copyright 2012, 2010, 2009, 2003 Elsevier, The Royal Society of Chemistry, IOP, John Wiley and Sons, respectively. (c) Typical digital photographs and different magnification SEM images of Nelumbo nucifera lotus leaves with a superhydrophobic surface and self-cleaning properties. Adapted with permission.198 Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (d) Typical digital photographs and SEM images of the sunflower plant and sunflower pollen with hydrophobic properties. Adapted with permission.50 Copyright 2017 and 2016, Elsevier and John Wiley and Sons, respectively. 
A typical example is found in the wings of Morpho butterflies, which show superhydrophobic character and directional adhesion. This non-wetting character enables the water droplets to be easily shed from the butterfly's wings upon a slight tremble, thus benefiting flying in the rain. Barthlott and co-workers investigated the wettability and surface structures of 97 insect wings.255 They found different families with highly hydrophobic wings, similar to termite wings as reported by Watson and co-workers.256 The mechanism of hydrophobicity, namely, the presence of an air layer trapped inside the rough surface can reduce liquid penetration, ion penetration, heat transfer and so on. In our recent work, we fabricated an electronic skin made of pollen, as a biological material with hydrophobic properties, with a water contact angle of approximately 100° and determined that the hydrophobic properties have a significant influence on the electronic signal stability and water resistance (Fig. 9d).50 We also tested the long-term water penetration of pollen materials over 0 to 30 min, and the results showed that the water droplet exhibited no obvious change over time. Furthermore, increasing the interior roughness and interlocked structure of the e-skin materials by increasing the amount of pollen also increased another function, the elasticity. This result indicated that biological materials have many applications as active units that require both good mechanical properties and hydrophobic properties.


2.2.4 High adhesion. 
Strong and robust adhesion to almost all types of surfaces is another attractive feature of biological materials. In nature, many biological materials possess robust adhesion, such as biological molecules,257 the skin of animals,174,176 and some plants. As materials with high and strong adhesion or cohesion, they are not expected to delaminate from the substrate, which results in stable devices applicable in various areas. The Dauskardt laboratory extensively described the adhesive and cohesive energies of organic semiconductors and devices.258–261 Adhesion depends on chemical bonding, van der Waals interactions, and chain entanglements.
Polydopamine is the most famous natural adhesive, which relies on both noncovalent and covalent bonding. Polydopamine adheres strongly on the organic surfaces with covalent coupling under alkaline conditions possibly via Michael-type addition reactions or via aryl–aryl coupling.85 This process depends on the oxidation of the catechol present in polydopamine to quinones. Though the binding mechanism is not completely understood, research on polydopamine has not ceased. The robust adhesion of polydopamine has resulted in increasing attention in fabricating hybrid materials and functional substrates (Fig. 10a–c).85 Additionally, for the past ten years, great importance has been attached to gecko lizards for their capacity to adhere to surfaces with different roughnesses and orientations (Fig. 10d and e).98 Such intriguing adhesion properties result from arrays of millions of fine microscopic (setae) foot hairs, which are split into hundreds of nanoscale ends (spatulae), by strong adhesive van der Waals forces to form a conformal connection on different surfaces (Fig. 10f).
 Fig. 10  Adhesion properties in nature. (a) Photograph showing adhesive pads and the byssal threads of a mussel attached on the surface of glass. (b) The biodistribution of Mefps, Mefp-3 and Mefp-5 at the pad–substrate interface. The inset displays the amino acid sequences of Mefp-3 and Mefp-5. (c) Structure-based assignments of the adhesive molecules dopa and dopa-quinone by analysis of 1800 F–D curves each from two pH conditions (pH 9.7 and 8.3). Adapted with permission.85 Copyright 2006, PNAS. (d) Typical digital photographs of a tokay gecko foot attached to a glass surface as live experiment about adhesion properties. (e) Scaling relationship for natural adhesive systems showing agreement from the smallest single spatula features to the full organism level. (f) FESEM images of a tokay gecko toe composed of many setae. Adapted with permission,98 Copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons. 


2.2.5 Antimicrobial activity. 
Numerous flora and fauna can defend against external disturbances and better protect themselves via antimicrobial functionalities on their natural surfaces. Fatty acids and terpenes act as a cuticle surface with non-fouling features based on the internal antibacterial characteristics.106,245,262 A qualitative study showed that T. bielanensis can access Candida albicans, Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli, which represent fungi, Gram-negative bacteria and Gram-positive bacteria, respectively.263 No obvious deposition was observed in the cultures after four days. Meanwhile, terpenes were shown to defend against plants and insects to protect the cuticular surface from microbial attachment. Moreover, a few studies have suggested that the lipid layer is not covalently connected to the epicuticle, as the layer can be extracted by solvents or mechanically shed as dust particles from the movement of the animal. Lipids move to the surface, thus continually recovering the coating. Meanwhile, the lipid film can be used as a sacrificial layer that is constantly reproduced to avoid microbial colonization.264 Nevertheless, there is a hypothesis that should be further investigated. The whole cuticle will completely recover during molting due to natural growth.
Natural oligomeric proantho cyanidins (OPC), an anti-inflammatory drug, can combat neurodegenerative diseases with multipotent therapeutic effects.105,265 Moreover, the semi-hydrophilic OPC benefits the self-adhesion of nanohydrogels by acting as a structural stabilizer through its aromatic architecture and abundant hydroxyl groups, which the structure develops into a biostable 3D anti-inflammatory neural interface.227,266 Recently, Chen et al. reported a novel 3D nanocarrier that uses natural antioxidant oligomeric proantho cyanidin agents, which is derived from natural grape, as shown in Fig. 11a.105 As a result, this nanocarrier possesses antibiofouling properties, as an OPC-coated neural probe (Fig. 11b) showed a correspondingly lower impedance value as well as an exceptionally higher stability of signal as compared with a noncoated probe after short-range as well as continual in vivo implantation (Fig. 11c). Immunostaining of anti-ED1 (Fig. 11d), anti-GFAP (Fig. 11e), and anti-NeuN (Fig. 11f), around the implanted site, additionally showed that the oligomeric proantho cyanidin-based probe considerably decreased the population of astrocytes as well as activated microglia for all durations, which resulted in an improved survival 28 days subsequent to implantation.
 Fig. 11  Antimicrobial activity of biological materials. (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of a neural probe based on OPC with an anti-inflammatory neural interface. (b) SEM image of a neural probe based on OPC composites in a cross-sectional view. (c) Live experiment and set-up diagram for the electrophysiological recording. Fluorescence images of (d) ED1-staining; (e) GFAP-staining; (f) NeuN-staining showing tissue responses around the tip of the neural probe before and after being coated with OPC at days 2, 7, 14, and 28 post-implantation, respectively. Scale bar: 100 μm. Adapted with permission from ref. 105 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 

2.3 Biocomponents
The numerous functional groups found in biological materials can facilitate the grafting of some chemical species to achieve specific functions (surface functionalization) in an eco-friendly manner. Such surface functionalization allows the surface chemistry of the materials to be tailored to recognize different molecular or external stimuli, for example some specific gases, water, proteins, and bacteria, for bioapplications. The recent chemical analysis of Wang and co-workers further revealed that chitosan is a new class of linear polysaccharides obtained from natural Lebadea Martha parkeri Knight butterfly-wings (Fig. 12a).43 The composition of the amino acids in the polysaccharide chain exhibits high recognition ability for specific gas molecules (Fig. 12b and c). The surface of natural cellulose from, for example, natural wood, plants, tunicate, algae and bacteria possesses a large number of –OH side groups, which allows other types of chemical species (e.g., nanoparticles, proteins, water, organic molecules and so on) to be grafted onto the natural cellulose surface under certain conditions to afford different surface properties.92,267 For instance, a high-strength material was shown to form via hydrogen bonding between the hydroxyl groups of cellulose. In addition, cellulose composites were obtained by submersion in an acrylic resin matrix under a reduced pressure of about 0.09 MPa for 12 h.69 These reactions in natural cellulose are of important significance because they provide a versatile, simple and novel route to improve the material properties including transparency, tensile strength, flexibility, coefficient of thermal expansion, thermal stability and optical properties. Additionally, inverse opals of silk, cellulose and chitosan were shown to be sensitive to infiltration with water, the glucose concentration in aqueous solution, organic solvents, pH, and humidity.268,269 For instance, the chitosan inverse opal's reflectance peak transforms as per the improving absorption of different alcohols in water, from pure water to pure alcohol, with an overall general change of about 100 nm (Fig. 12d).270 Results of a more recent chemical analysis of cuticles (Tetrodontophora bielanensis) performed after molting were consistent with these present results, further confirming the chemical constituents of the vertically layered structure, that is, from outside to inside, a protein-rich epicuticle covering a chitin-rich lamellar procuticle (such as a comb-forming structure) as well as the furthest or the outermost lipid rich layer with a thickness of several nanometers (Fig. 12e).264 The wax-like surface coating had been confirmed indirectly 50 years ago by use of chloroform extraction suggested by Noble-Nesbitt.249 It was also accomplished through lanthanum staining that was proposed by Ghiradella and Radigan.271 These two distinct research studies summarized that the layer is capable of assuring hydrophobicity in wet environments as well as preventing desiccation in arid environments.
 Fig. 12  Diversified biocomponents in nature. (a) Photograph of Lebadea Martha parkeri Knight Butterfly. (b) Schematic showing the chemical structure of natural chitin and chitosan from butterfly wings. (c) FTIR image of natural chitosan. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43 and Copyright 2017, by Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Photos, SEM images and reflectance peaks of inverse opal photonic crystals of chitosan under ethanol or water condition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 270 and Copyright 2014, by American Chemical Society. (e) Chemical model of the multilayered collembolan cuticle of T. bielanensis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 264 and Copyright 2014, by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.4 Biocompatibility and biodegradation
Biocompatibility is a crucial component for establishing the appropriateness of a given material for particular applications in the biomedical as well as industrial fields, more so for “green” electronics applications.12 In particular, the continual accruals of non-biocompatibility or non-biodegradable external vehicles are greatly unfavorable to the human body as well as other objects. Therefore, exceptional biodegradability and biocompatibility are vital for the design and advancement of new physiologically friendly materials. Different from the traditional man-made or synthetic materials, biological materials expected to exhibit excellent biocompatibility are widely available in nature. They are capable of considerably decreasing the incidences of severe negative impacts brought about by the man-made or synthetic materials' administration. Polydopamine, a predominant pigment of organically occurring melanin, is composed of several operative groups, including catechol, amine, as well as imine, which makes it biodegradable as well as biocompatible.272 Studies carried out by Liu et al. confirmed that polydopamine-melanin exhibits low toxicity and excellent biocompatibility by observing the healthy behaviours, including exploratory behaviour, activity, grooming, eating, drinking, urination, or neurological status of rats after intravenous injection of a single dose over one-month period.273 These examinations indicated that polydopamine-melanin is not capable of stimulating clear cytotoxic impacts when attached to mouse 4T1 breast cancer cells as well as human cervical cancer cells (HeLa cells), even at extremely high doses. Amazingly, many examinations have shown that polydopamine-coatings encourage cell adhesion as well as propagation on substrates in material-independent ways, which is different from pristine substrates. These studies offer convincing confirmation of the insignificant cytotoxicity of polydopamine. In fact, many biological materials in nature are biocompatible and biodegradable. For example, silk, a natural material that has been widely used for a long time, is composed of sericin and fibroin and is biocompatible,142,274 bioresorbable275 and water soluble,276 with programmable rates of dissolution.277 Huang and co-workers demonstrated silk-based hydrogels with good mammalian cell adhesion and low cytotoxicity to exhibit excellent biocompatibility.278 They conducted live/dead staining to assess the biocompatibility by growing human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) on hydrogel surfaces. As a result, hMSCs seeded on the silk-elastin-like protein (SELP)-based hydrogels exhibited similar adhesion to the control tissue culture plate (TCP) surface and supported cell growth and proliferation for 2 weeks by observing fluorescence imaging of live/dead staining (Fig. 13a). Importantly, all tested surfaces show a healthy growth of hMSCs after 14 d by observing an elongated morphology of hMSCs. The results indicated that the SELP hydrogels have minimal cytotoxicity. Similarly, natural chitosan is also a typical biocompatible and non-toxic material, as verified by Arai and Kumirska. Because these compounds have very low toxicity, the LD50 of chitosan in laboratory mice is 16 g kg−1 body weight, which is similar to that of sugar and salt. In rats, chitosan is safe up to 19% in the diet.42 Biodegradation is necessary for materials used in biomedical applications since the long-term retention of foreign substances in the body is likely to cause severe adverse influences. Polydopamine nanoparticles showed reduced absorption along with color fading, suggesting the degradation of polydopamine nanoparticles. In addition, studies have examined the thorough degradation of melanin by hydrogen peroxide, which produces pyrrole-2,3-dicarboxylic acid and pyrrole-2,3-dicarboxylic acid.279 Furthermore, some microorganisms can produce the enzymatic degradation of polydopamine. For instance, natural proteins, cellulose and starch biological molecules with hydrolyzable linkages are generally susceptible to biodegradation by hydrolytic enzymes produced by microorganisms.280 Wheat gluten-based plastics were reported to fully degrade within 36 days through aerobic fermentation and 50 days in farmland soil, without the production of toxic products during the biodegradation period.281 Similarly, Benjamin P. Partlow et al. reported degradable natural silk materials.282 Silk protein-based hydrogels were implanted subcutaneously in mice and examined histologically at one (Fig. 13d), two (Fig. 13e) and four (Fig. 13f) weeks post-implantation. The results demonstrated that after four weeks of implantation the silk-based hydrogels showed a less distinct interface between the gel and adjacent tissues as the silk gel became integrated and had degraded their shapes. In addition, many biocompatible, bioresorbable, or biodegradable biological materials, such as polyphosphates, polylactides, polyethers, polyesters, and polyols, widely exist in nature. Combining newly emerging synthetic technologies and readily available biological materials will lead to the development of an increasing number of biodegradable and biocompatible biological materials as functional building blocks for various applications.283–285
 Fig. 13  
In vivo biocompatibility and biodegradation experiment of a natural silk hydrogel. Human mesenchymal stem cell interactions on silk-elastin-like protein (SELP)-based hydrogel surfaces: dead (red) and live (green) cell staining on (a) SELP hydrogel (1:8), (b) SELP hydrogel (4:8) and (c) the control tissue culture plate over a 14 d period. Scale bars: 100 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 278. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. The degradation of preformed hydrogels of 6% w/v implanted subcutaneously in a mouse model by H&E staining at (d) 1, (e) 2, and (f) 4 weeks following implantation, respectively. With the duration increased, the hydrogels showed degradation and progressive cell infiltration. Scale bars: 250 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. 
2.5 Other properties
In addition to the above mentioned alluring properties, other relevant properties of biological materials should also be discussed, such as their lightweight,286 and abrasion-resistant,287,288 paramagnetic,89,289,290 self-healing291 and tailorable optical properties.82 For example, silk, chitin, wood, and juglone are light weight and exhibit good flexibility and roughness. A cellulose-based aerogel possesses a porosity of 99.6% and a density of 5.6 mg cm−3 and exhibits an excellent compressive stress of 8.9 kPa at 80% strain.292 Furthermore, biological materials show various biofunctions of abrasion resistance, such as the radular teeth of chiton, which are composed of closely packed magnetite rod-like structures and are used for grazing algae from rocky surfaces.289 The scales of an ancient Polypterus senegalu fish (P. senegalu) contain rod-like, pseudo-prismatic crystallites of apatite in their ganoine layer and provide a defense mechanism against the attack of predators.293 In addition, melanin also displays paramagnetism and tailored optical properties.294 More importantly, novel functionalities, such as anticounterfeiting, catalytic, electrical, and chemical performance, can be integrated into biological materials. These unique properties afford biological materials with novel uses in a variety of fields.
3 Biological materials as components of hybrid structures
Biological materials have been widely accepted as one of the most attractive candidates for medical materials, as they possess unique biological activity unavailable in bulk materials. However, the intrinsic low conductivity of biological materials remains one of the greatest obstacles to their practical use in electronic materials. Due to their structural and compositional diversity, biological materials can be functionalized with relative ease by numerous synthetic methods. This functionalization may create unprecedented properties and functionalities to meet the demands of specific applications by altering the conductivity, mechanical properties, crystal structure, and solubility. Consequently, the features of biological composites might be elaborated more than those of non-natural materials. In developing high-performance composites motivated by nature's design principles, it is therefore needful to deem the structure–function relationships in hybrid biocomposites, to permit us design and produce novel hybrid biocomposites with most favorable natural architectures as well as functions. In this context, our primary concerns are the rational design and fabrication of hybrid biocomposites to tailor their unique structure, mechanical properties, and complex chemistry at multiple length scales to optimize their functional properties to produce ideal abilities.
Addressing this issue through systematic research will eventually open new directions and opportunities for the development of bioinspired composites with superior functional properties.177 Some examples of biologically derived materials from the latest literature are provided below to emphasize some of the modern efforts to comprehend this topic. Developed classification techniques that have permitted us to further understand the advantages of biological materials for specific functions at multiple length scales are first discussed (Section 3.1), followed by various case studies on the design of ‘smart’ materials combined with natural building blocks to afford outstanding properties (from Sections 3.2–3.5).
3.1 Properties of biological composites
The biological activity of living organisms, biological molecular and natural materials to assemble biological composites with remarkable properties using multiple weak hydrophobic effects, hydrogen bonds, electrostatic interactions, etc. chemical interactions or physical methods (e.g., freeze-drying)134 has produced a series of structural, chemical, and functional advantages, as follows:
(1) The natural topographic structures of biological building blocks at multiple length scales are designed to optimize the functional properties, which can provide biocomposites with excellent mechanical properties, hydrophobic surfaces with self-cleaning properties, and so on. Such structural features include, for instance, their detailed 3D architecture, the number of hierarchical levels, the topographic structures of the building blocks, the type and distribution of chemical bonds, and their spatial and orientational distribution.
(2) Modifying the chemical structure is a facile route to meet the demands of specific applications by adjusting the mechanical properties, conductivity, electron transfer rates, solubility, capacity, and crystal structure. For example, biological materials (e.g., pollen, butterfly, wood) coated with carbon materials (e.g., graphene, carbon nanotube, carbon dots) show excellent conductivity and offer ultrasensitive sensing platforms for the development of biosensors, including enzyme biosensors, protein biosensors, cancer biosensors, and air pollutant sensors.
(3) The multiple adjustable functions of biological materials (e.g., their light weight, natural abundance, biocompatibility, bioresorbability, and biodegradability) are ideal to produce new functional systems. The introduction of new properties derived from nature can endow biocomposites with multiple functions, for example, facile charge transfer, highly effective photon-harvesting and fast molecular transport. Hybrids with multiple functions can be designed to create materials with the properties of biospecies, nanomaterials, and atoms. As such, the combination could achieve “synergistic” results.
Biological composites can provide site-specific structure–function relationships that satisfy various demands and are environmentally friendly, thus providing an economic strategy to develop a novel biological composite with external functional properties by making efficient use of natural building blocks. Moreover, composites allow for the site-specific adjustment of the mechanical, optical, and electronic properties of a material to fit various applications. Examples of biological composites produced through the intimate incorporation of inorganic and organic building blocks are mineralized fish scales, teeth, byssus threads, mollusc shells, and bone.
3.2 Carbon–biomaterial composite materials
Carbon nanomaterials, including carbon nanotubes (CNTs) graphene (GO and rGO), and carbon dots, are particularly promising for various applications due to their unique electronic properties, mechanical properties, and chemical stability.295,296 First, both CNTs and graphene are molecular chemicals made entirely of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice, thus offering natural compatibility with biological materials.297,298 Second, these crystalline carbon nanomaterials exhibit extraordinary electronic properties with high stability and chemical flexibility due to their π–π conjugated skeletons.299–301 Third, they are easily produced over large areas through bottom-up chemical approaches and can be easily micro-/nanofabricated onto a wide range of substrates with high accuracy. Finally, another unique feature of these nanocarbons results from the fact that their low-dimensional nature is on the molecular scale, ensuring the number of bridged molecules down to the single-molecule level. Due to these features, carbon nanomaterials are well suited as nanoscale electrode materials for flexible electronics.302
Wang and co-workers first reported the preparation of a 3D hierarchical and hollow biological composite composed of biological L. clavatum sporopollenin pollen grains with reduced graphene oxide, rGO, as shown in Fig. 14a.39 In the work, a thin layer (<10 nm) of rGO was coated on the surface of the L. clavatum sporopollenin exine capsules using a multiple weak interaction method (e.g., electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonds). The structure and properties of the biological composite were statistically studied. The natural cellular structure of the L. clavatum sporopollenin exine capsules was retained, and the biological composite was highly conductive. Notably, this synthetic method can also produce other graphene-based biocomposites, such as graphene-sunflower pollen,18i.e., sunflower pollen/graphene with a perfect natural hierarchical structure and high conductivity. In addition to hierarchically structured pollen, some electro-active carbonyl compounds have been employed as a class of electrode materials, as shown in Fig. 14b.76 For example, natural juglone with redox-active quinone carbonyl groups, derived from walnut epicarp, has been proven to be capable of sodium-ion insertion/desertion and reversible electron transport (Fig. 14b). A rationally designed rGO/juglone biological material was fabricated by a facile self-assembly method without any additional conductive and binder agent. Natural juglone biological molecules were immobilized on rGO via noncovalent bonding with π–π interactions,303–306 which was confirmed via optical and photoelectron spectral analysis. Interestingly, this biological composite could prevent the dissolution of organic materials in the electrolyte and improve both the conductivity of the electrode and the sodium-ion accessibility.307 Additional research into carbon nanotubes (including MWCNTs and SWCNTs) and their integration into natural materials has provided a synthetic route involving weak hydrogen-bonding interactions. Recently, Wang and co-workers reported a synthetic method using weak hydrogen-bonding interactions for the fabrication of MWCNT-based biological composites.50 Structural features such as the natural hierarchical and hollow structure were shown in this MWCNT-based biological composite. Because of the tunable electronic properties of MWCNTs, the MWCNT-based biological composite is predicted to be an attractive material for electrical applications. One year later, they further used MWCNTs with PDMS and sunflower pollen to design a novel PDMS/MWCNT/pollen biological composite using the same synthetic method with a weak hydrogen-bonding interaction synthetic method (Fig. 14c). The porous MWCNT-based biological composite films exhibit high conductivity, permitting a response to external pressure stimuli, thus resulting in a significant development for the application of flexible electronic devices. Furthermore, honeycomb-shaped single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) were combined with Morpho sulkowskyi butterfly wings.251 These honeycomb-shaped SWCNT/(M. sulkowskyi) butterfly wing biological composites exhibited multiple functions with high electrical conductivity and laser-induced remote heating due to the highly intertwined, conductive and photothermal properties of the SWCNT/honeycomb networks.
 Fig. 14  Carbon–biomaterial composite materials prepared by various methods. (a) Electrostatic interactions: schematic illustration of combining natural Lycopodium clavatum pollen grains (cellular material) with an electrically conductive carbon material. FESEM images showing reduced graphene oxide/Lycopodium clavatum pollen-based composites. Reproduced with permission from Ref. 39 and Copyright 2016, by John Wiley and Sons. (b) π–π conjugation: schematic of the as-prepared biocomposites based on graphene/juglone. Typical top and cross-sectional view SEM images of rGO/Juglone biocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76 and Copyright 2015, by John Wiley and Sons. (c) Hydrogen bond: schematic of the synthesis mechanism of interlocked MWCNT-coated sunflower pollen. The inset shows hydrogen bonding between APTES on the surface of sunflower pollen and carboxyl-functionalized COOH-MWCNTs. FESEM images of samples from each synthetic step: APTES-modified SFPs and MWCNT-functionalized sunflower pollen biocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50 and Copyright 2017, by Elsevier. 
Carbon quantum dots (QDs) have been extensively explored to endow biological materials with novel functionalities to greatly expand the applications of biological materials.179,308–311 For instance, Lee et al. reported the combination of photoluminescent graphene quantum dots (GQDs) with mussel-inspired polydopamine biological composites fabricated by means of catechol chemistry.312 The coated biological composite exhibits an excellent and stable photoluminescence intensity, which can be well retained for 14 days in diverse buffers solutions, including those under acidic, neutral, and basic pH conditions. In contrast, the initial photoluminescence intensity of GQDs without polydopamine was reduced by 45% after 14 days of incubation in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution. The polydopamine coating was shown to protect GQDs from protonation, which leads to an improvement in the photoluminescence steadiness. Most significantly, the polydopamine coating predominantly improved the biocompatibility of GQDs. After administering into mice, the GQDs with polydopamine-coated biocomposites exhibited excellent long-term stable luminescence signals in the organs as compared to the GQDs without coating. Luminescent carbon nanodots were also coated on cellulose-based paper by an immersion method. They utilized the water-jet printing technology to create ink-free printing luminescent paper and may be made for anti-counterfeiting and information storage fields.313
3.3 Polymer–biomaterial composites
To combine biological activities for the creation of novel active materials, many polymers have been introduced into biological materials systems. These biological composite systems have found abundant applications in biosensing, energy, antibacterial action, etc., as revealed in Section 5. Huang and Chen et al. presented a well-controlled coating process for the fabrication of a natural oligo-proanthocyanidin/amphiphilic polydimethylsiloxane-modified N,O-carboxylic chitosan (PMSC) biological composite.105 The resultant oligo-proanthocyanidin-decorated polymer composite had a biostable 3D anti-inflammatory neural interface, as the semi-hydrophilic OPC can act as a structural stabilizer due to its abundant hydroxyl groups and aromatic architecture. In addition, PMSC self-assembled into spherical network nanostructures with sizes of approximately 150–200 nm, where the inner intertextures composed of hydrophobic and hydrophilic biological composites showed both large surface areas and biological structures. Because polymers can be tailored to provide excellent conductivity, in a very recent study, Chen et al. reported a simple route to fabricate juglone molecule/polypyrrole (PPy) biological composites using galvanostatic polymerization.73 Compared to smooth bare carbon fibers, the galvanostatic polymerization produced interlayer interactions between the carbon fiber and juglone/PPy, thus yielding a non-uniform facial layer consisting of granular clusters. PPy is a conductive polymer that possesses good charge storage capabilities, promoting the fast redox charge transfer of juglone by using its high electronic conductivity.
In addition to using biological molecules as simple building blocks in composite matrices, other biomolecules, including polysaccharides, proteins, viruses, DNA, and peptides, have been employed to prepare biological composites using a simple synthetic method. For example, among the many different organic templates for various nanomaterial fabrication and design strategies, M13 viruses have been given special attention because of their attractive and alluring properties, such as a high geometric aspect ratio with diameters of approximately 6 nm and lengths of approximately 880 nm, genetic tunability of the surface protein, and easy replicability.315 Recently, Zhang and co-workers developed a facile route to prepare biological composites through surface bonding and polymerization to produce polymethylacrylic acid (PMAA) on the surface of natural butterfly wings (Morpho), as illustrated in Fig. 15.95 Initially, the MAA monomer is introduced into the Morpho butterfly wing biotemplate which would interact through weak hydrogen bonding between the amino groups (–NH2) of chitosan in Morpho butterfly wings and the carboxyl groups (–COOH) of the MAA monomer. Subsequent PMAA was homogeneously coated on the hierarchical 3D architectures of the Morpho butterfly wings through a polymerization process. This biological material is structurally stable, and this work highlights a strategy for the development and design of a novel class of biocomposites with honeycomb and hierarchical 3D structures and provides an effective way for integrating functional polymers with biological materials for potential use in many fields.
 Fig. 15  Polymer coated various biological materials form biomaterial composite materials. (a) Schematic procedure for the preparation of Morpho butterfly wings with polymethylacrylic acid (PMAA) by using a surface bonding and polymerization route. (b) Photograph of a Morpho butterfly. SEM images of (c) alkali-treated Morpho butterfly wings and (d) PMAA-Morpho butterfly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
3.4 Inorganic–biomaterial composite materials
Inorganic materials, such as metal oxide semiconductors, have been employed in hybrid systems and provide a myriad of possibilities for further development and applications due to their various advantages: (1) their size and morphology are easily controlled, (2) their properties are very stable, and (3) their chemical composition is simple and tailorable. Based on these advantages, various metal oxide nanomaterials have been introduced into biological systems. Belcher and Lee reported pioneering research into using M13 viruses as biological templates for the fabrication of different biological composites.318,319 Tzvetkov et al. developed a simple two-step liquid precipitation method to successfully synthesize a novel biological composite with a well-defined core–shell nanostructure based on ZnO nanoparticles and natural pollen grains.193 This route is a simple, low temperature and environmentally friendly self-assembly procedure in which Zn2+-organic complexes were first grafted on the surface of pine pollen grains, followed by a treatment in Zn(CH3COO)2/NaOH solution (Fig. 16a). As a consequence, ZnO with a shell thickness of 450 nm was coated on the surface of Fe3O4 nanoparticles to form a well-defined core/shell structure (Fig. 16b–d). Goodwin reported the successful synthesis of hybrid iron oxide nanoparticles (Fe2O3 or Fe3O4)/pollen biological composites and replica materials by using a highly conformal surface sol–gel (SSG)-coating process.194 These 3D replicas exhibit additional advantages due to the synergistic properties of two materials.
 Fig. 16  Inorganic–biomaterial composite materials. (a) Schematic drawing of the two-step synthetic process for the fabrication of biological composite materials based on ZnO nanoparticles coated on the surface of pine pollen grains. SEM image of microcapsules: (b) pure natural pine pollen grain and (c and d) ZnO/pine pollen grain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. SEM image of sunflower pollen at different stages: (e) the exine of a natural sunflower pollen grain and (f) a core–shell Fe–O/sunflower pollen grain nanostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. TEM images of the Fe3O4@polydopamine core/shell biocompatible nanostructure with different shell thicknesses: (g) 10 nm, (h) 15 nm, and (i) 20 nm (120 nm Fe3O4 in diameter) and (j) 25 nm (200 nm Fe3O4 in diameter). Reprinted with permission from ref. 314 Copyright 2011 Elsevier. 
Polydopamine was coated on the surface of Fe3O4 nanoparticles, which underwent self-polymerization under basic conditions by the formation of –COO–NH2– ion pairs to form a well-defined polydopamine shell. The shell thickness can be precisely controlled in the range of 10–25 nm by varying the concentration of the dopamine monomer (Fig. 16g–j).314 Undoubtedly, such a method is also appropriate for other metal oxides.322–326 For example, many researchers reported the synthesis of various metal oxide–polydopamine composite materials through a similar coating strategy, such as TiO2/polydopamine core/shell spheres, polydopamine/SnO2 core–shell structures, monodisperse polydopamine/Ag hybrid hollow microspheres, Co3O4, MnO2/polydopamine nanocomposites. Furthermore, inorganic metallic nanowires and nanoparticles introduced into biological composites have also been recently reported. A small amount of silver nanowires or silver nanoparticles inside a cellulose nanopaper derived from natural wood was obtained by suction filtration and hot pressing.
3.5 Bio-hydrogels
Biological materials based on biohydrogels are composed of hydrophilic networks that are renewable, biocompatible, biodegradable, and of low cost and are potentially useful for various applications (such as sensors, biological devices, and separation systems).327,328 Different methods are available to fabricate biohydrogels.329 Two main synthetic methods are demonstrated in this section and can be distinguished according to different cross-linking reactions, physical synthetic methods and chemical polymerization methods. In physical synthetic methods, interactions between biological subunits are established to produce a biohydrogel through various noncovalent bonding interactions, including electrostatic interactions, π–π stacking, ionic bonds, coordination bonds, and hydrogen bonds. In chemical polymerization methods, the biological subunits are cross-linked through various polymerization methods, mainly including microwave irradiation polymerization, inverse phase suspension polymerization, and aqueous solution polymerization. A large number of biological-based hydrogels have been successfully prepared, such as chitosan, polydopamine, silk, cellulose, peptide, fibrin, collagen, actin and so on. For example, Toledano and co-workers first reported low molecular weight Fmoc-peptide hydrogels by using an efficient self-assembly method under mild conditions.330 Emma-rose et al. reported a cellulose-based hydrogel in which naphthyl-functionalized hydroxyethyl cellulose was added to a 1D carbon nanofiber colloidal nanoscale network (see Fig. 17a and b) to bridge multiple length scales, resulting in a significantly improved maximum elastic yield and enhanced storage modulus.316 And Qi and co-workers explored the incorporation of multiple functional biological molecules such as DNA and bacteria as programmable, sequence-specific ‘glues’ (Fig. 17c) into prescribed structures to control the shape of hydrogels (Fig. 17d–g), which demonstrates assembly across scales (Fig. 17d).317
 Fig. 17  Hydrogels based on natural cellulose and DNA materials. Schematic illustration of (a) a colloidal reinforced hydrogel made from nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) and (b) a hybrid hydrogel in which naphthyl-functionalized hydroxyethyl cellulose (HEC-Np) was adsorbed on the surface NFC hydrogel by using hydrogen bonding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 316 Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic showing the fabrication process of hydrogel cubes modified uniformly with giant DNA biological molecules. (d) Schematic of the hybridization process of giant-DNA-directed hydrogel assembly. (e–g) Various hydrogel structures forming DNA-directed self-assembly. Reproduced from with permission ref. 317 Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
In addition, hydrogels have been produced through dityrosine cross-linking (such as silk, resilin, gelatin and silk elastin-proteins), as demonstrated in Fig. 18. Such hydrogels had elastic moduli on the order of several hundred Pascals to several kilo-Pascals and exhibited good mechanical, optical, and swelling properties. For example, Partlow and co-workers developed a silk-based hydrogel with a tunable elastic modulus, which depended on the molecular weight of the precursor silk protein as well as the concentrations of hydrogen peroxide and peroxidase and showed extreme resilience, as demonstrated in Fig. 18a–c.282 Christopher M. Elvin and co-workers reported a photoinitiated Ru(II)bpy32+ reaction to prepare a resilin-based rubber-like biomaterial, and its flexibility is demonstrated in Fig. 18d–g.320 Gelation-based hydrogels and their mechanical properties were reported by Sakai and co-workers, as shown in Fig. 18h and i.321 Using the same method, a novel protein-based hydrogel was also developed by Huang et al. Interestingly, the gel exhibited a sequence-dependent response, whose mechanical, optical, and swelling properties could be tailored to respond to thermal and other external stimuli (Fig. 18j–l).278 As a consequence, these types of smart biological composite systems are tremendously useful for producing new biotechnological tools, such as sustainable lightweight batteries, high-sensitivity photosensors, and soft wearable devices.
 Fig. 18  Hydrogels based on biological silk, resilin, gelatin and silk elastin-protein materials. (a) Chemistry and structure of the silk molecules. (b) Cyclic compression properties of the silk hydrogel immersed in PBS. (c) Schematic showing the preparation of the highly elastic and complete recovery silk hydrogels by using covalent bonds, which are able to withstand 50% strain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (d and e) Structure of the dityrosine adduct from rec1-resilin. (f and g) Fluorescence and flexibility of a rubber-like rod of rec1-resilin. Photographs were taken under white light (upper panel) and ultraviolet light (lower panel). Reprinted with permission from ref. 320 Copyright 2005 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (h and i) Photographs of 3% (w/v) gelatin and gelatin-Ph solutions before (top) and after (bottom) ditryosine cross-linking. Reprinted with permission from ref. 321 Copyright 2009 Elsevier. (j) Representative images of covalent crosslinking mechanism of HRP-mediated SELP gelation. (k) Photograph of silk elastin-protein hydrogels. (l) Engineered thermally responsive hydrogels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 278. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
4 Biological materials for flexible electronic devices
Inorganic materials have applications in various fields of modern technology, such as energy, sensors, LED or flexible displays, lasers, detectors, catalysis, circuit elements, micro-fabricated memory elements, light-emitting diodes, photodiodes, solar cells, etc.1,331 However, applications of these intensively studied inorganic nanomaterials are frequently limited in some particular and industrial fields owing to their harsh synthesis, high cost, cytotoxicity, and non-degradability. In addition, developments in the fields like nanomedicine as well as bioelectronics, together with the imminent upheaval of ‘ubiquitous sensor networks’ need novel functional materials which are biocompatible, inexpensive, mechanically strong and adaptable enough for incorporation into tissues, building structures, fabrics as well as other hosts, apart from having least implanted manufacturing energy and very low power consumption. Nature is an exceptionally effective energy consumption engine that we can utilize for infinite inspirations. The diversity of biological materials offers a large number of unexplored possibilities to researchers, and has already started opening new opportunities in materials engineering, physics, and chemistry fields among other fields. Thus, in this section we focus primarily on advancements in conventional functional nanomaterials-based flexible electronic devices and discuss the current problems that limit the use of these conventional functional nanomaterials in the context of flexible electronic devices. After addressing the above issues, we summarize the current progress in creating biological materials derived from nature with various advantages and benefits in flexible electronic devices.
4.1 Problems of conventional functional nanomaterial-based flexible electronic devices: limited mechanical flexibility, high cost and biocompatibility
Flexible and wearable devices should preferably be flexible, easy to produce, biocompatible, inexpensive, lightweight, and multifunctional sensing platforms.291,332–334 Much attention is being paid on how to endow wearable devices with as much new functionalities as possible. Due to the increasingly high standards and demands for flexible, high-performance and environmentally friendly electronic devices, flexibility and biocompatibility, in particular, are being given much attention. Namely, high mechanical flexibility and biocompatibility not only allow conformation to curved and dynamic surfaces and the creation of compatible interfaces with curvilinear and soft biological tissues/organs with seamless fidelity, but also alleviate serious adverse effects and potential detriments resulting from the long-term retention of foreign substances in the body.48 Therefore, high mechanical flexibility and biocompatibility are required for the development of next-generation flexible and wearable electronics, especially for biological-related applications, such as biomedical diagnosis and therapy, electronic skin sensors, and brain/machine interfaces. In fact, functional nanomaterials have been widely investigated and employed in flexible and wearable devices over the past few decades due to their excellent electrical, structural, and optical properties. Even so, these intensively studied functional nanomaterials have limited applications in many fields, such as in food, medicine, biology, and large-scale industrial applications, due to their harsh and complicated fabrication steps and methods, low mechanical flexibility, high cost, toxicity, non-compatibility, and non-degradability.90
(1) Specifically, the limited availability of mineral resources hardly satisfies the increasing requirements and subsequent production quantity of energy-storage devices over the long term, which will necessarily result in price increases.
(2) The non-biodegradability of current electronic and energy-storage devices after their service lifetime will produce tremendous amounts of electronic garbage.
(3) Another issue encountered with current electronic and energy-storage devices arises from the laborious preparation processes of these synthetic materials and man-made functional materials, which usually require extreme conditions, which limits their low-cost large-scale fabrication capability.
(4) Although various 3D synthetic biomimetic man-made functional materials have been produced with much progress, key challenges remain, with limitations in mimicking or accurately recreating biological materials to obtain excellent mechanical flexibility.
The flexibility of functional nanomaterials is strongly dependent on their mechanical features, relating exactly to the structure as well as the size of the building blocks.336 Due to the yield stress of the crystalline material being inversely proportional to the square root of the grain size in the structural hierarchy, the innately brittle nanostructured materials are capable of producing functional nanomaterials with tunable efficient elastic modules. In particular, most bulk functional materials exhibit extremely limited deformability to failure. Therefore, excellent deformability with a low elastic modulus is required to improve the mechanical properties. Well-organized hierarchical and porous structures benefit the creation of mechanically flexible materials for a wide variety of applications, especially for flexible electronic skins that respond to external stimuli, which is one of the most common applications.32 There are numerous synthetic approaches and strategies for preparing multiscale hierarchical surfaces or 3D porous structures. The existing methods can be divided into various bottom-up, top-down, and hybrid approaches.126 Studies into these approaches suggest the formation of multilevel and complex structures, for example, honeycomb, multishell hollow,32,50 urchin-like,337 brush-like,304 flower-like,338,339 tree-like,340 and branched structures.341,342
The fabrication of conventional functional nanomaterials usually has high energy requirements and releases toxic materials, which pollute the environment. Therefore, the high cost and limited biocompatibility hinder the widespread use of these synthetic functional materials in many fields. In particular, the lasting buildup of non-biocompatible or non-biodegradable external vehicles is greatly disadvantageous to the human body as well as other objects. Therefore, exceptional biodegradability as well as biocompatibility is crucial in the design and advancement of novel physiologically friendly materials.283 One of the most promising strategies for obtaining environmental benignity as well as high performance, in addition to the low-cost large-scale fabrication capability, is by using a class of biocompatible and biodegradable materials. Biocompatible materials can meaningfully reduce the occurrence of serious adverse effects caused by the administration of man-made or synthetic materials. In most cases, nature-inspired functional materials are verified to possess good biocompatibility. Depending on the chemical composition and natural properties, various biomimetic polymer materials can be employed, such as chitosan, cellulose, paper, etc.343–349 One of the most interesting potentials of biocompatible materials is their employment in biointegrated electronic devices for biological-related applications, such as brain/machine interfaces, biomedical diagnosis and therapy, and sensor skins.
Though many useful strategies have been developed to address these problems over the past few decades, many challenges remain in developing new materials with low cost, excellent mechanical flexibility, and biocompatibility. Therefore, the key focus in this field is the development of materials with as many new properties and functions as possible.
4.2 Benefits of biological materials as active components in flexible electronic devices
Considering the numerous unique properties of biological materials, it should come as no surprise that they are currently, without a doubt, the most extensively studied materials for a wide range of applications, not only as convenient active synthetic precursors but also as complex actuators for electronic devices. Hitherto, several notable reviews have emphasized the advantages of using biological materials (such as silk, wood, polydopamine, etc.) in flexible and wearable electronic, energy, biological devices.12,48,89,91,351,352 What exactly makes biological materials interesting and beneficial subjects for biological reasons? As we discussed in previous sections, biological materials are structurally and functionally diverse with outstanding potential for fine-tuning, and these materials can serve as active building blocks and are easily functionalized through numerous synthetic methods. Thus, one may create combinations of multiple functional properties, including superhydrophobicity, biocompatibility, biodegradation, good mechanical properties, abundant renewable supply, etc., and these properties are not the limit. Applications of biologically active biological materials or biological-based composites in flexible electronic devices could overcome the problems of conventional synthetic materials:
(1) The unique hierarchical structures provide greater surface area and tailorable mechanical behaviors compared to other man-made or synthetic materials. On one hand, the high surface area ensures effective contact of the external stimulus (electrolyte, biomarkers, gas molecules, etc.) with the material surface, facilitating charge transfer across the sensing layer–target molecules interface. On the other hand, the diverse mechanical properties allow the creation of materials with tunable effective elastic moduli, thus endowing them with high performance.
(2) Highly organized hierarchical porous nanostructures create unique functionalities, such as structural color, superhydrophobicity, selective filtration capacity, directional adhesion, antireflective characteristics, etc., which endows their flexible and wearable electronic devices with multifunctionality or versatility.
(3) Biocompatibility, biodegradability, and lightweight characteristics reduce the risk for human environmental exposure as well as reduce the discomfort of users, allowing the continuous and long-term use of flexible and wearable electronic devices, thus endowing them with good long-term stability together with environmental friendliness.
(4) The abundant renewable supply and low cost of biological materials make them promising candidates for the development of flexible and wearable electronic devices for various applications and endow them with low-cost large-scale production capability.
(5) A large number of active groups on the surface of natural biological materials are easily functionalized and modified through many synthetic methods. As a consequence, natural biofunctional surfaces often have to fulfill several functions, which are achieved through their highly tailorable composition and structure. Changing the chemical structures is an ultimate way of meeting the needs of particular applications by transforming the capacity, solubility, crystal structure, electron-transfer rate, ionic conductivity, as well as mechanical features.
(6) The hierarchical structures are clasped through a combination of strong as well as weak tunable bonds in affording excellent fixed properties whereas still capable of adapting, remodeling, and self-healing their architecture and exploring other design spaces in regard to vigorously transforming external stimuli.
(7) The building blocks are collected into multiscale hierarchical structures, and then respond considerably to the external stimuli (such as the mechanical stress) for further improving the functional features of the material.
In the following sections, we describe recent progress in the application of biological materials or biological-based composites in flexible or wearable electronic devices.
5 Application of natural biomaterials as active components
Based on the above advantages of biological materials as active components in composites, in this section, we summarize current progress in the application of these materials in flexible and wearable electronics. We focus primarily on the fabrication of flexible substrate systems derived from nature (Section 5.1) and then outline some applications in biosensors (Section 5.2), electronic sensors (Section 5.3), energy conversion and storage devices (Section 5.4), and other applications (Section 5.5).
5.1 Flexible substrates
Substrates play an important role in electronic devices, such as flexible displays, energy, and sensing outlets. Flexible plastics, rubbers, and polymers (e.g., poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET), polyimide (PI), and poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS)) are widely used as substrates due to their great mechanical flexibility, good chemical resistance, stability, etc.355,356 Unfortunately, most current substrates are nonbiodegradable, nonrecyclable and have low biocompatibility. For example, plastic requires 450 years to decompose. However, the lifetime of many sensors and flexible displays, such as cellphones, is on average 18 months.357 As a result, electronic applications generate a large amount of waste. With further understanding of sustainable development, biodegradable and abundant materials are expected to replace nonbiodegradable materials in flexible electronic device applications.358 In this case, the two key issues to be considered when designing flexible electronics are (1) overcoming the mechanical instability of active films subjected to strain/stress and (2) identifying suitable substrates and permeation barrier layers to allow operational stability and resistance to degradation.
Highly mechanically flexible, robust and biodegradable substrates have been intensively investigated to reduce waste and minimize environmental pollution. In addition, biocompatibility and biodegradability are critical for biofunctional and bioimplantable electronics. Biological materials are the largest material systems in nature, with the features of excellent biocompatibility, biodegradability, versatility, sustainability, and low cost. Various biological materials can be used to make substrates exhibit excellent transparency, flexibility, structural robustness with small thermal expansion coefficients, stable mechanical flexibility and surface roughness, as illustrated in Fig. 19 and 20. For example, Rogers reported in 2012 that silk is a desirable natural polymer for biocompatible passive support and packaging materials for flexible and wearable electronics because it is mechanically robust, flexible, insulating, optically transparent, biocompatible, and amenable to chemical and biological functionalization.11 The inspiration to use silk as a substrate material first came from Bombyx mori cocoons.5,359 It was demonstrated that Mg inductive coils joined with other resistive microheaters made up of doped Si nanomaterials that are incorporated on silk substrates and then housed in silk packages, which are capable of providing transitory thermal therapy for the control of surgical site infections as nonantibiotic, programmable bactericidal appliqué that vanishes when the patient improves past the greatest risk period (Fig. 19a and b). Furthermore, the natural silk has significant biodegradability as well as bioresorbability features (Fig. 19c–e), which permits its programmable dissolution as well as its biodegradation rates and formation of noninflammatory degradation products, together with adaptable processability under favorable conditions, as shown in Fig. 19d. Accordingly, silk as an efficient medium has been widely applied in implantable devices which can transfer active electronic modules onto different objects' surfaces including the tooth, brain, skin as well as other organs in performing enviable functions with conformal contact.
 Fig. 19  Flexible biosubstrates based on natural silk biological materials. (a) Photograph and (b) schematic illustration of a device based on a thin silk substrate. (c–e) Images showing the mechanism of water solubility of the silk substrate with time from 0 to 10 min. (f) Evaluations of an implanted bioresorbable device for thermal therapy in vivo for 3 weeks. Images showing a partially resorbed region of the silk film after 3 weeks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11 Copyright 2012 Science. (g and h) Photograph of a silk-fibroin-based flexible sensor. (i and j) Photograph showing a wireless sensor based on graphene attached on a tooth and muscle after the dissolution of the silk substrate. Scale bar: 1 cm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 335 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 20  Flexible biosubstrates based on natural chitin and cellulose biological materials. (a) Molecular structure of chitin from squid pen (b). (c) Photograph showing a flexible organic light-emitting diode (OLED) device on a flexible and transparent chitin-substrate in flat and bent states. The scale bar is 1 cm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (d and e) Photographs and (f) SEM image of the flexible chitin film with ethanol coagulants under dry and wet conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) A flexible optically transparent cellulose-based film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 350 Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons. (h) Luminescence of an OLED deposited onto a transparent, flexible and low-coefficient of thermal expansion wood-cellulose substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69 Copyright 2009 Elsevier. 
A graphene-based wireless sensor on a silk fibroin film was recently created (Fig. 19g and h).335 This sensor is capable of conforming to many biological tissues, including teeth (Fig. 19i) and muscles (Fig. 19j). Through functionalization of graphene films with biorecognition peptides, this device can also be of biological significance or used to sense with exposure limits of a specified bacterium. Bacteria-detection function of this sensor is also reliant on the electrical conductivity transformation of the graphene film, which may be assessed indirectly or remotely through integration or assimilation using a wireless coil. Upon transfer of the sensor onto a tooth, a close connection was established between the sensing components as well as the tooth subsequent to dissolution of the silk substrate, allowing the sensor to rapidly react to the exhaled breath. Furthermore, the device also has potential for noninvasive biomedical analyses and diagnoses.
In addition to natural silk, Jin and Bae recently demonstrated that chitin [poly-β-(1,4)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine], a natural structural polysaccharide, is a highly desirable substrate material (Fig. 20a and b).101 Natural chitin is a major constituent of the endoskeletons of cephalopods, the exoskeletons of arthropods, and the cell walls of fungi and is non-toxic, biodegradable, biocompatible, and mechanically robust360,361 (inset, Fig. 20b). They reported a simple bottom-up self-assembled route to synthesize a new transparent chitin substrate via a centrifugal casting process. This work employed transparent chitin-based paper in a flexible optoelectronic device, such as an organic light-emitting diode (OLED), for the first time (Fig. 20c). Furthermore, Zhang et al. recently demonstrated a natural and green chitin transparent substrate or paper prepared by the same bottom-up synthetic method to coagulate chitin nanofiber from a chitin solution (Fig. 20d–f).102 Cellulose, which is naturally produced from a variety of organisms (wood, plants, trees, bacteria, algae, tunicates, etc.), has been reported as a natural passive support and packaging material. Nogi and co-workers in 2009 obtained an optically transparent cellulose-based paper/substrate using a polishing method (Fig. 20g).350 As a result, this cellulose substrate is flexible, foldable and highly transparent. Meanwhile, Okahisa and co-workers also reported an optically transparent wood cellulose-based substrate and applied the substrate in flexible OLED displays (Fig. 20h).69 They successfully deposited an OLED on optically transparent, low-coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE), and flexible wood cellulose-based substrate. Compared with other substrates, the wood cellulose nanocomposites exhibited a lower Young's modulus and a lower CTE value.
5.2 Biosensors
Biosensors are analytical devices, representing one of the most important and widely investigated areas for the application of biological materials. Biological materials have become famous because they display unique biological activities with remarkable hydrophilicity and biocompatibility and can undergo secondary reactions with various molecules, providing an important sensing platform to produce a variety of hybrid materials with certain functionalities. Therefore, a review by Cespedes emphasized the use of biological composite materials in biosensors. However, biological materials feature favorable physicochemical versatility, which results in numbers of biological and biomedical applications. Hence, different biological materials and biological-based composites are summarized in this section in terms of biosensor applications.

5.2.1 Flexible FET biosensors. 
In the early stages of research, researchers first tried to adapt biological materials to bioelectronic devices. One of the predominant contributions to the field of flexible FET biosensors was first offered by Rolandi and co-workers (Fig. 21a).353 The flexible FET biosensor employed a maleic–chitosan biocomposite as the sensing layer. The proton flow was regulated through an electrostatic potential that was applied to the gate electrode, causing the protons to dissociate from the maleic acid groups and move along the hydrated hydrogen-bonded matrix to the proton conductor PdHx protode instead of the electrode (Fig. 21b). The confirmed field-effect proton mobility was mH + B = 4.9 × 103 cm2 V−1. This demonstrated that with additional optimization, these devices can be combined with conventional electron conducting devices to interfere with the living tissue for a wider range of applications (Fig. 21c).
 Fig. 21  Field-effect transistor (FET) biosensors based on biological materials. (a) Schematic illustration and (b) atomic force micrographs (AFM) of a chitosan-based FET biosensor. (c) Plot of channel proton density as a function of Vgs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 353 Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Design scheme of a flexible FET biosensor with graphene-functionalized natural sunflower pollen microcapsules as the sensing element for molecular detection. (e) Dose-dependent responses to target PSA. (f) Measurement response as a function of PSA concentration and the degree of substrate bending. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18 Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (g and h) Photograph showing the silk from Bombyx mori silk cocoons. (i) Optical image showing the silk-based graphene FET biosensor attached onto the wrist. (j) Experimental measurement of the silk/GOx functionalized graphene FET biosensor in response to various concentrations of glucose at Vds = 100 mV. (k) The response curve at different concentrations of glucose of the silk/GOx functionalized graphene FET at Vg = 0 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 354 Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
Another successful demonstration was accomplished by our research group that employing a natural pollen microcapsule material (sunflower pollens, defined as SFPs), and functionalizing with reduced graphene oxide (rGO) coatings, the fabricated flexible FET biosensor exhibited remarkable stability during operation in aqueous media (Fig. 21d).18 Moreover, an antibody layer could be anchored on the surface of the sensing layer to efficiently recognize prostate specific antigen (PSA), which is a biomarker that can be used to diagnose prostate cancer in males (Fig. 21d). Furthermore, this biological-based biosensor was used to establish label-free flexible electronic sensing in an electrolyte solution and showed stable sensing performance with an ultra-low limit of detection for PSA of 1.7 fM (Fig. 21e) as well as excellent mechanical flexibility (Fig. 21f). Taking advantage of the fact that biological materials in FET biosensors are an integral part of the operation mechanism of the device, the principle of our work can be translated to other pollen grains with unique biological activity for application as receptors to detect target molecules in real fluid media.39
The notable dielectric as well as mechanical features of silk fibroin makes it a promising material in adaptable applications in biosensing, as shown in Fig. 21g–i.354 An adaptable as well as biocompatible graphene FET that applies silk fibroin both as a substrate and a gate dielectric for glucose sensing has been described recently. A silk-fibroin gate-dielectric film had been incorporated with the glucose oxidase enzyme, acting as a glucose-sensing layer in stimulating graphene conductance under a catalytic glucose response. The variable graphene FET biosensor indicated steady enzyme action as well as a linear reaction to glucose between 0.1–10 × 10−3 M, indicating that this device has potential in implantable incessant-glucose-monitoring applications (Fig. 21j and k). The mechanical elasticity and thickness of silk-fibroin films allow silk-based biosensors to be embedded on and conform to curved surfaces. This characteristic is important for realistic applications in health monitoring as well as biosensing. For example, an RFID-like silk sensor was created by integrating biocompatible silk substrates and wireless antennae. This sensor may be able to conform to different food surfaces for food and accurate quality monitoring (Fig. 22).62 In addition to offering a strong but conformal substrate, silk-fibroin films also greatly contribute to the continuous monitoring of food quality in terms of spoilage and deterioration by modifying its geometric and dielectric features. This feature may have significant impact on the operation of the wireless antennae. Both the active (recognition) and passive (substrate) functions of silk fibroin in wireless sensors offer potential pathways for implantable or biocompatible multifunctional flexible and wearable electronic device application.
 Fig. 22  Natural silk-based flexible biosensors. (a) Schematics of preparation routes for natural silk-based biosensors. (b) Image showing flexible sensors attached on egg surfaces. (c) Image of the shell–silk interface when silk was attached on the surface of an egg, from a cross-sectional view. (d) Reflection versus frequency curves of the eggs with (red) and without (blue) the THz SRR sensor. (e) Image showing flexible sensors attached on surfaces of various objects. (f) Photograph of a GHz resonant coil on a flexible silk substrate. (g) The frequency-dependent impedance phase angle curves of a silk sensor used to detect bacterial contamination in a slice of cheese. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. 


5.2.2 Flexible electrochemical biosensors. 
Many biological materials, as ideal materials for electrochemical biosensors, have also been widely studied for flexible electrochemical biosensors due to their excellent biocompatibility and robust mechanical flexibility. While biological materials exhibit great promise, biological-based composites have recently attracted great attention for their applicability to electrochemical sensing. Particularly, various carbon materials, including carbon nanotubes, graphene, and semiconductor nanoparticles, are already widely used in electrochemical biosensors.
Recently, Javey and co-workers reported fully integrated wearable biosensor array based CNT/chitosan biocomposite materials for the detection of electrolytes (such as sodium and potassium ions) and sweat metabolites (such as glucose and lactate) based on the skin temperature (Fig. 23a).110 A photograph of the wearable electrochemical biosensor and a schematic of the electric circuit are illustrated in Fig. 23b and c. In particular, chitosan is an ideal candidate for the immobilization of bioactive molecules onto electrodes as it has excellent biocompatibility and film-forming capabilities.362,363 As a result, this biological composite film exhibited a high sensitivity for glucose and lactate of 2.35 nA μM−1 and 220 nA mM−1, respectively (Fig. 23d). Moreover, the biosensor displayed excellent long-term stability and good repeatability, as the sensitivities of the biosensors were consistent over a period of at least four weeks. Furthermore, the effect of mechanical deformation was studied by detecting the mechanical properties of both the flexible printed circuit board (FPCB) and the sensor array in different bent states with radii of curvature of 1.5 and 3 cm, respectively, and a negligible signal change and robust mechanical flexibility were observed. As a result, this work can realize personalized medicine (Fig. 23e). In addition, Shan and co-workers published a similar report concerning a chitosan/graphene/Au composite-based electrochemical biosensor for monitoring glucose.364 In this case, the glucose oxidase enzyme was immobilized on the surface of the chitosan-based composite sensing film, which reduced O2 to H2O2 in the presence of glucose. The resulting chitosan-based composite sensing film exhibited good reproducibility with 4.7% standard deviation for six successive measurements, an amperometric response with a linear range from 2 to 14 mM, and a low limit of detection of 180 μM for glucose.
 Fig. 23  Flexible electrochemical biosensors based on chitosan composite materials. (a) Schematic illustration showing fully integrated wearable sensor arrays applied in the outdoor exercise. (b and c) A photograph of the wearable electrochemical biosensor and the schematic of the electric circuit. (d) Experimental characterization of the wearable sensors for detection of glucose and lactate in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solutions. (e) Perspiration analysis during stationary cycling in real-time: attached on the head and wrist. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 

5.3 Electronic sensors
In recent scientific and technological developments, increased attention has been given to environmentally friendly electronic devices. In particular, ‘green’ electronics is not only an emerging area of research but also a novel scientific field aimed at identifying compounds of natural origin and establishing economically efficient routes for the production of synthetic materials applicable to environmentally safe (biodegradable) and/or biocompatible devices.12 Natural biological materials, including various flora and fauna, such as plants, flower spores, butterflies, natural living particles, bacteria, DNA, proteins, etc., are earth abundant, sustainable, biocompatible, strong, biodegradable, and chemically accessible for modification, which offers abundant advantage for applications in ‘green’ flexible electronic devices. Research into the emerging class of ‘green’ electronics based on biological materials may not only deliver low-cost and energy efficient materials and devices but may also afford unimaginable functionalities by integrating benign biological materials or biological-based composites into daily life and the environment. This section highlights recent research advancements in emerging biological or biological-based composite materials and their integration in various flexible electronic devices.

5.3.1 Electronic skin sensors. 
Due to its ability to sense tactile forces, electronic skin (e-skin) is able to simulate the properties of human skin and enhance the capabilities of human skin by incorporating different sensors that are integrated with elastomeric and/or plastic substrates, allowing the signal capture and property simulation of the mechano- and thermo-receptors of skin tissues.366–368 Human skin is considered a benchmark for the performance of artificial tactile systems. Recently, the growth of e-skin based on material selection and the capability of transferring the mechanical properties (flexibility, low modulus and stretchability) of human skin to an artificial counterpart, such as conducting polymers,32,369–371 carbon materials372,373 and low-dimensional materials,374,375 has been considered. Natural biomaterials have diverse mechanical properties and, with proper material choice, can have tunable effective elastic moduli to achieve high performance. Recently, Wang et al. designed flexible pixel-type e-skin arrays that are highly sensitive and responsive in a very short time (Fig. 24).50 Their work demonstrated the development of a wearable, highly sensitive e-skin sensor based on the integration of natural elastic sunflower pollen microcapsules within hollow and hierarchical structures (Fig. 24a and b). The device functions well in discriminating between a variety of spatiotemporal tactile stimuli under both dynamic and static pressure states and exhibits a low-enough detection limit (1.6 Pa). A flexible 12 × 8 pixel sensor array 18 × 12 cm2 in size integrated with a 3D rubber composite film on a micro-structured PDMS substrate was also fabricated. Pressure changes in the contact region can be mapped by recording the relative current changes, as demonstrated by installing the sensor array on a human hand and other objects (e.g., the letters ‘N’, ‘T’, and ‘U’) (Fig. 24d–f). According to their explanation, noticeable changes in the resistance result from the tunable effective elastic modulus of the hollow spheres. Importantly, because SFP possesses natural superhydrophobic properties and a strong hierarchical structure, the resulting interlocked structure enables resistance to water absorption, as well as other structural and functional properties that are characteristic of hydrophobic surfaces (Fig. 24g). Therefore, the device displayed high stability, and the inclusion of the natural microcapsules imparted hydrophobic characteristics that facilitated waterproofing for all-weather use.
 Fig. 24  Electronic skin (e-skin) sensors based on biological materials. (a) Photograph and (b) FESEM images of sunflower and sunflower pollen. (c) Conceptual illustration of the 3D composite film based on an interlocking geometry with encapsulated sunflower pollen microcapsules. (d–f) Schematic diagram showing a 3D matrix rubber-based sensor array (12 × 8 pixels), which can map the shape of different objects such as a human hand, the “N”, “T”, and “U” letters. (g) Measured contact angle curves and images on the 3D sunflower pollen-based composite film (black line) and planar composite film without natural sunflower pollen (blue line) surfaces over time (0–30 min). (a) Sunflower image reprinted with permission from ref. 18 Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (b–g) Reprinted with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (h) Schematic illustration showing the structure and preparation route of natural silk-based e-skin sensors. (i) Shape-mapping of various objects distributed on the (9 × 9 pixels) e-skin sensor arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 365 Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. 
Biocompatibility is a significant consideration for such devices because applications of e-skins are closely related to biological interfaces. Ideally, e-skins should be fabricated from highly biocompatible precursors; however, biological reactions in the human body are so complex that the prediction of the interaction of a single substance with the body is difficult. For instance, CNTs have been identified to exhibit asbestos-like pathogenic behavior because of their needle-like morphology and small volume.376 Similarly, some reports have also demonstrated that high concentrations of CNTs are highly toxic to cells.377 Further, other reports have indicated that the immunogenic response due to the incorporation of CNTs into electronic devices is dependent on the nano-topology.355 In fact, the determination of biocompatibility involves many factors, such as the surface charge, concentration, morphology, chemical composition, and pH, indicating that the careful control of material design and proper in vivo testing are crucial to determine the biocompatibility of a particular material in a given application. A safe method to achieve biocompatibility is to choose materials that occur naturally, such as silk, chitosan, starch, and DNA. Silk fibroin has attracted wide attention for flexible electronic devices due to its matrix.48 In 2017, Zhang and co-workers fabricated a skin-like pressure sensor incorporated with silk fibroin-derived active materials through a large-scale and low-cost method (Fig. 24h).365 Flexible and positive pressure sensors can be produced from unstructured PDMS films and transparent carbonized silk nanofiber membranes through a large-scale and cost-effective method. As a result of the incorporation of unique N-doped carbon nanofibers with the interconnected structure of CSilkNM, the sensor displayed superior performance and showed several advantages, including an ultra-high sensitivity over a broad pressure range (34.47 kPa−1, 0.8–400 Pa and 1.16 kPa−1, 400–5000 Pa), an ultra-low detection limit of 0.8 Pa, a fast response time of <16.7 ms, and good durability and stability over >1000 cycles, showing a comprehensive advantage over previously reported pressure sensors. The advantageous performance of this device allows applications in the monitoring of human physiological signals, perceived micro-touches, the spatial distribution of pressure and other aspects (Fig. 24i).
In another study, Yang et al. reported a low-cost, simply prepared, and flexible graphene-silk pressure sensor based on a soft silk substrate via thermal reduction.378 In their work, silk was used as the support, and the device formed a 3D orderly multi-layer structure allowing for the detection of a large range of pressures. In addition, molecules such as DNA were also adopted as dielectric materials,379 and naturally sensing platforms (e.g., carotenoid polyenes and indigo) were used as flexible substances.380 In addition, due to the stable hydrogen-bonding π-stacked structure of natural dyes, the presence of hydrogen-bonded analogues of linear acenes was recently reported.381 Transient electronics, which can be decomposed or re-absorbed into the human body at a programmed rate, is an additional concept resulting from the synthesis of natural compounds.382,383 For instance, Bao et al. demonstrated a biocompatible and biodegradable pressure sensor patch composed of a capacitive sandwich structure with a biodegradable material, poly(glycerol sebacate), as the dielectric layer and Mg metal as the electrode (Fig. 25a).13 The device can be completely degraded after use, thus avoiding further surgical interference and reducing the generation of waste. Resorbable biological substrates can also play a key role in interactions with the body. Kim and co-workers created devices for cardiac electrophysiological and electrocorticography instruments on mechanically compliant matrices (Fig. 25b).5 The adaptability of flexible sensors was further enhanced through the use of bioresorbable silk substrates, which can be deposited on the surface of the brain or implanted into the brain. In general, great advancements have been achieved in the development of biodegradable and biocompatible equipment, enabling the integration of e-skin with the human body.
 Fig. 25  Biodegradable e-skin sensors. (a) The schematic structure of a flexible and biodegradable e-skin sensor based on microstructured PGS films. (b) Photographs from a representative device before in vitro degradation and after seven weeks of incubation. (c) Carotid artery and femoral artery monitored. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Photograph showing an electrode array with a mesh design on a dissolvable natural silk substrate. (e–h) Series of pictures illustrating how the thickness of the electrode array contributes to conformally attach on a brain model. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group. 


5.3.2 Flexible photodetectors. 
Photoelectric detectors with broadband light detection have been employed in biomedical imaging, remote sensing, and spectral and optical communications.2,385,386 In recent years, the biological response to light in organisms such as frogs, beetles, and octopuses has inspired the combination of intelligent materials with delicate optical structures in various biological materials or artificial sensors, leading to better performances over conventional photoelectric detectors.173,387,388 Moreover, the inorganic/biomolecule nanohybrids can be inorganic nano-structure and excellent electronic and optical properties of biological molecules and the combination of optoelectronics, its performance than conventional material performance can be realized. Biological macromolecules, such as DNA and proteins, are promising alternatives to synthetic polymers, and their heterojunctions, formed through covalent bonding with carbon and other nanostructures or noncovalent bonding, show great advantages. Therefore, inorganic/biomolecule optoelectronic nanohybrids allow atomic-scale to device-scale design of photon absorption, exciton dissociation, and charge-carrier transfer and transport by combining the unique electronic and optoelectronic properties of the materials. These nanohybrids present great opportunity for new optoelectronic devices with high quantum efficiency. In a recent study, Wu and co-workers explored the biomolecule cytochrome c (Cyt c, PDB ID: 1HRC) adsorbed on s-SWCNTs to form a molecular block.389 The high response rate and high external quantum efficiency (EQE) obtained in near-infrared (NIR) detection were as high as 90% due to the high exciton absorption of s-SWCNTs and the effective exciton separation of the sSWCNT/Cyt c interface. Although the EQEs obtained in previously reported studies of CNT-based nanocomposites show improvements of over two orders of magnitude, several basic problems remain. Other biomolecules, such as peptides and amino acids, have excellent charge-transport properties and great molecular dipoles that play a large role in the operation of electronic devices. Deng and co-workers adopted a mild, environmentally friendly strategy to create GO sheets functionalized with amino acids (Fig. 26a–c).384 The novel compounds were extensively adjusted with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene (PEDOT:PSS) to match the energy levels of various semiconductors. The functionalized organic photodetector shows the highest normalization capability at −0.1 V.
 Fig. 26  Flexible photodetectors based on biological materials. (a) Schematic showing the fabrication process of amino acid functionalized graphene oxide. (b) Responsivity and detectivity versus the wavelength of the amino acid (Cys)-based photodetectors under −0.1 V. (c) Frequency response of various photodetectors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 384. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Photograph showing a self-powered flexible photodetector on a bio-cellulose structure. (e) I–V curves of the cellulose-based flexible photodetector under different illumination intensities; (f) time–response of the cellulose-based flexible photodetector under 365 nm light illumination with 0.7 mW cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to the active material, the biological structure of the flexible substrate employed in a photodetector was also studied. Cellulosic structures, such as paper, have recently gained research interest for wearable photodetectors. Although polyethylene (PET) films and glass are still employed in the industry, the structure of cellulose makes it possible to lower the manufacturing cost and impart environmental friendliness. Lin et al. demonstrated a simple sandwich structure to fabricate a flexible UV photodetector based on ZnO nanocrystals on cellulosic materials (Fig. 26d–f).68 The active material was embedded on both sides of the structure. Flexible photodetectors have good sensing properties for UV light, and the large volume ratio of such structures benefits the adhesion of active nanomaterials, thereby reducing the deposition of materials. The high porosity from the staggered cellulose structure also allows light scattering through the structure, thereby increasing the absorption of the embedded active material. There is no doubt that due to the large number of bio-cellulose structures in nature and the developed man-made cellulose structure in the industry, it is possible to manufacture such equipment with a wider UV detection range at a lower cost.


5.3.3 Flexible transistors. 
In recent years, field effect transistors (FETs) have been one of the most important and basic components in electronic devices and have been a hotspot research topic.1,391 FETs have great potential in low-cost, large-field and flexible electronic devices.355,392 In recent years, biomaterials, such as silk, cellulose nanofibers and other composite biomaterials, have been extensively studied as building blocks for flexible FETs.18,48,91,393 In addition to the effects of inorganic/organic materials in the active layer, the nature of the dielectric material and its interface with the active layer play important roles in determining the mobility and operating voltage.394,395 Moving away from oxide dielectrics, such as SiO2 and Al2O3, in flexible transistors is not only cost effective but also provides great advantages in improving the mobility and stability of the equipment. To achieve a stable and low operating voltage for a flexible transistor, the active surface should be hydrophobic and must provide a relatively high capacitance, which is usually a challenge for many polymer dielectrics because they have inherently low dielectric constants. For example, Guha and co-workers employed diphenylalanine nanostructures as the gate dielectric.396 In their study, the nanostructure form of the peptide layer is a necessary condition to resist the bias pressure effect. The on–off ratio and the loading rate of switching were determined by using 102 and 2.5–3 cm2 V−1 as the dielectric layers, respectively. This device had a stable performance, even in air, over a few days. In addition, to further improve the organic field-effect transistor (OFET) performance, they incorporated nanotube structures and reduced the thickness of the layer, which greatly reduced the surface roughness and improved the interface between the conjugated molecules/polymer and the dielectric layer. The combination of organic and inorganic semiconductors demonstrates a new group of biocompatible materials for organic electronics.
Another interesting biomaterial is cellulosic fiber, which can be employed as a substrate for transistors or functional dielectric layers. Nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC)-based nanopaper is a renewable and environmentally friendly material. Nanopaper transistors have the unique features of very prominent light transmittance and flexibility. Hu et al. demonstrated a flexible OFET with high transparency fabricated on specially made nanotubes and observed beneficial good mechanical flexibility and electrical characteristics (Fig. 27a).67 The large binding energy between the cellulose nanomaterials and the polymer medium, as well as the effective stress release of the fibrous substrate, is believed to promote these beneficial properties. Interestingly, only a 10% difference was observed in the nanopaper transistors in a bent and folded state. The optical transmittance of the nanopaper transistors was as high as 83.5%. The flexible bioelectronic device configuration can be altered by employing many different semiconductor materials (Fig. 27b and c). In another study, Zhang and co-workers reported a MoS2 phototransistor fabricated on a flexible, transparent, biodegradable substrate with an electrolyte gate dielectric (Fig. 27d).390 The device used highly transparent, bendable, biodegradable nanomaterials as the support and passivating layers. The device showed a very good light reflectance of approximately 1.5 with 1/10 nW of lighting power, which is much higher than that in other reports of typical backdoor phototransistors (Fig. 27e and f). The device also showed a wide spectral range and good stability under continuous voltage bias and illumination.
 Fig. 27  Flexible transistors based on flexible paper substrates. (a) A photograph of a flexible and transparent nanopaper transistor. The inset shows the SEM cross-section of a nanopaper transistor with a layered structure. (b) The transparency of the nanopaper and nanopaper transistors. (c) Transfer characteristics of nanopaper transistors before and during bending. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic showing a three-dimensional image of the MoS2-based flexible paper phototransistor from a cross-sectional view. (e) Transfer characteristics (Ids–Vgs) under laser on and laser off conditions. (f) The device exhibiting great flexibility. Reprinted with permission from ref. 390. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.3.4 Flexible gas sensors. 
Flexible gas sensors hold significant potential for environmental and healthcare applications, and the development of biocompatible, flexible and wearable, sensing platforms for high accuracy detection of toxic and noxious gas molecules remains an elusive goal. Traditionally, metal oxide semiconductors (MOSs), such as stannic oxide (SnO2),398–400 ferric oxide (α-Fe2O3/Fe3O4),401–403 zinc oxide (ZnO),371,404 cobaltosic oxide (Co3O4),405,406 nickel oxide (NiO)407–410 and copper oxide (CuO/Cu2O),378,399 carbon materials, such as graphene,411,412 carbon nanotubes,413 and carbon quantum dots,414 and some polymers, such as polythiophene (P3HT),415 polyaniline (PANI),416 and polypyrrole (PPY),417 serving as sensing materials, have been widely used in nonflexible gas sensors. Compared to conventional sensing materials, such biological or biological-based composite materials have a large number of advantages as efficient sensing materials to create a ‘green’ flexible gas sensor, including excellent mechanical flexibility, large specific surface area, biocompatibility, biodegradability, light-weight, low cost, etc.43 The use of biological materials as a building block in sensing platforms allows for inexpensive gas devices for point-of-care diagnostics. For example, recently, Wang et al. demonstrated a biological-based flexible gas sensor based on a biological material, Knight butterfly wing, with a surface chemical, functional-graphene (Fig. 28a).43 The Knight butterfly wing functions as natural building blocks which are functionalized with crumpled rGO and then deposited on a biocompatible common laboratory filter paper surface, yielding a three-dimensional architecture with electro-sensing active properties for highly selective detection of diabetes-related volatile organic compounds (VOCs) (Fig. 28b). Because of a high proportion of active sites (–NH2) on the surface of the butterfly wing, the butterfly-based flexible gas sensor achieved rapid gas detection (≤1 s) of diabetes-related acetone vapours in exhaled breath down to a ultralow concentration of 20 ppb. Superior mechanical properties and stability were obtained by using this device under various tension conditions (Fig. 28c and d). As a result, the findings in this work demonstrate the promise of incorporating natural biological materials into high-performance sensors, with excellent potential for wearable and flexible sensors.
 Fig. 28  Butterfly based flexible gas sensors. (a) A schematic representation of self-assembled materials based on a biological composite sensing layer made of a combination of graphene and butterfly wings. (b) Schematic showing the structure of the flexible sensor unit, which consists of two copper electrodes, a functional butterfly wing-based sensing layer, and the cellulose paper layer. (c and d) Photograph of the wearable sensor and real-time sensor response to 2 ppm of simulated diabetic breath (acetone vapor) with 85% RH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2017 Royal Society Chemical. (e) Iridescent colouration of M. sulkowskyi scales and fabricated nanostructures. (f) Six regions of the gas sensor array (each region was 2 × 2 mm). (g) Tree-like gradient structure of natural butterfly scales and chemical gradients with their surface polarity and preparation of nanostructures by gas phase selective control and their design criteria. (h) ΔR spectra of gas sensor in water (H2O) vapour, methanol (MeOH), methyl ethyl ketone (MEK), acetonitrile (ACN) and benzene (Ben). Reprinted with permission from ref. 397. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
Apart from the tailored composition (–NH2) of the butterfly wing, it has intrinsic structural color to recognize various VOC vapours by the change in structural color.60 Potyrailo et al. recently developed a butterfly-based gas sensor array (Fig. 28e and f), which is motivated by the gradient surface chemistry as well as the iridescent nanostructure of Morpho butterflies.397 It includes equally important physical control together with chemical control for selective vapor sensing. Therefore, they formulated a three-dimensional (3D) nanostructure for selective detection of individual intimately linked vapors under the same pristine dry-gas conditions as the natural Morpho scales and the traditional sensor arrays. This was also meant to measure these vapors even in mixtures in the incidence of a variable moisture condition, as illustrated in Fig. 28f. In essence, the hierarchical nanostructures of the Morpho sulkowskyi butterfly scales offer an exceptional sensor mechanism in selective responses towards different vapors, such as methanol, water as well as isomers of dichloroethylene (Fig. 28g). Vapors of various polarities are significantly adsorbed onto the particular areas of the ridges through a combination of physical adsorption as well as capillary condensation of the condensable vapors (Fig. 28h). This work can open a route for sensors as individual nodes for distributed monitoring. A similar mechanism was also reported by other research groups.

5.4 Energy conversion and storage devices
The goal of flexible electronic devices is to produce portable, bendable, lightweight, foldable, flexible and even wearable products.7,418 Nonetheless, existing energy-storage devices, including lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and supercapacitors (SCs), are generally too bulky, too hard and too large to meet the special demands of wearable electronic equipment, which is seen as the main energy-storage technology to deliver sustainable power to a variety of flexible and wearable electronic products in modern society. Therefore, there is high demand for improving current state-of-the-art rechargeable batteries and supercapacitors in terms of their weight, electrochemical performance, sustainability, manufacturing costs, environmental friendliness and mechanical properties, and solving these problems has become an important research topic. Energy-storage and conversion systems in nature have evolved over billions of years to produce efficient and suitable cellular ventilators for external energy absorption, metabolism and distribution. As a result, natural biomaterials have drawn increasing interest in the field of energy storage and conversion as a novel and effective strategy to address these challenges. In this section, we review some of the latest advancements in natural biomaterials in the field of LIBs, SCs, solar cells and generators.

5.4.1 Flexible lithium ion batteries (LIBs). 
Because of their long cycle life, high energy density, low cost and good performance, LIBs are rapidly becoming popular in portable electronic products and emerging energy-storage devices.1,419–422 Recent attempts to further expand the practical applications of LIBs in flexible and wearable electronic equipment have produced a large amount of batteries that are flexible, foldable, and bendable, mainly resulting from various electrode configuration designs or integrated battery systems and nanomaterials and showing excellent electrochemical and mechanical properties.423–425 However, their performance standards in different fields, including cycle life, power density, renewable energy, biocompatibility and safety issues, require further improvements for future market demand. Biomaterials or biological materials with unique biological structures exhibit appropriate features for new flexible LIBs, which suggests urgent demand for the development and popularization of flexible electronics.78,426–429 However, so far, there have only been a few reports of flexible LIBs based on biomaterials.
The active electrode material is the most significant component in flexible LIBs, as this component controls the electrochemical performance of the energy-storage device. As a result, the sustainability, energy density, biocompatibility and cost of the active materials have been closely examined. In this regard, inspired by the metabolic processes of organisms that depend on ion transport and energy exchange between biomolecules, in addition to the self-assembly of specific functional groups or biological templates, some natural biomass and its derivatives can produce more sustainable flexible energy-storage devices in a variety of designs. The biological approach to electronic equipment manufacturing is no longer an early proof of concept but has now begun to provide new methods to improve the device performance. For instance, naturally derived redox biomolecules have been utilized. Guo and co-workers produced a biological-based electrode using a retractable telescopic conductive agent. Juglone is a renewable biomolecule extracted from discarded walnut epicarp and can be immobilized on rGO nanomaterials due to the intensive π–π interactions between the aromatic structures and the carbon scaffold (Fig. 29a and b).76 In combination with the redox activity of the quinone groups in juglone and the high conductivity of rGO nanomaterials, the regenerable hybrid electrode showed excellent cyclic stability and high storage capacity for flexible sodium-ion energy-storage devices (Fig. 29c). Sustainable biotechnology electrodes have greater energy-storage characteristics, such as rate capability, cycle stability and specific capacity. After 100 cycles, the high-gravity capacity density reached 305 mA h g−1 and 280 mA h g−1 (Fig. 29d). In addition, this versatile method can be used to construct electrodes of any size and shape, with high alignment accuracy and resolution on a particular substrate, demonstrating its possible application in the complicated and exact fabrication of prospective biocompatible electronic devices (Fig. 29e and f). Other regular redox components, such as flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), are present in living organisms, which have also been reported in biomolecule-based electrodes for direct energy storage.432
 Fig. 29  Biological molecule based flexible lithium ion batteries (LIBs). (a) Chemical structure of the Juglone molecule that can be derived from waste walnut epicarp. (b) Schematic illustration showing the π–π conjugation of the Juglone molecule with rGO nanosheets and the reversible sodium-ion insertion/extraction mechanism of the hybridized electrodes. (c) Capacity–voltage and (d) capacity retention profiles of the rGO/Juglone biocomposite electrode at 0.1 A g−1 compared with individual Juglone and rGO electrodes. (e and f) Photographs showing a rGO/Juglone film with a large piece of 900 cm2 to power an electric fan. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to the direct biotechnology electrodes, some biological organisms or molecules serve as templates to allow high-precision, multiscale patterning of electronic devices (Fig. 30a).111 For example, Belcher and his colleagues have recently applied the bio-simulated mineralization of viruses to the unique and efficient manufacture of cathode and anode active materials for lithium batteries (Fig. 30b).77 In this microelectrode structure, a virus-template Co3O4 (Fig. 30c) or Au/Co3O4 layer (Fig. 30e and g), which is used as an active substance, is synthesized on a multi-layered micro-scale island of polyelectrolyte, including LPEI/PAA on a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp. These microelectrodes can be easily attached to different flexible substrates to produce flexible LIBs with interdigital or three-dimensional structures (Fig. 30f). After stamping on the platinum micro-strip current collector, the samples were tested by subjecting them to a comprehensive electrochemical test (Fig. 30d and h). In another study, natural wood fibers, which are essentially soft, porous and multi-channel structures, were used for electrode preparation (Fig. 31a and b).430 Hu et al. prepared an electrodeposited anode composed of a Sn film on the coated natural wood materials to form a sodium-ion battery (Fig. 31c). The softness of the wood fiber effectively released the mechanical stress combined with the sodiation process, while the hierarchical and pore-rich structure acted as an electrolyte that can be ionized through the outer and inner surfaces of the fiber. Such unique features were experimentally and computationally confirmed. The results demonstrated a steady cycle performance and retention of an initial capacity of 339 h−1 after 400 cycles (Fig. 31d). The results showed that mesoporous and soft wood-based substrates can be used as a new platform for flexible batteries with low-cost.
 Fig. 30  Components of biological molecules in flexible lithium ion batteries. (a) Full virus molecular templates allowing for high-precision and multiscale patterning of electronic devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2009 Nature Publication Group. (b) Schematic diagram showing the virus-enabled synthesis and assembly of Co3O4 and Au/Co3O4 nanowires. (c) TEM image of the Co3O4/virus nanowires. (d) Specific capacity versus cycle number of Co3O4 nanowires for the same cell. (e) Genetic engineering visualization of M13 bacteriophage viruses. In E4 clones, P8 proteins with a gold binding group (yellow) are doped together to grow Co3O4. (f) Photograph of a flexible and transparent device based on Co3O4 nanowires. (g) TEM image of the hybrid Au/Co3O4 nanowires. (h) Specific capacity versus cycle number of hybrid Au/Co3O4 nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2006 Science. 
 Fig. 31  Wood-based flexible lithium batteries. (a) Photograph of trees. (b) Structure of the wood fiber that includes cellulose fiber, microfibril bundle, microfibril, and elementary fibril from outside-to-inside. (c) Photograph, schematic, and TEM image of cellulose fiber from wood. (d) Cycling performance of Cu current collector, Al2O3 coated fiber, and Sn@WF, at a rate of C/10. The inset exhibits the structure of the Al2O3 coated fiber and wood fiber. Reproduced with permission from ref. 430. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the design and structure of the self-healing electrode. (f–i) Demonstration of the composite SHP as the conductive pathway with excellent mechanical and electrical self-healing capability. Reproduced with permission from ref. 431. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
In addition to active electrode materials, biomaterials can also act as binders or separators for flexible batteries to improve the mechanical sustainability, self-healing ability, and electrochemical behavior. Recently, Bao and co-workers demonstrated that binders composed of bio-repair materials have excellent performance in flexible rechargeable batteries (Fig. 31e).431 Inspired by biological systems with intrinsic self-healing abilities, artificial intelligence materials that can repair internal or external damage have been developed over the last decade. Compared with conventional polymeric binders, a binder composed of a self-healing material can be stretched and spontaneously repair mechanical damage and cracks in the electrodes (Fig. 31f–i), thereby stabilizing the electrical and mechanical connections between the silicon particles and increasing their electrochemical cycle life. As expected, at a density of 0.4 A g−1, an electrode composed of silicon microparticles and the self-healing adhesive can produce up to 2617 mA h g−1 of energy in the first cycle, which is about six times the theoretical capacity of graphite. In addition, the electrode had good cycle stability compared to 14%, 27% and 47% PVDF, CMC and alginate-based binders and maintained 100% of its initial capacity after 20 cycles.
Moreover, the wettability of the separator is a key factor in determining the performance of its rechargeable battery. The use of natural processes to transform the separator effectively improves the hydrophilicity and subsequent ion diffusion.


5.4.2 Flexible supercapacitors. 
Supercapacitors (SCs) are another promising component of energy-storage equipment and have attracted widespread attention due to their rapid charge and discharge rates, high power density and long life.435–438 In particular, to meet the growing demand for portable electronic devices, we have been committed to developing lightweight, flexible, and miniaturized supercapacitors.439–441 Like flexible LIBs, flexible SCs also require high energy and power density, long life, renewability, biocompatibility and safety features. In addition to the configuration, the generation of new green supercapacitors from materials rich in natural reserves by exploring renewable biological materials is necessary.442 Organic materials have the beneficial properties of lightweight and easy handling but are not advantageous due to their low conductivity and rapid dissolution into the electrolyte.73 Several effective methods can be used to improve the low conductivity and large-scale dissolution of organic molecules.443–445 One is to construct unique nanostructures of these materials and to hybridize them with flexible carbon materials, which has proven to be an operative method for solving the issue of declining capacity. Chen and co-workers reported all-solid-state symmetrical supercapacitors, obtained through the polymerization of regenerable converging molecules on conductive carbon fibers that exhibited excellent electrochemical performance (Fig. 32a).73 The results showed that the initial permittivity of the device was 78%, that is, 1.72 mF−1, as the scanning speed increased from 5 to 200 mV−1 (Fig. 32b). Fiber optic supercapacitors also show excellent flexibility, with no significant deviation under different bending conditions (Fig. 32c). Integrated supercapacitor electric-wire-based energy transmission systems can afford synchronous energy transmission and storage, as verified by circuit analyses. In another study, Wu and co-workers presented a new green preparation route that took 3 days to produce a sponge-like carbonaceous hydrogel using crude biomass biogas from watermelon as a carbon source.446 They synthesized the carbon-based composites into SC electrodes, added Fe3O4 nanoparticles to the carbonaceous gel network, and then fired the magnetite carbon gas (MCAs). The MCAs showed a current density of 333.1 F g−1 in a 6 M solution. The MCAs also exhibited excellent cycle stability and were able to retain 96% capacitance after 1000 charge and discharge cycles.
 Fig. 32  Flexible and wearable supercapacitors based on biological materials with high performance. (a) Schematic of the as-fabricated flexible and wearable supercapacitors based on Juglone biomolecules derived from walnuts. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge tests of the Juglone biomolecule-based flexible supercapacitor at different current densities. (c) Photograph and the ability of transient energy storage of the wearable and flexible biological material-based supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Photographs and schematic of bamboos with a 3D hierarchical structure. (e) TEM images of the bamboo-inspired composite nanofiber with a pore-rich structure. (f) Electrochemical performances of the bamboo-inspired composite nanofiber-based flexible supercapacitor in different bent (step 1: 0° and step 2: 90°) and twisted (step 3: 90° and step 4: 180°) states. Mechanical deformation conditions. Photograph of the flexible device at 0° and 90° bent state and 90° and 180° twisted state. This flexible supercapacitor displays excellent mechanical flexibility and remarkable stable electrochemical performances. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Another method is to simulate the structure of natural products, and if the structure can be reasonably configured, the rational design of composite electrode nanostructures can effectively improve the structural stability and long-term electrochemical cycle life. Inspired by the geometry of bamboo, whose cross-section contains a periodic internal pore distribution as well as graded pore structures, Sun et al. reported multi-scale, stratified carbon nanofibers (Fig. 32d).72 As shown in Fig. 32e, the prepared carbon nanofibers consist of uniform, discontinuous, hollow internal and graded nanopores. Due to this unique structure, the nanofibers have high mechanical durability and flexibility, providing high surface contact for the electrolyte and low ion-transport resistance. The nanofiber-based all-solid-state supercapacitors showed an energy density of 61.3 kilowatts for 2.37 kilograms, which is much greater than that of traditional carbon-based active materials. In addition, the supercapacitor operates under different mechanical deformation conditions without performance degradation (Fig. 32f).
Typically, when flexible materials are used in practical applications, the electrode material is susceptible to structural breakage during bending or charging and discharging, and flexible polymer substrates can suffer mechanical damage over time or by accidental structural damage. These two failures will seriously affect the reliability and lifetime, resulting in electronic equipment failure and a large amount of e-waste, in addition to inconvenience and security risks.447–449 Due to the significant lack of current research into the mechanical sustainability of these supercapacitors, there is scientific and technical importance for the study of powerful supercapacitors with controllable expiration. In living organisms, wounds are usually treated by a regenerative system. Self-healing electronic equipment is highly desirable because it can enhance the service life of future flexible SC equipment and overcome the problem of electronic damage. In a study by Peng et al., carbon nanotubes were coated on the surface of self-healing polymer fibers to attach the carbon nanotubes.450 After fracture, these conductive fibers can effectively recover their high conductivity by physical contact with the re-established carbon nanotubes in the sheath and restore the mechanical strength by self-repair of the core polymer. The prepared linear supercapacitors can provide a high specific capacitance of 140.0 F g−1 or 1.34 mF cm−1 and can recover 92% of the initial capacitance after fracture and self-healing. Some similar works have also been reported.451,452 The successful manufacturing of self-healing flexible SCs will greatly extend the lifetime of future energy-storage devices, providing good economic and operational safety performance.


5.4.3 Flexible solar cells. 
Solar energy as a green energy has attracted great attention.80 Solar cells are one of the most studied devices that can capture sunlight and convert it into electrical energy.453,454 Here, we review the latest advances in flexible solar cells based on biomaterials. Improving the efficiency of optical energy conversion is the key to improving the performance of solar energy systems. Many organisms exhibit great efficiency in the use of light diffusion to enhance light collection.455 The optical structure in these biological systems provides inspiration for the design and manufacture of efficient artificial optical energy devices. In addition, biological systems have been given great attention in the study of traditional flat flexible solar cells and fiber-based wearable electronic devices due to the powerful biological flexible stress release properties and the unique function of space regulation.456 Augmenting light absorption is a fundamental factor in improving the energy conversion efficiency of a solar cell. In solar cells, retroreflective coatings can reduce the high reflection losses between the solar cell and air. Multilayer antireflective coatings and conventional monolayers are generally confined to a small range of incident angles over a narrow bandwidth, which limits the performance of the solar cell. Another widely used approach involves the coating of antireflective surfaces on different types of solar cells to improve the efficiency of the solar cell by suppressing the Fresnel reflection over a wide range of wavelengths. In a recent report, a double-sided nanoimprint lithography technique employing a polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane-based (POSS) antireflective moth's eye nanostructure was developed.457 These retro-reflected nanostructures show quasi-omnidirectional antireflective properties and excellent broadband range, increasing the light transmittance of the glass to 98.2%. Recently, Lee et al. used alumina as a template to construct PMMA nanostructures via hot embossing and obtained excellent wide-angle antireflective properties (at 400–2000 nm, the average reflectance was 8–45 with an average reflectance of 0.5%). A layer of deposited hydrophilic silica nanoparticles showed superhydrophilic anti-fogging functionality, and as biological templates they are interesting and as natural molds, they can be duplicated to yield bio-simulated polymer antireflective nanostructures. For instance, Ko and co-workers used a soft lithographic technique to reproduce the original surface nanoscale morphology of an Attacus moth's composite eye. Both the natural moth's eye and replica show less than 1% reflectivity in the visible region (Fig. 33a–e).433
 Fig. 33  Flexible solar cells based on biological-inspired biomaterials possessing unique structures with specific functions. (a) Images of a water droplet on a polyurethane substrate with (a) a flat surface, (b) a smooth sphere, and (c) the moth eye replica. (b and c) Micrographs of multiple images generated by the moth eye replica. (d) Reflectivity of a flat PU substrate, a PU moth eye replica and natural moth eye, as well as optical calculation at normal incidence. (e) SEM images of the PU moth eye replica. Reproduced with permission from ref. 433 Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) SEM image of an eye of a natural blowfly (Eucalliphora lilea). (g) Schematics of the multi-stage development of a bioinspired compound lens proceeding to a solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 434 Copyright 2010 IOP. (h) Photograph showing the structure of a natural butterfly wing (Papilio paris Linnaeus) with a low-magnification optical microscopy and FESEM image of a blue site and black site in the wing. (i) Current–potential curves of different microstructure photoanodes without dye sensitization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Using a large angle to gather light is another method to improve the efficiency of solar cells. Inspired by the eye of pterosaurs, the prismatic structure of the eye was reproduced to improve the solar light collection capability in flexible cells, as shown in Fig. 33f and g.434 In addition, with the design and arrangement of the multi-stage structure, light-coupling efficiency can be increased by 20% and 24% of that of exposed silicon surface cells when decorated with a pitted texture and bioinspired hill texture, respectively.
In addition, a variety of other bio-morphological structures have been studied to enhance the performance of solar cells, especially in terms of improving the efficiency of flexible cells with solar dyes. In solar cells, an optimized grading in the porous morphology of the photoanode is the key to enhancing the light extraction efficiency by increasing the surface area and the optical path length of the dye to enhance the light extraction efficiency. The conductive carbon cloth that is acquired by readily available cellulose fabric's single-step thermal decomposition was used as a counter electrode for flexible dye-sensitized solar cells to contend with the expensive platinum/FTO system. In addition, inspired by the structure of butterfly wings (Fig. 33h and i),83 a layered titanium dioxide lattice structure exhibited a larger surface area and improved light absorption over conventional titania photoanodes, suggesting that the solar cells were more efficient.

5.5 Other applications
In addition to the above applications, biological materials with unique structures and functions have been widely applied in other applications. The unique optical properties of some organisms, such as the brittle star O. wendtii, the beetle C. gloriosa, various butterfly wings, and the moth Cacostatia ossa, were utilized by Zhang and co-workers to fabricate optical sensors.82 For example, Potyrailo and co-workers reported that the natural hierarchical structure could be intensified by filling nanotubes into the empty spaces of the butterfly scales to produce a unique infrared sensor (Fig. 34a–c).458 Their experiments confirmed the fact that the complicated geometry of Morpho butterfly wings is capable of producing an observable specific optical response to temperature, especially as a result of thermal expansion as well as variations in the refractive index, which leads to the ‘wavelength conversion’ of MWIR radiation into observable iridescence with a spatial resolution possibly limited to characteristic ridges on a butterfly scale.458 The Morpho butterfly wing structure simulates the design of an artificial sensor with enhanced sensitivity as well as spatial resolution whose structure only relies on the utilization of our new approaches or methods. Among optical sensors, OLEDs are versatile platforms for electronic displays and are already ubiquitously used. Zhu and co-workers advanced an OLED created on pure natural cellulose nanofiber-based transparent paper (Fig. 34d–g).459
 Fig. 34  Thermal/optical devices based on a butterfly wing and cellulose-paper. (a) New principle of uncooled thermal detection based on the air-filled photonic architecture of iridescent scales of a Morpho butterfly. (b) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and SEM images of a butterfly wing (Morpho sulkowskyi), respectively. Inset: Photograph of a butterfly (Morpho sulkowskyi). (c) SEM images of a portion of a Morpho scale before modification with SWNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 458 Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Photograph of the nanopaper and regenerated cellulose film (RCF). (e) Comparison of reading comfortability in the case of paper and a PET film. (f) Total transmittance and (g) photograph of a paper-based device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 459. Copy right 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to these organisms, other biological materials and biological molecules have also exhibited optical properties. For example, Ling and co-workers reported a new route to directly exfoliate silk fibers at the single silk nanofibril level. This process retains the natural structure and functions of silk fibers and exhibits excellent optical properties.504 Additionally, the vacuum-filtration approaches to functionalize silk provide excellent physical properties and could be used in bio-optic and electronic devices. With respect to natural biological molecules, Yan and co-workers indicated that polydopamine coatings can improve the UV and visible-light photoluminescence of ZnO.505 These researchers were of the opinion that the improvement mechanism was the same as that of dye-sensitized solar cells. Polydopamine acted as a dye owing to its wide absorption and produced electrons after photoexcitation. The photogenerated electrons were capable of being transferred to the conduction band of the ZnO nanorods, thereby potentially enhancing the overall number of electrons which play a role in the process of photoluminescence.
6 Concluding remarks and perspectives
Biological materials have attracted increasing attention due to their unique hierarchical 3D structure, remarkable biological activity, tailorable chemical composition, biocompatibility, biodegradation, low-cost and abundant renewable supply. To fully exploit the potential of biological materials as components or active building blocks for practical functional electronic devices on a large scale, surface functionalization with other materials (e.g., carbon materials, polymers, metal oxides, and hydrogels) can be used to controllably assemble these biological materials into ‘smart’ and multifunctional composites. As a result, natural biofunctional surfaces often have to fulfill several functions to meet the requirements of specific applications, which can be achieved through their highly tailorable composition and structure, such as by crystal structure, electron-transfer rates, changing the mechanical properties, ionic conductivity, capacity and solubility. In this article, we summarized the applications of biological materials and biological-based composites as ‘smart’ materials for flexible electronic applications, including flexible substrates, flexible biosensors, flexible electronic sensors, and flexible energy conversion and storage devices. A summary of the types, properties and applications of biological materials is given in Table 2.
Table 2 Applications of biological-based composite materials in biosensors, electronic, and energy conversion and storage devices




Applications
Types
Biological materials
Features
References




Substrate
Flexible substrate
Silk, chitin, cellulose, polydopamine, shellac, hard gelatin, collagen, chitosan, alginate, dextran
Mechanical flexibility, structure color, lightweight, optical property, biodegradation, biocompatibility, adhesive property, self-healing, 3D hierarchical, chemical component, low-thermal expansion

5, 87, 275, 460 and 461




69, 71, 85, 350, 462 and 463




188, 464 and 465







Biosensor

FET biosensor
Electrochemical biosensor

Chitosan, pollen, butterfly, silk, polydopamine, cellulose-paper
Adhesive property, lightweight, mechanical property, 3D hierarchical, biocomponent, chemical sensing capability, antimicrobial activity, hydrophilic, self-healing

18, 108, 110, 466 and 467




62, 354 and 468–472




39 and 473–476







Electronic sensor

Electronic skin sensors
Flexible photodetector
Flexible transistors
Flexible gas sensor

Pollen grains, silk, wood, butterfly, DNA, Chitosan, amino acid, cellulose, plant leaf (Mimosa), starch, carotenoid polyenes, P. nigra, frogs, beetles, octopus, proteins, cytochrome c, peptides, opal, diatom, chicken albumen
3D hierarchical structure mechanical flexible, elasticity, biocompatibility and biodegradation, self-healing hydrophobic property, self-cleaning lightweight, high adhesive property, optical property, structural color, chemical sensing capability, drag reduction

325, 379, 380, 384, 387, 389, 477 and 478




62, 145, 234, 479 and 480




60, 71, 397, 481 and 482




188, 270 and 483–486




94, 389 and 487







Energy conversion/storage devices

Flexible lithium ion batteries
Flexible supercapacitors
Flexible solar cells

Mussel, alginate, bamboos, pomegranate, M13 virus, juglone molecule, vegetable, silk, nutrients, butterfly, mosquito compound eye flavin molecule, DNA, peptides, polydopamine, fish
Biocompatibility and biodegradation, 3D hierarchical structure, biocomponent, mechanical property, high adhesive property, hydrophobic and hydrophilic elasticity, lightweight, optical property, biotemplate

78, 315, 318 and 488–494




76, 77, 111, 315 and 495




80, 180 and 430–432




78, 426, 427, 429 and 496




211, 216 and 497–499







Other properties
Optical sensor
Butterfly wings, insects, birds, aquatic organisms, plants, opal, rose petals, pollen, beetles, polydopamine, silk
Structure color, hydrophobic and hydrophilic, anti-reflection, light focusing, hierarchical and porous, structure, biocompatibility and biodegradation anti-fogging, mechanical flexibility, paramagnetism

181 and 458–500




143 and 501–503




155, 179 and 241





Due to their structural diversity and incorporation of biologically active components derived from nature, biological materials have great potential as active components for flexible electronic devices, especially because they can realize sustainability and ‘green’ goals in the field of electronics. The number of publications in flexible electronic fields is greatly increasing, reflecting the strong demand for a sustainable society. Although much progress has been achieved, key challenges remain with limitations in thorough understanding of their structure–property relationships. Actually, the aim of more insightful comprehension of the relationship between the material structure, including the physicochemical and biological properties, and the device performance is to improve the flexible device performance (e.g. mechanical flexibility, electron or ion transport, reactivity, etc.). Thus, optimizing the natural biological materials to maximize the contribution resulting from structures and functions is always expected. For example, pore-rich and hierarchical biological materials being used in flexible electronic skin, supercapacitors, lithium ion batteries, etc., is anticipated to provide excellent flexibility and elasticity for mechanical deformation, sufficient contact surface for electronic transformation, and large pore size for ease of electrolyte diffusion. Undoubtedly, biological materials provided a facile route to develop next-generation flexible and wearable electronics that are of low cost and environmentally friendly.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC, Grant No. 61625404, 61504136, 51502110, 51672308), the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. 4162062) and the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences, CAS (QYZDY-SSW-JWC004).
Notes and references
Z. Liu, J. Xu, D. Chen and G. Shen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 161–192 RSC .
Z. Lou and G. Shen, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500287 CrossRef PubMed .
A. N. Sokolov, B. C. K. Tee, C. J. Bettinger, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 361–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, J. H. Ahn, W. M. Choi, H. S. Kim, T. H. Kim, J. Song, Y. Y. Huang, Z. Liu, C. Lu and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2008, 320, 507–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. R. Fan, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4283–4305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, C. K. Jeong, G.-T. Hwang and K. J. Lee, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 111–125 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Kim, R. Ghaffari, N. Lu and J. A. Rogers, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2012, 14, 113–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-T. Hwang, D. Im, S. E. Lee, J. Lee, M. Koo, S. Y. Park, S. Kim, K. Yang, S. J. Kim, K. Lee and K. J. Lee, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4545–4553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Hwang, H. Tao, D.-H. Kim, H. Cheng, J.-K. Song, E. Rill, M. A. Brenckle, B. Panilaitis, S. M. Won, Y.-S. Kim, Y. M. Song, K. J. Yu, A. Ameen, R. Li, Y. Su, M. Yang, D. L. Kaplan, M. R. Zakin, M. J. Slepian, Y. Huang, F. G. Omenetto and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2012, 337, 1640–1644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Irimia-Vladu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 588–610 RSC .
C. M. Boutry, A. Nguyen, Q. O. Lawal, A. Chortos, S. Rondeau-Gagné and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6954–6961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bauer, S. Bauer-Gogonea, I. Graz, M. Kaltenbrunner, C. Keplinger and R. Schwödiauer, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 149–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Irimia-Vladu, P. A. Troshin, M. Reisinger, L. Shmygleva, Y. Kanbur, G. Schwabegger, M. Bodea, R. Schwodiauer, A. Mumyatov, J. W. Fergus, V. F. Razumov, H. Sitter, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4069–4076 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaltenbrunner, T. Sekitani, J. Reeder, T. Yokota, K. Kuribara, T. Tokuhara, M. Drack, R. Schwodiauer, I. Graz, S. Bauer-Gogonea, S. Bauer and T. Someya, Nature, 2013, 499, 458–463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bechtle, S. F. Ang and G. A. Schneider, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 6378–6385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Wang, J. A. Jackman, W. B. Ng and N. J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8623–8630 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lou, S. Chen, L. Wang, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wen, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4306–4337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, L. J. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3639–3665 RSC .
J. Li, L. Niu, Z. Zheng and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5239–5273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Honda, S. Harada, S. Ishida, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4674–4680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, R. Liang, J. Tao, Z. Peng, Q. Xu, X. Han, X. Wang, C. Wang, J. Zhu, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3883–3889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, L. Wang, F. Xue, L. Chen, J. Fu, X. Feng, T. Li and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600185 CrossRef PubMed .
H. X. Li, N. S. Liu, X. H. Zhang, J. Su, L. Y. Li, Y. H. Gao and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 587–594 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Niu, Y. F. Hu, X. N. Wen, Y. S. Zhou, F. Zhang, L. Lin, S. H. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3701–3706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Oh, S. Kim, H.-K. Baik and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4455–4461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zarek, M. Layani, I. Cooperstein, E. Sachyani, D. Cohn and S. Magdassi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4449–4454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Adam, E. D. Glowacki, M. Drack, R. Schwodiauer, L. Leonat, D. H. Apaydin, H. Groiss, M. C. Scharber, M. S. White, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1032–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kim, J. H. Kim, T. E. Kang, C. Lee, H. Kang, M. Shin, C. Wang, B. Ma, U. Jeong, T. S. Kim and B. J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pan, A. Chortos, G. Yu, Y. Wang, S. Isaacson, R. Allen, Y. Shi, R. Dauskardt and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3002 Search PubMed .
A. Stoddart and V. Cleave, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 444–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Han, J. W. Lee and K. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5506–5511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Naleway, M. M. Porter, J. McKittrick and M. A. Meyers, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5455–5476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Davis, S. L. Burkett, N. H. Mendelson and S. Mann, Nature, 1997, 385, 420–423 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. C. Dunlop and P. Fratzl, Scr. Mater., 2013, 68, 8–12 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fratzl and R. Weinkamer, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2007, 52, 1263–1334 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Wang, W. B. Ng, J. A. Jackman and N. J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2097–2103 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Loh, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 185–195 RSC .
R. Hensel, C. Neinhuis and C. Werner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 323–341 RSC .
J. Kumirska, M. Czerwicka, Z. Kaczynski, A. Bychowska, K. Brzozowski, J. Thoming and P. Stepnowski, Mar. Drugs, 2010, 8, 1567–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. A. Jackman, J. H. Park, E.-L. Tan and N.-J. Cho, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 4019–4024 RSC .
M. A. Meyers, J. McKittrick and P.-Y. Chen, Science, 2013, 339, 773–779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun and B. Bhushan, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12606–12623 RSC .
M. A. Meyers, P. Y. Chen, A. Y. M. Lin and Y. Seki, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2008, 53, 1–206 CrossRef CAS .
R. Weinkamer and P. Fratzl, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2011, 31, 1164–1173 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Zhu, H. Wang, W. R. Leow, Y. R. Cai, X. J. Loh, M. Y. Han and X. D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4250–4265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Teule, Y. G. Miao, B. H. Sohn, Y. S. Kim, J. J. Hull, M. J. Fraser, R. V. Lewis and D. L. Jarvis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 923–928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Wang, J. A. Jackman, E. L. Tan, J. H. Park, M. G. Potroz, E. T. Hwang and N. J. Cho, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fattahi, G. Yang, G. Kim and M. R. Abidian, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1846–1885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, G. Yang, Q. Ha, J. Meng and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 310–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Blattman and P. D. Greenberg, Science, 2004, 305, 200–205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Parker and H. E. Townley, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 347–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lu, S. Zhu, Z. Chen, W. Wang, W. Zhang and D. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10316–10322 RSC .
D. D. Xu, H. A. Yu, Q. Xu, G. H. Xu and K. X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8750–8756 CAS .
S. Kinoshita, S. Yoshioka, Y. Fujii and N. Okamoto, FORMA, 2002, 17, 103–121 Search PubMed .
L. Feng, S. H. Li, Y. S. Li, H. J. Li, L. J. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. L. Song, B. Q. Liu, L. Jiang and D. B. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857–1860 CrossRef CAS .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 202, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Potyrailo, H. Ghiradella, A. Vertiatchikh, K. Dovidenko, J. R. Cournoyer and E. Olson, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 123–128 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, B. Zhu, X. Ma, Y. Hao and X. Chen, Small, 2016, 12, 2715–2719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tao, M. A. Brenckle, M. M. Yang, J. D. Zhang, M. K. Liu, S. M. Siebert, R. D. Averitt, M. S. Mannoor, M. C. McAlpine, J. A. Rogers, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1067–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Li, E. Gao, M. Jian, K. Xia, Q. Wang, Z. Xu, T. Ren and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6640–6648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. You, M. Li, B. Ding, X. Wu and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606895 CrossRef PubMed .
L. H. Hess, M. Jansen, V. Maybeck, M. V. Hauf, M. Seifert, M. Stutzmann, I. D. Sharp, A. Offenhausser and J. A. Garrido, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5045–5049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Chang, C. G. Wang, C. Y. Huang, T. D. Tsai, T. F. Guo and T. C. Wen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4077–4081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, H. Zhu, Y. Chen, C. Preston, K. Rohrbach, J. Cumings and L. Hu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2106–2113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu and L. Y. Lin, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1530–1536 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Okahisa, A. Yoshida, S. Miyaguchi and H. Yano, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2009, 69, 1958–1961 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Siegel, S. T. Phillips, B. J. Wiley and G. M. Whitesides, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 2775–2781 RSC .
M. Nogi and H. Yano, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1849–1852 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Sun, R. B. Sills, X. L. Hu, Z. W. Seh, X. Xiao, H. H. Xui, W. Luo, H. Y. Jin, Y. Xin, T. Q. Li, Z. L. Zhang, J. Zhou, W. Cai, Y. H. Huang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3899–3906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, F. S. Li, B. W. Zhu, L. Guo, Y. Yang, R. Hao, H. Wang, Y. Q. Liu, W. Wang, X. T. Guo and X. D. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3472–3479 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, C. Cao, F. Idrees and X. Ma, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2556–2564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Fratzl, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 8, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, P. F. Hu, J. Yang, G. M. Gong, L. Guo and X. D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2348–2354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Nam, D.-W. Kim, P. J. Yoo, C.-Y. Chiang, N. Meethong, P. T. Hammond, Y.-M. Chiang and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2006, 312, 885–888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Ryou, Y. M. Lee, J. K. Park and J. W. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3066–3070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Xiang, Y. Wang, J. H. Wu, Y. Guo, H. Wu, Y. Zhang and H. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 227, 7–16 CrossRef CAS .
G. Calogero, A. Bartolotta, G. Di Marco, A. Di Carlo and F. Bonaccorso, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3244–3294 RSC .
S. Lou, X. M. Guo, T. X. Fan and D. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9195–9216 CAS .
L. P. Wu, J. Q. He, W. Shang, T. Deng, J. J. Gu, H. L. Su, Q. L. Liu, W. Zhang and D. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 195–224 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, D. Zhang, T. Fan, J. Gu, J. Ding, H. Wang, Q. Guo and H. Ogawa, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 33–40 CrossRef .
K. Sugawara, T. Takano, H. Fukushi, S. Hoshi, K. Akatsuka, H. Kuramitz and S. Tanaka, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2000, 482, 81–86 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, S. M. Dellatore, W. M. Miller and P. B. Messersmith, Science, 2007, 318, 426–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nogi and H. Yano, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1849–1852 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, J. Viventi, J. J. Amsden, J. Xiao, L. Vigeland, Y. S. Kim, J. A. Blanco, B. Panilaitis, E. S. Frechette, D. Contreras, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, K. C. Hwang, M. R. Zakin, B. Litt and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 511–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, P. Zhang, L. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Jiang, D. Zhang, Z. Han and L. Jiang, Nature, 2016, 532, 85–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Liu, K. L. Ai and L. H. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5057–5115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Schirhagl, C. Weder, J. Lei, C. Werner and H. M. Textor, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 234–236 RSC .
H. L. Zhu, W. Luo, P. N. Ciesielski, Z. Q. Fang, J. Y. Zhu, G. Henriksson, M. E. Himmel and L. B. Hu, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9305–9374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Moon, A. Martini, J. Nairn, J. Simonsen and J. Youngblood, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3941–3994 RSC .
L. Feng, Y. Zhang, J. Xi, Y. Zhu, N. Wang, F. Xia and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4114–4119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Su, S. Gong, Z. Ma, L. W. Yap and W. L. Cheng, Small, 2015, 11, 1886–1891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Yang, S. M. Zhu, W. H. Peng, C. Yin, W. L. Wang, J. J. Gu, W. Zhang, J. Ma, T. Deng, C. L. Feng and D. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4911–4918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fudouzi, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2011, 12, 064704 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Parker, R. C. McPhedran, D. R. McKenzie, L. C. Botten and N. A. P. Nicorovici, Nature, 2001, 409, 36–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Bartlett, A. B. Croll, D. R. King, B. M. Paret, D. J. Irschick and A. J. Crosby, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1078–1083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zelzer and R. V. Ulijn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3351–3357 RSC .
Y. Gong, P. Adhikari, Q. Liu, T. Wang, M. Gong, W. L. Chan, W. Y. Ching and J. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11016–11024 CAS .
J. Jin, D. Lee, H. G. Im, Y. C. Han, E. G. Jeong, M. Rolandi, K. C. Choi and B. S. Bae, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5169–5175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Duan, C. Chang, B. Ding, J. Cai, M. Xu, S. Feng, J. Ren, X. Shi, Y. Du and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1867–1874 CAS .
R. Li, K. Parvez, F. Hinkel, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5535–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, L. P. Yang, C. Z. Li, C. Y. Yan, P. S. Lee and J. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1813–1819 CAS .
W. C. Huang, H. Y. Lai, L. W. Kuo, C. H. Liao, P. H. Chang, T. C. Liu, S. Y. Chen and Y. Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4186–4193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. McGaw, A. K. Jäger, J. van Staden and P. J. Houghton, S. Afr. J. Bot., 2002, 68, 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Ratner and S. J. Bryant, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2004, 6, 41–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Suginta, P. Khunkaewla and A. Schulte, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5458–5479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Tsigos, A. Martinou, D. Kafetzopoulos and V. Bouriotis, Trends Biotechnol., 2000, 18, 305–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, S. Emaminejad, H. Y. Nyein, S. Challa, K. Chen, A. Peck, H. M. Fahad, H. Ota, H. Shiraki, D. Kiriya, D. H. Lien, G. A. Brooks, R. W. Davis and A. Javey, Nature, 2016, 529, 509–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Huebsch and D. J. Mooney, Nature, 2009, 462, 426–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Scholz and G. Liebezeit, J. Appl. Phycol., 2013, 25, 643–660 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lou, S. Chen, L. Wang, R. Shi, L. Li, K. Jiang, D. Chen and G. Shen, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
U. G. K. Wegst, H. Bai, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia and R. O. Ritchie, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 23–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Barthelat, H. Tang, P. D. Zavattieri, C. M. Li and H. D. Espinosa, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2007, 55, 306–337 CrossRef CAS .
F. Barthelat and H. D. Espinosa, Exp. Mech., 2007, 47, 311–324 CrossRef .
G. Zan and Q. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2099–2147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Michael, V. András, D. John, F. Natalia, M. Bin, W. Ryan, R. Arvind, J. M. Robert, S. Ronald, H. W. Theodore and B. James, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2011, 22, 024005 CrossRef .
D. Dogu, D. Bakir, F. D. Tuncer, K. T. Hizal, O. Unsal and Z. Candan, Maderas: Cienc. Tecnol., 2016, 18, 337–348 Search PubMed .
M. Budakçı, H. Pelit, A. Sönmez and M. Korkmaz, BioResources, 2016, 11, 7822–7838 CrossRef .
E. Arzt, S. Gorb and R. Spolenak, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 10603–10606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Huber, S. N. Gorb, R. Spolenak and E. Arzt, Biol. Lett., 2005, 1, 2–4 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Gao, X. Wang, H. M. Yao, S. Gorb and E. Arzt, Mech. Mater., 2005, 37, 275–285 CrossRef .
B. Bhushan, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2007, 21, 1213–1258 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao and H. Gao, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2007, 21, 1185–1212 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Bae, H. N. Kim, D. Kim, S. H. Park, H. E. Jeong and K. Y. Suh, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 675–700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Heim, L. Romer and T. Scheibel, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 156–164 RSC .
M. Heim, D. Keerl and T. Scheibel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3584–3596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Weaver, G. W. Milliron, A. Miserez, K. Evans-Lutterodt, S. Herrera, I. Gallana, W. J. Mershon, B. Swanson, P. Zavattieri, E. DiMasi and D. Kisailus, Science, 2012, 336, 1275–1280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Cribb, A. Rathmell, R. Charters, R. Rasch, H. Huang and I. R. Tibbetts, Arthropod Struct. Dev., 2009, 38, 173–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. McKittrick, P. Y. Chen, L. Tombolato, E. E. Novitskaya, M. W. Trim, G. A. Hirata, E. A. Olevsky, M. F. Horstemeyer and M. A. Meyers, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2010, 30, 331–342 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, S. E. Naleway, M. M. Porter, M. A. Meyers and J. McKittrick, Acta Biomater., 2015, 23, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yang, I. H. Chen, B. Gludovatz, E. A. Zimmermann, R. O. Ritchie and M. A. Meyers, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 31–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yao, H. Y. Fang, X. H. Wang and S. H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3764–3785 RSC .
M. A. Meyers, A. Y.-M. Lin, P.-Y. Chen and J. Muyco, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed., 2008, 1, 76–85 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Bonderer, A. R. Studart and L. J. Gauckler, Science, 2008, 319, 1069–1073 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Knipprath, I. P. Bond and R. S. Trask, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2012, 9, 665–676 CrossRef PubMed .
H. D. Espinosa, A. L. Juster, F. J. Latourte, O. Y. Loh, D. Gregoire and P. D. Zavattieri, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 173 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Connors, H. Ehrlich, M. Hog, C. Godeffroy, S. Araya, I. Kallai, D. Gazit, M. Boyce and C. Ortiz, J. Struct. Biol., 2012, 177, 314–328 CrossRef PubMed .
F. J. Vernerey and F. Barthelat, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2014, 68, 66–76 CrossRef .
F. J. Vernerey, K. Musiket and F. Barthelat, Int. J. Solids Struct., 2014, 51, 274–283 CrossRef .
G. H. Altman, F. Diaz, C. Jakuba, T. Calabro, R. L. Horan, J. Chen, H. Lu, J. Richmond and D. L. Kaplan, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 401–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. G. Omenetto, 2011 IEEE Photonics Conference (PHO), 2011.
H. Tao, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, B. Marelli, M. A. Brenckle, A. N. Mitropoulos, E. S. Gil, K. Tsioris, H. Tao, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 306–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Jin and D. L. Kaplan, Nature, 2003, 424, 1057–1061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Ghaznavi, L. E. Kokai, M. L. Lovett, D. L. Kaplan and K. G. Marra, Ann. Plast. Surg., 2011, 66, 273–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, D. D. Rudym, A. Walsh, L. Abrahamsen, H. J. Kim, H. S. Kim, C. Kirkerhead and D. L. Kaplan, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 3415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, H. Bai, Z. Huang, X. Tian, F. Q. Nie, Y. Zhao, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Nature, 2010, 463, 640–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, X. Gao and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 178–182 RSC .
A. Singer, L. Boucheron, S. H. Dietze, K. E. Jensen, D. Vine, I. McNulty, E. R. Dufresne, R. O. Prum, S. G. J. Mochrie and O. G. Shpyrko, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, 6 Search PubMed .
P. P. Goodwyn, Y. Maezono, N. Hosoda and K. Fujisaki, Naturwissenschaften, 2009, 96, 781–787 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Vukusic, J. R. Sambles, C. R. Lawrence and R. J. Wootton, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 1999, 266, 1403 CrossRef .
P. Vukusic, R. Sambles, C. Lawrence and G. Wakely, Appl. Opt., 2001, 40, 1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vukusic and J. R. Sambles, Nature, 2003, 852–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vukusic, J. R. Sambles and C. R. Lawrence, Nature, 2000, 404, 457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Kim and B. Bhushan, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2007, 21, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sitti and R. S. Fearing, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2003, 17, 1055–1073 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Hansen and K. Autumn, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 385–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Dufresne, H. Noh, V. Saranathan, S. G. J. Mochrie, H. Cao and R. O. Prum, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1792–1795 RSC .
B. D. Wilts, K. Michielsen, H. D. Raedt and D. G. Stavenga, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2012, 2, 681–687 Search PubMed .
B. D. Wilts, K. Michielsen, R. H. De and D. G. Stavenga, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 4363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zi, X. Yu, Y. Li, X. Hu, C. Xu, X. Wang, X. Liu and R. Fu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 12576–12578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Lu, H. Yin, X. Yu, X. Liu and J. Zi, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 72, 010902 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Abu-Hamdah, W. J. Cho, J. K. Horber and B. P. Jena, Ultramicroscopy, 2006, 106, 670–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Zhao, Z. Y. Xie, H. C. Gu, C. Zhu and Z. Z. Gu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3297–3317 RSC .
J. Aizenberg, A. Tkachenko, S. Weiner, L. Addadi and G. Hendler, Nature, 2001, 412, 819–822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Lythgoe and J. Shand, J. Exp. Biol., 1989, 313–325 Search PubMed .
V. Welch, J. P. Vigneron, V. Lousse and A. Parker, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2006, 73, 7 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tributsch, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 2052–2062 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, A. Erbe, D. Raabe and H. O. Fabritius, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3615–3620 CrossRef CAS .
D. Van Opdenbosch, M. Johannes, X. Wu, H. Fabritius and C. Zollfrank, Photonics Nanostruct., 2012, 10, 516–522 CrossRef .
J. P. Vigneron, J. M. Pasteels, D. M. Windsor, Z. Vertesy, M. Rassart, T. Seldrum, J. Dumont, O. Deparis, V. Lousse, L. P. Biro, D. Ertz and V. Welch, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2007, 76, 10 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yuan and R. Verma, Colloids Surf., B, 2006, 48, 6–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Root, S. Savagatrup, A. D. Printz, D. Rodriquez and D. J. Lipomi, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6467–6499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Teyssier, S. V. Saenko, d. M. D. Van and M. C. Milinkovitch, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Studart, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5024–5044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Cao, H. Li, J. Li, Q. Jin, K. Ren and J. Ji, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9384–9395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nurunnabi, Z. Khatun, M. Nafiujjaman, D. G. Lee and Y. K. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8246–8253 CAS .
R. Dewan, S. Fischer, V. B. Meyer-Rochow, Y. Ozdemir, S. Hamraz and D. Knipp, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2012, 7, 016003 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Galeotti, F. Trespidi, G. Timo and M. Pasini, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 5827–5834 CAS .
M. A. K. Liebschner, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 1697–1714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. ten Dijke, C. Krause, D. J. J. de Gorter, C. W. G. M. Lowik and R. L. van Bezooijen, J. Bone Jt. Surg., Am. Vol., 2008, 90A, 31–35 CrossRef PubMed .
E. L. Fong, B. M. Watson, F. K. Kasper and A. G. Mikos, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4995–5013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Umbers, S. A. Fabricant, F. M. Gawryszewski, A. E. Seago and M. E. Herberstein, Biol. Rev. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 2014, 89, 820–848 CrossRef PubMed .
H. E. Hinton and G. M. Jarman, Nature, 1972, 238, 160–161 CrossRef .
H. R. Hepburn and A. Ball, J. Mater. Sci., 1973, 8, 618–623 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stegmaier, M. Linke and H. Planck, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2009, 367, 1749–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, L. Qi and J. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1119–1123 RSC .
S. A. Chechetka and E. Miyako, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 1061–1065 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ackland, M. Venkatesan and J. M. D. Coey, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2014, 50, 1–4 CrossRef .
R. C. Mundargi, M. G. Potroz, S. Park, H. Shirahama, J. H. Lee, J. Seo and N. J. Cho, Small, 2016, 12, 1167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tzvetkov, N. Kaneva and T. Spassov, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 400, 481–491 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Goodwin, I. J. Gomez, Y. N. Fang, J. C. Meredith and K. H. Sandhage, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4529–4536 CrossRef .
S. J. Archibald, S. L. Atkin, W. Bras, A. Diego-Taboada, G. Mackenzie, J. F. W. Mosselmans, S. Nikitenko, P. D. Quinn, M. F. Thomas and N. A. Young, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 945–959 RSC .
R. C. Mundargi, M. G. Potroz, S. Park, J. H. Park, H. Shirahama, J. H. Lee, J. Seo and N. J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 487–497 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bhushan and Y. C. Jung, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2758–2772 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koch, B. Bhushan and W. Barthlott, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2009, 54, 137–178 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Neinhuis, 1 DOI:10.1007/s004250050096.
H. J. Ensikat, P. Ditsche-Kuru, C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2, 152–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Latthe, C. Terashima, K. Nakata and A. Fujishima, Molecules, 2014, 19, 4256–4283 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Feng, Y. A. Zhang, M. Z. Li, Y. M. Zheng, W. Z. Shen and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14885–14888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, J. Du, J. Wu and L. Jiang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 768–772 RSC .
Y. L. Zhang, H. Xia, E. Kim and H. B. Sun, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 11217–11231 RSC .
H. M. Whitney, M. Kolle, P. Andrew, L. Chittka, U. Steiner and B. J. Glover, Science, 2009, 323, 130–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. M. Diah, S. B. Karman and I. C. Gebeshuber, J. Nanomater., 2014, 2, 1–15 Search PubMed .
M. Sato, A. Inoue and H. Shima, PLoS One, 2017, 12, e0175029 Search PubMed .
T. Tan, N. Rahbar, S. M. Allameh, S. Kwofie, D. Dissmore, K. Ghavami and W. O. Soboyejo, Acta Biomater., 2011, 7, 3796–3803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mele, S. Girardo and D. Pisignano, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 5312–5317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Zhao, Y. Wang, L. Wang and Y. L. Jin, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 994–1002 RSC .
Q. H. Liang, L. Ye, Z. H. Huang, Q. Xu, Y. Bai, F. Y. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13831–13837 RSC .
Y. Su, N. Lundholm, S. M. M. Friis and M. Ellegaard, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 2363–2372 CrossRef CAS .
B. Delalat, V. C. Sheppard, S. Rasi Ghaemi, S. Rao, C. A. Prestidge, G. McPhee, M. L. Rogers, J. F. Donoghue, V. Pillay, T. G. Johns, N. Kroger and N. H. Voelcker, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Barthlott, T. Schimmel, S. Wiersch, K. Koch, M. Brede, M. Barczewski, S. Walheim, A. Weis, A. Kaltenmaier, A. Leder and H. F. Bohn, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2325–2328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Otten and S. Herminghaus, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 2405–2408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dai and J. Rabani, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 421–426 RSC .
L. Xianyong, C. Hongyan, W. Yanzi, T. Chao, J. Congcong, Z. Ying and J. Lei, Sci. Bull., 2015, 60, 453–459 CrossRef .
W. Ming, D. Wu, R. van Benthem and G. de With, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2298–2301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vignolini, P. J. Rudall, A. V. Rowland, A. Reed, E. Moyroud, R. B. Faden, J. J. Baumberg, B. J. Glover and U. Steiner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15712–15715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. B. M. Yusof, A. Wee, L. Y. Lim and E. Khor, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2003, 66, 224–232 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, H. Yano, D. Li and K. Abe, Cellulose, 2015, 22, 2543–2550 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kean and M. Thanou, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2010, 62, 3–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Jin, G. Z. Li, J. Y. Yu and D. Y. Kang, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 1067–1074 CrossRef .
J.-M. Malho, S. Arola, P. Laaksonen, G. R. Szilvay, O. Ikkala and M. B. Linder, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 12193–12196 CrossRef .
B. L. Seagle, K. A. Rezai, Y. Kobori, E. M. Gasyna, K. A. Rezaei and J. R. Norris, Jr., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 8978–8983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Lynge, d. W. R. Van, A. Postma and B. Städler, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4916–4928 RSC .
W. Zhai, J. Chang, K. Lin, J. Wang, Q. Zhao and X. Sun, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 3684–3690 CAS .
B. Han, J. Jaurequi, B. W. Tang and M. E. Nimni, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2003, 65, 118–124 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Blum, A. P. Mosk, I. S. Nikolaev, V. Subramaniam and W. L. Vos, Small, 2008, 4, 492–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, P. Cebe, A. S. Weiss, F. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
F. G. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, Science, 2010, 329, 528–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Engelhardt, E. Hoch, K. Borchers, W. Meyer, H. Kruger, G. E. Tovar and A. Gillner, Biofabrication, 2011, 3, 025003 CrossRef PubMed .
K. H. Smith, E. Tejeda-Montes, M. Poch and A. Mata, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 42, 4563–4577 RSC .
N. B. Sopher, Z. R. Abrams, M. Reches, E. Gazit and Y. Hanein, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2007, 17, 2360–2365 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abbas, Q. Zou, S. Li and X. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605021 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Dai, D. Li, W. Xi, F. Luo, X. Zhang, M. Zou, M. Cao, J. Hu, W. Y. Wang, G. H. Wei, Y. Zhang and C. Liu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 2996–3001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Shen, N. Z. Bao, P. E. Prevelige and A. Gupta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2551–2559 CAS .
X. Chen, K. Gerasopoulos, J. Guo, A. Brown, C. Wang, R. Ghodssi and J. N. Culver, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5366–5372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Jones, N. C. Seeman and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2015, 347, 1260901 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Dave, Appl. Mech. Mater., 2013, 1981, 281–285 Search PubMed .
A. J. Steckl, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 3–5 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Diao, X. Y. Liu, G. W. Toh, L. Shi and J. Zi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5373–5380 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cao, S. Lim, H. Ji, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Honek, E. M. Hedlund and Y. Cao, Nat. Protoc., 2011, 6, 817–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Sommer, J. R. Vetsch, J. Leemann, R. Muller, A. R. Studart and S. Hofmann, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2016 DOI:10.1002/jbm.b.33737 .
K. Benkendorff, A. R. Davis, C. N. Rogers and J. B. Bremner, J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol., 2005, 316, 29–44 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Desbois and V. J. Smith, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 1629–1642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Curtis and C. Wilkinson, Biomaterials, 1997, 18, 1573–1583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Le, K. Kulangara, A. F. Adler, K. W. Leong and V. S. Ashby, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3278–3283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Noble-Nesbitt, J. Exp. Biol., 1963, 40, 681–700 CAS .
A. G. Dumanli and T. Savin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6698–6724 RSC .
E. Miyako, T. Sugino, T. Okazaki, A. Bianco, M. Yudasaka and S. Iijima, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8736–8742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, B. Q. Dong, X. H. Liu, Y. M. Zheng and J. Zi, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 16183–16191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, B. Ji, K. Zhang, H. Gao, Y. Huang and K. Hwang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 4984–4989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 273–285 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wagner, C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Acta Zool., 1996, 77, 213–225 CrossRef .
G. S. Watson, B. W. Cribb and J. A. Watson, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 129–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Harrington, A. Masic, N. Holten-Andersen, J. H. Waite and P. Fratzl, Science, 2010, 328, 216–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bruner and R. Dauskardt, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 1117–1121 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Dupont, M. Oliver, F. C. Krebs and R. H. Dauskardt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 171–175 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Dupont, F. Novoa, E. Voroshazi and R. H. Dauskardt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1325–1332 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bruner, N. C. Miller, M. D. McGehee and R. H. Dauskardt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2863–2871 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Desbois and K. C. Lawlor, Mar. Drugs, 2013, 11, 4544–4557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Helbig, J. Nickerl, C. Neinhuis and C. Werner, PLoS One, 2011, 6, e25105 CAS .
J. Nickerl, M. Tsurkan, R. Hensel, C. Neinhuis and C. Werner, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2014, 11, 20140619 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bagchi, M. Bagchi, S. J. Stohs, D. K. Das, S. D. Ray, C. A. Kuszynski, S. S. Joshi and H. G. Pruess, Toxicology, 2000, 148, 187–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-S. Liu, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2008, 87, 1092–1102 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Habibi, L. A. Lucia and O. J. Rojas, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3479–3500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Phillips, G. T. England, S. Sunny, E. Shirman, T. Shirman, N. Vogel and J. Aizenberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 281–322 RSC .
F. Wang, Z. Zhu, M. Xue, F. Xue, Q. Wang, Z. Meng, W. Lu, W. Chen, F. Qi and Z. Yan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 220, 222–226 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Huang, Y. B. Yin, Z. Pan, M. G. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. L. Zhang and J. P. Gao, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 4396–4402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ghiradella and W. Radigan, J. Insect Physiol., 1974, 20, 301–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Simon and D. N. Peles, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1452–1460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. Ai, J. Liu, M. Deng, Y. He and L. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1353–1359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Santin, A. Motta, G. Freddi and M. Cannas, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 1999, 46, 382–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, Y. S. Kim, J. Amsden, B. Panilaitis, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, M. R. Zakin and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 133701 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Jin, J. Park, V. Karageorgiou, U. J. Kim, R. Valluzzi, P. Cebe and D. Kaplan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 15, 1241–1247 CrossRef .
Q. Lu, X. Hu, X. Wang, J. A. Kluge, S. Lu, P. Cebe and D. L. Kaplan, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 1380–1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Huang, A. Tarakanova, N. Dinjaski, Q. Wang, X. X. Xia, Y. Chen, J. Y. Wong, M. J. Buehler and D. L. Kaplan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4113–4123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pezzella, M. d'Ischia, A. Napolitano, A. Palumbo and G. Prota, Tetrahedron, 1997, 53, 8281–8286 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Gozukara, P. Sangwan, D. Gao and S. Bateman, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2010, 95, 2309–2317 CrossRef CAS .
S. Domenek, P. Feuilloley, J. Gratraud, M. H. Morel and S. Guilbert, Chemosphere, 2004, 54, 551–559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Partlow, C. W. Hanna, J. Rnjak-Kovacina, J. E. Moreau, M. B. Applegate, K. A. Burke, B. Marelli, A. N. Mitropoulos, F. G. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4615–4624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, Y. Zhou, X. Huang, X. Zhu, Y. Lu and J. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 498–526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yui, R. Katoono and A. Yamashita, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2008, 222, 115–173 CrossRef .
E. A. Appel, J. del Barrio, X. J. Loh and O. A. Scherman, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6195–6214 RSC .
L. B. Hu and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6423–6435 Search PubMed .
J. Meng, P. Zhang and S. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 45, 237–251 RSC .
P. Fratzl, O. Kolednik, F. D. Fischer and M. N. Dean, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 252–267 RSC .
J. C. Weaver, Q. Wang, A. Miserez, A. Tantuccio, R. Stromberg, K. N. Bozhilov, P. Maxwell, R. Nay, S. T. Heier, E. DiMasi and D. Kisailus, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 42–52 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Z. Hao, Y. Li, Y. Li, X. Wang, W. Zhu and R. Zhou, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2015, 99, 1249 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wu, Y. Huang, F. Xu, Y. Duan and Z. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang and E. D. Cranston, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6016–6025 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Bruet, J. Song, M. C. Boyce and C. Ortiz, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 748–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Felix, J. S. Hyde, T. Sarna and R. C. Sealy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 3922–3926 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Baptista, S. A. Belhout, S. Giordani and S. J. Quinn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4433–4453 RSC .
K. Saha, S. S. Agasti, C. Kim, X. Li and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2739–2779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Falko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gomez-Navarro, R. T. Weitz, A. M. Bittner, M. Scolari, A. Mews, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3499–3503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Nat. Nanotechnol, 2013, 8, 377.
X. Zhang, Y. Feng, S. Tang and W. Feng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 211–216 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, K.-Y. Pu, J. Li, X. Qi, H. Li, H. Zhang, C. Fan and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4386–4391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Ju, J. Doll, I. Sharma and F. Papadimitrakopoulos, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 356–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Ju, W. P. Kopcha and F. Papadimitrakopoulos, Science, 2009, 323, 1319–1323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Yang and L. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601709 CrossRef .
T. Naghdi, M. Atashi, H. Golmohammadi, I. Saeedi and M. Alanezhad, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2017, 52, 162–167 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liang, Y. L. Wang, F. C. Lin, M. S. Jiang, P. F. Li and B. Huang, Anal. Methods, 2017, 9, 3675–3681 RSC .
Y. Lin, R. Chapman and M. M. Stevens, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3183–3192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, J. Shen, X. Zhang, S. Guo, J. Pan, X. Hou, H. Zhang, L. Wang and B. Feng, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13119–13122 RSC .
M. Nurunnabi, Z. Khatun, M. Nafiujjaman, D.-g. Lee and Y.-k. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8246–8253 CAS .
Q. Lou, S. Qu, P. Jing, W. Ji, D. Li, J. Cao, H. Zhang, L. Liu, J. Zhao and D. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1389–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Si and Y. Hua, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 128, 519–524 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Nam, R. Wartena, P. J. Yoo, F. W. Liau, Y. J. Lee, Y. M. Chiang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 17227–17231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Janeček, J. R. Mckee, C. S. Y. Tan, A. Nykänen, M. Kettunen, J. Laine, O. Ikkala and O. A. Scherman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5383–5388 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Qi, M. Ghodousi, Y. Du, C. Grun, H. Bae, P. Yin and A. Khademhosseini, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2275 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Lee, H. Yi, W. J. Kim, K. Kang, D. S. Yun, M. S. Strano, G. Ceder and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2009, 324, 1051–1055 CAS .
C. K. Jeong, I. Kim, K.-I. Park, M. H. Oh, H. Paik, G.-T. Hwang, K. No, Y. S. Nam and K. J. Lee, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11016–11025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Elvin, A. G. Carr, M. G. Huson, J. M. Maxwell, R. D. Pearson, T. Vuocolo, N. E. Liyou, D. C. C. Wong, D. J. Merritt and N. E. Dixon, Nature, 2005, 437, 999–1002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sakai, K. Hirose, K. Taguchi, Y. Ogushi and K. Kawakami, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 3371–3377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Jin, S. Zhu, Y. Liu, M. Long, Y. Zhou and D. Yan, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 325602 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhang, X. He, L. Chen and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10696–10704 RSC .
T. H. Yoon and J. P. Yong, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 344–353 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, J. Kong, L. Yang, L. Ke, H. Tan, H. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Sun, X. Lu and H. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5045–5052 CAS .
Q. Li, M. Tian, L. Liu, H. Zou, L. Zhang and W. C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 114–121 CrossRef CAS .
J. Thiele, Y. Ma, S. M. C. Bruekers, S. Ma and W. T. S. Huck, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zei, Q. Wang, S. Sun, W. Zhu and P. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700321 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Mohammed and W. L. Murphy, Adv. Mater., 2010, 21, 2361–2374 CrossRef .
S. Toledano, R. J. Williams, A. Vineetha Jayawarna and R. V. Ulijn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1070–1071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jian, Y. S. Hu, X. Ji and W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601925 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Segev-Bar and H. Haick, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8366–8378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Segevbar, G. Konvalina and H. Haick, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1779–1784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kahn, O. Lavie, M. Paz, Y. Segev and H. Haick, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7023–7028 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Mannoor, H. Tao, J. D. Clayton, A. Sengupta, D. L. Kaplan, R. R. Naik, N. Verma, F. G. Omenetto and M. C. Mcalpine, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 763 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Shan, G. Adesso, A. Cabot, M. P. Sherburne, S. A. Asif, O. L. Warren, D. C. Chrzan, A. M. Minor and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 947–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ha, S. Lim, J. Park, D. S. Um, Y. Lee and H. Ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2841–2849 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Shin, J. S. Lee, J. Jun, J. H. An, S. G. Kim, K. H. Cho and J. Jang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12294 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, G. H. Li, L. H. Li, L. Liu, Y. Xu, H. Y. Ding and T. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2562–2572 CAS .
M. Dolgushev and A. Blumen, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 044905 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Ai, Z. Lou, L. Li, S. Chen, H. S. Park, Z. M. M. Wang and G. Z. Shen, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600142 CrossRef .
W. Li, L. Gan, K. Guo, L. Ke, Y. Wei, H. Li, G. Shen and T. Zhai, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8666–8672 RSC .
R. Vanholder, Clin. Mater., 1992, 87–133 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, Z. Zhang, G. Sèbe, R. Wu, R. V. Rivera Virtudazo, P. Tingaut and M. M. Koebel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2326–2334 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bendahou, A. Bendahou, B. Seantier, Y. Grohens and H. Kaddami, Ind. Crops Prod., 2015, 65, 374–382 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bi, X. Huang, X. Wu, X. Cao, C. Tan, Z. Yin, X. Lu, L. Sun and H. Zhang, Small, 2014, 10, 3544–3550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. O. Carlsson, G. Nystrom, Q. Zhou, L. A. Berglund, L. Nyholm and M. Stromme, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19014–19024 RSC .
Y. Kobayashi, T. Saito and A. Isogai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10394–10397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lemaire, R. Moser, C. J. Borsa and D. Briand, Sens. Actuators, A, 2016, 244, 285–291 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nogi, S. Iwamoto, A. N. Nakagaito and H. Yano, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1595–1598 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Huynh, P. Sonar and H. Haick, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604973 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Jung, T. H. Chang, H. Zhang, C. Yao, Q. Zheng, V. W. Yang, H. Mi, M. Kim, S. J. Cho, D. W. Park, H. Jiang, J. Lee, Y. Qiu, W. Zhou, Z. Cai, S. Gong and Z. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7170 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhong, Y. Deng, A. F. Roudsari, A. Kapetanovic, M. P. Anantram and M. Rolandi, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 476 CrossRef PubMed .
X. You and J. J. Pak, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 202, 1357–1365 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Hammock, A. Chortos, B. C. Tee, J. B. Tok and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5997–6038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, J. H. Son, S. H. Lee, B. K. You, K.-I. Park, H. K. Lee, M. Byun and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7480–7487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Robinson, Sci. Total Environ., 2009, 408, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Irimia-Vladu, E. D. Glowacki, G. Voss, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 340–346 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Sun, Q. Li, S. M. Sun, J. C. Huang, B. Y. Zheng, Q. D. Chen, Z. Z. Shao and H. B. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jin, V. Reese, R. Coler, D. Carter and M. Rolandi, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 349–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. G. K. Wegst, H. Bai, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia and R. O. Ritchie, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 23–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Wang, F. Zhao, Z. Xu and S. Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2005, 21, 984–988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. T. Yin, S. Shah, M. Chhowalla and K. B. Lee, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2483–2531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shan, H. Yang, D. Han, Q. Zhang, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1070–1074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, M. Jian, C. Wang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605657 CrossRef .
G. Schwartz, B. C. Tee, J. Mei, A. L. Appleton, D. H. Kim, H. Wang and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1859 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hu, R. Xiong, H. Guo, R. Ma, S. Zhang, Z. L. Wang and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Hong, Y. H. Lee, H. Park, S. W. Jin, Y. R. Jeong, J. Yun, I. You, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 930–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Pal, A. A. Farghaly, M. M. Collinson, S. C. Kundu and V. K. Yadavalli, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1406–1412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, H. Kwon, J. Seo, S. Shin, J. H. Koo, C. Pang, S. Son, J. H. Kim, Y. H. Jang and D. E. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2433–2439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, C. Chao, W. Lin and S. Hung, J. Chin. Inst. Eng., 2012, 35, 595–599 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hou, T. Huang, H. Wang, H. Yu, Q. Zhang and Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3138 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Kim, S. Park, H. W. Park, D. H. Park, Y. Jeong and D. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4178–4185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Gao, L. Xu, F. Long, Z. Pan, Y. X. Du, Y. Lu, J. Ge and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4561–4566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gong, W. Schwalb, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Tang, J. Si, B. Shirinzadeh and W. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3132 Search PubMed .
C. A. Poland, R. Duffin, I. Kinloch, A. Maynard, W. A. H. Wallace, A. Seaton, V. Stone, S. Brown, W. MacNee and K. Donaldson, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 423–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pantarotto, J.-P. Briand, M. Prato and A. Bianco, Chem. Commun., 2004, 16–17 RSC .
Y. Liu, L. Q. Tao, D. Y. Wang, T. Y. Zhang, Y. Yang and T. L. Ren, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 123508 CrossRef .
C. Yumusak, T. B. Singh, N. S. Sariciftci and J. G. Grote, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 263304 CrossRef .
M. Irimia-Vladu, E. D. Glowacki, P. A. Troshin, G. Schwabegger, L. Leonat, D. K. Susarova, O. Krystal, M. Ullah, Y. Kanbur, M. A. Bodea, V. F. Razumov, H. Sitter, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 375–380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Glowacki, M. Irimia-Vladu, M. Kaltenbrunner, J. Gsiorowski, M. S. White, U. Monkowius, G. Romanazzi, G. P. Suranna, P. Mastrorilli, T. Sekitani, S. Bauer, T. Someya, L. Torsi and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1563–1569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Yu, D. Kuzum, S.-W. Hwang, B. H. Kim, H. Juul, N. H. Kim, S. M. Won, K. Chiang, M. Trumpis, A. G. Richardson, H. Cheng, H. Fang, M. Thompson, H. Bink, D. Talos, K. J. Seo, H. N. Lee, S.-K. Kang, J.-H. Kim, J. Y. Lee, Y. Huang, F. E. Jensen, M. A. Dichter, T. H. Lucas, J. Viventi, B. Litt and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 782–791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-K. Kang, R. K. J. Murphy, S.-W. Hwang, S. M. Lee, D. V. Harburg, N. A. Krueger, J. Shin, P. Gamble, H. Cheng, S. Yu, Z. Liu, J. G. McCall, M. Stephen, H. Ying, J. Kim, G. Park, R. C. Webb, C. H. Lee, S. Chung, D. S. Wie, A. D. Gujar, B. Vemulapalli, A. H. Kim, K.-M. Lee, J. Cheng, Y. Huang, S. H. Lee, P. V. Braun, W. Z. Ray and J. A. Rogers, Nature, 2016, 530, 71–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, C. Li, R. Nie, Y. Li, J. Tang and X. Deng, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 99431–99438 RSC .
X. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. Yang and Y. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 24, 7373–7380 CrossRef .
N. Liu, H. Tian, G. Schwartz, J. B. H. Tok, T.-L. Ren and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3702–3708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, B. Bhushan and J. Tong, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 14862–14889 RSC .
M. Rassart, J. F. Colomer, T. Tabarrant and J. P. Vigneron, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 033014 CrossRef .
Y. P. Gong, Q. F. Liu, J. S. Wilt, M. G. Gong, S. Q. Ren and J. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, W. Bao, A. Gong, T. Gong, D. Ma, J. Wan, J. Dai, J. N. Munday, J. H. He, L. Hu and D. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14237–14242 RSC .
S. K. Lee, J. B. Lee, J. Singh, K. Rana and J. H. Ahn, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4142–4149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sekitani and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2228–2246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fujisaki, H. Koga, Y. Nakajima, M. Nakata, H. Tsuji, T. Yamamoto, T. Kurita, M. Nogi and N. Shimidzu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1656 CrossRef .
J. Veres, S. Ogier, G. Lloyd and D. de Leeuw, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4543–4555 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Yoon, H. Yan, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10388–10395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cipriano, G. Knotts, A. Laudari, R. C. Bianchi, W. A. Alves and S. Guha, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21408–21415 CAS .
R. A. Potyrailo, R. K. Bonam, J. G. Hartley, T. A. Starkey, P. Vukusic, M. Vasudev, T. Bunning, R. R. Naik, Z. Tang and M. A. Palacios, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7959 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Dou, Z. Lou and T. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2686–2691 RSC .
L. Wang, Z. Lou, R. Zhang, T. Zhou, J. Deng and T. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6539–6545 CAS .
Y. Zeng, Y. Wang, L. Qiao, Y. Bing, B. Zou and W. Zheng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 222, 354–361 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Wang, T. Fei, Z. Lou and T. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4689–4694 CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Lou, J. Deng, R. Zhang and T. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13098–13104 CAS .
Q. Zhai, B. Du, R. Feng, W. Xu and Q. Wei, Anal. Methods, 2014, 6, 886–892 RSC .
L. Wang, Z. Lou, T. Fei and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 19331–19336 RSC .
L. Wang, J. Deng, Z. Lou and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10022–10028 CAS .
A. Umar, A. A. Alshahrani, H. Algarni and R. Kumar, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 250, 24–31 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, R. Chai, Z. Lou and G. Shen, Nano Res., 2017 DOI:10.1007/s12274-017-1718-9 .
L. Wang, J. Deng, T. Fei and T. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 164, 90–95 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Lou, T. Fei and T. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 161, 178–183 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Lou, R. Wang, T. Fei and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12453–12456 RSC .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, X. Chen, L. Yu, X. Wu, Q. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Yang, H. Tian, Y. Hu and P. Du, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500462 Search PubMed .
T. Kawano, H. C. Chiamori, M. Suter, Q. Zhou, B. D. Sosnowchik and L. Lin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3686–3690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, G. Li, Y. Dong, Y. Chi and G. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 8065–8069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Rad, P. Valipour, A. Gholizade and S. E. Mousavinezhad, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 639, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
S. Virji, J. Huang, R. B. Kaner and B. H. Weiller, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 491–496 CrossRef CAS .
A. Akbarinejad, A. Ghoorchian, M. Kamalabadi and N. Alizadeh, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 236, 99–108 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Pushparaj, M. M. Shaijumon, A. Kumar, S. Murugesan, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, R. J. Linhardt, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 13574–13577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Chen, D. Chen, C. Zhou and G. Shen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3005–3011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Chen, W. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17360–17365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lee, K. H. Choi, W. S. Choi, Y. H. Kwon, H. R. Jung, H. C. Shin and J. Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2414–2423 CAS .
M. Park, H. Cha, Y. Lee, J. Hong, S. Y. Kim and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605773 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Hu and X. L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10712–10738 CAS .
W. Liu, M.-S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603436 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Lu, B. Liu, D. Chen, Y. Tong and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4763–4782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand, S. Grugeon, H. Vezin, S. Laruelle, P. Ribiere, P. Poizot and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 120–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, M. Lee, B. Lee, D. H. Seo, C. B. Park and K. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kim, Y. K. Kim, H. Lee, S. B. Lee and H. S. Park, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1094–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Milczarek and O. Inganäs, Science, 2012, 335, 1468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Zhu, Z. Jia, Y. C. Chen, N. Weadock, J. Y. Wan, O. Vaaland, X. G. Han, T. Li and L. B. Hu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3093–3100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Wu, Z. Chen, M. T. McDowell, Y. Cui and Z. A. Bao, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 1042–1048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, J. Hong, D. H. Seo, D. H. Nam, K. T. Nam, K. Kang and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8322–8328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Ko, J. R. Tumbleston, K. J. Henderson, L. E. Euliss, J. M. DeSimone, R. Lopez and E. T. Samulski, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 6404–6407 RSC .
C. Francesco, F. Vincenzo, S. Antonio and L. Akhlesh, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2011, 6, 014002 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Sheberla, J. C. Bachman, J. S. Elias, C. J. Sun, Y. Shao-Horn and M. Dinca, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 220–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Salanne, B. Rotenberg, K. Naoi, K. Kaneko, P. L. Taberna, C. P. Grey, B. Dunn and P. Simon, Nat. Energy, 2017, 1, 16070 CrossRef .
X. Pu, L. Li, M. Liu, C. Jiang, C. Du, Z. Zhao, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 98–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. González, E. Goikolea, J. A. Barrena and R. Mysyk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1189–1206 CrossRef .
X. Lu, T. Zhai, X. Zhang, Y. Shen, L. Yuan, B. Hu, L. Gong, J. Chen, Y. Gao, J. Zhou, Y. Tong and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 938–944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, X. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Ding, P. Qiang, X. Tan, W. Mai, Z. Lin, W. Wu and T. Li, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2617–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, M. Yu, S. Xie, Y. Ling, C. Liang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5376–5381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Li, D. K. Huang, B. Y. Zhang, X. B. Xu, M. K. Wang, G. Yang and Y. Shen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 867–872 Search PubMed .
B. Genorio, K. Pirnat, R. Cerc-Korosec, R. Dominko and M. Gaberscek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7222–7224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, M. Miao, H. Niu and Z. Wei, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4571–4579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Su, S. Pang, V. Alijani, C. Li, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 21, 3191–3195 CrossRef .
X. L. Wu, T. Wen, H. L. Guo, S. Yang, X. Wang and A. W. Xu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3589–3597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Raymundo-Piñero, M. Cadek, M. Wachtler and F. Béguin, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 943 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Bian, A. Yu and H. Wu, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 266–269 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, N. Yi, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2224–2228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, X. You, Y. Jiang, G. Guan, X. Fang, J. Deng, P. Chen, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., 2014, 53, 9526–9531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, M. Zhong, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Z. Wang, Q. Xue, X. Xie and C. Zhi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Trivedi, D. Bhattacharjya, J. S. Yu and A. Kumar, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C. C. Chen, J. Gao and G. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Chen, W. H. Chang, K. Yoshimura, K. Ohya, J. You, J. Gao, Z. Hong and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Mccormick, P. Bombelli, R. W. Bradley, R. Thorne, T. Wenzel and C. J. Howe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1092–1109 CAS .
T. Lv, Y. Yao, N. Li and T. Chen, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 644–660 CrossRef CAS .

          K.-H. Jeong, J.-J. Kim, D. Keum, H. Jung, M. Kang and S.-P. Yang, Optical MEMS for Chemical Analysis and Biomedicine, Institution of Engineering and Technology,  2016, pp. 157–199 Search PubMed .
A. D. Pris, Y. Utturkar, C. Surman, W. G. Morris, A. Vert, S. Zalyubovskiy, T. Deng, H. T. Ghiradella and R. A. Potyrailo, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, Z. Xiao, D. Liu, Y. Li, N. J. Weadock, Z. Fang, J. Huang and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2105–2111 CAS .
T. Sawada, H. Otsuka, H. Yui and T. Serizawa, Polym. Bull., 2015, 72, 1487–1496 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Yusof, L. Y. Lim and E. Khor, Carbohydr. Res., 2004, 339, 2701–2711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Irimiavladu, E. D. Głowacki, G. Schwabegger, L. Leonat, H. Z. Akpinar, H. Sitter, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1473–1476 RSC .
S. Moreno, M. Baniasadi, S. Mohammed, I. Mejia, Y. Chen, M. A. Quevedo-Lopez, N. Kumar, S. Dimitrijevich and M. Minary-Jolandan, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1500154 CrossRef .
N. R. Hosseini and J. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5586–5592 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tseng, I. Pushkarsky and C. D. Di, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e106091 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, M. Zhao, J. Chen, S. Fan, J. Liang, L. Ding and S. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 232, 750–757 CrossRef CAS .
T. Martins, A. A. R. Oliveira, A. C. Oliveira, T. P. Boaventura, B. R. Barrioni, E. S. Costa-Junior and M. M. Pereira, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 189, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sureshkumar and C. K. Lee, Carbohydr. Polym., 2011, 84, 775–780 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liang, L. Fang, Y. Hu, G. Yang, Q. Zhu and X. Ye, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4264–4274 RSC .
T. Hu, M. A. Brenckle, M. Yang, J. Zhang, M. Liu, S. M. Siebert, R. D. Averitt, M. S. Mannoor, M. C. Mcalpine and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1067 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, M. M. Thuo and X. Liu, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2013, 14, 4402 Search PubMed .
Y. Huang, Z. B. Zhong, B. Duan, L. N. Zhang, Z. X. Yang, Y. F. Wang and Q. F. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 3427–3432 RSC .
A. Cooper, C. Zhong, Y. Kinoshita, R. S. Morrison, M. Rolandi and M. Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3105–3109 RSC .
T. Jie, S. Zhu, Z. Chen, C. Feng, Y. Shen, Y. Fan, Z. Di, W. J. Moon and D. M. Song, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 131, 706–713 CrossRef .
D. Roy, J. N. Cambre and B. S. Sumerlin, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 278–301 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Cao and G. J. Wang, Chem. Rec., 2016, 16, 1398–1435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Pitayatanakul, T. Higashino, T. Kadoya, M. Tanaka, H. Kojima, M. Ashizawa, T. Kawamoto, H. Matsumoto, K. Ishikawa and T. Mori, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 9311–9317 RSC .

          J. Wu and L. Y. Lin, Advanced Photonics 2015, Boston, Massachusetts,  2015 Search PubMed .
E. Pardieu, N. T. T. Chau, T. Dintzer, T. Romero, D. Favier, T. Roland, D. Edouard, L. Jierry and V. Ritleng, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4691–4693 RSC .
S. K. Mahadeva, S. Yun and J. Kim, Sens. Actuators, A, 2011, 165, 194–199 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Ha, J. Gu, Q. Li, L. Zhang and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7414–7423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fujisaki, H. Koga, Y. Nakajima, M. Nakata, H. Tsuji, T. Yamamoto, T. Kurita, M. Nogi and N. Shimidzu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1657–1663 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chortos and Z. N. Bao, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 321–331 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee, J. Park and J. Moon, IEEE Sens. J., 2010, 805–808 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, M. Li, O. Voznyy, L. Hu, Q. Fu, D. Zhou, Z. Xia, E. H. Sargent and J. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2718–2724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. D. Van, G. Fritz-Popovski, W. Wagermaier, O. Paris and C. Zollfrank, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5235 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. N. Basir, H. Yussof, N. I. Zahari and F. Idris, International Symposium on Micro-Nanomechatronics and Human Science,  2014 Search PubMed .
P. Y. Chen, X. Dang, M. T. Klug, J. Qi, N. M. Dorval Courchesne, F. J. Burpo, N. Fang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6563–6574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Oh, X. Dang, H. Yi, M. A. Allen, K. Xu, J. L. Yun and A. M. Belcher, Small, 2012, 8, 1006–1011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Z. Liu, Q. Kong, C. Zhang, S. Pang, L. Yue, X. Wang, J. Yao and G. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 128–134 CAS .
J. Zhang, L. Yue, Q. Kong, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, C. Zhang, Q. Xu, B. Zhang, G. Ding, B. Qin, Y. Duan, Q. Wang, J. Yao, G. Cui and L. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3935 CrossRef PubMed .
G. L. Ding, B. S. Qin, Z. H. Liu, J. J. Zhang, B. Zhang, P. Hu, C. J. Zhang, G. J. Xu, J. H. Yao and G. L. Cui, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A834–A838 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, X. Xu, M. Ma and L. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 023302 CrossRef .
Y. J. Kim, W. Wu, S. E. Chun, J. F. Whitacre and C. J. Bettinger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 20912–20917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gao, C. Bumgardner, N. Song, Y. Zhang, J. Li and X. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Huang, R. Howland, E. Agar, M. Nourani, J. A. Golen and P. J. Cappillino, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11586–11591 CAS .
S. Parvez, M. M. Rahman, M. A. Khan, M. A. H. Khan, J. M. M. Islam, M. Ahmed, M. F. Rahman and B. Ahmed, Polym. Bull., 2012, 69, 715–731 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Ge, L. L. Yang, A. Honglawan, J. Li and S. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1678–1685 CrossRef CAS .
S. Selvam, B. Balamuralitharan, S. Jegatheeswaran, M. Y. Kim, S. N. Karthick, J. A. Raj, P. Boomi, M. Sundrarajan, K. Prabakar and H. J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1380–1386 CAS .
S. Purandare, E. F. Gomez and A. J. Steckl, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 094012 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. L. Sun, S. M. Sun, B. Y. Zheng, Z. S. Hou, P. Wang, X. L. Zhang, W. F. Dong, L. Zhang, Q. D. Chen, L. M. Tong and H. B. Sun, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2016, 28, 629–632 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sami, M. Anna, K. Lasse, K. Khanh and Z. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22358 CrossRef PubMed .

          F. G. Omenetto, Frontiers in Optics,  2012 Search PubMed.
S. Ling, C. Li, K. Jin, D. L. Kaplan and M. J. Buehler, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7783–7790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, Z. Zheng, C. Deng, X. Zhang and P. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5055–5057 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Lili Wang
	Lili Wang is an Associate professor at the College of Electronic Science and Engineering at Jilin University, China. She earned her PhD degree in Microelectronics and Solid State Electronics from Jilin University in 2014. Her current research interests focus on flexible and wearable sensors based on biological materials, 2D materials and metal oxide semiconductors.

Di Chen
	Di Chen received her BS degree from Anhui Normal University (1999) and PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology of China (2005). Before joining the University of Science and Technology, Beijing, in 2014, she conducted her research at the National Institute for Materials Science and Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Her research interests focus on designing nanostructures for sustainable energy and embeddable electronic applications.

Kai Jiang
	Kai Jiang received his MB/BS degree from Second Military Medical College, Shanghai, China, in 1991, and MD/PhD degrees from Chinese PLA Postgraduate Medical College, Beijing, China, in 1998. He further studied at the Queen Mary Hospital of University of Hong Kong in 2002, and Universitat de Barcelona, Spain, in 2008. He has been with the Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital since 1991, where he is currently a Professor of surgery and vice Dean of the Department. His current research interests focus on surgical operation and applications of nanotechnology in clinical medicine.

Guozhen Shen
	Guozhen Shen received his BS degree (1999) in Chemistry from Anhui Normal University and PhD degree (2003) in Chemistry from the University of Science and technology of China. He joined the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, as a Professor in 2013. He has published more than 200 papers with a publication H-factor of 57. His current research focuses on flexible electronics and printable electronics, including transistors, photodetectors, sensors and flexible energy storage and conversion devices.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Number of publications in terms of biological materials sorted by year with the key phrase “biomaterials and application” searched in the Web of Science on 15 Jul 2017. (b) A brief timeline for the development and application of biological materials. Chitin/chitosan in biosensors; reproduced with permission from ref. 84 and Copyright 2000, Elsevier. A butterfly with structural color in an optical device; reproduced with permission from ref. 54 and Copyright 2002, Elsevier. Polydopamine used as the coating material for diverse surfaces; reproduced with permission from ref. 85 and Copyright 2007, Science. Cellulose applied in an electronic device; reproduced with permission from ref. 86 and Copyright 2008, John Wiley and Sons. Silk as a compatible transparent substrate or a self-sacrificing template used in a flexible and wearable electronic device; reproduced with permission from ref. 11 and 87 Copyright 2010 and 2012, Science and Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively. Nepenthes alata with hydrophobic/hydrophilic properties used in a fluid-transport system; reproduced with permission from ref. 88 and Copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers Limited. Sunflower pollen used in a biosensor and an e-skin sensor; reproduced with permission from ref. 50 and Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  Summary of biological material-based flexible devices for flexible substrate (wood-cellulose-based substrate and chitin-based substrate), flexible biosensor (sunflower pollen-based biosensor and chitosan-based biosensor), flexible electronic sensor (butterfly-based gas sensor and pollen-based electronic skin sensor), and energy conversion and storage device (Juglone-based battery and supercapacitor) applications. Images reproduced with permission: “wood-cellulose-based substrate”, ref. 69 Copyright 2009, Elsevier. “chitin-based substrate”, ref. 101 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons, “sunflower pollen-based biosensor”, ref. 18 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons, “chitosan-based biosensor”, ref. 110 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group, “butterfly-based gas sensor”, ref. 43 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry, “pollen-based electronic skin sensor”, ref. 50 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. “Juglone-based battery”, ref. 76 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. “Juglone-based supercapacitor”, ref. 73 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. Scale bar: 1 cm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Summary of the physicochemical and biological properties of biological materials. In general, these biological materials provide the main functionalities such as a 3D structure, biocomponents, biocompatibility, hydrophobic properties, mechanical properties, structural colors, adhesion properties, antimicrobial activity and so on. On the peripheral panel, various representative examples of biological materials are shown: dandelion, rose, lotus leaf, silk, butterfly, gecko, grape, wood, and mussels. Image “device” from ref. 113. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. Image “biocomponent” from ref. 89. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Image “3D structure” of National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) Biomass Surface/Structure Characterization Lab, USA.	 

 	Fig. 4  Macroscopic and microscopic structures and representative scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of natural 3D hierarchical structure materials. They are classified into eight categories depending on their structural design elements. (a) Fibrous structure: Spider (Arachnida) with a hierarchy of fibrous silk at multiple length scales. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128 and Copyright 2009, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Helical structure: Stomatopod (Malacostraca) with reinforcements aligned at sequential angles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129 and Copyright 2012, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Gradient structure: Crab (Malacostraca) displaying a gradient in its claws. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130 and Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (d) Layered structure: Abalone shell (Gastropoda) with layer-like structure integration by micrometer scaled aragonite platelets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115 and Copyright 2007, Elsevier. (e) Tubular structure: Human tooth (Mammalia) with dentin tubules or pores in a solid matrix. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131 and Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (f) Cellular structures: Pollen (lycopodium clavatum) with honeycomb or foam microstructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39 and Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (g) Suture structure: Boxfish (Actinopterygii) showing a compliant interface and the rigid sutures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 and Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (h) Overlapping structure: Shark (Chondrichthyes) with overlapping scales consisting of individual plates and allowing for flexing while ensuring full coverage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133 and Copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons. (Schemes a–h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 35 and Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  Examples of multiscale 3D hierarchical structures in nature. (a) Photograph (left) and SEM image (right) of trunk section from a pine tree. Images courtesy of National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) Biomass Surface/Structure Characterization Lab, USA. (b) Light micrographs with different magnifications and the SEM image (inset) of cross-section from poplar (Aspen) wood. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119 and Copyright 2016 and 2016, Elsevier. SEM images reproduced with permission from ref. 120 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Photograph, schematic diagram and SEM image of the lamellar structure of Gecko foot. The lamellae consist of keratinaceous filaments (setae) that split into finer, knob-like structures (spatulae) at their ends. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111, 126 and 127 and Copyright 2014, 2006 and 2010, by John Wiley and Sons, Nature Publishing Group and Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Photograph, schematic, and SEM image of a fracture surface in an abalone shell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134 and Copyright 2011, by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Fauna	Silk	Mechanical flexibility and optical functions	
48 and 142–149

Water solubility, biodegradability, high adhesion, light-weight, elasticity
Butterfly/moth wing	Structural color, superhydrophobicity, self-cleaning, optical functions, directional adhesion, chemical sensing capability, fluorescence emission functions, light-weight, anti-reflection	
43 and 150–156

Gecko foot	High adhesion, mechanical property, superhydrophobicity, self-cleaning, drag reduction, mechanical stability	
123–125 and 157–159

Brid	Structural color, superhydrophobicity, anti-fogging	
160–162

Peacock feather	Structural color, superhydrophobicity	
163 and 164

Fish/brittlestar	Structural color, drag reduction, superoleophilicity in air, optical functions, superoleophobicity in water	
96, 140, 141 and 165–168

Sea animals	Structural color, optical property	
97 and 169

Inset	Structural color, superhydrophobicity, optical properties	
165 and 170–173

Skin	Self-healing, mechanical flexibility, superhydrophobicity, drag reduction, extensibility	
174–176

Mussel	Mechanical property, high adhesion	
85 and 177–179

Nacre	Mechanical property, structural color	
136–138

Mosquito compound eye	Superhydrophobicity, anti-reflection, anti-fogging, optical property	
180 and 181

Bone/tooth	Robust mechanical strength	
47 and 182–184

Chiton/Brachiopod shells	Robust mechanical strength, mechanical flexibility, structural color	
185–187

Polar bear fur	Optical property, thermal insulation	
188

Eggshell membrane	Mechanical flexibility, drag reduction, adhesion property	
189



Flora	Pollen grain	Superhydrophobicity, mechanical property, adhesion property, light-weight	
18, 39 and 190–196

Drag reduction, anti-radiation, antimicrobial activity
Lotus leaf	Superhydrophobicity, low adhesion, self-cleaning	
197–201

Rose petal	Structural color, superhydrophobicity, self-cleaning, high adhesion	
93 and 202–204

Flower	Superhydrophobicity and structural color, optical property	
205 and 206

Bamboo	Superior flexibility and mechanical durability, light-weight	
72, 207 and 208

Wood	Lightweight, mechanically roust, optical	
47, 92 and 118

property, thermal property, biodegradable
Rice leaf	Superhydrophobicity, anisotropic wettability	
58 and 209

Pomelo peel	Mechanical property, drag reduction	
210 and 211

Diatom	High mechanical stability, biocompatibility, optical property	
212 and 213

Plant/nepenthes alata	Directional hydrophobic and hydrophilic, directional adhesion	
214 and 215

Vegetable	Natural color, biocompatibility, optical property	
80 and 216

Fruits	Structural color and hydrophobic property, optical property	
217–219

Mimosa	Highly dry adhesion, mechanical flexibility	
94



Biological molecular	Chitin	Light-weight, high adhesion, mechanical flexibility, biodegradability, optical property	
108, 220 and 221

Chitosan	Biodegradability, mechanical flexibility, chemical sensing capability, light-weight	
108, 222 and 223

Cellulose	Mechanical property, light-weight, high adhesion, optical property, low-thermal expansion	
75, 92 and 224

Polydopamine/melanin	Optical property, adhesive property, biocompatibility and biodegradation, hydrophilicity, antimicrobial activity, paramagnetism	
89, 178, 225 and 226

Juglone	Lightweight, biocompatibility, structural flexibility	
73 and 76

Oligo-proanthocyanidin	Antimicrobial activity, optical property	
227 and 228

High adhesion, hydrophilic	

Proteins	Mechanical strength, adhesion property, biodegradation, structural color	
229–232

Peptide	Biodegradation, antimicrobial activity	
233–236

Bacterial cellulose	Hydrophobic property, mechanical anisotropy, biodegradation	
237

Viruses	Mechanical flexibility, adhesion property, lightweight	
77 and 238

Immunocytes	Antimicrobial activity, chemical sensing capability, biodegradation, mechanical property	
52

Tendon collagen/gelatin	Mechanical flexibility and strength, adhesive property, elasticity	
223 and 228

DNA	High adhesive property, biocompatibility, optical functionalities	
239–241

Opal	Structure color, mechanical property, optical property, chemical sensing capability	
242–244

Fatty acids	Antimicrobial activity and adhesive property	
106, 245 and 246

Cell	Adhesive property	
165, 247 and 248

Lipid layer	Antimicrobial activity	
249

	(1)

 	Fig. 6  Mechanical properties of biological materials with various structures in nature. (a) Overlapping structures from chiton (polyplacophora) representing a variety of biological classes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 and Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (b) SEM image and stretching of spider silk with a fibrous structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44 and 128 and Copyright 2013 and 2009, by Science and John Wiley and Sons.	 
σ = κ1εn+1 + H(εc)E(ε − εc)	(2)

 	Fig. 7  Structural colours in nature. Image of butterflies, including Morpho sulkowskyi butterfly (a), Knight butterfly (b), and T. imperialis (Kaiseri-Hind) butterfly (c). Image of flowers and leaves, including Hibiscus trionum petal (d), Tulipa flower (e) and Mapania caudate plant (f). Image of birds, including Eastern Bluebird Sialia sialis (g), Plum-throated Cotinga maynana (h), and blue peacock Pavo cristatus (i). Images of insects, including the beetle C. gloriosa (j), the weevil Pachyrhynchus argus (k), and the neotropic weevil Entimus imperialis (l). Image of fish, including Paracheirodon innesi (m), the ctenophore Beroe cucumis (n), and the blue-ringed octopus Hapalochlaena lunulata (o). (a) Adapted with permission.251 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (b) adapted with permission.43 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) adapted with permission.151 Copyright 2016, Science; (d and e) adapted with permission.205 Copyright 2009, Science; (f) adapted with permission.206 Copyright 2014, Hindawi Publishing Corporation; (g and h) adapted with permission.160 Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry; (i) adapted with permission.163 Copyright 2003, National Academy of Sciences, USA. (j) Adapted with permission.171 Copyright 2009, Science; (k) adapted with permission.82 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (I) Adapted with permission.172 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (m) Adapted with permission.166 Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (n) Adapted with permission.169 Copyright 2006, The American Physical Society. (o) Adapted with permission.82 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  The change in structural colors of natural creatures. (a) The change in structural color of Paracheirodon innesi from cyan to yellow after the swelling of the oval iridophores. Adapted with permission.166 Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Change in structural color of Charidotella egregia from gold to red was triggered by touching its wings, resulting in a missed attempt at predation. Adapted with permission.173 Copyright 2007, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Hydrophobic properties in nature. (a) Typical hydrophobic behavior of a droplet in the Wenzel and the Cassie–Baxter state. (b) Various typical natural hydrophobic surfaces: Salvinia molesta, butterfly wing, gecko toe, rose, mosquito eyes, and iridescent peacock. Adapted with permission.152,163,180,203,204,214 Copyright 2012, 2010, 2009, 2003 Elsevier, The Royal Society of Chemistry, IOP, John Wiley and Sons, respectively. (c) Typical digital photographs and different magnification SEM images of Nelumbo nucifera lotus leaves with a superhydrophobic surface and self-cleaning properties. Adapted with permission.198 Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (d) Typical digital photographs and SEM images of the sunflower plant and sunflower pollen with hydrophobic properties. Adapted with permission.50 Copyright 2017 and 2016, Elsevier and John Wiley and Sons, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 10  Adhesion properties in nature. (a) Photograph showing adhesive pads and the byssal threads of a mussel attached on the surface of glass. (b) The biodistribution of Mefps, Mefp-3 and Mefp-5 at the pad–substrate interface. The inset displays the amino acid sequences of Mefp-3 and Mefp-5. (c) Structure-based assignments of the adhesive molecules dopa and dopa-quinone by analysis of 1800 F–D curves each from two pH conditions (pH 9.7 and 8.3). Adapted with permission.85 Copyright 2006, PNAS. (d) Typical digital photographs of a tokay gecko foot attached to a glass surface as live experiment about adhesion properties. (e) Scaling relationship for natural adhesive systems showing agreement from the smallest single spatula features to the full organism level. (f) FESEM images of a tokay gecko toe composed of many setae. Adapted with permission,98 Copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  Antimicrobial activity of biological materials. (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of a neural probe based on OPC with an anti-inflammatory neural interface. (b) SEM image of a neural probe based on OPC composites in a cross-sectional view. (c) Live experiment and set-up diagram for the electrophysiological recording. Fluorescence images of (d) ED1-staining; (e) GFAP-staining; (f) NeuN-staining showing tissue responses around the tip of the neural probe before and after being coated with OPC at days 2, 7, 14, and 28 post-implantation, respectively. Scale bar: 100 μm. Adapted with permission from ref. 105 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  Diversified biocomponents in nature. (a) Photograph of Lebadea Martha parkeri Knight Butterfly. (b) Schematic showing the chemical structure of natural chitin and chitosan from butterfly wings. (c) FTIR image of natural chitosan. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43 and Copyright 2017, by Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Photos, SEM images and reflectance peaks of inverse opal photonic crystals of chitosan under ethanol or water condition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 270 and Copyright 2014, by American Chemical Society. (e) Chemical model of the multilayered collembolan cuticle of T. bielanensis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 264 and Copyright 2014, by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  
In vivo biocompatibility and biodegradation experiment of a natural silk hydrogel. Human mesenchymal stem cell interactions on silk-elastin-like protein (SELP)-based hydrogel surfaces: dead (red) and live (green) cell staining on (a) SELP hydrogel (1:8), (b) SELP hydrogel (4:8) and (c) the control tissue culture plate over a 14 d period. Scale bars: 100 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 278. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. The degradation of preformed hydrogels of 6% w/v implanted subcutaneously in a mouse model by H&E staining at (d) 1, (e) 2, and (f) 4 weeks following implantation, respectively. With the duration increased, the hydrogels showed degradation and progressive cell infiltration. Scale bars: 250 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  Carbon–biomaterial composite materials prepared by various methods. (a) Electrostatic interactions: schematic illustration of combining natural Lycopodium clavatum pollen grains (cellular material) with an electrically conductive carbon material. FESEM images showing reduced graphene oxide/Lycopodium clavatum pollen-based composites. Reproduced with permission from Ref. 39 and Copyright 2016, by John Wiley and Sons. (b) π–π conjugation: schematic of the as-prepared biocomposites based on graphene/juglone. Typical top and cross-sectional view SEM images of rGO/Juglone biocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76 and Copyright 2015, by John Wiley and Sons. (c) Hydrogen bond: schematic of the synthesis mechanism of interlocked MWCNT-coated sunflower pollen. The inset shows hydrogen bonding between APTES on the surface of sunflower pollen and carboxyl-functionalized COOH-MWCNTs. FESEM images of samples from each synthetic step: APTES-modified SFPs and MWCNT-functionalized sunflower pollen biocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50 and Copyright 2017, by Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  Polymer coated various biological materials form biomaterial composite materials. (a) Schematic procedure for the preparation of Morpho butterfly wings with polymethylacrylic acid (PMAA) by using a surface bonding and polymerization route. (b) Photograph of a Morpho butterfly. SEM images of (c) alkali-treated Morpho butterfly wings and (d) PMAA-Morpho butterfly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Inorganic–biomaterial composite materials. (a) Schematic drawing of the two-step synthetic process for the fabrication of biological composite materials based on ZnO nanoparticles coated on the surface of pine pollen grains. SEM image of microcapsules: (b) pure natural pine pollen grain and (c and d) ZnO/pine pollen grain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. SEM image of sunflower pollen at different stages: (e) the exine of a natural sunflower pollen grain and (f) a core–shell Fe–O/sunflower pollen grain nanostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. TEM images of the Fe3O4@polydopamine core/shell biocompatible nanostructure with different shell thicknesses: (g) 10 nm, (h) 15 nm, and (i) 20 nm (120 nm Fe3O4 in diameter) and (j) 25 nm (200 nm Fe3O4 in diameter). Reprinted with permission from ref. 314 Copyright 2011 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  Hydrogels based on natural cellulose and DNA materials. Schematic illustration of (a) a colloidal reinforced hydrogel made from nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) and (b) a hybrid hydrogel in which naphthyl-functionalized hydroxyethyl cellulose (HEC-Np) was adsorbed on the surface NFC hydrogel by using hydrogen bonding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 316 Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic showing the fabrication process of hydrogel cubes modified uniformly with giant DNA biological molecules. (d) Schematic of the hybridization process of giant-DNA-directed hydrogel assembly. (e–g) Various hydrogel structures forming DNA-directed self-assembly. Reproduced from with permission ref. 317 Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 18  Hydrogels based on biological silk, resilin, gelatin and silk elastin-protein materials. (a) Chemistry and structure of the silk molecules. (b) Cyclic compression properties of the silk hydrogel immersed in PBS. (c) Schematic showing the preparation of the highly elastic and complete recovery silk hydrogels by using covalent bonds, which are able to withstand 50% strain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (d and e) Structure of the dityrosine adduct from rec1-resilin. (f and g) Fluorescence and flexibility of a rubber-like rod of rec1-resilin. Photographs were taken under white light (upper panel) and ultraviolet light (lower panel). Reprinted with permission from ref. 320 Copyright 2005 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (h and i) Photographs of 3% (w/v) gelatin and gelatin-Ph solutions before (top) and after (bottom) ditryosine cross-linking. Reprinted with permission from ref. 321 Copyright 2009 Elsevier. (j) Representative images of covalent crosslinking mechanism of HRP-mediated SELP gelation. (k) Photograph of silk elastin-protein hydrogels. (l) Engineered thermally responsive hydrogels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 278. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 19  Flexible biosubstrates based on natural silk biological materials. (a) Photograph and (b) schematic illustration of a device based on a thin silk substrate. (c–e) Images showing the mechanism of water solubility of the silk substrate with time from 0 to 10 min. (f) Evaluations of an implanted bioresorbable device for thermal therapy in vivo for 3 weeks. Images showing a partially resorbed region of the silk film after 3 weeks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11 Copyright 2012 Science. (g and h) Photograph of a silk-fibroin-based flexible sensor. (i and j) Photograph showing a wireless sensor based on graphene attached on a tooth and muscle after the dissolution of the silk substrate. Scale bar: 1 cm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 335 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 20  Flexible biosubstrates based on natural chitin and cellulose biological materials. (a) Molecular structure of chitin from squid pen (b). (c) Photograph showing a flexible organic light-emitting diode (OLED) device on a flexible and transparent chitin-substrate in flat and bent states. The scale bar is 1 cm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (d and e) Photographs and (f) SEM image of the flexible chitin film with ethanol coagulants under dry and wet conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) A flexible optically transparent cellulose-based film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 350 Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons. (h) Luminescence of an OLED deposited onto a transparent, flexible and low-coefficient of thermal expansion wood-cellulose substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69 Copyright 2009 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 21  Field-effect transistor (FET) biosensors based on biological materials. (a) Schematic illustration and (b) atomic force micrographs (AFM) of a chitosan-based FET biosensor. (c) Plot of channel proton density as a function of Vgs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 353 Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Design scheme of a flexible FET biosensor with graphene-functionalized natural sunflower pollen microcapsules as the sensing element for molecular detection. (e) Dose-dependent responses to target PSA. (f) Measurement response as a function of PSA concentration and the degree of substrate bending. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18 Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (g and h) Photograph showing the silk from Bombyx mori silk cocoons. (i) Optical image showing the silk-based graphene FET biosensor attached onto the wrist. (j) Experimental measurement of the silk/GOx functionalized graphene FET biosensor in response to various concentrations of glucose at Vds = 100 mV. (k) The response curve at different concentrations of glucose of the silk/GOx functionalized graphene FET at Vg = 0 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 354 Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  Natural silk-based flexible biosensors. (a) Schematics of preparation routes for natural silk-based biosensors. (b) Image showing flexible sensors attached on egg surfaces. (c) Image of the shell–silk interface when silk was attached on the surface of an egg, from a cross-sectional view. (d) Reflection versus frequency curves of the eggs with (red) and without (blue) the THz SRR sensor. (e) Image showing flexible sensors attached on surfaces of various objects. (f) Photograph of a GHz resonant coil on a flexible silk substrate. (g) The frequency-dependent impedance phase angle curves of a silk sensor used to detect bacterial contamination in a slice of cheese. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 23  Flexible electrochemical biosensors based on chitosan composite materials. (a) Schematic illustration showing fully integrated wearable sensor arrays applied in the outdoor exercise. (b and c) A photograph of the wearable electrochemical biosensor and the schematic of the electric circuit. (d) Experimental characterization of the wearable sensors for detection of glucose and lactate in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solutions. (e) Perspiration analysis during stationary cycling in real-time: attached on the head and wrist. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 24  Electronic skin (e-skin) sensors based on biological materials. (a) Photograph and (b) FESEM images of sunflower and sunflower pollen. (c) Conceptual illustration of the 3D composite film based on an interlocking geometry with encapsulated sunflower pollen microcapsules. (d–f) Schematic diagram showing a 3D matrix rubber-based sensor array (12 × 8 pixels), which can map the shape of different objects such as a human hand, the “N”, “T”, and “U” letters. (g) Measured contact angle curves and images on the 3D sunflower pollen-based composite film (black line) and planar composite film without natural sunflower pollen (blue line) surfaces over time (0–30 min). (a) Sunflower image reprinted with permission from ref. 18 Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (b–g) Reprinted with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (h) Schematic illustration showing the structure and preparation route of natural silk-based e-skin sensors. (i) Shape-mapping of various objects distributed on the (9 × 9 pixels) e-skin sensor arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 365 Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 25  Biodegradable e-skin sensors. (a) The schematic structure of a flexible and biodegradable e-skin sensor based on microstructured PGS films. (b) Photographs from a representative device before in vitro degradation and after seven weeks of incubation. (c) Carotid artery and femoral artery monitored. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Photograph showing an electrode array with a mesh design on a dissolvable natural silk substrate. (e–h) Series of pictures illustrating how the thickness of the electrode array contributes to conformally attach on a brain model. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 26  Flexible photodetectors based on biological materials. (a) Schematic showing the fabrication process of amino acid functionalized graphene oxide. (b) Responsivity and detectivity versus the wavelength of the amino acid (Cys)-based photodetectors under −0.1 V. (c) Frequency response of various photodetectors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 384. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Photograph showing a self-powered flexible photodetector on a bio-cellulose structure. (e) I–V curves of the cellulose-based flexible photodetector under different illumination intensities; (f) time–response of the cellulose-based flexible photodetector under 365 nm light illumination with 0.7 mW cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 27  Flexible transistors based on flexible paper substrates. (a) A photograph of a flexible and transparent nanopaper transistor. The inset shows the SEM cross-section of a nanopaper transistor with a layered structure. (b) The transparency of the nanopaper and nanopaper transistors. (c) Transfer characteristics of nanopaper transistors before and during bending. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic showing a three-dimensional image of the MoS2-based flexible paper phototransistor from a cross-sectional view. (e) Transfer characteristics (Ids–Vgs) under laser on and laser off conditions. (f) The device exhibiting great flexibility. Reprinted with permission from ref. 390. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 28  Butterfly based flexible gas sensors. (a) A schematic representation of self-assembled materials based on a biological composite sensing layer made of a combination of graphene and butterfly wings. (b) Schematic showing the structure of the flexible sensor unit, which consists of two copper electrodes, a functional butterfly wing-based sensing layer, and the cellulose paper layer. (c and d) Photograph of the wearable sensor and real-time sensor response to 2 ppm of simulated diabetic breath (acetone vapor) with 85% RH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2017 Royal Society Chemical. (e) Iridescent colouration of M. sulkowskyi scales and fabricated nanostructures. (f) Six regions of the gas sensor array (each region was 2 × 2 mm). (g) Tree-like gradient structure of natural butterfly scales and chemical gradients with their surface polarity and preparation of nanostructures by gas phase selective control and their design criteria. (h) ΔR spectra of gas sensor in water (H2O) vapour, methanol (MeOH), methyl ethyl ketone (MEK), acetonitrile (ACN) and benzene (Ben). Reprinted with permission from ref. 397. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 29  Biological molecule based flexible lithium ion batteries (LIBs). (a) Chemical structure of the Juglone molecule that can be derived from waste walnut epicarp. (b) Schematic illustration showing the π–π conjugation of the Juglone molecule with rGO nanosheets and the reversible sodium-ion insertion/extraction mechanism of the hybridized electrodes. (c) Capacity–voltage and (d) capacity retention profiles of the rGO/Juglone biocomposite electrode at 0.1 A g−1 compared with individual Juglone and rGO electrodes. (e and f) Photographs showing a rGO/Juglone film with a large piece of 900 cm2 to power an electric fan. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 30  Components of biological molecules in flexible lithium ion batteries. (a) Full virus molecular templates allowing for high-precision and multiscale patterning of electronic devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2009 Nature Publication Group. (b) Schematic diagram showing the virus-enabled synthesis and assembly of Co3O4 and Au/Co3O4 nanowires. (c) TEM image of the Co3O4/virus nanowires. (d) Specific capacity versus cycle number of Co3O4 nanowires for the same cell. (e) Genetic engineering visualization of M13 bacteriophage viruses. In E4 clones, P8 proteins with a gold binding group (yellow) are doped together to grow Co3O4. (f) Photograph of a flexible and transparent device based on Co3O4 nanowires. (g) TEM image of the hybrid Au/Co3O4 nanowires. (h) Specific capacity versus cycle number of hybrid Au/Co3O4 nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2006 Science.	 

 	Fig. 31  Wood-based flexible lithium batteries. (a) Photograph of trees. (b) Structure of the wood fiber that includes cellulose fiber, microfibril bundle, microfibril, and elementary fibril from outside-to-inside. (c) Photograph, schematic, and TEM image of cellulose fiber from wood. (d) Cycling performance of Cu current collector, Al2O3 coated fiber, and Sn@WF, at a rate of C/10. The inset exhibits the structure of the Al2O3 coated fiber and wood fiber. Reproduced with permission from ref. 430. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the design and structure of the self-healing electrode. (f–i) Demonstration of the composite SHP as the conductive pathway with excellent mechanical and electrical self-healing capability. Reproduced with permission from ref. 431. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 32  Flexible and wearable supercapacitors based on biological materials with high performance. (a) Schematic of the as-fabricated flexible and wearable supercapacitors based on Juglone biomolecules derived from walnuts. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge tests of the Juglone biomolecule-based flexible supercapacitor at different current densities. (c) Photograph and the ability of transient energy storage of the wearable and flexible biological material-based supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Photographs and schematic of bamboos with a 3D hierarchical structure. (e) TEM images of the bamboo-inspired composite nanofiber with a pore-rich structure. (f) Electrochemical performances of the bamboo-inspired composite nanofiber-based flexible supercapacitor in different bent (step 1: 0° and step 2: 90°) and twisted (step 3: 90° and step 4: 180°) states. Mechanical deformation conditions. Photograph of the flexible device at 0° and 90° bent state and 90° and 180° twisted state. This flexible supercapacitor displays excellent mechanical flexibility and remarkable stable electrochemical performances. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  Flexible solar cells based on biological-inspired biomaterials possessing unique structures with specific functions. (a) Images of a water droplet on a polyurethane substrate with (a) a flat surface, (b) a smooth sphere, and (c) the moth eye replica. (b and c) Micrographs of multiple images generated by the moth eye replica. (d) Reflectivity of a flat PU substrate, a PU moth eye replica and natural moth eye, as well as optical calculation at normal incidence. (e) SEM images of the PU moth eye replica. Reproduced with permission from ref. 433 Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) SEM image of an eye of a natural blowfly (Eucalliphora lilea). (g) Schematics of the multi-stage development of a bioinspired compound lens proceeding to a solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 434 Copyright 2010 IOP. (h) Photograph showing the structure of a natural butterfly wing (Papilio paris Linnaeus) with a low-magnification optical microscopy and FESEM image of a blue site and black site in the wing. (i) Current–potential curves of different microstructure photoanodes without dye sensitization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 34  Thermal/optical devices based on a butterfly wing and cellulose-paper. (a) New principle of uncooled thermal detection based on the air-filled photonic architecture of iridescent scales of a Morpho butterfly. (b) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and SEM images of a butterfly wing (Morpho sulkowskyi), respectively. Inset: Photograph of a butterfly (Morpho sulkowskyi). (c) SEM images of a portion of a Morpho scale before modification with SWNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 458 Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Photograph of the nanopaper and regenerated cellulose film (RCF). (e) Comparison of reading comfortability in the case of paper and a PET film. (f) Total transmittance and (g) photograph of a paper-based device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 459. Copy right 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Substrate	Flexible substrate	Silk, chitin, cellulose, polydopamine, shellac, hard gelatin, collagen, chitosan, alginate, dextran	Mechanical flexibility, structure color, lightweight, optical property, biodegradation, biocompatibility, adhesive property, self-healing, 3D hierarchical, chemical component, low-thermal expansion	
5, 87, 275, 460 and 461


69, 71, 85, 350, 462 and 463


188, 464 and 465



Biosensor	
FET biosensor
Electrochemical biosensor
	Chitosan, pollen, butterfly, silk, polydopamine, cellulose-paper	Adhesive property, lightweight, mechanical property, 3D hierarchical, biocomponent, chemical sensing capability, antimicrobial activity, hydrophilic, self-healing	
18, 108, 110, 466 and 467


62, 354 and 468–472


39 and 473–476



Electronic sensor	
Electronic skin sensors
Flexible photodetector
Flexible transistors
Flexible gas sensor
	Pollen grains, silk, wood, butterfly, DNA, Chitosan, amino acid, cellulose, plant leaf (Mimosa), starch, carotenoid polyenes, P. nigra, frogs, beetles, octopus, proteins, cytochrome c, peptides, opal, diatom, chicken albumen	3D hierarchical structure mechanical flexible, elasticity, biocompatibility and biodegradation, self-healing hydrophobic property, self-cleaning lightweight, high adhesive property, optical property, structural color, chemical sensing capability, drag reduction	
325, 379, 380, 384, 387, 389, 477 and 478


62, 145, 234, 479 and 480


60, 71, 397, 481 and 482


188, 270 and 483–486


94, 389 and 487



Energy conversion/storage devices	
Flexible lithium ion batteries
Flexible supercapacitors
Flexible solar cells
	Mussel, alginate, bamboos, pomegranate, M13 virus, juglone molecule, vegetable, silk, nutrients, butterfly, mosquito compound eye flavin molecule, DNA, peptides, polydopamine, fish	Biocompatibility and biodegradation, 3D hierarchical structure, biocomponent, mechanical property, high adhesive property, hydrophobic and hydrophilic elasticity, lightweight, optical property, biotemplate	
78, 315, 318 and 488–494


76, 77, 111, 315 and 495


80, 180 and 430–432


78, 426, 427, 429 and 496


211, 216 and 497–499



Other properties	Optical sensor	Butterfly wings, insects, birds, aquatic organisms, plants, opal, rose petals, pollen, beetles, polydopamine, silk	Structure color, hydrophobic and hydrophilic, anti-reflection, light focusing, hierarchical and porous, structure, biocompatibility and biodegradation anti-fogging, mechanical flexibility, paramagnetism	
181 and 458–500


143 and 501–503


155, 179 and 241

Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
