UV-visible photocurrent enhancement using metal–semiconductor–metal with symmetric and asymmetric double Schottky barriers  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR02466A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR02466A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12848-12854UV-visible photocurrent enhancement using metal–semiconductor–metal with symmetric and asymmetric double Schottky barriers

        
          
            Li 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Taozheng 
            Hu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wen 
            Dong
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuo 
            Chen
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Zhenlin 
            Wang
          
        
      b
aCollege of Physics, Optoelectronics and Energy, Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Thin Films, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China. E-mail: dongwen@suda.edu.cn
bNational Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, School of Physics and Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. E-mail: zchen@nju.edu.cn
Received 
      26th March 2018
    , Accepted 21st June 2018First published on 22nd June 2018AbstractWe experimentally report improved photocurrent performance under the illumination of both UV and visible light in the metal–semiconductor–metal nanostructures with double Schottky barriers, consisting of a monolayer of Au nanoparticles and a planar Au film separated by a thin WO3 layer. In addition to the near-unit broadband optical absorption causing the increased population of hot electrons, we demonstrate that the occurrence of the electron trapping effect at the bottom Schottky barrier is also responsible for the photocurrent enhancement under visible light illumination. Under the direct UV bandgap excitation of WO3, the electron trapping effect at the bottom barrier plays a crucial role in the anodic photocurrent enhancement. Furthermore, we demonstrate that by replacing the Au film with the metal Pt of higher work function to increase the barrier height of the bottom Schottky barrier, and hence strengthening its ability for electron trapping, the photocurrent is found to gain a further significant enhancement under the illumination of both visible and UV light.
1. Introduction
Incorporation of metal nanostructures into semiconductors can greatly improve the performance of the conventional semiconductor through the localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs) supported by the metal nanostructures.1 For example, with the aid of the LSPR induced localized field enhancement of silver nanoparticles (NPs) on the GaN detectors, the surface potential around these silver NPs could be greatly reduced,2 leading to a significant enhancement in the detector responsivity.3 In addition to the advantage of the LSPR-mediated field enhancement,4 plasmon-induced hot electron injection from the metal to the semiconductor has become a topic of rapidly increasing interest.5 Recently, many groups have reported the extension of the spectral response of the large-bandgap semiconductors (e.g., n-type TiO2 in most cases) from the ultraviolet (UV) region to the visible light region by exploiting the hot electron injection mechanism in the metal–TiO2 nanostructures and its applications to photocurrent generation, efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting and photodegradation of organic pollutants.6–16 In these composite materials, the incident visible light is coupled into the LSPRs supported by the metal nanostructures, and consequently hot electrons could be generated through the non-radiative decay of the LSPRs.5 Hot electrons with energies that are only required to be sufficient for overcoming the Schottky barrier at the metal–semiconductor interface instead of the considerably higher bandgap of the semiconductor can be injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor.17 This enables the creation of active electrons and holes in the TiO2 even under visible light and thus renders a visible light response to the TiO2.18
Recently, several groups have demonstrated that near-unit broadband absorption achieved in the three-layered metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM) nanostructures could be exploited to greatly enhance hot-carrier generation and visible-light photocatalytic performance.19–21 Furthermore, it has been reported that Schottky barriers of the MSM structures could play an important role in the performance of MSM ultraviolet (UV) detectors.22 The spectral response of the GaN-based MSM UV detector with different Schottky contact metals was found to increase with increasing difference between the interdigitated Schottky barrier heights.23 So far, in the context of the plasmonic photocatalysts, most of the research has focused on the hot electron harvesting under visible light illumination.6–16,19–21 Little attention has been paid to the photocatalysis performance of the plasmonic photocatalysts under the irradiation of UV light. In most cases, the improved visible light responsivity in the plasmonic photocatalysts is achieved at the cost of sacrificing their UV performance. For example, as compared with the TiO2 film, the photocurrent in the Au-NP loaded TiO2 film could gain a 5-fold enhancement under visible light illumination, while it suffers a 4-fold decrease under UV illumination.24 To make full use of the solar energy, it remains a challenge for plasmonic photocatalysts to have improved performance under the illumination of both UV and visible light.
In this study, we investigate the photocurrent performance of the MSM nanostructures with double Schottky barriers, which consist of a monolayer of Au-NPs and a planar Au film separated by a 50 nm thick WO3 layer, under the illumination of UV and visible light. We demonstrate that under visible irradiation, the top Schottky barrier at the Au-NPs/WO3-layer interface can capture and inject hot electrons from Au-NPs to WO3, in which near-unit broadband absorption can increase the population of hot electrons, and thus partially contribute to the photocurrent enhancement. We also demonstrate that the bottom Schottky barrier at the WO3-layer/Au-film interface is able to trap either hot electrons that get injected into WO3 under visible irradiation or photo-generated electrons arising from the direct bandgap excitation of WO3 under UV irradiation and transfer them into the Au film, which thus plays a positive role in the photocurrent enhancement. Furthermore, by replacing the Au film with the Pt of higher work function, we show that the photocurrent can gain a further significant enhancement, which could be attributed to the improved electron trapping ability of the bottom Schottky barrier with a higher barrier height.
2. Fabrication and methods
2.1 Sample preparation
The control sample of the pure WO3 film with a thickness of 50 nm was prepared by depositing WO3 directly onto the FTO substrate. The control sample of the Au-nanoparticle loaded WO3 film was prepared by successively depositing 50 nm thick WO3 and 5 nm thick Au onto the FTO substrate. For preparing the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film and Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructures, optically thick (150 nm) Au and Pt layers were first deposited onto the FTO substrate, respectively. After that, 50 nm thick WO3 and 5 nm thick Au were successively deposited onto the as-deposited Au and Pt layers. All the as-prepared samples were annealed under an air atmosphere at 400 °C for 3 hours to transform the top thin Au film into a monolayer of Au-NPs and simultaneously transform the amorphous WO3 film into a polycrystalline film structure.
2.2 Optical measurements
To characterize the optical properties of the prepared samples, un-polarized white light from a halogen lamp is slightly focused by a microscope objective onto the samples. The reflected light from the samples was collected by the same objective lens, while the transmitted light was collected by a microscope condenser. The collected signals were guided into a visible/near-infrared spectrometer. The measured transmission spectra (T) were normalized with a transmission spectrum of a cleaned FTO glass substrate, and the reflection spectra (R) were normalized with a reflection spectrum collected on a silver mirror. For the bare WO3 film and the Au-NP loaded WO3 film, the absorption spectra were derived by A = 1 − T − R. The bottom metal film in the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film and Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructures is thick enough to eliminate the optical light transmission (T = 0). Therefore, only the reflection spectra needed to be measured for these two nanostructures, and the absorption spectra were given by A = 1 − R.
2.3 Photocurrent measurements
The photocurrents of the prepared samples are measured in a three-electrode photoelectrochemical cell without applied voltage. The samples, a platinum wire and a saturated calomel electrode act as a working electrode (photoanode electrode), a counter electrode and a reference electrode, respectively. An aqueous solution of 1.0 M KOH (pH = 14) was used as the electrolyte solution. A 300 W xenon lamp was used as the light source. The area of the samples exposed to light was ∼0.25 cm2. A long-pass filter with a cut-on wavelength of 480 nm and a short-pass filter with a cut-off wavelength of 400 nm were placed in the light path to approximate the visible and UV illumination, respectively. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum was obtained by a semi-monochromatic irradiation produced through a series of band pass filters with different center wavelengths (10 nm full widths at half-maximum). The wavelength dependent light intensity was measured by using a spectroradiometer.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Observation of photocurrent enhancement in MSM under the illumination of the full solar spectrum
As schematically shown in the inset of Fig. 1(a), the MSM nanostructure supported by a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrate consists of a 150 nm thick Au film and a monolayer of Au-NPs separated by a 50 nm thick WO3 layer (see Fabrication and methods for the detailed fabrication process). A representative top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the obtained MSM nanostructure is shown in Fig. 1a, which confirms that the Au-NPs with large size dispersion are distributed randomly on the surface of the WO3 layer after the thermal annealing. Fig. 1b shows the XRD patterns of the FTO glass substrate and a 50 nm thick WO3 layer deposited onto the FTO substrate. The signals that only appear in the case of the WO3 layer at 2θ = 23.1, 23.7, 24.3, 28.7, and 34.2 degrees can be associated with the (001), (020), (200), (111) and (220) planes of the monoclinic phase of WO3.25 Further analysis of the top-view SEM image [Fig. 1a] shows that the sizes of the formed Au-NPs follow a Gaussian distribution centered around 17 nm [Fig. 1c]. Fig. 1d shows the normalized absorption spectra of the MSM nanostructure and the 50 nm thick WO3 film with and without Au-NPs. The thin WO3 planar film is almost transparent and absorbs light with a wavelength smaller than 450 nm due to its relatively large bandgap (2.8 eV).26 In the Au-NPs/WO3 structure, the LSPRs of the Au-NPs are found to raise a single-band absorption peak with an absorbance value of up to ∼25% at ∼575 nm, making the structure appear dark bluish grey. It has been demonstrated that associated with the excitation of the gap plasmon resonances, the MSM nanostructures with a top layer of metal NPs having a heterogeneous particle size distribution could give rise to broadband near-perfect absorption.27 The Au-NPs in our MSM sample have a polydisperse size distribution, and hence a corresponding spread of plasmon resonance wavelengths is expected. Indeed, it is seen from Fig. 1d that the prepared Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure appears almost black and exhibits a distinctively broadband absorption with a high average absorbance value of ∼85%. Fig. 1e presents the photocurrent versus time (I–t) curves for the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film, Au-NPs/WO3 and WO3 film nanostructures under the illumination of the full solar spectrum. The most remarkable feature is that the anodic photocurrent from the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure can reach a value as high as ∼60 μA cm−2, which is much higher than that measured for the bare WO3 film (∼20 μA cm−2) and the Au-NPs/WO3 structure (∼28 μA cm−2). This validates that the concept of MSM-based plasmonic photocatalysts is not confined to the previously reported TiO2,20,21 but can be applied to other conventional n-type semiconductors.
 Fig. 1  (a) Top-view SEM image of the prepared Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure. The inset shows the schematic of the MSM nanostructure. Light is incident onto the top surface of the nanostructure. (b) XRD patterns for a FTO glass substrate (blue) and a 50 nm thick WO3 film deposited onto the FTO substrate (red). (c) Histogram of the effective size of the Au NPs formed after the thermal treatment. (d) Experimentally measured absorption spectra of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure (red), the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure (blue) and the bare WO3 film (yellow). The insets show the photographic images of the prepared samples. (e) I–t curves characterized for three samples presented in (d) under the illumination of the full solar spectrum. 
3.2 Mechanisms of visible-light photocurrent enhancement

Fig. 2a shows the calculated normal incidence absorption spectra of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film (red line) and Au-NPs/WO3 (blue line) nanostructures, which are obtained by using the three-dimensional finite-element-method (FEM) software COMSOL Multiphysics. In the simulations, the top-layer of Au-NPs is approximated by hemispherical Au NPs with diameters randomly chosen from the analyzed Gaussian distribution [Fig. 1c], and the thickness of the WO3 film is assumed to be 50 nm. The refractive index of WO3 is set to 2.2, and the permittivity of Au is taken from the experimental data of Johnson and Christy.28 By comparing Fig. 2a with Fig. 1d, it is found that the simulations are in reasonable agreement with the experimental results, in which small discrepancies may result from the approximations made in the simulations, such as a smoothed WO3 layer and Au NPs that are assumed to have regular hemispherical shapes. Furthermore, the absorption contributions from the top layer of Au NPs and the bottom Au film in the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure are calculated by integrating the power loss density over their respective volumes and also shown in Fig. 2a. It is clearly seen that the incident light with wavelengths shorter than ∼550 nm is dominantly absorbed by the bottom Au film [black dashed line in Fig. 2a] due to the interband transitions, and light with wavelengths longer than ∼550 nm is overwhelmingly absorbed by the top layer of Au-NPs [green dashed line in Fig. 2a] due to the excitation of the gap-plasmon resonance, which is consistent with a previously reported result.21
 Fig. 2  (a) Calculated normal incidence absorption spectrum of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure (red solid line), and absorption contributions from the top layer of Au NPs (green dashed line) and the bottom Au film (black dashed line). For comparison, the simulated absorption spectrum of the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure is also presented (purple dashed line). (b) Photocurrents measured for the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure (red), the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure (blue) and the bare WO3 film (yellow) at wavelengths longer than 480 nm. (c) and (d) Working principle of the Au-NPs/WO3 and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructures under visible light illumination, respectively. ECB and EVB refer to the conduction and valence band energy of WO3, respectively. EF is the Fermi level of the structure at equilibrium. φt and φb are the barrier height of the top and bottom Schottky barriers, respectively. The arrows indicate the direction of electron transfer. 
In order to demonstrate the possible mechanisms involved in the photocurrent enhancement, the long-pass filter is first placed in the optical path to approximate the visible irradiation. Fig. 2b shows the measured photocurrents from the samples under the illumination of visible light with wavelengths longer than 480 nm (λ > 480 nm). In this case, since the photon energies are smaller than the bandgap of WO3 (2.8 eV), the direct bandgap excitation of WO3 could be ignored, which is confirmed by the observation of a near-zero photocurrent in the bare WO3 film [yellow line in Fig. 2b]. When the WO3 film is decorated with Au-NPs, a Schottky barrier forms at the Au-NPs/WO3 interface, and the barrier height is given by φt = WAu − χs, where WAu = 5.4 eV and χs = 4.0 eV are the work function of Au and the electron affinity of WO3, respectively.29,30Fig. 2c shows the working principle of the Au-NPs/WO3 structure under the optical excitation of the LSPRs of the Au-NPs. As denoted by process (i) in Fig. 2c, hot electrons generated through the non-radiative decay of the LSPRs can overcome the Schottky barrier and be injected from the Au-NPs into the conduction band of WO3. The injected electrons without suffering inelastic collisions can propagate across the WO3 layer, which are then collected by the FTO substrate and transported to the Pt counter electrode, resulting in a measurable anodic photocurrent of ∼3.2 μA cm−2 in the Au-NPs/WO3 structure [blue line in Fig. 2b].
For the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure, the anodic photocurrent can reach a value as high as ∼7 μA cm−2 [red line in Fig. 2b], which is more than two times larger than that obtained in the Au-NPs/WO3 structure. The working principle of the MSM nanostructure is schematically illustrated in Fig. 2d. Unlike in the Au-NPs/WO3 structure, where only one Schottky barrier forms at the Au-NPs/WO3 interface [Fig. 2c], Schottky barriers in the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure can form not only at the top Au-NPs/WO3 interface (φt) but also at the bottom WO3/Au-film interface (φb) [Fig. 2d]. It has been demonstrated that the hot electrons produced by interband transitions have energies lower than the height of the bottom Schottky barrier and could not be transferred from the Au-film to WO3.31 Therefore, only the hot electrons produced from the non-radiative decay of the gap-plasmon resonance have enough energy to overcome the top Schottky barrier and can be injected from the Au-NPs into WO3, as denoted by process (i) in Fig. 2d. Because light absorption by the Au-NPs in the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure is much stronger and broader than that in the Au-NPs/WO3 structure [Fig. 2a], the population of hot electrons is expected to be significantly enhanced, which has been employed in the previous studies to explain the improved performance of the MSM nanostructures.19–21
In addition to the contribution from the increased population of hot electrons, the bottom Schottky barrier should also play an important role in the photocurrent enhancement. After process (i), the injected hot electrons propagate across the WO3 layer and approach the bottom Schottky barrier. As denoted by process (ii) in Fig. 2d, the bottom barrier allows the hot electrons in the conduction band of WO3 to be trapped into the Fermi level of the Au film, and prevents migrating electrons from crossing back to WO3. This electron trapping effect makes the bottom Au film act as an effective electron sink, which could improve the electron collection efficiency of the anode, and thus contribute to the photocurrent enhancement.
3.3 Mechanisms of photocurrent enhancement in MSM under UV illumination

Fig. 3a presents the photocurrents measured from the samples under the irradiation of UV light (λ < 400 nm), which is approximated by placing a short-pass filter in the light path. It is important to note that under UV illumination the LSPRs or gap-plasmon resonances would not be excited. For the bare WO3 film, the incident photons have energies larger than the bandgap of WO3 and can directly excite electron–hole pairs in WO3, resulting in an anodic photocurrent of ∼3.9 μA cm−2 [yellow line in Fig. 3a]. In the case of the Au-NPs/WO3 structure, the photocurrent is found to be decreased to ∼2.8 μA cm−2 [blue line in Fig. 3a], which could be partially attributed to the reduction of the light-receiving area of the semiconductor decorated with Au-NPs (shading effect).24,32
 Fig. 3  (a) Photocurrents measured for the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure (red), the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure (blue) and the bare WO3 film (yellow) at wavelengths shorter than 400 nm. (b) Working principle of the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure under direct bandgap excitation of WO3. (c) Measured IPCE spectra of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure (red), the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure (blue) and the bare WO3 film (yellow). (d) Working principle of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure under direct bandgap excitation of WO3. The arrows in (b) and (d) indicate the direction of electron transfer. 
In addition, due to the existence of the Schottky barrier at the Au-NPs/WO3 interface, the photo-generated electrons in the conduction band of WO3 could be transferred to the Au-NPs, as denoted by process (i) in Fig. 3b. It should be noted that the electron trapping effect at the Schottky barrier could prevent charge recombination and prolong the lifespan of electron–hole pairs, which has been widely exploited in the metal–semiconductor particles to improve their photocatalytic activity.33–36 However, in the configuration of the Au-NPs/WO3-film nanostructure, the electron-trapping effect actually has an adverse impact on the anodic photocurrent generation, because the transfer of photo-generated electrons from WO3 to the Au-NPs produces a reverse cathodic photocurrent.

Fig. 3c shows the experimental IPCE spectra of the prepared samples under zero external bias voltage. At each center wavelength (λ, unit in nm) of a quasi-monochromatic light produced using a bandpass filter (10 nm FWHM), the IPCE value is defined as IPCE = 1240R/λ, where R = I/J is the photoresponsivity, with I being the measured photocurrent density (mA cm−2) and J being the incident light power density (mw cm−2). As compared with the bare WO3 film [yellow line with triangles in Fig. 3c], the WO3 film decorated with Au-NPs is found to have smaller IPCE values at each UV wavelength [blue line with squares in Fig. 3c], which coincides with the smaller photocurrent obtained in the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure under the irradiation of UV light.
In the case of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure, the electron-trapping effect can occur at both the top and bottom Schottky barriers, as denoted by processes (i) and (ii) in Fig. 3d, respectively. In process (i), the photo-generated electrons are transferred from WO3 into the Au-NPs, which produce a cathodic current and thus play a negative role in the measurable anodic photocurrent. On the contrary, the photo-generated electrons in process (ii) are transferred from WO3 into the Au film, which produce an anodic current and thus play a positive role in the anodic photocurrent. Furthermore, since the metal–semiconductor contact area of the bottom Schottky barrier is much larger than that of the top barrier, more photo-generated electrons are expected to be trapped into the bottom Au film. As a result, the anodic photocurrent in the MSM nanostructure is found to be increased to ∼8.2 μA cm−2 [red line in Fig. 3a], which is more than two times larger than that obtained in the bare WO3 film under UV illumination. Further comparison between the IPCE values of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure [red line with circles in Fig. 3c] and the bare WO3 film [yellow line with triangles in Fig. 3c] demonstrates that the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure exhibits a higher IPCE value at each UV wavelength, which coincides with the observation of the larger photocurrent achieved in the MSM nanostructure.
3.4 Further enhancement in photocurrent using MSM with asymmetric double Schottky barriers
In the above discussions, we have demonstrated that the bottom Schottky barrier in the MSM nanostructure could serve as an effective electron trap and transfer the electrons from the WO3 film to the bottom Au film under the illumination of both UV and visible light. It has been demonstrated that the ability of the Schottky barrier for electron trapping has a high correlation with its barrier height.35 As schematically shown in Fig. 4a, by replacing the Au film of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure with the metal Pt of higher work function (WPt = 5.7 eV)30 and consequently constructing a MSM nanostructure with asymmetric double Schottky barriers, the height of the bottom barrier could be increased from the original φb = WAu − χs = 1.4 eV to φb = WPt − χs = 1.7 eV.
 Fig. 4  (a) Energy diagram of the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure with asymmetric double Schottky barriers. Note that the barrier height of the bottom Schottky barrier at the WO3/Pt-film interface of the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure is larger than that at the WO3/Au-film interface of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure and also larger than that of the top Schottky barrier at the Au-NPs/WO3-film interface. (b) Experimentally measured absorption spectra of the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film (red) and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructures (blue). The insets show the photographic images of the two prepared MSM samples. (c) Calculated absorption contributions from the top layer of Au NPs in the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film (red) and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructures (blue). (d) I–t curves measured for the two samples presented in (b) under the illumination of visible light. 

Fig. 4b shows the absorption spectrum of the prepared Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure, where the geometrical parameters and thermal annealing conditions are the same as those used in the preparation of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure. For direct comparison, the experimental results for the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure are also included. It is clearly seen from Fig. 4b that the prepared Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure still appears quite dark in colour and exhibits large broadband absorption, which reveals that the total optical absorption feature remains almost unchanged even by replacing the bottom Au film with the Pt film. Fig. 4c presents the calculated absorption contributions from the top layer of Au NPs in the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructures. It is found that absorption by the Au-NPs in the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure [red line in Fig. 4c] is weaker than that in the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure [blue line in Fig. 4c]. From this point of view, the efficiency of hot electron generation and injection from the Au-NPs to WO3via the top Schottky barrier in the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure under visible light illumination is expected to be smaller than that of process (i) in Fig. 2c. However, due to the existence of the bottom Schottky barrier with a higher barrier height in the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure, the efficiency of the electron trapping and transfer from WO3 to the Pt film which occurs at this barrier is expected to be increased [process (ii) in Fig. 4a]. As a result, the anodic photocurrent is found to be increased from ∼7.0 μA cm−2 for the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure to ∼9.3 μA cm−2 for the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure under visible light illumination [Fig. 4d].
Under the direct UV bandgap excitation of WO3, the efficiency of the trapping for photo-generated electrons at the top Schottky barrier in the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure is expected to be the same as that of process (i) in the case of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure, since the replacement of the bottom metal film would not change the property of the top barrier. Because the Schottky barrier with a higher barrier height exhibits improved electron trapping ability, the WO3/Pt-film barrier is expected to be able to trap and transfer more photo-generated electrons from WO3 to the bottom metal film than the WO3/Au-film barrier. For this reason, the anodic photocurrent is expected to be higher in the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure than that in the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 5a, the obtained photocurrent is increased from ∼8.2 μA cm−2 for the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure (blue line) to ∼15.6 μA cm−2 for the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure (red line) under UV illumination. In addition, the comparison between the IPCE values of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film [blue line with squares in Fig. 5b] and Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film [red line with circles in Fig. 5b] nanostructures demonstrates that the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure exhibits a higher IPCE value at each UV wavelength, which further provides a confirmation of the above interpretation. Furthermore, as compared to the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure, the anodic photocurrent in the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure increases from ∼60 μA cm−2 to ∼120 μA cm−2 under the illumination of the full solar spectrum [Fig. 5c], which reveals that the electron trapping effect under the illumination of UV and visible light can contribute to the anodic photocurrent enhancement simultaneously without conflicts.
 Fig. 5  (a) I–t curves measured for the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film (red) and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film (blue) nanostructures under the illumination of UV light. (b) Measured IPCE spectra of the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film (red) and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film (blue) nanostructures. (c) I–t curves measured for the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film (red) and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film (blue) nanostructures under the illumination of the full solar spectrum. 
4. Conclusions
In summary, we demonstrate that as compared to the bare WO3 film and the Au-NPs/WO3-film nanostructure, the anodic photocurrent under the illumination of both visible and UV light can be significantly enhanced using the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure with double Schottky barriers. Under the optical excitation of gap plasmon resonance in the visible region, both the top and bottom Schottky barriers can play a positive role in the photocurrent generation, where the top barrier is responsible for capturing and injecting hot electrons from the Au-NPs to WO3, and the bottom barrier can trap the hot electrons that get injected into WO3 and transfer them into the Au film. In this case, the observed anodic photocurrent enhancement in the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure can thus be explained by the near-unit broadband absorption causing the increased population of hot electrons in combination with the electron trapping effect. Under the direct UV bandgap excitation of WO3, the electron trapping effect at the bottom barrier can contribute to the anodic photocurrent enhancement. We also demonstrate that the photocurrent can gain a further significant enhancement by replacing the Au film with the metal Pt of higher work function to increase the height of the bottom Schottky barrier, and hence strengthening its electron trapping ability. We hope the results obtained in this study can be widely applied to the design of photocatalysts that can harvest the full solar light spectrum with much improved performance.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant No. 11474215, 11674168 and 11621091.
Notes and references
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-B. Li, X.-J. Sun, Y.-P. Jia, M. I. Stockman, H. P. Paudel, H. Song, H. Jiang and Z.-M. Li, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e17038 CrossRef .
D. Li, X. Sun, H. Song, Z. Li, Y. Chen, H. Jiang and G. Miao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 845 CrossRef PubMed .
X. M. Zhang, Y. L. Chen, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 046401 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95 CrossRef .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yu, Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 5417 RSC .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Nishijima, K. Ueno, Y. Yokota, K. Murakoshi and H. Misawa, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2031 CrossRef .
S. Mubeen, G. Hernandez-Sosa, D. Moses, J. Lee and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5548 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Mubeen, X. L. Ji, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5014 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Zhang, L. B. Zhang, M. N. Hedhili, H. N. Zhang and P. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 14 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Shi, K. Ueno, N. Takabayashi and H. Misawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2494 CrossRef .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Kramer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shi, X. Wang, M. Zheng, Z. Wu, Y. Chen, Z. Yang, G. Zhang and H. Duan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600588 CrossRef .
C. V. Hoang, K. Hayashi, Y. Ito, N. Gorai, G. Allison, X. Shi, Q. Sun, Z. Cheng, K. Ueno, K. Goda and H. Misawa, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 771 CrossRef PubMed .
M. W. Knight, H. Sobhani, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Science, 2011, 332, 702 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Jiang, B. Li, C. Fang and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5274 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Robatjazi, S. M. Bahauddin, C. Doiron and I. Thomann, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6155 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ng, J. J. Cadusch, S. Dligatch, A. Roberts, T. J. Davis, P. Mulvaney and D. E. Gómez, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4704 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lu, W. Dong, Z. Chen, A. Pors, Z. Wang and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30650 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, X. Sun, H. Song, Z. Li, H. Jiang, Y. Chen, G. Miao and B. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 261102 CrossRef .
X. Sun, D. Li, Z. Li, H. Song, H. Jiang, Y. Chen, G. Miao and Z. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16819 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Hu, P. Diao, D. Xu and Q. Wu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1735 CrossRef .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Nielsen, A. Pors, O. Albrektsen and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 13311 CrossRef PubMed .
P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 6, 4370 CrossRef .
C. W. Walter, C. F. Hertzler, P. Devynck, G. P. Smith and J. R. Peterson, J. Chem. Phys., 1991, 95, 824 CrossRef .
H. L. Skriver and N. M. Rosengaard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 7157 CrossRef .
B. Y. Zheng, H. Zhao, A. Manjavacas, M. McClain, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7797 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Chen, Y. H. Lu, W. Dong, Z. Chen and M. R. Shen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 50, 31 CrossRef .
G. L. Chiarello, M. H. Aguirre and E. Selli, J. Catal., 2010, 273, 182 CrossRef .
S. G. Kumar and L. G. Devi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 13211 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Yang, D. G. Wang, H. X. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Park, Y. Park, W. Kim and W. Choi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 15, 1 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Top-view SEM image of the prepared Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure. The inset shows the schematic of the MSM nanostructure. Light is incident onto the top surface of the nanostructure. (b) XRD patterns for a FTO glass substrate (blue) and a 50 nm thick WO3 film deposited onto the FTO substrate (red). (c) Histogram of the effective size of the Au NPs formed after the thermal treatment. (d) Experimentally measured absorption spectra of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure (red), the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure (blue) and the bare WO3 film (yellow). The insets show the photographic images of the prepared samples. (e) I–t curves characterized for three samples presented in (d) under the illumination of the full solar spectrum.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Calculated normal incidence absorption spectrum of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure (red solid line), and absorption contributions from the top layer of Au NPs (green dashed line) and the bottom Au film (black dashed line). For comparison, the simulated absorption spectrum of the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure is also presented (purple dashed line). (b) Photocurrents measured for the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure (red), the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure (blue) and the bare WO3 film (yellow) at wavelengths longer than 480 nm. (c) and (d) Working principle of the Au-NPs/WO3 and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructures under visible light illumination, respectively. ECB and EVB refer to the conduction and valence band energy of WO3, respectively. EF is the Fermi level of the structure at equilibrium. φt and φb are the barrier height of the top and bottom Schottky barriers, respectively. The arrows indicate the direction of electron transfer.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photocurrents measured for the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure (red), the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure (blue) and the bare WO3 film (yellow) at wavelengths shorter than 400 nm. (b) Working principle of the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure under direct bandgap excitation of WO3. (c) Measured IPCE spectra of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure (red), the Au-NPs/WO3 nanostructure (blue) and the bare WO3 film (yellow). (d) Working principle of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure under direct bandgap excitation of WO3. The arrows in (b) and (d) indicate the direction of electron transfer.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Energy diagram of the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure with asymmetric double Schottky barriers. Note that the barrier height of the bottom Schottky barrier at the WO3/Pt-film interface of the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film nanostructure is larger than that at the WO3/Au-film interface of the Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructure and also larger than that of the top Schottky barrier at the Au-NPs/WO3-film interface. (b) Experimentally measured absorption spectra of the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film (red) and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructures (blue). The insets show the photographic images of the two prepared MSM samples. (c) Calculated absorption contributions from the top layer of Au NPs in the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film (red) and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film nanostructures (blue). (d) I–t curves measured for the two samples presented in (b) under the illumination of visible light.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) I–t curves measured for the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film (red) and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film (blue) nanostructures under the illumination of UV light. (b) Measured IPCE spectra of the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film (red) and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film (blue) nanostructures. (c) I–t curves measured for the Au-NPs/WO3/Pt-film (red) and Au-NPs/WO3/Au-film (blue) nanostructures under the illumination of the full solar spectrum.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
