Atomic layer deposition for nanomaterial synthesis and functionalization in energy technology  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6MH00521G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6MH00521G
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 133-154Atomic layer deposition for nanomaterial synthesis and functionalization in energy technology

        
          
            Xiangbo 
            Meng†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xinwei 
            Wang†
b, 
      
        
          
            Dongsheng 
            Geng†
c, 
      
        
          
            Cagla 
            Ozgit-Akgun†
d, 
      
        
          
            Nathanaelle 
            Schneider†
ef and 

        
          
            Jeffrey W. 
            Elam†
g
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA. E-mail: xbmeng@uark.edu
bSchool of Advanced Materials, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: wangxw@pkusz.edu.cn
cCenter for Green Innovation, School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: dgeng@ustb.edu.cn
dASELSAN Inc. – Microelectronics, Guidance and Electro-Optics Business Sector, Ankara 06750, Turkey. E-mail: cakgun@aselsan.com.tr
eInstitut de Recherche et Développement sur l'Energie Photovoltaïque (IRDEP, UMR 7174, EDF-CNRS-Chimie ParisTech), 78401 Chatou, France. E-mail: n.schneider@chimie-paristech.fr
fInstitut Photovoltaïque d'Ile de France (IPVF), 92160 Antony, France
gEnergy Systems Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439, USA. E-mail: jelam@anl.gov
Received 
      21st November 2016
    , Accepted 5th January 2017First published on 5th January 2017AbstractAtomic layer deposition (ALD) has been receiving more and more research attention in the past few decades, ascribed to its unrivaled capabilities in controlling material growth with atomic precision, manipulating novel nanostructures, tuning material composition, offering multiple choices in terms of crystallinity, and producing conformal and uniform film coverage, as well as its suitability for thermally sensitive substrates. These unique characteristics have made ALD an irreplaceable tool and research approach for numerous applications. In this review, we summarize the recent advances of ALD in several important areas including rechargeable secondary batteries, fuel cells, solar cells, and optoelectronics. With this review, we expect to exhibit ALD's versatile potential in providing unique solutions to various technical challenges and also hope to further expand ALD's applications in emerging areas.
Xiangbo Meng
Dr Xiangbo (Henry) Meng is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Arkansas (Fayetteville, AR). His research focuses on developing novel nanoscale materials for energy applications such as rechargeable batteries, fuel cells, and catalysis. Dr Meng was a postdoctoral research fellow in the Energy Systems Division at Argonne National Laboratory (2012–2016) and in the Chemistry Division at Brookhaven National Laboratory (2011–2012). He earned two PhD degrees in Mechanical & Materials Engineering and Chemical & Biochemical Engineering from the University of Western Ontario (2005–2011). He was an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellow and an awardee of several prestigious honors.
Xinwei Wang
Dr Xinwei Wang is currently an Assistant Professor at School of Advanced Materials, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China. His research has been mainly focused on atomic layer deposition for thin film materials, with the emphasis on the development of new ALD processes and their applications for energy and microelectronic devices. He received his BSc (2008) in Physics from Peking University, China, and both his AM (2012) in Chemistry and PhD (2012) in Chemical Physics from Harvard University under the supervision of Prof. Roy G. Gordon. After a short period of postdoctoral research at Harvard University, he joined the faculty of Peking University in 2013.
Dongsheng Geng
Dr Dongsheng Geng is a professor at the University of Science and Technology Beijing. He obtained his PhD in Physical Chemistry from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007. From 2007 to 2015, Dr Geng worked in Shinshu University (Japan) as a NEDO researcher, the University of Western Ontario (Canada) as a postdoctoral fellow, and Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (Singapore) as a research scientist. His current research is mainly focused on the development of highly efficient electrocatalysts by various methods including ALD technology and the investigation of their structure–performance relationship in metal–air batteries and fuel cells.
Cagla Ozgit-Akgun
Dr Cagla Ozgit-Akgun has been a senior engineer in Department of Micro/Nano Devices Design at ASELSAN Inc. since December 2014, focusing on optoelectronic devices. She was also a visiting scientist at IBM Research-Almaden between 2015 and 2016, where she conducted research on Li–air battery cathodes. Dr Ozgit-Akgun was a postdoctoral research associate at Bilkent University, where she got her PhD degree in Materials Science and Nanotechnology in 2014. She received her MSc and BSc degrees in Metallurgical and Materials Engineering from Middle East Technical University in 2009 and 2006, respectively.
Nathanaelle Schneider
Dr Nathanaelle Schneider is a CNRS (Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique) – Researcher since 2013 at IRDEP (R&D Institute on PV Energy) in France. Her research activities currently focus on the development of new materials by ALD and their applications in PV. She received her BSc (2002) and MSc (2004) in Chemistry from Strasbourg University, France and PhD (2008) in Chemistry from both Heidelberg, Germany and Strasbourg, France universities, under the co-supervision of Prof. L. H. Gade and Dr S. Bellemin-Laponnaz. After staying at AIST-Tsukuba, Japan and Air Liquide Laboratories, Japan, she joined IRDEP in 2012 first as a post-doctoral researcher.
Jeffrey W. Elam
Dr Jeffrey W. Elam is a Senior Chemist and Group Leader at Argonne National Laboratory where he directs a program in atomic layer deposition (ALD) technology with the goal of developing new applications for ALD in fields such as photovoltaics, catalysis, batteries, lithography, and large-area detectors. Dr Elam earned his BA in Chemistry from Cornell University and his PhD in Physical Chemistry from the University of Chicago. As a Postdoctoral Researcher at the University of Colorado, Dr Elam developed ALD thin film growth methods. Dr Elam has authored over 200 papers and is an inventor of over 50 patents and inventions related to ALD. He has won four R&D100 Awards, and is heavily involved in chairing and organizing ALD sessions at ECS and AVS.
1. Introduction
Nanoscience and nanotechnology are emerging as promising tools for addressing the energy challenges facing society including the need for clean, renewable power, reliable, high-capacity energy storage, and efficient energy conversion.1–4 Radical new designs in photovoltaics,5 rechargeable batteries,6 fuel cells,7 and optoelectronics,8 all of which rely on functionalized nanomaterials, can fulfill these needs but advances in nanomaterial synthesis are required before these devices can achieve commercialization. In this context, vapor phase and solution-based techniques for growing functional thin film coatings on nanomaterials are undergoing intensive investigation.9–11 Optimizing the functionalities of nanomaterials requires precise control over composition, thickness, and morphology. To this end, atomic layer deposition (ALD) has emerged as a powerful tool for nanomaterial synthesis and functionalization offering unrivalled benefits, especially as compared to other thin film coating techniques such as chemical- and physical-vapor deposition (CVD and PVD).12,13
Relying on successive, separated, and self-terminating chemical reactions between precursor vapors and a solid surface, ALD can deposit materials with atomic-level precision.14,15 The surface-controlled nature of ALD enables extremely uniform and conformal films on virtually any complex substrates including high aspect ratio nanopores of over 1000:1.16,17 This provides great opportunities for many applications, such as magnetic recording, sensors, and drug delivery in medical treatment.18,19 Furthermore, ALD enables deposition at low growth temperatures even down to room temperature20 and this makes ALD suitable for biological21,22 and polymer substrates.23 By selecting suitable precursors, substrates, and deposition temperatures, in addition, ALD can realize different crystallinities.15 This is particularly desirable for optimizing material performance in energy applications. For example, amorphous SnO2 is better than crystalline SnO2 for battery anodes,24 while crystalline SnO2 is superior to amorphous SnO2 for fuel cells.25
ALD was first used to grow ZnS thin films for electroluminescent display panels using elemental sources in the 1970s.26 There are some excellent review articles discussing ALD's history27,28 and the accomplishments at its early stages of development.29–31 In the early 2000s, ALD emerged as an enabling technology in microelectronics manufacturing, particularly for depositing high-k oxides32 and a new strategy for nanotechnology.33 To date, over one thousand ALD processes have been developed to grow an enormous variety of materials, including inorganic, organic and organic–inorganic hybrid films.15,34 These unique attributes and flexibility in material choice have fostered a rapid expansion in ALD research for energy applications, particularly for nanomaterial synthesis and functionalization, in areas such as photovoltaics,35 catalysis,36 fuel cells,37 batteries,38,39 supercapacitors,39 water splitting,40 and optoelectronics.32
In this review, we highlight some very recent research on nanomaterials for energy technology. We organize the review as follows: we first illustrate the surface chemistry for ALD to provide a basic understanding of how ALD produces precise, conformal coatings. We then summarize recent progress in ALD nanomaterial synthesis for application in energy storage (batteries), energy conversion (fuel cells), energy harvesting (photovoltaics), and energy conservation (solid-state lighting and energy-efficient electronics). Finally, we provide a brief summary and outlook for the future of ALD in energy technology.
2. Surface chemistry and characteristics
ALD is a technique for depositing thin film coatings, and is typically performed by alternately dosing two precursors into an evacuated deposition chamber. The chamber houses the substrate to be coated, and is typically heated to accelerate the chemical reactions that will grow the film. During each precursor dose, a sufficient quantity of the precursor (typically in excess of the stoichiometric amount) is supplied to ensure that the surface chemical reactions reach completion. An inert gas purging period is normally used between the two successive precursor doses to completely remove the byproducts as well as the unreacted precursor from the deposition chamber. ALD has primarily been used for depositing inorganic binary compounds such as oxides, nitrides and sulfides by combining a metal precursor and a co-reactant.14,15,41,42 There are a number of desirable attributes for the metal precursor, the first of which is high volatility (e.g. >∼0.1 Torr) to enable rapid and efficient growth. In addition, the precursor should be thermally stable so as not to decompose at the ALD growth temperature, and also to allow the precursor source to be heated if necessary in order to boost the vapor pressure. The metal precursor should be highly reactive on the co-reactant terminated surface, but completely unreactive on the precursor-terminated surface. These attributes are necessary for efficient and self-limiting surface reactions. Finally, the precursor should ideally have a small kinetic diameter to enable diffusion into nm-scale features, and also be inexpensive and readily available.
A typical ALD process can be illustrated with the example of metal oxide ALD (see Fig. 1) using a metal precursor of ML2 (M = metal and L = ligand) and water (i.e., H2O) as the precursors. More specifically, a classical case of metal oxides can be exemplified by the ALD process of ZnO using diethyl zinc (DEZ, Zn(C2H5)2) and water as the precursors. In the first step, the ML2 vapor is introduced into an ALD reactor containing the substrate(s) to be coated. ML2 consists of two L functional groups bound to a central metal atom, and can react with one or two surface hydroxyl (–OH) groups. Hydroxyl groups naturally exist on most substrates such as silicon, metal, and metal oxides. The ML2 (e.g., DEZ) reaction forms a new metal–oxygen bond (e.g., O–Zn) and liberates one or more L (e.g., ethyl) groups as the HL (e.g., ethane) gas, while the other L (e.g., ethyl) group remains bound to the metal (e.g., zinc). Once all of the surface hydroxyl groups have been consumed by ML2 (e.g., DEZ), the reaction terminates even in the presence of excess ML2 (e.g., DEZ). The excess ML2 (e.g., DEZ) precursor and HL (e.g., ethane) product are then removed by evacuation or inert gas purge. Next, water vapor is supplied. The water reacts with the surface L (e.g., ethyl) groups deposited by the previous ML2 (e.g., DEZ) exposure, again forming new metal–oxygen (e.g., Zn–O) bonds and releasing HL (e.g., ethane) as the byproduct. This reaction also repopulates the surface with –OH groups thereby restoring the initial surface chemical termination. Finally, the residual water and HL (e.g., ethane) are removed by evacuation or purging. These four steps (dosing ML2, the first purge, dosing water, and the second purge) comprise one metal oxide (e.g., ZnO) ALD cycle and generally deposit a layer of <0.2 nm of metal oxides (e.g., ∼0.2 nm for ZnO ALD using DEZ and water). Since the surface is restored to its initial sate, any number of metal oxide (e.g., ZnO) ALD cycles can be performed in sequence to grow a film of the desired thickness. It should be mentioned that not all ALD processes proceed in such a clean fashion. Some metal precursors, such as alkoxides and amides, can at least partially decompose on the substrate surface. This partial decomposition may introduce carbon and/or nitrogen impurities into the deposited films, although sometimes the decomposed products can still be fully removed by the following co-reactant exposure.43
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the ALD process of metal oxides for using ML2 (precursor A) and water (precursor B): (1) a substrate surface initially covered by –OH groups, (2) dosing the metal precursor A of ML2 to react with the surface –OH groups, (3) the reaction of ML2 with –OH groups with the release of the HL byproduct, (4) a continuous supply of a sufficient amount of ML2, (5) a new saturated ML layer formed with the depletion of –OH surface groups and no more surface reactions with excess ML2, (6) a thorough purge to vacate the over-supplied ML2 and the byproduct of HL, (7) the substrate surface covered with new functional groups of –ML, (8) dosing the precursor B of H2O as the oxygen source to react with the surface –ML groups, (9) the reaction of H2O with –ML groups releasing the HL byproduct, (10) a continuous supply of a sufficient amount of H2O, (11) a new saturated OH layer formed with the production of MO, and (12) a thorough purge to vacate the over-supplied ML2 and the byproduct of HL. The dosing–purge–dosing–purge four-step procedure is repeatable to increase the deposited MO layer thickness in an accurately well-controlled mode. 
The success or failure of a given ALD process is frequently dictated by the surface chemistry. To understand the surface chemistry involved in an ALD process, one may perform in situ measurements during film growth. Common in situ methods include quartz crystal microbalance (QCM),44 mass spectrometry (MS),44 infrared (IR) spectroscopy,45 and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).46 QCM monitors the mass changes during ALD and provides a cycle-by-cycle, real-time confirmation that the film is growing. Moreover, by comparing the mass changes produced by individual precursor exposure, one can glean information about the surface chemical mechanism. For instance, during TiO2 ALD using titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4) and water, the water exchanges heavy Cl atoms with much lighter OH groups, so that the mass actually decreases during the water exposure. The overall growth pattern is thus a large mass increase during TiCl4 exposure followed by a smaller mass decrease during H2O exposure, and this pattern repeats during each TiO2 ALD cycle. Mass spectrometry is used to monitor the gas-phase species formed during ALD, and is an excellent complement to the QCM. For example, by comparing the relative amounts of hydrogen chloride (HCl) gaseous product formed during TiCl4 and H2O exposure for TiO2 ALD, one can determine the average number of Cl atoms (0–4) lost during the reaction of TiCl4 with the surface, and this value, in turn, can help to rationalize or predict the ALD TiO2 growth per cycle. Both IR and XPS measure the bonding conditions on the substrate surface, and therefore they can provide information for inferring the types of surface functional groups responsible for ALD growth. These techniques are also valuable for probing the origin of residual impurities in the ALD films due to thermal decomposition or extremely slow surface reactions. It should be noted that ALD surface reactions can be very complex, and very often one need to combine two or more in situ methods in order to achieve an accurate and detailed understanding of the ALD surface chemistry.
The most distinguishing feature of ALD compared to other thin film deposition techniques is self-limiting surface chemistry, and this attribute provides all of the characteristics that make ALD attractive for applications in nanomaterial synthesis and functionalization for energy technology. First, self-limiting surface chemistry provides a constant growth per cycle, and therefore the total film thickness can be precisely controlled by adjusting the total number of ALD cycles. Self-limiting surface chemistry also affords large-scale film thickness uniformity (so long as sufficient precursor is supplied to saturate the entire substrate) allowing convenient scale-up for commercialization. Finally, and most importantly for nanomaterials, self-limiting chemistry provides excellent conformality on high aspect-ratio and high surface area 3D nanostructures. This capability enables a large variety of novel applications for ALD in energy technology, some of which will be described below.
3. ALD for high-performance energy storage battery systems
Energy is essential for modern civilization. Currently we rely mostly on fossil fuels (e.g. coal, oil, and natural gas) for our energy supply, but these non-renewable sources are quickly depleting and also cause environmental problems.47 Thus, it becomes imperative to seek alternative renewable energies. Solar and wind power48,49 are highly promising “green” and renewable alternatives to fossil fuels given their abundance and potential cost-effectiveness. However, both solar and wind power are highly variable and dependent on weather and time of day which leads to their intermittence in operation. To this end, electrical energy storage (EES) devices49 become particularly critical for widely implementing solar and wind energy.
Batteries are among the most successful electrochemical devices for EES. In particular, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs)50 dominate consumer electronics due to their superior performance and are expected to power transportation and support smart grids in the future. However, even state-of-the-art LIBs are insufficient in energy density, charging rate, durability, safety, and cost.51 Consequently, next-generation LIBs and also “beyond lithium-ion” technologies, such as lithium–sulfur (Li–S),52,53 lithium–oxygen (Li–O2),53 sodium-based batteries,54,55 and magnesium-based batteries,56 are undergoing intensive investigation.
Rechargeable (also called secondary) battery cells consist of four main parts: an anode, a cathode, an electrolyte, and a separator. Electrolytes are typically composed of lithium salts dissolved in organic liquids that are by nature flammable, and thus can cause fire or even explosion. The anode and cathode serve as the reservoirs for lithium ions that shuttle back and forth through the electrolyte during cycling, while the separator prevents these electrodes from physical contact that would cause an electrical short. The electrodes primarily determine the capacity, voltage, and cost of the battery depending on the electrochemistry and relative abundance of their constituent materials.
Based on their electrochemical reactions with lithium ions, LIB anode materials can be classified into three categories: intercalation/de-intercalation (e.g., graphite, TiO2, and Li4Ti5O1257–60), alloy/de-alloy (e.g., Si, Ge, and Sn61), and conversion (e.g., metal oxides, sulfides, and fluorides62). The materials in each class have their benefits and drawbacks. Intercalation/de-intercalation materials exhibit only small volume changes resulting in excellent mechanical stability, but typically have a low capacity. Conversion-based materials have higher capacities, but larger volume changes during cycling and a relatively low electrical conductivity leading to low charge–discharge rates. Alloy/de-alloy materials have high capacity but a huge volume change typically leading to poor cyclability. In pursuing high energy battery systems, the latter two classes are under intensive investigation.
In general, all aspects of secondary battery performance including energy density, stability, cost, and safety must be improved for their wide scale deployment in transportation and the grid. Improved performance demands innovations in materials, and particularly in nanophase materials. The attraction of nanomaterials in this regard is that their mesoporosity can accommodate volume changes (for improved cyclability) and also provides short pathways for lithium ions and electrons (for higher rates). Given its capability for nanomaterial synthesis and functionalization, ALD has emerged as a promising technology for achieving the necessary improvements in energy storage systems.38,63
The first report of ALD technology in battery research appeared in 2000, where ALD V2O564 nanofilms were electrochemically investigated as LIB cathodes. But it was not until 2007 that it was used for surface functionalization in LIBs.65 In the study, ALD TiN was used to tailor the interface between the Li4Ti5O12 anode and the liquid electrolyte to control the solid–electrolyte interphase (SEI) for improved LIB performance. Since approximately 2010, there has been a more widespread appreciation for the tremendous promise that ALD holds in nanomaterials for energy storage such as synthesizing nanophase electrode materials, fabricating solid-state inorganic electrolytes, and tailoring the electrolyte/electrode interface using ultrathin protective films.38,63,66–68 In this section, we focus mainly on examples of ALD technology for fabricating nanostructured electrode materials.
In nanostructuring electrodes via ALD, intercalation-based TiO2 was among the earliest studies and was made into hollow nanotubes and core–shell structures.69,70 These TiO2 nanostructures exhibited higher performance electrochemically, but were limited by the inherent capability of TiO2 for hosting lithium ions. In the following studies, another intercalation-based anode material, Li4Ti5O12, has been synthesized by ALD.71,72 In comparison, there were more conversion-based high-capacity materials fabricated into nanomaterials via ALD, such as SnO2,73,74 RuO2,75 NixCo1−xO,76 metal sulfides (GaSx77 and MoS278), and metal nitrides (MoNx79). However, to date there have been no studies reported on ALD elemental materials for energy storage. Upon depositing SnO2 on graphene nanosheets (GNSs) and nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (CNTs), Meng et al.73,74 revealed that, by adjusting the ALD deposition temperatures the SnO2 crystallinity could be tuned from amorphous at low temperatures of ≤200 °C to the rutile crystalline phase at high temperatures of ≥400 °C. They further demonstrated that GNS-supported amorphous SnO2 performed much better than GNS-supported crystalline SnO2 as LIB anodes,24 showing a high capacity of 793 mA h g−1 (two times that of graphite) after 150 electrochemical cycles. GNS–SnO2 nanocomposites have several benefits: (i) the GNS scaffolds are excellent electrical conductors which provide facile pathways of electrons; (ii) nanoscale SnO2 is more accessible for lithium ions and electrons, and (iii) the amorphous SnO2 has better accommodation to stress produced in charge–discharge processes. Another ALD anode material recently reported is GaSx. Meng et al. first explored a new ALD process for amorphous GaSx using hexakis(dimethylamido)digallium and H2S as precursors.80 Further depositing GaSx on the networks of single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs), Meng et al. developed core–shell SWCNT–GaSx nanocomposites (see Fig. 2),77 in which the GaSx film thickness was precisely and systematically varied. This new composite demonstrated outstanding electrochemical performance with high capacity and sustainability. After 100 charge–discharge cycles, the SWCNT–GaSx still retained a capacity of 575 mA h g−1. The high performance of the SWCNT–GaSx was attributed to the excellent conductivity of the SWCNTs, the nanoscale GaSx coating, and the amorphous phase of GaSx. More recently, there were other sulfides reported by ALD, such as MnS,81 Co9S8,82 and NiSx,83 and these are also promising LIB anode materials.
 Fig. 2  TEM images of: (a) SWCNTs and their bundles; SWCNTs coated by (b) 50-cycle, (c) 100-cycle, and (d) 150-cycle ALD GaSx. Electrochemical performance of SWCNT–GaSx: (e) cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of commercial Ga2S3, commercial SWCNTs, and a SWCNT–GaSx composite at 120 mA g−1.77 Reproduced by permission of John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to conformally coating conducting substrates such as GNS and CNTs with functional ALD coatings, novel nanostructures were also reported using other nanophase templates. For example, Jiang et al.84 synthesized Co(CO3)0.5(OH)0.11H2O nanowires via a hydrothermal method and then coated the nanowires with a 10 nm TiO2 coating using ALD, resulting in core–shell Co(CO3)0.5(OH)0.11H2O@TiO2 nanowires. By post-treating the core–shell nanowire at different temperatures, Jiang et al.84 disclosed that the core–shell Co(CO3)0.5(OH)0.11H2O@TiO2 nanowires evolved into CoCO3@TiO2 nanowires at ≥200 °C and then hollow CoO–CoTiO3 hybrid nanotubes due to the diffusion of CoO into TiO2 totally at ≥450 °C. Jiang et al. further demonstrated that these hybrid nanotubes exhibited a capacity of ∼600 mA h g−1 and better cyclability compared to pure CoO nanowires. Using a similar strategy, Guan et al.85 coated hydrothermally fabricated Co2(CO3)(OH)2 nanowires with 10 nm SnO2 using ALD. Through a post-treatment at 450 °C, they obtained a new structure, CoO nanowires in CoSnO3 tubes. Moreover, there was a void space between the CoO nanowires and the CoSnO3 nanotubes. This new structure yielded excellent electrochemical performance in LIBs. Even more interesting, Zhu et al.86 developed a core-branch nanostructure by combining ALD with a hydrothermal method. They coated Co2(CO3)(OH)2 nanowires using ALD TiO2 and then removed the inner nanowires by acid etching. They applied another hydrothermal preparation of SnO2 nanoflakes on the TiO2 nanotubes left. As a result, Zhu et al. obtained TiO2 nanotube@SnO2 nanoflake core-branch nanostructures. The obtained nanostructures performed much better than a kind of commercial nano-SnO2 powder as LIB anodes.
In comparison to the large variety of anode materials, relatively fewer LIB cathode materials are available. To date, three general categories of LIB cathodes have been developed: (i) layered LiMO2 (M = Co, Mn, and Ni) as well as their derivatives; (ii) spinel LiMn2O4; and (iii) olivine LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Mn, Co, Ni, Mg, or mixtures thereof). The first report of ALD for LIBs described planar ALD V2O5 films as cathodes.64 Later, an ALD process was reported for LiCoO2 using CoCp2, LiOtBu, and O2 plasma precursors.87 Shortly thereafter, FePO488 and LixMn2O489 were synthesized as LIB cathodes via ALD. However, all of these examples used thin film cathodes that have a very low absolute capacity. Using multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) as substrates, Chen et al. made ALD V2O5 into nanostructured core–shell composites,90 which exhibited high electrochemical performance. Sun et al. deposited ALD V2O5 on GNS and the resulting GNS–V2O5 demonstrated excellent capacity and cyclability.91 More recently, Liu et al.92 explored nanostructured LiFePO4 fabricated by ALD using CNT scaffolds. In their work, Liu et al. combined individual ALD processes for Fe2O3, POx, and Li2O. By adjusting the relative number of ALD cycles for these three processes, Liu et al. successfully deposited the ternary compound LiFePO4 in a controllable and predictable mode. The resulting CNT–LiFePO4 exhibited a remarkable capacity of 120 mA h g−1 in 2000 electrochemical cycles under a current density of 170 mA g−1. In a more recent work, Meng et al.93 deposited Cu2S on SWCNTs using ALD and the resultant core–shell SWCNT–Cu2S composites exhibited an exceptional capacity of 260 mA h g−1 with a stable cyclability over 200 charge–discharge cycles as conversion-based LIB cathodes.
Beyond lithium-ions, ALD shows great promise for Li–S and Na-ion batteries. Meng et al.94 reported a new ALD process for Li2S suitable for the cathode in Li–S batteries, using LiOtBu and H2S as precursors. By depositing ALD nanoscale Li2S on carbon powder (MesoCarbon MicroBeads, i.e., MCMBs), Meng et al. revealed that the carbon-supported amorphous Li2S nanofilms exhibited very high capacity and excellent cyclability (see Fig. 3). In another work,95 Liu et al. developed an ALD process for NaTiO as an anode for Na-ion batteries, using NaOtBu and H2O for Na2O ALD and Ti[OCH(CH3)2]4 and H2O for TiO2 ALD. By depositing the NaTiO on CNTs, Liu et al. verified that the resultant nanocomposites were promising as anodes in Na-ion batteries.
 Fig. 3  Electrochemical performance of ALD Li2S: (a and b) SEM images of MCMB particles (a) before and (b) after 700-cycle ALD Li2S coating; (c) EDX analysis of an ALD Li2S film deposited on MCMB particles, using 700 cycles at 200 °C: (top-left) SEM image, (top-right) C elemental map, (bottom-left) F elemental map, and (bottom-right) S elemental map; (d and e) electrochemical characteristics of Li2S films deposited on MCMB particles using 360 ALD Li2S cycles at 300 °C: (d) charge–discharge profiles in the first three cycles (inset: the first three cycles versus time) with a voltage window of 1.6–3.0 V and a current density of 55 mA g−1, and (e) cyclability and coulombic efficiency (CE) measured over 36 charge–discharge cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
To summarize, ALD holds great potential as a tool for exploring novel nanostructured materials as active materials in rechargeable batteries to meet the demands of electric vehicles and renewable energy storage. The combination of precise thickness control, superb conformality and a broad material palette enables the synthesis and functionalization of a broad range of candidate nanomaterials with outstanding electrochemical performance. The high performance stems from short pathways of ions and electrons, large contact areas, and mesoporosity to accommodate volume changes during cycling.
4. ALD for cost-effective and durable fuel cells
Fuel cells are energy-conversion devices that can continuously and efficiently convert chemical energy into electrical energy as long as suitable fuels are supplied. These fuels can include H2 and methanol, both of which can be produced from renewable resources, making fuel cells an attractive technology for “green” energy. Fuel cells can escape the Carnot-cycle limitation, allowing very high theoretical efficiencies compared to their thermal counterparts (e.g. internal combustion engines). All fuel cells are structurally similar, consisting of two electrodes (the anode and cathode) separated by a solid or liquid electrolyte that facilitates the transport of ionic charges between them. Redox reactions on both the anode and cathode typically require noble metal catalysts such as Pt, Pd, and Ru. There are many different types of fuel cells and, among them, proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are very attractive due to their low operation temperature, high power density, and short start time. PEMFCs are currently the leading technology for light duty vehicles,96 and in 2015 Toyota unveiled one of the first commercially available fuel cell powered vehicles in North America. Although this section will focus exclusively on PEMFCs, ALD has been intensively studied for modifying and improving the electrolytes of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs), which has been well-reviewed previously.97
Noble metal catalysts are expensive, and therefore it is critical to maintain their high efficiency for durable operation. In the case of PEMFCs, Pt nanoparticles are usually supported on porous carbon materials. However, with extended operation these Pt nanoparticles commonly experience a reduction in specific surface area that lowers their catalytic activity and degrades the PEMFC performance. Several mechanisms were believed to be responsible for the reduction in the active Pt surface area: (i) Pt nanoparticle dissolution and re-aggregation due to Ostwald ripening; (ii) migration and coalescence of Pt nanoparticles due to the weak interaction between Pt and the carbon support; and (iii) Pt loss through corrosion of the carbon support.98 Therefore, it has been a central mission to address the high cost and insufficient durability of catalysts in PEMFCs, because they are hindering the ultimate commercialization. Although non-noble catalysts are being explored, these are not sufficiently developed for commercialization. Consequently, strategies are being developed to mitigate the aforementioned problems with Pt and other noble catalysts such as alloying, atomic monolayer formation, and precise control over the nanoparticles. There were also efforts to develop alternative materials to replace the carbon support showing improved corrosion resistance and/or a stronger interaction with Pt for greater catalyst durability.99
Given the unique advantages described in the preceding sections, ALD is a promising technology to improve PEMFC catalyst stability.36,97,100–103 It has been demonstrated that a 3M nanostructured thin film (NSTF) is more stable and has a higher area-specific activity than Pt nanoparticles, ascribed to its continuous and high radius of the Pt curvature film.104 To decrease the cost of Pt catalysts to the largest extent, however, the Pt film should be ultrathin and have a large surface area. To this end, Clancey et al. successfully prepared continuous and ultrathin Pt (only 1.5 nm in thickness) on flat and high surface area substrates using ALD tungsten as a high surface energy adhesion layer.105Fig. 4 shows a schematic sequence for depositing ultrathin ALD Pt films on TiO2 nanoparticles. The resulting Pt ALD film has a large radius of curvature for high efficiency of oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activity. Using Pt ALD, Sun et al. deposited single-atom and sub-nanometer cluster catalysts on high surface area GNS supports.106 The single-atom catalysts exhibit significantly improved activity (up to 10 times) compared to state-of-the-art commercial Pt/C catalysts, which might have stemmed from the low-coordination and partially unoccupied 5d orbitals of the Pt atoms.106 Importantly, improving Pt catalytic activity allows lower Pt loadings, and hence less expensive fuel cells. Although the Pt size effect has been demonstrated in electrochemical studies,107 conventional preparation methods do not provide adequate size control for commercial fuel cells to capitalize on this effect. If the Pt ALD can be successfully scaled up, this would provide a practical means to accurately manipulate Pt catalyst size ranging from single atoms to sub-nanometer clusters and nanoparticles.
 Fig. 4  Schematic depicting a TiO2 nanoparticle with Al2O3 ALD, W ALD, and Pt ALD layers forming a multilayer shell around the TiO2 nanoparticle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 298. Copyright (2015), American Vacuum Society. 
Another widely used strategy is reducing the Pt loading in catalysts by fabricating Pt-alloys or Pt-bimetals. Among the multi-metallic catalysts explored for PEMFCs, Pt-based bimetallic electrocatalysts (such as PtCo, PtCu, and PtNi, etc.) have received considerable attention due to their relatively high activity and stability towards the ORR. However, the composition of these bimetallic catalysts plays a key role in their electrocatalytic reaction, i.e., the activity strongly depends on the ratio between the metals as well as the size and structure of the particles. ALD is an effective strategy for controlling the composition, size, and even the structure of bimetallic noble metal nanoparticles.108,109 This control is achieved by adjusting the deposition conditions and the order of precursor dosing during the ALD process. Sairanen et al. prepared bimetallic PtCo catalysts with high dispersion and narrow particle size distribution using ALD.110 By adjusting the cycle ratio and deposition sequence of the Pt and Co, they developed various bimetallic catalysts, including PtCo, PtCoPt, and PtCoPtPt (see Fig. 5).110 As a result of this excellent control, the researchers observed different catalytic activities for these different structures. Evidently, ALD significantly reduces the variability or inhomogeneity in catalysts, which usually is inevitable in traditional synthesis techniques. As a consequence, ALD provides new venues for gaining a better understanding of the fundamental nature of the active sites in bimetallic catalysts.36 These studies clearly demonstrated that ALD is very promising and quite suitable for synthesizing stable and active bi-metallic catalysts with a controlled crystalline structure.
 Fig. 5  TEM images of ALD-prepared catalysts. Reprinted by permission from ref. 110. Copyright (2014) Elsevier. 
It is widely accepted that strong metal–support interactions (SMSIs) play an important role in the supported catalysts by improving the activity and enhancing the stability of the catalysts.111 In comparison to traditional synthesis methods, ALD offers many unique advantages for tailoring SMSIs at the atomic level. The surface chemistry of ALD dictates that chemical bonds are formed during the initial nucleation of ALD metals on the support, and it is not simply physical adsorption (e.g., van der Waals force), as provided by conventional means for Pt deposition. This ensures a strong interaction between the deposited material and the support. Some examples of experiments have supported this point. Sun's group used ALD to grow Pt on the surface of ZrC,112 and the resultant catalyst was 3 times more stable than commercial Pt/C and Pt/C produced by conventional chemical reduction methods. Similar evidence was also obtained in the ALD-Pt/TiSi2 by Wang et al.113
In summary, ALD has enabled the synthesis of highly active, next-generation catalysts including single-atom/sub-monolayer Pt, homogenous bimetallic nanoparticles, and catalysts with tailored SMSIs. These advances have exploited the digital nature of ALD, and the high uniformity and conformality afforded by self-limiting surface chemical reactions. We believe that continued advances in ALD technology will substantially reduce the cost and improve the reliability of PEMFCs for wide scale deployment. These advances will also benefit other industries that use noble metal catalysts.114–117
5. ALD for highly efficient photovoltaics
Photovoltaics (PVs) are devices that convert solar energy into direct current electricity. Since the 1950s, PV technology has matured such that efficiencies up to 46.0% have been achieved.118 Despite this success, radical innovations in materials are required for PVs to displace fossil fuels. To appreciate this, PVs must: (i) absorb sunlight, (ii) generate charge carriers, (iii) separate these charge carriers, and (iv) transport the charges for collection at the terminals. Furthermore, PVs must be inexpensive and composed of earth-abundant elements. Integrating all of these functionalities while maintaining high efficiency is extremely challenging. The mechanisms for poor efficiency in PVs include carrier recombination, parasitic light absorption by non-active layers, energy mismatch between the absorbing layer band gap and the solar spectrum, lattice thermalisation, and voltage losses at junctions and contacts. Nanophase materials offer potential solutions to these problems, and ALD can play a critical role by enabling detailed and systematic evaluation of new PV concepts, or possibly even in high volume PV manufacturing. Efforts in this area are underway, and in fact, ALD was used in the early 1990s to deposit III–V absorbers for multijunction solar cells.119 Since then, ALD has been applied to a broad range of PV devices to serve functions such as encapsulation, surface passivation and/or sensitization, optical absorption, charge transport, and band structure engineering. Recent review articles expound on these various roles for ALD in PVs.35,120–122
Accounting for more than 85% of PV installations, there are intensive efforts to reduce the cost per watt peak of crystalline-silicon (c-Si) solar cells (generation I). Due to its indirect band gap that imposes a large absorber thickness (∼150–200 μm), the ALD of Si for PV is not practical. Consequently, ALD in c-Si PV is limited to coatings, interfaces, and point contacts. Dielectric materials can improve the device efficiencies not only by preventing minority charge carrier recombination at interfaces, but also by reducing the optical losses by increased internal reflections. ALD-Al2O3 is one of the most promising surface passivation materials, as it allows chemical passivation (reduction of defect density at the interface through the passivation of the Si dangling bonds with H atoms), field-effect passivation (high fixed negative charge density at the interface that reduces the density of minority charge carriers), absence of absorption in the visible part (gap of amorphous Al2O3 ∼ 6.4 eV), and its uniformity on large-area substrates is excellent. Surface passivation properties are characterized by the surface recombination velocity Seff in cm s−1.123 Various processes (e.g., different oxygen sources, aluminum sources and grades, deposition temperatures, and thermal or plasma ALD) have been developed for ALD-Al2O3 on several c-Si architectures. For PERC (Passivated Emitter and Rear Cell) solar cells, a 130 nm Al2O3 layer or 30 nm ALD-Al2O3 combined with 200 nm plasma-enhanced-CVD-SiOx (PECVD-SiOx) efficiently passivate the point contacts (Seff ∼ 70–90 cm s−1).124 ALD-Al2O3 or ALD-Al2O3/PECVD-SiNx can also be used for the passivation of the front p+ emitter in n-type c-Si PERL (Passivated Emitter with Rear Locally diffused),125 and of black silicon (b-Si), i.e. nanostructured silicon surface, solar cells. In those systems, a random nanoscale structure with a typical height of ∼800 nm and a diameter of ∼200 nm at the bottom of the pillar is passivated by 20 nm Al2O3, and an efficiency over 22%, comparable to the reference planar ones (see Fig. 6), has been reported for p-type b-Si IBC (Interdigitated Back Contact) solar cells.126–128 Functional silicon nanowire-based solar cells grown on Si(100) substrates, consisting of a n-type core and a p-type shell, also benefit from a highly conformal ALD-Al2O3 passivation layer.129
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image (cross-sectional view) of a b-Si surface. The 20 nm Al2O3 layer can be seen as a brighter layer on top of the pillars; (b) structure of the p-type b-Si IBC (Interdigitated Back Contact) solar cell. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Nanotechnology (ref. 126). 
The economics of PV demands the use of fewer and/or cheaper materials leading to thin film solar cells (generation II) and emerging solar cell concepts, often based on nanostructures (generation III). ALD plays an important role in encapsulating flexible generation-II and -III devices, where the capability to deposit pinhole-free inorganic films at low temperatures makes ALD very attractive. For instance, 50–100 nm of ALD-Al2O3 provides excellent moisture permeation protection for CIGS ([Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2] as the absorber)130 or organic (OPV) solar cells.131
Interface control and band gap engineering are even more critical for PV devices of II and III generations, and ALD is well adapted to tackle those issues. For example, ALD has proven to be a suitable technique to deposit alternative buffer layers of CIGS solar cells.132 This layer is essential, as it forms the p–n junction with the p-type CIGS absorber, modifies its surface that is usually too sensitive for the direct deposition of window layers (e.g., transparent conductive oxides, TCO), and allows an optimum band alignment at p–n and n-TCO junctions (see Fig. 7). To replace the conventional CdS buffer layer whose band gap (2.54 eV) limits the CIGS absorption in the UV range, materials such as sulfide and oxide materials (e.g., (Zn,Mg)O, Zn(O,S), (Zn,Sn)O, and In2S3) have been developed by ALD. The excellent control of the film properties in terms of composition, thickness, morphology, and electrical and optical properties obtained by combination of single growth cycles, but also the uniformity of those films that are deposited on rough CIGS absorbers, enable good interfacial properties and an adjustment of the conduction band offset (ΔEc).133 Moreover, ALD can modify the junction by interdiffusion mechanisms that change the absorber near-interface region and improve transport mechanisms.134 Similar materials have been applied to CZTS (Cu2ZnSnS4 as the absorber) solar cells.135,136 In a superstrate configuration, the buffer layer is directly deposited on the TCO, followed by absorber deposition. Thanks to ALD's conformality, the TCO can be nanostructured in nanowire (NW) CIGS solar cells, based on ZnO NWs and an ALD-(Zn,Mg)O buffer layer.137 Tuning the work function of the electrodes to create an optimum band alignment has also been used in OPV with ALD-TiO2,138 ZnO,139 and Al2O3–ZrO2 nanolayers140 in bulk heterojunction devices and polymer nanorod solar cells,141 and in ZnO/CdTe nanorod array solar cells with TiO2.142 ALD-Al2O3 has been used to optimize back contacts of CIGS on stainless steel,143 and for the development of nano-sized local rear point contacts, similar to the one of PERC cells.144 Those engineered back contacts allowed the development of ultra-thin CIGS solar cells (385 nm for the absorber) with a high efficiency of 15.6% (versus 9.1% for unpassivated contacts).145 Similarly, ALD-Al2O3 has been used to optimize the back contact of CdTe solar cells.146
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM image (cross-sectional view) and schematic description of CIGS solar cells. Credits IRDEP; (b) band diagram of a typical CIGS solar cell with CBD/CdS as a buffer layer. 
Nanostructuring enhances the light absorption due to light scattering and the trapping effect, and improves charge separation (due to increased surface area) and collection (due to shorter transport distance). However, it leads to larger interfacial areas that can cause high recombination rates and surface electronic states. Some examples have already been cited and we will focus on four other PV technologies: dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), colloidal quantum dot solar cells (CQDs), and perovskite solar cells (PSCs). DSSCs consist of a monolayer of dye absorber molecules deposited on a mesoporous transparent conducting material (typically TiO2) covering a planar TCO, an electrolyte or hole transport layer, and a back contact (see Fig. 8). DSSC efficiencies are typically limited by the carrier recombination at the interfaces, which can be suppressed by a barrier layer. The barrier decreases the charge injection, and thus its thickness has to be well-controlled. In this case, the superior capability of ALD to coat high aspect ratio surfaces with a few atomic layers is very advantageous. Optimum barrier performances can be obtained by 1–5 ALD cycles of dielectric materials such as Al2O3,147 TiO2,148 ZrO2, Ga2O3, Nb2O5, Ta2O5,149 and HfO2.150 In fact, ALD in these studies did not produce a full film on substrate surfaces until 15 cycles and experienced a transition phase from island growth to layer-by-layer growth. This has been shown by X-ray spectroscopy (XPS) observations.151,152 Post-assembly of the ALD-TiO2 layer can improve the long-term stability of the system by preventing the desorption of the dye molecule (about 50 times slower) and allow better permeation of the electrolyte by surface modification.153 ALD has also been applied to NW-based photoanodes. For instance, a 1 nm ALD-TiO2 coating on TiO2 NWs improves interconnectivity and surpasses the usual acidic TiCl4 solution treatment.154 It was also reported that ZnO NWs have been coated by ALD-Al2O3 and ALD-TiO2. In particular, it was observed that, in the case of ALD-TiO2,155 an interesting surface-field effect improved the electron injection into the electrode by reducing electron exposure time at the surface. Similar ALD-TiO2 coatings were proven to be efficient on SnO2 NW-based DSSCs156 and on ITO (indium tin oxide) nanotubes.157 Furthermore, ALD has also been used for synthesizing whole electrodes, based on a template such as an aerogel,158,159 a nano-ribbon peptide network,160 an anodic aluminum oxide157 and opal.161,162
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic description of DSSCs. QDSSCs and PSCs in mesoscopic architecture have structures similar to DSSCs; (b) influence of Al2O3 ALD reaction cycle number on the fractional coverage of TiO2 electrodes and the overall efficiency (PCE) of DSSCs; and (c) TEM images of TiO2 core particles (top) without an Al2O3 shell layer, (middle) with a one-cycle ALD Al2O3 shell layer, and (bottom) with a five-cycle ALD-Al2O3 shell layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
QDSSC solar cells use quantum dots (QDs) instead of a dye as the sensitizer. Similar to the cases in DSSCs as discussed above, ALD barrier layers have also been implemented in QDSSCs.163 However, QDSSCs suffer from a low coverage of QDs on mesostructures. ALD's gaseous precursors can transport into porous structures with ease, and therefore deposit nanoparticles rather than ultrathin films by limiting the number of ALD cycles. As a consequence, ALD has been successfully used to synthesize CdS,164 PbS165 and In2S3166 QDs for QDSSCs. There are also other absorber materials developed by ALD as ultra-thin films such as CZTS,167 CuInS2,168 Sb2S3,169 and TiS2.170 A critical advantage of ALD over traditional deposition methods is its relatively gentle conditions (i.e., low temperature, no annealing, and no plasma-etching), and this makes it compatible with a large variety of substrates. In CQD solar cells, QDs serve as both sensitizers and hole transport materials. The resultant low carrier mobility may put a limit on efficiency, but this can be solved by inorganic infilling of the colloidal film, e.g. depositing materials such as ZnO within the QD matrix.171,172 The gentle deposition conditions of ALD are of great importance, for even a moderate temperature (e.g., 100 °C) can lead to a sintering of the QDs.
In addition, PSCs, the most recent member of the PV family, have also benefited from ALD. The perovskite absorbers are generally organo-lead halide materials, typically MAPbI3 (MA = methylammonium). Unlike the monolayered dye in DSSCs, however, the perovskite layer has a certain volume, which makes the device less dependent on the surface area of the electron transport layer, and functions as both an absorber and a hole/electron transporter. Thus, it has been reported in both sensitized mesoporous and thin planar device architectures. Perovskite synthesis itself is challenging. ALD to date has been reported for surface preparation173 and absorber synthesis (e.g., post-treatment of ALD-PbS using I2 and MAI).174 ALD has been used for developing conformal coatings of TiO2 over high-aspect-ratio structures as barrier layers,175,176 compact layers on FTO (fluorine-doped tin oxide),177,178 metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) back contacts,179 or semi-transparent solar cells.180 It was also confirmed that an ALD-Al2O3 layer over the perovskite can improve the whole device stability, which is a critical factor for commercializing this PV technology.181 Perovskite-based absorbers have complementary band gaps to c-Si for fabricating tandem solar cells, but the devices have been restricted by the availability of materials and requirements of device processing. Using ALD-SnO2 as an electron selective contact, impressively, Albrecht et al. recently reported a monolithic perovskite/silicon–heterojunction tandem solar cell with 18% efficiency (see Fig. 9).182
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic device design of the silicon heterojunction/perovskite tandem solar cell reported by Albrecht et al. The red dashed line indicates the active area. (b) Cross-section SEM observation. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Based on the afore-discussed studies, ALD has proven its significant roles in developing highly efficient PV devices, benefiting from ALD's tunable fabrication and unique capabilities in nanostructuring. These characteristics will undoubtedly continue to greatly facilitate researchers' efforts in pursuing next-generation highly efficient solar cells.
6. ALD for highly efficient optoelectronics
ALD research in optoelectronics was initiated in Finland in the late 1970s, and was motivated by the need for large area, thin film electroluminescent (EL) flat panel displays.30 Since then, ALD has been used to deposit ultrathin films and nanostructures for a variety of optoelectronic devices including EL devices, organic and inorganic light-emitting diodes (LEDs), and photodetectors.
In EL devices, to date there have been numerous active (phosphor) materials developed using ALD, including BaS:(Ce, Mn, or Eu),183 CaS:Pb,184,185 SrS:Cu,183,186 SrS:(Ce, Pb, Mn, or Eu),183 SrS1−xSex:Ce,187 ZnS:Mn,188–190 ZnS:Tb,191 ZnS1−xSex:Mn,187 and mixed SiO2–Tb2O3–Al2O3.192 Deposition temperature and precursor choice were shown to be important parameters determining device performance.183,186,189,190 It was further suggested that the dopant precursors have a stronger impact on the emission compared to the host metal precursors.170 Yun et al.184 used tetraethyl lead (Pb(C2H5)4) to selectively incorporate dimeric Pb2+ ions into the CaS host matrix, and reported a blue luminescence at a voltage of 25 V higher than the threshold voltage (L25) of >80 cd m−2 at 60 Hz, which was the highest luminescence among the blue EL phosphors reported until that date. At the same measurement frequency, blue- and green-emitting SrS:Cu,173 and yellow-emitting ZnS:Mn177 EL devices emitted 17, 44, and 378 cd m−2 at L40, after aging. Not limited to the active layers, ALD was also used to synthesize insulators (e.g., Al2O3,183,186–188,190,191,193 AlON,193,194 TiO2/AlON,194 TiON/AlON,194 AlON/TiON,194 and Ta2O5/Al2O3 nanolaminate191), electron accelerating/current controlling layers (e.g., ZnS185), and transparent conducting oxides (TCOs, e.g., ZnO:Al188).
In heterojunction LEDs, ALD ZnO films are commonly employed as n-type layers. For example, n-ZnO/p-GaN LEDs were studied without195,196 or with197–199 an interlayer. The devices exhibited different EL characteristics under forward and reverse bias conditions with emission wavelengths ranging from ultraviolet (UV) to visible (vis). In addition, various heterostructures using Al- and N-doped ZnO layers were reported, including n-ZnO:Al/p-SiC(4H),200 n-ZnO:Al/i-ZnO/p-SiC(4H),200 n-ZnO:Al/SiO2–Si nanocrystal–SiO2/p-Si,201 n-ZnO:Al/ZnO nanodot–SiO2 composite/p-Al0.12Ga0.88N,202 n-ZnO:Al/SiO2–ZnO nanocomposite/p-GaN:Mg,203,204 and n-ZnO:N/p-GaN:Mg.205 Furthermore, p-type ZnO:P thin films were deposited as a first step towards the all-ALD-grown ZnO homojunction LEDs.206 Shih et al.200 demonstrated amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) of the UV EL from the n-ZnO layer in n-ZnO:Al/ZnO nanodot–SiO2 composite/p-Al0.12Ga0.88N LEDs. The light extraction efficiency from n-ZnO and the internal optical feedback of UV EL into the n-ZnO layer increased as a result of the low refractive index of the ZnO nanodot–SiO2 composite layer, where ALD was used to embed ZnO nanodots in a spin-coated SiO2 nanoparticle matrix. This, in turn, yielded enhanced performance, such as high UV EL intensity, owing to ASE in the n-ZnO layer. The n-ZnO:Al/SiO2–ZnO nanocomposite/p-GaN:Mg heterojunction LED, with the same composite layer, exhibited a significant UV EL at 387 nm from the n-ZnO layer at a forward bias current as low as 1.8 mA.203,204 As researchers continuously pursue ways to enhance device performance, ALD has found additional uses for LEDs. Undoped ZnO,207,208 Ga-doped ZnO (GZO),209–212 and In-doped ZnO (IZO)210 TCOs were integrated into GaN-based LED structures in order to enhance light extraction efficiencies. Al-doped ZnO (AZO)213 and GZO214–217 layers were used as current spreading layers. ALD-AlInN218 and -GaN219 buffer layers were used to reduce dislocation densities in fabricated GaN-based LEDs. Al2O3 layers were also reported for modifying the growth direction of ZnO in n-ZnO/p-GaN heterojunction LEDs,187 growing crack-free GaN LEDs on Si,220 passivating GaN-based LEDs,221 and as an infilling material for encapsulation.222
In organic LEDs (OLEDs), undoped,223 Al-doped,224–228 and F-doped ZnO229 TCOs were investigated as anodes. Improved device performance was obtained using a 10 nm thick AZO buffer layer, which controlled the nature of the interface in terms of resistivity and work function (see Fig. 10).227 The highest luminescence and current efficiency were 20290 cd m−2 and 13.4 cd A−1, respectively, for the OLED device fabricated on an AZO anode with the AZO buffer layer containing 4.1 at% Al. ALD Al2O3,230 ZnO,231 and ZrO2232 electron injection layers were demonstrated as well. Besides serving as an electron injection layer, ALD Al2O3 also protected the OLED structure from patterning-induced degradation.230 The EL characteristics were improved by coating the ITO surface with ALD HfOx233 and a thin, insulating ALD Al2O3 buffer layer.234 Recently, Chen et al.235 fabricated a white polymer LED using a transparent conductive electrode composed of Ag nanowires coated with a thin, conformal ALD ZnO layer embedded within a polyimide matrix. Hoye et al.236 reported perovskite and polymer LEDs utilizing ALD ZnO and Zn1−xMgxO electron injector layers, the first perovskite LEDs without fluorine-based layers. Polymer LEDs fabricated as a part of their study showed luminous efficiencies comparable to or exceeding previous records. They also demonstrated that the operating voltages can be significantly reduced by lowering the electron injection barrier.
 Fig. 10  Device architecture of the OLED devices fabricated on (a) an AZO anode without a buffer layer (control device), (b) an AZO anode with an AZO homogeneous buffer layer, (c) the corresponding energy band diagram of the device, and (d) the real image of the OLED device on an AZO anode with an homogeneous AZO buffer layer (4.1 at% Al).227 Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
Considerable efforts have been devoted to OLED encapsulation, where Al2O3 thin films were mainly deposited at ≤100 °C using various ALD chemistries.237–242 For stable and reliable operation of OLED devices, water vapor transmission rates (WVTRs) of about 10−6 g m−2 day−1 are required. Recently, Li et al.241 showed that Al2O3 films prepared using H2O and O3 exhibit higher density and purity, which results in WVTR values as low as 5.43 × 10−5 g m−2 day−1 (40 °C, 100% relative humidity). The top-emitting OLED encapsulated with this layer had a longer lifetime and produced no black spots under operation times up to 400 h. Al2O3 films were further doped with N,243 or used in ALD-grown nanolaminates231,237,244–247 to improve the barrier properties of the encapsulation layer. Among these reports, the Al2O3/ZrO2 nanolaminate barrier247 enabled the longest device lifetime (i.e., 22000 h).
Wegler et al.239 studied the failure mechanisms associated with the ALD grown barrier layers and revealed that it was due to the limited flexibility of the oxide layer and the swelling of the polymer. In this respect, especially for flexible OLEDs, inorganic/organic hybrid barriers with special stack designs are essential. Numerous efforts were dedicated to developing stacks of Al2O3/alucone,248,249 Al2O3/ZrO2/alucone,250 Al2O3/plasma-polymerized layers,251 Al2O3/plasma-polymerized layers/polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrates,252 ZrO2/UV-curable NOA63 epoxy,253 and MgO/silica nanoparticle-embedded hybrid nanocomposites.254 Multilayered barrier films prepared using Al2O3 and plasma-polymerized layers (with252 or without251 PEN substrates) showed ≤20% change from their initial WVTR values of ∼10−4 g m−2 day−1 even after 10000 severe bending cycles.
ALD ZnO films have been widely used in photodetection. For example, ALD has been used for developing UV/vis range thin film n-ZnO/p-Si heterojunction photodiodes,255,256 and ZnO257,258 and MgxZn1−xO259,260 metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM) thin film UV photodetectors. In addition, an ALD ZnO-channel thin film phototransistor with actively tunable photocurrent in the visible spectrum has been reported.261 The unique advantages of ALD (i.e., conformal, non-line-of-sight deposition, and precise thickness control) have enabled novel, nanostructured optoelectronic devices. For instance, core–shell p-Si@n-ZnO262,263 and p-Si@n-ZnO:N264,265 nanowires have been used as UV/vis radial heterojunctions, and core–shell n-ZnO@ZnO:N266 nanorods have been used as UV homojunction photodiodes, all exhibiting significantly improved responsivities with respect to their planar counterparts. It was also disclosed that the core–shell nanofibers of SnO2@ZnO267 and polyacrylonitrile (PAN)@ZnO (see Fig. 11)268 were of great potential for UV sensor applications. Owing to its very large surface area, the 3D PAN/ZnO photosensor exhibited 250 times higher UV photoresponse current, and only a slightly longer recovery time. It was also demonstrated that multi-walled carbon nanotubes decorated with ALD-grown ZnO nanoparticles could be operated as p- and n-type UV photodetectors depending on the amount and surface coverage of ZnO;269 and the photon sensing properties of ZnO nanowires could be further enhanced by the uniform deposition of ALD-Pt nanoparticles.270 Recently, Cao et al.271 reported on self-cleaning UV photodetectors based on 3D ZnO porous films obtained by a template-based ALD. The device exhibited a notable photocurrent improvement of ∼6 times as a result of its large specific surface area and the novel structure of the porous ZnO film. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that ALD Al2O3/ZnO272 and AZO273 layers could also serve as seed/buffer layers in nanostructured photodetectors. AZO thin films were further used in Si-based broad-band near infrared (IR) Schottky barriers274 and organic near IR275 photodetectors as the capping layer/top contact and the anode, respectively; and a Zn driven-in GZO film was applied to InGaAs p–i–n photodiodes as the window layer.212
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the design of the PAN/ZnO 1D nanostructured UV sensor; (b) SEM images of 1D ZnO nanostructures obtained with a 240 s electrospinning time coated with 250 cycles ALD ZnO at 100 °C; (c) X-ray diffraction spectra; sweep voltammetry of the ALD ZnO thin layer (50 nm thick) on glass (d) and with a 240 s electrospinning time (e); and (f) chronoamperometry measurements of sensors on glass and with a 240 s electrospinning time with UV (365 nm) illumination between 100 and 200 s. Reproduced from ref. 268 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
ALD TiO2 was used as the active semiconductor layer in metal–insulator–semiconductor–insulator–metal thin film UV photodetectors.276 For photodetection, ALD TiO2 was further synthesized into a series of core–shell structures of nanorods and nanowires, including Zn@TiO2,277 ZnO@Zn2TiO4,277 Zn@TiO2,278 and Ag@TiO2.279 The UV photodetector based on ZnO@TiO2 nanowires showed a photoresponsivity as high as 495 A W−1 at 373 nm under −10 V, which was ∼8 times higher than that of the device fabricated using bare ZnO nanowires.278 Ag/TiO2 metal–semiconductor nanorod arrays, on the other hand, exhibited 149 times higher photoresponse under a reverse bias of 3 V.279 In addition, ITO/TiO2/p-Si and Ti/TiO2/p-Si nanotube-based photodiodes were demonstrated, where varying the contact area between the electrode (Ti or ITO) and the TiO2's tip by tuning the tube's inner wall thickness with ALD provided a direct and systematic probe of the heterojunction effects upon the photodiode's responses.280 Recently, Akhavan et al.281 reported light-sensitive nanocrystals with broadband sensitivity enhancement based on electron transfer to a thin, ALD-TiO2 film. ALD-TiO2 was also employed in an ALD-PbS photodetector as the shunt-preventing interfacial layer.282 In addition to the ALD-ZnO and ALD-TiO2 layers, the low-temperature nanocrystalline ALD-GaN was shown to be a promising material for flexible thin film UV photodetectors.283,284 MSM photodetectors based on GaN layers deposited at a low temperature of 200 °C by hollow cathode plasma-assisted ALD exhibited dark current values as low as 14 pA at a 30 V reverse bias. Insertion of a thin ALD HfO2 insulator layer suppressed dark currents in GaN-based metal–insulator–semiconductor285 and MSM286 photodetectors. SnO2 ALD was used in combination with vapor transport to synthesize flexible 3D SnO2 nanowire arrays, which exhibited high selectivity towards UV illumination.287 ALD-Al2O3 and ALD-HfO2 were also employed as insulators281,288–290 and passivation layers291–297 in various types of photon sensing devices, including graphene- and MoS2-based photodetectors.
According to the studies stated above, one can easily conclude that ALD is a highly viable route for engineering various nanostructures to accomplish highly efficient optoelectronics, featuring a large variety of materials, highly tunable composition, flexible and accurate deposition, and low temperature.
7. Summary and outlook
The aim of this review was to provide a brief introduction to some of the exciting ongoing work in ALD for nanomaterial synthesis and functionalization in energy technology, and in so doing to stimulate and inspire scientists and engineers to push the technology even further. As noted in the Introduction, the nanomaterials field is huge and rapidly expanding, and ALD has been recognized as a particularly useful synthetic technique in this area. This utility stems from the unique attributes of ALD compared to other coating methods, including precise thickness control, excellent conformality, and low temperature growth. For instance, the digital nature of ALD facilitates the growth of extremely precise, sub-nm films. This quality has been exploited to grow protective coatings on battery electrodes (Section 3) where the coatings must be sufficiently thick to provide chemical resistance, but not be so thick as to increase impedance. This same attribute enables ALD films to be used for back-side passivation of Si to improve solar cell efficiency (Fig. 6). Superb conformality and broad compositional flexibility make ALD a powerful tool for exploring the influence of nanostructure on materials’ properties. For instance, core–shell nanowires synthesized by ALD have been evaluated as high-capacity lithium battery electrodes (Fig. 2), and nanoparticles composed of concentric shells of metal and oxide layers have been employed as sinter-resistant fuel cell catalysts (Fig. 4). Because the half-reactions are executed individually, slow chemical reactions can be allowed to progress to completion without compromising film quality or uniformity. As a consequence, ALD can be performed at very low temperatures and this has opened opportunities in areas such as OLEDs where the active materials are thermally sensitive (Fig. 10).
It is remarkable that all of the attributes that make ALD useful (precise thickness, superb conformality, and low temperature) derive from a single feature: self-limiting surface chemistry (Fig. 1). The eventual commercialization of ALD in new markets such as OLEDs and batteries will depend on achieving self-limiting surface chemistry on ever more challenging substrates and environments. These substrates may be kilometer-length rolls of polymer film or tons of high surface area powder, and the environments could be atmospheric pressure or room temperature. These conditions will no doubt prove too severe for some existing ALD processes, requiring new processes to be devised that use inexpensive and extremely self-limiting precursors. It is likely that the precursors themselves will need to be designed and synthesized. New ALD tools must be created that are optimized to run these processes on specific substrates. These are great challenges, but they must be overcome for ALD to progress beyond a convenient research tool for nanotechnology, and ultimately provide societal benefit. However, given the growing urgency for renewable energy and the successful demonstrations of ALD in applications such as lithium batteries and photovoltaics described above, we are confident that ALD films will find their way into everyday devices and products and help make a better future.
Acknowledgements
The work by X. M. and J. W. E. was supported as part of the Center for Electrochemical Energy Science, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences. Use of the Center for Nanoscale Materials, an Office of Science user facility, was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. X. M. acknowledges partial support from the Center for Advanced Surface Engineering, under the National Science Foundation Grant No. IIA-1457888 and the Arkansas EPSCoR Program, ASSET III. X. M. also appreciates the financial research support from the University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, USA. X. W. would like to thank the financial support from NSFC (Grant No. 51672011), Guangdong Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholar (Grant No. 2015A030306036), and Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (Grant No. KQCX20150327093155293).
References
Y. Yin and D. Talapin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2484–2487 RSC .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelaria and G. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127–3171 RSC .
X. Chen, C. Li, M. Gratzel, R. Kostecki and S. S. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909–7937 RSC .
R. Yu, Q. Lin, S.-F. Leung and Z. Fan, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 57–72 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef PubMed .
N. V. Long, Y. Yang, C. Minh Thi, N. V. Minh, Y. Cao and M. Nogami, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 636–676 CrossRef .
Y. Li, F. Qian, J. Xiang and C. M. Lieber, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 18–27 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, G. Hu and J. Hu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2099–2117 RSC .
M. T. Swihart, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 8, 127–133 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Kruis, H. Fissan and A. Peled, J. Aerosol Sci., 1998, 29, 511–535 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. George, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 111–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Knez, K. Nielsch and L. Niinistö, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3425–3438 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Puurunen, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 121301 CrossRef .
V. Miikkulainen, M. Leskelä, M. Ritala and R. L. Puurunen, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 021301 CrossRef .
J. W. Elam, D. Routkevitch, P. P. Mardilovich and S. M. George, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3507–3517 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Elam, G. Xiong, C. Y. Han, H. H. Wang, J. P. Birrell, U. Welp, J. N. Hryn, M. J. Pellin, T. F. Baumann, J. F. Poco and J. H. Satcher, J. Nanomater., 2006, 2006, 64501 Search PubMed .
J. Escrig, M. Daub, P. Landeros, K. Nielsch and D. Altbir, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 445706 CrossRef .
P. Alejandro, L. P. Juan, C. D. Juliano and E. Juan, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 345709 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Groner, F. H. Fabreguette, J. W. Elam and S. M. George, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 639–645 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, B. Cao, R. Nicholas, C. Mao and M. Kane, ECS Trans., 2010, 33, 43–48 CAS .
M. Knez, A. Kadri, C. Wege, U. Gösele, H. Jeske and K. Nielsch, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1172–1177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. N. Parsons, S. E. Atanasov, E. C. Dandley, C. K. Devine, B. Gong, J. S. Jur, K. Lee, C. J. Oldham, Q. Peng, J. C. Spagnola and P. S. Williams, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 3323–3331 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, X. B. Meng, J. Liu, D. S. Geng, Y. Zhang, M. N. Banis, Y. L. Li, J. L. Yang, R. Y. Li, X. L. Sun, M. Cai and M. W. Verbrugge, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1647–1654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Wang, X. Meng, Y. Zhong, R. Li, X. Sun, S. Ye and S. Knights, J. Power Sources, 2013, 238, 144–149 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Suntola and J. Antson, Method for producing compound thin films, US Pat., 4058430,  1977 .
G. N. Parsons, J. W. Elam, S. M. George, S. Haukka, H. Jeon, W. M. M. Kessels, M. Leskelä, P. Poodt, M. Ritala and S. M. Rossnagel, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2013, 31, 050818 Search PubMed .
R. L. Puurunen, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2014, 20, 332–344 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suntola and J. Hyvarinen, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1985, 15, 177–195 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suntola, Mater. Sci. Rep., 1989, 4, 261–312 CrossRef CAS .
L. Niinistö, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1998, 3, 147–152 CrossRef .
L. Niinistö, M. Nieminen, J. Päiväsaari, J. Niinistö, M. Putkonen and M. Nieminen, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2004, 201, 1443–1452 CrossRef .
R. Mikko and L. Markku, Nanotechnology, 1999, 10, 19 CrossRef .
S. M. George, B. Yoon and A. A. Dameron, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 498–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Niu, X. Li, S. K. Karuturi, D. W. Fam, H. Fan, S. Shrestha, L. H. Wong and A. I. Tok, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 064001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. O'Neill, D. H. K. Jackson, J. Lee, C. Canlas, P. C. Stair, C. L. Marshall, J. W. Elam, T. F. Kuech, J. A. Dumesic and G. W. Huber, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1804–1825 CrossRef .
R. W. Johnson, A. Hultqvist and S. F. Bent, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 236–246 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Meng, X. Q. Yang and X. L. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3589–3615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang and G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1889–1904 CAS .
T. Wang, Z. Luo, C. Li and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7469–7484 RSC .
H. Kim, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2003, 21, 2231–2261 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Dasgupta, X. Meng, J. W. Elam and A. B. F. Martinson, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 341–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, H. Li, Q. Chen, L. Sang, L. Yang, Z. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5988–5996 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. S. Heil, J. L. v. Hemmen, M. C. M. v. d. Sanden and W. M. M. Kessels, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 103302 CrossRef .
M. Dai, J. Kwon, M. D. Halls, R. G. Gordon and Y. J. Chabal, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3911–3917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ma, H. Guo, R. G. Gordon and F. Zaera, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3325–3334 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tomabechi, Energies, 2010, 3, 686 CrossRef .
K. H. Solangi, M. R. Islam, R. Saidur, N. A. Rahim and H. Fayaz, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 2149–2163 CrossRef .
M. Yekini Suberu, M. Wazir Mustafa and N. Bashir, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 35, 499–514 CrossRef .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S.-H. Chung, C. Zu and Y.-S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-Gonzalez and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 CAS .
B. L. Ellis and L. F. Nazar, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2012, 16, 168–177 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mohtadi and F. Mizuno, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 1291–1311 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Panda, S. Lee, W. S. Yoon and H. Shin, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 59–65 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lahiri and W. Choi, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2013, 38, 128–166 CrossRef CAS .
T.-F. Yi, S.-Y. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5750–5777 CAS .
Y. Liu and Y. Yang, J. Nanomater., 2016, 2016, 8123652 Search PubMed .
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115–3141 RSC .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacín, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170–E192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 020501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Badot, S. Ribes, E. B. Yousfi, V. Vivier, J. P. Pereira-Ramos, N. Baffier and D. Lincot, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2000, 3, 485–488 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Snyder, S. A. Trebukhova, B. Ravdel, M. C. Wheeler, J. DiCarlo, C. P. Tripp and W. J. DeSisto, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 379–385 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng and J. W. Elam, ECS Trans., 2015, 69, 39–57 CrossRef .
J. S. Park, X. B. Meng, J. W. Elam, S. Q. Hao, C. Wolverton, C. Kim and J. Cabana, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3128–3134 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bloom, L. Trahey, A. Abouimrane, I. Belharouak, X. F. Zhang, Q. L. Wu, W. Q. Lu, D. P. Abraham, M. Bettge, J. W. Elam, X. B. Meng, A. K. Burrell, C. M. Ban, R. Tenent, J. Nanda and N. Dudney, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 509–514 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Kim, T. H. Han, J. Kim, H. Gwon, H.-S. Moon, S.-W. Kang, S. O. Kim and K. Kang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1085–1090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gerasopoulos, X. L. Chen, J. Culver, C. S. Wang and R. Ghodssi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7349–7351 RSC .
X. B. Meng, J. Liu, X. F. Li, M. N. Banis, J. L. Yang, R. Y. Li and X. L. Sun, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7285–7288 RSC .
V. Miikkulainen, O. Nilsen, M. Laitinen, T. Sajavaara and H. Fjellvag, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7537–7542 RSC .
X. B. Meng, Y. Zhong, Y. F. Sun, M. N. Banis, R. Y. Li and X. L. Sun, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1133–1144 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, D. Geng, J. Liu, M. N. Banis, Y. Zhang, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18330–18337 CAS .
K. E. Gregorczyk, A. C. Kozen, X. Chen, M. A. Schroeder, M. Noked, A. Cao, L. Hu and G. W. Rubloff, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 464–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cao, W. Yadong, Z. Margit, W. John and F. Hong Jin, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 014001 CrossRef PubMed .
X. B. Meng, K. He, D. Su, X. F. Zhang, C. J. Sun, Y. Ren, H. H. Wang, W. Weng, L. Trahey, C. P. Canlas and J. W. Elam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5435–5442 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Nandi, U. K. Sen, D. Choudhury, S. Mitra and S. K. Sarkar, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 706–713 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Nandi, U. K. Sen, D. Choudhury, S. Mitra and S. K. Sarkar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6606–6615 CAS .
X. Meng, J. A. Libera, T. T. Fister, H. Zhou, J. K. Hedlund, P. Fenter and J. W. Elam, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1029–1039 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Riha, A. A. Koegel, X. Meng, I. S. Kim, Y. Cao, M. J. Pellin, J. W. Elam and A. B. F. Martinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2774–2780 CAS .
H. Li, Y. Gao, Y. Shao, Y. Su and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6689–6695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Shao, Y. Su, Y. Gao and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1155–1164 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, J. S. Luo, J. H. Zhu, X. T. Huang, J. P. Liu and T. Yu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8105–8113 RSC .
C. Guan, X. Li, H. Yu, L. Mao, L. H. Wong, Q. Yan and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13824–13830 RSC .
C. Zhu, X. Xia, J. Liu, Z. Fan, D. Chao, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Donders, H. C. M. Knoops, W. M. M. Kessels and P. H. L. Notten, ECS Trans., 2011, 41, 321–330 CAS .
K. B. Gandrud, A. Pettersen, O. Nilsen and H. Fjellvag, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9054–9059 CAS .
V. Miikkulainen, A. Ruud, E. Ostreng, O. Nilsen, M. Laitinen, T. Sajavaara and H. Fjellvag, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 1258–1268 CAS .
X. Y. Chen, H. L. Zhu, Y. C. Chen, Y. Y. Shang, A. Y. Cao, L. B. Hu and G. W. Rubloff, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7948–7955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, C. G. Zhou, M. Xie, T. Hu, H. T. Sun, G. Q. Xin, G. K. Wang, S. M. George and J. Lian, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10703–10706 RSC .
J. Liu, M. N. Banis, Q. Sun, A. Lushington, R. Li, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6472–6477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, S. C. Riha, J. A. Libera, Q. Wu, H.-H. Wang, A. B. F. Martinson and J. W. Elam, J. Power Sources, 2015, 280, 621–629 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, D. J. Comstock, T. T. Fister and J. W. Elam, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10963–10972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. N. Banis, B. Xiao, Q. Sun, A. Lushington, R. Li, J. Guo, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24281–24288 CAS .
Y.-J. Wang, D. P. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 7625–7651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Elam, N. P. Dasgupta and F. B. Prinz, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 899–906 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao-Horn, W. C. Sheng, S. Chen, P. J. Ferreira, E. F. Holby and D. Morgan, Top. Catal., 2007, 46, 285–305 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Front. Energy, 2011, 5, 137–148 CrossRef .
J. Lu, J. W. Elam and P. C. Stair, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1806–1815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cheng, Y. Shao, J. Liu and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 220–242 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hämäläinen, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 786–801 CrossRef .
Q. Peng, J. S. Lewis, P. G. Hoertz, J. T. Glass and G. N. Parsons, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 010803 Search PubMed .
A. Rabis, P. Rodriguez and T. J. Schmidt, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 864–890 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Clancey, A. S. Cavanagh, R. S. Kukreja, A. Kongkanand and S. M. George, J. Vac. Sci. Technol.,
A, 2015, 33, 01A130 Search PubMed .
S. Sun, G. Zhang, N. Gauquelin, N. Chen, J. Zhou, S. Yang, W. Chen, X. Meng, D. Geng, M. N. Banis, R. Li, S. Ye, S. Knights, G. A. Botton, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1775 Search PubMed .
K. Yamamoto, T. Imaoka, W.-J. Chun, O. Enoki, H. Katoh, M. Takenaga and A. Sonoi, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 397–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Molenbroek, S. Haukka and B. S. Clausen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 10680–10689 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, K.-B. Low, Y. Lei, J. A. Libera, A. Nicholls, P. C. Stair and J. W. Elam, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3264 Search PubMed .
E. Sairanen, M. C. Figueiredo, R. Karinen, A. Santasalo-Aarnio, H. Jiang, J. Sainio, T. Kallio and J. Lehtonen, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 148–149, 11–21 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cargnello, V. V. T. Doan-Nguyen, T. R. Gordon, R. E. Diaz, E. A. Stach, R. J. Gorte, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, Science, 2013, 341, 771–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cheng, M. Norouzi Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, S. Mu, R. Li, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1450–1455 CAS .
J. Xie, X. Yang, B. Han, Y. Shao-Horn and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6337–6345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Shu, S.-J. Liao, C.-T. Hsieh, A. K. Roy, Y.-Y. Liu, D.-Y. Tzou and W.-Y. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 75, 101–107 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, C.-C. Wang, C.-C. Kei, Y.-C. Hsueh and T.-P. Perng, Small, 2009, 5, 1535–1538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tian, J. Luo, H. Nan, H. Zou, R. Chen, T. Shu, X. Li, Y. Li, H. Song, S. Liao and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1575–1583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Phillips, P. Hansen and E. Eisenbraun, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 01A125 Search PubMed .
NREL: National Center for Photovoltaics Home Page, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/, (accessed March 22, 2016).
N. Hayafuji, G. M. Eldallal, A. Dip, P. C. Colter, N. A. El-Masry and S. M. Bedair, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1994, 82, 18–22 CrossRef .
J. R. Bakke, K. L. Pickrahn, T. P. Brennan and S. F. Bent, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3482–3508 RSC .
J. Van Delft, D. Garcia-Alonso and W. Kessels, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2012, 27, 074002 CrossRef .
A. F. Palmstrom, P. K. Santra and S. F. Bent, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12266–12283 RSC .
G. Dingemans and W. Kessels, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 040802 Search PubMed .
J. Schmidt, A. Merkle, R. Brendel, B. Hoex, M. Van de Sanden and W. Kessels, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2008, 16, 461–466 CAS .
R. Bock, J. Schmidt, S. Mau, B. Hoex and R. Brendel, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2010, 57, 1966–1971 CrossRef CAS .
H. Savin, P. Repo, G. von Gastrow, P. Ortega, E. Calle, M. Garín and R. Alcubilla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 624–628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ortega, E. Calle, G. von Gastrow, P. Repo, D. Carrió, H. Savin and R. Alcubilla, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 1448–1457 Search PubMed .
G. von Gastrow, R. Alcubilla, P. Ortega, M. Yli-Koski, S. Conesa-Boj, A. Fontcuberta i Morral and H. Savin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 142, 29–33 CrossRef CAS .
O. Gunawan and S. Guha, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1388–1393 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Carcia, R. S. McLean and S. Hegedus, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2375–2378 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Clark, M. L. Jespersen, R. J. Patel and B. J. Leever, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
N. Naghavi, D. Abou-Ras, N. Allsop, N. Barreau, S. Bücheler, A. Ennaoui, C. H. Fischer, C. Guillen, D. Hariskos, J. Herrero, R. Klenk, K. Kushiya, D. Lincot, R. Menner, T. Nakada, C. Platzer-Björkman, S. Spiering, A. N. Tiwari and T. Törndahl, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 411–433 CAS .
C. Platzer-Björkman, T. Törndahl, D. Abou-Ras, J. Malmström, J. Kessler and L. Stolt, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 044506 CrossRef .

          C. Bugot, C. Broussillou, A. Sorba, L. Parissi, N. Schneider, D. Lincot and F. Donsanti, 2015 IEEE 42nd Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), New Orleans, LA,  2015, pp. 1–6.
C. Platzer-Björkman, C. Frisk, J. K. Larsen, T. Ericson, S.-Y. Li, J. J. S. Scragg, J. Keller, F. Larsson and T. Törndahl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 243904 CrossRef .
T. Ericson, J. J. Scragg, A. Hultqvist, J. T. Watjen, P. Szaniawski, T. T. Torndahl and C. Platzer-Bjorkman, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 465–469 CrossRef .
J. C. Armstrong and J. B. Cui, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 356–363 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schmidt, K. Zilberberg, S. Schmale, H. Flügge, T. Riedl and W. Kowalsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 243305 CrossRef .
J.-C. Wang, W.-T. Weng, M.-Y. Tsai, M.-K. Lee, S.-F. Horng, T.-P. Perng, C.-C. Kei, C.-C. Yu and H.-F. Meng, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 862–866 RSC .
M. Vasilopoulou, D. G. Georgiadou, A. Soultati, N. Boukos, S. Gardelis, L. C. Palilis, M. Fakis, G. Skoulatakis, S. Kennou, M. Botzakaki, S. Georga, C. A. Krontiras, F. Auras, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, T. Bein, T. A. Papadopoulos, D. Davazoglou and P. Argitis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400214 CrossRef .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, B. D. Yuhas and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18451–18456 CAS .
G. Zhang, Y. Wu, H. Ding, Y. Zhu, J. Li, Y. Lin, S. Jiang, Q. Zhang, N. Pan, Y. Luo and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 71883–71889 RSC .
D. Bae, S. Kwon, J. Oh, W. K. Kim and H. Park, Renewable Energy, 2013, 55, 62–68 CrossRef CAS .
B. Vermang, V. Fjällström, J. Pettersson, P. Salomé and M. Edoff, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 505–511 CrossRef CAS .
B. Vermang, J. T. Wätjen, V. Fjällström, F. Rostvall, M. Edoff, R. Kotipalli, F. Henry and D. Flandre, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2014, 22, 1023–1029 CAS .
J. Liang, Q. Lin, H. Li, Y. Su, X. Yang, Z. Wu, J. Zheng, X. Wang, Y. Lin and F. Pan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 013907 CrossRef .
Y. Xie, J. Baillargeon and T. W. Hamann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28155–28166 CAS .
W. Song, H. Wang, G. Liu, M. Peng and D. Zou, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1615–1623 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, C. Xu, Y. Zhao, S. Chen and K. J. Ziegler, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12824–12831 CAS .
T.-C. Tien, F.-M. Pan, L.-P. Wang, F.-Y. Tsai and C. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10048–10053 CAS .
T.-C. Tien, F.-M. Pan, L.-P. Wang, F.-Y. Tsai and C. Lin, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 1745–1750 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Son, C. Prasittichai, J. E. Mondloch, L. Luo, J. Wu, D. W. Kim, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11529–11532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tétreault, E. Horváth, T. Moehl, J. Brillet, R. Smajda, S. Bungener, N. Cai, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Forró, A. Magrez and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7644–7650 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, A. Radenovic, T. Kuykendall, J. Liphardt and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22652–22663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gubbala, V. Chakrapani, V. Kumar and M. K. Sunkara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2411–2418 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. Liu, M. J. Pellin, T. J. Marks and J. T. Hupp, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2862–2866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Hamann, A. B. Martinson, J. W. Elam, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10303–10307 CAS .
T. W. Hamann, A. B. Martinson, J. W. Elam, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1560–1564 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Han, H.-S. Moon, J. O. Hwang, S. I. Seok, S. H. Im and S. O. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 185601 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, L. T. Su and A. I. Y. Tok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 209–215 CAS .
N. Tétreault, É. Arsenault, L.-P. Heiniger, N. Soheilnia, J. Brillet, T. Moehl, S. Zakeeruddin, G. A. Ozin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4579–4584 CrossRef PubMed .
K. E. Roelofs, T. P. Brennan, J. C. Dominguez, C. D. Bailie, G. Y. Margulis, E. T. Hoke, M. D. McGehee and S. F. Bent, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5584–5592 CAS .
T. P. Brennan, P. Ardalan, H. B. R. Lee, J. R. Bakke, I. Ding, M. D. McGehee and S. F. Bent, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1169–1175 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Brennan, O. Trejo, K. E. Roelofs, J. Xu, F. B. Prinz and S. F. Bent, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7566–7571 CAS .
S. K. Sarkar, J. Y. Kim, D. N. Goldstein, N. R. Neale, K. Zhu, C. M. Elliott, A. J. Frank and S. M. George, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8032–8039 CAS .
E. Thimsen, S. C. Riha, S. V. Baryshev, A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam and M. J. Pellin, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3188–3196 CrossRef CAS .
N. Schneider, M. Bouttemy, P. Genevée, D. Lincot and F. Donsanti, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 054001 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, S.-J. Lee, M. S. Park, J.-K. Kang, J. H. Heo, S. H. Im and S.-J. Sung, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14549–14554 RSC .
N. Mahuli and S. K. Sarkar, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2015, 33, 01A150 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Gibbs, C. L. Perkins, J. Tolentino, M. H. Zarghami, J. Bustamante Jr and M. Law, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5349–5355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pourret, P. Guyot-Sionnest and J. W. Elam, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 232–235 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, H. Hu, B. Lin, J. Ding and N. Yuan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14405–14408 RSC .
B. R. Sutherland, S. Hoogland, M. M. Adachi, P. Kanjanaboos, C. T. Wong, J. J. McDowell, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, Z. Ning and A. J. Houtepen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 53–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Chandiran, A. Yella, M. T. Mayer, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4309–4312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Mali, C. S. Shim, H. K. Park, J. Heo, P. S. Patil and C. K. Hong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1541–1551 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, B. Dong, H. Hu, F. Chen, M. Kong, Q. Zhang, T. Luo, L. Zhao, Z. Guo, J. Li, Z. Xu, S. Wang, D. Eder and L. Wan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17999–18007 CAS .
H. Si, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Yang, G. Zhang, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 223–231 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, J. Shi, X. Xu, J. Xiao, J. Luo, J. Dong, S. Lv, L. Zhu, H. Wu and D. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4937–4944 RSC .
C.-Y. Chang, K.-T. Lee, W.-K. Huang, H.-Y. Siao and Y.-C. Chang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5122–5130 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, X. Fang, M. Lv, B. Lin, S. Zhang, J. Ding and N. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5360–5367 CAS .
S. Albrecht, M. Saliba, J. P. C. Baena, F. Lang, L. Kegelmann, M. Mews, L. Steier, A. Abate, J. Rappich and L. Korte, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 81–88 CAS .
J. Ihanus, T. Hänninen, T. Hatanpää, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, H221–H225 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yun, Y. S. Kim and S.-H. K. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 721–723 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yong Shin, P. Sang-Hee Ko and Y. Sun Jin, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 42, L520–L522 CrossRef .
J. Ihanus, M. Ritala, M. Leskelä, E. Soininen, W. Park, A. E. Kaloyeros, W. Harris, K. W. Barth, A. W. Topol, T. Sajavaara and J. Keinonen, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 3862–3868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ihanus, E. Lambers, P. H. Holloway, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, J. Cryst. Growth, 2004, 260, 440–446 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gert, V. Patrick De, N. Kristiaan and H. Andriy, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 41, 5702–5705 CrossRef .
G. Stuyven, P. De Visschere, A. Hikavyy and K. Neyts, J. Cryst. Growth, 2002, 234, 690–698 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ihanus, M. P. Lankinen, M. Kemell, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 113526 CrossRef .
K. Yong Shin and Y. Sun Jin, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 4848–4854 CrossRef .
L. Rebohle, M. Braun, R. Wutzler, B. Liu, J. M. Sun, M. Helm and W. Skorupa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 251113 CrossRef .
L. Jung Wook and Y. Sun Jin, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 42, L663–L665 CrossRef .
J. W. Lim and S. J. Yun, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, H33–H35 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Chen, M. J. Chen, M. K. Wu, W. C. Li, H. L. Tsai, J. R. Yang, H. Kuan and M. Shiojiri, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2010, 46, 265–271 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Chen, M. J. Chen, Y. H. Huang, W. C. Sun, W. C. Li, J. R. Yang, H. Kuan and M. Shiojiri, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2011, 58, 3970–3975 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, H. Wu, H. Zheng, J. B. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Chen, Y. Xu and C. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 141912 CrossRef .
T. Wang, H. Wu, Z. Wang, C. Chen and C. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 161905 CrossRef .
T. Wang, H. Wu, Z. Wang, C. Chen and C. Liu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 99 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. T. Shih, M. K. Wu, M. J. Chen, Y. C. Cheng, J. R. Yang and M. Shiojiri, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2009, 98, 767–772 CrossRef .
S. Edward, S. Fu-Hsiang, S. Ying-Tsang, T. Hung-Ling, C. Ching-Huang, W. Mong-Kai, Y. Jer-Ren and C. Miin-Jang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 445202 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ying Tsang, W. Mong Kai, L. Wei Chih, K. Hon, Y. Jer Ren, S. Makoto and C. Miin Jang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 165201 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Wu, Y. T. Shih, W. C. Li, H. C. Chen, M. J. Chen, H. Kuan, J. R. Yang and M. Shiojiri, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2008, 20, 1772–1774 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Chen, Y. T. Shih, M. K. Wu, H. C. Chen, H. L. Tsai, W. C. Li, J. R. Yang, H. Kuan and M. Shiojiri, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2010, 57, 2195–2202 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Chien, H.-Y. Liao, S.-F. Yu, R.-M. Lin, M. Shiojiri, J.-J. Shyue and M.-J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 227–232 CAS .
M.-J. Chen, J.-R. Yang and M. Shiojiri, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2012, 27, 074005 CrossRef .
K.-W. Kim, N.-J. Choi, K.-B. Kim, M. Kim and S.-N. Lee, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 666, 88–92 CrossRef CAS .
N.-J. Choi, H.-S. Son, H.-J. Choi, K.-K. Kim and S.-N. Lee, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2014, 65, 417–420 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Yen, C. H. Chiu, C. W. Li, C. H. Chou, P. S. Lin, T. P. Chen, T. Y. Lin and J. R. Gong, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2012, 24, 2105–2108 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Y. Yen, C.-H. Chiu, C.-Y. Hsiao, C.-W. Li, C.-H. Chou, K.-Y. Lo, T.-P. Chen, C.-H. Lin, T.-Y. Lin and J.-R. Gong, J. Cryst. Growth, 2014, 387, 91–95 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Lee, C. C. Huang, C. L. Liao, Y. F. Chang, S. F. Chen, C. L. Ho, J. Z. Liu and M. C. Wu, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2013, 34, 1283–1285 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Huang, C.-L. Ho, S.-F. Chen, Y.-F. Chang and M.-C. Wu, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2014, 3, P159–P162 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Kong, H. K. Cho, M. Y. Kim, R. J. Choi and B. K. Kim, J. Cryst. Growth, 2011, 326, 147–151 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Chen, H. L. Syu, C. C. Huang, Y. L. Lee, C. L. Ho and M. C. Wu, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2014, 35, 36–38 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Chen, H. L. Syu, C. L. Liao, Y. F. Chang, C. C. Huang, C. L. Ho and M. C. Wu, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2013, 34, 972–974 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Liao, Y. F. Chang, C. L. Ho and M. C. Wu, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2013, 34, 611–613 CrossRef CAS .
W.-L. Bi, C.-L. Ho and M.-C. Wu, ECS Solid State Lett., 2013, 2, Q98–Q100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Naoi, K. Ikeda, T. Hama, K. Ono, R. Choi, T. Fukumoto, K. Nishino, S. Sakai, S. M. Lee and M. Koike, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2007, 4, 2810–2813 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Shih, M. Shiojiri, C.-H. Chen, S.-F. Yu, C.-T. Ko, J.-R. Yang, R.-M. Lin and M.-J. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13671 CrossRef PubMed .
W. E. Fenwick, A. Melton, T. Xu, N. Li, C. Summers, M. Jamil and I. T. Ferguson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 222105 CrossRef .
G. Hao, Z. Xiong, C. Hongjun, L. Honggang, Z. Peiyuan, L. Qinghua, H. Shujuan, C. Hudong, S. Bing, W. Shengkai and C. Yiping, Appl. Phys. Express, 2013, 6, 072103 CrossRef .
W. Ju Yeon, L. Jongsoo and H. Chang-Soo, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 505714 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Luka, P. Stakhira, V. Cherpak, D. Volynyuk, Z. Hotra, M. Godlewski, E. Guziewicz, B. Witkowski, W. Paszkowicz and A. Kostruba, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 064518 CrossRef .
S.-H. K. Park, J.-I. Lee, C.-S. Hwang and H. Y. Chu, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, L242–L245 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meyer, P. Görrn, S. Hamwi, H.-H. Johannes, T. Riedl and W. Kowalsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 073308 CrossRef .
S. C. Gong, J. G. Jang, H. J. Chang and J.-S. Park, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 823–827 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Choi, S. C. Gong, C.-S. Park, H.-S. Lee, J. G. Jang, H. J. Chang, G. Y. Yeom and H.-H. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3650–3655 CAS .
S. C. Gong, Y.-J. Choi, H. Kim, C.-S. Park, H.-H. Park, J. G. Jang, H. J. Chang and G. Y. Yeom, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2013, 31, 01A101 Search PubMed .
Y.-J. Choi, S. C. Gong, K.-M. Kang and H.-H. Park, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8344–8349 RSC .
C.-Y. Chang, F.-Y. Tsai, S.-J. Jhuo and M.-J. Chen, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 667–672 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuan-Yu, C. Yi-Neng, T. Ming-Hung, W. Ching-Chiun and T. Feng-Yu, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 024005 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Vasilopoulou, S. Kennou, S. Ladas, S. N. Georga, M. Botzakaki, D. Skarlatos, C. A. Krontiras, N. A. Stathopoulos, P. Argitis and L. C. Palilis, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 312–319 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sunyoung, P. Keunhee, J. Donggeun, K. Hyoungsub, C. Heeyeop, K. Hyunmin, Y. Junsin, C. Mann-ho and B. Jin-hyo, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 46, L461–L464 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, J. Y. Zhuang, S. Tongay, W. M. Su and Z. Cui, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 074506 CrossRef .
D. Chen, J. Liang, C. Liu, G. Saldanha, F. Zhao, K. Tong, J. Liu and Q. Pei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7512–7520 CrossRef .
R. L. Z. Hoye, M. R. Chua, K. P. Musselman, G. Li, M.-L. Lai, Z.-K. Tan, N. C. Greenham, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, R. H. Friend and D. Credgington, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1414–1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Keuning, P. van de Weijer, H. Lifka, W. M. M. Kessels and M. Creatore, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 01A131 Search PubMed .
A. Singh, H. Klumbies, U. Schröder, L. Müller-Meskamp, M. Geidel, M. Knaut, C. Hoßbach, M. Albert, K. Leo and T. Mikolajick, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 233302 CrossRef .
B. Wegler, O. Schmidt and B. Hensel, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2015, 33, 01A147 Search PubMed .
Y.-Q. Yang, Y. Duan, Y.-H. Duan, X. Wang, P. Chen, D. Yang, F.-B. Sun and K.-W. Xue, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1120–1125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, D. Gao, S. Li, Z. Zhou, J. Zou, H. Tao, L. Wang, M. Xu and J. Peng, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 104613–104620 RSC .
H. Choi, S. Shin, H. Jeon, Y. Choi, J. Kim, S. Kim, S. C. Chung and K. Oh, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2016, 34, 01A121 Search PubMed .
S. J. Yun, Y.-W. Ko and J. W. Lim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 4896–4898 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Tsai, A. Chittawanij, F.-S. Juang, P.-C. Lin, L.-A. Hong, F.-Y. Tsai, M.-H. Tseng, C.-C. Wang, C.-C. Chen, K.-L. Lin and S.-H. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2015, 83, 135–139 CrossRef CAS .
D.-S. Han, D.-K. Choi and J.-W. Park, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 552, 155–158 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Kim, Y. J. Jeong, T. K. An, S. Park, J. H. Jang, S. Nam, J. Jang, S. H. Kim and C. E. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 1042–1049 RSC .
J. Meyer, D. Schneidenbach, T. Winkler, S. Hamwi, T. Weimann, P. Hinze, S. Ammermann, H.-H. Johannes, T. Riedl and W. Kowalsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 233305 CrossRef .
M. Park, S. Oh, H. Kim, D. Jung, D. Choi and J.-S. Park, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 546, 153–156 CrossRef CAS .
F.-B. Sun, Y. Duan, Y.-Q. Yang, P. Chen, Y.-H. Duan, X. Wang, D. Yang and K.-W. Xue, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 2546–2552 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Ding, M. Wei, C. Li, B. Wei and J. Zhang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 169 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-W. Seo, H. Chae, S. Sang Joon, C. Ho Kyoon and M. C. Sung, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 161908 CrossRef .
S.-W. Seo, E. Jung, S. Joon Seo, H. Chae, H. Kyoon Chung and S. Min Cho, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 143505 CrossRef .
Y. Duan, X. Wang, Y.-H. Duan, Y.-Q. Yang, P. Chen, D. Yang, F.-B. Sun, K.-W. Xue, N. Hu and J.-W. Hou, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1936–1941 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kim, Y. Han, W. Kim, K. C. Choi, H.-G. Im and B.-S. Bae, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1737–1743 CrossRef CAS .
S. Alkis, B. Tekcan, A. Nayfeh and A. K. Okyay, J. Opt., 2013, 15, 105002 CrossRef .
P. Hazra, S. K. Singh and S. Jit, J. Semicond. Technol. Sci., 2014, 14, 117–123 CrossRef .
C. X. Shan, J. Y. Zhang, B. Yao, D. Z. Shen, X. W. Fan and K. L. Choy, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2009, 27, 1765–1768 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lin, H.-Y. Lee and T.-H. Lee, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2016, 34, 01A110 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Lee, Y.-C. Lin, M.-J. Lee, W.-Y. Uen and K. Sreenivas, J. Nanomater., 2014, 2014, 972869 Search PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, H.-Y. Lee and C.-T. Lee, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2016, 34, 01A141 Search PubMed .
L. E. Aygun, F. B. Oruc, F. B. Atar and A. K. Okyay, IEEE Photonics J., 2013, 5, 2200707 CrossRef .
H.-D. Um, S. A. Moiz, K.-T. Park, J.-Y. Jung, S.-W. Jee, C. H. Ahn, D. C. Kim, H. K. Cho, D.-W. Kim and J.-H. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 033102 CrossRef .
K. Y. Ko, H. Kang, J. Kim, W. Lee, H. S. Lee, S. Im, J. Y. Kang, J.-M. Myoung, H.-G. Kim, S.-H. Kim and H. Kim, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2014, 27, 297–302 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kang, J. Park, T. Choi, H. Jung, K. H. Lee, S. Im and H. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 041117 CrossRef .
K. Yong Ko, H. Kang, W. Lee, C.-W. Lee, J. Park, H. S. Lee, S. Im, H.-G. Kim, S.-H. Kim, B.-W. Min and H. Kim, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 33, 154–160 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Ko, H. Kang, J. Park, B.-W. Min, H. S. Lee, S. Im, J. Y. Kang, J.-M. Myoung, J.-H. Jung, S.-H. Kim and H. Kim, Sens. Actuators, A, 2014, 210, 197–204 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Y. Pan, Y.-H. Lin, P.-S. Lee, J.-M. Wu and H. C. Shih, J. Nanomater., 2012, 2012, 279245 Search PubMed .
A. A. Chaaya, M. Bechelany, S. Balme and P. Miele, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20650–20658 CAS .
Y.-H. Lin, P.-S. Lee, Y.-C. Hsueh, K.-Y. Pan, C.-C. Kei, M.-H. Chan, J.-M. Wu, T.-P. Perng and H. C. Shih, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, K24–K27 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Lin, Y.-C. Hsueh, C.-C. Wang, J.-M. Wu, T.-P. Perng and H. C. Shih, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, K93–K95 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, S. Deng, Q. Hu, Q. Zhong, Q.-P. Luo, L. Yuan and J. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 85969–85973 RSC .
S. Bang, S. Lee, Y. Ko, J. Park, S. Shin, H. Seo and H. Jeon, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 290 CrossRef PubMed .
D. C. Kim, B. O. Jung, Y. H. Kwon and H. K. Cho, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 159, K10–K14 CrossRef .
M. A. Nazirzadeh, F. B. Atar, B. B. Turgut and A. K. Okyay, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7103 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xing, F. Fang, S. Zisheng, F. Xuan, Z. Guang, W. Junbo, W. Zhipeng, L. Jinhua and W. Xiaohua, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 335104 CrossRef .
W. Wang, C. Shan, H. Zhu, F. Ma, D. Shen, X. Fan and K. Choy, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 045102 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Liang and W.-K. Liao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 19482–19487 RSC .
D. Shao, H. Sun, G. Xin, J. Lian and S. Sawyer, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 314, 872–876 CrossRef CAS .
A. Haider, H. Cansizoglu, M. F. Cansizoglu, T. Karabacak, A. K. Okyay and N. Biyikli, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2015, 33, 01A110 Search PubMed .
Y.-H. Chang, C.-M. Liu, Y.-C. Tseng, C. Chen, C.-C. Chen and H.-E. Cheng, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 225602 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Akhavan, A. Yeltik and H. V. Demir, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9023–9028 CAS .
J. Xu, B. R. Sutherland, S. Hoogland, F. Fan, S. Kinge and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 153105 CrossRef .
B. Tekcan, C. Ozgit-Akgun, S. Bolat, N. Biyikli and A. K. Okyay, OPTICE, 2014, 53, 107106 CrossRef .
S. Bolat, B. Tekcan, C. Ozgit-Akgun, N. Biyikli and A. K. Okyay, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2015, 33, 01A143 Search PubMed .
M. Kumar, B. Tekcan and A. K. Okyay, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2014, 14, 1703–1706 CrossRef .
M. Kumar, B. Tekcan and A. K. Okyay, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2015, 33, 021204 Search PubMed .
K. Deng, H. Lu, Z. Shi, Q. Liu and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7845–7851 CAS .
M. C. Lemme, F. H. L. Koppens, A. L. Falk, M. S. Rudner, H. Park, L. S. Levitov and C. M. Marcus, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4134–4137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Shao, D. J. Chen, B. Liu, H. Lu, Z. L. Xie, R. Zhang and Y. D. Zheng, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2011, 29, 051201 Search PubMed .
H. Chalabi, D. Schoen and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1374–1380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Salihoglu, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2014, 32, 051201 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, M. Shi, X. Shao, T. Li, X. Li, N. Tang, H. Gong, R. Liu, H. Tang and Z.-J. Qiu, Infrared Phys. Technol., 2015, 71, 272–276 CAS .
C. G. Kang, S. K. Lee, S. Choe, Y. G. Lee, C.-L. Lee and B. H. Lee, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 23391–23400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, Z. Dong, Y. Liu, T. Liu, J. Tao, Y. Zeng, J. K. W. Yang and Q. J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 327–332 RSC .
D. Kufer and G. Konstantatos, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7307–7313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Miao, W. Hu, Y. Jing, W. Luo, L. Liao, A. Pan, S. Wu, J. Cheng, X. Chen and W. Lu, Small, 2015, 11, 2392–2398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, W. Tian, F. Cao, Y. Ma, B. Gu and L. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1296–1302 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Clancey, A. S. Cavanagh, R. S. Kukreja, A. Kongkanand and S. M. George, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2015, 33, 01A130 Search PubMed .

Footnote† All authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Xiangbo Meng
	Dr Xiangbo (Henry) Meng is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Arkansas (Fayetteville, AR). His research focuses on developing novel nanoscale materials for energy applications such as rechargeable batteries, fuel cells, and catalysis. Dr Meng was a postdoctoral research fellow in the Energy Systems Division at Argonne National Laboratory (2012–2016) and in the Chemistry Division at Brookhaven National Laboratory (2011–2012). He earned two PhD degrees in Mechanical & Materials Engineering and Chemical & Biochemical Engineering from the University of Western Ontario (2005–2011). He was an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellow and an awardee of several prestigious honors.

Xinwei Wang
	Dr Xinwei Wang is currently an Assistant Professor at School of Advanced Materials, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China. His research has been mainly focused on atomic layer deposition for thin film materials, with the emphasis on the development of new ALD processes and their applications for energy and microelectronic devices. He received his BSc (2008) in Physics from Peking University, China, and both his AM (2012) in Chemistry and PhD (2012) in Chemical Physics from Harvard University under the supervision of Prof. Roy G. Gordon. After a short period of postdoctoral research at Harvard University, he joined the faculty of Peking University in 2013.

Dongsheng Geng
	Dr Dongsheng Geng is a professor at the University of Science and Technology Beijing. He obtained his PhD in Physical Chemistry from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007. From 2007 to 2015, Dr Geng worked in Shinshu University (Japan) as a NEDO researcher, the University of Western Ontario (Canada) as a postdoctoral fellow, and Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (Singapore) as a research scientist. His current research is mainly focused on the development of highly efficient electrocatalysts by various methods including ALD technology and the investigation of their structure–performance relationship in metal–air batteries and fuel cells.

Cagla Ozgit-Akgun
	Dr Cagla Ozgit-Akgun has been a senior engineer in Department of Micro/Nano Devices Design at ASELSAN Inc. since December 2014, focusing on optoelectronic devices. She was also a visiting scientist at IBM Research-Almaden between 2015 and 2016, where she conducted research on Li–air battery cathodes. Dr Ozgit-Akgun was a postdoctoral research associate at Bilkent University, where she got her PhD degree in Materials Science and Nanotechnology in 2014. She received her MSc and BSc degrees in Metallurgical and Materials Engineering from Middle East Technical University in 2009 and 2006, respectively.

Nathanaelle Schneider
	Dr Nathanaelle Schneider is a CNRS (Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique) – Researcher since 2013 at IRDEP (R&D Institute on PV Energy) in France. Her research activities currently focus on the development of new materials by ALD and their applications in PV. She received her BSc (2002) and MSc (2004) in Chemistry from Strasbourg University, France and PhD (2008) in Chemistry from both Heidelberg, Germany and Strasbourg, France universities, under the co-supervision of Prof. L. H. Gade and Dr S. Bellemin-Laponnaz. After staying at AIST-Tsukuba, Japan and Air Liquide Laboratories, Japan, she joined IRDEP in 2012 first as a post-doctoral researcher.

Jeffrey W. Elam
	Dr Jeffrey W. Elam is a Senior Chemist and Group Leader at Argonne National Laboratory where he directs a program in atomic layer deposition (ALD) technology with the goal of developing new applications for ALD in fields such as photovoltaics, catalysis, batteries, lithography, and large-area detectors. Dr Elam earned his BA in Chemistry from Cornell University and his PhD in Physical Chemistry from the University of Chicago. As a Postdoctoral Researcher at the University of Colorado, Dr Elam developed ALD thin film growth methods. Dr Elam has authored over 200 papers and is an inventor of over 50 patents and inventions related to ALD. He has won four R&D100 Awards, and is heavily involved in chairing and organizing ALD sessions at ECS and AVS.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the ALD process of metal oxides for using ML2 (precursor A) and water (precursor B): (1) a substrate surface initially covered by –OH groups, (2) dosing the metal precursor A of ML2 to react with the surface –OH groups, (3) the reaction of ML2 with –OH groups with the release of the HL byproduct, (4) a continuous supply of a sufficient amount of ML2, (5) a new saturated ML layer formed with the depletion of –OH surface groups and no more surface reactions with excess ML2, (6) a thorough purge to vacate the over-supplied ML2 and the byproduct of HL, (7) the substrate surface covered with new functional groups of –ML, (8) dosing the precursor B of H2O as the oxygen source to react with the surface –ML groups, (9) the reaction of H2O with –ML groups releasing the HL byproduct, (10) a continuous supply of a sufficient amount of H2O, (11) a new saturated OH layer formed with the production of MO, and (12) a thorough purge to vacate the over-supplied ML2 and the byproduct of HL. The dosing–purge–dosing–purge four-step procedure is repeatable to increase the deposited MO layer thickness in an accurately well-controlled mode.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of: (a) SWCNTs and their bundles; SWCNTs coated by (b) 50-cycle, (c) 100-cycle, and (d) 150-cycle ALD GaSx. Electrochemical performance of SWCNT–GaSx: (e) cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of commercial Ga2S3, commercial SWCNTs, and a SWCNT–GaSx composite at 120 mA g−1.77 Reproduced by permission of John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrochemical performance of ALD Li2S: (a and b) SEM images of MCMB particles (a) before and (b) after 700-cycle ALD Li2S coating; (c) EDX analysis of an ALD Li2S film deposited on MCMB particles, using 700 cycles at 200 °C: (top-left) SEM image, (top-right) C elemental map, (bottom-left) F elemental map, and (bottom-right) S elemental map; (d and e) electrochemical characteristics of Li2S films deposited on MCMB particles using 360 ALD Li2S cycles at 300 °C: (d) charge–discharge profiles in the first three cycles (inset: the first three cycles versus time) with a voltage window of 1.6–3.0 V and a current density of 55 mA g−1, and (e) cyclability and coulombic efficiency (CE) measured over 36 charge–discharge cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic depicting a TiO2 nanoparticle with Al2O3 ALD, W ALD, and Pt ALD layers forming a multilayer shell around the TiO2 nanoparticle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 298. Copyright (2015), American Vacuum Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM images of ALD-prepared catalysts. Reprinted by permission from ref. 110. Copyright (2014) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image (cross-sectional view) of a b-Si surface. The 20 nm Al2O3 layer can be seen as a brighter layer on top of the pillars; (b) structure of the p-type b-Si IBC (Interdigitated Back Contact) solar cell. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Nanotechnology (ref. 126).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM image (cross-sectional view) and schematic description of CIGS solar cells. Credits IRDEP; (b) band diagram of a typical CIGS solar cell with CBD/CdS as a buffer layer.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic description of DSSCs. QDSSCs and PSCs in mesoscopic architecture have structures similar to DSSCs; (b) influence of Al2O3 ALD reaction cycle number on the fractional coverage of TiO2 electrodes and the overall efficiency (PCE) of DSSCs; and (c) TEM images of TiO2 core particles (top) without an Al2O3 shell layer, (middle) with a one-cycle ALD Al2O3 shell layer, and (bottom) with a five-cycle ALD-Al2O3 shell layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic device design of the silicon heterojunction/perovskite tandem solar cell reported by Albrecht et al. The red dashed line indicates the active area. (b) Cross-section SEM observation. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Device architecture of the OLED devices fabricated on (a) an AZO anode without a buffer layer (control device), (b) an AZO anode with an AZO homogeneous buffer layer, (c) the corresponding energy band diagram of the device, and (d) the real image of the OLED device on an AZO anode with an homogeneous AZO buffer layer (4.1 at% Al).227 Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the design of the PAN/ZnO 1D nanostructured UV sensor; (b) SEM images of 1D ZnO nanostructures obtained with a 240 s electrospinning time coated with 250 cycles ALD ZnO at 100 °C; (c) X-ray diffraction spectra; sweep voltammetry of the ALD ZnO thin layer (50 nm thick) on glass (d) and with a 240 s electrospinning time (e); and (f) chronoamperometry measurements of sensors on glass and with a 240 s electrospinning time with UV (365 nm) illumination between 100 and 200 s. Reproduced from ref. 268 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† All authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
