Utilisation of CO 2 as a chemical feedstock: opportunities and challenges  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B700658F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B700658F
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2007, 2975-2992Utilisation of CO2 as a chemical feedstock: opportunities and challengesMichele Aresta*a and Angela DibenedettobaDepartment of Chemistry and CIRCC, University of Bari, Via Celso Ulpiani 27, Bari, Italy. E-mail: m.aresta@chimica.uniba.it;  Fax: +39 (1)805442429;   Tel: +39 1805442084bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Bari, Campus Universitario, 70126, Bari, Italy. E-mail: a.dibenedetto@chimica.uniba.it;  Fax: +39 (0)805442083;   Tel: +39 0805442078Received 17th January 2007, Accepted 14th May 2007First published on 26th June 2007AbstractThe need to reduce the accumulation of CO2 into the atmosphere requires new technologies able to reduce the CO2 emission. The utilization of CO2 as a building block may represent an interesting approach to synthetic methodologies less intensive in carbon and energy. In this paper the general properties of carbon dioxide and its interaction with metal centres is first considered. The potential of carbon dioxide as a raw material in the synthesis of chemicals such as carboxylates, carbonates, carbamates is then discussed. The utilization of CO2 as source of carbon for the synthesis of fuels or other C1 molecules such as formic acid and methanol is also described and the conditions for its implementation are outlined. A comparison of chemical and biotechnological conversion routes of CO2 is made and the barriers to their exploitation are highlighted.Michele ArestaMichele Aresta received his doctoral degree in Industrial Chemistry at the University of Milan in 1964, and was a research assistant at the University of Bari, Faculty of Engineering (1964–1976) and the Department of Chemistry, University College London with Prof. Sir R. S. Nyholm from 1967–69. He became a lecturer of inorganic chemistry at the University of Bari, Faculty of Sciences (1965–1979). He was made an associate professor from 1979–1982 and has been a full professor of inorganic chemistry at the University of Bari since 1985. He was a professor of inorganic chemistry at the Lecce University (1979–85). His areas of scientific interest include carbon dioxide utilisation in synthetic chemistry; catalysis, coordination and metallorganic chemistry; the chemistry of small molecules (H2, CO, N2, CO2, CH4, C2H4, etc.); the chemistry of metal centres in low oxidation states as catalysts in organic synthesis; greenhouse gas emission in combustion processes; energy saving; renewable energy sources; site remediation and biomass utilization.Angela DibenedettoAngela Dibenedetto was born in Altamura, Italy on February 22, 1968. She received her doctor degree in biochemical sciences at the University of Bari (1994). Her present position is that of an associate professor at the University of Bari, in the Department of Chemistry. Her areas of scientific interest include carbon dioxide utilization in synthetic chemistry; catalysis; coordination chemistry and organometallic chemistry; green chemistry; fuels and chemicals from marine biomass. She is a member of the editorial board of Environmental Chemistry Letters.1. Introduction1.1 The natural carbon cycle and anthropogenic emissionsThe natural carbon-cycle of carbon dioxide uses processes occurring in terrestrial and aquatic environments in a dynamic exchange with the atmosphere. The estimate for the “atmospheric” content of CO2 is 750 Gt of carbon, while the “carbon-flow” between the atmosphere and water basins equals ca. 90 Gt of carbon per year and global fixation by terrestrial plants and microorganisms, plus underground inorganication, amounts to ca. 90 Gt per year. Such uptake is balanced by the emission of carbon in the form of CO2 during the respiration of plants and animals, and by natural emissions of volcanoes. Deforestation and “spontaneous fires” contribute ca. 1.5 Gt y−1 of carbon. The amount of CO2 emitted in human activities is estimated at 5.5 Gt carbon per year. However, the total anthropogenic carbon can be assumed to amount to ca. 7 Gt per year or 25.7 Gt CO2 per year (including the indirect effects of deforestation), that represents a ca. 3.9% excess with respect to the yearly CO2-flow in the natural “carbon cycle”. Such an amount is not balanced and, as a result, the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has kept steadily increasing in the last 200 years, rising to 380 ppm from ca. 270 ppm in the pre-industrial era.1 An issue that deserves attention is the fact that only 30–35% of the chemical energy content associated with the carbon (fossil, and provided from the biosphere) used in anthropic activities is converted into and used as various forms of energy (electric, mechanical, others), while the remaining 65–70% is lost as heat that directly affects the atmosphere. To this direct warming is added the effect due to the increase of the concentration of CO2 and other greenhouse gases (GHGs), among which is water vapour, that prevent the infrared radiation emitted by the surface of our planet during the night-time escape to the troposphere. The two combined effects are considered to cause the “atmospheric warming” that is associated with global climate change and planetary temperature increase.1.2 Technologies for carbon dioxide reductionHowever, much interest is concentrated these days on technologies that may reduce CO2 emission into the atmosphere. Besides efficiency technologies (in the production and use of electric energy) that may make a better use of fossil fuels and reduce the amount of heat and carbon released per unit of kWh, the recovery and disposal of CO2 from point-continuous sources, such as power plants and industries, is afforded much attention as carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) looks particularly suited for the elimination of large volumes of CO2.2The capture of CO2 and its disposal is an energetically-costly procedure: per each ton of disposed CO2ca. 0.4–0.5 t of CO2 are generated, which causes a net increase in the amount of extracted fuel. It should also be considered that sites for disposal are not easily available in all countries. Therefore, the long-distance transportation of CO2 to available disposal sites represents a prominent part of the economic and energetic costs of CO2 disposal. A new concept of electric energy production and distribution, based on the conversion of fuels into energy at the fuel extraction site and electric energy distribution, has to be evaluated for the minimisation of the cost of disposal of CO2 that might be placed in the spent fields from which fossil fuels were extracted.It is worth mentioning that the reduction of CO2 emission is also a key issue in the case of large scale hydrogen-production. In fact, unless water splitting using solar energy is implemented, hydrogen will be produced mainly from carbonaceous materials with co-generation of CO2: if the “hydrogen economy” is to be implemented, CO2 cannot be eliminated into the atmosphere or there will be no benefit from an environmental point of view.1.2.1 Carbon dioxide capture and disposal. The capture of carbon dioxide from the flue gases of coal-, oil-, or gas-fired power plants and from industrial processes is a mature technology, commercially available. Either solid phases or liquids, such as monoethanolamine (MEA, by far the most used liquid), are used.3 More recently, membranes have been introduced for CO2 separation. The latter are less space-demanding, while being more expensive than MEA. The capture of CO2 is already implemented at the Mt level, mainly for the separation of liquefied natural gas (LNG) into CO2 and methane. Separated CO2 can be confined in natural sites such as: aquifers, deep geological cavities, spent oil- or gas-fields, coal-mines or the ocean.4 Each of the above technologies has limitations and uncertainties that will require a large research effort before complete exploitation. So far, only the disposal in spent LNG-fields and the use in enhanced oil recovery (EOR) are proven technologies that still need monitoring of the disposal sites to guarantee that there are no significant losses of confined CO2. This practice is already exploited in Norway where large volumes of separated CO2 are re-injected into spent gas-fields.5 This is a reference case for CO2 separation and disposal.1.3 Industrial uses of CO2Carbon dioxide has been used for the industrial synthesis of organics, such as urea6a and salicylic acid,6b,c and inorganic compounds (pigments) since the second half of the 19th century. New applications have been investigated and applied (carboxylation of epoxides) after the 1973 oil-crisis. The topic has been comprehensively reviewed by several authors.7In recent years, carbon dioxide has also found a growing application as a fluid in dry-cleaning, refrigerators, air conditioners, fire-extinguishers, separation techniques, water treatment and the food- or agro-chemical industry (as packaging, an additive to beverages or a fumigant).8 Supercritical-CO2 finds an application as a solvent for reactions, nano-particle or -composite production, and polymer-modification. With the exception of the case of water treatment, in all other technological applications, CO2 is not converted into other chemicals, and can be recovered as such at the end of the application.Both use as a building block in the synthesis of chemicals and use as a technological fluid, in contrast to disposal, reduce dependence on fossil fuels and generate profit. Such uses of CO2 are well-in-line with a sustainable chemical industry, as they are based on clean reactions that reduce carbon dioxide emission into the atmosphere. A question is: how much CO2 is avoided by implementing maximum utilisation of CO2, and if such technology should also be considered for “global warming control” and be coupled with CCS? As a matter of fact, the correct estimate of the amount of CO2 emission that can be avoided by chemical or technological utilisation requires the analysis of the whole reaction cycle of existing and new processes based on the use of CO2.9b To do this, life cycle assessment (LCA) is the only reliable methodology.101.3.1 Industrial uses. How much CO2 is used in the chemical industry or other applications? 110 Mt CO2 per year are either converted into chemicals9a such as urea (70 Mt CO2 per year), inorganic carbonates and pigments (ca. 30 Mt CO2 per year) or used as an additive to CO in the synthesis of methanol (6 Mt CO2 per year). Other chemicals, such as salicylic acid (20 kt CO2 per year) and propylene carbonate (a few kt per year), have a minor share of the market. In addition, 18 Mt of CO2 per year are used8b as a technological fluid.Among these industrial uses, the syntheses of urea and salicylic acid are purely thermal processes. In the reaction of Na/K-phenate with CO2, the Na-cation favours the formation of the salicylate, while the K-cation promotes the formation of the para isomer, 4-OH-benzoic acid. Conversely, both the carboxylation of epoxides and (to a much greater degree) the synthesis of methanol require the intervention of catalysts, mainly metal systems. Several other options for CO2 conversion exist that need the development of new catalytic systems.2. The carbon dioxide molecule2.1 Molecular geometry and spectroscopic propertiesCarbon dioxide, a 16e− molecule, belongs to the D∞h point group and is linear in its ground state. Consequently, although it contains two polar C–O bonds, the molecule itself is apolar. CO2 presents two different reaction sites: the carbon atom is an electrophile, while the oxygen atoms are nucleophiles: that makes it a bi-functional catalyst,11 maybe best suited for its activation or conversion. The Walsh diagram12 shows that the population of the LUMO-orbitals (as may occur in electronically excited CO2, the radical anion CO2− or the adduct of CO2 with an electron rich species) causes the distortion of the molecule from linearity (when the carbon atom of CO2 is bonded to a third atom, the OCO angle is always close to 133°), the variation of the molecular energy and the increase of the C–O bond length.Infrared (IR)13 and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)14 techniques are much used as diagnostic tools of the state of the CO2 molecule or for its quantitative determination. UV-Visible spectroscopy15 has not found extensive use. Table 1 shows the IR data for CO2 in different states. The CO symmetric stretching of free CO2 is not IR active, while in the Raman spectrum such a vibration is found at 1285–1388 cm−1. IR spectroscopy can be used for the determination of CO2 in the atmosphere (by non dispersive infra-red, NDIR) and as a tool for indicating the mode of bonding of CO2 to metal systems. The utilisation of labelled O or C, e.g. by using 13CO2 and C18O2, helps in the determination of the mode of bonding in metallorganic species containing CO2 as ligand.
Table 1 Infrared and Raman spectroscopic data for carbon dioxide

 Sym.COBendingAsym.COGaseous1285–1388 (Raman)6672349Aqueous solution——2342Solid—660, 6532344The 13C-NMR spectrum of CO2 is widely used as diagnostic tool. CO2 dissolved in a non-polar solvent such as benzene or toluene shows a resonance at 126 ppm.2.2 Energetics of CO2 conversion.Carbon dioxide is, with water, the end product of any combustion of materials containing carbon and hydrogen, thus laying in a potential-energy well (Table 2). CO2 is the lowest in energy of all carbon-containing binary neutral species. The bonding of a third atom to C (O or any other) is an exothermic process. It happens, thus, that organic carbonates are lower in energy than CO2 and, similarly, the natural weathering of silicates,17 [eqn (1a–b)] is an exoergonic process, but is very slow for kinetic reasons. M2SiO4 + 2CO2
							→ 2MCO3 + SiO2(1a) MSiO3 + CO2
							→ MCO3 + SiO2(1b)
Table 2 Energy of formation of some chemicals relevant to CO216

CompoundΔHf°/kJ mol−1ΔGf°/kJ mol−1Sf° cal/K−1CO(g)−110.53−137.2197.7CO2(aq)−413.26—— (g)−393.51−394.4213.8CO32−(aq)−675.23——CaCO3(s)−1100——HCN(l)108.9125.0112.8 (g)135.1124.7201.8CH4(g)−74.4−50.3186.3CH3COONa(s)−708.8−607.2123C2H4(g)52.568.4219.6OCH2CH2OC(O) (ethene carbonate)(s)−586.30——C2H5OH(l)−277.7−174.8160.7 (g)−235.1−168.5282.7HOCH2CH2OH(s)−455.3—163.2 (g)−387.5—303.8(l)−122.6—— (g)−94.7——C6H6(l)49.0—— (g)82.6——C6H5COOH (benzoic acid)(s)−385.2—167.6HO–C2H4COOH(s)−589.9——C6H4(COOH)2(s)−782.0——The reactions above, and those in which CO2 reacts with hydroxyl ions, OH−, amines or olefins are good examples of processes in which CO2 is converted without any external energetic input. Therefore, by using opportune catalysts, CO2 could be conveniently used for the direct synthesis of useful organic products such as carboxylates and lactones (RCOOR′), carbamates (RR′NCOOR″), ureas (RR′NCONRR′), isocyanates (RNCO), carbonates [(ROC(O)OR′], supplanting more polluting starting materials and processes currently in use.On the contrary, the reactions that generate reduced forms of CO2 (such as HCOO− (formates), [C(O)O]22− (oxalates), H2CO (formaldehyde), CO, CH3OH and CH4) require energy that may be provided as heat (thermal processes) or electrons (electrochemical processes), or else radiation.Anyway, as a general rule, the convenience of developing a process based on CO2 does not depend on the fact that it is endo- or exoergonic. Today, several strongly-endothermic processes are run at the industrial level that consume a lot of energy and, additionally, produce large amounts of waste. Consequently, a new process based on CO2 will be more sustainable than an existing one if it minimizes the material and energy consumption and CO2 emission.3. Interaction of carbon dioxide with metal centresMetal systems are good candidates for driving new reactions based on CO2. After the discovery of the first transition metal complex bearing CO2, η2-C,O bonded to Ni,18 the co-ordination of CO2 to metal systems (Table 3) and the insertion of CO2 into M–E bonds have been intensively investigated with the aim of discovering new catalysts for CO2 conversion.
Table 3 Modes of bonding of CO2 to metal centres

Mode of bondingStructural features of the adductM [ref.]νasymνsymC–O bond length/Åη1-OM–O–COU202188 1.122(4), 1.277(4)η1-CRh,21 Ir22161012101.20(2), 1.25(2)η2-C,ONi,23 Rh,24 Fe,25 Pd2617401140–10941.17, 1.22µ2-η2Pt27 Ir/Zr,28 Ir/Os,29 Rh,30 Ru3114951290–11901.229/12), 1.306(12)µ2-η3 (class I)Re/Zr,32 Ru/Zr,33 Ru/Ti, Fe/Zr, Fe/Ti33134812881.285(5), 1.281(5)13481290µ2-η3 (class II)Re/Sn34 Fe/Sn35139511881.269(11), 2.257(7)145011521.252(3), 2.394(2)µ3-η3Os36 Re37  1.276(5), 1.322(5)1.28, 1.25µ3-η4Co38  1.20(2), 1.24(2)µ4-η4Ru39  1.283(15), 1.245(16)µ4-η5Rh/Zn40  1.29(14), 1.322(14)Moving from the η1 to the µ4-η5 mode,19 the carbon–oxygen bond order decreases and the length of the C–O bond increases. Nevertheless, such complexes do not show any significant activity as promoters of coupling reactions of CO2 to organic substrates, most probably because the high energy of the M–O bonds makes the CO2 complexes “stabilized forms of activated CO2”, or because the C-atom is engaged in a bond with a metal that prevents the further C–C bond formation.FTIR spectroscopy,41 more recently coupled to density functional theory (DFT)42 has been used for the investigation of matrix interaction of CO2 with metal atoms: the co-ordination of CO2 is influenced by the metal and the gas matrix. Late-transition metals [Fe, Co, Ni, Ag and Cu] form one-to-one M(CO2) complexes, while left-hand elements [Ti, V, and Cr] easily insert into one of the CO bonds yielding oxo-carbonyl species.42 Additionally, in net CO2 the cumulene is easily side-on coordinated to nickel (binding energy = 75 kJ mol−1) to afford a 1 : 1 complex, while if argon is used to dilute the matrix, no reaction occurs, even after annealing. Conversely, if N2 is added to the Ar-matrix, CO2 co-ordinates to pre-formed “NiN2” (binding energy = 133.8 kJ mol−1).423.1 Reactions of co-ordinated CO2There are several examples that demonstrate that the η2-bonded oxygen of the co-ordinated CO2 undergoes an electrophilic attack by protons or other similar reagents and there is very little evidence that co-ordinated C may undergo the formation of a C–C bond, e.g. between CO2 and an olefin. Scheme 1 shows that co-ordinated CO2 may undergo a reaction at the oxygen atoms with several reagents such as those shown in Scheme 1: Scheme 1  Reactions of co-ordinated CO2 with various electrophiles and the hydride. The “oxygen-transfer” to a metal centre with formation of the OM(CO) moiety may be driven by the ancillary ligands, as recently shown in the case of the U(III) complex described in ref. 20 in which CO2 may be co-ordinated to U either in a η1-O- or in a η2-C,O-mode, depending on the steric hindrance of the ligand around the U-centre. In the case of the η2-C,O-co-ordination, a further reaction occurs with formation of “OU(CO)”.3.2 The insertion of CO2 into M–E bondsCO2 inserts into metal-element bonds (M–E), where E is H, N, C, O, P. This chemistry is of great interest as M–OC(O)–E or M–C(O)O–E forms may be useful intermediates for synthetic applications. The mode of insertion of CO2 depends on the charge distribution on the M–E couple of atoms and on the energy of the M–C, M–O, E–C, E–O bonds. Often, the driver of the insertion is the difference in energy between the M–C and M–O bonds. Such energies also drive the potential use of such intermediates in synthetic chemistry, as will be described in section 4.1.1.4. Carbon dioxide as a building block for organic productsThe incorporation of carbon dioxide into an organic substrate with formation of compounds containing the entire COO moiety (carboxylates), is a good example of a “sustainable process”. In fact, compared to processes on stream, the direct carboxylation of organic substrates causes the reduction of waste at source, uses less and diversified starting materials, and recycles carbon. One can also expect that, under the appropriate reaction conditions, being the carboxylation an exo-ergonic reaction, such direct carboxylations may be associated to a reduction of energy consumption with respect to processes on stream.4.1 Synthesis of monomeric carboxylated productsAlthough the incorporation of CO2 into an organic substrate to afford C–COOH, C–COOC, E–COO–C (EN,O), or C–OC(O)O–C moieties is a process of great importance from the industrial point of view, to date there are still severe barriers to its exploitation. The formation of a terminal “carboxylic moiety” C–COO, is industrially achieved through multi-step syntheses (such as oxidation of aliphatic or aromatic moieties, hydration of cyanides, Grignard reagents), that are not selective nor quantitative,51 but are thermodynamically and kinetically possible. Cyclic compounds containing a “COO” moiety require even more complex synthetic procedures. The synthesis of the moieties reported above can be considered as the insertion of CO2 into the C–H, C–C, E–C, C–O–C bonds, respectively. Such reactions are expected to have a favourable thermodynamics eventually associated with adverse kinetics. The use of an appropriate catalyst is essential in order to overcome the kinetic barrier, but even this is not enough as it is often necessary to develop ad hoc synthetic strategies.4.1.1 C–C bond formation to afford acids, esters, lactones, pyrones. The carboxylation of an organic saturated hydrocarbon [eqn (2)] or benzene [eqn (3)] can be considered as a formal insertion of CO2 into a C–H bond. The enthalpy change of such reactions is, in general, favourable, although dependent on the reagents, as shown in eqn (2) and (3), but the entropy change may deeply influence the free energy change. CH4 (g) + CO2 (g) → CH3COOH (l); ΔH = −16.6 kJ mol−1, ΔG298 = +54.8 kJ mol−1(2) C6H6 (l) + CO2 (g) → C6H5COOH (s); ΔH = −40.7 kJ mol−1, ΔG298 = +57.3 kJ mol−1(3)The key step in such reactions is the C–H splitting that may present a high kinetic barrier, and may occur in a homolytic (R + H) or heterolytic way (R− + H+). In Nature, the formation of a carbanion takes usually place [eqn (4)] that easily reacts with CO2 to afford the corresponding carboxylate. (4)Despite the fact that direct carboxylation of organic substrates represents a great synthetic opportunity that would greatly improve the environmental quality of existing processes,55–57 only very few attempts have been made in the past in such a direction. The synthesis of salicylic acid,56 that uses one mole of Na/K per mole of fixed CO2, is a process known and used since the 19th century. The intensification of research effort in this area would provide more information about the behaviour of microorganisms, enzymes and biomimetic systems, and an increased knowledge of CO2 chemistry would leave the door open to the hope that a chemical- and/or biotechnological approach to the carboxylation of organic substrates may be developed industrially, which would greatly contribute to reduction of the environmental impact of the chemical industry in this particular sector.4.1.1.1 Natural carboxylations and RuBisCO genetic engineering. Natural carboxylation processes use either CO2 or its hydrated form HCO3−, which is available in cells at a higher concentration than gas-CO2 (Scheme 2). The reaction is catalysed by an enzyme and often requires a metal cation as co-factor (Table 4). The latter is in some cases also used for the activation of the enzyme. Mg2+, Mn2+, Co2+, Fe2+ are frequently encountered, while Co3+, Al3+, Fe3+ are less present. Scheme 2  C-Carboxylation reactions. 
Table 4 Enzymes, substrates and metal cations occurring in natural carboxylation reactions

EnzymesSubstratesMetal cationsProductsOccurrenceRibulose-1,5 bis(phosphate) carboxylase/oxidase (RuBisCO)RibuloseMg2+GlucoseC3-plants (also higher)Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC)Pyruvic acidMg2+, Mn2+OxaloacetateC4-plants (maize, sugar-cane, sorghum, etc.)Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) carboxykinasePyruvic acidMg2+, Mn2+Oxaloacetate Acetyl coA carboxylaseAcetyl coAMg2+, Mn2+Malonyl coA Propionyl coA carboxylasePropionyl coAMg2+, Mn2+Methylmalonyl coA Pyruvate carboxylasePyruvateMg2+, Mn2+Oxaloacetate Vitamin K-dependent carboxylasesFirst 10 glutamic acid residues in the NH2-terminal region of the precursor of pro-thrombinMn2+γ-Carboxyglutamic acid The ionic radius (85–110 pm52) and the co-ordination number of the cation are important factors.The most abundant carboxylation enzyme in Nature is ribulose 1,5-bis(phosphate)carboxylase oxidase (RuBisCO)53 found in all eukaryotes and the majority of prokaryotes. RuBisCO constitutes a large and a small unit and performs both the carboxylation at C2 of ribulose, and its oxidation at the same site. The efficiency (selectivity) is around 50%. The mechanism of action is quite complex: it has been shown that, for both carboxylase and oxidase functions, RuBisCO has an activation site, constituting a lysine residue and a catalytic site, both placed in the large sub-unit. Once the two C3 moieties are formed (Scheme 2c), the carboxylic functionalities are reduced and the reduced C3 moieties couple to afford glucose. Formally, the process consists of a CO2 reduction to the “HCOH” moiety, that is then inserted into a C–C bond of a C5 sugar to afford the relevant C6 sugar. This process uses some tens of Gt per year of C.54 It is surprising that the most abundant enzyme in Nature that determines the size of the biosphere in the carbon cycle has such a low selectivity. Much attention is today focused on its genetic manipulation,54c directed towards increasing its specificity for CO2.54d Despite the many efforts made so far, there is not yet a clear indication of the feasibility of such a biotechnological approach54e–g that has a high potential for the natural conversion of excess anthropogenic CO2 (Scheme 2).4.1.1.2 An example of biotechnological carboxylation: the enzymatic, selective phenol carboxylation to 4-hydroxobenzoic acid in water or sc-CO2. Thauera aromatica bacteria can use phenol as the only source of carbon under anaerobic conditions: phenol is eventually converted into CO2 and water.  The first step in the degradation path is the carboxylation of phenol-phosphate to 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (upper part) which is then dehydroxylated (Scheme 3) to benzoic acid.58 Scheme 3  Phenol carboxylation to 4-hydroxybenzoic acid The carboxylation of phenol is carried out by a phenolcarboxylase enzyme, a new type of lyase.59 The enzyme was isolated from the cytoplasmatic portion of the cell, supported on low-melting-agar, and used in vitro for the carboxylation of phenolphosphate, mimicking the natural system.60 Cut-off membranes 57 allow an easy separation of products from the mother liquid phase containing the enzyme and nutrients.Interestingly, the phenol carboxylase enzyme also works in sc-CO2.614.1.1.3 Other examples of carboxylation reactions. The direct carboxylation of hydrocarbons containing active hydrogens can be carried out using the phenolate anion (PhO−) as CO2-transfer agent62 or the 2-carboxylated form of imidazolium salts63 [eqn (5)]. R1R2Im-2-CO2 + substrate–H + MX → R1R2ImX + substrate–COOM(5) where R1R2Im-2-CO2 = 1,3-dialkylimidazolium-2-carboxylate, substrate = PhC(O)CH3, CH3OH and MX = NaBF4, NaBPh4, KPF6.In all the above cases, one mol of the group 1 metal cation is consumed per mol of carboxylated product: for practical applications, metal cations should be substituted by protons, not an easy task. Methane can be carboxylated to acetic acid using Rh and Pd catalysts, but still the yield is low and the reaction conditions must be much improved for practical application.64Olefins, which are rich in energy, easily react with CO2 in the presence of transition metal systems in a low oxidation state, such as Ni(0),65 Ti,66 Fe(0),67 Mo(0),68 Rh(I).69 The reaction of ethene and CO2 with the above metals results in an “oxidative addition” to afford either a metallacycle or a metal hydride (Scheme 4). In both cases, the elimination of the product (a four-membered lactone or acrylic acid) does not occur spontaneously, despite the fact that the formation of either product from ethene and CO2 is permitted thermodynamically. An organic carboxylate (propanoic acid or acrylic acid) can be released upon reaction of the metallacarboxylate with a strong acid, such as HCl, which leaves the metal in an oxidation state two units higher with respect to the starting one: such a metal-species is not able to act as a catalyst. Therefore, for practical applications, such reactions should be carried out using metal compounds that favour the release of the lactone or acid, regenerating the original system: tailored ligands may promote such elimination, as shown by DFT calculations.70 Transition metal catalyzed electrochemical carboxylations of olefin or halogenated hydrocarbons with CO2 have been successfully used for the synthesis of several carboxylated organic substrates.71 Scheme 4  Modes of carboxylation of an olefin: the carboxylate is only released upon protonation. Coupling ethene or propene with CO2 to afford acrylic- or methacrylic acid would represent a great improvement of the synthesis of the above monomers used for the synthesis of poly(acrylate)s, which are among the most used polymers.Alkynes (Scheme 5) can be catalytically converted into six-membered pyrones, but not into four-membered carboxylated species. The turnover number (TON) needs to be improved.68,73 Scheme 5  Conversion of terminal and internal alkynes into pyrones. Cumulated and conjugated dienes (Scheme 6) are converted with high yield and good TONs into products such as five- and six-membered lactones, linear esters and acids. Such reactions also lack selectivity if they are characterized by a good yield of conversion of the diene (>90%). Pd (ref. 72c–d) and Rh (ref. 72e) catalysts may promote the coupling of a different number of molecules of butadiene before carboxylation occurs, resulting in products with chains of different length. Selective catalysts have been developed by changing the ancillary phosphine ligands. For example, the carboxylation of butadiene to six-membered lactones has been achieved with high selectivity and yield by using (i-C3H7)2P(CH2)nCN (n = 2–5) phosphane ligands in various solvents, including pyridine.72 The reaction has a good selectivity under electrochemical catalysis.72b In sc-CO2, using Pd(dba)372c as catalyst, interesting results are also obtained. The synthesis of six-membered lactones following this reactive route has been developed to the pilot-plant scale.72c–d The reaction can have an interesting exploitation for the synthesis of fragrances or long chain carboxylic acids: the latter may find application in the synthesis of biodegradable surfactants. Scheme 6  Conversion of butadiene into lactones and linear esters using various metal-catalysts. Allene may be reacted with CO2 to afford not only pyrones or linear esters,73 with Ni or Rh as catalysts (Scheme 7a–b), but also, although with lower yields, a four-membered lactone that is the result of a formal unprecedented “2 + 2” addition of the two cumulenes (Scheme 6c).74 Scheme 7  Conversion of allene into linear esters, pyrones or lactones. The carboxylation of strained rings (Scheme 8) promoted by transition metal catalysts75 produces different products, including products of formal insertion of CO2 into a C–C bond (Scheme 8a). Such reactions are still a “curiosity”, as the TON rarely exceeds unity, meaning that one mole of metal is used per mole of reacted hydrocarbon, making the process economically unacceptable. Scheme 8  Carboxylation of strained rings. However, while several reactions in the literature document the feasibility of direct carboxylation of saturated hydrocarbons and olefins, research is still necessary in order to find the most appropriate conditions for transforming stoichiometric reactions into catalytic ones or either for improving the yield and selectivity of the new catalytic reactions. It must be considered that this science is quite young, as it has been developed in the last thirty years or so with a low intensity of investment. More consistent efforts should be made for understanding the reaction mechanisms, so as to discover real breakthroughs to innovative synthetic procedures.4.1.2 C–N bond formation with production of carbamates and isocyanates. Carbamic acids (RR′NCOOH) are labile compounds that easily convert back to the parent amine (RR′NH) and CO2. Their synthesis has been achieved only very recently76 using either benzylamine or PhP(OCH2CH2)2NH. In both cases the carbamic acid has been isolated as a solid dimer that has made possible its characterization in the solid state by X-rays. The common feature of both isolated acids is the dimeric moiety shown below with an O–H…O distance of 122 pm, identical to that found in dimeric carboxylic acids.  Evidence of the formation of carbamic acid in solution has also more recently been provided for amines like ω-(1-naphthyl)alkylamines.77The formation of RR′N–CO2R” compounds from amines and CO2 would allow the synthesis of carbamic acid derivatives avoiding the use of phosgene, currently a hot topic (Scheme 9). Scheme 9  Synthesis of carbamic acid (a) and carbamates (b) from amines and CO2. Organic carbamates find wide application in the chemical,78 pharmaceutical (as anti-depressants79) and agro-chemical industries.80 The reaction of an amine (RR′NH) with CO2 proceeds very easily at room temperature to afford quantitatively the ammonium carbamate, RR′NCOO−NRR′H2+. The subsequent step, the alkylation using an alkylating agent RX, rises problems as the electrophile “R+” reacts at the nitrogen more than at the oxygen atom. The use of a metal system (Scheme 10)81 that generates an amide does not improve the situation: transition metal carbamato complexes, LnM-OC(O)-NRR′, when reacted with the alkylating agent RX,81 produce a net alkylation of the amine (Scheme 10a). Scheme 10  Carboxyalkylation of amines to carbamic esters. The N-alkylation is avoided if the reaction between the amine and CO2 is carried out in presence of a crown ether82 (Scheme 10b) or strong bases, such as DBU.83 The crown ether can be easily recovered and recycled: this gives an easy way to the selective synthesis of carbamates at room temperature. The carbamation of amines either by reduction of MO2 derivatives84a,b or by using carbonates (Scheme 10c) also has great industrial interest. Metal systems84c–g and various homogeneous85 or heterogeneous86 catalysts have been developed. The major drawback is the alkylation of the amine, (Scheme 10b) a process that occurs at higher temperature than the carboxyalkylation. Phosphonic acids have been successfully used as low-temperature catalysts for such a reaction.85h This route to organic carbamic esters is quite interesting, as it may represent a phosgene/alkyl halide-free route.It is worth mentioning that when carbamates of primary amines are formed, RHN-COOR′, they can be thermally converted into alcohol (R′OH) and the corresponding isocyanate RNCO, that can be used for other industrial applications. Diisocyanates, such as toluene 2,4-diisocyanate or methylene dianiline diisocyanate, are used for the production of poly(urethan)s.4.1.2.1 Mimicking the carboxyphosphate enzyme. The carboxy phosphate enzyme [CP, (−O)2P(O)OC(O)O−] is used for the elimination from a living organism of ammonia and amines in the form of urea or its derivatives. The active form of CP is produced by reacting HCO3− with ATP, which is converted into ADP, a reaction that does not occur in vitro. CP is able to transfer CO2 to amines with formation of the carbamate (RR′N-COO−) moiety that is the precursor of ureas. Inorganic phosphate HxPO4(3−x)−, cannot be directly reacted with CO2 nor with HCO3− to afford CP. Conversely, phosphonic acids such as R2P(O)OH can be easily reacted with dimethylcarbonate (DMC) to afford a mimic system of CP, namely R2P(O)OC(O)OCH3, that can be advantageously used as substitute for CP in the catalytic conversion of amines of industrial interest (toluene diamine or methylene dianiline) into their carbamates,85h which are the precursors of isocyanates. Interestingly, the chemical system, although performing the same activity of CP, requires less energy with the same selectivity.4.1.3 C–O bond formation for the production of cyclic carbonates and poly(carbonate)s. The O–C bond formation is relevant to the synthesis of organic carbonates characterized by the O–C(O)O– moiety. Both linear and cyclic carbonates have an industrial interest and are today produced mainly from phosgene (Table 5).
Table 5 Linear and cyclic carbonates and their market and use

 CarbonatesMarketUsesLinear(CH3O)2CO(CH2CHCH2O)CO(EtO)2CO(PhO)2CO18 Mt per yearSolvents, reagents (for alkylation or acylation reactions), additive for gasolineDMC (dimethyl carbonate)DAC (diallyl carbonate)DEC (diallyl carbonate)DPC (diethyl carbonate)CyclicMonomers for polymers, synthesis of hydroxyesters and hydroxyamines, component of special materialsEC (ethylene carbonate)PC (propylene carbonate)CC (cyclohexene carbonate)SC (styrene carbonate)The reaction of epoxides with CO2 affords either molecular cyclic carbonates or polymers.87 Main group metal-halides88 and metal-complexes,89 ammonium salts (both free90 and supported91), phosphines,92 transition metal complexes,93 metal-oxides,94,99 and ionic liquids95 afford monomeric carbonates. Heterogeneous catalysts such as oxides94 and supported ammonium salts91 or metal complexes93 are more long-lived than homogeneous catalysts. Instead, Al-96 and Zn-catalysts97 promote the formation of polymers. Sc-CO2 also favours98 the formation of cyclic carbonates. Amides such as dimethylformamides (DMF) or dialkylacetamides (DAA) are often used as solvents in such reactions and can themselves promote the carboxylation of epoxides (also with low TON).99Optically-active carbonates100 have been prepared from pure enantiomers of the parent epoxide with total retention of configuration. When a racemic mixture of the epoxide was used, an ee of the order of 22% was obtained using Nb(IV) complexes with optically active (N, O, P as donor atoms) ligands: the low ee is due to the de-anchoring of the ligand from the metal centre, as shown by an NMR study.100As reported above, Al–porphyrin complexes96 or Zn-compounds97 promote the co-polymerization of CO2 and epoxides to afford polycarbonates. Al-catalysts, the first to be described in the literature, are now being used in a plant. The mechanism of polymerisation has been studied and the accepted mechanism with Zn-compounds is shown in Scheme 11. Scheme 11  Mechanism of co-polymerisation of propene and CO2 with Zn-carboxylates. The molecular mass of the polymers varies with the co-polymerization conditions. Mainly propene oxide and styrene oxide have been used so far, with some applications of cyclohexene oxide. Other substrates may be used that ensure new properties of the polymers.As for today, the limiting factor to the carboxylation of epoxides for the synthesis of monomeric- or polymeric-carbonates, is the availability of large volumes of the parent epoxide that are often prepared using techniques that generate pollution.101 The cleanest route to epoxides is based on the use of hydrogen peroxide,102 which has as its main drawback the limited availability and cost of H2O2.However, a route to cyclic carbonates decoupled from H2O2 appears of fundamental importance for developing a large-volume industrial production of cyclic carbonates or poly(carbonate)s. (6)A good candidate is the “oxidative carboxylation” of olefins,103 which converts cheap products (such as olefins) and waste (such as CO2) into valuable compounds [eqn (6)]. Such a reaction has been tested on styrene and propene. An early process reported in the patent literature used a complex catalytic mixture.103a Recent studies have elucidated the reaction mechanism for both homogeneous104 and heterogeneous105 catalysts showing two concurrent processes, i.e. (Scheme 12) the “one oxygen” addition to the double bond (that affords the epoxide and its derivatives, i.e. compounds 1–4 in Scheme 12, where the two columns of figures on the right give the relative molar abundance in the reaction)105d and the “two-oxygen” addition that causes the splitting of the olefin to afford aldehydes, acids and their derivatives (compounds 5–6). Scheme 12  Oxidative carboxylation of olefins with homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts. Using RhCl(PEt2Ph)3104 as a homogeneous catalyst, a detailed study has shown that O2 and CO2 produce a peroxocarbonate that is the real oxidant. Using 18O2, 13C18O2 or 13C16O2, it has been possible to demonstrate, by accurate IR study and calculation of vibrational frequencies for the peroxocarbonate-complex,106 that the formation of the peroxocarbonate occurs via insertion of CO2 into the O–O bond of the dioxygen–Rh complex. The formation of an asymmetric *O–O peroxo bond allows following the oxygen transfer reaction106 to an oxophile (like a phosphine or olefin). The resulting carbonate can be converted into a Rh(I) complex via deoxygenation of the carbonate104 by a free phosphine (either added or released by the complex). The progressive release of phosphine converts the original Rh(I) catalyst that after a limited number of cycles (2–4) is not able to promote the epoxidation of the olefin any more. Using Co, Cr or Mn analogues does not give a real improvement of the TON.Group 1 or 2 metal oxides105 or transition metal oxides are effective catalysts but promote radical reactions with loss of the olefin, a process that must be limited for a practical application of the synthetic methodology.4.1.4 C–O bond formation for the synthesis of linear carbonates. A most interesting route to linear carbonates is the direct carboxylation of alcohols [eqn (7)]. 2 ROH + CO2
								→ (RO)2CO + H2O(7)Such reaction is very clean and has a high atom-efficiency.The existing limitation to the exploitation of such reaction is the almost-neutral free energy change107,112b [ΔH for (MeO)2CO = −16.74; (EtO)2CO = −15.90; (allyl-O)2CO = −16.37; (PhO)2CO = +50.49 kJ mol−1] that causes a low yield at the equilibrium, that ranges between 1–2%.108 Attempts have been made to use chemical water traps in order to displace the equilibrium to the right. Molecular sieves cannot be used at the reaction temperature as the formed surface –OH groups are sufficiently acidic to protonate the carbonate and reverse the reaction. Organic water traps are better suited: aldols (eqn (8)),109 ketals (eqn (9)),110 and dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC)109 have been used as such. (8) (9)Cyclohexanone109b can be reacted with ethyleneglycol to afford the relevant ketal that in sc-CO2 affords ethenecarbonate and cyclohexanone again (Scheme 13). Scheme 13  Use of cyclohexanone ketal in a two-step process for carbonate formation, avoiding the formation of water in the reaction medium containing the carbonate. This approach is limited by the slow kinetics and the need to separate the products for recycling cyclohexanone.A detailed study has shown that DCC is a promoter of the carboxylation; more than a simple dewatering agent. Combining experimental studies and DFT calculations, the reaction mechanism has fully been elucidated, as shown in Scheme 14.111 Several carbonates have been produced using different alcohols with yields between 35 and 90% and selectivity always higher than 95%. The latter is highly influenced by the temperature. Above 335 K, the favoured reaction is the formation of carbamate (Scheme 14, upper part). Scheme 14  Reaction mechanism of carboxylation of alcohols promoted by DCC. This reaction represents by far the most effective route to carbonates, but is limited by the fact that one mole of DCC is used per mole of carbonate. Should the formed urea be quantitatively converted back to DCC, the method could have a practical application.Transition metal alkoxides have been used as homogeneous catalysts. The reaction mechanism has been investigated for the Sn108 and Nb112 systems. An intramolecular mechanism that operates with Sn and DCC (Scheme 15) based on a double “base-activation” of methanol produces twice the MeO− unit. The subsequent elimination of DMC causes the formation of a EO double bond (EC, Sn in Scheme 15) that strongly reduces the activity of the catalyst (or makes it inert). The intermolecular mechanism, that seems to be operative with Nb-systems (Scheme 16), can follow two different routes (with the intermediacy of one or two alcohol molecules). In the latter case, the reaction mechanism is based on a “acid-plus-base” activation of methanol: the catalyst can perform much better and does not lose its activity over several cycles.112b Polyols have also been used in the direct carboxylation reaction using a tin catalyst.112d Glycerol can be converted into glycerol carbonate with the same limitations observed for methanol. Scheme 15  Intramolecular (a and b) mechanism of formation of linear carbonates based on the “double base-activation” of methanol.  Scheme 16  Intermolecular mechanism based on the “acid-plus-base” activation of methanol. Scheme A is operative. In order to eliminate water, new reactor concepts can be used: membrane reactors for water separation, or pervaporation processes, supposing that the concentration of water at the equilibrium is high enough to make these techniques applicable.The thermodynamic constraints of reaction (7) suggests the development of alternative routes that may have better thermodynamics. Urea (H2NCONH2), produced on a large scale (95 Mt per year)9a from ammonia and CO2 (eqn (10)) can be used as an active form of CO2 in reaction with alcohols to afford 2 NH3 + CO2
								→ H2NCONH2 + H2O(10)urethans [eqn (11)] or carbonates [eqn (12)].113 H2NCONH2 + ROH → H2NCOOR + NH3(11) H2NCOOR + ROH → ROC(O)OR + NH3(12)Such reactions are usually carried out in two steps: the intermediate urethane can be quantitatively isolated, if necessary.114 Urea has also been used for the synthesis of cyclic carbonates by reaction with diols [eqn (13)].115a,b (13)The released ammonia can be recovered and re-converted into urea. It is worth noting that the separation/purification cost of the carbonate depends on the length of the carbon chain of the alcohol, and decreases with increasing number of carbon atoms. For this reason, such technology is better applied for the synthesis of carbonates of higher alcohols.The transesterification reaction converts any carbonate into another one [eqn (14) and (15)]. (RO)2CO + 2 R′OH → (R′O)2CO + 2 ROH(14) (15)Diphenylcarbonate is produced in this way at the industrial level, using Ti(OPh)4 as the catalyst.116 Other catalysts have been developed117 that have a similar or better yield. As a general feature, the transesterification is very selective. Therefore, if a single process of all those mentioned above is developed at the level of industrial exploitation, it will be possible to produce a number of different carbonates by transesterification. The main drawback to such a process is the co-production of alcohol, which must be recycled (or find a market utilization comparable to that of carbonates). The production line must be designed in such a way to avoid the generation of any excess non-recyclable products. This approach could also give the opportunity to develop integrated processes: for example, one could imagine the coupling of the direct conversion of an olefin into the relevant cyclic carbonate with a consequent conversion of the latter into a linear carbonate by reaction with an alcohol: such a reaction would generate ethylene glycol, avoiding the need for the direct production of such a chemical.4.2 Other options of using CO2 as co-monomer in the synthesis of polymersThe use of CO2 as co-monomer may find application in other areas in addition to the production of poly(carbonate)s. This particular use of CO2 is of great interest, as the materials obtained may have a long life, on the order of several decades. This property differentiates polymers from monomeric compounds, which are quickly converted back to CO2 after use. Therefore, the development of routes to new polymeric materials based on CO2 is relevant to the storage of CO2. For example, poly(urethan)s can be used as insulating materials (from heat, noise, and others) in buildings. They would store CO2 for decades on a scale of several Mt per year. Poly(urethan)s can be synthesised from CO2 and cyclic amines such as aziridines and azetidines or N-analogues of epoxides, avoiding the synthesis of isocyanates.Another reaction that it would be of interest to develop is the co-polymerisation of ethene and CO2 to afford poly(ester)s. Such a reaction recalls the co-polymerisation of ethene and CO, but presents substantial differences. In fact, in the case of CO2, M–O bonds are formed and this will introduce kinetic and thermodynamic differences with respect to the use of CO as co-monomer.Research is needed in these areas for the development of new catalysts and understanding of the reaction mechanism.5. Reduction of CO2 to afford energy-rich productsTable 2 shows that the conversion of CO2 into other C1 (or Cn) molecules, characterized by a lower O : C ratio, that means a higher H/C ratio, requires energy that can be provided in various forms: heat, electrons, radiation, or carried by chemicals. Despite this, the utilisation of CO2 as carbon source for the synthesis of products such as fuels may result a convenient alternative to the production of CO or syngas (molar ratio H2 : CO = 2 used for making methanol, gasoline and diesel fuel) from conventional routes based on the use of more reduced carbon (coal, LNG, HC) that are quite low in efficiency and strongly endothermic. Additionally, CO2 is a convenient starting product for the synthesis of other C1 molecules such as formic acid and methanol.5.1 Formic acid and its derivativesThe transition-metal catalysed hydrogenation of CO2 to formic acid or its derivatives (such as formamides) has so far been extensively investigated. The reaction is carried out in organic solvents, water or ionic liquids, or else directly in supercritical CO2.118 Methods for the production of methyl formate have not been developed yet. Interestingly, carbonate or hydrogen carbonate can be hydrogenated to formate salts at very high rates, with TOFs as high as 9600 at 80 °C and 1364 at room temperature. The hydrogenation of aqueous bicarbonate is sensitive to CO2 pressure that most likely influences the HCO3− concentration or may be converted into formate. Ru and Rh systems have been found to be active catalysts in both aqueous media and organic solvents. A recent publication has coupled IR studies with DFT to elucidate the reaction mechanism and the role of Ru–(H2) complexes in the reduction of CO2.118iIn general, the production of formic acid is promoted by an amine, present in the reaction medium, which converts the acid into ammonium formate. The formation of the latter improves the thermodynamics and shifts the equilibrium to the right as a consequence of the formation of a weaker acid (such as the ammonium cation, which has a Ka four to five orders of magnitude lower than formic acid). This reduces the probability of a back-addition to the metal centre. Ligands bearing amine functional groups as pendant arms were found to improve the catalytic activity of metal complexes but at a lower level than an external amine.Ru(II)–trimethylphosphine complexes118 have also been extensively investigated from the kinetic point of view: it has been shown that the rate of formation of formic acid is first order in both H2 and CO2. Sc-CO2 as a solvent has a significant positive influence118 on the reaction rate.Most probably, a cationic mechanism is operating and the active cationic species is generated with the assistance of the added base or alcohol that promotes the loss of an halide ion. This point needs further investigation. Among the Rh(I) catalysts, Rh(H)(diphosphine) is the most active.118 NiCl2(dcpe) is the most active of other metal complexes, but still it has yields and rates well below those of Ru and Rh.The best catalyst precursors for formic acid production are RhCl(TPPTS)3, Rh(hfacac)(dcpb) and RuCl(OAc)(PMe3)4, all very close in activity,118 although ranking of catalysts is not easy as they have all been used in quite different conditions and normalisation is difficult. Several aspects of the reaction still need a better explanation, such as the high activity of the aqueous-phase catalysts, not easily explained taking into account the mass transfer rates.118 Recently, combined experimental and theoretical studies118i have shed light on the reaction mechanism.5.1.1 Other natural processes based on the reduction of CO2. Besides the reduction of CO2 to “formal H2CO” that occurs upon RuBisCO catalysis, CO2 is reduced to other C1 molecules by a number of micro-organisms such as algae and bacteria. Such reduction processes are listed in Table 6, with the name of the enzyme that catalyses the reduction and the metal present as prosthetic group.These enzymatic reactions have been investigated in detail as, in principle, they could be reproduced in vitro. In particular, the production of acetic acid from CO2 under carbon monoxide dehydrogenase catalysis has been thoroughly investigated and is quite well understood (Scheme 17). Scheme 17  Production of acetic acid from CO2. The synthesis of acetic acid has been matter of discussion in the literature.125,126 It has now been eventually agreed127 that Ni is the active center in S4Fe4–Ni enzymes for both the coordination of CO and the coupling of CO with CH3 to afford the acetyl moiety, as shown by mimic systems.126b5.2 Production of CO and syngasSyngas (CO/H2 mixture) can be used for the synthesis of methanol or long chain hydrocarbons, such as gasoline, and oxygenates. Therefore, the production of CO and syngas has been investigated in detail.The adsorption and reaction of CO2 on clean Rh, Pd, Pt, Ni, Fe, Cu, Re, Al, Mg and Ag metal surfaces128 have been studied by several authors using spectroscopic methods. The formation of CO2− is a key step, as it may either dissociate to CO and O− or convert into adsorbed CO32− and CO, depending on the metal. Adsorbed CO2 dissociates on Fe, Ni, Re, Al, and Mg and remains unchanged over Pt and Cu surfaces. If oxygen is pre-adsorbed on the metal surface, the formation of stable carbonate structures is favoured.Syngas is formed from methane following three different ways: the partial oxidation [eqn (16)], steam reforming [eqn (17)] and CO2 reforming [eqn (18)], also called dry-reforming. CH4 + 1/2 O2
							→ CO + 2 H2; ΔH0298 = −36 kJ mol−1(16) CH4 + H2O → CO + 3 H2; ΔH0298 = 206 kJ mol−1(17) CO2 + CH4
							→ 2 CO + 2 H2; ΔH0298 = 247 kJ mol−1(18)Only the partial oxidation of methane [eqn (16)] is exothermic and can also (if only partially) compensate the endothermic reactions (17)–(18).The combination of the three reactions (16)–(18) is known as the “tri-reforming”129 that produces the proper CO : H2 molar ratio (1.7) for methanol or higher hydrocarbon synthesis.130 Although CO2 reforming of methane is more endothermic than steam reforming, it produces syngas with a lower residual CH4 with respect to steam reforming, which leaves up to 2% of unreacted methane. The great existing interest in dry reforming is justified by the fact that it can be used in remote natural gas fields to convert on-site CO2-rich LNG into liquid fuels (gas to liquid, GTL), which are more easily transportable (at a lower cost) than gas. Tri-reforming, a good option for CO2 and methane co-utilisation,131 can be integrated advantageously into the direct re-use of flue gas from C-based power plants. The new catalysts, Ni–La2O3, which prevent coke-formation may push forward the exploitation of this process. An innovative approach is the utilisation of catalysts under cold-plasma conditions for methane dry-reforming,132 that can also be used for the direct synthesis of oxy-fuels.133 In 2002, a pilot plant for the conversion of natural gas to liquid fuel (GTL) under plasma conditions started operation in Alberta.134Efficient catalysts for ethanol formation from H2/CO2 have been developed135 and higher alcohols can be produced in the same way.136 Nevertheless, the yield is lower than using H2/CO and the technology requires further development for practical application.C5+ olefins can be obtained from CO2 using iron carbide (Fe5C2) as catalyst. C2–C4 olefins are produced using a Fe–K/alumina catalyst with a selectivity of about 44% at a CO2 conversion of 68% under 2 MPa at 400 °C.137 Alternatively, C2–C4 olefins are made with > 90% overall selectivity by first making methanol using a Cu–ZnO catalyst, and secondly converting the alcohol with a solid acid catalyst.138CO2 can be used as selective oxidant towards hydrocarbons. For example, it is conveniently used as dehydrogenating agent in the conversion of C6H5CH2CH3 into styrene, C6H5CHCH2 [eqn (19)].139 C6H5CH2CH3 + CO2
							→ C6H5CHCH2 + CO + H2O(19)An aspect of this reaction that deserves attention is that the co-products CO and H2O can be converted into CO2 and H2 by using a water–gas shift catalyst [eqn (20)]. H2O + CO → H2 + CO2(20)In this way, the net result would be the conversion of a saturated hydrocarbon into the relevant unsaturated compound and hydrogen under quite mild conditions and with good selectivity under transition metal catalysis assisted by CO2.5.3 Production of methanolCO2 can be converted into methanol, with 100% selectivity and high TOF. The excellent performance, most likely due to a different reaction mechanism,136 compensates in terms of efficiency the extra amount of dihydrogen needed for CO2 reduction [eqn (21)] with respect to CO [eqn (22)]. CO2 + 3 H2
							→ CH3OH + H2O(21) CO + 2 H2
							→ CH3OH(22)CO2 is currently added (up to 30% of total C) to syngas in the synthesis of methanol over Cu–ZnO at 250–300 °C and 5–10 MPa. The addition of CO2 to the H2/CO feed significantly improves the methanol yield and the energy balance, via a direct conversion of CO2 to methanol without a preliminary reduction to CO.140,141 The Cu–ZnO catalysts can be further improved if Pd is added.142 The first pilot plant (50 kg per day) for the production of methanol from CO2 and H2 has been built in Japan143 using a SiO2 modified Cu–ZnO catalyst. Recycling the feed produces a space–time yield of methanol around 600 g L−1 h−1, with 99.9% selectivity over 8000 h operation at 250 °C and 5 MPa. The methanol production from H2/CO2 is technically competitive with the industrial production from syngas, also if economically less convenient.5.3.1 Methanol from CO2 and water using a cascade of metal enzymes. The synthesis of methanol from CO2 and water can be carried out using a cascade of enzymes that allow the conversion of CO2 into HCOO (formate dehydrogenase), CH2O (formaldehyde dehydrogenase), and CH3OH (methanol dehydrogenases).121,122 All enzymes are easily available and can be used either separately or co-encapsulated into a unique system providing a one-pot–three-step conversion of CO2 into methanol.122b The limiting factor is the electron source: the NADPH+/NADP couple has at this point been used up. Cheap reducing agents or solar energy should be used11 to generate the electrons necessary for the reduction of CO2 into methanol. This process would be of great importance, as the production of methanol under such conditions would represent the solution to recycling CO2 as well using it as source of carbon in the energy and chemical industry.5.4 Photoelectrochemical reductionTransition metal complexes can absorb a significant part of the solar spectrum, have long-lived excited states and can promote the activation of small molecules. Therefore, they have been used as catalysts in the photochemical conversion of CO2 using water as the source of electrons. Cobalt complexes with N-macrocycles and Ru(bpy)2(CO)Xn complexes (X = CO, Cl, H) have shown quite interesting activity.144
Table 6 Processes of reduction of CO2 in microorganisms

Reduction processEnzymeMetalReferenceCO2 + H+ + 2e−
										→ HCOO−Formate dehydrogenaseW, Mo[119]CO2 +2H+ + 2e−
										→ CO + H2OCarbon monoxide dehydrogenaseNi, Fe[120]HCO2H + 2H+ + 2e−
										→ H2CO + H2OFormaldehyde dehydrogenase[121]H2CO + 2H+ + 2e−
										→ CH3OHMethanol dehydrogenase[122]CO2 + CH4
										→ CH3COOHMethanogen[123]CO2 + 8 H+ + 8 e−
										→ CH4 + 2 H2OTetrahydrofolateNone[124]Notably, while the potential for the reduction of CO2 to the radical anion CO2˙− is −2.2 V versus NHE in strictly anhydrous, aprotic solvents, making the one-electron reduction highly unfavourable, the multielectron reduction in water presents much lower potentials (Table 7).
Table 7 One electron versus multielectron reduction of CO2 assisted by protons (pH 7 in aqueous solution versus NHE)144

 Eo/VCO2 + e− = CO2−2.2CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−˙ = HCO2H−0.61CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−˙ = CO + H2O−0.53CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− = C + 2H2O−0.20CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− = HCHO + H2O−0.48CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− = CH3OH + H2O−0.38CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− = CH4 + 2H2O−0.245.5 The key issues: the energy source and light efficiencyWhile progress has been made after the pioneering work of Lehn and Ziessel and Mackor and Halnrann,146 and several metal complexes or semiconductors have been used, effective photocatalysts for CO2 reduction have not yet been found. In general, low light efficiency is often coupled with scarce selectivity. Encouraging results have been obtained with Co and Ru complexes. CoHMD2+144b has been used successfully as a catalyst for photochemical reduction of CO2 because of the small Co(II)HMD2+/Co(I)HMD+ reorganization energy, the fast CO2 binding to Co(I)HMD+ (1.7 × 108 M−1 s−1) and the large KCO2. XANES studies suggest that the Co(I) species can promote the two-electron transfer to the bound CO2 with formation of CO22− and a consequent easy reduction to CO.144b–dSemiconductors145 have been used in an attempt to reduce CO2 in water under sunlight irradiation. HCOOH, HCHO, and CH3OH are produced under solar irradiation of a CO2-saturated aqueous suspension of semiconductors such as TiO2 and SrTiO3.146 The quantum yield is very low,141c being one order of magnitude below the efficiency of natural processes. It may be improved by using sacrificial hole traps or electron donors, such as n-propanol, tertiary amines, or EDTA; a solution not economically-convenient as the organic materials may be more valuable than the CO2 reduction products. A Ti-modified mesoporous silica catalyst reduces CO2 in H2O147 with a selectivity of 30% for ethanol, compared to 1.4% over bulk TiO2.The photochemical reduction of CO2 is of great interest as it allows cheap carbon-recycling.148 Further investigation is needed for a practical application.6. ConclusionsCarbon dioxide is, thus, a suitable source of carbon in a variety of synthetic applications and can be used as a technological fluid supplanting other gases with higher GHG potential. The use in carboxylation reactions appears the most promising synthetic application in the short-term. Addition to CO for making methanol and use as mild oxidant are other interesting applications. Such uses recycle CO2 and reduce CO2 emission.Currently, some 130 Mt CO2 per year are used in several applications. This does not mean that the release of 130 Mt CO2 per year is avoided: the amount used does not represent the amount of CO2 release avoided, which can be correctly estimated only by applying the LCA methodology.A fair estimate of the amount of CO2 release that can be avoided in the short–medium term ranges around 300 Mt per year; should all options of CO2 utilization be implemented, including use in air conditioners.148The photochemical reduction of CO2 in water under solar light irradiation is an option that, if implemented, may greatly increase carbon recycling.The cost of CO2 and the energy needed for the separation/purification are key issues. The recovery of pure CO2 from sources such as fermentation processes should be better exploited, as the cost of recycling is much lower than when power sources are considered.However, at the moment there is no single technology that can alone reduce the worldwide emission of CO2 into the atmosphere at the levels required by the Kyoto protocol. Therefore the most-correct approach to reducing the CO2 emission into the atmosphere is to select of a number of technologies, each able to reduce emission by a given fraction of Gt of CO2 per year, and add up their effects to reach this goal. In this frame, the utilization of CO2 could well be a technology contributing to the reduction of the atmospheric loading, by recycling carbon and reducing emission at the source, implementing sustainable production technologies that reduce waste and make better use of energy and carbon. The net effect can be the reduction of CO2 emission by an amount larger than the amount of fixed CO2. The utilization of CO2 has a different philosophical approach to disposal. In the utilization option, CO2 replaces fossil-carbon: what is important is not the permanence time of CO2 in the products, but the rate and the energy of formation of the product from CO2 with respect to the rate of formation of CO2 from the product.Efforts must be directed towards the discovery of fast and low-energy pathways for the utilization of CO2. Concerted policies are necessary, which will make research less random and focus science and technology upon fields that may better contribute to reducing the CO2 emission. As a matter of fact, the utilization of CO2 is the only technology that may produce profit out of recovered CO2, while contributing to reducing its global emission.ReferencesThe Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. B. Mertz, O. Davidson, R. Swart and J. Pan, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK,  2001 Search PubMed .Greenhouse Gas Sinks, ed. D. Reay, N. Hewitt, J. Grace and K. A. Smith, CABI Books,  2007 Search PubMed .R. J. Allam, R. Bredesen and E. Drioli, in Carbon Dioxide Recovery and Utilization, ed. M. Aresta, Kluwer Academic Publisher,  2003, pp. 53–118 Search PubMed .Greenhouse Gases Technologies, ed. J. Gale and Y. Kaya, Pergamon Press,  2002 Search PubMed .
  (a) A. Mathisen, Greenhouse Gas Control Technol., Proc. Int. Conf. 8th, 2005, 2 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Kongsjordan, O. Karstad and T. A. Torp, Waste Manage., 1997, 17, 303–308 .The first report was by Bassarov in 1870, see: 
  (a) D. Fromm and D. Lutzov, Chem. Unserer Zeit., 1979, 13, 78 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Kolbe and E. Lautemann, Ann., 1869, 113, 125 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) R. Schmitt and E. Burkard, Ber., 1877, 20, 2699 Search PubMed .
  (a) NATO ASI Ser., Ser C, Carbon dioxide as a source of carbon: chemical and biochemical uses, ed. M. Aresta and G. Forti, Reidel Publishers,  1987, p. 206 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) NATO ASI Ser., Ser C, Enzymatic and model reduction and carboxylation reactions for carbon dioxide utilization, ed. M. Aresta and J. Schloss, Kluwer Publ.,  1990, p. 314 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) Carbon Dioxide Activation by Metal Complexes, ed. A. Behr, VCH Publ.,  1988 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) ACS Symp. Ser., Ser. 809, CO2 Conversion and utilization, ed. C. Song, A. M. Gaffney and K. Fujimoto,  2002 Search PubMed ; 
  (e) ACS Symp. Ser., Ser. 852, Carbon dioxide recovery and utilization, ed. M. Aresta, Kluwer Publ.,  2003 Search PubMed ; 
  (f) Utilization of Greenhouse Gases, ed. C. J. Liu, R. Mallinson and M. Aresta,  2003 Search PubMed ; 
  (g) M. Aresta, J. N. Armor, M. A. Barteau, E. J. Beckman, A. T. Bell, J. E. Bercaw, C. Creutz, E. Dinjus, D. A. Dixon, K. Domen, D. L. Dubois, J. Eckert, E. Fujita, D. H. Gibson, W. A. Goddard, D. W. Goodman, J. Keller, G. J. Kubas, H. H. Kung, J. E. Lyons, L. E. Manzer, T. J. Marks, K. Morokuma, K. M. Nicholas, R. Periana, L. Que, J. Rostrup-Nielsen, W. M. H. Sachtler, L. D. Schmidt, A. Sen, G. A. Somorjai, P. C. Stair, B. R. Stults and W. Tumas, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101(4), 953–996 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. De Simone, Greenhouse Gas Control Technol., Proc. Int. Conf. 6th, 2001, 33 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Vansant in Recovery and Utilization of Carbon Dioxide, ed. M. Aresta, Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands,  2003, pp. 3–50 Search PubMed .
  (a) M. Ricci in Recovery and Utilization of Carbon Dioxide, ed. M. Aresta, Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands,  2003, pp. 395–402 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Aresta and M. Galatola, J. Cleaner Prod., 1999, 7, 181–193 Search PubMed .M. Aresta, A. Caroppo, A. Dibenedetto and M. Narracci, in Environmental Challenges and Greenhouse Gas Control for Fossil Fuel Utilization in the 21st Century, ed. M. Maroto Valer, C. Song, Y. Soong,  2002, pp. 331–347 Search PubMed .M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto in Greenhouse Gas Sinks, ed. D. Reay, N. Hewitt, J. Grace and K. A. Smith, CABI Books,  2007, pp. 98–114 Search PubMed .J. W. Rabalais, J. M. McDonald, V. Scherr and S. P. McGlynn, Chem. Rev., 1971, 71, 73–108 CrossRef   and references therein.M. Aresta, E. Quaranta, I. Tommasi, P. Giannoccaro and A. Ciccarese, Gazz. Chim. Ital., 1995, 125, 509–539 CAS   and references therein.G. Liger-Belair, E. Prost, M. Parmentier, P. Jeandet and J.-M. Nuzillard, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2003, 51(26), 7560–7563 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Shemansky, J. Chem. Phys., 1972, 56, 1582–1587 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Lide, Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, FL, USA, 74th edn,  1993–1994 Search PubMed.K. S. Lackner, C. H. Wendt, D. P. Butt, E. L. Joyce and D. H. Sharp, Energy, 1995, 20, 1153–1170 CrossRef CAS .M. Aresta, C. F. Nobile, V. G. Albano, E. Forni and M. Manassero, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1975, 15, 636–637 RSC .D. H. Gibson, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 2063–2095 CrossRef CAS .K. Meyer and I. Castro Rodriguez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11242–11243 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Calabrese, T. Herskovitz and J. B. Kinney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105(18), 5914–5915 CrossRef CAS .T. Herskovitz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99(7), 2391–2392 CrossRef .
  (a) M. Aresta and C. F. Nobile, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1977, 7, 708–711 RSC ; 
  (b) M. G. Mason and J. A. Ibers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104(19), 5153–5157 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Doehring, P. W. Jolly, C. Krueger and M. Romao, Z. Naturforsch., B, 1985, 40, 484–488 .M. Aresta and C. F. Nobile, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1977, 24(2), L49–L50 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) H. H. Karsch, Chem. Ber., 1977, 110, 2213 CAS ; 
  (b) S. Komiya, M. Akita, N. Kasuga, M. Hirano and A. Fukuoka, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 9, 1115–1116 RSC .M. Sakamoto, L. Shimizu and A. Yamamoto, Organometallics, 1994, 13(2), 407–409 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. M. Tetrick, F. S. Thom and A. R. Cutler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 119(26), 6193–6194 ; 
  (b) S. M. Tetrick, C. Xu, J. R. Pinkes and A. R. Cutler, Organometallics, 1998, 17(9), 1861–1867 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Hanna, A. M. Baranger and R. G. Bergman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117(11), 3292–3293 CrossRef CAS .J. D. Audett, T. J. Collins, B. D. Santarsiero and G. H. Spies, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104(25), 7352–7353 CrossRef CAS .C. P. Kubiak, C. Woodcock and R. Eisenberg, Inorg. Chem., 1982, 21(6), 2119–2126 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. S. Field, R. J. Haines, J. Sundermeyer and S. F. Woollam, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1990, 14, 985–988 RSC ; 
  (b) J. S. Field, R. J. Haines, J. Sundermeyer and S. F. Woollam, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1993, 18, 2735–2748 RSC .C. T. Tso and A. R. Cutler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 6069 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. C. Vites, B. D. Steffey, M. E. Giuseppetti-Dery and A. R. Cutler, Organometallics, 1991, 10(8), 2827–2834 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. R. Pinkes, B. D. Steffey, J. C. Vites and A. R. Cutler, Organometallics, 1994, 13(1), 21–23 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Senn, J. A. Gladysz, K. Emerson and R. D. Larsen, Inorg. Chem., 1987, 26(17), 2737–2739 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Gibson, M. Ye, B. A. Sleadd, J. M. Mehta, O. P. Mbadike, J. F. Richardson and M. S. Mashuta, Organometallics, 1995, 14(3), 1242–1255 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) C. R. Eady, J. J. Guy, B. F. G. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. C. Malatesta and G. M. Sheldrick, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1976, 602 RSC ; 
  (b) G. R. John, B. F. G. Johnson, J. Lewis and K. C. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 1979, 169, C23 CrossRef CAS .B. K. Balbach, F. Helus, F. Oberdorfer and M. L. Ziegler, Angew. Chem., 1981, 93(5), 479–480 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) C. Floriani and G. Fachinetti, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1974, 15, 615–16 RSC ; 
  (b) G. Fachinetti, C. Floriani and P. F. Zanazzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100(23), 7405–7 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Gambarotta, F. Arena, C. Floriani and P. F. Zanazzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104(19), 5082–5092 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) D. H. Gibson, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1999, 185–186, 335–355 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. H. Gibson, Compr. Coord. Chem. II, 2004, 1, 595–602 Search PubMed .E. G. Lundquist, J. C. Huffman, K. Folting, B. E. Mann and K. G. Caulton, Inorg. Chem., 1990, 29, 128–134 CrossRef CAS .J. Mascetti and M. Tranquille, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92(8), 2177–2184 CrossRef CAS .J. Mascetti, F. Galan and I. Papai, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1999, 190–192, 557–576 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Aresta, E. Quaranta and I. Tommasi, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1988, 7, 450–452 RSC ; 
  (b) K. Tanaka and D. Ooyama, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 226, 211–218 CrossRef CAS .T. Yoshida, D. Thorn, T. Okano, J. A. Ibers and A. Yamamoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101(15), 4212–4221 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Calabrese, T. Herskovitz and J. B. Kinney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105(18), 5914–5915 CrossRef CAS .J.-C. Tsai, M. Khan and K. M. Nicholas, Organometallics, 1989, 8, 2967–2970 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) B. Demerseman, G. Bouquet and M. Bigorgne, J. Organomet. Chem., 1978, 145(1), 41–48 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Felkin, P. J. Knowles and B. Meunier, J. Organomet. Chem., 1978, 146, 151–153 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) K. M. Nicholas, J. Organomet. Chem., 1980, 188(1), C10–C12 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Bianchini and A. Meli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106(9), 2698–2699 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. Tsuda, S. I. Sanada and T. Saegusa, J. Organomet. Chem., 1976, 116(1), C10–C12 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. L. Delact, R. Del Rosario, P. E. Fanwick and C. P. Kubiak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 754–755 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Wu, P. E. Fanwick and C. P. Kubiak, Organometallics, 1987, 6, 1805–1807 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. Chatt, M. Kubota, G.-J. Leigh, F. C. March, R. Mason and D. J. Yarrow, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1974, 24, 1033–1034 RSC ; 
  (b) H. H. Karsch, Chem. Ber., 1977, 110, 2213 CAS ; 
  (c) G. Fachinetti, C. Floriani, A. Chiesi-Villa and C. Guastini, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101(7), 1767–1775 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. Burkhart and H. Hoberg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1982, 21, 76 CrossRef ; 
  (e) C. Bianchini, C. Mealli, A. Meli and M. Sabat, Inorg. Chem., 1984, 23(18), 2731–2732 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) G. Fachinetti, G. Fochi, T. Funaioli and P. F. Zanassi, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1987, 2, 89–90 RSC ; 
  (g) G. R. Lee, J. M. Maher and N. J. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109(10), 2956–2962 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) K. A. Belmore, R. A. Vanderpool, J.-C. Tsai, M. A. Kahn and K. M. Nicholas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110(6), 2004–2005 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) J. Ruiz, V. Guerchis and D. Astruc, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1989, 812 RSC .M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto in ACS Symp. Ser., Ser. 809, CO2 Conversion and utilization, ed. C. Song, A. M. Gaffney and K. Fujimoto,  2002, pp. 54–70 Search PubMed .J. V. Schloss and G. H. Lorimer, J. Biol. Chem., 1982, 257(9), 4691–4694 CAS .T. Akazawa, A. Incharoensakdi and T. Takabe in NATO ASI Ser., Ser. C, Carbon dioxide as a source of carbon: chemical and biochemical uses, ed. M. Aresta and G. Forti, Reidel Publ., Nato-Asi,  1987, pp. 83–91 Search PubMed .
  (a) T. J. Andrews and G. H. Lorimer, FEBS Lett., 1978, 90, 1–9 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. K. Morell, K. Paul, H. J. Kane and T. J. Andrews, Aust. J. Bot., 1992, 40, 431–441 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) Z. Swab, P. Hjdukiewicz and P. Maliga, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1990, 87, 8526–8530 CAS ; 
  (d) M. P. Reynolds, M. van Ginkel and J. M. Ribaut, J. Exp. Bot., 2000, 51, 459–473 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) T. J. Andrews and S. M. Whitney, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 2003, 414, 159–169 ; 
  (f) M. A. J. Parry, P. J. Andralojc, R. A. C. Mitchell, P. J. Magdwick and A. J. Keys, J. Exp. Bot., 2003, 54, 1321–1333 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) M. W. Finn and F. R. Tabita, J. Bacteriol., 2004, 186, 6360–6366 CrossRef CAS .H. Wu, S. Huang and Z. Jiang, Catal. Today, 2004, 98, 545–552 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. Yatsuka, A. Ito, O. Manabe, M. Dehara and H. Hiyama, J. Synth. Org. Chem., Jpn., 1972, 30(12), 1030–1034 CAS ; 
  (b) W. Bachmann, C. Gnabs, K. Janecka, E. Mudlos, T. Papenfuhs and G. Waese, Ger. Offen. 2, 426, 850,  1976 ; 
  (c) F. Mutterer and C. D. Weis, J. Heterocycl. Chem., 1976, 13(5), 1103–1104 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Z. Weglinski and T. Talik, Rocz. Chem, 1977, 51(12), 2401–2409 Search PubMed ; 
  (e) R. Ueno, M. Kitayama, R. Otsuka and T. Shirai, WO Pat. Appl.,  2004, JP2554 20040302 ; 
  (f) S. Muradov, B. N. Khamidov and Ch. Sh. Kadyrov, O'zb. Kim. J., 2004, 25–29 Search PubMed .M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto, Rev. Mol. Biotechnol., 2002, 90, 113–128 CrossRef CAS .M. Aresta, A. Lack, I. Tommasi and G. Fuchs, Eur. J. Biochem., 1991, 197(2), 473–479 CrossRef .K. Schuehle and G. Fuchs, J. Bacteriol., 2004, 186, 4556–4567 CrossRef CAS .M. Aresta, E. Quaranta, R. Liberio, C. Dileo and I. Tommasi, Tetrahedron, 1998, 54(30), 8841–8846 CrossRef CAS .M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, C. Fragale, C. Pastore and R. Lonoce, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2006, 3(4), 145–148 Search PubMed .
  (a) G. Bottaccio and G. P. Chiusoli, Chem. Commun., 1966, 17, 618 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) G. Bottaccio, G. P. Chiusoli and M. Marchi, Ger. Offen., 2, 514, 571 .
  (a) M. Aresta, I. Tkatchenko and I. Tommasi in ACS Symp. Ser., Ser. 856, Ionic liquids as green solvents: progress and prospects, ed. R. D. Rogers and K. R. Seddon, ACS, Washington D.C.,  2003, pp. 93–99 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) I. Tommasi and F. Sorrentino, Tetrahedron Lett., 2005, 46, 2141–2145 CrossRef CAS .L.-H. Yin, Z.-H. Gao, W. Huang and K. Xie, Taiyuan Ligong Daxue Xuebao, 2004, 35, 318–320 Search PubMed .
  (a) H. Hoberg and D. Schaefer, J. Organomet. Chem., 1982, 236(1), C28–C30 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Hoberg and D. Schaefer, J. Organomet. Chem., 1983, 251(3), C51–C53 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) E. Dinjus, D. Walther and H. Schueltz, Z. Chem., 1983, 23(11), 408–409 CAS ; 
  (d) D. Walther, E. Dinjus, J. Sieler, L. Andersen and O. Lindqvist, J. Organomet. Chem., 1984, 276(1), 99–107 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) H. Hoberg, Y. Peres and A. Michelreit, J. Organomet. Chem., 1986, 307(2), C41–C43 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) H. Hoberg, Y. Peres and A. Michelreit, J. Organomet. Chem., 1986, 307(2), C38–C40 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) H. Hoberg, Y. Peres, C. Krueger and Y.-H. Tsai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1987, 99(8), 799–800 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) R. Fischer, J. Langer, A. Malassa, D. Walther, H. Goerls and G. Vaugham, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2510–2 RSC .S. A. Cohen and J. E. Bercaw, Organometallics, 1985, 4(6), 1006–1014 CrossRef CAS .H. Hoberg, K. Jenni, K. Angermund and C. Krueger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1987, 26, 153 CrossRef .R. Alvarez, E. Carmona, D. J. Cole-Hamilton, A. Galindo, E. Gutierrez-Puebla, A. Monge, M. I. Poveda and C. Ruiz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 5529–5531 CrossRef CAS .M. Aresta and E. Quaranta, J. Organomet. Chem., 1993, 463(1–2), 215–221 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) G. Schubert and I. Papai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14847–14858 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Papai, G. Schubert, I. Mayer, G. Besenyei and M. Aresta, Organometallics, 2004, 23(22), 5252–5259 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. Derien, J. C. Clinet, E. Dunach and J. Perichon, J. Org. Chem., 1993, 58(9), 2578–2588 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) O. Scialdone, G. Filardo, A. Galia, D. Mantione and G. Silvestri, Acta Chem. Scand., 1999, 53(10), 800–806 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Moinet, J. P. Hurvois and A. Jutand, Adv. Org. Synth., 2005, 1, 403–453 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) J. C. Gressin, D. Michelet, L. Nadjo and J. M. Saveant, Nouv. J. Chim., 1979, 3(8–9), 545–554 Search PubMed ; 
  (e) N. El Murr, J. E. Sheats, W. E. Geiger and J. D. Holloway, Inorg. Chem., 1979, 18(6), 1443–1446 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. Pitter and E. Dinjus, J. Mol. Catal. A, 1997, 125, 39–45 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Koster, E. Dinjus and E. Dunach, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2001, 18, 3575 CrossRef ; 
  (c) F. Gassner, V. Haack, A. Janssen, A. Elsagir and E. Dinjus, Eur. Pat. Appl.,  2000, 103297 20000218 ; 
  (d) A. Behr, E. Herdtweck, W. A. Herrmann, W. Keim and W. Kipshagen, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 16, 1262–1263 RSC ; 
  (e) M. Aresta, E. Quaranta and I. Tommasi, New J. Chem., 1994, 18, 133–142 Search PubMed .
  (a) A. Doehring and P. W. Jolly, Tetrahedron Lett., 1980, 21(32), 3021–3024 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Aresta, E. Quaranta and A. Ciccarese, C1 Mol. Chem., 1985, 1(4), 283–295 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) P. Albano and M. Aresta, J. Organomet. Chem., 1980, 190(3), 243–246 CrossRef CAS .M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, I. Papai and G. Schubert, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2002, 334, 294–300 CrossRef CAS .A. Behr and G. Thelen, C1 Mol. Chem., 1984, 1, 137–153 Search PubMed .
  (a) M. Aresta, D. Ballivet-Tkatchenko, M. C. Bonnet, R. Faure and H. Loiseleur, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107(10), 2994–2995 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Aresta, D. Ballivet-Tkatchenko, D. Belli Dell'Amico, M. C. Bonnet, D. Boschi, F. Calderazzo, R. Faure, L. Labella and F. Marchetti, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1099–1100 RSC .K. Masuda, Y. Ito, M. Horiguchi and H. Fujita, Tetrahedron, 2005, 61, 213–229 CrossRef .M. Aresta and E. Quaranta, CHEMTECH, 1997, 27, 32–40 CAS .J. Barthelemy, Lyon Pharm., 1986, 37(5), 249–263 Search PubMed .
  (a) T.-T. Wu, J. Huang, N. D. Arrington and G. M. Dill, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1987, 35(5), 817–823 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Suzuki, T. Kato, J. Takahashi and K. Kamoshita, Nippon Noyaku Gakkaishi, 1984, 9(3), 497–501 Search PubMed  , CAN 102:180714, 1985  U. Romano, F. Rivetti and G. Sasselli, Eur. Pat. 125726,  1984, CAN 102:95246,  1985 .M. H. Chisholm and M. W. Extine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99(3), 782–792 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Aresta and E. Quaranta, Tetrahedron, 1992, 48(8), 1515–1530 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Aresta and E. Quaranta, Ital. Pat. 1237208,  1993 .W. D. McGhee and D. P. Riley, Organometallics, 1992, 11(2), 900–907 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) F. Porta, S. Cenini, M. Pizzotti and C. Crotti, Gazz. Chim. Ital., 1985, 115, 275 CAS ; 
  (b) S. Cenini, F. Porta and M. Pizzotti, J. Organomet. Chem., 1985, 296(1–2), 291–300 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. Garcia Deleon, A. Kobayashi, T. Yamauchi, J. Ooishi, T. Baba, S. Masaki and F. Hiarata, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 225, 43–49 CrossRef ; 
  (d) M. Curini, F. Epifano, F. Maltese and O. Rosati, Tetrahedron Lett., 2002, 43, 4895–4897 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. Calderoni, F. Mizia, F. Rivetti and U. Romano, Eur. Pat. 391473,  1990 ; 
  (f) S. Carloni, D. E. De Vos, P. A. Jacobs, R. Maggi and G. Sartori, J. Catal., 2002, 205, 199–204 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) T. Baba, A. Kobayashi, T. Yamauchi, H. Tanaka, S. Aso, M. Inomata and Y. Kawanami, Catal. Lett., 2002, 82, 193–197 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Aresta and E. Quaranta, Ital. Pat. 1198206,  1988 ; 
  (b) M. Aresta and E. Quaranta, Tetrahedron, 1991, 47(45), 9489–9502 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Aresta and E. Quaranta, Ital. Pat. 1237207,  1993 ; 
  (d) M. Aresta, C. Berloco and E. Quaranta, Tetrahedron, 1995, 51(29), 8073–8078 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. Aresta, A. Bosetti and E. Quaranta, Ital. Pat. Appl. 002202,  1996 ; 
  (f) M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and E. Quaranta, Tetrahedron, 1998, 54(46), 14145–14156 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and E. Quaranta, Green Chem., 1999, 1(5), 237–242 RSC ; 
  (h) M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto, Chem.–Eur. J., 2002, 8, 685–690 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) M. Distaso and E. Quaranta, Tetrahedron, 2004, 60, 1531–1539 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) M. Distaso and E. Quaranta, J. Catal., 2004, 228, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. Carloni, D. E. De Vos, P. A. Jacobs, R. Maggi, G. Sartori and R. Sartorio, J. Catal., 2002, 205, 199–204 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. P. Gupte, A. B. Shivarkar and R. W. Chaudari, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2620–2621 RSC ; 
  (c) I. Vauthey, F. Valot, C. Gozzi, F. Fache and M. Lemaire, Tetrahedron Lett., 2000, 41, 6347–6350 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Z.-H. Fu and Y. Ono, J. Mol. Catal., 1994, 91, 399–405 CrossRef ; 
  (e) T. Baba, M. Fujiwara, A. Oosku, A. Kobayashi, R. G. Deleon and Y. Ono, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 227, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Darensbourg and M. W. Holtcamp, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1996, 153, 155–174 CrossRef CAS .T. Sakai, N. Kihara and T. Endo, Macromolecules, 1995, 28(13), 4701–4706 CrossRef CAS .M. Sone, T. Sako, C. Kamisawa, Jpn. Pat. 11335372,  1999 .
  (a) H. Yasuda, L. N. He, T. Sakakura and C. W. Hu, J. Catal., 2005, 233, 119–122 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Du, F. Cai, D. L. Kang and L. N. He, Green Chem., 2005, 7, 518–523 RSC .
  (a) Y. Li, X. Q. Zhao and Y. J. Wang, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 279, 205–208 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Zhang, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Greenhouse Gas Control Technol., Proc. Int. Conf. 8th, 2005, 68 Search PubMed .R. J. De Pasquale, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1973, 157–158 RSC .D. J. Darensbourg and M. S. Zimmer, Macromolecules, 1999, 32(7), 2137–2140 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. Yano, H. Matsui, T. Koike, H. Ishiguro, H. Fujihara, M. Yoshihara and T. Maeshima, Chem. Commun., 1997, 1129–30 RSC ; 
  (b) K. Yamaguchi, K. Ebitani, T. Yoshida, H. Yoshida and K. Kaneda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 4526–27 CrossRef CAS .J. Sun, S.-I. Fujita and M. Arai, J. Organomet. Chem., 2005, 690, 3490–3497 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) H. Sugimoto and S. Inoue, J. Polym. Sci., Part A, 2004, 42, 5561–5573 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Sugimoto, H. Ohtsuka and S. Inoue, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2004, 153, 243–246 CAS .M. Super, E. Berluche, C. Costello and E. Beckman, Macromolecules, 1997, 30(3), 368–372 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) D. J. Darensbourg, N. W. Stafford and T. Katsurao, J. Mol. Catal., 1995, 104, L1–L4 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Mang, A. I. Cooper, M. E. Colclough, N. Chauhan and A. B. Holmes, Macrocromolecules, 2000, 33, 303–308 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Van Schilt, M. Kemmere and J. Keurentjes, Greenhouse Gas Control Technol., Proc. Int. Conf. 8th, 2005, 54 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) T. Endo, Greenhouse Gas Control Technol., Proc. Int. Conf. 8th, 2005, 60 Search PubMed .M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, L. Gianfrate and C. Pastore, J. Mol. Catal. A, 2003, 204–205, 245–252 CrossRef CAS .M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, L. Gianfrate and C. Pastore, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 255, 5–11 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. J. Ainsworth, Chem. Eng. News, 1992, 2, 9 ; 
  (b) R. O. Kirk and T. J. Dempsey in Kirk–Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, vol. 19, ed. M. Grayson, D. Eckroth, H. F. Mark, D. F. Othmer, C. G. Overberger and G. T. Seaborg, Wiley, New York,  1982, p. 246 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) H. P. Wulff and F. Wattimenu, US Pat. 4021454,  1977 (Shell Oil Company) ; 
  (d) N. W. Cant and W. K. Hall, J. Catal., 1978, 52, 81–87 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. G. Clerici and P. Ingallina, Catal. Today, 1988, 41, 351–363   and references therein; 
  (f) V. Duma and D. Honicke, J. Catal., 2002, 191, 93–104 .
  (a) G. F. Thiele and E. Roland, J. Mol. Catal. A, 1997, 117, 351–356 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. G. Clerici, G. Belussi and U. Romano, J. Catal., 1991, 129(1), 159–167 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. E. Jacobson, Eur. Pat. Appl. 118248 ; S. E. Jacobson, Eur. Pat. Appl. 117147 ; 
  (b) M. Aresta, A. Ciccarese and E. Quaranta, C1 Mol. Chem., 1985, 1(4), 267–281 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Aresta, A. Ciccarese and E. Quaranta, J. Mol. Catal., 1987, 41(3), 355–359 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Aresta, C. Fragale, E. Quaranta and e I. Tommasi, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1992, 4, 315–317 RSC ; 
  (e) M. Aresta, E. Quaranta and e I. Tommasi, New J. Chem., 1994, 18(1), 133–142 Search PubMed .M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and I. Tommasi, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2001, 1801–1806 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and I. Tommasi, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2000, 14, 799–802 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto, J. Mol. Catal, 2002, 182–183, 399–409 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto, Proc. Int. Symp. Relat. Homogeneous Heterogeneous Catalysis, 12th, 2005, 40 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, F. Nocito, C. Pastore, A. M. Venezia, E. Chirykalova, V. I. Kononenko, V. G. Shevchenko and I. A. Chupova, Catal. Today, 2006, 115, 117–123 CrossRef .M. Aresta, I. Tommasi, E. Quaranta, C. Fragale, J. Mascetti, M. Tranquille, F. Galan and M. Fouassier, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35(14), 4254–4260 CrossRef CAS .W. Benson and N. Cohen, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 2419–2438 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. Sakakura, Y. Saito, M. Okano, J.-C. Choi and T. Sako, J. Org. Chem., 1998, 63, 7095–7096 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Ballivet-Tkatchenko, S. Chambrey, R. Keiski, R. Ligabue, L. Plasseraud, P. Richard and H. Turunen, Catal. Today, 2006, 115(1–4), 80–87 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. Ballivet-Tkatchenko and S. Sorokina in Carbon Dioxide Recovery and Utilization, ed. M. Aresta,  2003, pp. 261–277 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) D. Ballivet-Tkatchenko, T. Jerphagnon, R. Ligabue, L. Plasseraud and D. Poinsot, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 255(1), 93–99 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, F. Nocito and C. Pastore, Proceedings of the 234th ACS National Meeting, Boston, MA, August 19–23, 2007, Paper no. 828 Search PubMed.
  (a) N. S. Isaacs, B. O'Sullivan and C. Verhaelen, Tetrahedron, 1999, 55, 11949–11956 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, C. Dileo, I. Tommasi and E. Amodio, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2003, 25(2), 177–182 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. Sakakura, Y. Saito, J.-C. Choi, T. Masuda, T. Sako and T. Oriyama, J. Org. Chem., 1999, 64, 4506–4508 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Sakakura, Y. Saito, J.-C. Choi and T. Sako, Polyhedron, 2000, 19, 573–576 CrossRef CAS .M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, E. Fracchiolla, P. Giannoccaro, C. Pastore, I. Pápai and G. Schubert, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70(16), 6177–6186 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and C. Pastore, Greenhouse Gas Control Technol., Proc. Int. Conf. 8th, 2005, 62 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and C. Pastore, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42(10), 3256–3261 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, C. Pastore, I. Pápai and G. Schubert, Top. Catal., 2006, 40(1–4), 71–81 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, F. Nocito and C. Pastore, J. Mol. Catal., 2006, 257, 149–153 Search PubMed .P. Ball, H. Fuellmann and W. Heitz, Angew. Chem., 1980, 92(9), 742–743 CrossRef CAS .M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, C. Devita, O. A. Bourova and O. N. Chupakhin in Studies in Surface Sciences and Catalysis, Carbon dioxide utilization for global sustainability, ed. S.-E. Park, J.-S. Chang and K.-W. Lee,  2004, 153, 213-220 Search PubMed .
  (a) Q. Li, N. Zhao, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2004, 153, 573–576 CAS ; 
  (b) Q. Li, W. Zhang, N. Zhao, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Greenhouse Gas Control Technol., Proc. Int. Conf. 8th, 2005, 164 Search PubMed .
  (a) G. Illuminati, U. Romano and R. Tesei, (Snam Progetti SPA) DE Pat. 75-2528412,  1985 ; 
  (b) G. Illuminati, U. Romano, R. Tesei, (Snam Progetti SPA) RO Pat. 75-82648,  1980 .M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and C. Pastore, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2004, 153, 221–226 CAS .
  (a) P. G. Jessop, T. Ikaryia and R. Noyori, Nature, 1994, 368, 231–233 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. G. Jessop, T. Ikaryia and R. Noyori, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 259–272 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) P. G. Jessop, F. Joò and C.-C. Tai, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 2425–2442 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) F. Gassun and W. Leitner, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 1465 RSC ; 
  (e) P. Munshi, A. D. Main, J. Linehan, C.-C. Tai and P. G. Jessop, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7963–7971 CrossRef ; 
  (f) O. Krocker, R. A. Koppel, M. Froba and A. Baiker, J. Catal., 1998, 178, 284–298 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) P. G. Jessop, H. Hsiao, T. Ikariya and R. Noyori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 8851–8852 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) P. Munshi, D. Heldebrandt, E. McKoon, P. A. Kelly, C.-C. Tai and P. G. Jessop, Tetrahedron Lett., 2003, 44, 2725–2726 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) J. Elek, L. Nadasdi, G. Papp, G. Laurenczy and F. Joo, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 255(1), 9–67 ; 
  (j) A. Agnes, Z. Opre, G. Laurenczy and F. Joo, J. Mol. Catal. A, 2003, 204–205, 143–148 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) R. A. Schmitz, S. P. J. Albracht and R. K. Thauer, FEBS Lett., 1992, 309(1), 78–81 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. A. Schmitz, S. P. J. Albracht and R. K. Thauer, Eur. J. Biochem., 1992, 209(3), 1013–1018 CAS ; 
  (c) R. A. Schmitz, M. Richter, D. Linder and R. K. Thauer, Eur. J. Biochem., 1992, 207(2), 559–565 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. J. G. Moura, C. D. Brondino, J. Trincão and M. J. Romão, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 9, 791–799 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. L. Kraft, Biochemistry, 2002, 41, 1681–1688 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. L. Drennan, T. I. Doukov and S. W. Ragsdale, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 9, 511–515 CAS .R. Obert and B. C. Dace, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 12192–12193 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) Z. Y. Jiang, H. Wu, S. W. Xu and S. F. Huang, Chin. J. Catal., 2002, 23, 162 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. Jiang, S. Wu and H. Wu, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2004, 153, 475–480 CAS .R. S. Wolfe, Trends Biol. Sci., 1985, 10, 396–399 Search PubMed .G. Fuchs, in Carbon dioxide as a source of carbon, ed. M. Aresta and G. Forti, Reidel Publ.,  1987, pp. 263–274 Search PubMed .D. Qiu, M. Kumar, S. W. Ragsdale and T. G. Spiro, Science, 1994, 264, 817–819 .
  (a) M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1998, 272, 38–42 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto, Greenhouse Gas Control Technol., Proc. Int. Conf. 8th, 2005, 4 Search PubMed .
  (a) S. W. Ragsdale, I. Tzanko and C. L. Drennan, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 9, 511–515 CAS ; 
  (b) S. W. Ragsdale, T. Craft and Y.-C. Horng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4068–4069 CrossRef .
  (a) F. Solymosi and G. Kliveny, Surf. Sci., 1994, 315(3), 255–268 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Solymosi and L. Bugyi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1987, 83, 2015–2033 RSC ; 
  (c) D. W. Goodman, D. E. Peably and J. M. White, Surf. Sci., 1984, 140, L239–L243 CrossRef CAS .C. Song, in ACS Symp Ser., Ser. 809, CO2 Conversion and Utilization, ed. C. Song, A. M. Gaffney and K. Fujimoto, ACS, USA,  2002, pp. 2–30 Search PubMed .
  (a) J. M. Fox III, Catal. Rev. Sci. Eng., 1993, 35(2), 169–212 CAS ; 
  (b) J. R. Rostrup-Nielsen, in Natural Gas Conversion II, ed. Curry-Hyde and Howe, R. F. Elsevier,Amsterdam,  1994, p. 25 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) J. R. H. Ross, A. N. J. van Keule, M. E. S. Hegarty and K. Seshan, Catal. Today, 1996, 30(1–3), 193–199 CrossRef CAS .M. M. Halmann and A. Steinfeld, Greenhouse Gas Control Technol., Proc. Int. Conf. 8th, 2005, 24 Search PubMed .B. Eliasson and U. Kogelschatz, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 1991, 19(6), 1063–1077 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, Y. Li, Yu Wang, C. Liu and B. Eliasson, Fuel Process. Technol., 2003, 83(1), 101–109 CrossRef CAS .A. Czernichowski, M. Czernichowski, P. Czernichowski and T. E. Cooley, Fuel Chem. Div. Prepr., 2002, 47(1), 280–281 Search PubMed .M. Takagawa, A. Okamoto, H. Fujimura, Y. Izawa and H. Arakawa, in Advances in Chemical Conversions for Mitigating Carbon Dioxide, ed. T. Inui, M. Anpo, K. Izui, S. Yanagida and T. Yamaguchi, Elsevier Science B.V.,  1998, pp. 525–528 Search PubMed .R. Kieffer, M. Fujiwara, L. Udron and Y. Souma, Catal. Today, 1997, 36(1), 15–24 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) R. A. Fiato, S. L. Soled, G. B. Rice and S. Miseo, US Pat.,  1992, 5140049 ; 
  (b) M. J. Choi, K. Kikim, H. Lee, S. B. Kim, J. S. Nam and K. W. Lee, Greenhouse Gas Control Technol., Proc. Int. Conf. 5th, 2000, 607–612 Search PubMed .T. Inui, Catal. Today, 1996, 29(1–4), 329–337 CrossRef CAS .S.-E. Park and J. S. Yoo, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2004, 153, 303–314 CAS .A. Rozovskii, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1989, 58(1), 41–56 Search PubMed .
  (a) M. Saito, T. Fujitani, M. Takeuchi and T. Watanabe, Appl. Catal., A, 1996, 138(2), 311–318 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Arakawa, in Advances in Chemical Conversions for Mitigating Carbon Dioxide, Elsevier Science B.V.,  1998, pp. 19-3-0 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) Greenhouse Gas Carbon Dioxide Mitigation Science and Technology, ed. M. M. Halmann and M. Steinberg, Lewis Publishers, USA,  1999 Search PubMed .T. Inui, T. Takeguchi, K. Yanagisawa and M. Inoue, Appl. Catal., A, 2000, 192, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .K. Ushikoshi, K. Mori, T. Watanabe, M. Takeuchi and M. Saito, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 1998, 114, 357–362 Search PubMed .
  (a) R. Ziessel in NATO ASI Ser., Ser. C, Carbon dioxide as a source of carbon: chemical and biochemical uses, ed. M. Aresta and G. Forti, Reidel Publishers, Nato-Asi, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  1987, pp. 113–138 and references therein Search PubMed ; 
  (b) E. Fujita, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1994, 185–186, 373–384 ; 
  (c) Y. Heyashi, S. Kita, B. S. Brunschwig and E. Fujita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11976–11987 CrossRef ; 
  (d) E. Fujita and J. T. Muckerman, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 7636–7647 CrossRef CAS .T. Inoue, A. Fujisima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 .A. Mackor, A. H. A. Tinnemans and T. P. M. Koster in NATO ASI Ser., Ser. C, Carbon dioxide as a source of carbon: chemical and biochemical uses, ed. M. Aresta and G. Forti, D. Reidel, Publishing Company, Dordrecht, Holland,  1987 Search PubMed .M. Anpo, S. G. Zhag, Y. Fuji, H. Yamashita, K. Koyano and K. T. Tatsumi, Chem. Lett., 1997, 659–660 CrossRef .M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto, Catal. Today, 2004, 98, 455–462 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
Table Content:
Michele Aresta	Michele Aresta received his doctoral degree in Industrial Chemistry at the University of Milan in 1964, and was a research assistant at the University of Bari, Faculty of Engineering (1964–1976) and the Department of Chemistry, University College London with Prof. Sir R. S. Nyholm from 1967–69. He became a lecturer of inorganic chemistry at the University of Bari, Faculty of Sciences (1965–1979). He was made an associate professor from 1979–1982 and has been a full professor of inorganic chemistry at the University of Bari since 1985. He was a professor of inorganic chemistry at the Lecce University (1979–85). His areas of scientific interest include carbon dioxide utilisation in synthetic chemistry; catalysis, coordination and metallorganic chemistry; the chemistry of small molecules (H2, CO, N2, CO2, CH4, C2H4, etc.); the chemistry of metal centres in low oxidation states as catalysts in organic synthesis; greenhouse gas emission in combustion processes; energy saving; renewable energy sources; site remediation and biomass utilization.
Angela Dibenedetto	Angela Dibenedetto was born in Altamura, Italy on February 22, 1968. She received her doctor degree in biochemical sciences at the University of Bari (1994). Her present position is that of an associate professor at the University of Bari, in the Department of Chemistry. Her areas of scientific interest include carbon dioxide utilization in synthetic chemistry; catalysis; coordination chemistry and organometallic chemistry; green chemistry; fuels and chemicals from marine biomass. She is a member of the editorial board of Environmental Chemistry Letters.

Gaseous	1285–1388 (Raman)	667	2349
Aqueous solution	—	—	2342
Solid	—	660, 653	2344
M2SiO4 + 2CO2
							→ 2MCO3 + SiO2	(1a)
MSiO3 + CO2
							→ MCO3 + SiO2	(1b)

CO	(g)	−110.53	−137.2	197.7
CO2	(aq)	−413.26	—	—
 	(g)	−393.51	−394.4	213.8
CO32−	(aq)	−675.23	—	—
CaCO3	(s)	−1100	—	—
HCN	(l)	108.9	125.0	112.8
 	(g)	135.1	124.7	201.8
CH4	(g)	−74.4	−50.3	186.3
CH3COONa	(s)	−708.8	−607.2	123
C2H4	(g)	52.5	68.4	219.6
OCH2CH2OC(O) (ethene carbonate)	(s)	−586.30	—	—
C2H5OH	(l)	−277.7	−174.8	160.7
 	(g)	−235.1	−168.5	282.7
HOCH2CH2OH	(s)	−455.3	—	163.2
 	(g)	−387.5	—	303.8
	(l)	−122.6	—	—
 	(g)	−94.7	—	—
C6H6	(l)	49.0	—	—
 	(g)	82.6	—	—
C6H5COOH (benzoic acid)	(s)	−385.2	—	167.6
HO–C2H4COOH	(s)	−589.9	—	—
C6H4(COOH)2	(s)	−782.0	—	—

η1-O	M–O–CO	U20	2188	 	1.122(4), 1.277(4)
η1-C		Rh,21 Ir22	1610	1210	1.20(2), 1.25(2)
η2-C,O		Ni,23 Rh,24 Fe,25 Pd26	1740	1140–1094	1.17, 1.22
µ2-η2		Pt27 Ir/Zr,28 Ir/Os,29 Rh,30 Ru31	1495	1290–1190	1.229/12), 1.306(12)
µ2-η3 (class I)		Re/Zr,32 Ru/Zr,33 Ru/Ti, Fe/Zr, Fe/Ti33	1348	1288	1.285(5), 1.281(5)
1348	1290
µ2-η3 (class II)		Re/Sn34 Fe/Sn35	1395	1188	1.269(11), 2.257(7)
1450	1152	1.252(3), 2.394(2)
µ3-η3		Os36 Re37	 	 	1.276(5), 1.322(5)
1.28, 1.25
µ3-η4		Co38	 	 	1.20(2), 1.24(2)
µ4-η4		Ru39	 	 	1.283(15), 1.245(16)
µ4-η5		Rh/Zn40	 	 	1.29(14), 1.322(14)

 	Scheme 1  Reactions of co-ordinated CO2 with various electrophiles and the hydride.	 
CH4 (g) + CO2 (g) → CH3COOH (l); ΔH = −16.6 kJ mol−1, ΔG298 = +54.8 kJ mol−1	(2)
C6H6 (l) + CO2 (g) → C6H5COOH (s); ΔH = −40.7 kJ mol−1, ΔG298 = +57.3 kJ mol−1	(3)
	(4)

 	Scheme 2  C-Carboxylation reactions.	 

Ribulose-1,5 bis(phosphate) carboxylase/oxidase (RuBisCO)	Ribulose	Mg2+	Glucose	C3-plants (also higher)
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC)	Pyruvic acid	Mg2+, Mn2+	Oxaloacetate	C4-plants (maize, sugar-cane, sorghum, etc.)
Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) carboxykinase	Pyruvic acid	Mg2+, Mn2+	Oxaloacetate	 
Acetyl coA carboxylase	Acetyl coA	Mg2+, Mn2+	Malonyl coA	 
Propionyl coA carboxylase	Propionyl coA	Mg2+, Mn2+	Methylmalonyl coA	 
Pyruvate carboxylase	Pyruvate	Mg2+, Mn2+	Oxaloacetate	 
Vitamin K-dependent carboxylases	First 10 glutamic acid residues in the NH2-terminal region of the precursor of pro-thrombin	Mn2+	γ-Carboxyglutamic acid	 

 		 

 	Scheme 3  Phenol carboxylation to 4-hydroxybenzoic acid	 
R1R2Im-2-CO2 + substrate–H + MX → R1R2ImX + substrate–COOM	(5)

 	Scheme 4  Modes of carboxylation of an olefin: the carboxylate is only released upon protonation.	 

 	Scheme 5  Conversion of terminal and internal alkynes into pyrones.	 

 	Scheme 6  Conversion of butadiene into lactones and linear esters using various metal-catalysts.	 

 	Scheme 7  Conversion of allene into linear esters, pyrones or lactones.	 

 	Scheme 8  Carboxylation of strained rings.	 

 		 

 	Scheme 9  Synthesis of carbamic acid (a) and carbamates (b) from amines and CO2.	 

 	Scheme 10  Carboxyalkylation of amines to carbamic esters.	 

Linear	(CH3O)2CO	(CH2CHCH2O)CO	(EtO)2CO	(PhO)2CO	18 Mt per year	Solvents, reagents (for alkylation or acylation reactions), additive for gasoline
DMC (dimethyl carbonate)	DAC (diallyl carbonate)	DEC (diallyl carbonate)	DPC (diethyl carbonate)
Cyclic					Monomers for polymers, synthesis of hydroxyesters and hydroxyamines, component of special materials
EC (ethylene carbonate)	PC (propylene carbonate)	CC (cyclohexene carbonate)	SC (styrene carbonate)

 	Scheme 11  Mechanism of co-polymerisation of propene and CO2 with Zn-carboxylates.	 
	(6)

 	Scheme 12  Oxidative carboxylation of olefins with homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts.	 
2 ROH + CO2
								→ (RO)2CO + H2O	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Scheme 13  Use of cyclohexanone ketal in a two-step process for carbonate formation, avoiding the formation of water in the reaction medium containing the carbonate.	 

 	Scheme 14  Reaction mechanism of carboxylation of alcohols promoted by DCC.	 

 	Scheme 15  Intramolecular (a and b) mechanism of formation of linear carbonates based on the “double base-activation” of methanol.	 

 	Scheme 16  Intermolecular mechanism based on the “acid-plus-base” activation of methanol. Scheme A is operative.	 
2 NH3 + CO2
								→ H2NCONH2 + H2O	(10)
H2NCONH2 + ROH → H2NCOOR + NH3	(11)
H2NCOOR + ROH → ROC(O)OR + NH3	(12)
	(13)
(RO)2CO + 2 R′OH → (R′O)2CO + 2 ROH	(14)
	(15)

 	Scheme 17  Production of acetic acid from CO2.	 
CH4 + 1/2 O2
							→ CO + 2 H2; ΔH0298 = −36 kJ mol−1	(16)
CH4 + H2O → CO + 3 H2; ΔH0298 = 206 kJ mol−1	(17)
CO2 + CH4
							→ 2 CO + 2 H2; ΔH0298 = 247 kJ mol−1	(18)
C6H5CH2CH3 + CO2
							→ C6H5CHCH2 + CO + H2O	(19)
H2O + CO → H2 + CO2	(20)
CO2 + 3 H2
							→ CH3OH + H2O	(21)
CO + 2 H2
							→ CH3OH	(22)

CO2 + H+ + 2e−
										→ HCOO−	Formate dehydrogenase	W, Mo	[119]
CO2 +2H+ + 2e−
										→ CO + H2O	Carbon monoxide dehydrogenase	Ni, Fe	[120]
HCO2H + 2H+ + 2e−
										→ H2CO + H2O	Formaldehyde dehydrogenase	[121]
H2CO + 2H+ + 2e−
										→ CH3OH	Methanol dehydrogenase	[122]
CO2 + CH4
										→ CH3COOH	Methanogen	[123]
CO2 + 8 H+ + 8 e−
										→ CH4 + 2 H2O	Tetrahydrofolate	None	[124]

CO2 + e− = CO2	−2.2
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−˙ = HCO2H	−0.61
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−˙ = CO + H2O	−0.53
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− = C + 2H2O	−0.20
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− = HCHO + H2O	−0.48
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− = CH3OH + H2O	−0.38
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− = CH4 + 2H2O	−0.24

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
