Kinetics and mechanism of solar-thermochemical H 2 production by oxidation of a cobalt ferrite– zirconia composite   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE23568H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE23568H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 963-973Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsKinetics and mechanism of solar-thermochemical H2 production by oxidation of a cobalt ferrite–zirconia composite†

        
          
            Jonathan R. 
            Scheffe‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Anthony H. 
            McDaniel
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Mark D. 
            Allendorf
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Alan W. 
            Weimer
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, 3415 Colorado Avenue, JSCBB Campus Box 596, Boulder, Colorado 80309-0424, USA
bSandia National Laboratories, Livermore, California 94551-0969, USA. E-mail: amcdani@sandia.gov;  Fax: +1 925-294-2276;   Tel: +1 925-294-1440
Received 
      25th May 2012
    , Accepted 11th January 2013First published on 5th February 2013AbstractAccurate knowledge of water splitting kinetics is essential for the design and optimization of high-temperature thermochemical cycles for solar-driven fuel production, but such crucial data are unavailable for virtually all redox materials of potential practical value. We describe an investigation of the redox activity and oxidation kinetics of cobalt ferrite, a promising material for this application that is representative of a broader class of metal-substituted ferrites. To enable repetitive cycling, ferrites must be supported on another oxide to avoid sintering and deactivation. Consequently, we synthesized a composite material using atomic layer deposition of cobalt and iron oxides on zirconia, a commonly used ferrite “support”, to create a well-controlled, uniformly distributed composition. Our results show that the support is not an innocent bystander and that dissolved iron within it reacts by a different mechanism than embedded iron oxide particles in the matrix. Samples were thermally reduced at 1450 °C under helium and oxidized with steam at realistic process temperatures ranging from 900 °C to 1400 °C. Experiments within a fluid-dynamically well-behaved stagnation-flow reactor, coupled with detailed numerical modelling of the transient H2 production rates, allow us to effectively deconvolve experimental artefacts from intrinsic material behaviour over the entire time domain of the oxidation reaction. We find that second-order reaction and diffusion-limited mechanisms occur simultaneously at different oxidation rates and involve iron in two separate phases: (1) reduced Fe dissolved in the ZrO2 support and (2) iron oxide located at the interface between embedded ferrite particles and the zirconia matrix. Surprisingly, we also identified a catalytic mechanism occurring at the highest temperatures by which steady-state production of H2 and O2 occurs. The results reported here, which include Arrhenius rate constants for both oxidation mechanisms, will enable high-fidelity computational simulation of this complex, but promising approach to renewable fuel production.

Broader context
Exploiting an otherwise underutilized global resource such as solar energy is critical to realizing environmentally sound and sustainable energy practices. However, the efficient collection and storage of solar energy continues to be an engineering challenge. One attractive alternative to photovoltaic- or photoelectrochemical-based approaches is concentrated solar power (CSP). Here, solar radiation in the form of process heat can be used to drive endothermic water-splitting reactions, thereby storing solar energy in a H2 chemical bond. Successful development of CSP technologies for fuel synthesis, using non-volatile metal oxides as the working fluid in a two-step thermochemical cycle, relies upon knowing the solid-state processes underpinning the hydrogen evolution reaction in thermally reduced complex oxides. Often times these reactive materials are composites, which further complicates our understanding of the high-temperature oxidation chemistry. This article provides mechanistic insight into the solid-state behavior that governs hydrogen evolution as well as proposes a general framework upon which artifacts intrinsic to flow reactors can be removed so that the true kinetic behaviour is revealed.

Introduction
Metal-substituted ferrites having the spinel structure and the general stoichiometry MxFe3−xO4, where M represents Ni,1,2 Zn,3 Co,4 or other transition metals, are promising materials for splitting water by the solar-driven, two-step redox cycle shown below:5 (1) (2)
In this process, the first step is endothermic and occurs at a temperature above the second step, with heat provided by solar energy to reduce iron in the ferrite from Fe3+ to Fe2+. This typically occurs at temperatures greater than 1400 °C. In the second, lower-temperature reaction, the reduced oxide is exposed to steam to reoxidize it to the ferrite and produce H2. The reduced product is either a solid solution with the wustite crystal structure, or a molten slag containing iron in both the 2+ and 3+ oxidation states as well as the M2+ metal ion.1 There are now numerous examples demonstrating this concept in a variety of reactor types.6–9
The kinetics and mechanism of ferrite thermochemical cycles, which are expected to play a critical role in both reactor design and overall process efficiency, are poorly understood, although other aspects of this chemistry have been examined in some detail. For example, the effects of metal substitution on ferrite reactivity have received considerable attention. The influence of MxFe3−xO4 stoichiometry,1,2,4 synthetic method,4,10,11 and support material2,12 on the total amount of H2 produced, as well as the ability to be cycled have been characterized. Thermodynamic analysis of Fe, Co, Ni, and Zn substitution in MxFe3−xO4, indicates that x and the identity of M strongly influence the stability of the ferrite with respect to reaction (1) and, consequently, the amount of H2 that can be produced for a given reduction temperature.1 Although one investigation reported that H2 yield from cobalt ferrite peaked at the non-stoichiometric composition Co0.7Fe2.3O4,4 subsequent investigations indicate that yield peaks at the stoichiometric composition (i.e., MFe2O4)1,2 in agreement with the thermodynamic analysis.1 In general, this body of work shows that Co and Ni substitution significantly increases the extent of reduction at a given temperature relative to Fe3O4, which does not fully reduce until temperatures in excess of the melting point of wustite.
In contrast, the kinetics and mechanism of ferrite thermochemical cycles have received almost no attention. Charvin et al. studied the oxidation of FeO in the presence of steam and observed a strong dependence of H2 production rate on FeO particle size during water oxidation experiments.13 As the particle size was increased, slower rates were observed. This was attributed to formation of an oxide layer on the surface of the particles, hindering further oxidation of the bulk. Similar behaviour is observed for CO2 reduction to carbon on chemically reduced CoFe2O4 nanoparticles.14 In this case, early stages in the reduction of CO2 appeared to be limited by reactions at the interfaces between nanoparticles in the compacted sample, while at later stages the reaction became limited by solid-state diffusion. Go et al. studied water oxidation by Mn and Zn substituted ferrite powders that were chemically reduced, concluding that the reaction is diffusion limited.15 Neises et al. also investigated water oxidation by Zn ferrite, using a SiC honeycomb support. They determined that the kinetics agreed well with a shrinking core model; however, they also observed a significant interaction between the SiC support phase and active ferrite layer which was not accounted for in their kinetic analysis.3 Finally, Loutzenhiser et al. monitored the oxidation of FeO particles by CO2 as a function of temperature and oxidant partial pressure. They reported that the reaction is initially limited by surface chemistry, followed by a regime controlled by the diffusion of ions through the material,16 which they simulated using a shell–core model similar to Neises et al.
An additional factor not addressed thus far is the impact of a support material such as YSZ or ZrO2, even though its use is often essential for repeated cycling in a realistic solar application.2,17 The use of support materials was originally introduced to stabilize the ferrite against sintering and consequent loss of reactivity due to the reduction in surface area. For example, Kodama et al. observed that both H2 production and reproducibility over multiple reaction cycles improved when Ni, Co, and Fe ferrites were mixed with ZrO2 and yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) supports.2,4,17 In addition, they determined that Fe2+ forms a solid solution with these supports during thermal reduction. This dissolved iron appears to be more active or accessible than the ferrite, probably due to the high oxygen-ion transport rate through zirconia.
Here, we describe a detailed investigation of the water-splitting (WS) kinetics of thermally reduced cobalt ferrite supported on zirconia. Although the prior work discussed above provides a useful basis for understanding gas splitting by ferrites, actual kinetic data were reported only for materials that are unlikely to be practical. In particular, magnetite (Fe3O4) does not undergo deep reduction until temperatures exceeding the melting point of the FeO product are reached, while ZnFe2O4 decomposition yields volatile Zn-containing products that rapidly deplete the ferrite of that metal.1 Cobalt- and nickel-substituted ferrites are more attractive for solar-driven water splitting, as their reduced-oxide product melts at higher temperatures than FeO and is much less volatile than zinc. We prepared a cobalt ferrite/m-ZrO2 composite (20 mass% Co0.9Fe2.1O4 in m-ZrO2) using an atomic layer deposition (ALD) method we reported previously.18 This approach allows uniform deposition onto high surface-area supports with pore sizes inaccessible to liquid-phase deposition methods, as well as facile control of the oxide composition and loading. The ALD material was sintered to create a dense composite that provides a reasonably well-controlled platform for measuring the WS kinetics and employing solid-state kinetic models to identify specific reaction regimes. In addition, we describe a previously unreported and surprising catalytic phenomenon at high temperatures, in which heterogeneous WS occurs to produce both H2 and O2. The results delineate limitations on the use of cobalt ferrites in solar-driven WS thermochemical cycles, as well as provide insight with respect to the design of novel materials having enhanced performance.
Experimental methods
All materials were synthesized via sequential deposition of CoO and Fe2O3 films onto porous ZrO2 supports (Alfa Aesar, S.A. 90 m2 g−1 and median pore diameter of 400 Å) via atomic layer deposition. Before synthesis, the supports were ground with a mortar and pestle and sieved below a 325 mesh. A detailed description of the synthesis procedure is documented in Scheffe et al.18 The resulting material consisted of 20 mass% active ferrite material with a layer thickness of ∼2 nm that was heat treated at 1450 °C in air for two hours, resulting in a dense, sintered powder. A JEOL 7600F field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) operating at 4 kV and 15 kV was used to examine the microstructure and local chemical composition for both as-prepared ALD and post heat-treatment materials. SEM samples were mounted on conductive tape and sputtered with carbon. Elemental composition was determined via energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS).
Following heat treatment the sintered samples were reduced and oxidized in a stagnation flow reactor (SFR), which has also been described elsewhere.18 Salient features of the experimental apparatus consist of a stainless-steel gas-handling manifold, ceramic reactor core, high-temperature furnace, and modulated effusive-beam mass spectrometer. In stagnation flow, the gas-phase region above the sample between centre line and reactor wall can be considered an ideal one-dimensional stagnation plane governed by diffusive transport. This is an important attribute that distinguishes the fluid dynamics of this reactor type from others typically used to characterize kinetic behaviour of ferrites and other materials used in thermochemical cycles, namely, packed bed reactors,19 flow tube reactors,3 and flow geometries common to thermogravimetric analysers (TGA).16 It is also important to note that in the SFR, sample material is placed in a loosely packed shallow bed where gases have access to all exposed surfaces and are well mixed within the control volume at the temperatures and pressures used in this experiment.
Mass flow controllers were used to meter all gas feed rates. The reactor exhaust was throttled, allowing for feedback control of the reactor pressure to any desired set point within the range 1–760 Torr. Water was delivered through an evaporator fed by a micro-syringe pump. Between 50 and 200 mg of sample were placed in the reactor. Thermal reduction (TR) was accomplished by heating the sample to 1450 °C in a helium flow (500 sccm) for 100 minutes. WS was performed using 20–40 vol% steam in He with a total flow rate of 500 sccm over a 1000 s time interval. WS temperatures ranged from 900 °C to 1400 °C. A single sample was used over the course of the experimental campaign and sequentially cycled more than 15 times. The total reactor pressure for both TR and WS was 75 Torr.
Gases exiting the flow reactor were sampled using a differentially pumped, modulated effusive beam mass spectrometer (Extrell C50, 500 amu). Molecular oxygen (m/z = 32) was monitored during TR and molecular hydrogen (m/z = 2) during WS at a data collection rate of approximately 1.8 Hz. A liquid nitrogen-filled cryogenic trap was used to condense water before gases were sampled by the mass spectrometer. In post-measurement data analysis, a numerical procedure was used to remove the effects of detector time lag and dispersion/mixing downstream of the reactor on the observed rates of gas production. Analytical standards for O2 and H2 were used to calibrate the mass spectrometer.
Computational methods
The evolution of H2 during the WS reaction is an inherently transient response governed by non-equilibrated surface and bulk-mediated processes that commence upon exposure to water vapour. Characteristic temporal behaviour of the H2 production rate measured during WS is illustrated in the left panel of Fig. 1, which shows a sharp increase in H2 that peaks at relatively short times, followed by a gradual decline. The observed behaviour is certainly a reflection of the rate-governing mechanisms in the material, namely surface reactions and bulk diffusion of reactive intermediates. However, physical processes intrinsic to the experimental apparatus, such as detector time lag and gas-phase dispersion, complicate interpretation of the temporal response. Consequently, it is necessary to apply a more comprehensive analytical treatment to the data to separate these experimental affects and reveal the true nature of the material behaviour.
 Fig. 1  H2 production rate measured during oxidation at 1100 °C and 30 vol% H2O (left), and the subsequent rate of evolved O2 measured during thermal reduction at 1450 °C (right). The rates are normalized to the mass of ferrite in the sample. 
A numerical approach to analysing the transient H2 production rates observed during WS was devised that accounts for: (1) kinetic processes occurring in the solid state; (2) the finite time required to introduce water vapour into the reacting volume; (3) detector time lag; and (4) dispersion/mixing of the H2 evolved from the solid surface as it is transported downstream of the reactor volume to the detector. Impacts of the aforementioned experimental artefacts (namely 2–4 listed above) were not fully addressed by previous researchers even though they can lead to erroneous conclusions regarding both the nature of rate limiting processes and the energetics associated with them (see Fig. S3 and S4 in the ESI†).
Here, the concepts of solid-state kinetic theory20,21 were used without modification to describe the chemical and physical changes occurring in the material. A transient, three-dimensional simulation of the inlet gas-handling manifold and ceramic body were used to establish a lower-order functional form for the time-dependent flow rate of water vapour into the reactor volume. A continuously stirred tank reactor (CSTR) model was used to approximate flow effects downstream of the reactor volume. Finally, kinetic parameters for the solid-state reactions were extracted from experimental observations by minimizing a weighted, least-squares objective function that compares predicted values to measurements at every time step.
The system of equations used to simulate the experimental data and determine the residual sum of squares error (RSSQ) is as follows: (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Definitions for notation can be found in Table 1 and a schematic that illustrates the modelling approach is presented in Fig. S1.†Eqn (3) represents the extent of reaction as predicted by solid-state kinetic theory.20,21 Functional forms for f(αi)were taken directly from a pallet of 14 validated mathematical expressions for various rate-limiting mechanisms applicable to the phenomena under investigation. A subset of this pallet can also be found in Table 1, which shows the expressions that result in best fits to the data. Eqn (4) balances the global reaction extent when two or more competing mechanisms are evaluated. Eqn (5) is a series CSTR model and eqn (6) is the proportionality relationship between H2 mole fraction and reaction extent.
Table 1 Model nomenclature and definitions for f(αi)




Symbol
Description
Units





α

i,k

Extent of reaction for the ith process and kth run
None



α
tot,k

Total extent of reaction for kth run
None



A

i


Pre-exponential factor for the ith process
1/s



E

i


Activation energy for the ith process
J mol−1



γ

j,i

Reaction order for jth species in the ith process
None



Y

j,n,k

Mole fraction of jth species in the nth reactor and kth run
None



τ

k


Space velocity for kth run
1/s



t

s,k

Detector lag time for the kth run
s



V

j,k

Standard volume of jth species in kth run
scm3



F
tot,k

Standard total flow rate for kth run
scm3 s−1



ω

j,k

Weighting factor for jth species in kth run
None


F2

f(αi) = (1 − αi)2, second order reaction




D1

f(αi) = 1/(2αi), 1-D diffusion






The number of CSTRs in series (n) was either 2 or 3, depending on the experimental conditions used. In particular, this number depends on the amount of water vapour in the flow stream and was determined by conducting separate H2 and CO tracer experiments in the SFR (Fig. S2†). The number of oxidation experiments or runs (k) was 12 and the number of solid-state processes occurring simultaneously (i) was either 1 or 2. The inlet mole fraction for water vapour (YH2O,0,k) was based on a time-shifted error function that produced an appropriately shaped sigmoidal curve (Fig. S1†). It should also be noted that when an order-based model (F2 in Table 1) is paired with a diffusion or shrinking core model, the water concentration dependence term is only applied to the order-based equation.
Conceptually, the system of ordinary differential equations (eqn (3)–(5)) describes a transient process in which H2 is produced by one or two solid-state mechanisms occurring irreversibly within a perfectly mixed control volume containing the active material. This product gas is then transported through a series of CSTRs that alters the temporal characteristics of the H2 signal. There are at most eight unknowns in this system, the triplet (Ai,Ei,γH2O,i; i = 1,2) and the choice for kinetic model (f(αi); i = 1,2), which are resolved by fitting to experimental data. The computational tool Mathematica®22 was used to numerically solve the system of governing equations (NDSolve), produce a value for the RSSQ shown in eqn (7), and then pass this information to a numerical minimization routine (NMinimize). The fitting routine uses a Differential Evolution algorithm native to Mathematica® that stochastically solves a constrained, mixed-integer optimization problem (kinetic parameters ∈, and model choice ∈). Constraints take the form of inequalities and brick-wall penalty functions. Differential weighting is also applied to data points surrounding the peak in H2 signal (10 < t < 400 s), and to a lesser extent, the tails observed at t > 400 s.
Results
Thermal reduction and water oxidation reactions
The redox-active cobalt ferrite spinel was deposited as described above on substrate particles via ALD, resulting in homogeneous thin films of Co0.9Fe2.1O4.18 An SEM image of the as-deposited material is shown in panel (a) of Fig. 2, where primary particles with diameters in the range of 100–200 nm are easily visible, indicating that little or no sintering occurs during the ALD process. Additionally, X-ray fluorescence maps of Fe(Kα1) and Zr(Lα1) absorption edges, shown in panels (c) and (e) in Fig. 2, indicate that a homogeneous dispersion of these elements is achieved. Following heat treatment at 1450 °C in air (a realistic temperature for TR), the substrate particles become noticeably sintered and Zr and Fe/Co phases segregate, as evidenced by SEM images and EDS elemental maps (panels b, d, and f in Fig. 2). The resulting microstructure is similar to ferrite/ZrO2 composites that have been used in high temperature thermochemical cycles and described elsewhere in the literature.2,4,17 Here, primary particles of order 1 μm in diameter are clearly evident among a high density of grain boundaries and distinct regions containing high concentrations of either Zr or Fe are revealed by EDS.
 Fig. 2  SEM micrographs of 20 mass% Co0.9Fe2.1O4 deposited on m-ZrO2 before heat treatment (a) and after (b). EDS maps of the Fe(Kα1) absorption edge (light areas) before heat treatment (c) and after (d). EDS maps of the Zr(Lα1) absorption edge (light areas) before heat treatment (e) and after (f). 
The sintered cobalt ferrite/ZrO2 composite material was thermally reduced at 1450 °C in helium and subsequently re-oxidized by exposure to various concentrations of water vapour. Representative production rates normalized to the ferrite mass for H2 (measured at 1100 °C oxidation temperature and 30 vol% H2O) and O2 are presented in Fig. 1. These data show that, despite having been sintered, the redox activity of the ferrite is preserved. Oxidation via WS is much more rapid than TR and occurs primarily within the first 1000 s of water vapour exposure. As mentioned previously, the WS reaction is characterized by a sharp peak in the H2 production rate at early times followed by a gradual decay, which is behaviour characteristic of other ferrite/composite WS chemistry reported in the literature.3,12 Note that the H2 production rate plateaus at times longer than 900 s. The magnitude of this plateau above baseline is even greater at oxidation temperatures in excess of 1200 °C and does not return to baseline even after long periods of water vapour exposure. The time required for TR is much longer than WS and after 6000 s oxygen evolution is still not complete. A near-stoichiometric ratio of H2/O2 is observed under all WS conditions below an oxidation temperature of 1200 °C.
We observe that the total amount of H2 produced during WS is highly dependent upon the oxidation temperature; the total amount of O2 produced during TR subsequent to WS is also temperature dependent. These observations are summarized in Fig. 3, where the total O2versus total H2 is plotted along with the ideal 1:2 stoichiometric trend line. The WS temperature increases from left to right. Because WS thermodynamics are more favourable at lower temperatures,1 we attribute this trend to the kinetics of the reaction; the measured yields are limited by the amount of time the sample experiences oxidative conditions (1000 s in this case). Cobalt ferrite samples were also compared to Fe3O4 (not shown) and we find a negligible difference in the H2 and O2 yields between similarly prepared samples, which is contrary to thermodynamic equilibrium calculations that predict larger yields for cobalt ferrite compared to magnetite.1 This further supports the conclusion that kinetics rather than thermodynamics limit our observed reaction rates.
 Fig. 3  Total O2 and H2 evolved during each experiment for all conditions. Solid line represents the ideal stoichiometric ratio of O2:H2 equal to 1:2. Circled data point indicates more H2 produced than can be accounted for by simple stoichiometry (see text). The total amount of O2 and H2 are normalized to the mass of ferrite in the sample. 
Comparison of the amount of H2 and O2 produced by a net thermochemical cycle reveals an unexpected behaviour. At WS temperatures below 1200 °C, the amounts of H2 and O2 produced in our experiments correspond to those expected for a net stoichiometric reaction every cycle. This is clearly evident in Fig. 3 by the data scattered about the 1:2 trend line between 0 and 1000 μmol g−1 H2. However, above this temperature, a larger amount of H2 is produced relative to O2, with the data consistently falling below the ideal trend line. Interestingly, the H2 plateau shown in Fig. 1 at 1100 °C becomes more pronounced at higher WS temperatures and does not decrease or return to baseline after several hours of water vapour exposure. We conjectured that this steady-state H2 production is due to a catalytic process that becomes active at high temperatures.
To test this hypothesis, we performed an extended oxidation experiment for 6000 s and varied the temperature between 1250 °C and 1400 °C. The results are shown in Fig. 4. WS chemistry was initiated at 1300 °C and 30 vol% H2O, and then the furnace temperature changed and the effect on the magnitude of the H2 plateau monitored as a function of time. The results of these experiments are fully consistent with this hypothesis. At the outset of the experiment, the rapid initial rate of H2 production and subsequent decay are indicative of the stoichiometric process in which O atoms liberated by WS are incorporated into the solid. After 1000 s, the H2 production rate stabilizes at approximately 0.5 μmol s−1 g. After holding the reactor at 1300 °C for 2000 s, the temperature was increased first to 1350 °C, then 1400 °C, while maintaining the flow of water vapour. In all cases, an increase in the furnace temperature produces a corresponding increase in the H2 production rate, indicating the presence of an activated process that is able to continuously split water despite the net oxidation state of iron in the solid. We also observed continuous production of O2 at each temperature, the amount of which was proportional to the thermally induced shifts in the H2 plateau.
 Fig. 4  H2 production rate measured during elevated oxidation temperatures (1250–1400 °C and 30 vol% H2O) and prolonged exposure to water vapour. The H2 production rate is normalized to the mass of ferrite in the sample. 
The H2 plateaus observed at high temperature and long reaction times cannot be due to the slow oxidation of the sample, because the amount of H2 generated is always much greater than the amount of O2 liberated during the subsequent TR step (4332 μmol H2 per g vs. 407 μmol O2 per g, see circled data point in Fig. 3). In fact, more H2 can be produced than that predicted if all of the available Fe3+ in the sample were reduced to Fe2+ and then re-oxidized. We can also rule out gas-phase water thermolysis and catalytic activity on extraneous surfaces in the SFR. Experiments performed without samples show no evidence of H2 production until the temperature exceeds 1400 °C, and in that case, the amounts observed are insignificant compared to the magnitude of the H2 plateaus measured in the presence of a sample.
The high-temperature steady-state H2 production behaviour is indicative of a reaction operating at equilibrium, where both TR and WS occur simultaneously, analogous to that observed in water–gas shift (WGS) catalysis.23 In the latter case, an oxidant (H2O) and reductant (CO) react simultaneously with a metal oxide surface to produce H2 and CO2, whose yields are dictated by equilibrium. This is conceptually similar to the behaviour observed here, but reduction is achieved via a competition between TR and chemical reduction. These results indicate that it is possible to split H2O, in the presence of the resultant solid solution formed by decomposition of Co0.9Fe2.1O4, into H2 and O2 for an indefinite period of time without going to the extreme temperatures required for water thermolysis.24 However, while scientifically interesting, a process such as this for solar H2 production is likely not feasible because H2 and O2 must be separated before they recombine. We are able to observe coevolution of H2 and O2 in this experiment because they are highly dilute and the extremely short gas residence time (of order ms) in the SFR effectively quenches recombination. These features of our experiment likely explain why this has not been reported by researchers using traditional reactor configurations. In addition, the temperature required to efficiently operate this non-stoichiometric process is in excess of 1400 °C, which further complicates production-scale reactor designs. In light of this behaviour, we have chosen to limit our kinetic analysis to temperatures below 1100 °C where the stoichiometric WS reaction dominates. It is important to note that other research groups reporting kinetics on similar iron-containing composites should also consider the high-temperature catalytic process when interpreting their results.
Numerical analysis of water oxidation kinetics
The intent of the numerical analysis is to separate experimental artefacts, such as detector time lag and gas-phase dispersion, from the observed time-dependent H2 production rate signal to obtain accurate values of the material-specific kinetic rates. This will enable us to identify rate-controlling mechanisms and their associated kinetic parameters, within the context of solid-state kinetic theory, using the complete dataset we obtained over its entire time domain. Thus, our model-based approach is markedly different from kinetic investigations of similar reactions reported in the literature.3,15,16
Our numerical approach tested 14 individual mechanisms that span four distinct families of solid-state reaction phenomena, including nucleation and growth, geometrical contraction (shrinking core), diffusion, and reaction-order behaviours. In performing the fits, it rapidly became clear that no single mechanism could fit the H2 production rate across the entire time interval of the experiment. In particular, F2 (second-order reaction, analogous to homogenous kinetics) and D1 (1-D diffusion), which are physically reasonable mechanisms in the context of our materials, yield much better fits when combined than when either is used individually. As seen in Fig. 5 (note the logarithmic scale on the x-axis), the early phase of the reaction (the first 20 seconds) is described well by D1, but this mechanism under-predicts H2 production at longer times between 20 and 300 s. Similarly, the F2 mechanism fails to capture the initial peak correctly and tends to over-predict H2 production rates past the peak. The same is true for all mechanism pairs that were evaluated numerically, none of which yields a lowered-value least-squares objective than the F2 + D1 pair (see Fig. S5 and Table S1 in the ESI†).
 Fig. 5  H2 mole fraction as a function of time (solid points) measured at 1100 °C and 40 vol% H2O compared to simulations (solid and dashed lines) derived from solid-state kinetic models. The solid line combines F2 and D1 functionals, the dashed lines are simulations using either F2 or D1 as labelled (see text). 
The high quality of the dual-mechanism (F2 + D1) fit to the experimental data is maintained over the entire range of WS conditions we examined. Shown in Fig. 6 is a typical example where the mole fraction of hydrogen is plotted as a function of time for WS at three temperatures between 900 and 1100 °C and 30 vol% H2O. The model fit was generated from a least squares optimization over the entire dataset comprised of 12 experimental H2 production rate curves (measured at 1.8 Hz for 1000 s), taken at three different water vapour volume fractions (20, 30, and 40 vol%), and three different temperatures (900, 1000, and 1100 °C). The RSSQ in eqn (7) was calculated at every time step, meaning that greater than 20000 data points were considered during each iteration of the optimizer. As seen here the WS activity at each of these temperatures, as well as for the remaining nine reactor conditions (not shown for clarity), is well represented by the combined F2 and D1 kinetic models.
 Fig. 6  H2 mole fractions as a function of time (solid points) compared to simulations (solid lines) derived from a solid-state model that combines F2 and D1 functionals for three WS temperatures at 30 vol% H2O. 
A comparison of the RSSQ values for other mechanism pairs provides further confirmation that (F2 + D1) describes the kinetic data considerably better than any of the other dual-mechanism possibilities considered. The top panel of Fig. 7 shows the minimum RSSQ value obtained for a subset of the model pairs we tested, with the magnitude indicated by the diameter of the symbol located at the intersection between grid lines. Only F2 and D1 are labelled in this graph for clarity; however, this mechanism subset includes three order-based models and three diffusion-based models, for a total of nine model pairs. The smallest symbol is located at the intersection between F2 and D1 grid lines. The relatively large symbol sizes of nearest neighbours indicate that the (F2 + D1) pair is a strong attractor, giving confidence that the fitting procedure found the global minimum in the response surface and the result is unique. The bottom panel in Fig. 7 plots the RSSQ values for the two kinetic parameters (EF2 and ED1) obtained while the fitting routine iteratively sampled the constrained region around these two constants. Here again, there is a well-defined minimum in the response surface (marked by black arrows in Fig. 7), indicating a unique solution was obtained from the Differential Evolution algorithm. The apparent activation energies corresponding to this minimum RSSQ are 53.9 kJ mol−1 for the second-order reaction process (F2) and 141 kJ mol−1 for the diffusion process (D1). The significance of these values with respect to the reaction mechanism is discussed below.
 Fig. 7  Values of RSSQ (see eqn (7)) for solid-state model pairs (top panel), and the apparent activation energy for F2 and D1 (bottom panel). 
The end result of finding a model that fits the experimental data is not limited to the kinetic parameters obtained, or the ability to simulate H2 production in the SFR. Valuable mechanistic insight can be obtained by determining the relative importance of one kinetic process over the other during the course of the oxidation. We computed this from the first derivative of the extent of reaction variable (αi) for F2 and D1 as a function of time, which is plotted in Fig. 8. The sum of these two derivatives is proportional to the rate of H2 production (eqn (6)) at 1100 °C and 40 vol% H2O. In the first 11 s, it appears that oxidation of the iron located on the active areas of the embedded cobalto-wustite particles reacts first, accounting for 69% of the hydrogen produced during this time interval. At later times, however, the D1 reaction shuts down, limiting the amount of hydrogen generated by this pathway to 36% of the total (288 μmol g−1 out of a total 800 μmol g−1 H2). In contrast, the rate of F2 decreases steadily during the entire experiment, but overall is responsible for the remaining 64% of the hydrogen produced (512 μmol g−1 H2).
 Fig. 8  The first derivative of the extent of reaction variable (αi) for F2 and D1 models resulting from the simulation of a H2 production rate curve at 1100 °C and 40 vol% H2O. 
Mechanism of water oxidation
The kinetic analysis just described suggests a process in which two different sources of reduced iron contribute to the production of H2. The diagram in Fig. 9 and reactions (8) through (11) (written in Kröger–Vink notation) outline the proposed solid-state chemistry. 2Fe′′Zr → 2Fe′Zr + 2e′(8) (9) (10) (11)
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustrating the oxidation of Fe2+ located in the ZrO2 lattice and in the embedded iron oxide particle, initiated by reaction with H2O. The dark solid line at left is the external gas–solid interface (a), the grey bar is the advancing spinel phase growing from the embedded cobalto-wustite particle, and (b) marks the internal interface between support and particle through which iron must diffuse in order to react with lattice oxygen from the ZrO2. 
Reaction (8) represents the oxidation of the reduced iron dissolved in the ZrO2 lattice. Reaction (9) describes water reacting at the external interface of the composite converting oxygen vacancies to lattice oxygen. Summing reactions (8) and (9) gives reaction (10), which is the net result of iron oxidation and incorporation of lattice oxygen into the support phase and is governed by a second-order power law relation (F2). The oxidation of cobalto-wustite at the internal interface (labelled “b” in Fig. 9) is captured by reaction (11). The defect chemistry denoted in reaction (11) was derived in accordance with the assumptions adopted for oxidation of similar ferrite-based spinels.25,26 Here cation, defect, and coordination distributions are ignored; hence Me represents all cations in the system and it is assumed that the concentration of Co3+ is insignificant so that the defect chemistry describes valence state changes in the Fe exclusively. The precise mechanism of charge compensation during this process is unclear, but our results indicate that this reaction rate is limited by diffusion (D1). We assume that the ionic defect Fe′Me is transported through the growing ferrite layer, which is consistent with the accepted mechanism of wustite oxidation at high-temperature. Therefore, according to the schematic in Fig. 9, oxygen vacancies are consumed at the outer surface by reaction with steam, generating hydrogen, and are produced at the interface between the zirconia support and embedded iron oxide particle. The incorporation of lattice oxygen into the support is described by reaction (10), and reactions (10) and (11) occur in parallel.
Qualitatively, an initial rapid reaction occurs between the (CoxFe1−x)O solid solution and lattice oxygen at the highly reactive areas of the embedded cobalto-wustite particles seen in Fig. 2(f). However, the ferrite product layer (CoxFe1−x)3O4 that quickly forms has a low ion permeability, causing the rate of this process to rapidly decay (the D1 curve falls below F2 in Fig. 8). We note that the ferrite layer at this internal interface does not form instantaneously and in all likelihood the nucleation of this layer would not be well described by D1. Neglecting this short-lived process impacts the initial slope of the simulated production curve and slightly underpredicts the amount of H2 attributed to the D1 mechanism. No attempt was made to resolve this behaviour over the rising edge of the water vapour input pulse. The slower, but more continuous reaction described by F2 simultaneously produces H2 at a rate that decays as the Fe′′Zr impurity is depleted. As will be shown below, these observations are consistent with both the results of our experiments and related investigations by others that describe the high-temperature phases and species transport in iron oxides and zirconia.
With two distinct forms of reduced iron present, we expect that transport and reaction between them cannot be described by a single rate-governing process. The SEM images in Fig. 2 show the zirconia substrate and cobalt ferrite phases segregate during high-temperature heat treatment. In addition, it is well known that both Fe2+ and Fe3+ are soluble in both ZrO227,28 and YSZ.29 Experiments by Kodama et al. for ZrO2 and YSZ suggest that this dissolved iron is more reactive than the iron contained in the cobalto-wustite phase that forms when cobalt ferrite is reduced.17 We hypothesize that this apparent difference in reactivity is actually the result of the formation of a diffusion barrier at the cobalto-wustite/ferrite interface that forms during WS, which effectively isolates the cobalto-wustite phase from oxygen permeating through the ZrO2 lattice. Oxygen ion accessibility to the dissolved iron impurity in the zirconia lattice is not likewise encumbered.
A recent investigation of CO2 splitting by Coker et al. using Fe3O4 supported on YSZ provides strong evidence that this hypothesis is correct.30 These authors mapped the exchange of 16O with 18O oxygen in a ferrite/YSZ composite monolith using isotopically labelled CO2 as the reactant. They find that a substantial amount of the CO generated during oxidation of reduced ferrite can be attributed to the iron dissolved in the YSZ lattice, rather than the grains of a separate iron oxide phase embedded within the YSZ matrix. Using TOF-SIMS they found that oxygen from C(18O)2 permeates the YSZ matrix several orders of magnitude faster at 1100 °C than the thermochemical re-oxidation of the reduced iron species by CO2 at the same temperature. In addition, oxygen permeation into bulk iron oxide particles embedded in the YSZ matrix is limited to the outer surface of the particle, even after a 7 h exposure to C(18O)2 at 1100 °C. For iron oxide particles with characteristic dimensions of a few microns or less, a 7 h exposure was sufficient to re-oxidize a majority of the reduced material; however, the interior of particles larger than this remained unreacted at these conditions. As a result, material formulations with iron loadings greater than the iron solid solubility limit in YSZ (∼9 mass%)30 exhibit significantly lower iron utilization on a mass basis, as well as slower oxidation kinetics, because the excess iron segregates to form large particles that cannot fully participate in the re-oxidation reaction.
Together, these observations (fast oxygen anion transport/exchange through YSZ; oxygen permeation into the embedded bulk iron oxide particles limited to the outer surface; and under-utilization of iron in samples where the mass loading exceeds the zirconia solid solubility limit) indicate that the kinetics of iron oxidation in our ZrO2 composite can be described by the aforementioned solid-state processes occurring in parallel. At this point it is unclear whether F2, which accounts for the reaction of the dissolved iron, represents a surface-mediated process that governs the dissociation of water molecules, or the oxidation of Fe′′Zr defect in the ZrO2 lattice. Both of these rate-limiting processes are described by second-order reaction kinetics. Rate expressions and kinetic parameters for the complete oxidation model are listed in Table S2.†
Discussion and conclusions
The experimental method and model-based analytical approach employed here to resolve the kinetic behaviour of similar two-step thermochemical redox material systems are markedly different from other work in the literature. Most notably, our method resolves and makes use of the entire time domain, including reaction initiation, rather than using a simple peak-rate analysis or universal “Master Plot” analysis,20 and addresses the fact that multiple reaction mechanisms are operative simultaneously. This allows temporal artefacts associated with instrument response and experimental protocols to be separated from the actual H2 production kinetics, so that multiple solid-state mechanisms acting simultaneously can be considered. Previous investigations employed either single-step mechanisms or sequential processes to account for the time dependence of the gas splitting rate. Moreover, these studies considered only the kinetics of bulk ferrites in their analysis, while in practice redox-active phases are often mixed with solid supports to prevent undesirable sintering.2–4,12,17,30 Other than the investigation by Coker et al. discussed above,30 the effects of the support on iron oxide water splitting kinetics have not been addressed and kinetic treatments reported to date do not account for the possibility of multiple physical and/or chemical phenomena occurring simultaneously.
In our analysis, the kinetic model D1 represents a classic parabolic rate law for one-dimensional diffusion (see Table 1). This is reasonable, since one-dimensional behaviour is expected for transport across a thin oxide layer when the layer thickness is much smaller than the particle diameter. Such behaviour was found by Coker et al., who observed using TOF-SIMS that 18O from isotopically labeled CO2 was concentrated at the surface of iron oxide particles embedded in YSZ.30 Considering that our oxidation times were on the order of 1000 s vs. 7 hours at temperatures comparable to those used by Coker et al., we expect that our material system will also behave in a one-dimensional fashion.
In cases where the D1 rate law is applicable to iron oxidation to form magnetite (Fe3O4), it is generally accepted that the rate-limiting process is the outward diffusion of iron through the product layer.31 Dieckmann et al.32 and Lu et al.33 performed cation tracer experiments with 59Fe and 60Co on both stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric spinels and identified two mechanisms by which diffusion can occur between 900 and 1400 °C: a vacancy mechanism that is operative at high oxygen activities having a negative activation energy (Ea) of −140 kJ mol−1, and movement of bulk interstitial iron cations at low oxygen activities with an Ea of 615 kJ mol−1. The activation energy for D1 of 141 kJ mol−1 extracted from our analysis is not in good agreement with either value. Interestingly, activation energies reported in the literature for oxidation of Fe34 and FeO15,16 at lower temperatures are in the range of 100–160 kJ mol−1, and those measured by the aforementioned researchers under redox conditions similar to ours are also in agreement.
Since the oxygen activity was not controlled in either our experiments or in these previous reports, it is not possible to say conclusively what elementary mechanism (i.e., interstitial or vacancy) controls the rate of the diffusion process, nor is it necessary. It is clear from the work of Dieckmann et al. and Lu et al. that the diffusion coefficients are highly dependent upon the temperature, the oxygen activity, and the oxide stoichiometry (i.e., cobalt content). While the value of Ea (141 kJ mol−1) we obtain suggests that neither the vacancy nor interstitial mechanisms alone control the rate, it is possible that our parameterized D1 model is reflective of a transitional state between these two elementary processes. This may be attributed to: (1) the equilibrium gas-phase oxygen activity changes by three orders of magnitude under our experimental conditions during the course of the oxidation and (2) the high sensitivity of the vacancy and interstitial diffusion constants to both oxygen activity and cobalt content in the spinel. For the latter, the diffusion constants for metal vacancies decrease by several orders of magnitude, while that for the interstitials increase, as the spinel composition approaches CoFe2O4. Both of these effects have a large impact on the concentration of defects that govern cation diffusion,33 and thus the rate controlling mechanism. Unfortunately more definitive conclusions cannot be made without a far more extensive experimental program than was possible here.
The order-based reaction F2 is also activated, with an energy obtained from the fit (Ea) = 53.9 kJ mol−1 and a reaction order for the water mole fraction (γ) = 1.22 (see Table S2†). The kinetic expression presented in eqn (3) and Table S2† represents a global reaction, which takes an Arrhenius form and describes either surface-mediated processes involving the adsorption and dissociation of H2O molecules, followed by surface exchange of O atoms through vacancies and H2 desorption, or chemical reactions internal to the solid solution. We cannot confirm which of these possibilities is rate limiting, but the aforementioned order-based model yields a better fit to the experimental observation than other solid-state mechanisms involving diffusion and/or nucleation and growth, even when paired with D1 (see Fig. S5 and Table S1†).
If a chemical reaction is the rate-limiting step, then presumably oxygen transport through the ferrite/ZrO2 composite must be faster by comparison. Activation energies for oxygen diffusion in both monoclinic and cation-stabilized cubic zirconia have been reported. For undoped monoclinic ZrO2, their magnitude is dependent on the diffusion mechanism (volume vs. interface), but are in any case ≥ 190 kJ mol−1.35 It is also well known that doping with various metal cations dramatically increases the ionic conductivity. For example, yttria doping reduces Ea for oxygen diffusion to as little as 75 kJ mol−1.36 This value is still greater than what we obtain by fitting the F2 mechanism. Furthermore, a diffusion mechanism does not adequately describe the H2 production rate behaviour. One possible explanation is that treating zirconia with hydrogen creates surface oxygen vacancies, for which Ea is only 20 kJ mol−1 when measured over previously reduced ZrO2.37 In addition, the number of surface vacancies formed is influenced by the relative amounts of H2O and H2 in the feed stream, the flow rate, and iron impurities in the ZrO2, which are all circumstances that pertain to the conditions of our experiments as well as to previously reported rates. Here again, the parameterized F2 model is reflective of a complex reaction network that exhibits energetics which cannot be attributed to a single elementary process.
In summary, the quantitative data and insights into ferrite reactivity gained from this investigation fill a critical gap in the knowledge base required to develop high-fidelity computational models for designing solar receiver reactors. Maximizing the solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency requires system designs in which the reaction chemistry within the oxidation and reduction zones is matched to the corresponding material transport rates, and thus the transit times, for each zone. Clearly, optimization of material properties and reactor design is an iterative process, and for complex composite materials such as cobalt ferrite/ZrO2, validated models based on experimental rate constants will be an invaluable enabling resource for rational process design.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation via Grant CBET 0966201, by the U.S. Department of Energy Fuel Cell Technologies Program via the Solar Thermochemical Hydrogen (STCH) directive, and by Laboratory Directed Research and Development at Sandia National Laboratories. Sandia is a multiprogram laboratory operated by Sandia Corporation, a Lockheed Martin Company, for the United States Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration under Contract DE-AC04-94AL85000.
Notes and references
M. D. Allendorf, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 4115–4124 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kodama, N. Gokon and R. Yamamoto, Sol. Energy, 2008, 82, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
M. Neises, M. Roeb, M. Schmücker, C. Sattler and R. Pitz-Paal, Int. J. Energy Res., 2010, 34, 651–661 CAS .
T. Kodama, Y. Kondoh, R. Yamamoto, H. Andou and N. Satou, Sol. Energy, 2005, 78, 623–631 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kodama, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2003, 29, 567–597 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Diver, J. E. Miller, M. D. Allendorf, N. P. Siegel and R. E. Hogan, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2008, 130, 041001 CrossRef .
N. Gokon, S. Takahashi, H. Yamamoto and T. Kodama, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2009, 131, 011007 CrossRef .
H. Kaneko, T. Miura, A. Fuse, H. Ishihara, S. Taku, H. Fukuzumi, Y. Naganuma and Y. Tamaura, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 2287–2293 CrossRef CAS .
M. Roeb, M. Neises, J.-P. Säck, P. Rietbrock, N. Monnerie, J. Dersch, M. Schmitz and C. Sattler, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4537–4545 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb, A. G. Konstandopoulos, L. Nalbandian, V. T. Zaspalis, C. Sattler, P. Stobbe and A. M. Steele, Sol. Energy, 2005, 79, 409–421 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lorentzou, C. C. Agrafiotis and A. G. Konstandopoulos, Granular Matter, 2008, 10, 113–122 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Miller, M. D. Allendorf, R. B. Diver, L. R. Evans, N. P. Siegel and J. N. Stuecker, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 4714–4728 CrossRef CAS .
P. Charvin, S. Abanades, G. Flamant and F. Lemort, Energy, 2007, 32, 1124–1133 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Khedr, A. A. Omar and S. A. Abdel-Moaty, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2006, 432, 26–33 CrossRef .
K. S. Go, S. R. Son and S. D. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 5986–5995 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Loutzenhiser, M. E. Galvez, I. Hischier, A. Stamatiou, A. Frei and A. Steinfeld, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 2832–2839 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kodama, Y. Nakamuro and T. Mizuno, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2006, 128, 3–7 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Scheffe, M. D. Allendorf, E. N. Coker, B. W. Jacobs, A. H. McDaniel and A. W. Weimer, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2030–2038 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Chueh and S. M. Haile, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 735–739 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Gotor, J. M. Criado, J. Malek and N. Koga, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 10777–10782 CrossRef CAS .
J. Šesták and J. Málek, Solid State Ionics, 1993, 63–65, 245–254 CrossRef .

          I. Wolfram Research, Mathematica Edition: Version 8.0, Wolfram Research, Inc.,  2010 Search PubMed .
P. C. Ford, Acc. Chem. Res., 1981, 14, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
C. Etievant, Sol. Energy Mater., 1991, 24, 413–440 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aggarwal and R. Dieckmann, Phys. Chem. Miner., 2002, 29, 695–706 CrossRef CAS .
F.-H. Lu and R. Dieckmann, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 53-56, 290–302 CrossRef CAS .
S. Figueroa, J. Desimoni, P. C. Rivas, M. C. Caracoche and O. de Sanctis, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 3759–3764 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Ferguson, A. W. Weimer and S. M. George, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2005, 23, 118–125 CAS .
F. L. Garcia, V. G. de Resende, E. De Grave, A. Peigney, A. Barnabe and C. Laurent, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 1301–1311 CrossRef CAS .
E. N. Coker, J. A. Ohlhausen, A. Ambrosini and J. E. Miller, J. Mater. Chem., 2012 Search PubMed .
A. Atkinson, M. L. O'Dwyer and R. I. Taylor, J. Mater. Sci., 1983, 18, 2371–2379 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dieckmann, M. R. Hilton and T. O. Mason, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
F.-H. Lu, S. Tinkler and R. Diekmann, Solid State Ionics, 1993, 62, 39–52 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Chen and W. Y. D. Yuen, Oxid. Met., 2003, 59, 433–468 CrossRef CAS .
U. Brossmann, R. Wurschum, U. Sodervall and H. E. Schaefer, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 85, 7646–7654 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kilo, C. Argirusis, G. Borchardt and R. A. Jackson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 2219–2224 RSC .
D. Eder and R. Kramer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 795–801 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee23568h‡ Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
Exploiting an otherwise underutilized global resource such as solar energy is critical to realizing environmentally sound and sustainable energy practices. However, the efficient collection and storage of solar energy continues to be an engineering challenge. One attractive alternative to photovoltaic- or photoelectrochemical-based approaches is concentrated solar power (CSP). Here, solar radiation in the form of process heat can be used to drive endothermic water-splitting reactions, thereby storing solar energy in a H2 chemical bond. Successful development of CSP technologies for fuel synthesis, using non-volatile metal oxides as the working fluid in a two-step thermochemical cycle, relies upon knowing the solid-state processes underpinning the hydrogen evolution reaction in thermally reduced complex oxides. Often times these reactive materials are composites, which further complicates our understanding of the high-temperature oxidation chemistry. This article provides mechanistic insight into the solid-state behavior that governs hydrogen evolution as well as proposes a general framework upon which artifacts intrinsic to flow reactors can be removed so that the true kinetic behaviour is revealed.

	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  H2 production rate measured during oxidation at 1100 °C and 30 vol% H2O (left), and the subsequent rate of evolved O2 measured during thermal reduction at 1450 °C (right). The rates are normalized to the mass of ferrite in the sample.	 
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)


α

i,k
	Extent of reaction for the ith process and kth run	None

α
tot,k
	Total extent of reaction for kth run	None

A

i

	Pre-exponential factor for the ith process	1/s

E

i

	Activation energy for the ith process	J mol−1

γ

j,i
	Reaction order for jth species in the ith process	None

Y

j,n,k
	Mole fraction of jth species in the nth reactor and kth run	None

τ

k

	Space velocity for kth run	1/s

t

s,k
	Detector lag time for the kth run	s

V

j,k
	Standard volume of jth species in kth run	scm3

F
tot,k
	Standard total flow rate for kth run	scm3 s−1

ω

j,k
	Weighting factor for jth species in kth run	None
F2	
f(αi) = (1 − αi)2, second order reaction	

D1	
f(αi) = 1/(2αi), 1-D diffusion	


 	Fig. 2  SEM micrographs of 20 mass% Co0.9Fe2.1O4 deposited on m-ZrO2 before heat treatment (a) and after (b). EDS maps of the Fe(Kα1) absorption edge (light areas) before heat treatment (c) and after (d). EDS maps of the Zr(Lα1) absorption edge (light areas) before heat treatment (e) and after (f).	 

 	Fig. 3  Total O2 and H2 evolved during each experiment for all conditions. Solid line represents the ideal stoichiometric ratio of O2:H2 equal to 1:2. Circled data point indicates more H2 produced than can be accounted for by simple stoichiometry (see text). The total amount of O2 and H2 are normalized to the mass of ferrite in the sample.	 

 	Fig. 4  H2 production rate measured during elevated oxidation temperatures (1250–1400 °C and 30 vol% H2O) and prolonged exposure to water vapour. The H2 production rate is normalized to the mass of ferrite in the sample.	 

 	Fig. 5  H2 mole fraction as a function of time (solid points) measured at 1100 °C and 40 vol% H2O compared to simulations (solid and dashed lines) derived from solid-state kinetic models. The solid line combines F2 and D1 functionals, the dashed lines are simulations using either F2 or D1 as labelled (see text).	 

 	Fig. 6  H2 mole fractions as a function of time (solid points) compared to simulations (solid lines) derived from a solid-state model that combines F2 and D1 functionals for three WS temperatures at 30 vol% H2O.	 

 	Fig. 7  Values of RSSQ (see eqn (7)) for solid-state model pairs (top panel), and the apparent activation energy for F2 and D1 (bottom panel).	 

 	Fig. 8  The first derivative of the extent of reaction variable (αi) for F2 and D1 models resulting from the simulation of a H2 production rate curve at 1100 °C and 40 vol% H2O.	 
2Fe′′Zr → 2Fe′Zr + 2e′	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustrating the oxidation of Fe2+ located in the ZrO2 lattice and in the embedded iron oxide particle, initiated by reaction with H2O. The dark solid line at left is the external gas–solid interface (a), the grey bar is the advancing spinel phase growing from the embedded cobalto-wustite particle, and (b) marks the internal interface between support and particle through which iron must diffuse in order to react with lattice oxygen from the ZrO2.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee23568h
‡ Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
