Monolithic tandem solar cells comprising electrodeposited CuInSe 2 and perovskite solar cells with a nanoparticulate ZnO buffer layer   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA06163C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA06163C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19439-19446Monolithic tandem solar cells comprising electrodeposited CuInSe2 and perovskite solar cells with a nanoparticulate ZnO buffer layer†

        
          
            Yoon Hee 
            Jang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jang Mi 
            Lee
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jung Woo 
            Seo
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Inho 
            Kim
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Doh-Kwon 
            Lee
          
        
      *abc
aPhoto-electronic Hybrids Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST), Seoul 02792, Korea. E-mail: dklee@kist.re.kr
bDivision of Nano and Information Technology, KIST School, Korea University of Science and Technology, Seoul 02792, Korea
cGreen School, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Korea
dCenter for Electronic Materials, Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST), Seoul 02792, Korea
Received 
      14th July 2017
    , Accepted 25th August 2017First published on 25th August 2017AbstractWe demonstrate semi-transparent inverted planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs) for monolithic tandem construction with an electrodeposited CuInSe2 (CISe) solar cell. To eliminate the severe degradation of perovskite/PCBM layers during a transparent conducting oxide sputtering process, a thin ZnO nanoparticle (NP) layer is introduced onto the electron-extracting PCBM layer by a simple solution process without a post-annealing step. It is found that a thin ZnO-NP layer with an optimal thickness facilitates the electron transfer from PCBM to the Ag back contact in opaque devices while also helping to protect the underlying layers from plasma-induced damage in semi-transparent devices. As a result, semi-transparent PSC devices with an inverted architecture having a sputtered Al-doped ZnO top electrode are realized with power conversion efficiencies over 10%. In addition, monolithically integrated, two-terminal tandem devices composed of solution-processed CISe/perovskite are successfully fabricated, demonstrating an efficiency of 11% with a negligible degree of hysteresis.
Introduction
Solar photovoltaics (PVs) account for less than 2% of today's global electricity. A reduction of the production cost in combination with improved efficiency is required to realize advances in solar technology. However, there is an intrinsic limitation when attempting to increase the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single-junction solar cells, which is known as the Shockley–Queisser limit.1 As a new approach to improve the efficiency further such that it surpasses the theoretical limit, the formation of multiple-junctions in a cell has received a considerable amount of attention. Double-junction tandem architectures, for instance, are built by placing a high bandgap cell on top of a low bandgap cell, which can boost the PCE of PV devices by minimizing the thermalization loss among the major efficiency loss mechanisms. While there are many bottom cell candidates with low bandgap energies (e.g., CuInSe2 (CISe), CuIn1−xGaxSe2 (CIGSe), or crystalline-Si solar cells), the limitation of top cell candidates with suitable bandgaps as well as high efficiency has impeded the progress of tandem devices. Recently, organometal halide perovskite-based solar cells have emerged as a promising top cell candidate, demonstrating bandgap tunability ranging from 1.5 to 2.3 eV. In a short period of time, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have shown quite a rapid improvement in the PCE (from 3.8% in 2009 to the latest certified value over 22% in 2016).2–4 Such an impressive improvement in the PV performance can be attributed to the excellent optical and electrical properties of the perovskite absorber materials, such as the high absorption coefficient (∼105 cm−1),5 long ambipolar diffusion length exceeding 1 μm with high charge carrier mobility (∼27 cm2 V−1 s−1),6–8 and the ease of optical bandgap tuning via compositional tailoring.9
To achieve highly efficient tandem devices, the realization of a high efficiency semi-transparent PSC is an essential challenge. Such a PSC can be realized by replacing the metal contacts commonly used in PSCs with a transparent conducting electrode, allowing sunlight to pass through down to the bottom cell. The transparent electrode should have high transparency, low sheet resistance, and good chemical/physical compatibility with adjoining layers for highly efficient semi-transparent devices. In addition, the development of a suitable deposition process that does not deteriorate the low-cost advantage but also maintains the high performance of PSCs is crucial. Several approaches have been proposed to fabricate a semi-transparent PSC device and therewith, four-terminal or monolithic integrated two-terminal tandem solar cells. Bailie et al. used a silver nanowire mesh electrode to fabricate a semi-transparent perovskite top cell with 12.7% efficiency, thereby achieving a mechanically stacked (four-terminal) perovskite/CIGS tandem cell with 18.6% efficiency.10 Chen et al. investigated semi-transparent PSCs with 12.1% efficiency in a substrate configuration with ultrathin metal electrodes consisting of Cu (1 nm) and Au (7 nm) and demonstrated perovskite/silicon four-terminal tandem cells with 23.0% efficiency.11 Sputtered transparent conducting oxide (TCO) thin films have also been explored as a transparent top contact for PSCs, such as indium tin oxide (ITO), aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO), and indium zinc oxide (IZO). McMeekin et al. reported a fairly high efficiency of 15.1% (with a stabilized efficiency of 12.5%) for a semi-transparent cell and 19.8% for a perovskite/silicon heterojunction four-terminal tandem cell.12 It is important to note that the direct sputtering of TCO films may cause plasma-induced damage to organic charge-selective layers (CSLs) and/or perovskite absorbers, possibly resulting in severe degradation of device performance. In order to avoid TCO sputtering damage, a suitable protective layer is required, which however must also possess charge (electron or hole) selectivity and transparency to minimize the parasitic absorption. For this purpose, various metal oxide nanoparticles (NPs), such as MoOx, ZnO, TiO2, AZO, SnO2 and ITO NPs, have been introduced as a buffer layer on top of perovskite/CSLs.12–20
As exemplified above, previous reports of tandem solar cells with perovskite top cells have primarily focused on mechanically stacked, four-terminal configurations, possibly owing to their processing simplicity for preliminary studies. However, a monolithically integrated, two-terminal configuration, in which two sub-cells are electrically connected in series without the need for external lead wires, is of higher technical significance in that such a configuration can minimize the absorption loss induced by free carriers in the thick TCO layer as well as by a glass substrate between the two sub-cells, allowing more photons to reach the bottom cells. Moreover, from an economic viewpoint, the monolithically integrated structure is favorable as it can reduce the manufacturing cost by eliminating several processing steps and materials. In order to construct monolithic tandem devices with p-type Si solar cells, which have a majority of the market share, and CIGSe solar cells in a substrate configuration, PSCs with only a p–i–n (inverted) structure can be utilized. Among these, the monolithic CIGSe/perovskite tandem cells consisting of thin-film absorbers only have potential particularly for high-efficiency, flexible applications. In general, however, there are key challenges which make monolithic integration difficult. A successful attempt must meet several requirements, including current matching between the sub-cells, optimization of the recombination layer for good transmission of low-energy photons and low interfacial resistance, and the development of a fabrication strategy that is viable for industrial use. Thus, the monolithic CIGSe/perovskite tandem solar cells have been scarcely reported to date. Todorov et al. demonstrated a 10.9%-efficient, monolithic CIGSe/perovskite tandem device using a CIGSe solar cell which showed 11.4% efficiency.21 However, the thin metal electrodes (Al or Ca) as a top contact can lead to high absorption loss in the long wavelength regime.
In this work, in an attempt to realize high-efficiency, monolithic thin-film tandem devices, a sputtered AZO layer is chosen as a top TCO while employing a thin ZnO-NP layer, which is prepared by a simple solution process as a buffer layer to protect the underlying CSLs and/or perovskite layers from possible damage during the sputter deposition of the AZO electrode. Interestingly, we found that the ZnO-NP layer exhibits good electron-selective behavior by forming a smooth interlayer between the PCBM and electrode layers, enhancing the device performance and reproducibility of methylammonium (MA) lead iodide PSCs. To demonstrate the feasibility of all-solution-processed, monolithic two-terminal tandems, an electrodeposited CISe thin-film solar cell with a PCE of ca. 10% was used as a bottom cell. An intrinsic ZnO (i-ZnO)/AZO double layer was applied as a transparent recombination layer at the junction between the sub-cells by tuning its thickness. As a consequence, monolithically integrated, two-terminal CISe/perovskite tandem solar cells with a higher PCE than the constituent single-junction devices were realized.
Results and discussion
Opaque, p–i–n (inverted) PSCs with a ZnO-NP layer were investigated first in a structure of ITO-glass/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO-NPs/Ag, as schematically depicted in Fig. 1a. As shown in the cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. 1b), the fabricated MAPbI3 films with an average thickness of 250 nm consisted of crystalline grains 150 to 350 nm in size (see Fig. S1 in the ESI,† for the surface morphology). In this work, we introduce a ZnO-NP layer on top of the electron-extracting PCBM layer of the conventional inverted PSC structure for the purpose of establishing an additional selective contact as well as minimizing plasma-induced damage to the underlying perovskite/PCBM layers. Fig. 1b clearly shows that a compact ZnO-NP layer with a thickness of 60 nm was uniformly and tightly deposited over the underlying PCBM layer (40 nm in thickness). The ZnO-NP layer is considered as one of the best inorganic candidates for an electron-selective buffer layer due to its wide bandgap and favorable energy level alignment.22–24 In addition, the ZnO layer can significantly improve the stability of devices by preventing metal diffusion into the PCBM layer, as demonstrated by Zhang et al. and You et al.24,25
 Fig. 1  Structure and photovoltaic performances of opaque, inverted PSCs with (in red) and without (in black) a ZnO-NP layer: (a) schematic, (b) cross-sectional SEM image, (c) j–V characteristics under 1 sun illumination, and (d) EQE curves along with the reflectance spectra. 

Fig. 1c shows the j–V characteristics of two different devices with and without a ZnO-NP layer under 1 sun illumination. Both devices exhibited good diode behavior with a negligible degree of hysteresis. The device without a ZnO-NP layer exhibited an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.90 V, a short-circuit current density (jSC) of 15.9 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.73, and a PCE (η) of 10.4%. Meanwhile, the device with the ZnO-NP interlayer having an optimal thickness of ∼60 nm displayed a higher FF of 0.78 with VOC and jSC values (0.89 V and 16.3 mA cm−2) comparable to those of a ZnO-free device, thus resulting in an improved efficiency of 11.4%. The corresponding PV parameters are listed along with the diode parameters in Table 1. Fig. 1d shows the EQE and reflectance spectra of both devices. The integrated jSC (jSC,int) values extracted from the EQE curves were in fairly good agreement with the measured jSC values from j–V curves, as shown in Fig. S2† and Table 1. The EQE peak at around 600 nm of the ZnO-NPs-free device appears to shift towards a longer wavelength region (∼650 nm) for the device with ZnO-NPs, likely due to the altered light interference induced by the additional ZnO-NP layer, which is supported by the reflectance (R) spectra co-plotted in Fig. 1d. In order to determine which PV parameters were mainly influenced by the introduction of the ZnO-NP layer, the statistics of the PV parameters of the two devices were evaluated from 39 to 45 devices, as shown in Fig. S3.† It was noted that despite the overlap of the error bounds, the mean PCE value of the device containing the ZnO-NP interlayer is higher than that of the device without a ZnO-NP layer, which can be clearly attributed to the improvement of the FF (see the numerical values in Table S1† for the average and standard deviation of each parameter).
Table 1 Photovoltaic and diode parameters of typical opaque PSCs with and without a ZnO-NP layer







V
OC [V]

j
SC [mA cm−2]
FF

η [%]

G
sh [mS cm−2]

R
s [Ω cm2]

n


j
0 [mA cm−2]





a The numeral in parentheses represents the integrated jSC estimated from the EQE curve using the standard AM 1.5G spectra.





Without ZnO
0.899
15.9 (15.5)a
0.729
10.4
0.1
6.37 ± 0.04
1.23 ± 0.01
(5.4 ± 0.4) × 10−12


With ZnO
0.889
16.3 (16.0)
0.784
11.4
0.01
2.60 ± 0.05
1.21 ± 0.01
(3.5 ± 0.5) × 10−12




In order to gain more insight into the origin of the increased FF, the j–V curves of two devices measured in the dark were analyzed on the basis of a standard diode analysis, which enables us to extract the diode parameters, i.e., the shunt conductance (Gsh), series resistance (Rs), diode ideality factor (n), and reverse saturation current density (j0).26,27 Briefly, the shunt conductance (Gsh) was estimated from the slope of the dark j–V curves in the plateau region (Fig. 2a). The series resistance (Rs) and the saturation current density (j0) were extracted from the y-intercept of dV/dj vs. 1/(j − GshV) (Fig. 2b) plots and semi-logarithmic plots of (j − GshV) vs. V − jRs (Fig. 2c), respectively, in the high bias regime. The ideality factor (n) was individually determined from the slope of both plots (Fig. 2b and c), with cross-comparison to validate the analysis. The diode parameters determined in this manner are listed in Table 1, where the displayed n is the average value of those obtained from two independent procedures. Among the extracted diode parameters, the variations in Rs and Gsh were found to be most conspicuous, while the variations in n and j0 were less pronounced between the two devices. Despite the similar values of n (n = 1.23 and 1.21), the difference in the curvature at the power maximum points originates from the more inclined slope of the j–V curve near the VOC regime for the ZnO-NPs-free device as a result of the larger Rs. Obviously, the higher Rs value of the device without a ZnO-NP layer (6.37 Ω cm2) compared to that of the device with the ZnO-NP layer (Rs = 2.6 Ω cm2) is the main origin of the lower FF. Thus, it is certain that the introduction of a ZnO-NP layer can effectively reduce the series resistance of PSC devices.
 Fig. 2  Diode analyses of opaque PSCs with and without a ZnO-NP layer: (a) j–V curves in the dark, (b) dV/dj vs. 1/(j − GshV) plots for the determination of Rs and n, (c) semi-logarithmic plots of (j − GshV) vs. V − jRs for the determination of n and j0. The inset in (c) is an enlarged plot showing the regime from 0.75 to 1.0 V. 
Now that the PCBM/ZnO-NP ensemble performs better as an electron-selective layer, we examine its buffering action against possible plasma damage during a TCO sputtering process. Thus, semi-transparent PSCs were fabricated by introducing a top TCO electrode and an Ag-grid (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO-NPs/AZO/Ag-grid). An AZO layer with a thickness of about 250 nm was deposited onto the ZnO-NP layer to serve as a top TCO electrode through radio-frequency magnetron sputtering. The sputtering process was performed with a mild power of 30 W at a slow deposition rate of 0.33 Å s−1. We note here that the AZO-sputtered device without a ZnO-NP layer did not work properly, as shown in Fig. S4b,† likely due to plasma damage to the underlying MAPbI3/PCBM layers. It is also worth noting that the thickness of the ZnO-NP layer needs to be optimized to ensure negligible interfacial resistance as well as effective buffering against sputtering damage to achieve semi-transparent devices with decent performance. Fig. S4a† shows the j–V characteristics of opaque PSC devices which include ZnO-NP interlayers with different thicknesses ranging from 30 to 100 nm, minutely controlled by adjusting the spin-coating conditions. As shown in the figure, the PV performance of the opaque devices declined abruptly when the thickness of the ZnO-NP layer exceeded 70 nm, which appears to be due to the emergence of undesirable interfacial resistance. With regard to the samples with ZnO-NP layers less than 70 nm thick, the variation in the device performance was comparatively negligible. Regarding the buffering effect against AZO sputtering, however, there was another restriction on the allowed thickness of ZnO-NP layers, as the use of too thin ZnO-NP layers (e.g., 30 nm) led to shunted behavior of the PSC devices, as shown in Fig. S4b.† In sum, the thickness of the ZnO-NP buffer layer is critical for achieving efficient semi-transparent PSC devices and their tandems, as the device performance tends to be severely degraded when its thickness is out of an optimal range. We found that the optimal thickness of the ZnO-NP layer was ca. 60 nm, ensuring effective buffering against sputtering damage without causing interfacial resistance.
With the optimized ZnO-NP layers, we investigated the PV performance of semi-transparent PSC devices in a substrate configuration (under illumination from the AZO side, i.e., under front illumination), as shown in Fig. 3a–c. The semi-transparent PSC exhibited a PCE of 10.3% with a VOC value of 0.92 V, a jSC of 15.0 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.75 (see the statistics of the PV parameters in Fig. S5†). The VOC and FF values of the semi-transparent device were comparable to those of the opaque device with a ZnO-NP layer (Fig. 1c and Table 1), indicating that the sputtered AZO top electrode played its role in the semi-transparent PSC devices. On the other hand, the drop in the photocurrent may have been caused in part by the lack of back reflection in the semi-transparent device due to the absence of a thick Ag-back electrode. In addition, parasitic absorption loss by ZnO-NPs/AZO layers can lead to a decrease in the photocurrent in a short wavelength range of 300 to 350 nm. The EQE spectrum of the semi-transparent device (Fig. 3b), when compared to that of the opaque device, supports the above interpretation on the drop in the jSC. The jSC,int value of the semi-transparent device as evaluated from the EQE spectrum was slightly higher than the jSC from the j–V measurement, as shown in Fig. 3b. The bandgap value estimated from the EQE curves near the band-edge regime was 1.60 ± 0.02 eV for both the opaque and the semi-transparent PSCs (Fig. 3c). In order to examine the optical compatibility of this semi-transparent PSC (Fig. 3d) for tandem construction, UV-NIR spectroscopy was carried out. To measure the absorptance, transmittance, and reflectance, the incident beam was irradiated through the sputtered AZO film and collected using an integrating sphere. As shown in Fig. 3e, the semi-transparent PSC absorbed most of the visible light and transmitted about 40% of the red light (650–750 nm). In addition, transmission in the wavelength range of 800 to 1100 nm was fairly high, with a peak transmittance value of 81% at ca. 970 nm. The high transmission in the near-infrared region implies that low-energy photons can be utilized by an underlying cell, rendering it a competent top cell in tandem architectures. The optical bandgap of the semi-transparent PSC was evaluated and found to be 1.59 ± 0.02 eV (Fig. 3f), which is in good agreement with the outcome from the EQE measurement.
 Fig. 3  Photovoltaic and optical properties of the best semi-transparent PSC with a 60 nm-thick ZnO-NP layer: (a) j–V characteristics under front illumination as well as in the dark, (b) EQE spectra and integrated jSC (along with those for the opaque device for comparison), (c) [hνln(1 − EQE)]2vs. hν curves near the band-edge regime, (d) a photograph of a semi-transparent PSC device, (e) absorptance, A, transmittance, T, and reflectance, R spectra (measured with an incident beam through the sputtered AZO side), and (f) a Tauc plot for an evaluation of the bandgap. 
The proposed semi-transparent, inverted PSC was directly constructed on CuInSe2 (CISe) thin-film solar cells to assess the possibility of applying it to a tandem as a top cell. An electrodeposition technique was adopted to fabricate the CISe bottom cells, as this technique enables the realization of all-solution-processed tandem devices for ultra-low-cost photovoltaics. In addition to the advantages of solution-processable thin-film technology, CISe-based absorbers have another merit, i.e., facile tunability of the bandgap by substituting Ga and S for In and Se, respectively. In this work, low-bandgap (1.0 eV, as shown in Fig. S6†) CISe thin-film solar cells with a PCE of ca. 10% were prepared according to a technique described in a previous report by the authors.28 For the monolithic tandem construction, a perovskite top cell and a CISe bottom cell should be connected in series through an intermediate (recombination) layer. For the recombination layer, we employed an i-ZnO/AZO double layer of the type commonly used as a window layer in CISe thin-film solar cells. The hole-transporting PEDOT:PSS layer was then directly coated onto the i-ZnO/AZO intermediate layer. The monolithic CISe/perovskite tandem solar cells were completed by sequentially depositing the MAPbI3, PCBM, and ZnO-NP layers as well as an Ag-grid with a method identical to that used for the fabrication of the semi-transparent PSC. A schematic of the monolithically integrated tandem device (SLG/Mo/CISe/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO-NPs/AZO/Ag-grid) is presented in Fig. 4a. As shown in the cross-section SEM image (Fig. 4b), the underneath CISe bottom cell remained intact during the solution process of the top cell.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic and (b) cross-sectional SEM image of a monolithic CISe/perovskite tandem solar cell, (c) j–V curves of the best-performing tandem device together with stand-alone CISe and the semi-transparent perovskite devices, and (d) EQE spectra of the perovskite and CISe sub-cells and the stand-alone CISe device. 
For achieving an efficient tandem device, it is crucial to minimize the electrical loss arising from the recombination layer. Thus, the performance of the monolithic CISe/perovskite tandem solar cells depending on the thickness of the recombination layer was investigated. The thickness of the AZO layer was varied from 0 to 210 nm while fixing the i-ZnO layer thickness at 40 nm. The resulting j–V curves of the tandem devices are presented in Fig. S7† as a function of the total thickness of the i-ZnO/AZO double layer. It should be noted first that a tandem cell without the AZO layer experienced large interfacial resistance between the sub-cells. The interfacial resistance turned out to be, in general, significantly reduced in the presence of the AZO layer. However, it was also found that the resistance increased if the recombination layer was too thin (∼80 nm) or too thick (∼250 nm), resulting in a loss of the FF. One may infer that the recombination layer should be thick enough to cover the rough CISe/CdS surface for the conformal deposition of the subsequent layers. On the other hand, it has yet to be elucidated why the resistance increased when the intermediate layer thickness exceeded a certain value (200 nm). Nevertheless, we may tentatively conclude that the optimum thickness of the i-ZnO/AZO recombination layer is ca. 200 nm, and hence, further characterization steps were carried out on the tandem devices with a 200 nm-thick recombination layer.

Fig. 4c shows the j–V curves of a monolithic CISe/perovskite tandem device together with stand-alone sub-cells. The corresponding PV parameters are summarized in Table 2. The best monolithic tandem cell efficiency was 11.03% with a cell area of about 0.5 cm2 (see Fig. S8† for the statistics of PV parameters). The obtained VOC value of 1.346 V is nearly equal to the sum of the VOC values of the stand-alone CISe (0.422 V) and the semi-transparent perovskite cell (0.882 V), indicating that the two sub-cells are successfully connected in series in a lossless manner in terms of the photovoltage. The detailed spectral response of the tandem cell was investigated by an EQE measurement of each sub-cell while keeping the other sub-cell current saturated using bias light sources with appropriate spectral ranges (Fig. 4d). The EQE spectra indicate that the perovskite top cell and the CISe bottom cell generated photocurrent of 13.9 and 17.8 mA cm−2, respectively. Hence, it is suggested that the jSC value of the tandem device (12.9 mA cm−2) is limited by the semi-transparent perovskite top cell, which may be primarily caused by insufficient photocurrent generation by the perovskite layer and less significantly by the parasitic absorption of the interfacial layers, i.e., the top TCO and ZnO-NP layers. The low FF (0.64) of the tandem device is another cause of the tantalizing performance. In principle, a cell with a high VOC value tends to produce high FF.29 However, the deteriorated FF of our tandem device compared to those of the constituent sub-cells suggests that there still remains non-negligible resistance between the top and bottom cells. In an ongoing effort to elevate the performance of monolithic CISe/perovskite tandem devices, we are currently tackling several issues. First, in order to raise the lowest current limit in tandem devices, the perovskite top cell must generate greater amounts of current through an increase of its optical thickness. The development of transparent window layers with less parasitic absorption and sheet resistance as well as interface engineering to reduce the non-negligible interfacial resistance is also expected to produce jSC and FF gains.
Table 2 Photovoltaic parameters of a stand-alone CISe solar cell, a semi-transparent PSC, and a monolithic CISe/perovskite tandem cell




Device

V
OC [V]

j
SC [mA cm−2]
FF

η [%]




Stand-alone CISe
0.422
38.3
0.658
10.64


Semi-transparent perovskite
0.882
12.7
0.755
8.44


CISe/perovskite tandem
1.346
12.9
0.635
11.03




Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated semi-transparent perovskite solar cells in the p–i–n architecture, in which a solution-processed ZnO-NP layer was introduced as an effective charge-selective layer between the PCBM and TCO layers. In addition, due to the sputter-buffering ability of the ZnO-NP layer, an AZO top TCO layer could be deposited without causing severe plasma damage to the underlying perovskite/PCBM layers. The best semi-transparent devices with a bandgap energy of 1.59 eV showed a PCE of 10.3% at an optimal thickness of 60 nm for the ZnO-NP layer and exhibited average transmittance of 71% in the wavelength range of 800 to 1100 nm. These semi-transparent devices were directly prepared on electrodeposited CISe solar cells with a bandgap energy of 1.0 eV to form monolithic tandem devices. The optimized i-ZnO/AZO recombination layer has enabled the successful interconnection of two devices in a lossless manner in the VOC. The resulting CISe/perovskite tandem device achieved a PCE of 11.03% with a negligible degree of hysteresis. It was worth noting that both sub-cells are fabricated by solution processes and that the obtained tandem cell efficiency is the highest among the CISe/perovskite monolithic tandem configurations to the best of our knowledge. This outcome sheds light on the possibility of all-solution-processed, highly efficient tandem solar cells.
Experimental
Inverted planar perovskite solar cells
Indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates (2.5 × 2.5 cm2, 20 Ω sq−1) were cleaned with acetone, ethanol, and 2-propanol by ultrasonication in succession. Before their use, the ITO substrates were exposed to UV-Ozone (UVO) for 20 min. The (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS, Clevios, P VP AI 4083) used in this study, diluted with methanol, was spin-coated onto the UVO-treated ITO substrate at 4000 rpm for 60 s and subsequently annealed at 150 °C for 20 min in a N2-filled glove box. Methylammonium (MA) lead iodide, MAPbI3, perovskite film was grown via an anti-solvent engineering approach.30 A precursor solution was prepared by dissolving MAI and PbI2 (1.04:1 molar ratio) in a mixture of γ-butyrolactone (GBL) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) with a final concentration of 44 wt%. The precursor solution was spun onto the PEDOT:PSS layer at 1000 rpm for 10 s and 4500 rpm for 20 s in sequence. An appropriate amount of chlorobenzene was quickly dropped onto the film surface before the end of the second spin-coating step. The as-coated films were then annealed on a hot plate preheated to 100 °C for 13 min. After cooling to room temperature, the 3′H-cyclopropa[1,9][5,6]fullerene-C60-Ih-3′-butanoic acid 3′-phenyl methyl ester (C60 PCBM, nano-C-PCBM-BF) solution at a concentration of 20 mg ml−1 in chlorobenzene was spin-coated onto the MAPbI3 film at 2000 rpm for 60 s. The ZnO-NP solution (2.5 wt% in 2-propanol, Nanograde N10) was then spin-coated onto PCBM to form a buffer layer at 2000 rpm for 60 s. To fabricate semi-transparent devices, a 250 nm-thick Al-doped ZnO (AZO) transparent conducting layer was deposited onto the ZnO-NP layer via radio-frequency magnetron sputtering. The front-contact Ag grids were finally deposited by thermal evaporation for measurement in a substrate configuration (illumination from the opposite side of the substrate). The active area of the semi-transparent cells was about 0.4–0.5 cm2, as defined by mechanical scribing. For the opaque devices, a 150 nm-thick Ag electrode as a charge collector was deposited onto the ZnO-NP layer by thermal evaporation through a shadow mask with an aperture size of 0.5 cm2. The active area of the opaque cells, which was defined by the overlapping area of the ITO and Ag electrodes, was 0.22 cm2.
CuInSe2 (CISe) thin-film solar cells
The CISe devices were fabricated with the architecture of SLG/Mo/CISe/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Ni/Al. First, CISe thin films were deposited onto Mo-coated soda-lime glass (SLG) substrates by one-step electrodeposition in a 5.2 mM selenite-based electrolyte using a three-electrode system. Details of the procedure used to fabricate the electrodeposition are described in our previous paper.28 The as-prepared electrodeposited CISe films were thermally annealed at 580 °C for 30 min in a Se vapor atmosphere to improve the crystallinity and microstructure of the films. The annealed films were then chemically etched in a 0.1 M KCN solution for 60 s to remove any CuxSe secondary phases. Subsequently, an n-type CdS buffer layer was deposited via chemical bath deposition for ca. 10 min at 60 °C in a solution containing 2 mM CdSO4, 1.02 M NH4OH, and 84 mM thiourea to form 60 nm-thick layers. The intrinsic ZnO (i-ZnO) and AZO layers were sequentially deposited using radio-frequency magnetron sputtering. The device was then finalized by thermal deposition of the Ni/Al grids.
Fabrication of the monolithic tandem device
To fabricate the monolithic CISe/perovskite tandem devices, the CISe bottom cell and semi-transparent perovskite top cell were combined by having them share the i-ZnO/AZO layers in such a way that the perovskite cell was directly fabricated onto the AZO layer of the CISe solar cell. To avoid thermal degradation of the CISe/CdS junction properties, thermal annealing of the PEDOT:PSS layer was carried out at a comparatively low temperature of 120 °C for 5 min. The remaining steps of the fabrication procedure were identical to those of the single-junction semi-transparent perovskite cell.
Characterization
The cross-sectional morphologies of the perovskite single cells and the tandem cells were investigated using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) at an acceleration voltage of 10 kV (FEI, Inspect F). The optical properties of the semi-transparent perovskite devices were characterized with an optical spectrometer (HR2000CG + UV-NIR, Ocean Optics, Inc.). The current density–voltage (j–V) curves were measured using a Keithley 2400 SourceMeter and a class-A solar simulator (Yamashita Denso, YSS-50A) equipped with a 180 W xenon lamp. The illumination intensity was calibrated to AM 1.5G 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) using National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)-calibrated silicon solar cells with KG-2 and BK-7 filters (PV Measurements, Inc.) for PSC and CISe devices, respectively. The j–V curves of the perovskite and tandem solar cells were measured with a 100 ms delay time between adjacent data point acquisition in backward and forward scan modes, respectively. The external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the cells were measured with an incident photon-to-current conversion measurement system G1218a (PV Measurements, Inc.) at a chopping frequency of 4 Hz. The EQE spectra of sub-cells in tandem devices were extracted under highly unbalanced photocurrent conditions using additional light sources with controlled wavelengths. Specifically, the EQE of top cells was measured by saturating the bottom cell current with infrared light applying a long-wave pass filter (RG-830 Filter Glass, 830FG07-25, Andover Corporation), whereas EQE of bottom cells was measured by saturating the top cell current with blue light applying a bandpass filter (S-8612 Filter Glass, S86FG11-25, Andover Corporation). All the j–V and EQE characterizations were carried out under ambient conditions without encapsulations or anti-reflection coatings.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) (20163010012450, 20163010012580), by the KIST-UNIST partnership program (1.160097.01/2.160482.01), and by the KIST institutional program.
Notes and references
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
Best Research-Chell Efficiencies, http://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png, accessed April 2017.
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S.-J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F.-J. Haug, J.-H. Yum and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Karakus, S. A. Jensen, F. D'Angelo, D. Turchinovich, M. Bonn and E. Cánovas, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4991–4996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Ponseca Jr, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J.-P. Wolf and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Savenije, C. S. Ponseca Jr, L. Kunneman, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, Y. Tian, Q. Zhu, S. E. Canton, I. G. Scheblykin, T. Pullerits, A. Yartsev and V. Sundström, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2189–2194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Bailie, M. G. Christoforo, J. P. Mailoa, A. R. Bowring, E. L. Unger, W. H. Nguyen, J. Burschka, N. Pellet, J. Z. Lee, M. Grätzel, R. Noufi, T. Buonassisi, A. Salleoa and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 956–963 CAS .
B. Chen, Y. Bai, Z. Yu, T. Li, X. Zheng, Q. Dong, L. Shen, M. Boccard, A. Gruverman, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601128 CrossRef .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .
J. Werner, C.-H. Weng, A. Walter, L. Fesquet, J. P. Seif, S. De Wolf, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 7, 161–166 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Bush, C. D. Bailie, Y. Chen, A. R. Bowring, W. Wang, W. Ma, T. Leijtens, F. Moghadam and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3937–3943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. P. Weiss, S. Pisoni, E. Avancini, C. Andres, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16190 CrossRef .
S. Albrecht, M. Saliba, J. P. C. Baena, F. Lang, L. Kegelmann, M. Mews, L. Steier, A. Abate, J. Rappich, L. Korte, R. Schlatmann, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and B. Rech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 81–88 CAS .
J. Werner, L. Barraud, A. Walter, M. Bräuninger, F. Sahli, D. Sacchetto, N. Tétreault, B. Paviet-Salomon, S.-J. Moon, C. Allebé, M. Despeisse, S. Nicolay, S. De Wolf, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kranz, A. Abate, T. Feurer, F. Fu, E. Avancini, J. Löckinger, P. Reinhard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2676–2681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. Jäger, E. Avancini, B. Bissig, S. Yoon, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Todorov, T. Gershon, O. Gunawan, Y. S. Lee, C. Sturdevant, L.-Y. Chang and S. Guha, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500799 CrossRef .
S. Bai, Z. Wu, X. Wu, Y. Jin, N. Zhao, Z. Chen, Q. Mei, X. Wang, Z. Ye, T. Song, R. Liu, S. Lee and B. Sun, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1749–1758 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guo, H. Azimi, Y. Hou, T. Przybilla, M. Hu, C. Bronnbauer, S. Langner, E. Spiecker, K. Forbericha and C. J. Brabec, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1642–1649 RSC .
L. Q. Zhang, X. W. Zhang, Z. G. Yin, Q. Jiang, X. Liu, J. H. Meng, Y. J. Zhao and H. L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12133–12138 CAS .
J. You, L. Meng, T.-B. Song, T.-F. Guo, Y. M. Yang, W.-H. Chang, Z. Hong, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Liu, N. De Marco and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 75–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Hegedus and W. N. Shafarman, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2014, 12, 155–176 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Lim, J. Jeong, J. Y. Kim, M. J. Ko, H. Kim, B. Kim, U. Jeong and D.-K. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11930–11940 CAS .
B.-S. Lee, S.-Y. L. Park, J. M. Lee, J.-H. Jeong, J. Y. Kim, C.-H. Chung and D.-K. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24585–24593 CAS .
M. A. Green, Sol. Cells, 1982, 7, 337–340 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Surface SEM image of a typical MAPbI3 thin film, integrated short-circuit current density and bandgap determination of opaque PSCs, statistics of PV parameters of opaque PSCs, j–V characteristics of PSCs with ZnO-NP layers of various thicknesses, statistics of PV parameters of semi-transparent PSCs, bandgap estimation of an electrodeposited CuInSe2 solar cell, j–V characteristics of monolithic CISe/perovskite tandem devices as a function of recombination layer thickness, statistics of PV parameters of tandem devices, and the result of a stability test. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta06163cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structure and photovoltaic performances of opaque, inverted PSCs with (in red) and without (in black) a ZnO-NP layer: (a) schematic, (b) cross-sectional SEM image, (c) j–V characteristics under 1 sun illumination, and (d) EQE curves along with the reflectance spectra.	 


Without ZnO	0.899	15.9 (15.5)a	0.729	10.4	0.1	6.37 ± 0.04	1.23 ± 0.01	(5.4 ± 0.4) × 10−12
With ZnO	0.889	16.3 (16.0)	0.784	11.4	0.01	2.60 ± 0.05	1.21 ± 0.01	(3.5 ± 0.5) × 10−12

 	Fig. 2  Diode analyses of opaque PSCs with and without a ZnO-NP layer: (a) j–V curves in the dark, (b) dV/dj vs. 1/(j − GshV) plots for the determination of Rs and n, (c) semi-logarithmic plots of (j − GshV) vs. V − jRs for the determination of n and j0. The inset in (c) is an enlarged plot showing the regime from 0.75 to 1.0 V.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photovoltaic and optical properties of the best semi-transparent PSC with a 60 nm-thick ZnO-NP layer: (a) j–V characteristics under front illumination as well as in the dark, (b) EQE spectra and integrated jSC (along with those for the opaque device for comparison), (c) [hνln(1 − EQE)]2vs. hν curves near the band-edge regime, (d) a photograph of a semi-transparent PSC device, (e) absorptance, A, transmittance, T, and reflectance, R spectra (measured with an incident beam through the sputtered AZO side), and (f) a Tauc plot for an evaluation of the bandgap.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic and (b) cross-sectional SEM image of a monolithic CISe/perovskite tandem solar cell, (c) j–V curves of the best-performing tandem device together with stand-alone CISe and the semi-transparent perovskite devices, and (d) EQE spectra of the perovskite and CISe sub-cells and the stand-alone CISe device.	 

Stand-alone CISe	0.422	38.3	0.658	10.64
Semi-transparent perovskite	0.882	12.7	0.755	8.44
CISe/perovskite tandem	1.346	12.9	0.635	11.03
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Surface SEM image of a typical MAPbI3 thin film, integrated short-circuit current density and bandgap determination of opaque PSCs, statistics of PV parameters of opaque PSCs, j–V characteristics of PSCs with ZnO-NP layers of various thicknesses, statistics of PV parameters of semi-transparent PSCs, bandgap estimation of an electrodeposited CuInSe2 solar cell, j–V characteristics of monolithic CISe/perovskite tandem devices as a function of recombination layer thickness, statistics of PV parameters of tandem devices, and the result of a stability test. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta06163c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
