Novel onion-like graphene aerogel beads for efficient solar vapor generation under non-concentrated illumination   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA09062A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA09062A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4400-4407Novel onion-like graphene aerogel beads for efficient solar vapor generation under non-concentrated illumination†

        
          
            Xiaming 
            Feng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jinliang 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dawei 
            Sun
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Logesh 
            Shanmugam
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jang-Kyo 
            Kim
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jinglei 
            Yang
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR. E-mail: maeyang@ust.hk;  Fax: +852-2358-1543;   Tel: +852-3469-2298
bCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China
Received 
      17th September 2018
    , Accepted 30th January 2019First published on 30th January 2019AbstractGraphene aerogel has attracted great attention due to its unique properties in solar vapor generation for water purification and desalination. However, many challenges remain in promoting their development and practical application, such as scalable fabrication and facile use in a large area of water. Herein, we report a simple self-assembly approach to prepare onion-like graphene aerogel beads on a millimeter scale. The floatable, low-density graphene aerogel beads are used to promote water evaporation under non-concentrated illumination for the first time. MoS2 microflakes with a strong light absorption capability in the visible and near-infrared regions are incorporated to form hybrid beads with a much enhanced water evaporation performance. A record steam generation efficiency of 74% is obtained under illumination of only 0.5 kW m−2 with a single layer of hybrid beads, corresponding to a remarkable evaporation rate of 0.54 kg m−2 h−1. When scaled up to a 0.05 m2 active area in a home-made solar water still for use in an outdoor environment, the hybrid beads are easily dispersed on the water surface by self-spreading action. Their freshwater generation rate is about 2.0 L m−2 day−1 on a typical spring day in Hong Kong, which is sufficient to satisfy the daily drinking needs of a person. By simultaneously addressing both the requirements of high-efficiency operation and facile fabrication, the graphene aerogel beads developed in this study may offer a viable solution for drinking water problems in water-stressed regions.
1. Introduction
Lack of renewable, sustainable energy sources and shortage of clean water supply are the two major challenges in today's human society. Solar energy is one of the most abundant and readily available renewable energy sources,1–3 and advanced technologies have been developed to harvest solar energy, such as photovoltaic cells4,5 and solar thermal techniques.6–8 Solving the clean water crisis is as important as creating renewable energy sources. Worldwide, 844 million people do not have access to clean water: one in nine people lives with water unsafe for human consumption. Among many potential solutions, solar vapor generation for desalination and sewage treatment is regarded to be a promising approach.9 Though remarkable progress has been made towards improving the solar vapor generation rate and conversion efficiency through the use of advanced solar absorber materials,10–12 many challenges remain in practical applications. For instance, metallic nanoparticles13,14 and nanorods15 were dispersed in aqueous solutions to enhance the heat localization performance. However, their high cost, low conversion efficiency and potential safety problem have limited their usage. Recently, a new approach has been devised using floating solar absorbers on the surface of water where the available heat is localized to facilitate water evaporation without losing heat so as to achieve efficient solar evaporation properties.16–19 A variety of materials and structures with a rational design have been established to further enhance the light absorbing performance for commercialization. They include plasmonic wood,20 3D printed structures,21 carbonized stuffs,22,23 paper-based systems24,25 and polymer foams.26,27 Nevertheless, most of these light absorbers either have lackluster efficiencies or need complex processes for fabrication with limited scalability for mass production.
As a typical two-dimensional nanomaterial, graphene enables high-performance conversion of solar energy owing to its efficient broadband absorption and unique dimensional feature.17 It can make an ideal platform to construct a variety of structures for water purification applications, such as films,28 coatings,29 and foam.30 For example, carbon foam was used to support an exfoliated graphite double-layer structure for solar steam generation31 while highly efficient solar thermal steam has been generated using functionalized graphene loaded on a membrane.32 The graphene oxide (GO) film with 2D water paths33 enabled excellent vapor generation and desalination performance. These studies indicate that to achieve high efficiency, most of the current designs and systems rely heavily on costly concentrated illumination and complicated assisting components, such as a water supply system and an extra supporting part or thermally insulating layer. Graphene aerogel recently exhibited an excellent solar vapor production property34,35 thanks to its low density, high thermal insulation and multilevel structure. Because of the complicated fabrication process and limited shape and size of aerogels, however, these graphene aerogel-based solar vapor systems demonstrated their performance only on a very small area of water within a laboratory environment. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop a new methodology for the preparation of large amounts of graphene aerogels towards efficient solar vapor generation in a large area of water.
Herein, we demonstrate a remarkably high water evaporation rate of 0.54 kg m−2 h−1 and 74% energy conversion efficiency under only 0.5 kW m−2 illumination using novel, mass-produced onion-like graphene/MoS2 hybrid aerogel beads, for the first time. The home-made solar still prepared using aerogel beads recorded an excellent clean water production rate of 2.0 L m−2 day−1 with a collection efficiency of ∼21% under the real outside conditions. The high efficiency is attributed to the combination of ameliorating structural and functional characteristics of onion-like hybrid beads, such as intrinsic high solar absorption capability, low heat loss to the ambient environment, hydrophilicity and inherent water paths by capillary force. Notably, their recyclability and potential use in a very large area of water make them ideally suited for commercial applications. With these merits, this work provides a highly meaningful reference for scalable manufacturing of efficient solar thermal aerogel materials in practical water purification applications.
2. Results and discussion
2.1 Fabrication of graphene aerogel beads

Scheme 1 illustrates the preparation of graphene hybrid beads. Unlike the conventional technique for fabricating aerogels using a fixed container, a self-assembly, wet-spinning process was involved to mass produce graphene aerogel hybrid beads in this work. The dispersion of MoS2 microflakes (Fig. S1†) was mixed with a diluted commercial GO slurry (Fig. S2†) to form a hybrid precursor. After extrusion through the syringe, the droplets of the hybrid precursor were continuously released into a polyethylenimine coagulation bath. GO and MoS2 were in situ oriented during extrusion and self-assembled in the coagulation bath. The internal and external structures of aerogel beads were optimized to form an onion-like shape ideally suited for solar steam generation by tuning the concentrations and extruding parameters (Fig. S3†). The obtained aerogel beads were reduced to regulate the hydrophilic surface character. Obviously, such a facile and continuous fabrication approach is highly practical for large-scale fabrication of aerogel beads, offering a promising solution for their real-world applications.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the preparation of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads by wet-spinning and reduction. The inset is digital images of freshly formed GO/MoS2 hybrid hydrogel beads (left) and ∼1.6 L of hybrid aerogel beads (right). 
2.2 Characterization of structure and morphology

Fig. 1a and b display the digital photographs of RGO beads and RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads, respectively, whose average diameters were equal to ∼4.2 mm with very narrow variations. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the internal structures of RGO and RGO/MoS2 beads taken at different magnifications are shown in Fig. 1c–h. Both aerogel beads exhibit clear core–shell structures. Similar to a real onion (inset in Fig. 1), the vertical sectional morphologies of the aerogel beads exhibit a typical core–shell structure with a circular shell of graphene sheets around a random cellular core. What's more, as shown in Fig. S4,† the cross section of the aerogel beads clearly demonstrates a concentric cell structure, which is highly similar to the cross section of a real onion. Fig. 1e and f present parallel layers with an interlayer spacing of ∼100 μm. Compared to the smooth surface of graphene sheets in RGO beads (Fig. 1f), many protrusions are observed on the surface of the graphene sheets in RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads (Fig. 1h). These MoS2 microflakes were tightly attached on the surface of the graphene sheets during the self-assembly process. Different from the internal cellular structure, the outside surface of the beads exhibits a continuous self-assembled skin with a wrinkled morphology (Fig. S5†). In the high-resolution image (Fig. S5d†), similarly, it is easy to observe plenty of MoS2 microflakes on the external surface of the RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads, the protrusion of which will be a benefit to the absorption of sunlight.
 Fig. 1  Digital images of (a) RGO beads and (b) RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads. SEM images of (c, e and f) RGO beads and (d, g and h) RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads; (i) EDX results and carbon/oxygen atomic ratios of different samples. (j) Contact angles of compressed GO, RGO and RGO/MoS2 beads taken at the first moment. The inset shows a sectional photograph of a real onion. 
The EDX results were applied to characterize the reduction process of RGO and RGO/MoS2 beads (Fig. 1i). The C/O ratio of pristine GO increased from 1.36 to 2.40 after the reduction, while the C/O ratio of RGO/MoS2 beads is 2.03. Moreover, the C/O ratio of the external surface of RGO/MoS2 beads is higher than that of the inner surface, which is attributed to the concentration difference of the reducing agent between the bead core and shell. It is interesting to note that the content of MoS2 on the surface is much higher than that in the inner surface, indicating a higher concentration of MoS2 microflakes in the shell during the self-assembly process. EDX mapping was performed to monitor the distribution state of MoS2 (Fig. S6†). The homogenous distributions of each element demonstrated a uniform mixture of GO and MoS2 precursors and no agglomeration occurred in the extrusion and coagulation procedures. Raman spectroscopy was conducted to investigate the structural evolution of RGO and RGO/MoS2 beads during reduction, as shown in Fig. S7.† Upon the introduction of MoS2, two similar peaks appeared at 382.9 and 408.7 cm−1 in the spectrum of RGO/MoS2 beads, corresponding to the E2g1 and A1g vibration modes.36 A slightly higher ID/IG intensity ratio of the RGO/MoS2 bead than that of its RGO counterpart indicates that the reduction of GO restricted by the presence of MoS2 microflakes. This arose mainly from the formation of hydrogen bonds between the hydroxyl groups of GO and the S atom of MoS2.
Because of the spherical shape of the beads, all the samples were compressed to conduct the contact angle test. In addition, due to the highly porous aerogel structure, the water droplets tended to be rapidly absorbed. Therefore, the contact angles measured right at the first moment are shown in Fig. 1j. As expected, the contact angle of RGO beads increased from 66.3 to 70.1° after reduction, while the contact angle of RGO/MoS2 beads further increased to 76.9° as a testament to the presence of hydrophobic MoS2 microflakes. As for the case of solar vapor generation, the hydrophobic MoS2 microflakes in RGO/MoS2 beads may enhance the absorption of visible and near-infrared light while the marginally reduced graphene framework is conducive to the easy transport of water.
2.3 Photothermal performance
As revealed by the UV-Vis-NIR spectra in Fig. 2a, there are two intrinsic absorption peaks in the wavelengths around 600 nm for the RGO/MoS2 sample, indicating the presence of MoS2 flakes. In the ultraviolet and visible regions, both the RGO and RGO/MoS2 samples exhibit stronger absorption than the GO sample. With the increase in wavelength, RGO shows an obvious decrease in absorbance, while the RGO/MoS2 sample still maintains a remarkable absorption, which is attributed to the good absorption capacity of MoS2 flakes in the near-infrared region. The photothermal performance of two kinds of beads was studied. The infrared (IR) images of the beads under illumination at different times were recorded simultaneously to characterize the temperature variations. Upon irradiation at 1 kW m−2, the surface temperature of a RGO/MoS2 bead rapidly increases from 22.4 to 55.3 °C after 5 min of illumination, while the RGO bead displays a relatively low temperature of 51.7 °C, as shown in Fig. 2b. This result indicates that the addition of MoS2 microflakes enhances the absorption capability as well as the photothermal effect of the hybrid beads. Additionally, IR images of water with and without the floated RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads before and after 60 min of illumination were collected to compare the surface temperature of interfacial water (Fig. 2c). The temperature distribution across the air–water interface is uniform, indicating a homogeneous heat localization layer of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads. There was only a slight increase in the surface temperature of water without beads. In contrast, the final surface temperature of water with RGO/MoS2 beads reached 34.3 °C. The temperatures of the two systems versus time were also profiled to directly indicate the photothermal conversion performance of RGO/MoS2 beads (Fig. 2d). Once the light was turned on, the surface temperature of water with RGO/MoS2 rapidly increased to ∼30 °C and reached a steady-state temperature of ∼34 °C after about 15 min. The obvious improvement of the temperature gradient, namely 14.5 °C for water with beads vs. 0.9 °C for water without beads, demonstrates the efficient solar-to-heat conversion performance of RGO/MoS2 beads during the water vapor generation process.
 Fig. 2  (a) Standard solar spectrum and UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectra of GO, RGO and RGO/MoS2. IR thermal images of (b) RGO beads (left panel) and RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads (right panel) before and after 5 min of illumination, (c) pure water and water with RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads before and after 60 min of illumination. (d) Surface temperatures of pure water and water with RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads under illumination of 1 kW m−2 as a function of time measured using an IR camera. 
2.4 Water evaporation performance
The strong photothermal capability combined with the scalable fabrication capability makes the graphene aerogel beads a very promising candidate for water evaporation/desalination applications. The water evaporation performance of graphene aerogel beads was investigated by recording the water mass change vs. time under illumination. The aerogel beads were floated on the water surface of a vapor generator without any insulation support or water supply component, which was placed on a precision balance and exposed to an adjustable illumination. Fig. 3a shows that the mass of water without the light absorber gradually decreases with time when the intensity of illumination is 1 kW m−2. In contrast, the water with a single layer of the RGO/MoS2 (∼98 g m−2) evaporation device exhibits a much higher mass loss rate of 0.90 kg m−2 after 60 min of illumination than that of the water acting along (0.23 kg m−2) or that with the RGO bead (0.78 kg m−2) evaporation device. This finding indicates that the heat localization of graphene aerogel drastically improves the water evaporation performance to which the strong absorption capability of MoS2 microflakes in the visible and near-infrared regions significantly contributed. To determine the optimal use conditions, the water evaporation performance of the RGO/MoS2 bead device was determined with different layers of aerogel beads and under different illumination intensities (Fig. 3b and c). We did not characterize the water evaporation rate under a concentrated illumination here because the current case is different from the commercial concentrated photovoltaic systems. Instead, a lower illumination was used to study the water evaporation performance of the RGO/MoS2 bead device. The mass loss rate of a single layer of the RGO/MoS2 bead device under 0.5 kW m−2 reaches 0.54 kg m−2 after 1 h, indicating a fairly high solar vapor generation performance, as shown in Fig. 3b. In addition, Fig. 3c depicts the evaporation properties of water with different number of layers of RGO/MoS2 beads, i.e. ∼98, ∼210 and ∼358 g m−2 for one, two and three layers, respectively. When the number of floated bead layers increased from one to three, there is a gradual improvement in the mass loss rate from 0.90 to 1.12 kg m−2, signifying weak dependence on the number of aerogel bead layers.
 Fig. 3  Time course of water evaporation performance under various conditions. (a) Pure water, water with RGO and RGO/MoS2 beads in a dark environment or under illumination of 1 kW m−2 respectively, (b) water with one layer (∼98 g m−2) of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads under different illumination intensities, (c) water with different amounts of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads under illumination of 1 kW m−2. (d) Efficiencies of steam generation under different conditions. (e) Comparison of efficiencies of solar vapor generators at a solar intensity of 1 kW m−2 and their respective experimental temperatures and relative humidity levels. (f) Schematic diagram of the water evaporation mechanism with aerogel beads floating on the water surface. 
To evaluate the overall solar-to-vapor efficiency, the energy conversion efficiency (η) was calculated from the mass loss rate of water according to the following equation:31  where ṁ is the mass loss rate measured from the slope of the mass loss curves at a steady state, hLV is the total enthalpy of the sensible heat and liquid–vapor phase change, and I is the power density of illumination. The evaporation rate in the dark environment was subtracted from the measured evaporation rate to calculate the steam generation efficiency. The conversion efficiencies of the water evaporation device under various conditions are plotted in Fig. 3d. At 1 kW m−2 solar intensity, the evaporation efficiency of the single layer of RGO/MoS2 beads (62.1%) is obviously higher than that of RGO beads (53.6%) and pure water (15.2%). Especially, the evaporation efficiency of the former device increases to 74.3% when the power density of illumination is reduced to 0.5 kW m−2, verifying the high suitability of RGO/MoS2 beads for generation of freshwater in reality. A possible explanation for the observed efficiency change of RGO/MoS2 beads under 0.5 and 1 kW m−2 illumination is that a larger part of solar energy was lost to heat water under the layer of aerogel beads, thus leading to a bigger loss of efficiency under 1 kW m−2 illumination. Additionally, with increasing RGO/MoS2 bead layers, the evaporation efficiency under 1.0 kW m−2 illumination slightly increases to reach 77.4% at ∼358 g m−2 for three layers. In the absence of an accepted testing standard for the measurement of solar steam generation, it may be inappropriate to make a direct comparison of the efficiencies of different studies. Nonetheless, the comparison of the current study with other reports22,26,28,31,32,34,37 indicates that the current RGO/MoS2 beads exhibit among the highest evaporation efficiencies at a low ambient temperature and high humidity, as shown in Fig. 3e. This finding can be explained by the ameliorating structural and functional features of RGO/MoS2 beads: the excellent light absorption capability and aligned graphene sheets in the onion-like structure offer an efficient capillary action for rapid water transport and vapor release (Fig. 3f). The high solar water evaporation efficiency, together with scalable fabrication and facile use, makes the graphene aerogel beads a viable solution for solar water evaporation.
2.5 Durability and salt resistance
To fully address the practical requirements, the durability and salt resistance of solar absorbers were characterized. Fig. 4a demonstrates the stable evaporation performance of the RGO/MoS2 bead device for over 10 cycles, with each cycle lasting for 1 h without any thermal insulation. After the steam generation experiment, the RGO/MoS2 beads were immersed in seawater before drying at ambient temperature. The inset shows that the dried RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads maintain the spherical shape with little shrinkage. The compression test was conducted to characterize the structural stability of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads,38 and the load-deformation curves obtained after the steam generation experiments are shown in Fig. 4b. There is only a mild reduction in the compressive load of dried RGO/MoS2 beads compared to the fresh samples for a given strain, as a result of a marginal morphological change due to drying. The morphology of the dried RGO/MoS2 beads shown in Fig. 4c confirms the original onion-like structure with well-spaced RGO/MoS2 sheets separated by large pores. The overall cellular inner structure of aerogel beads remains intact although there is regional deformation of the skeleton (Fig. S8†). These findings demonstrate good structural stability of aerogel beads and durability required for solar vapor generation applications. While many efforts have been devoted to producing high-performance solar absorbers, most of the previous studies focused mainly on improving the solar-to-vapor efficiency. Very little information is available on salt accumulation during the seawater evaporation process. The accumulated salt particles can clog the water passageways and deteriorate the water evaporation rate over time. Interestingly, after simple stirring and washing in seawater, the RGO/MoS2 aerogel beads present almost no salt particles, as revealed in Fig. S9.† Even without any washing process, only a few salt particles are detected on the surface of graphene sheets (Fig. S10†). Judging from the stable evaporation performance in Fig. 4a, it can be said that these salt particles have no adverse effects on vapor generation behavior of the aerogel device.
 Fig. 4  (a) Evaporation rate performance of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads for 10 cycles with each cycle lasting 1 h. The inset shows a digital image of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads after the steam generation experiments. (b) Load-deformation curves of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads before and after the steam generation experiments. (c) SEM images of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads after the steam generation experiments in seawater. (d) Schematic of the homemade solar desalination device under natural sunlight. (e) Outdoor experiment with a solar still prototype under natural sunlight with the collected freshwater in the inset. (f) Concentrations of primary ions of seawater and the purified water. 
2.6 Outdoor experiment and desalination performance
Based on the excellent water evaporation properties of aerogel beads, a typical solar still was prepared to demonstrate their actual desalination performance under natural light and real environmental conditions. Fig. 4d illustrates the schematic of a homemade solar desalination device. The sunlight is absorbed by the aerogel beads which simply float on seawater to generate water vapor. A tilted transparent glass covers the box to condense and collect the water vapor. The condensed water could slip into the freshwater collecting tank along the inclined plane. A representative sunny day was chosen to conduct the outdoor experiment. The red line in Fig. S11† displays the intensity of natural light on the rooftop of a building; it reached the maximum of ∼940 W m−2 at 01:00 pm, and the ambient temperature is about 26 °C. The total daily solar insolation is 6.52 kW h. Fig. 4e shows the image of the homemade solar device with an active area of about 0.05 m2. Finally, a total of 100.1 g of water was collected (see the inset picture). It is noteworthy that there are not any auxiliary components for assisting the thermal management and water supply in our system, such as thermally insulating foams or water path supplier, indicating the facile construction and low-cost device. The solar still produces freshwater at an excellent rate of 2.0 L m−2 day−1, which is sufficient to provide one person's drinking water per day. The collection efficiency or daily-averaged solar-to-water efficiency is about 21%: the detailed calculation procedure is provided in the ESI.† Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) was performed to characterize the concentrations of primary ions of seawater and purified water, and the results are shown in Fig. 4f. It is obvious that the concentrations of tested ions are much decreased and the concentration of Na+ is below the World Health Organization (WHO) standard (200 mg L−1) for drinking water.39 In addition, a more simple and practicable testing in reality was conducted to characterize the quality of collected water. As shown in Fig. S12,† the electrical resistances of real seawater, purified water and commercial drinking distilled water were measured using a multimeter to represent the purities of the water samples. The resistance of collected water was significantly higher than that of seawater, i.e. 1.53 MΩ vs. 36.33kΩ, while it is comparable to that of commercial drinking distilled water. These results demonstrate excellent desalination performance of the aerogel beads as a viable solar vapor generation device.
3. Conclusions
In summary, we have developed an efficient solar vapor generation system based on novel onion-like graphene aerogel beads for purification of seawater and polluted water for the first time. Thanks to the excellent light absorption capability and distinctive onion-like structure, the RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads delivered a high photothermal performance along with efficient water transport paths and vapor release capabilities. These characteristics lead to a high water evaporation rate of 0.54 kg m−2 h−1 with a remarkable solar steam generation efficiency of 74% for a single layer of hybrid aerogel beads under an illumination of only 0.5 kW m−2. In addition, stable water evaporation performance and excellent salt resistance were demonstrated through repeated seawater desalination tests. The solar vapor generation system exhibited a high efficiency in purifying contaminated water, such as industrial and domestic sewage. Furthermore, a portable solar still prototype was developed to conduct an outdoor experiment under practical conditions. High quality freshwater at a high production rate of 2.0 L m−2 day−1 was collected, the capability of the solar still is particularly attractive for production of drinking water from seawater or polluted water for water-stressed areas.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was financially supported by the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Grant#: R9365) of Hong Kong SAR and Guangdong Science and Technology Department (Project#: 2018B050502001).
References
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351(6271), aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Li, S. K. Cushing, F. K. Meng, T. R. Senty, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9(9), 601–607 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi and T. Mueller, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9(4), 257–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Park, J. Y. Lee, T. Lee and L. J. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3(9), 1135–1142 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki, W. Yoshida, T. Irie, K. Konishi, K. Nakano, T. Uto, D. Adachi, M. Kanematsu, H. Uzu and K. Yamamoto, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2(5), 17032 CrossRef CAS .
O. Neumann, C. Feronti, A. D. Neumann, A. J. Dong, K. Schell, B. Lu, E. Kim, M. Quinn, S. Thompson, N. Grady, P. Nordlander, M. Oden and N. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110(29), 11677–11681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Romero and A. Steinfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(11), 9234–9245 RSC .
Y. M. Wang, B. T. Tang and S. F. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23(35), 4354–4360 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Liu, J. L. Xu and K. Y. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 269–284 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Wang, G. Ou, N. Wang and H. We, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(14), 9194–9199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. L. Tan, D. X. Ji, B. Zhu, P. Zhang, J. Xu, Q. Q. Gan, Z. F. Yu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2(4), e1501227 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Zielinski, J. W. Choi, T. La Grange, M. Modestino, S. M. H. Hashemi, Y. Pu, S. Birkhold, J. A. Hubbell and D. Psaltis, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(4), 2159–2167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Jin, G. P. Lin, L. Z. Bai, A. Zeiny and D. S. Wen, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 397–406 CrossRef CAS .
O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(1), 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Tao, Y. L. Zhang, F. H. Zhang, K. Wang, X. T. Chang, Y. An, L. H. Dong and Y. S. Yin, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2(10), 3039–3048 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bae, G. Kang, S. K. Cho, W. Park, K. Kim and W. J. Padilla, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ito, Y. Tanabe, J. H. Han, T. Fujita, K. Tanigaki and M. W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(29), 4302–4307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, H. Liu, X. P. Zhao, G. Chen, J. Q. Dai, G. Pastel, C. Jia, C. J. Chen, E. Hitz, D. Siddhartha, R. G. Yang and L. B. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(16), 1707134 CrossRef .
Z. H. Wang, Y. M. Liu, P. Tao, Q. C. Shen, N. Yi, F. Y. Zhang, Q. L. Liu, C. Y. Song, D. Zhang, W. Shang and T. Deng, Small, 2014, 10(16), 3234–3239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Zhu, Y. J. Li, F. J. Chen, X. Y. Zhu, J. Q. Dai, Y. F. Li, Z. Yang, X. J. Yan, J. W. Song, Y. B. Wang, E. Hitz, W. Luo, M. H. Lu, B. Yang and L. B. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(4), 1702884 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Li, T. T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. J. Chen, W. Luo, J. W. Song, E. Hitz, C. Jia, Y. B. Zhou, B. Y. Liu, B. Yang and L. B. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(26), 1700981 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Xu, X. Z. Hu, W. C. Xu, X. Q. Li, L. Zhou, S. N. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(28), 1606762 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Lin, J. Y. Chen, Z. K. Yuan, M. J. Yang, G. J. Chen, D. S. Yu, M. Q. Zhang, W. Hong and X. D. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(11), 4642–4648 RSC .
J. W. Lou, Y. Liu, Z. Y. Wang, D. W. Zhao, C. Y. Song, J. B. Wu, N. Dasgupta, W. Zhang, D. Zhang, P. Tao, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(23), 14628–14636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Liu, S. T. Yu, R. Feng, A. Bernard, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Z. Duan, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Y. Song and T. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(17), 2768–2774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. M. Chen, Z. Q. Pei, Y. S. Xu, Z. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9(5), 1392 RSC .
S. N. Ma, C. P. Chiu, Y. J. Zhu, C. Y. Tang, H. Long, W. Qarony, X. H. Zhao, X. M. Zhang, W. H. Lo and Y. H. Tsang, Appl. Energy, 2017, 206, 63–69 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Zhang, J. Li, L. X. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. T. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(5), 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Liu, Q. Jiang, S. Tadepallifit, R. Raliya, P. Biswas, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(8), 7675–7681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Sajadi, N. Farokhnia, P. Irajizad, M. Hasnain and H. Ghasemi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(13), 4700–4705 RSC .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, ncomms5449 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Pang, W. Huang, S. K. Shaw, J. Schiffbauer, M. Anne Pillers, X. Mu, S. Luo, T. Zhang, Y. Huang, G. Li, S. Ptasinska, M. Lieberman and T. Luo, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5510–5518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Li, W. C. Xu, M. Y. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. N. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113(49), 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Hu, W. C. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. L. Tan, Y. Wang, S. N. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(5), 1604031 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. S. Jiang, L. M. Tian, K. K. Liu, S. Tadepalli, R. Raliya, P. Biswas, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(42), 9400–9407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Feng, W. Y. Xing, L. Song and Y. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(33), 13299–13308 RSC .
Y. Yang, X. Yang, L. Fu, M. Zou, A. Cao, Y. Du, Q. Yuan and C.-H. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1165–1171 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Yang, M. W. Keller, J. S. Moore, S. R. White and N. R. Sottos, Macromolecules, 2008, 41(24), 9650–9655 CrossRef CAS .

Safe Drinking-Water from Desalination, WHO,  2011, https://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/desalination_guidance/en/ Search PubMed.

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09062aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the preparation of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads by wet-spinning and reduction. The inset is digital images of freshly formed GO/MoS2 hybrid hydrogel beads (left) and ∼1.6 L of hybrid aerogel beads (right).	 

 	Fig. 1  Digital images of (a) RGO beads and (b) RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads. SEM images of (c, e and f) RGO beads and (d, g and h) RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads; (i) EDX results and carbon/oxygen atomic ratios of different samples. (j) Contact angles of compressed GO, RGO and RGO/MoS2 beads taken at the first moment. The inset shows a sectional photograph of a real onion.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Standard solar spectrum and UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectra of GO, RGO and RGO/MoS2. IR thermal images of (b) RGO beads (left panel) and RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads (right panel) before and after 5 min of illumination, (c) pure water and water with RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads before and after 60 min of illumination. (d) Surface temperatures of pure water and water with RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads under illumination of 1 kW m−2 as a function of time measured using an IR camera.	 

 	Fig. 3  Time course of water evaporation performance under various conditions. (a) Pure water, water with RGO and RGO/MoS2 beads in a dark environment or under illumination of 1 kW m−2 respectively, (b) water with one layer (∼98 g m−2) of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads under different illumination intensities, (c) water with different amounts of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads under illumination of 1 kW m−2. (d) Efficiencies of steam generation under different conditions. (e) Comparison of efficiencies of solar vapor generators at a solar intensity of 1 kW m−2 and their respective experimental temperatures and relative humidity levels. (f) Schematic diagram of the water evaporation mechanism with aerogel beads floating on the water surface.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Evaporation rate performance of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads for 10 cycles with each cycle lasting 1 h. The inset shows a digital image of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads after the steam generation experiments. (b) Load-deformation curves of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads before and after the steam generation experiments. (c) SEM images of RGO/MoS2 hybrid beads after the steam generation experiments in seawater. (d) Schematic of the homemade solar desalination device under natural sunlight. (e) Outdoor experiment with a solar still prototype under natural sunlight with the collected freshwater in the inset. (f) Concentrations of primary ions of seawater and the purified water.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09062a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
