Changes in in-plane electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS thin films due to electric field induced dipolar reorientation  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5RA13610E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5RA13610E
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 86393-86401Changes in in-plane electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS thin films due to electric field induced dipolar reorientation
Mrunal S. Mahajana, 
D. M. Marathea, 
Sanjay S. Ghosha, 
V. Ganesanb and 
Jaydeep V. Sali*a
aOrganic Photovoltaic Laboratory, Department of Physics, North Maharashtra University, Jalgaon-425001, India. E-mail: jvsali@nmu.ac.in;   Tel: +91 257 2257474
bUGC-DAE Consortium for Scientific Research, Indore 452001, India
Received 
11th July 2015
, Accepted 24th September 2015First published on 13th October 2015AbstractOrientation of polar polymer chains can be achieved by direct application of high electric field to the polymer thin films. Changes in morphology due to such electric field treatment can impart changes in electrical conductivity of the thin films. PEDOT:PSS thin films exhibit isotropic in-plane electrical conductivity. We have observed that the electric field treatment at high temperature lead to anisotropic behaviour in in-plane conductivity of thin film of PEDOT:PSS film. In case of films prepared with aqueous solution of PEDOT:PSS, electric field treatment cause rise in electrical in-plane conductivity in orthogonal direction to electric field and it falls in direction of electric field. Thin films prepared with DMSO added aqueous solution of PEDOT:PSS show initial isotropic switching from high conductivity to low conductivity state due to electric field treatment. Prolonged treatment resulted in significant fall in in-plane electrical conductivity specifically in the direction of electric field. A model, based on re-orientation of polymer chains caused by interaction of electric field and electric dipoles of PEDOT:PSS chains, has been proposed to explain this behaviour. The hypothesis is supported by the results of Raman spectroscopy. Co-relating changes are also recorded in absorption spectra of these films. This study may find application in write once read many memory devices based on PEDOT:PSS.
1. Introduction
Recent organic optoelectronic devices based on conducting conjugated polymers, provide economically affordable device fabrications using low cost solution processable methods. Electronic properties of conjugated polymers are based on delocalization of π electrons in and between the backbones of polymer chains, which in turn depend on aggregation or crystallization of polymer chains in the thin film. Self assembly of chains in terms of molecular stacking order, connectivity between crystalline regions, amount of crystallites and alignment of crystalline regions are considered as important primary morphological and structural features which greatly influence the continuous and efficient charge transport in the polymeric electronic devices.1 Recently, researchers have employed electric field treatment as one of the options for improving the efficiency of polymeric semiconductor devices such as polymer solar cells and polymer light emitting devices.2 It has been shown that orientation of polar polymer molecules can be achieved by direct application of high electric field between the electrodes during or after fabrication of devices.3,4 Polar organization of polymer chains facilitates interchain transport along the backbones of polymer chains in the devices. In some of the studies bias voltages have been applied on devices to establish a large electric field, which can order the arrangement of conjugated polymers to improve the performance of polymer solar cells.5 Shen et al. applied horizontal electric field externally to P3HT:PCBM based solar cell and achieved enhanced power conversion efficiency from 3.04% to 3.46%.6 It has been also shown that the molecular arrangement and thus dielectric properties of polar organic dielectric material could be changed under the influence of electric field. An application of external AC electric field to PVP dielectric layer increases its dielectric constant by about 30%.7 Morphological changes resulting due to application of electric field could change the electronic properties of conjugated polymers.
PEDOT:PSS ((poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)):(polystyrene sulfonate)) is the highly conducting conjugated polymer assisted with its inherent advantages over other conducting polymers such as high transparency in the visible range, long term stability and solution process ability. In case of PEDOT:PSS, the electronic characteristics are related to the conjugated polythiophene backbone of PEDOT.8 It is reported that the transport of charge is expected to be efficient along the more π-stacked PEDOT chains, since the smaller distance between PEDOT chains favors the hopping of charges.9 Several studies have proposed that the conductivity enhancement in PEDOT:PSS is either due to conformational change of the PEDOT chains10 or due to reorientation of PEDOT chains, which generally occurs due to the interaction of dipoles of additives and the dipoles or charge on PEDOT chains in PEDOT:PSS film.11 The conformational changes in the PEDOT:PSS film are considered as a change of coil conformation of chains i.e. benzoid structure to the linear conformation i.e. qunoid structure.12 In linear structure, the neighboring thiophene rings in the polymer chains are most orientated in the same plane, so the conjugated π electrons are delocalized over the whole polymer chains. Thus, linear structure of PEDOT chain has higher charge carrier mobility as compared to coil conformation.13 Such a change in PEDOT chains have been reported to occur due to electric field assisted spray deposition of PEDOT:PSS thin films which lead to the improved inter-chain charge transport or to an interconnected network of elongated PEDOT grain with resultant conductivity enhancement.14 Aggregation of PEDOT chains due to reduction of PSS chains in the PEDOT:PSS film also lead to conductivity enhancement in the film.15 It is reported that, the application of electric field during spin coating of PEDOT:PSS thin film, reduced concentration of PSS chains from the surface of the film, resulting in enhanced conductivity of the film.16 PEDOT:PSS films are employed as conductive polymer fuses in write-once read many time (WORM) memory devices, in which it undergoes an irreversible reduction in conductivity when exposed to large (WRITE) current.17 It has been shown that permanent conductivity decreases in PEDOT:PSS is caused by segregation of PEDOT+ and PSS− near the interface in the presence of a large current.18
In this paper, we have investigated the effect of electric field on the morphological and hence on the electrical properties of PEDOT:PSS films. Nardes et al. has shown that the morphology of PEDOT:PSS films could be highly correlated with its anisotropic nature of conductivities along in-plane and out of plane direction. It has also been reported that PEDOT:PSS thin films show isotropic behaviour in in-plane conductivity.19 However, we have observed that electric field treatment to the PEDOT:PSS thin films could lead to anisotropic behavior in its in-plane conductivity. DC electric field treatment at high temperature could re-orient polymer chains. These orientations of chains are reflected in the anisotropic in-plane conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films. Interestingly, electric field treatment to PEDOT:PSS thin films prepared with DMSO added solution results in switching from high conductivity state to very low conductivity state in specific direction along the film surface.
2. Experimental
PEDOT:PSS films used for treatment were prepared by spraying highly diluted solution (25% PEDOT:PSS + 75% water) of PEDOT:PSS (Clevios P VP AL 4083) on corning glass substrates using ultrasonic spray nozzle (#120-2-16-09-000-03 THD, Sonotek Corporation) operated at 120 kHz. The spray was operated for optimized time period to achieve desired thickness (1000 nm). The solution flow rate was kept at 10 ml h−1 while the substrate temperature was kept at 33 °C. Similarly, another solution was prepared by addition of 5 wt% of DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide) in PEDOT:PSS solution (25% PEDOT:PSS + 75% water) with stirring for overnight. The solutions were filtered using a 0.45 μm syringe filter and were sprayed on Corning glass substrate to prepare the thin films. The thin films of PEDOT:PSS prepared with aqueous solution of PEDOT:PSS are hereafter mentioned as pristine PEDOT:PSS films and the films prepared with DMSO added to aqueous solution of PEDOT:PSS are mentioned as DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films in the further discussion. The as deposited thin films have been termed as ‘untreated’. These films are neither thermally annealed nor treated with electric field. Other films were treated with electric field of 5 kV cm−1, which was assisted with simultaneous annealing at 120 °C for 1 hour, 3 hour and 6 hour time intervals. The experimental set up consists of small enclosure that could sustain temperature up to 200 °C, in which hot plate of dimensions 4 × 4 cm2 was placed. Corning sheet was placed on the hot plate to ensure electrical isolation. Parallel electric field treatment (electric field parallel to surface) was achieved using the parallel plate geometry as shown in Fig. 1. It consists of two thin stainless steel plates of dimensions 2 × 3 cm2 kept parallel and 1 cm apart from each other. In this gap of 1 cm PEDOT:PSS thin film was placed such that its plane was perpendicular to the plane of plates. Electric field was applied using these plates with high voltage DC power supply. During the treatment time, the steady-state current due to the application of the electric field was below the detection limit.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of parallel plate geometry for the electric field treatment. 
The conductivities of thin films were measured by two probe method with Keithley 2611A source measure unit with application of fixed bias voltage of 1.5 V. The electrical contacts were made by depositing Al electrodes with special pattern using thermal evaporation system for measuring the conductivity of treated pristine PEDOT:PSS and DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films. The electrode pattern is shown in Fig. 2. The idea behind such pattern used for electrodes geometry was to trace the effect of electric field treatment on polymer chains, in different directions. The pattern consists of electrode pairs in which each electrode has dimension 2 mm × 3 mm and two electrodes were 2 mm apart. The geometry of electrodes was kept such that one pair of electrodes will measure the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS film in the direction perpendicular to the direction of electric field (pair labeled 1) and another pair in parallel direction (pair labeled 2). Two pair of electrodes (pairs labeled 3 and 4) measure conductivity in diagonal directions. Thus, the conductivities were measured in four different directions relative to the direction of electric field. The Raman spectra of the polymer films were obtained using JobinYvon HoribaLabram-HR visible with 632.8 nm excitation wavelength. Atomic force microscope (AFM) images were obtained from a Nanoscope III digital Instrument operated in tapping mode. The UV-Vis absorption spectra were taken using UV Spectrometer 1601 (Shimadzu). Film thicknesses were determined using stylus profiler (Dektak 150).
 Fig. 2  Geometry of electrodes deposited on the PEDOT:PSS thin films for measurement of in-plane electrical conductivity in different directions relative to direction of electric field. 
3. Results and discussion
The effect of annealing assisted electric field treatment on both pristine PEDOT:PSS thin films and DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin films on specifically in-plane conductivity have been investigated. Fig. 3 shows effect of simply annealing and annealing assisted electric field treatment of both types of films on in-plane electrical conductivity in different directions with reference to the direction of applied electric field during the treatment. Logarithm of the electrical conductivities has been plotted in case of electric field treated films to show clearly its variation which spans over a large range, specifically in DMSO added thin films. In case of pristine PEDOT:PSS thin films (Fig. 3(a)), the electrical conductivity in a direction perpendicular to electric field rises with treatment time upto 3 hours. Thereafter it decreases. Similar behavior, on a lower scale, is observed in diagonal direction. The electrical conductivity in a direction parallel to the electric field, however, shows different behavior. With initial rise in conductivity for 1 hour treatment, it decreases suddenly for 3 hour treatment and shows negligible change thereafter. The in-plane electrical conductivity of untreated PEDOT:PSS thin films show isotropic behavior. However, the PEDOT:PSS thin film, treated with electric field for three hours, shows anisotropic behavior of in-plane conductivity. While the electrical conductivity in a direction parallel to electric field decrease by half, the electrical conductivity in a direction perpendicular to electric field increases by about 2.5 times. The observed changes are not caused by the thermal annealing used to assist the electric field treatment. This can be observed from Fig. 3(b) which shows changes in electrical conductivity (averaged over the three directions) as a function of treatment time.
 Fig. 3  Conductivities measured for (a) the thermal annealing assisted electric field PEDOT:PSS films (b) thermally annealed PEDOT:PSS film (c) the thermal annealing assisted electric field DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films (d) thermally annealed DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films. Numbers in bracket in the legend indicate corresponding electrode pair as labeled in Fig. 2. 
Addition of DMSO to aqueous PEDOT:PSS solution increases the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS thin films by 1000 folds. As seen from Fig. 3(c), the average conductivity (averaged over the three directions) of the untreated film is about 0.25 S cm−1, which is about 3 orders greater than the same for pristine PEDOT:PSS thin films i.e. 7.0 × 10−5 S cm−1. When treated with electric field, assisted by thermal annealing, these films show totally different behavior than the pristine films. The electric field treatment results in significant reduction in electrical conductivities of DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films with respect to treatment time (Fig. 3(c)). In this case also we can say that the observed changes are not caused by the thermal annealing used to assist the electric field treatment. This can be observed from Fig. 3(d), which shows change in electrical conductivity (averaged over the three directions) as a function of treatment time due to thermal annealing.
The effect of electric field treatment on the conductivity in different directions becomes more clear if we plot the ratio of untreated conductivity to the conductivity after treatment for the three directions. The results are plotted in Fig. 4(a) for the case of DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin films. The y-axis shows how much times the resistivity rises due to the electric field treatment. It can be observed that the electrical resistivity, in a direction parallel to electric field rises considerably as a function of treatment time. Resistivity, in a direction perpendicular to electric field, increases for a treatment of one-hour and thereafter remains almost constant. The resistivity, in a direction diagonal to electric field, shows an intermediate behavior. Similar data, in case of thermal annealing only, is shown in Fig. 4(b). It clearly shows negligible effect of only thermal annealing on the electrical resistivity of the PEDOT:PSS thin films. Significant change in electrical resistivity due to electric field treatment to DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin film may find application in write once read many type memory devices. Reduction in ‘element’ dimensions, increase in electric-field strength and optimization in terms of solution composition and annealing temperature may reduce the time taken for significant change in electrical conductivity.
 Fig. 4  (a) Ratio of untreated conductivity to the conductivity after treatment for the three directions for the case of DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films (b) same ratio for only thermally annealed films: plots and data. Numbers in bracket in the legend indicate corresponding electrode pair as labeled in Fig. 2. 
To explain the observed results, we propose a simple model using the structure of PEDOT:PSS chains. The negative charges on the PSS chains and the corresponding positive charges on the PEDOT segments form electric dipoles along the PEDOT:PSS chains. The electric dipole moments, ordinarily, are randomly oriented. However, under the influence of external electric field, they can be oriented to an extent, decided by the morphology of the chains. Fig. 5 shows the randomly oriented dipoles as well as the status of dipoles under the influence of external electric field.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of orientation of PEDOT:PSS dipoles: initial random orientation and re-orientation under the influence of electric field. 
It can be depicted that under this situation, the conducting path along the direction perpendicular to electric field will be well connected and the electrical conductivity in that direction would be high. On the other hand, the motion of charge carries along the direction of electric field will be hampered by the presence of non-conducting PSS chains and so the conductivity in that direction will be very low. Thus, the orientation of chains due to influence of electric field on the electric dipoles could result in anisotropic conductivity. We have observed such behavior in the pristine PEDOT:PSS thin films treated under electric field for three hours. A schematic diagram to show the morphological changes is presented in Fig. 6(a) and (b).
 Fig. 6  Schematic to show the morphological changes in case of pristine PEDOT:PSS thin films (a) untreated (b) electric field treated. 
In case of DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin films, a distinctly different behavior is observed. As reported earlier by many researchers, addition of DMSO to the source solution results in enhancement of electrical conductivity.20,21 The enhancement in conductivity has been attributed to screening effect between the chains, induced by the DMSO, which reduces the columbic interaction between the positively charged PEDOT chains and negatively charged PSS chains.22 This results in aggregation of PEDOT domain in the DMSO added PEDOT:PSS film. We present a schematic of the chains morphology in Fig. 7(a) based on the literature reports on the effect of polar solvent like DMSO on the arrangement of the PEDOT:PSS chains.20
 Fig. 7  Schematic to show the morphological changes in case of DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin films (a) untreated (b) electric field treated. 
The aggregation of PEDOT segments lead to possibilities of interconnected pathways for the charge carriers leading to enhanced conductivities. On application of thermal annealing assisted electric field, however, the conductivity decreases to the level of pristine PEDOT:PSS films. This occurs during the treatment for an hour. It seems that the application of electric field to DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin films do not cause much change in morphology of aggregated PEDOT. But the non-aggregated PSS chains may migrate in the presence of electric field. It leads to morphology of PSS chains which is analogous to that in the pristine films. Here, insulating PSS chain play a role to decrease the conductivity by acting as barrier to charge transport. This prevents the charge transport and blocks the conducting pathways between conducting PEDOT domains. Effectively, it brings the conductivity of the electric field treated films down to the conductivity of as deposited pristine PEDOT:PSS thin films. Thereafter, with treatment time, the effect of applied electric field is reflected in further changes in conductivity. In particular, we observed, significant decrease in electrical conductivity along a direction parallel to the electric field as a function of treatment time. Data in Fig. 4 represents ratio of conductivity of untreated films to conductivity of treated films. In other words, this ratio indicates change in resistivity in the treated films. It can be observed that with one hour treatment it rises by two orders, with three hours treatment it rises by three orders and with six hours treatment it rises by four orders. The resistivity in a direction perpendicular to the electric field seems to be saturated. The resistivity in diagonal direction shows an intermediate behavior.
The changes induced in the chain alignment due to application of electric field on the films could be effectively noted with the help of intensity and positions of peaks in the Raman spectra obtained for different films. Raman spectroscopy has been employed here to probe the changes that have occurred at the molecular level. The Raman spectra of the PEDOT:PSS and DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin films are shown in Fig. 8. The intense peak at 1421 cm−1 has been assigned to the symmetrical stretching of CαCβ, 1365 cm−1 to CβCβ, 1255 cm−1 to CαCα inter ring stretching. The peak at 1563 cm−1 and 1532 cm−1 are originated from the asymmetrical stretching of CαCβ. The relative peak intensities of these peaks have been used as an indicative of some degree of PEDOT polymer chain doping.23 It has been reported that, if the band between 1400 and 1500 cm−1 corresponding to the stretching vibration of CαCβ, shifts to red and become narrow, it indicates that the resonant structure of PEDOT chain changes from benzoid to quinoid structure.24 But, for both the electric field treated pristine PEDOT:PSS and DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin films no such shifting of peak is observed. This clearly indicates that electric field treatments are not responsible for chain conformation, but only results in reorientation of the polymer chains. This can be observed from variation in intensities of asymmetric peaks.
 Fig. 8  Raman spectra for (a) thermally annealed PEDOT:PSS film (b) electric field treated PEDOT:PSS films (c) thermally annealed DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films (d) electric field treated DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films. 
As depicted in Fig. 5 there are dipoles along the PEDOT:PSS chains in the thin film. Thermal energy given to PEDOT:PSS during thermal treatment converts PEDOT:PSS film into glassy state. Dipoles of PEDOT:PSS then have freedom to orient randomly (chain relaxation) in the film. However, the thermal energy is not enough to cause any significant changes in chain alignment. This is reflected in feeble changes in Raman spectra obtained for the thermal annealed PEDOT:PSS films, as shown in Fig. 8(a). However, with the application of electric field in association of thermal annealing, columbic attractions between the dipoles are reduced in the PEDOT:PSS film. This result in increase in dipole moment and therefore, the torque on the dipole moments. Electric field, thus, forces the PEDOT and PSS ion chains to align according to electric field. Hence, more dipoles reorient themselves according to electric field. The significant changes in the chain alignment could be observed in the Raman spectra of thermal annealing assisted electric field treated pristine PEDOT:PSS films Fig. 8(b). However, contrast situation could be seen for the case of DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films. Addition of DMSO in PEDOT:PSS film cause screening effect between PEDOT and PSS chains. PEDOT domains are aggregated in the films, increasing the conductive path in the films. Chain partitions in this case avoid dipoles formation. However, due to thermal annealing chains have freedom to orient in their glassy states. Opposite ionic chains may get chance to come close due to columbic attraction leading to more orientation of chains. The effect could be seen from the pronounced changes in peak intensity of asymmetric peaks for DMSO added PEDOT:PSS Raman spectra, Fig. 8(c). Thermal annealing may not bring the chains close enough to form dipoles. However, application of electric field in this case may oppose motion of chains under columbic force, so almost no changes are observed in asymmetric modes of Raman spectra, Fig. 8(d). But the non-aggregated PSS chains may migrate in the presence of electric field. This prevents the charge transport and blocks the conducting pathways between conducting PEDOT domains. Consequently the effect could be seen in the significant decrease in conductivity of DMSO added PEDOT:PSS film within an hour of treatment. This explanation has been summarized in Table 1 below:
Table 1 Summary of effect of thermal annealing and electric field treatment assisted by thermal annealing on pristine and DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin films




 
Thermal annealing
Electric field treatment




PEDOT:PSS
Only relaxation
Dipole orientation


DMSO added PEDOT:PSS
Columbic force cause movements of separated chains
Only relaxation (electric field opposes movement of chains)




The electronic absorption in the near IR range has been assigned to the free-carrier absorption, similar to that observed, for example, in polyaniline.25 Thus, increase in absorption near IR range indicates, the increase of the free-carrier concentration and intramolecular conductivity, which are related to favorable changes, occurred in PEDOT:PSS chains.26 The absorption spectra for the treated PEDOT:PSS films show behavior correlating with the changes in their electrical conductivities. As seen in Fig. 9(a), absorption shows rise with electric field treatment upto 3 hours. However, it further decreases for electric field treatment for 6 hours. Interestingly, for DMSO added thin films, the absorption shows fall with electric field treatment (Fig. 9(b)).
 Fig. 9  Absorption spectra for thermal annealing assisted electric field treated (a) pristine PEDOT:PSS (b) DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films. 
The AFM phase images of the untreated and electric field treated pristine as well as DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin films are presented in Fig. 10. As reported in previous publications the bright (hard) region represents presence of PEDOT and the dark (soft) region represents presence of PSS.27 The phase image of untreated pristine film shows pronounced presence of PSS on the surface with intermixed uniform distribution of comparatively less fraction of PEDOT (Fig. 10(a)). The DMSO added PEDOT:PSS film on the other hand, clearly shows aggregated domains of PEDOT (Fig. 10(e)). The tapping mode AFM images of untreated PEDOT:PSS and DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films shows high phase contrast (phase angle range 0 to around 20°) as compared to the treated films. With the annealing assisted electric field treatment the films shows lower phase contrast (phase angle range 0 to 4°) which do not change significantly with increase in treatment time. Comparisons of these images with phase images of only annealed films (Fig. 10(h and i)) indicate that the electric field may be assisting the intermixing of two phases.
 Fig. 10  Tapping mode AFM phase images: pristine PEDOT:PSS thin films: (a) untreated (b) electric field treatment for 1 hour (c) electric field treatment for 3 hours (d) electric field treatment for 6 hours. DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin films: (e) untreated (f) electric field treatment for 1 hour (g) electric field treatment for 6 hours thermal annealing treatment: (h) pristine PEDOT:PSS (i) DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin film. 
4. Conclusion
In summary, we have shown that the application of thermal annealing assisted electric field treatment on PEDOT:PSS thin films lead to anisotropic behavior of electrical in-plane conductivity. Due to intrinsically different morphology of PEDOT:PSS thin films prepared without (pristine PEDOT:PSS) and with addition of DMSO (DMSO added PEDOT:PSS) to the source solution, different changes in electrical in-plane conductivity are observed due to electric field treatment. In case of pristine PEDOT:PSS thin films, electric field treatment cause rise in electrical in-plane conductivity in orthogonal direction to electric field and it falls in direction of electric field. DMSO added thin films show initial isotropic switching from high conductivity to low conductivity state due to electric field treatment. Prolonged electric field treatment results in significant fall in in-plane electrical conductivity specifically in the direction of electric field. A model, based on re-orientation of polymer chains caused by interaction of electric field and electric dipoles of PEDOT:PSS chains, has been proposed to explain this behavior. The hypothesis is supported by the results of Raman spectroscopy. Co-relating changes are also recorded in absorption spectra of these films. This study may find application in write once read many memory devices based on PEDOT:PSS.
AcknowledgementsThe work was financially supported by University Grants Commission of India through Special Assistance Programme (530/2/DRS/2010(SAP-I)) Phase-II. The author would like to thank Dr Vasant Sathe (Scientist F), UGC-DAE Consortium for Scientific Research, Indore Centre, for help in Micro Raman Spectroscopy.
ReferencesH. Wang, Y. Xu, X. Yu, R. Xing, J. Liu and Y. Han, Polymers, 2013, 5, 1272–1324 CrossRef PubMed .A. Osman Sevim and S. Mutlu, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 18–26 CrossRef PubMed .G. Sharma, V. Singh Choudahry and M. Roy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 275–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Jin, Y. Hou, Q. Shi, X. Meng and F. Teng, Solid State Commun., 2006, 140, 555–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Li, Y. Hou, Y. Wang, Z. Feng, B. Feng, L. Qin and F. Teng, Synth. Met., 2008, 158, 190–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. M. Shen, C. S. Chen, P.-C. Yang, S.-Y. Ma and C. F. Lin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 99, 263–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Hoon Park and E. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 103311 CrossRef PubMed .X. Crispin, S. Marciniak, W. Osikowicz, G. Zotti, A. W. DeniervanderGon, F. Louwet, M. Fahlman, L. Groenedaal, F. de Schryver and W. R. Salaneck, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2003, 41, 2561–2583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, M. Shkynov, R. Friend and J. L. Bredas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 229 CrossRef CAS .J. Ouyang, C. W. Chu, F. C. Chen, Q. Xu and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 2 Search PubMed .L. A. A. Pettersson, S. Ghosh and O. Inganas, Org. Electron., 2002, 3, 143 CrossRef CAS .J. Ouyang, Q. Xu, C. W. Chu, Y. Yang, G. Li and J. Shinar, Polymer, 2004, 45, 8443–8450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Y. Kim, J. H. Jung, D. E. Lee and J. Joo, Synth. Met., 2002, 126, 311 CrossRef CAS .N. Chaturvedi, F. Alam, S. K. Swami and V. Dutta, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 184501 CrossRef PubMed .S. K. M. Jonsson, J. Birgerson, X. Crispin, G. Greczynski, W. Osikowicz, A. W. D. vanderGon, W. R. Salneck and M. Fahlman, Synth. Met., 2003, 139, 1 CrossRef CAS .H. Jin, Y. Hou, Q. Shi, X. Meng and F. Teng, Solid State Commun., 2006, 140, 555–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Smith and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 5019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Xu, R. A. Register and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 142109 CrossRef PubMed .A. M. Nardes, M. Kemerink, R. A. J. Janseen, J. A. M. Bastiaansen, N. M. M. Kiggen, B. M. W. Langeveld, J. J. M. van Breeman and M. M. de Kok, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. I. Na, G. Wang, S. S. Kim, T. W. Kim, S. H. Oh, B. K. Yu, T. Lee and D. Y. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 9045–9053 RSC .P. K. Choudhury, D. Bagchi, C. S. Suchand Sangeeth and R. Menon, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1607–1614 RSC .J. Y. Kim, J. H. Jung, D. E. Lee and J. Joo, Synth. Met., 2002, 126, 311 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Farah, S. A. Rutledge, A. Schaarschmidt, R. Lai, J. P. Freedman and A. S. Helmy, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2012, 112, 113709 Search PubMed .S. Garreau, J. L. Duvail and G. Lourrn, Synth. Met., 2002, 125, 325 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xia, J. M. Wiesinger and A. G. MacDiarmid, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 443 CrossRef CAS .O. P. Dimitriev, D. A. Grinko, Y. V. Noskov, N. A. Ogurstsov and A. A. Pud, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 2237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Xia and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4927–4936 RSC .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of parallel plate geometry for the electric field treatment.	 

 	Fig. 2  Geometry of electrodes deposited on the PEDOT:PSS thin films for measurement of in-plane electrical conductivity in different directions relative to direction of electric field.	 

 	Fig. 3  Conductivities measured for (a) the thermal annealing assisted electric field PEDOT:PSS films (b) thermally annealed PEDOT:PSS film (c) the thermal annealing assisted electric field DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films (d) thermally annealed DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films. Numbers in bracket in the legend indicate corresponding electrode pair as labeled in Fig. 2.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Ratio of untreated conductivity to the conductivity after treatment for the three directions for the case of DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films (b) same ratio for only thermally annealed films: plots and data. Numbers in bracket in the legend indicate corresponding electrode pair as labeled in Fig. 2.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of orientation of PEDOT:PSS dipoles: initial random orientation and re-orientation under the influence of electric field.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic to show the morphological changes in case of pristine PEDOT:PSS thin films (a) untreated (b) electric field treated.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic to show the morphological changes in case of DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin films (a) untreated (b) electric field treated.	 

 	Fig. 8  Raman spectra for (a) thermally annealed PEDOT:PSS film (b) electric field treated PEDOT:PSS films (c) thermally annealed DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films (d) electric field treated DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films.	 

PEDOT:PSS	Only relaxation	Dipole orientation
DMSO added PEDOT:PSS	Columbic force cause movements of separated chains	Only relaxation (electric field opposes movement of chains)

 	Fig. 9  Absorption spectra for thermal annealing assisted electric field treated (a) pristine PEDOT:PSS (b) DMSO added PEDOT:PSS films.	 

 	Fig. 10  Tapping mode AFM phase images: pristine PEDOT:PSS thin films: (a) untreated (b) electric field treatment for 1 hour (c) electric field treatment for 3 hours (d) electric field treatment for 6 hours. DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin films: (e) untreated (f) electric field treatment for 1 hour (g) electric field treatment for 6 hours thermal annealing treatment: (h) pristine PEDOT:PSS (i) DMSO added PEDOT:PSS thin film.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
