Whole- cell based hybrid materials for green energy production, environmental remediation and smart cell -therapy   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CS00024H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CS00024H
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 860-885Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsWhole-cell based hybrid materials for green energy production, environmental remediation and smart cell-therapy†

        
          
            Alexandre 
            Léonard‡§
a, 
      
        
          
            Philippe 
            Dandoy‡§
a, 
      
        
          
            Emeric 
            Danloy‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Grégory 
            Leroux‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Christophe F. 
            Meunier‡§
a, 
      
        
          
            Joanna C. 
            Rooke‡
a and 

        
          
            Bao-Lian 
            Su
          
          
        
      *ab
aLaboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry (CMI), The University of Namur (FUNDP), 61, rue de Bruxelles, B-5000 Namur, Belgium. E-mail: bao-lian.su@fundp.ac.be;  Fax: +32 81 72 5414;   Tel: +32 81 72 4531
bState Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, 122, Luoshi Road, Wuhan, 430070, China. E-mail: baoliansu@whut.edu.cn
Received 
      29th June 2010
    First published on 7th January 2011AbstractThis critical review highlights the advances that have been made over recent years in the domain of whole-cell immobilisation and encapsulation for applications relating to the environment and human health, particularly focusing on examples of photosynthetic plant cells, bacteria and algae as well as animal cells. Evidence that encapsulated photosynthetic cells remain active in terms of CO2 sequestration and biotransformation (solar driven conversion of CO2 into biofuels, drugs, fine chemicals etc.), coupled with the most recent advances made in the field of cell therapy, reveals the need to develop novel devices based on the preservation of living cells within abiotic porous frameworks. This review shall corroborate this statement by selecting precise examples that unambiguously demonstrate the necessity and the benefits of such smart materials. As will be described, the handling and exploitation of photosynthetic cells are enhanced by entrapment or encapsulation since the cells are physically separated from the liquid medium, thereby facilitating the recovery of the metabolites produced. In the case of animal cells, their encapsulation within a matrix is essential in order to create a physical barrier that can protect the cells auto-immune defenders upon implantation into a living body. For these two research axes, the key parameters that have to be kept in mind when designing hybrid materials will be identified, concentrating on essential aspects such as biocompatibility, mechanical strength and controlled porosity (264 references).
Alexandre Léonard
Dr Alexandre Léonard received his Master's and PhD degrees under the supervision of Prof. Dr Bao-Lian Su at the University of Namur in 2000 and 2005. He was awarded the Royal Chemical Society of Belgium prize and laureate of the DSM Award for Science and Technology in 2005. His research was aimed at new synthesis pathways towards highly structured mesoporous (alumino)silicates and the preparation of hierarchical aluminosilicates, based on original spontaneous formation mechanisms. He is currently working at the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry as ‘‘Chargé de Recherches’’ on the conception of new photobioreactors based on immobilized photosynthetic microorganisms within porous inorganic matrices.
Emeric Danloy, Philippe Dandoy and Grégory Leroux
Emeric Danloy, Philippe Dandoy and Grégory Leroux, are PhD students in Prof Su's research group, each working on projects involving cell encapsulation.
Christophe F. Meunier
Christophe Meunier obtained his Master’s and PhD degrees under the supervision of Prof. Dr Bao-Lian Su from the laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry, University of Namur (FUNDP), Belgium, in 2006 and 2010. He received the SRC prize for his master's thesis from the Royal Belgian Society of Chemistry. He is currently working in the laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry as a Postdoctoral Researcher in the frame of the Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique (FNRS), Belgium. He is carrying out his research on the incorporation of biological functionalities within inorganic matrices and on the comprehension of the bio-mineralization processes.
Joanna C. Rooke
Dr Joanna Rooke received a MNatSc. (Chemistry) degree from the University of Birmingham (2000). She was awarded a PhD, jointly funded by Merck and EPSRC, by the University of Southampton (2004) under the supervision of Prof. M. T. Weller. After a PDRF at the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials chemistry, University of Namur she moved to LEPMI, INP Grenoble before returning to Namur to participate in an EU INTERREG IV project concerning VOC and CO2 abatement. Her research interests include synthesis and crystallography of oxynitrides, adsorption of Pt nanoparticles on carbon aerogels and encapsulation of photosynthetic entities within porous silica gels.
Bao-Lian Su
Prof. Bao-Lian Su joined the faculty and created the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry at the University of Namur, Belgium in 1995. He is currently a Full Professor of Chemistry, Director of the Chemistry Department and the Research Centre for Nanomaterials Chemistry. He is also Changjiang Professor at Wuhan University of Technology and ‘‘The Expert of the State’’ in the frame of ‘‘Thousands Talents’’ program, China. His current research fields include the synthesis, the property study and the molecular engineering of organized, hierarchically porous and bio-inspired materials, living materials and leaf-like materials and the immobilization of bio-organisms for artificial photosynthesis, nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology, cell therapy and biomedical applications.
1. Introduction
Immobilisation of biomolecules and whole cells has been recognised as a powerful tool for over 50 years, dating from the time when scientists explored the possibility of using enzymes for industrial bioconversions. It was stated that individual enzymes and cells in suspension behave as elements of the fluid and are thus difficult to separate from the broth, precluding their continuous or repeated use in chemical processes. Immobilisation by adhesion on substrates, entrapment or encapsulation is therefore one way in which the biomolecules can exhibit hydrodynamic characteristics different from the surrounding environment.1 Keeping this in mind, a huge deal of work has since been carried out to find the most suitable immobilisation matrices for sustaining biomolecule activity or keeping the cells intact whilst allowing the processing to continue within the reaction media. Concurrently, it becomes evident that biocatalysis, i.e. catalytic conversion processes carried out in the presence of bioactive species (enzymes, yeasts, bacteria etc.) is one of the most efficient and green methods to produce molecules of interest at an industrial level.2 However, the handling of these species in liquid media presents severe drawbacks, such as uncontrolled cell density, potential toxicity of reactants and products, nutritional limitations and difficulties in the recovery of the end-products. To overcome these problems, a physical separation from the liquid phase is required (attachment or entrapment), which can maintain high cell densities without leaching, improve reaction yields and rates, increase bioreactor volumetric productivity and simplify the operation.3 Moreover, this strategy leads to considerable process economies since immobilisation also increases the reusability of the catalysts.4 A concrete example of the benefits of whole-cell immobilisation on biocatalytic processes is the production of biodiesel (monoalkyl esters of long chain fatty esters from vegetable oils or animal fats). The oils have to be processed via transesterification and the benefits of using intracellular lipases over conventional alkaline catalysts has previously been demonstrated by the gentler operating conditions (less energy needed), the broad spectrum of starting oils and a minimum production of waste.5,6 In addition to these features, the use of immobilised species allowed them to be separated from the reaction mixture by filtration or kept in the reactor, in the case of a packed bed, to be reused for subsequent reaction cycles, thus improving the overall catalytic performance. An enhanced enzymatic activity was even demonstrated upon immobilisation by comparison to cells in suspension, resulting either from cell aggregation or a constant cell density.7–9
Biocatalysis thus unambiguously demonstrates the benefits of immobilising living cells within matrices. The advantages of embedding cells within a support however go beyond the ease of catalyst recovery, constant cell density and physical separation from the medium. The encapsulation of cells also confers protection. This is important when cells are to be exploited outside their natural environment, for instance where predation can occur. It is even more relevant in the case of cell therapy. In fact microencapsulation is necessary when living whole cells are to be implanted in living bodies, thereby conferring immunoprotection and also immunoisolation.10 Much research is currently being carried out in the treatment of diabetes,11 cancer,12 anemia,13 Huntington's disease,14etc. through the use of cell therapy. This technique allows a controlled release of hormones or enzymes, which is not always possible by exogeneous injections say. Even though it has been proved that the cells are well-protected against immunity defenders, much work is still needed to find the most suitable encapsulation matrix in terms of mechanical and long-term stability as well as full biocompatibility with both the entrapped organism and the host body.15,16
From these concrete examples, it becomes evident that different scientific disciplines have to work in unison in order to develop new advanced devices based on the exploitation of natural whole cells to realise their full potential. Faced with some of the most alarming problems of our modern society, such as pollution and disease, this review article aims to tackle the major breakthroughs made possible by whole-cell immobilisation in two precise domains, (1) environmental remediation and energy production by photosynthetic organisms and (2) cell therapy.
Photosynthetic organisms like plant cells, cyanobacteria and microalgae hold much promise for solving the concomitant problem of depleting fossil-fuel resources and high CO2 emissions. Photosynthesis is the best way to assimilate carbon dioxide into hydrocarbons, oils and sugars thereby directly converting solar energy. Due to this remarkable property, some experts talk of microalgae as producers of “3rd generation biofuels” since the efficiency of these species in energy conversion and oil production is very significant.17 Currently there are numerous studies worldwide in the design of photobioreactors. These are mainly open ponds and closed tubular vessels, where the organisms are fed and grown in liquid cultures followed by processing steps, where the hydrocarbons/oils produced are recovered.18–20 More specialised chemicals can also be targeted by exploiting photosynthesis, as an example plant cells can produce drugs, pesticides, fungicides or recombinant proteins in higher yields with greater efficiency and operational safety.21–24 Both microalgae and plant cells are also well-known components of depollution devices, useful in the degradation of phosphates and nitrates,25 metals,26–28 and organic pollutants.29–31 Parallel research deals with the idea of whole-cell based sensors for monitoring such pollutants.32–35 Detailed review papers report on the application of whole cells in environmental processes.25,36 Regarding the great potential that photosynthetic whole cells have in the above-mentioned applications new and more efficient devices are currently being studied by employing immobilisation technologies to give added value to these processes. For instance, the co-immobilisation of microalgae that produce triglycerides with fungal whole-cells that produce lipases to bioconvert these fats by transesterification could lead to highly efficient biodiesel producers from CO2 and sunlight.9 As explained before, the main advantages of immobilisation lies in the ease of handling, maintaining a controlled and constant cell population and easy product and/or cell recovery from the liquid media.3 Thus it becomes evident that photosynthetic plant cells and microalgae, owing to their remarkable biosynthetic and environmental remediation properties, could find an even broader application spectrum when entrapped inside artificial supports.37 As a consequence, the first part of this review is dedicated to the most remarkable advances realised in this field.
As already suggested above, cell therapy is becoming a prominent field of research. This concept implies the replacement of deficient or absent cells by healthy ones, originating either from the patient themselves or from another person or even from an animal, introducing the concept of “living cell medicines”.38 Bone regeneration as well as cardiac reparation could be triggered by the use of stem cells,39,40 whereas neurological diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's or Huntington's could be cured by reimplanting cerebral cells that secrete neurotrophic factors.41 Following the same idea, a possible solution to effective cancer treatment could be the implantation of cells that either secrete tumor-killing drugs (endostatin) or produce chemotherapeutic agents inside the tumors.42,43 Finally, the most widespread research deals with the treatment of diabetes where a huge body of work has been carried out in the transplantation of islets of Langerhans for insulin secretion.44 The success of this technology is however based on managing the human body's tolerance towards these implanted cells, via long-term administration of immunosuppressive therapies, which are often accompanied by other side effects. For that reason, the strategy of cell encapsulation within a semi-permeable membrane or capsule is now universally recognised as a very powerful tool as it creates a barrier against the components of the immune system while allowing complete nutrition and oxygenation of the cells and the excretion of the metabolites produced. The promising future of this methodology is further underlined by the fact that even genetically engineered cells that can be designed to express any desired protein in vivo can be implanted without risk of direct rejection.45 In light of such encouraging prospects, the second part of this article will be devoted to the most significant advances in the domain of animal cell immobilisation (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the benefits arising from immobilisation and encapsulation. 
Emphasis will be focused on the choice of immobilising or encapsulating matrices. This is an important factor since many parameters such as biocompatibility, cellular microenvironment, optical transparency, porosity, inertness, mechanical stability, shape and size etc. contribute to the success of any hybrid living material in its desired application i.e. energy production, pollution mitigation or therapeutic devices.
2. Immobilisation strategies and common host structures
The integration of cells into abiotic materials can be achieved through different approaches. There have been numerous projects on cell immobilisation, from yeasts46,47 to bacteria48–50 to plant cells49 and even animal cells52–54 over the years. Immobilisation techniques can be mainly divided into three groups: post-synthesis, in situ and multistep immobilisation.
2.1 Post-synthesis immobilisation
The post-synthesis method, used to protect and control the cell environment, is based on the adsorption of cells on different pre-formed substrates such as polyurethane foams,55–58 nylon foams,59 fiberglass,60 loofa (Luffa cylindrica) sponges61,62 and inverted colloidal crystals.63 Post-formation avoids the need to consider the biocompatibility of the precursors used in materials synthesis as long as the resultant host structure is free from cytotoxins. In the case of plant cells this approach exploits the natural tendency of plant cell suspensions to form stable aggregates in the pores of various types of carriers. Although immobilisation by adsorption has the advantage of being easier than other techniques, this method of assembly suffers from several limitations. Firstly, some polymeric substrates, such as polyurethane foams, are quite cytotoxic owing to residual monomeric precursors, glass and loofa sponges are thus often the better choice.64 Secondly, it is difficult to control the density, distribution and deposition characteristics of cells within the support. Finally, a significant leaching of cells from the material is generally observed which is not suitable to develop functional hybrid materials.
2.2 
          In situ immobilisation
The in situ method immobilises cells during the fabrication of the host structure by incorporating them into the precursor mix. This method reduces the problems of leaching as the cells themselves become confined within the forming matrices. However the choice of precursors is limited to chemicals that will not damage or even kill the cells to be immobilised, i.e. they must be biocompatible. Furthermore the synthesis conditions are critical to preserve cell activity after encapsulation; the conditions must match the ambient environment of the cells as found in nature.
The entrapment within bio-organic gels (agar, agarose, alginate (Fig. 2), carrageenan, pectate, chitosan and gelatin) has been the preferred approach for the immobilisation of many types of living cells.3,24,65–69 Such biopolymers can offer a flexible environment with structures that do not exert undue external strain upon the cells. There are also examples of the use of synthetic polymers such as polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)70–72 and polysulfone73 as whole-cell immobilising matrices.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structure depicting the building blocks that make up alginate gel where G represents guluronic acid and M mannuronic acid. 
However this flexibility can also be the reason why organic (bio)polymers have their limitations in encaspulation technologies. Such materials often have limited thermal stabilities (even at room temperature) and mechanical strengths causing the host structures to rupture as the cells propagate, ultimately leaching cells into the external surrounds. Owing to such inadequacies researchers have turned towards inorganic sol–gel technologies (Fig. 3) to produce more robust materials through biocompatible methods that could serve as host scaffolds for whole cell encapsulation, examples of which include alumina,74 ferrihydrite,75 silica76–78 and zirconium oxyhydroxide.79 These materials can impart an unparalleled mechanical rigidity and chemical stability in comparison to organic (bio)polymers, conferring an excellent level of protection to the cellular structures entrapped within. Silica in particular has been well received as an encapsulating matrix, with many successful examples to be found in the literature.76–78,80 It is non-toxic and optically transparent with variable porosities dependent on synthesis method.76,81 However several sol–gel routes rely on the use of alkoxide precursors such as tetramethylorthosilicate (TMOS) and tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS), which during hydrolysis and polycondensation release cytotoxic alcohols.46,76 This has led to many adaptations or alternative routes such as the distillation of these aliphatic alcohols from the sol82 prior to cell introduction or the use of more complex alkoxides or organosilicas say, that release biocompatible alcohols during polymerisation.83 As these techniques require more effort in the elaboration of hybrid materials, an aqueous route based on the neutralisation of sodium silicate, widely used by Livage et al.,76 has subsequently become a favoured method.
 Fig. 3  Schematic showing the formation of a hybrid material through sol–gel methodology. 
2.3 Multistep immobilisation
One final method of note is that which encompasses a layer by layer approach in that the cells are immobilised in one material and the hybrid obtained is subsequently encapsulated in a different material. This allows the benefits of different materials to be combined, for instance the flexibility of a biopolymer with the durability and rigidity of an inorganic material. For example, by first encapsulating the cells in a biopolymer core that is expandable the cells can divide yet they cannot escape when the biopolymer ruptures owing to a mechanically resistant inorganic shell coating. Biopolymer beads may also act as a templating agent to create macrovoids within an inorganic monolith yielding more space for cell propogation and growth. One common example is the use of alginate to form a biopolymer and cell core with a robust silica crust (Fig. 4). However, there is an electrostatic repulsion between alginate and silicon species which hinders the deposition of silica on the alginate bead. A growing silica network becomes progressively more acidic and thus negatively charged owing to the terminal silanol functionalities. Alginate is also negatively charged at pH 7. Livage et al. overcame this problem by imparting a net positive charge on the alginate bead surface using poly-L-lysine.84,85 They have also shown how hydrogen bonding can occur between the polysaccharide chain and the silanol groups.86
 Fig. 4  Schematic showing the core-shell principle of immobilisation. 
3. Immobilisation and photosynthesis
This section is dedicated to the most prominent advances in recent years in the field of photosynthetically active cell immobilisation owing to its potential to resolve several energetic and environmental issues. The major strategies in cell immobilisation that have been developed will be described in detail focusing on hybrid material design and potential applications based on cellular functions.
3.1 Immobilisation and exploitation of plant cells
Plant cells are eukaryotic cells that have several unique structural features which set them apart from other eukaryotic cells. Of interest are the photosynthetically active cells usually found within the leaves. Such cells possess chloroplasts that contain chlorophyll–protein complexes which are responsible for light capture. This light energy is used to reduce NADP+ (Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) to NADPH and to produce adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the molecule responsible for chemical energy transport within cells. This forms the basis of photosynthesis but this process is even more elaborate than energy capture, conversion and storage, it is in essence responsible for the production of a vast array of useful (macro-)molecules. In fact, owing to their complex light harvesting mechanisms, plant cells can be considered as tiny factories. More than 40000 compounds, including pharmaceuticals, anti-microbials, flavorings and fragrances are produced from plant systems.87 This is four times more than can be obtained from microbes.88 This section aims to deal with the design of hybrid materials and the interactions between the cell and host structure, as well as examples of hybrid material applications.

3.1.1 Plant cell based hybrid materials. 
Plant cells have a bright future in the development of “green” technologies. Owing to the upsurge in progress in genomics and metabolite engineering, cells can be manipulated to target specific applications. The sophisticated organisation and elaborate processes of these cells could thus be harnessed in the construction of new devices such as (photo-)bioreactors, depollution systems or even biosensors. However, the integration of living cells into operating devices is problematic. Plant cells isolated from their native environment are exceptionally fragile. In comparison to animal cells, bacteria, yeasts and microalgae, plant cells are bigger in size and, consequently, more sensitive to shear stresses. Shear forces are known to have a detrimental impact on the metabolic function of plant cells and can even break the cell wall.89 The creation of an artificial interface around the cells is thus crucial to protect them from any harsh surroundings. Moreover, an immobilisation strategy could allow a control of the three-dimensional cellular environment. Plant cells could thus be oriented to achieve specific tasks.
Many in situ immobilisations have been reported in the scientific press from organic (bio)polymers to inorganic oxides. The use of polysaccharide gels is commonplace, with alginate having been employed the most. Alginate is a linear copolymer comprised of covalently linked sequences of (1–4)-linked β-D-mannuronate (M) residues and its epimer α-L-guluronate (G). The alginate gels (Fig. 2) are formed directly around the cells which remain, in principle, suspended in a liquid-core alginate membrane capsule. The core-shell system is obtained by dropping the cell-alginate mixture into a solution containing divalent cations (generally Ca2+ or Ba2+) which crosslink the biopolymer forming a gel. The metabolic activity of different plant cell species (e.g. Morinda citrifolia, Catharanthus roseus and Digitalis lanata) has been reported to be preserved for a moderately long period of time.51 Nevertheless, the alginate immobilisation method has been reported to be unsatisfactory in some cases due to the tendency of capsules to rupture. Consequently, a high concentration of divalent cations (e.g. Ca2+) is generally used to ensure a high degree of crosslinking to form more stable gels, thus avoiding severe degradation. Unfortunately high calcium content, for instance, can affect the metabolic activity of entrapped plant cells in a detrimental way since Ca2+ is a trigger for many metabolic processes.60 Moreover, alginate oligomers themselves can be recognised by plant cells as stress messengers.90,91 Thus for some applications, this immobilisation approach needs to be improved since high cellular stress can result in unproductive cells.
The encapsulation of plant cells into inorganic materials is a promising alternative to the biopolymer based approach, with current emphasis focusing on silica.82,92 The first paper, dealing with the careful immobilisation of plant cells (Coronilla vaginalis, Haplophyllum patavinum, C. roseus) in hybrid silica materials was performed by Carturan and cowokers.77,93 The immobilisation method, called Biosil, involves the exposure of the cells, pre-adsorbed on a fibreglass support, to a gaseous flow of silicon alkoxide. The water adsorbed on the plant cell wall reacts with silicon alkoxide to form a porous silica layer via the sol–gel process (Fig. 5). Although the immobilised cells maintain some metabolic activity, issues remain owing to limitations in cellular division. For that reason, plant cell based hybrid materials have also been fabricated in a two-step biopolymer-silica immobilisation process. This approach leads to the formation of macrocavities inside the silica monolith after the removal of the biopolymer. Located inside these cavities, cells can proliferate within the silica structure.94 The resulting device had good mechanical stability and proved to be an effective barrier against microbial contamination, suggesting that it could be employed for long-term plant cell entrapment applications.
 Fig. 5  Cells on polyester fibres and immobilised in a siliceous layer (300×). [With kind permission from Springer Science + Business Media93]. 


3.1.2 Optimising plant cell activity via a control of the cell-matrix interface. 
Efficient living materials rely not only on the principles of physical entrapment but require a control of the interfacial interactions between host and cell wall in order to create a microenvironment capable of influencing cellular behaviour. Textural, rheological and structural properties of silica-based matrices can be readily manipulated by varying the precursor type and polymerisation conditions. In particular, the introduction of organically modified silicates (Ormosils) provides a direct avenue for imparting and manipulating cell-matrix interactions. For instance, the in situ functionalisation of silica walls by sugar alcohols decreases the surface charge and the acidity of silica. Moreover, it increases the water retention of hybrid materials by modifying their hygroscopic properties (Fig. 6a). An exploratory study has shown that the behaviour of plant cells (Arabidopsis thaliana) entrapped within restricted environments can be modified via the addition of N-(3-Trimethoxysilylpropyl)gluconamide (GLTMS).95 The formation of a sugar layer on the silica wall limits any further condensation of silanol groups after gel formation. Such condensation processes could provoke deleterious physical constraints upon the entrapped plant cells ultimately influencing their physiological state. Transmission electron microcopy (TEM) images have highlighted that silica-based materials are formed by the aggregation of nanoparticles which interact with the cell surface and can even diffuse through the distal layer of the cell wall (see arrows in Fig. 6b). Even though the deposition of silica within the cell wall contributes to the reinforcement of its mechanical properties,96 this process can affect the plant cell physiology. Plant cell walls play an important role in the transport, absorption and secretion of different chemicals and contribute to the signal transduction of environmental stimuli and as such the silica nanoparticles may block the active sites, hindering the aforementioned functions of the cell wall. Hence by controlling the cell-matrix interactions with the use of a controlled amount of GLTMS, extended mineralisation of the cell wall can be avoided prolonging cellular viability and improving biological activity. Mineralisation not only hinders activity but can reduce the bioavailability of nutrients. In the future, more detailed investigations of physiological and proteomic modifications, generated by cellular confinement, must be realised in order to establish optimal encapsulation conditions that lead to hybrid materials with a long term sustainability of living cells.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of cell-matrix interactions and (b) cell wall micrographs (TEM) of encapsulated plants cells within pure silica gel (I) and organically modified silica gels (II) after 2 days postimmobilisation. V, C, CW and M stand for vacuole, cytoplasm, cell wall and matrix, respectively [adapted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society]. 


3.1.3 Plant cell based hybrid materials for biosynthesis. 
Higher plants are valuable resources for various important compounds such as alkaloids, glycosteroids, terpenoids, phenolics and vitamins. In particular the biosynthesis of recombinant proteins is of great biotechnological interest.94 All these compounds have complicated structures and thus are somewhat difficult to synthesise using traditional laboratory routes or on an industrial scale. Plant cells however can provide an interesting alternative synthesis pathway to these compounds, which are not usually produced by any other types of cell such as microorganisms.61 For instance, important anticancer agents are still extracted from plants and not synthesised on a commercial scale due to their complex structures, often with several chiral centres. A sustainable bioproduction of many pharmaceutically attractive metabolites (e.g. antitussive, stimulant, antiarrhythmic, antimalarial) may be achieved by plant cell suspensions.97 When considering the logistics, there is a series of advantages in producing the valuable metabolites from isolated plant cell cultures (in vitro) as opposed to using intact crop plants (in vivo). Plant cultivation is hindered by a variety of external factors such as seasonal change, predation and disease. The variable cultivation conditions impede the application of good manufacturing practice (GMP) to the early stages of production. Consequently, the development of an effective plant tissue reactor becomes an ambitious challenge.98 Nevertheless, major obstacles remain which prevent a high yield of desired metabolites being obtained from in vitro plant cell suspensions. The main causes of low productivity in plant cell cultures are slow growth rates, a low shear resistance and the tendency to aggregate. Advances in metabolic engineering and immobilisation techniques contribute to a considerable increase in the number of applications of plant cell cultures.99 In terms of the development of a functional bioreactor, the benefits of immobilising plant cells focus mainly on microenvironmental control.100 Furthermore hybrid materials would facilitate the continuous use of a bioreactor, where the biomass could be reused and the products, as well as the inhibitory biochemicals, easily extracted from the entrapped cells.60 A high density of immobilised cells reduces the problems of a low growth rate and genetic instability of plant cell lines, resulting in a more cost-effective bioreactor.101
Several immobilised plant cell species have been used in single and multistep biotransformations of foreign substrates to target desired products as well as in the de novo biosynthesis of secondary metabolites and recombinant proteins.102,103 From the literature, the effects of immobilisation on cell productivity are still not clear. Evidence of both an increase and a decrease in the yield of secondary metabolites has been found (Table 1). For instance, Brodelius et al. have shown that a high-level of intracellular products (i.e. ajmalicine isomers) can be recovered from C. roseus cells entrapped in agarose or alginate and permeabilised with dimethylsulfoxide. A key feature of this process is that the cells remain alive and could thus be used continuously as a biocatalyst.104 The same species was also able to produce valuable drugs (i.e. alkaloids) when supported on a polyester fibre and encapsulated within a porous silica layer modified by SiCH3 and SiH bonds using the Biosil method. Moreover, the productivity was found to increase by two orders of magnitude with respect to that of free cells.105 Conversely, the adsorption of Papaver somniferum cells on non-woven polyester shortfibres has shown to be unsuitable for the production of metabolites (i.e. sanguinarine). The yield was between 3 to 14 times lower than that obtained with the control cultures. The authors explained this poor performance by the limitation in the diffusion of dissolved oxygen through the biofilm as well as the inherent physiological heterogeneity of the plant cell biofilm.106,107
Table 1 Impact of immobilisation on metabolite production by various plant cells




Plant cell species
Product(s)
Host support
Productivity (%)a
Ref.





a The productivity (%) is calculated with respect to free cells taken as reference (100%).






Catharanthus roseus

Alkaloids
Silica
∼1500–3000

105




Cruciata glabra

Anthra-quinone
Pectate/Chitosan
556

108-110




Nicotiana tabacum

Scopolin
Alginate
∼2000

112




Papaver somniferum

Sanginarine
Polyester shortfibres
∼7–35

106




Solanum chrysotrichum

Spirostanol saponin
Alginate
∼25

111




Vitis vinifera

Anthocyanin
Pectate/chitosan
∼100

108, 109




Usually, the increase in secondary metabolite production is explained by the restricted space found within the matrix. These bio-products are normally synthesised once the cells have reached the stationary phase. Thus, the uncoupling of the growth and production phases led to enhanced secondary metabolite production.109 Furthermore it should be emphasised that some supports, such as pectate or chitosan, are recognised by plant cells as active polysaccharides, giving signals that trigger the formation of secondary metabolites.110 These data clearly show that a fine-tuning of the properties of the host-matrix (e.g. chemical composition, porosity, mechanical resistance) is essential when designing living and active functional materials.
More recently, plant cells have been immobilised in order to investigate the impact of encapsulation on the production of value-added proteins. In general, bacteria and yeast systems lacked the machinery to correctly fold, process, and secrete eukaryotic proteins. Even though mammalian and insect platforms can be successfully employed to produce recombinant human proteins, plant cells offer many advantages in terms of purification, safety, economy and scaling up.23 Additionally, the encapsulation of Nicotiana tabacum cells within alginate, agar or carrageenan has shown that the production of recombinant human proteins (human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, GM-CSF) can be increased by approximately 50% (Fig. 7). The most likely cause for this higher yield is the altered growth conditions within biopolymer beads. The authors state that the geometry of the beads improves the surface area to volume ratio when compared to a bulk material thus improving the oxygen and nutrient transport. In fact, the cellular proliferation within the matrix is much slower than in free suspension which leads to a prolonged exponential growth phase and hence an enhanced production period of proteins.113 However alginate was the preferred biopolymer as the others required heat treatment (ca. 50 °C) to maintain a low viscosity during immobilisation and bead formation, which may have damaged the cells resulting in lower yields.
 Fig. 7  GL-CSF production by hybrid alginate beads and free cell suspension (control). [With kind permission from Springer Science + Business Media113]. 
Immobilisation of plant cells has also a huge impact on other metabolic pathways. Pressi et al. have shown that the entrapment of Ajuga reptans on a polyester scaffold enveloped by a sol–gel SiO2 membrane (Biosil process) leads to a 40-fold increase in invertase production with respect to free cells.93 This enzyme is used in the food industry for the hydrolysis of sugar into glucose and fructose. The authors state that as the immobilised plant cells cannot proliferate they potentially undergo a metabolic change, increasing the expression of invertase. In the framework of designing a bioreactor, the effects of the immobilisation matrix on the cellular physiology need to be considered and investigated in more detail in order to unlock the door leading to useful biotechnological and sustainable industrial applications.


3.1.4 Leaf-like materials. 
As described above, natural photosynthesis is an attractive process. Like microalgae and cyanobacteria, higher plants can also harvest light energy to convert atmospheric carbon dioxide into chemical energy. In particular, photo-autotrophic plant cells could be used to reduce polluting atmospheric CO2 into pharmaceutically active compounds or even biofuels. Based on this principle, a photochemical material that can act as a bioreactor by exploiting a photosynthesis mechanism has been fabricated by entrapping Arabidopsis thaliana plant cells within a porous silica matrix (Fig. 8a). The hybrid material has been formed via the co-polymerisation of aqueous silica precursors (H2SiO3 and fumed silica) and a biocompatible trifunctional silane bearing organic moieties (GLTMS) directly around the photo-autotrophic cells.83 The efficiency of this “leaf-like material” has been monitored using several techniques. The results have shown that plant cells retain their photosynthetic activity for over a month (Fig. 8b). In contrast to the life span of Arabidopsis leaves, this system holds great promise considering that Bleecker et al. reported that the longevity of an individual leaf from an Arabidopsis plant is around 20 days.114 Furthermore, the hybrid material is able to produce oxygen from water and excrete polysaccharides from CO2 under light irradiation over several weeks. The carbohydrates produced are mainly composed of rhamnose and galactose units and a limited amount of glucose, xylose and mannose units. These metabolites can easily be recovered through washing, while the active biomass is continuously reused. Unlike most conventional chemical processes, this living hybrid material operates in an aqueous environment, at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. As a consequence, the environmental impact and energy required are lower. These emerging technologies could therefore be very promising in terms of the development of new waste management routes coupled with efficient “green” synthesis pathways.
 Fig. 8  (a) Scanning electron micrograph (cross section) of one A. thaliana cell entrapped within a porous silica-based matrix and (b) Photosynthetic production of oxygen by the hybrid material. 100% corresponds to the photosynthetic activity of free cells. [Reproduced by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry83]. 


3.1.5 Other eco-friendly devices. 
The intrinsic properties of plant cells can also lend themselves to biosensor or decontamination applications to clean up soil, water and air. Their cellular metabolism can be advantageously exploited to detect115,116 and decompose toxic chemicals such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) or 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT).30,31,117 Additionally, the extraction of heavy metals27,28 (e.g. Co, Ni, Cd) by living cells can be combined with the biosynthesis of valuable nanomaterials.118,119 For such purposes, the immobilisation of cells is also beneficial. For instance, the entrapment of Nicotiana tabacum within alginate gel has improved the bioconversion of toxic benzophenone and bisphenol A into stable glycosylated compounds that accumulate within the cells.120 This domain is too vast to detail here and thus the reader is directed to an excellent review by Rouillon et al. for further information.116

3.2 Immobilisation and exploitation of photosynthetic bacteria
Photosynthetic bacteria are classed as prokaryotic organisms that perform photosynthesis and consist of a large group of photoautotrophic microorganisms such as cyanobacteria, purple bacteria and green sulfur bacteria. They possess photosynthetic pigments (such as chlorophylls, bacteriochlorophyll and phycocyanin), which they use to harvest solar energy in order to synthesise bio-organic compounds such as sucrose, starch, etc. Such micro-organisms could be employed in mitigation technologies to combat rising CO2 levels, which is believed to be a major factor in global warming, or in the design of efficient photobioreactors which can exploit solar radiation and convert it into biomass or high value chemical compounds. Furthermore, certain organisms are also known to have the capacity to absorb heavy metals, to metabolise nutrients like nitrates and phosphates, and to transform organic pollutants into less toxic compounds.25,37,121 Finally they can also be used for the synthesis of biofuels and for the production of biohydrogen in the search for alternatives to fossil fuels. This section aims to review the hybrid materials detailed in the literature in terms of their applications.

3.2.1 Energy conversion and CO2 sequestration. 
The exploitation of conventional energy sources inevitably leads to increasing CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere. The problems of global warming have been recognised and goals to reduce CO2 outputs have been defined. The utilisation of photosynthetic entities such as cyanobacteria to combat the increase in atmospheric CO2, constitutes an effective and sustainable solution to global warming. These organisms require only inorganic salts, light and water to convert carbon dioxide into oxygen and carbohydrates (i.e. chemical energy), facilitating potential solutions to the problem of efficient CO2 sequestration. They are also ideal for use in photobioreactors to target specific metabolites.
One possible CO2 sequestration device could be based on photochemical materials derived from Synechococcus PCC 6301, PCC 7002 and Cyanothece PCC 7418 immobilised within porous silica networks.122,123 The matrix was based on the immobilisation of Escherichia coli76,124,125 which employed an aqueous sodium silicate precursor as outlined in 2.2. Colloidal SiO2 nanoparticles were added before gelification to act as a cement, ultimately strengthening the matrix to extend its durability. Glycerol was added to combat the problem of increased ionic strength, stemming from the liberation of NaCl during the neutralisation of sodium silicate. Glycerol is a known osmoregulator and its derivatives such as glucosylglycerol are produced by cyanobacterial strains found in hypersaline environments viz. PCC 7418 to prevent an intracellular build up of ions.126 These immobilised cells showed survival rates of a few months with TEM images revealing the integrity of the cell walls of certain strains one month post encapsulation (Fig. 9). UV-visible spectroscopy, confocal microscopy and epifluorescence microscopy were employed to exploit the autofluoresence of chlorophyllous molecules. A three month long study revealed a preservation of photosynthetic pigments within the hybrid gels as confirmed through HPLC measurements on acetone extractions.122 By adding NaH14CO3 to the precursors, a radiolabelled form of CO2 can be incorporated into the gel and is thus available for sequestration by the cells. This ‘primary production' technique was used to prove that photosynthetic CO2 sequestration continued within the hybrid materials, i.e. post immobilisation, 14CO2 was assimilated intracellularly and the organic molecules excreted by the cell were radio-labelled.
 Fig. 9  Time-dependent TEM images of cyanobacteria immobilised within silica gels ((i) one hour, (ii) one day, (iii) one week and (iv) one months for strain PCC6301) [Reproduced by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry122]. 
This immobilisation method was improved by passing the sodium silicate solution over an ion exchange resin. This replaced Na+ by H+, forming a metastable sol (H2SiO3). By removing the sodium ions that would ordinarily be generated during neutralisation, undue osmotic stress imposed upon the cells was minimised.127,128 Cell survival was followed by UV-visible spectroscopy which revealed that the photosynthetic pigments were preserved for at least 35 weeks (Fig. 10). Cellular activity was determined by oximetry using a Clark-type electrode (oxygen production evidenced over 17 weeks) and also by primary production measurements (positive 14CO2 assimilation).127 Results showed that it was possible to encapsulate cyanobacteria in silica hydrogels under mild conditions, whilst keeping the photosynthetic apparatus intact. The porous properties of the gel permits nutrients to diffuse towards the cell and the metabolites to be harvested, whilst the optical transparency of silica minimises the inhibition of the light harvesting mechanism of photosynthetic cells.
 Fig. 10  Reflectance mode UV-Vis spectra of cyanobacteria strain PCC6301 immobilised in a silica gel (including the presence of H+ exchanged silicate, glycerol) as a function of time (numbers on the right correspond to weeks) [Reproduced by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry127]. 


3.2.2 Hydrogen production. 
Hydrogen can be obtained through various ways: production from fossil fuels and biomass (e.g. coal gasification, steam reforming etc.), from water through non biological methods (e.g. thermal and thermochemical processes, electrolysis etc.) and, more pertinent to this review, from biological pathways.129–131
Many photosynthetic organisms can split water molecules into hydrogen ions and oxygen via direct and indirect biophotolysis, by fermentation of carbohydrate wastes or from organic acid wastewaters.132 The hydrogen ions generated are converted into hydrogen gas in the medium, by electrons donated from reduced ferredoxin which is produced by hydrogenases (and nitrogenases) present in the cells.133,134
A study of hydrogen production by the cyanobacteria Oscillatoria sp. immobilised in a 1.5% agar matrix has shown that the rate and longevity of hydrogen production increased significantly compared to the free cells with rates in excess of 13 μL g−1 dry weight h−1 and a sustained production for at least three weeks.135 Furthermore encapsulation offered some protection towards environmental variability and was adaptable to external light conditions.
The cyanobacteria Microcystis aeruginosa, has also been immobilised in agar, with small cubes of the hybrid gel being aged for two weeks prior to hydrogen production analysis. Using a light/dark cycle the agar immobilised cells were able to successfully produce hydrogen without hydrogenase inactivation. The cells were very effective at switching between photosynthesis and hydrogen production on changing the conditions. Furthermore they could produce hydrogen using both endogenous carbohydrate storage and glucose coming from external sources, under anaerobic and S-deprived conditions in darkness.136
The cyanobacteria Phormidium valderianum has been co-encapsulated in a PVA-alginate matrix with E. coli and another phototroph, the archaea Halobacterium halobium, and used in a packed-bed reactor to monitor the photo-evolution of hydrogen.137 Halobacter perform non-oxygen generating photosynthesis with the aid of the light-sensitive protein bacteriorhodopsin. This protein produces chemical energy by using sunlight to pump protons out of the cell. In turn the resultant proton gradient is used to drive ATP synthesis. The PVA-alginate gel was crosslinked using gluteraldehyde and CaCl2. This served not only to strengthen the material but to stabilise the entrapped cells with the benefit that it could be performed at ambient temperature. Results have shown how the immobilised system was more stable than the cells in suspension and that hydrogen could be produced in a continuous fashion for 60 days. Previous immobilisations in an alginate matrix alone could only sustain an H2 output for 11 days owing to bead rupture and subsequent cell leakage. Overall the findings revealed how H2 production could be increased on increasing PVA concentration owing to this strengthening-stabilising effect (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Effect of PVA concentration (top) and cell loading (bottom) on hydrogen production by a combination of cells immobilised in PVA-alginate pieces and packed in a packed bed reactor at 27 ± 1 °C with combined nitrogen-free medium passing continuously at 1 mL min−1. [Copyright 1999, with permission from Elsevier137]. 
Dickson et al. immobilised the cyanobacteria Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 in silica matrices using TEOS, TMOS and methyltriethoxysilane (METS) as precursors in a sol–gel reaction with additives such as glycerol and polyethylene glycol (PEG). The most productive matrices were found through high-throughput techniques and analysed in further detail. The silica matrix provided structural, thermal and chemical stability to the entrapped cultures. Results showed that the hydrogen production of encapsulated cells was at least the same if not higher than the cells in suspension, confirming the activity of encapsulated cells.138
Biological hydrogen production has the advantages of being both cost effective and pollution free. In general green algae and cyanobacteria obtain hydrogen through the photolysis of water alone. However, although this is a very clean process, hydrogen production efficiency is low as the mechanism is complicated and has to overcome a free energy of +242 kJ mol−1 H2. Photosynthetic bacteria generate hydrogen from organic acids with much more ease. For instance the decomposition of lactate into H2 and CO2 has a free energy of just +8.5 kJ mol−1 H2 and thus less light energy is required.132 So in terms of large-scale hydrogen production photosynthetic bacteria such as purple bacteria offer not only energy savings but are able to consume organic acids obtained from industrial waste promoting waste treatment.132,139 Hydrogen production by free photosynthetic bacteria, such as Rhodopseudomonas capsulate, is regarded as a promising technology because of the high purity and high conversion yields. Using this strain a maximum H2 production rate of 19.1 mL g−1 dry weight h−1 can be achieved.140 Several other photosynthetic purple bacteria from the rhodobacter family have also been used in photobioreactors to produce hydrogen.139,141,142
The photosynthetic bacterium Rhodopseudomonas palustris was encapsulated in a PVA host structure supplemented with both alginate and carrageean. The PVA was subsequently crosslinked with boric acid whilst the alginate was crosslinked with Ca2+ to harden the gels to guard against rupture. The PVA-boric acid granules formed were both adequately porous and optically transparent such that mass transport and irradiation were not limiting factors. The efficiency of hydrogen production was improved by investigating the effects of key physiological and environmental conditions, such as the glucose concentration, the flow rate of the substrate solution, the illumination intensity and wavelength, the temperature and the pH value. After optimisation, the maximum hydrogen production was 3.6 mmol g−1 cell dry weight h−1 (equivalent to 80.6 mL g−1 cell dry weight h−1) with a steady production over at least 20 days.143
Related to H2 production, hydrogen peroxide is also an interesting molecule, used in industry as a disinfectant and a bleaching agent or as a clean and efficient fuel for rocket propulsion.144,145 Cells such as Anabaena variabilis immobilised in agar gels have shown a photocatalytic activity similar to the cells in suspension. Under optimal conditions it was shown that H2O2 production attains a rate of 100 μmol mg Chl−1 h−1. As H2O2 is a known fuel, this may provide an answer to solar energy storage.146


3.2.3 Biosynthesis. 
The production of useful metabolites by microalgae as well as cyanobacteria has been well documented by Behrens.146 Such organisms could well be a rich source of pharmaceutically active or high value organic products which should be exploited owing to the cheap, clean and facile nature in which such compounds could theoretically be produced. However one major problem, as for all photoautotrophs, is how to recuperate the products from the cells in a continuous fashion. One idea is to play with the stress mechanisms of the cell to release the compounds into the extracellular environment. Immobilisation could also play a vital role if the host matrix that is chosen has a suitable porosity. A porosity that can imprison the cells yet is sufficiently large to let the macromolecular metabolites diffuse through would be ideal. Immobilisation would thus allow the compounds to be harvested whilst preserving the cells for further biotransformations.
It has been established that microorganisms such as cyanobacteria synthesise low molecular weight metabolites in response to osmotic stress. Cyanobacteria Synechocystis PCC 6714 and Synechococcus PCC 6311 were immobilised in a solution of alginic acid, coated onto nylon netting and mixed with CaCl2 for increased hardness. After osmotic shocking, up to 50% of the low molecular weight carbohydrates and 73% of the intracellular free amino acids were released from the cells in under 2 min. The principal carbohydrate identified in PCC 6714 was glucosylglycerol while PCC 6311 contained sucrose.147 This bioconversion of CO2 could be regarded as a clean and renewable energy source since repeated shock treatments did not appear to damage the cells. The filamentous cyanobacteria Spirulina platensis can convert exogeneously fed codeine, an opium alkaloid, to morphine. When immobilised in a calcium alginate matrix it was found that the conversion rate increased slightly in comparison to free cells.148
Exploitation of carbohydrate production by immobilised cyanobacteria is not yet widespread, however, as shown in the above examples, this methodology may improve biotransformation efficiencies. It has been shown for instance that Raphidiopsis brookii produces glucose and galactose and can release saxitoxin, carbohydrates and proteins when isolated from its medium over a period of at least 60 days.149 Free cells of Rhodospirillum rubrum, a purple photosynthetic bacterium store poly-β-hydroxybutyrate polymers under sulfur-deprived conditions. This polymer presents an attractive opportunity for the industrial production of biodegradable plastics.150 It is believed that the use of immobilised cells could even improve metabolite production processes, since the cells are physically separated from the aqueous medium.


3.2.4 Biosensors and phytoremediation. 
Industry constantly creates wastewaters rich in pollutants, heavy metals and organometallic compounds. In contrast to “classical” approaches, such as the addition of chemicals to precipitate metals or ion-exchange resins to bind or flocculate pollutants, photosynthetic entities could provide a greener, low-cost solution. As already discussed in section 3.1 concerning the immobilisation of plant cells, some micro-organisms have the capacity to absorb significant quantities of heavy metals from wastewater and store them in different cytoplasmatic structures without toxic consequences. The cultivation of immobilised cells in wastewater offers the combined advantages of treating the wastewaters and simultaneously producing biomass, which can then be exploited in green energy technologies.151–153 Two very interesting review articles written by Mallick and Moreno develop the potential of immobilised photosynthetic bacteria in wastewater treatment owing to their ability to detect or remove nitrogen, phosphorous and metals coupled with the benefits of metabolite or energy production upon removal of undesired or valuable substances from aqueous media.25,37
In general, research into efficient bioreactors for sewage treatment is based on immobilisation methods. The purple non-sulfur bacterium Rhodobacter capsulatus has been immobilised on cellulose beads post-synthesis. The polysaccharide cellulose, a linear chain of hundreds to tens of thousands β(1→4) linked D-glucose units, is the most abundant organic compound on Earth, owing to its role as the structural component of the primary cell wall of green plants and many algae. With cotton and wood being of high cellulose content it is a cheap and readily available immobilising matrix. In this example, preformed cellulose beads were added to a culture medium and mixed for 5 min. The beads were then packed into the photobioreactor prior to analysis. The authors state that the cells were electrostatically entrapped onto the surface of the beads and from scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements the cells were seen to be growing within the interior of the beads two weeks post immobilisation. The results showed that the immobilised cells were able to remove organic carbon, ammonium and phosphate ions from water. The report states how it should be possible to regenerate the beads by washing with an acid solution and that the biomass obtained from R. capsulatus could be put to use as a fertilizer.154 Sasaki et al. have successfully immobilised several rhodobacter, notably Rhodobacter sphaeroides, in various different supports previously described such as alginate and agar gels155 to degrade cooking oil found in sewage and accumulate the volatile fatty acids subsequently produced. Cells immobilised in PVA and alginate beads (hardened with boric acid or CaCl2 respectively) were shown to effectively purify and denitrify the water in carp breeding aquariums.156 Finally, they also infiltrated porous ceramic blocks, waste from the ceramic industry, with the rhodobacter cells and subsequently formed an alginate coating to imprison the cells.157 These materials proved very efficient in the removal of organic matter, nitrates, phosphates and H2S from simulated sewage.
A study about the removal of nitrate from water by foam (polyvinyl and polyurethane) immobilised Phormidium laminosum in batch and continuous-flow bioreactors also showed very promising results for wastewater decontamination and was extended to the removal of nitrites and phosphates. In the case of polyurethane foams the cyanobacteria were immobilised either by absorption post-synthesis or in situ by mixing with the prepolymer prior to polymerisation whereas for polyvinyl foams the immobilisation was just through adsorption.158,159 Physical entrapment had issues with toxicity of the by-products leading to rapid cell death even though they cite it was a technique previously used by Garbisu to immobilise Anabaena azollae.160 However the cells adsorped onto polymer foams proved successful in batch and continuous flow bioreactors to remove nitrates and phosphates from water. Similar results were also obtained when this cyanobacteria was immobilised post-synthesis on hollow cellulose fibres in tubular photobioreactors.161 This same strain was successfully used in the remediation of industrial wastewaters by the biosorption of heavy metals such as Cu(II), Fe(II), Ni(II) and Zn(II).162 This biosorption was achieved using non-viable P. laminosum (dried biomass) immobilised in polysulfone (a thermoplastic material) and epoxy resin beads. The polysulfone biomass beads were able to be reused for at least ten cycles without any apparent loss in efficiency.
Cadmium adsorption capacities of S. platensis immobilised in alginate beads and sodium silicate derived silica gels of 70.92 and 36.63 mg Cd g−1 biomass respectively demonstrate the efficiency of this cyanobacterium to remove Cd(II) ions from aquatic systems.163 Chromium ions are also accumulated by the cyanobacteria Anacystis nidulans immobilised in agar gel or alginate beads. Furthermore they are able to grow in the presence of this metal in a continuous flow bioreactor and an even higher accumulation was observed in comparison to free cells.164,165
Additionally, the use of photosynthetic materials in toxicity biotests presents an interesting application. As an example the cyanobacteria Synechocystis PCC 6803 and Synechococcus PCC 7942 were entrapped successfully in PVA bearing styrylpyridinium groups to target a biosensor, leading to a rapid and low cost method to detect pollutants like HgCl2 and herbicide diuron.72–166 Under mild conditions, the use of these functional groups attached to the PVA cross-link the polymer chains, thereby encapsulating the biological material without damage and allowing good conservation of the photosynthetic membrane activity.
In summary, the controlled exploitation of photosynthetic bacteria leads to the development of a general strategy for monitoring pollutants as contamination of the environment by heavy metals poses a serious threat; these metals are nonbiodegradable. Moreover, the utilisation of some carbohydrate rich, starch or cellulose containing solid wastes and/or some food industry wastewaters is an attractive approach for biohydrogen production as cited previously.132

3.3 Immobilisation and exploitation of (micro-)algae
Algae form a diverse group of organisms that are usually autotrophic, meaning that they are able to form complex organic compounds using just simple inorganic molecules and light energy (photosynthesis) or inorganic reactions (chemosynthesis). They come in many forms, from unicellular to multicellular species and are related to higher plants. All algae are therefore eukaryotic in nature and, generally speaking, conduct photosynthesis through membrane bound organelles called chloroplasts. Algae play a key role in aquatic ecosystems contributing significantly to the assimilation of carbon dioxide and provision of organic metabolites. Algae have been divided into four divisions based on their pigmentation: Red Algae (Rhodophyta), Brown Algae (Heteromontophyta), Green Algae (Chlorophyta) and Diatomaceae. This section however treats algae as a whole and aims to outline some of the potential applications of immobilised algae, in particular unicellular species.

3.3.1 Oxygen production. 
As seen previously, immobilisation of cells can hold much promise in (bio-)technological or medical advances. However in certain cases some stumbling blocks remain to which algae may provide some solutions. For example, immunoisolated pancreatic islets have been co-immobilised with the green algae Chlorella sorokiniana, in alginate beads in order to supply the islets with oxygen.167 Islets are extremely sensitive to oxygen deficiencies. Thus, to overcome oxygen transport limitations in immobilised cell systems, scientists have employed many different strategies in their quest to design a biohybrid artificial pancreas. In this study the use of a thermophilic photosynthetic strain, C. sorokiniana would enable the overall device to be operated at optimal body temperature (37 °C). Upon illumination, the algae cells enabled the islets to undergo glucose stimulated insulin secretion during perfusion with anoxic medium. In the absence of photosynthetic cells, no insulin response to increasing glucose concentration was detected from the islets perfused with the oxygen free medium. However in the presence of algae immobilised in separate alginate beads the insulin production was two-fold (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Glucose-stimulated insulin response from 100 encapsulated islets perifused with and without algae. Insulin response is expressed as fold stimulation compared with 100 mg dL−1 glucose: n = 5 for islets group, n = 3 for islets + algae group, n = 10 for glucose determination. [Reproduced with permission from Wiley167]. 


3.3.2 Hydrogen production. 
The reversible [FeFe] hydrogenase enzyme is critical in hydrogen production from water through photosynthesis; however it is sensitive to oxygen and thus the reaction must be conducted in an anaerobic environment. In terms of commercial exploitation, purging oxygen from a reactor is both expensive and impractical. However progress has been made in separating the growth phase (under oxygenic photosynthesis conditions) from the photosynthetic production of hydrogen (under aerobic conditions) via alternating growth media with and without sulfate nutrients respectively.168 The lack of sulfur enables a partial inactivation of photosystem II (PSII), which is responsible for O2 evolution.169 Despite these efforts, the yield of hydrogen is below the capacity of the organism studied, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. In addition, the need to alternate the growth media hinders scaling up.170
Various studies have revealed that, by immobilising cells in polymeric or glass matrices, the stability and hydrogen yield can be improved.169,171–173 This enables media to be flushed through a system whilst the cells remain fixed. However the materials used are often expensive and thus Jacoby et al. have resorted to a much cheaper particulate alternative whereby the immobilised cells could be removed from one nutrient media simply through filtration. Cells of the photosynthetic green algae C. reinhardtii were bound to fumed silica particles to target hydrogen production via a two step process.170 The study was based on the principle that bound cells can be facilely cycled between growth mode and H2 production mode. The study showed that the presence of silica particles did not inhibit growth in sulfur rich media. Furthermore the cells in H2 production mode performed as well as algae in suspension. Not only can the media flow and purge gases be controlled without cell loss but the entire concept can easily be adapted to be incorporated into reactor design.

C. reinhardtii cells have also been immobilised in thin alginate films, demonstrating high cell densities (up to 2000 μg Chl mL−1), similar H2 photoproduction kinetics as cells in suspension, higher specific rates of H2 evolution and a high resistance to inactivation of the H2 photoproducing system by atmospheric O2.174 In choosing alginate, the cells were better entrapped than on the fumed silica particles. Furthermore alginate is a natural polymer that is not toxic to the algae and the pH of a 4–6% solution is close to 7. No alteration to this pH within the matrix itself during the polymerisation process was detected, which is essential for maximum cell survival. Encapsulation also occurs at room temperature. A template was prepared from untreated, black polymer insect screen, which was placed onto the sticky side of some adhesive tape. The templates were washed in ethanol and when dry, attached to a glass slide for mechanical support. The cells were suspended in an alginate solution and then pipetted onto the template. Polymerisation was achieved by spraying with a 50 mM CaCl2 solution. The templates were then removed from the glass base and added to vials of adapted media then sealed. When the headspace contained 21% oxygen, the cells produced up to 67% of the H2 gas produced under anaerobic conditions. In suspension cultures even trace amounts of O2 inhibit H2 production making this an exciting discovery. The results indicated that this reduction in susceptibility lay with two factors: the presence of acetate in the medium and the ability the polymeric matrix had in restricting the diffusion of oxygen throughout the hybrid material, thus effectively separating the cells from the oxygen rich gaseous headspace.


3.3.3 Hydrogen peroxide production. 

C. reinhardtii cells can also produce hydrogen peroxide, an efficient and clean fuel for motors, heating and rocket propulsion, when in the presence of a Mehler reagent such as methyl viologen. Therefore immobilised cells and thylakoid vesicles of these green algae have been put to use in solar cells to manufacture H2O2 through their photosystem. It does so in a catalytic cycle whereby the methyl viologen, a redox mediator, is reduced by electrons previously liberated from water by the cell's photosynthetic apparatus. The methyl viologen is then re-oxidised by dissolved oxygen within the solution. H2O2 photoproduction was monitored via a discontinuous system with either whole cells or thylakoid vesicles, in a free or alginate-immobilised state. Stimulation by a catalase inhibitor, azide, was also analysed. Under optimum conditions, a photoproduction rate of 33 mol H2O2 mg−1 Chl hr−1 was maintained for several hours from the hybrid alginate beads, with an energy conversion efficiency of 0.25%.145


3.3.4 Energy conversion and CO2 sequestration. 

Cyanidium caldarium, a red alga, has been encapsulated within porous silica gel via the acidification of sodium silicate and a colloidal nanoparticulate silica. The objective of this study was to target novel photosynthetic hybrid materials suitable for use in light harvesting or CO2 fixation systems. C. caldarium cells, being thermophilic and acidophilic, could be suitable in harsher environments such as factory flues, a major source of CO2 emissions. TEM studies have highlighted that the external cell membrane can remain intact after encapsulation (Fig. 13). They also revealed an alignment of silica gel around this structure, providing evidence that the cell wall acted as both a nucleation and polymerisation site for silica species and that the silica scaffold formed by the aggregation of colloidal particles, generated a porosity that could facilitate the transport of nutrients towards the cell. Epifluorescence microscopy and UV-visible spectroscopy revealed the preservation of photosynthetic apparatus post-immobilisation. Productivity studies showed how the presence of a glycerol additive hindered CO2 sequestration as shown through experiments monitoring the assimilation of a radiolabelled bicarbonate based 14CO2 source. Furthermore silica nanoparticles within the matrix adversely interacted with the exterior cellular structures preventing the production of oxygen through photosynthesis.175 Currently, studies have turned towards a pretreatment step of the precursor over an acid ion exchange resin, exchanging Na+ for H+. By synthesising the silicic acid intermediary prior to in situ immobilisation, the need for glycerol as an osmoregulator is avoided. Furthermore, the silica nanoparticulate colloid can be replaced by a silica nanopowder that aggregates upon sonication. These aggregates act in the same way as Ludox, strengthening the gel and making it more durable yet are large enough not to block the active sites on the cell wall. This was demonstated in the immobilisation of Chlorella vulgaris and Botryococcus braunii within a silicic acid metastable sol where the cells were revealed to be active in CO2 sequestration and oxygen production post encapsulation.176
 Fig. 13  Transmission electron microscopy image of C. caldarium cell within a silica matrix clearly identifying the alignment of silica colloids around the cell wall. [Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier175]. 


3.3.5 Phytoremediation. 
Phytoremediation concerns the decontamination and treatment of environmental issues through the use of plants and algae, such as the absorption of heavy metals or degradation of organic compounds. For example, C. vulgaris is capable of removing nitrogen and phosphorus nutrients from settled domestic water in a cheap and efficient manner. However, one major stumbling block is the recovery of the green algae after the process is complete. Immobilisation technology not only permits the cells to be separated from the wastewater but eliminates the wash out of biomass from a bioreactor. The efficiency of such a system is dependent on many factors such as species, matrix material, concentration, morphology, aeration etc. Calcium alginate has proved to be an ideal matrix that allows a uniform distribution of cells within each bead. In this work a C. vulgaris cell suspension, 7.02 × 107 cells mL−1, was mixed with a 4% sodium alginate solution in a 1:1 volume ratio and the ensuing mixture dropped into a 2.5% CaCl2 solution using a peristaltic pump to form regular sized beads which were left for 12 h to harden.177 The bioreactors themselves were comprised of PVC tubes in which the hybrid beads were packed along with the wastewater. The bioreactors were subsequently aerated to keep the beads in suspension and in good contact with the simulated sewage. Complete removal of NH4+–N and a 94% reduction in PO4–P was achieved after 16 h and 8 h of treatment respectively in bioreactors with a pre-optimised bead concentration. In addition the beads remained intact such that matrix breakdown and cell proliferation posed no problem.
Thakur et al. worked with Dunaliella salina in targeting systems capable of removing nutrients (ammonium, nitrate, phosphate) from wastewaters. Being halotolerant, these algae can be adapted to work in a wide range of salinities. They found that nutrient uptake by immobilised cells was always greater than for free cells. Such technologies may prove interesting in nutrient removal from animal wastewaters in an effort to combat eutrophication of underground water reserves.
Further use of green algae in phytoremediation has seen the cells of C. sorokiniana immobilised onto the biostructural matrix of Luffa cylindrica, a vegetable sponge, in order to improve the sorption uptake of cadmium ions from aqueous media (Fig. 14). Free and immobilised cells were found to remove cadmium from a 10 mg L−1 solution with an efficiency of 92.7% and 97.9% respectively.62
 Fig. 14  Scanning electron micrograph of C. sorokiniana cells immobilised along sponge fibres. [Copyright 2003, with permission from Elsevier62]. 


3.3.6 Biosynthesis. 
Microalgae are easily exploited as biocatalysts in biotransformation and de novo biosynthesis. However, their microscopic size can pose problems in terms of biomass loss which can be overcome through immobilisation. For instance, encapsulated C. reinhardtii cells have been investigated as a method to reduce energy and raw materials in the production of glycerol as the cells are found to excrete glycerol in response to an osmotic shock. The cells were immobilised into small beads either by adding the cells to an alginate mix (alginic acid and alginate sodium salt) and dropped into a CaCl2 or BaCl2 solution, or alternatively adding them to agar and dropping the mix into vegetable oil.178 Glycerol excretion by the Ca-alginate immobilised cells was found to be ca. 2 fold higher than by free cells. The photoproduction of glycerol from Ba-alginate immobilised cells was far lower whilst agar based hybrids suffered from mechanical stability issues. It is believed that the increase in production within immobilised cells was associated to changes in membrane permeability induced by cell-matrix interactions. Furthermore the matrix may have improved the salt tolerance of the cells.
Other algae immobilised in alginate based gels include Dunaliella parva, which took advantage of their ability to carry out the asymmetric reduction of hydroxyacetone to (R)-propanediol, a high value glycol. The immobilised cells were found to have a similar productivity as free cells thus making this a very attractive biotechnological approach in green chemical synthesis.179 Also Haematococcus pluvialis, which was exploited for its capabilities in the biotransformation of phenylpropanoid compounds to vanilla flavour metabolites, with an increase in vanillin accumulation being reported for immobilised cf. free cells.180
Living green algae such as H. pluvialis, C. vulgaris, Botryococcus braunii and Nannochloropsis limnetica have been embedded within thin transparent silica layers using sol–gel technology.181 Silica was chosen as an immobilising matrix primarily for its transparency. The cells were embedded within a thin silica layer and attached to glass slides via dip coating in a nanosol preformed from TEOS, water and HCl, with the addition of GLYEO [(3-glycidyloxypropyl)-triethoxysilane in certain cases (Fig. 15). The work centred on the concept of using immobilised algae in photobioreactors to obtain high light efficiencies and simplify the process control, i.e. removal of products formed or the facile nature in which the cells can be put under stress conditions to stimulate secondary metabolite production. The biocers (ceramic-like oxide matrices with biological systems) formed were monitored for their activity and survival rates. As the metabolic activity of non-growing cells decreases with time the authors cite that the best way to compensate cell deactivation post immobilisation is to permit cellular division within the matrix. The first technique chosen allowed the cells to be immobilised on a variety of surfaces. Dependant on cell size and layer thickness, the embedded cells were then able to grow out of the rigid silica layer that binds them to the surface of the glass slide. They were also in closer contact with the external nutrient rich medium. Work is ongoing to test the efficiency of such immobilised algae in the production of unsaturated fatty acids and long chain hydrocarbons. A second biocer variant made use of the freeze-gelation technique that allowed the microorganisms to be entrapped in a conserved state within porous shaped ceramic composites. This method yielded biocers with porosity, the pores being large enough to permit cell division. Biocer materials based on H. Pluvialis immobilised within modified silica layers as described above have been of particular interest owing to the cells' biosynthesis of the carotinoid dye, astaxanthin. Although primarily used as a food supplement or colorant, it is however a powerful antioxidant and as such may find use in the medical world.182 Furthermore the studies found that the application of certain stress factors (Fe2+ compounds with NaCl or H2O2) vastly increased astaxanthin production.183
 Fig. 15  3D digital microscopic image of Chlorella vulgaris algae embedded within thin silica layers. [With kind permission from Springer Science + Business Media181]. 


3.3.7 Cellular interactions. 
One major obstacle in the study of cellular interactions between prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms is the complexity of the eukaryotic cell. These studies are of economic importance in agriculture to improve crop yields say through the study of interactions between plants and plant growth promoting bacteria (PGPB). However these studies are not easy. Even the simplest plant model, the mouse-ear cress Arabidopsis thaliana, has a 125 Mb genome, whereas green algae can have much smaller plant genomes (ca. 28 Mb for Chlorella). The green algae respond in a similar fashion to the PGPB chosen, such as enhanced growth and changes to their metabolism. Furthermore with higher plants there are multiple tissue functions and numerous possible interactions with the plant roots plus interference with the soil matrix. In the work proposed by Bashan these problems were overcome through co-immobilisation within alginate beads of a unicellular microalgae from the Chlorella genus, playing the role of a plant, and an Azospirillum species as the PGPB. This allowed close interactions yet avoided external interferences from bacterial contaminants, yielding an entrapment system that was inexpensive, easy to handle and could produce rapid results.184
Livage et al. took a different approach to immobilisation in silica by actually selecting a photosynthetic organism that plays a major role in the biogenic silicon cycle.185 Diatoms are renowned for their highly elaborate silica frustules. Their reliance on silica for growth makes them good candidates to withstand silica encapsulation. They are also responsible for 20% of the annual net primary production, the formation of organic compounds from atmospheric or aquatic CO2via photosynthesis. This therefore could provide interesting applications in terms of both the silica precipitating proteins one can extract as well as for the carbohydrates they may produce. The work focused primarily on the interactions between cell and matrix, whereby the dissolution of the silica was monitored as a function of time. The cells were immobilised via the acidification of a sodium silicate solution. Through TEM observations they were able to determine that the silica network in the vicinity of live cells disappeared and was replaced by a non-mineralised region. This was not the case for dead cells suggesting that diatom physiology and/or protein activity was an essential factor in the dissolution process (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Measurement of the silica-gel dissolution index. The insert corresponds to an image of C. fusiformis after 8 days of entrapment, and illustrates the measured surfaces of the cavity and of the cells. Dissolution is reported as a function of time. Light grey, C. fusiformis (n = 4); dark grey, P. tricornutum (n = 3); and white, Nannochloropsis salina (n = 2). In each experiment from 4 to 25 surface measurements were performed. Error bars indicate s.d.) [Reproduced by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry185]. 
The ability to dissolve the surrounding silica may lead to new scaffold materials that have been engineered by the entrapped organisms themselves, thereby creating materials with a porosity suited to cellular division coupled with an easier diffusion of nutrients and/or harvesting of metabolites.

3.4 Immobilisation of photosynthetic cells: Conclusions
As illustrated by the concrete examples of plant cells, photosynthetic bacteria and algae, photosynthesis is a key natural reaction that could and even should be exploited for converting solar energy and carbon dioxide into molecules of interest. Such processes remain CO2-neutral and often yield much more efficient alternatives to “classical” chemical pathways. Be it biofuel production, drugs biosynthesis or pollutant uptake, immobilisation always brings a positive aspect to the processes under investigation, principally owing to the fact that the cells are physically isolated from the aqueous medium, protection is conferred to the cells and the recovery of metabolites becomes more facile. As a consequence, the employment of immobilised photosynthetic entities in industrial processes is close to realisation.
4. Immobilisation and medicine
Healthcare is of primordial concern and as such multidisciplinary research, which results in improvements to human health and new medicines brought to market, never ceases. Throughout time mankind has relied on nature to cure disease. Many folklore remedies from aloe vera to rhinoceros horn have been used through the ages. However with time chemical knowledge and techniques have progressed. As a consequence, many active ingredients have been isolated from plants by apothecaries, bringing about more effective treatments. Subsequently, chemists have developed synthesis techniques which they use to modify the structures of known active compounds to improve efficiency or to target novel therapeutic drugs. However, pharmaceuticals alone are not always sufficient, or their synthesis processes are quite laboured and complex. Companies, driven by profit, seek new ways of production which are faster, cheaper and even more efficient. Scientists are often turning back to traditional methods, using nature as the primary resource or inspiration. One major concept centres on the exploitation of living cells (photosynthetic cells, yeasts, bacteria, animal cells etc.) to further medical developments. The interest lies predominantly in either the metabolites they produce,105 as mentioned for photosynthetic cells above (section 3), or the processes they carry out.186 For instance cells harvested from animal tissues such as cows and pigs can be used to produce the hormone insulin, however some people may develop an allergy to such “foreign” proteins. Through recombinant DNA techniques it has become possible to fabricate human insulin. The human gene which codes for the insulin protein was cloned and then inserted into a bacteria and through manipulation the bacteria was forced to constantly produce insulin. However it is hoped cell exploitation can go one step further; research is rapidly progressing in the domain of cell implants. As a consequence new biocompatible materials are sort after that can both host these foreign cells yet be suitable for transplantation within a human body. This point will be developed in more detail in the sections that follow.
4.1 Cell immobilisation and medicine: historical perspectives
Exciting discoveries have recently been made in the field of medicine, emerging from the possibility to immobilise living cells inside a porous material. Recent successes in genetic modification, coupled with a more profound understanding of the enzymatic mechanisms involved in metabolite production, has led to the belief that animal cell encapsulation, dubbed microencapsulation, could herald relief for patients suffering from chronic diseases. Microencapsulation provides a great opportunity to treat diseases caused by hormonal or enzyme deficiencies. The characteristics offered by this biotechnology are: cell protection, survival and preservation or even enhancement of activity. Moreover, it provides a solution to the very limited number of organ donors or the ethical concerns regarding gene therapy. In fact encapsulated cells do not require any intervention on the genome.
Bisceglie was a pioneer in this field.54 In 1933, he worked on an immunoshielding polymer membrane to encase mouse tumor cells and showed cell survival was possible after implantation within a pig's abdominal cavity.187 Twenty years later Algire et al. developed the field further by confining cells between two membranes of porous cellulose, highlighting the potential to successfully graft tissue obtained from an organism of the same species as the recipient, viz. homograft resistance.188 The porosity of these two filters is such that the cells are imprisoned and cannot pass through, unlike the metabolites and nutrients which are small enough to diffuse through the membrane.
In 1964, Chang applied the term artificial cells to the idea of immobilising cells from one body and transplanting them into another by medical intervention for cell therapy purposes.189 Several types of immobilising matrix based on three main classes of material were developed: membrane biopolymers (i.e. alginate, alg-PLL,¶ chitosan), organic hydrogels (i.e. HEMA-MMA,|| PVA, PEG, collagen) or the sol–gel processing of inorganic gels (i.e. silica),190,191 in much the same vein as described earlier for photosynthetic cells. Likewise the hybrid materials can be targeted through in situ, post or multistep synthesis immobilisation approaches, for a wide range of medical applications (cancer therapy, factor IX deficiency in haemophilia B, dwarfism, renal failure, diabetes, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease etc.).192–197 To respect the constraints of such a biomedical application, there are additional requirements in comparison to the photochemical materials described earlier. The matrix has to be biocompatible not only for the cells entrapped inside but also for the body that will host the hybrid material. Furthermore to prevent cell death it has to be connected to the circulatory system to allow blood to pass through the cells. Consequently, the materials are tailored to encompass an adequate porosity, large enough for the exchange of nutrients, oxygen, metabolites and waste products both inside and outside the matrix, and small enough to block any potential immune response from the body against the newly implanted cells. However diffusion properties are also closely related to size. In macroencapsulation, where many cells are located in one macrovoid, the supply of oxygen to the cells found at the core may be insufficient resulting in hypoxia, hence cells within a partitioned matrix (microencapsulation) fare better than those in a single cavity.
Although most of the current literature is based on in vitro studies but there are some reports of in vivo research such as the encapsulation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells that were subsequently implanted in mice to facilitate bone and cartilage growth198,199 and the encapsulation of embryonic stem cells (ESC) to avoid rejection on transplantation (Fig. 17).200 Furthermore even though this technology is not, as yet, commercially available for a diverse range of illnesses, the progress made by many research groups worldwide has already reached the stage at which First-in-Man clinical trials are being conducted with encouraging results.201 In 1995, Galetti reviewed several potential diseases that could be treated by cell therapy and since then the majority of research has focused on insulin-secretion systems (Fig. 18).202
 Fig. 17  Encapsulated mouse embryonic stem cells retrieved from the peritoneal cavity of BALB/c mice were encapsulated as single cells on day 0 (A). Capsules retrieved at one month (B), two months (C), and three months (D) have formed aggregates in contrast to being single cells prior to transplantation. [Reproduced with permission of Wolters Kluwer Health200]. 
 Fig. 18  Potential diseases amenable to treatment by cell therapy.202 
4.2 Cell type
When considering encapsulation in biomedical applications, cell selection is critical. Different parameters must be considered, since the use of cells from the same species (allogeneic) or from foreign species (xenogeneic) has significant immunological repercussions. Also, the choice of proliferating cells versus non-proliferating cells is judicious as the cells could eventually fill the entire matrix space, decreasing diffusion efficiency and ultimately affecting the cells' viability.203 Cell encapsulation can be exploited for different therapeutic purposes such as the development of bioartificial organs, the treatment of classical Mendelian disorders caused by an enzymatic or gene product deficiency, cancer eradication and the treatment of various other diseases (viz. neurological disorders or cardiopathy).204
Pancreatic islets have been immobilised in alginate microcapsules to develop a bioartificial pancreas for the treatment of type I diabetes.192,205,206 The same matrix was used for the encapsulation of allogenoic parathyroid tissue for the treatments of hypoparathyroidism,207 whereas myoblasts of mice have been immobilised in alginate/poly-L-lysine/alginate (APA)-liquefied microcapsules for the treatment of dwarfism.196 The same support has been used for the encapsulation of human ADA-expressing fibroblasts and β-glucuronidase-secreting 2A-50 fibroblasts for the treatment of type VII mucopolysaccharidosis. In one case, ADA activity was secreted from the capsules and cells remained viable for up to 5 months and, in the second case, significant levels of enzyme were observed in the liver and spleen.196 This type of capsule has also been employed in the immobilisation of human factor IX-secreting myoblasts for the treatment of haemophilia, with this factor detected in plasma for up to 14 days and antibodies against the factor for up to 213 days.196 Anaemia is another disorder that can be potentially treated by cell encapsulation using erythropoietin-secreting myoblasts,208 whereas renal failure can be treated by encapsulation of an E. coli strain transfected with the gene encoding Klebsiella aerogenes urease.204 Other cell sources cited in the literature for medical purposes are ovary cells (Fabry disease), parathyroid cells (artificial organs), hepatocytes (liver transplantation), chondrocytes (bone and cartilage regeneration), leydig cells (hormone replacement), adrenal chromaffin cells (Parkinson's disease, chronic pain), stem cells (bone regeneration), PC12 pheochromocytoma cells (neurothrophic factors, neurotransmitters), myeloma cells (hepatic growth factor) hybridoma cells (antibody production), tumor cells (cancer vaccine, interleukins) or virus producer cells (cancer), the material support being in each case alginate or alginate-based microcapsules (see 4.3.1).187
4.3 Biocompatible host structures
As already widely discussed throughout this review article, encapsulation allows the protection of the inner cell content from both mechanical stress and, in the case of transplantation, the immune response of the body. A suitable equilibrium between the stability and diffusional properties of the immunoshielding material would favour the long-term function of the cells, rendering any device elaborated from such materials suitable for the treatment of chronic disease. An ideal support for animal cell immobilisation should fulfill as many of these characteristics as possible: simple non-toxic immobilisation procedure, maximum surface area to volume ratio, high loading capacity, adequate access to nutrients, good mechanical stability and also a uniform size distribution.204 The following sections outline some of the advances made in biocompatible materials.

4.3.1 Polymer microcapsules. 
The most widespread approach is microencapsulation, which consists of enclosing the biologically active material within a polymeric matrix surrounded by a semi-permeable membrane that is designed to circumvent immune rejection. This membrane allows the bi-directional diffusion of nutrients, oxygen and waste but prevents immune cells and antibodies that might destroy the enclosed cells from entering (Fig. 1). Since the work of Bisceglie and Chang, many efforts have been made to understand the biology, genetics and pharmaceutical technologies and to develop new encapsulation devices.
Alginate can be considered as an ideal biocompatible polymer for bioencapsulation. It is the most frequently employed biopolymer for cell immobilisation due to its abundance and easy gelling properties. As mentioned earlier, alginate is an anionic polysaccharide composed of guluronic (G blocks) and mannuronic (M blocks) acid units interspersed with regions of mixed sequences. The development of this polymer for bioencapsulation applications consists in defining an ideal G-M relationship, which plays an important role in the viscosity, and a purification protocol to remove contaminants like proteins, polyphenols, lipopolysaccharides and endotoxins.204 For animal cell encapsulation, much more care has to be taken in comparison to microorganisms, since it has been reported for instance that alginate with a high content in M blocks induces an inflammatory response as it stimulates monocytes into producing cytokines like interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF).209 Moreover, hydrogel formation occurs following an electrostatic interaction between the carboxylic moieties on the G blocks of alginate and multivalent cations. The majority of the literature reports the employment of poly-L-lysine (PLL) as polycation in the formation of microcapsules. PLL is a homopolypeptide comprised of residues of the amino acid lysine. However, its use should be kept to a minimum as it attracts inflammatory cells, and so induces necrosis of the encapsulated cells.209 Research has shown how PLL damages cells as it can adsorb electrostatically onto the surface of bacterial cells, stripping the outer membrane, resulting in an abnormal cytoplasm distribution.210
Alternative systems make use of poly-L-ornithine (PLO),187 which has one less CH2 group within the base amino acid cf. PLL, chitosan,211 or agarose212 as they can increase biocompatibility and mechanical stability. Table 2 gives some insight into the tried and tested alternative systems for microencapsulation.187
Table 2 Alternative encapsulation systems to the classical alginate-poly-L-lysine-alginate microcapsules, ref. 187 and references therein




Microcapsule design
Advantages





a PMCG: poly(methylene-co-guanidine).
b PDADMAC: polydiallyldimethyl ammonium chloride.





Alginate-PLO
Increased biocompatibility


Alginate-cellulose sulfate-PMCGa
Independent adjustment of capsule parameters


HEMA-MMA
Improved mass transfer, stability and durability


Agarose-polystyrene sulfonate
Blocks the activation complement via enhancing the activity of C1 inhibitors


Alginate-agarose
Increased mechanical stability


Barium-alginate
Increased mechanical and chemical stability


PDADMACb
Increased mechanical stability


Alginate-chitosan
Increased biocompatibility


PVA
Improved intracapsular nutrient transport


Photopolymerised PEG-diacrylate
Increased biocompatibility




Chitosan, a linear polysaccharide comprised of randomly distributed D-glucosamine and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine, has been employed in diverse health applications such as drug delivery systems or implants.213,214 Chitosan, a derivative of chitin, is found in crustacean shells, insects or molluscs. It forms hydrogels by ionic or chemical cross-linking with glutaraldehyde, and degrades via enzymatic hydrolysis. The major drawback of this biopolymer is its weak mechanical properties, making it necessary to combine it with other materials such as calcium phosphate. In example, Oreffo et al. immobilised a variety of human cell types within mineralised polysaccharide capsules without any loss of activity in vivo. The mechanical strength and permeability of the mineral shell, formed from calcium phosphate, was shown to be controlled by the concentration of phosphate ions in the alginate droplets (Fig. 19).215
 Fig. 19  Mineralized polysaccharide beads. Optical micrographs showing (a) intact capsules with a mineral content (25 mM Ca2+, 30 mM phosphate) and (b) the edge of a single bead and the corresponding Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of a mineralized alginate/chitosan outer membrane (d) and Ca alginate core (c). [Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission215]. 
Agarose, like alginate, is a seaweed derived polysaccharide that can form a thermally reversible gel, widely used in molecular biology. It is a linear polymer of repeating agarobiose units, which itself is a disaccharide based on D-galactose and 3,6-anhydro-L-galactopyranose. The gel network of agarose contains double helices, stabilised through the presence of water molecules which are bound to the cavity inside the double helix. Suprafibres are formed from the aggregation of up to 10000 helices through exterior facing hydroxyl groups. Lahooti et al. described the co-encapsulation of human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells in a HEMA-MMA-agarose matrix. HEK cells are specific cell lines derived from human embryonic kidney cells grown in tissue culture that can produce proteins and viruses for gene therapy. Although the viability of cells decreases rapidly when encapsulated in HEMA-MMA capsules, their co-encapsulation within an ultralow gelling temperature agarose matrix favours the proliferation of the encapsulated cells.216 Agarose has other applications such as transplantation of allograft chondrocytes into cartilage defects.217
Finally, other polysaccharide derived biopolymers such as hyaluronic acid218 have been investigated in the field of cell encapsulation but their use is not as widespread as the above-mentioned examples. Recently bacterial cellulose has gained increasing interest owing to its high biocompatibility, hydrophilicity, biofunctionality and non-toxicity and therefore these natural nanofibres, of less than 50 nm in diameter, should also be considered as a suitable choice of host scaffold in cell encapsulation.219,220
As an alternative to polysaccharides such as alginate, proteins can also lend themselves to biocompatibly suitable host structures. For example, collagen, a major component of mammalian connective tissue, has been used in cell immobilisation owing to its abundance, biocompatibility, biodegradability and its ability to bind cells. It is mainly found in tendon, skin, bone, cartilage and ligament and can be processed into porous sponge, films, fibres and macroporous scaffolds with natural interactions with cells.221,222 The major limitation of collagen-based matrices is the extensive contraction it can undergo. This can however be circumvented by plastic compression immediately after its formation.223 This process produces dense, mechanically strong structures that can have controllable micro and nanoscale biomimetic structures. Using a native biostructure could have advantages in terms of biocompatibility with the body into which a hybrid material were to be transplanted and thus combining cell immobilisation with tissue engineering was considered a very interesting prospect. However, attention must be focused on its biodegradability and its immunogenicity (animal prions or retrovirus could be transferred form a species to another through biosynthesis).
Another example is gelatin, a denatured, biodegradable protein obtained by acid and alkaline processing of collagen. Tabata et al. described gelatin hydrogel as an ideal material in drug delivery systems, very effective in exerting the biological functions of the growth factor.224 Gelatin microcarriers have also been investigated as a new drug delivery system to combat Parkinson's disease, which is caused by the loss of neurons and glial cells in the brain.197
A final example is fibrin, a fibrous protein involved in the clotting of blood. Gels can be prepared from this protein and have long been used clinically to prevent bleeding and promote wound healing. Gelation time and matrix architecture can be controlled by varying the unique polymerisation mechanism. A vast array of soft substrates can thus be formed employing physiological conditions. Fibrin gels have been of rheological interest owing to their nonlinear elasticity. They have a soft compliance under small strains but on the application of greater forces they have impressive stiffening qualities allowing them to deform to a large extent yet not break. Cell adhesion to fibrin gels can be improved by the presence of molecules such as RGD (arginine-glycine-aspartic acid) within the gel network. It too allows the binding of several important growth factors.225 However, in the presence of mammalian cells, fibrin can degrade due to the localised secretion of proteolytic enzymes.226
Other microcapsule designs, like alginate-cellulose sulfate-poly(methylene-co-guanidine) (PMCG),227 hydroxyethyl methacrylate-methyl methacrylate (HEMA-MMA),228 agarose-polystyrene sulfonate,187 barium-alginate,187 polydiallydimethyl ammonium chloride (PDADMAC),229 polyvinylalcohol (PVA)187 or photopolymerised poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG)-diacrylate187 have also been explored. However, even if each material presents some unique advantages, none of them overcome all of the disadvantages of PLL and alginate. For instance they all suffer from poor mechanical stability, and thus uncoated alginate beads remain the preferred option.

Table 3 gives an overview of the main research carried out in cell therapy via animal cell encaspulation with some examples of the biopolymers used.
Table 3 Microencapsulation of cells in biopolymers for cell therapy




Disease
Encapsulated cell type
Biopolymer gel
Ref.




Diabetes
Islet cells
Alginate

192, 205, 206







Agarose

230







Chitosan

213, 231



Hyperlipidemia
Kidney cells
Agarose

216



Brain tumour
Kidney cells
Alginate

42



Hemophilia
Myoblasts
Alginate

196



Dwarfism
Myoblasts
Alginate

196



Mucopolysaccharidosis
Fibroblasts
Alginate

196



Anemia
Myoblasts
Alginate

208



Parkinson's disease
RPE cells
Gelatin

197







4.3.2 Silica- and titania-based supporting matrices. 
As already stated above in the sections dedicated to photosynthetic cell immobilisation, amorphous silica matrices permit cell encapsulation under physiological conditions.232 Compared to polymer microcapsules, silica-based ceramic matrices possess further advantages like improved mechanical properties and chemical and thermal stabilities making them more suited to long term applications. They also have a non-toxic and biologically inert aqueous environment.233 Their high surface area with controlled porosity and diffusion properties and the ease of surface functionalisation make them very attractive for animal cell encapsulation. Nevertheless, even more care has to be taken in the preparation protocols in comparison to those developed for microorganism immobilisation since compressive stresses or liberation of cytotoxic compounds can have even more pronounced effects on animal cells.76,234–239
The encapsulation of β-cells, the cells found in the pancreas that make and release the hormone insulin that regulates glucose levels, into a silica gel was popularised by Pope in the 1990s. Pope developed new approaches to silica encapsulation that avoided the liberation of lethal compounds in proximity to the cells.240–243 The procedures used were as follows: First, a silica precursor was hydrolysed under acidic conditions. Then one of two techniques which gave a spherical matrix that enclosed murine β-cells was employed. In the first example, the sol was stirred in vegetable oil to form a water-in-oil mixture, leading to an emulsion that allowed for the formation of silica microspheres. In the second approach, the silica sol was added dropwise onto a high tower also filled with oil and the spheres were collected in a flask at the bottom. In vitro studies have shown that mouse islets of Langherans can produce and secrete insulin. Furthermore, encapsulated islets were transplanted in some diabetic mice resulting in a significant decrease in their urinary sugar content. However, the use of pure silica matrices for animal cell encapsulation was not pursued further until 2000 when the Carturan group published a paper about multicell immobilisation to treat hepatic failure.244 They seeded rat hepatocytes on collagen, covered them with a second layer of collagen and finally coated them following the Biosil method.245 The particularity of the matrix was to use “Organically Modified Silica” (ORMOSIL) since the porous SiO2 was modified by Si–CH3 and Si–H moieties. Owing to this modification, a control of the thickness of the matrix was obtained by modulation of exposure time, favouring mass transport through the system. 3T3 mouse fibroblasts and CRL-2595 epithelial cells were encapsulated in a silica matrix, using the sol–gel process with a high water-to-TEOS ratio and the addition of D-glucose as a porogen and source of nutrients in order to minimise silica dissolution and improve the biocompatibility of the process. The cell integrity in the encapsulation process was preserved by removal of alcohol from the starting solution.232
Other inorganic oxides could be used in the field of cell encapsulation to improve the advantages inorganic oxides have over biopolymers. For example, silica has the disadvantage of being brittle, especially macroporous silica, whereas titanium alkoxide based matrices show improved pH stability, thermal resistance and mechanical strength.246 Lopez et al. developed a nanostructured titania bioceramic device to use in a drug delivery system by employing titanium n-butoxide as a precursor in a sol–gel reaction.247 This method allowed for a control in porosity and particle size. The matrix encapsulated an anticonvulsant drug, valproic acid (VPA), which could be released directly into the temporal lobe of the brain at a constant rate for the treatment of epilepsy. Point defects were generated within the framework to facilitate interactions between the titania and the highly polar pharmaceutical. This device has been successfully implanted in a rat. Its biocompatibility with the brain tissue was verified and a drastic decrease in the epileptic activity was observed.247 These promising results suggest that titania is not only fully biocompatible with the human body but that it could be suitable for the encapsulation of live cells.
It is believed that this field of research still offers a lot of room for innovation, especially regarding the enhanced properties of titania vs. silica matrices. One of the major obstacles is precursor selection. For in situ immobilisation, encapsulation has to be carried out within physiological conditions, which is a leading argument for sol–gel methodology. However simple metal alkoxides liberate toxic aliphatic alcohols and transition metal alkoxides are also often more reactive than silica alkoxides. Thus gelation could occur before a homogeneous mix of cells in the forming support matrix can be established.


4.3.3 Multistep immobilisation. 
In 2001, Sakai reported on alginate/sol–gel microcapsules.248–250 Ca-alginate beads, which encapsulated cells, were stirred in n-hexane containing silica precursors (APTrMOS** and TMOS). Consequently, sol–gel reactions occurred only on the surface of the alginate, keeping the cells isolated from the lethal effects that can occur when cytotoxic chemical compounds are released during polymerisation. Electrostatic attractions facilitated the deposition of the silica layer on the surface of the alginate. Finally the positively charged amino groups on the silica surface were neutralised by re-coating with alginate, resulting in alginate/silica/alginate microbeads. Such techniques were a leap forward in encapsulation technology as the problem of alcohol release was mitigated as was the need to carefully buffer the reactant mix owing to the acidic or basic conditions under which silica gel formation is catalysed. As shown, the studies in this particular field imply a combination of old and new technologies. Currently, research points towards the design and implementation of a core-shell matrix where the core is mainly comprised of a flexible biopolymer containing the cells, while the shell, made from silica or titania gels, is added to fortify the beads. This combination has the advantage of maintaining the cells in large compartments without any direct contact or undue exerted pressure from the more rigid inorganic shell.

4.4 Immobilisation of animal cells: Conclusions
From all of the above-mentioned examples it becomes obvious that immobilisation can be applied to cure many diseases caused by dysfunctional cells within the body. The main advantages are obvious: the encapsulated cells are physically protected against degradation. The hybrid materials could serve as mini drug factories, resulting in a controlled and regulated drug delivery system akin to normal cellular metabolic processes. Furthermore by using homografts there would be little need for immunosuppressants common in organ transplantation. The most studied systems are based on hepatocytes and β-cells as the efficiency of the matrix can be demonstrated easier and faster than for other types of cells. Nevertheless, regarding the vast knowledge acquired on stable matrix design and the increasing collaborations that exist between clinicians, biologists and chemists, the field of animal cell encapsulation promises a very bright future and will certainly offer new possibilities for a wide range of diseases in particular genetic disorders that stem from cellular deficiencies.
5. General conclusions and perspectives
Alternative energy supplies, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and healthcare are major issues that have to be addressed for a sustainable future. Research has to be expanded beyond traditional man-made catalysts or synthetic drugs as it becomes evermore apparent that Nature can aid researchers in the development of novel smart devices. In particular, the controlled exploitation of whole cells seems to be very promising for realising chemical transformations at low cost and with enhanced efficiency. Nevertheless, these cells need protection in order to preserve their longevity and activity for extended periods of time which is where the concepts of immobilisation and encapsulation come into play.
This review article has clearly proven that encapsulation and immobilisation are powerful tools for the controlled exploitation of living whole cells. As shown by specific examples, the utilisation of whole cells for solar energy conversion of CO2 into useful compounds (biofuels, drugs etc.) as well as for cell therapy constitutes a promising field of research with plenty of potential applications. Nevertheless, research on the exploitation of photosynthesis and cell therapy really has to be combined with the progress made in porous material synthesis. In particular, different scientific disciplines now have to work in unison to go one step further and create smart living materials that show properties superior to the sum of their individual benefits. The existing examples of immobilised cells clearly underline this necessity, since it has been unambiguously demonstrated that higher efficiencies or expanded survival rates can be reached when the cells are associated to a compatible supporting matrix.
The vast potential of immobilised photosynthetic cells has clearly been demonstrated throughout this whole article where better efficiencies and long-term stabilities can be reached when the cells are confined. Since plant cells and microalgae are highly promising as energy converters, immobilisation research should focus on these organisms. More precisely by combining the knowledge acquired in terms of whole-cell mediated production of biofuels and drugs and in the fixation and metabolisation of harmful substances with the work done by chemists in the preparation of stable porous immobilisation matrices. This collaboration has to address key issues such as 3-D cellular environment, activity outside the natural habitat, interactions between cell and matrix as well as cellular communication. In particular, biologists can genetically modify the cells to make them work in a precise targeted fashion, not only orienting production towards the desired metabolites but also increasing their longevity inside an artificial matrix.251 The matrix has to be precisely tailored to provide the most appropriate environment, especially in terms of stability and porosity for a thorough diffusion of nutrients and metabolites, with space that allows for cellular division. These issues clearly put emphasis on the necessity of different scientific disciplines to work in unison for the creation of new advanced materials.
For instance, recent progress in the design of hybrid materials could lead the way to improvements in the performance of biofuel cells. These electrochemical systems are able to convert the chemical energy of a biofuel (e.g. H2, fructose, glucose, oil) into electrical energy under mild conditions. The surrounding matrix could not only improve the stability of the system but could also improve the power density owing to an increase in the biospecies loading252 and an improvement in charge transport between the bioentities and the electrode.253 In the future the design of the next generation of efficient photosynthetic biofuel cells could be used to combine the removal of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and the conversion of light into electricity in a simple, renewable and sustainable way.254
New breakthroughs in the field of cell therapy could also be attained owing to recent progress in cell encapsulation. As has been reviewed, the implantation of cells in a deficient organism relies on encapsulation to protect the cells from auto-immune reactions. Again, specialists in healthcare have to work in close collaboration with chemists to find the ideal method to create hybrid materials that feature long-term stability and are fully-functioning upon implantation in the human body. Still in the spirit of healthcare, beyond cell therapy, as for bioproduction by photosynthetic cells, several important medicines can be produced by yeasts, bacteria and fungi. If they are immobilised, one can hope that their efficiency will be enhanced even more. In recent years, a lot of studies were dedicated to such microorganisms, without immobilisation. For instance, the majority of insulin used by diabetics comes from genetically modified bacteria. The gene responsible for insulin production is inserted into the genome of E. coli, and owing to the recombinant DNA technique it can produce a large quantity of human insulin.255Saccharomyces cerevisiae has also been commercialised for insulin production since 1987. A lot of work has been done by several laboratories on the encapsulation of this yeast. This success could be mimicked with so many other interesting species in order to target specific applications. Most of the time, when yeasts, bacteria and fungi are encapsulated, it is not for therapeutical purposes. However a substantial enhancement of their efficiency upon entrapment could be envisaged. As examples, vitamins B2, B7, B12 and C have seen their production dramatically increased by the use of (genetically-modified) yeasts or bacteria (e.g. Erwinia herbicola, Serratia marcescens, Eremothecium ashbyii with Ashbya gossypii, Propionibacterium shermanii and Pseudomonas denitrificans).256–260 It is believed that such biosyntheses could be even more productive with immobilised species. Furthermore, the oral administration of immobilised genetically engineered bacteria could be used for therapeutic purposes. These hybrid materials could deliver therapeutic agents directly to the correct target tissues. In particular, the encapsulated cells can in vivo degrade harmful substances which accumulate during renal failure.261 In such cases, the surrounding matrix allows the bacteria to remain alive after their passage through the gastrointestinal tract and avoids immunogenic responses.262 All these examples are just suggestions of what could be done to advance this specific field. As explained, for the moment these living microorganisms are often selected based on the metabolites they produce (amino acids, nucleotides, proteins, vitamins etc.) but they can also be exploited to make a diagnosis. Maybe, this last example will never be exploited through means of encapsulation but research is being undertaken on magnetotactic bacteria (MTB) for tumour targeting. Magnetospirillum magneticum AMB-1 can provide positive contrast for visualisation using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).263,264 They can be used as nanorobots to highlight hard-to-find tumors. MTB can colonise the tumors, making them visible via MRI for further surgical interventions. Therefore there is still great potential in this area to advance the medical sciences through cell immobilisation. As shown in this article, it is well-known that cell entrapment onto or within artificial matrices can significantly increase the production of metabolites and even orientate the biosynthesis. Therefore cell encapsulation in terms of healthcare should not only be limited to cell therapy by implantation but also be extended to metabolite production in new types of bioreactors that can work in a continuous and controlled manner, combining the advantages of bioproduction with physical separation from the liquid medium via encapsulating matrices.
Cell immobilisation is a very promising concept that emerged over 50 years ago but is one that is now blossoming due to major advances in cell engineering in recent years, thereby opening up a bright future for photosynthesis based technologies, bioproduction and cell therapy.
Acknowledgements
This work was realised in the framework of “Redugaz”, an Interreg IV (France-Wallonia) project funded by the European Union and the Walloon community. The authors also thank the Interuniversity Attraction Pole (IAP-P6/17) for financially supporting “Inanomat”, a Belgian federal government project. B.L. Su acknowledges the Chinese Central Government for an “Expert of the State” position in the program of “Thousands Talents” and the Chinese Ministry of Education for a “Changjiang Scholar” position at the Wuhan University of Technology. A. Léonard, C.F. Meunier and P. Dandoy thank the Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique (FNRS) for their Postdoctoral, Research Fellow and FRIA positions respectively. Finally, the authors thank Pascal Dandoy for his help with the graphics.
Notes and references

          C. Webb and G. A. Dervakos, Studies in Viable Cell Immobilisation (Biotechnology intelligence unit), R.G. Landes Company, Academic Press, San Diego,  1996 Search PubMed .
A. Tripathi, H. Sami, S. R. Jain, M. Viloria-Cols, N. Zhuravleva, G. Nilsson, H. Jungvid and A. Kumar, Enzyme Microb. Tech., 2010 Search PubMed .
J. K. Park and H. N. Chang, Biotechnol. Adv., 2000, 18, 303 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Trelles, F. Quiroga, C. Britos, E. E. Smolko and M. Grasselli, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2010, 79, 241 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fukuda, A. Kondo and H. Noda, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2001, 92, 405 CrossRef CAS .
W. Du, W. Li, T. Sun, X. Chen and D. Liu, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 79, 331 CrossRef CAS .
A. Robles-Medina, P. A. Gonzalez-Moreno, L. Esteban-Cerdan and E. Molina-Grima, Biotechnol. Adv., 2009, 27, 398 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakashima, S. Kyotani, E. Izumoto and H. Fukuda, J. Ferment. Bioeng., 1990, 20, 85 CrossRef .
H. Fukuda, S. Hama, S. Tamalampudi and H. Noda, Trends Biotechnol., 2008, 26, 668 CrossRef CAS .

          S. K. Tam, Microencapsulation: Des Sciences aux Technologies, T. Vandamme, D. Poncelet, P. Subra-Paternault (coord.), Editions Tec&Doc, Lavoisier, Paris,  2007, 115 Search PubMed .
P. Soon-Shiong, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 1999, 35, 259 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cirone, F. Shen and P. L. Chang, Cancer Gene Ther., 2005, 12, 369 CrossRef CAS .
E. Régulier, B. L. Schneider, N. Déglon, Y. Beuzard and P. Aebischer, Gene Ther., 1998, 5, 1014 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Emerich, M. D. Lindner, S. R. Winn, E. Y. Chen, B. R. Frydel and J. H. Kordower, J. Neurosci., 1996, 16, 5168 CAS .
S. Prakash and H. S. Lin, Trends Biomater. Artif. Organs, 2004, 18, 24 Search PubMed .
G. Orive, S. K. Tamb, J. L. Pedraz and J. P. Hallé, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 3691 CrossRef CAS .
C. Posten and G. Schaub, J. Biotechnol., 2009, 142, 64 CrossRef CAS .
I. Douskova, J. Doucha, K. Livansky, J. Machet, P. Novak, D. Umysova, V. Zachleder and M. Vitova, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2009, 82, 179 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Schenk, S. R. Thomas-Hall, E. Stephens, U. C. Marx, J. H. Mussgnug, C. Posten, O. Kruse and B. Hankamer, BioEnergy Res., 2008, 1, 20 CrossRef .
E. Sierra, F. G. Acien, J. M. Fernandez, J. L. Garcia, C. Gonzalez and E. Molina, Chem. Eng. J., 2008, 138, 136 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Kieran, P. F. MacLoughlin and D. M. Malone, J. Biotechnol., 1997, 59, 39 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Huang and K. A. McDonald, Biochem. Eng. J., 2009, 45, 168 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abranches, S. Marcel, E. Arcalis, F. Altmann, P. Fevereiro and E. Stoger, J. Biotechnol., 2005, 120, 121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dörnenburg and D. Knorr, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 1995, 17, 674 CrossRef .
N. Mallick, BioMetals, 2002, 15, 377 Search PubMed .
L. Travieso, A. Pellón, F. Benitez, E. Sánchez, R. Borja, N. O'Farrill and P. Weiland, Biochem. Eng. J., 2002, 12, 87 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. McGrath, E. Lombi, C. W. Gray, N. Caille, S. J. Dunhan and F. J. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 141, 115 CAS .
R. B. Meagher and A. C. P. Heaton, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2005, 32, 502 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Aksu, Process Biochem., 2005, 40, 997 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Yoon, D. J. Olivier and J. V. Shanks, Chemosphere, 2007, 68, 1050 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vila, S. Pascal-Lorber, E. Rathahao, L. Debrauwer, C. Canlet and F. Laurent, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 663 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naessens, J. C. Leclerc and C. Tran-Minh, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2000, 46, 181 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bozeman, B. Koopman and G. Bitton, Aquat. Toxicol., 1989, 14, 345 CrossRef CAS .
S. Belkin, Curr. Opin. Microbiol., 2003, 6, 206 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Shao, C. J. Howe, A. J. R. Porter and L. A. Glover, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2002, 68, 5026 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Cassidy, H. Lee and J. T. Trevors, J. Ind. Microbiol., 1996, 16, 79 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moreno-Garrido, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 3949 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Hernandez, G. Orive, A. Murua and J. L. Pedraz, Adv. Drug Deliver Rev., 2010 Search PubMed .
N. Kimelman, G. Pelled, G. A. Helm, J. Huard, E. M. Schwarz and D. Gazit, Tissue Eng., 2007, 13, 1135 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Collins, R. Baffour and R. Waksman, Cardiovasc. Revasc. Med., 2007, 8, 43 Search PubMed .
D. F. Emerich, S. J. M. Skinner, C. V. Borlongan, A. V. Vasconcellos and C. G. Thanos, BioEssays, 2005, 27, 262 CrossRef CAS .
T. Joki, M. Machluf, A. Atala, J. Zhu, N. T. Seyfried, I. F. Dunn, T. Abe, R. S. Carroll and P. McL. Black, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 35 CrossRef CAS .
M. Löhr, P. Müller, P. Karle, J. Stange, S. Mitzner, R. Jesnowski, H. Nizze, B. Nebe, S. Liebe, B. Salmons and W. H. Günzburg, Gene Ther., 1998, 5, 1070 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. J. Shapiro, J. R. T. Lakey, E. A. Ryan, G. S. Korbutt, E. Toth, G. L. Warnock, N. M. Kneteman and R. V. Rajotte, N. Engl. J. Med., 2000, 343, 230 CrossRef CAS .
A. Murua, A. Portero, G. Orive, R. M. Hernández, M. de Castro and J. L. Pedraz, J. Controlled Release, 2008, 132, 76 CrossRef CAS .
G. Carturan, R. Campostrini, S. Dirè, V. Scardi and E. De Alteriis, J. Mol. Catal., 1989, 57, L13 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Desimone, J. Degrossi, M. D'Aquino and L. E. Diaz, Biotechnol. Lett., 2003, 25, 671 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. A. Martin and D. Perlman, Eur. J. Appl. Microbiol, 1976, 3, 91 Search PubMed .
H. J. Somerville, J. R. Mason and R. N. Ruffell, Eur. J. Appl. Microbiol, 1977, 4, 75 Search PubMed .
A. Muallem, D. Bruce and D. O. Hall, Biotechnol. Lett., 1983, 5, 365 CrossRef CAS .
P. Brodelius, B. Deus, K. Mosbach and M. H. Zenk, FEBS Lett., 1979, 103, 83 .
E. J. A. Pope, K. Braun and C. M. Peterson, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 1997, 8, 635 CrossRef CAS .
P. De Vos, C. G. van Hoogmoed, J. van Zanten, S. Netter, J. H. Strubbe and H. J. Busscher, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 305 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bisceglie, J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol., 1933, 40, 122 .
K. Lindsey, M. M. Yeoman, G. M. Black and F. Mavituna, FEBS Lett., 1983, 155, 143 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mavituna and J. M. Park, Biotechnol. Lett., 1985, 7, 637 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Yin, J. C. Wu and Y. J. Yuan, Biotechnol. Lett., 2006, 28, 29 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kannaiyan, S. Aruna, S. Merina Prem Kumari and D. Hall, J. Appl. Phycol., 1997, 9, 167 Search PubMed .
M. J. C. Rhodes, R. J. Robin, R. Turner and J. I. Smith, Can. J. Bot., 1985, 63, 2357 CrossRef .
P. J. Facchini and F. DiCosmo, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1990, 33, 36 CAS .
Y. K. Liu, M. Seki, H. Tanaka and S. Furusaki, J. Ferment. Bioeng., 1998, 85, 416 CrossRef CAS .
N. Akhtar, A. Saeed and M. Iqbal, Bioresour. Technol., 2003, 88, 163 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kotov, Y. Liu, S. Wang, C. Cumming, M. Eghtedari, G. Vargas, M. Motamedi, J. Nichols and J. Cortiella, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 7887 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. C. Rhodes, J. I. Smith and R. J. Robins, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1987, 26, 28 CrossRef CAS .
P. Brodelius and K. Nilsson, FEBS Lett., 1980, 122, 312 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nilsson, S. Birnbaum, S. Flygare, L. Linse, U. Schröder, U. Jeppsson, P. Larsson, K. Mosbach and P. Brodelius, Eur. J. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1983, 17, 319 CrossRef CAS .
H. Iwata, T. Takagi, H. Amemiya, H. Shimizu, K. Yamashita, K. Kobayashi and T. Akutsu, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 1992, 26, 967 CrossRef CAS .
S. Del Guerra, C. Bracci, K. Nilsson, A. Belcourt, L. Kessler, R. Lupi, L. Marselli, P. de Vos and P. Marchetti, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2001, 75, 741 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Luan, J. Jin, S. M. N. Chan, Y. S. Wong and N. F. Y. Tam, Process Biochem., 2006, 41, 1560 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qi, Y. Gu, N. Sakata, D. Kim, Y. Shirouzu, C. Yamamoto, A. Hiura, S. Sumi and K. Inoue, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 5885 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, Q. Liao, W. Liu, Y. Z. Wang, X. Zhu, J. Li and H. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4708 CrossRef CAS .
A. Avramescu, R. Rouillon and R. Carpentier, Biotechnol. Tech., 1999, 13, 559 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fey-Lamprecht, T. Groth, W. Albrecht, D. Paul and U. Gross, Biomaterials, 2000, 21, 183 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amoura, N. Nassif, C. Roux, J. Livage and T. Coradin, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4015 RSC .
M. Amoura, R. Brayner, M. Perullini, C. Sicard, C. Roux, J. Livage and T. Coradin, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 19, 1241 Search PubMed .
A. Coiffier, T. Coradin, C. Roux, O. M. M. Bouvet and J. Livage, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2039 RSC .
R. Campostrini, G. Carturan, R. Caniato, A. Piovan, R. Filippini, G. Innocenti and E. M. Cappelletti, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1996, 7, 87 CAS .
E. J. A. Pope, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1995, 4, 225 CAS .
M. Amoura, C. Roux, S. Masse, N. Steunou and T. Coradin, C. R. Chim., 2010, 13, 52 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nassif, O. M. M. Bouvet, M. Ragier, C. Roux, T. Coradin and J. Livage, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 42 CrossRef CAS .
J. Livage, T. Coradin and C. Roux, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2001, 13, R673 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Meunier, P. Van Cutsem, Y. U. Kwon and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1535 RSC .
C. F. Meunier, J. C. Rooke, A. Léonard, P. Van Cutsem and B. L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 929 RSC .
T. Coradin, E. Mercey, L. Lisnard and J. Livage, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2496 RSC .
T. Coradin, N. Nassif and J. Livage, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2003, 61, 429 CAS .
T. Coradin and J. Livage, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2003, 26, 1165 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Roberts, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2007, 3, 387 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Zhong, J. T. Yu and T. Yoshida, World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1995, 11, 461 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Namdev and E. H. Dunlop, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 1995, 54, 109 CrossRef CAS .
C. Akimoto, H. Aoyagi and H. Tanaka, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1999, 52, 429 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Chandia, B. Matsuhiro, E. Mejias and A. Moenne, J. Appl. Phycol., 2004, 16, 127 Search PubMed .
C. F. Meunier, P. Dandoy and B.-L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 342, 211 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pressi, R. Dal Toso, R. Dal Monte and G. Carturan, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2003, 26, 1189 CrossRef CAS .
M. Perullini, M. M. Rivero, M. Jobbagy, A. Mentaberry and S. A. Bilmes, J. Biotechnol., 2007, 127, 542 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Meunier, J. C. Rooke, K. Hajdu, P. Van Cutsem, P. Cambier, A. Léonard and B. L. Su, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6568 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kauss, K. Seehaus, R. Franke, S. Gilbert, R. A. Dietrich and N. Kröger, Plant J., 2003, 33, 87 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wink, A. W. Alfermann, R. Franke, B. Wetterauer, M. Distl, J. Windhoevel, O. Krohn, E. Fuss, H. Garden, A. Mohagheghzadeh, E. Wildi and P. Ripplinger, Plant Genet. Res., 2005, 3, 90 Search PubMed .
S. Hellwig, J. Drossard, M. R. Twyman and R. Fischer, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 1415 CrossRef CAS .
S. Karuppusamy, J. Med. Plants Res., 2009, 3, 1222 Search PubMed .
M. L. Shuler, G. A. Hallsby, J. W. Payne and T. Cho, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1986, 469, 270 CrossRef CAS .
R. Soderquist and J. M. Lee, Focus Biotechnol., 2005, 8b, 469 Search PubMed .
S. Ramachandra Rao and G. A. Ravishankar, Biotechnol. Adv., 2002, 20, 101 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ishihara, H. Hamada, T. Hirata and N. Nakajima, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2003, 23, 145 CrossRef CAS .
P. Brodelius and K. Nilsson, Eur. J. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1983, 17, 275 CrossRef CAS .
G. Carturan, R. Dal Monte, G. Pressi, S. Secondin and P. Verza, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1998, 13, 273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Archambault, R. D. Williams, M. Perrier and C. Chavarie, J. Biotechnol., 1996, 46, 121 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rho, C. Bédard and J. Archambault, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1990, 33, 59 CAS .
H. Dörnenburg, Process Biochem., 2004, 39, 1369 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Cheng and Y.-J. Yuan, Proteomics, 2006, 6, 2199 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dörnenburg and D. Knorr, J. Biotechnol., 1996, 50, 55 CrossRef .
S. Charlet, F. Gillet, M. L. Villarreal, J. N. Barbotin, M. A. Fliniaux and J. E. Nava-Saucedo, Plant Physiol. Biochem., 2000, 38, 875 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gillet, C. Roisin, M. A. Fliniaux, A. Jacquin-Dubreuil, J. N. Barbotin and J. E. Nava-Saucedo, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2000, 26, 229 CrossRef .
T. Bodeutsch, E. A. James and J. M. Lee, Plant Cell Rep., 2001, 20, 562 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Hensel, V. Grbic, D. A. Baumgarten and A. B. Bleeker, Plant Cell, 1993, 5, 553 CAS .
T. Oczkowski, E. Zwierkowska and S. Bartkowiak, Electrochem., 2007, 70, 192 Search PubMed .
M. Campàs, R. Carpentier and R. Rouillon, Biotechnol. Adv., 2008, 26, 370 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mackova, T. Macek, J. Ocenaskova, J. Burkhard, K. Demnerova and J. Pazlarova, Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad., 1997, 39, 317 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Sharma, S. V. Shahi, S. Nath, J. G. Parson, J. L. Gardea-Torresdey and T. Pal, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 5137 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Gardea-Torresdey, J. G. Parsons, E. Gomer, J. Peralta-Videa, H. E. Troiani, P. Santiago and M. J. Yacaman, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 397 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimoda, H. Hamada and H. Hamada, Environ. Health Insights, 2009, 3, 19 Search PubMed .
J. C. Rooke, C. F. Meunier, A. Leonard and B. L. Su, Pure Appl. Chem., 2008, 80, 2345 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Rooke, A. Leonard, H. Sarmento, J. P. Descy and B. L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2833 RSC .
J. C. Rooke, A. Leonard and B. L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1333 RSC .
S. Fennouh, S. Guyon, J. Livage and C. Roux, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2000, 19, 647 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nassif, A. Coiffier, T. Coradin, C. Roux and J. Livage, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2003, 26, 1141 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fulda, J. Huckauf, A. Schoor and M. Hagemann, J. Plant Physiol., 1999, 154, 240 CAS .
A. Leonard, J. C. Rooke, C. F. Meunier, H. Sarmento, J. P. Descy and B. L. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 370 RSC .
C. F. Meunier, P. Van Cutsem, Y. U. Kwon and B. L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4131 RSC .
M. Momirlan and T. N. Veziroglu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2002, 6, 141 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Levin, L. Pitt and M. Love, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2004, 29, 173 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Ghirardi, L. Zhang, J. W. Lee, T. Flynn, M. Seibert, E. Greenbaum and A. Melis, Trends Biotechnol., 2000, 18, 506 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Kapdan and F. Kargi, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2006, 38, 569 CrossRef CAS .
D. Das and T. N. Veziroglu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 6046 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dutta, D. De, S. Chaudhuri and S. K. Bhattacharya, Microb. Cell Fact., 2005, 4, 36 CrossRef .
E. J. Philips and A. Mitsui, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1986, 11, 83 CrossRef .
N. Rashid, W. Song, J. Park, H. F. Jin and K. Lee, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2009, 15, 498 Search PubMed .
R. Bagai and D. Madamwar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1999, 24, 311 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Dickson, C. J. Page and R. L. Ely, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 204 CrossRef CAS .
J. Miyake, M. Miyake and Y. Asada, J. Biotechnol., 1999, 70, 89 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Shi and H. Q. Yu, Process Biochem., 2005, 40, 2475 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Barbosa, J. M. S. Rocha, J. Tramper and R. H. Wijffels, J. Biotechnol., 2001, 85, 25 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nakada, Y. Asada, T. Aria and J. Miyake, J. Ferment. Bioeng., 1995, 80, 53 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, Q. Liao, W. Liu, Y. Z. Wang, X. Zhu, J. Li and H. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4708 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moralas and F. F. De La Rosa, Sol. Energy, 1992, 49, 41 CrossRef .
W. Scholz, F. Galvan and F. F. De La Rosa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1995, 39, 61 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Apt and P. W. Behrens, J. Phycol., 1999, 35, 215 CrossRef .
R. H. Reed, S. R. C. Warr, N. W. Kerby and W. D. P. Stewart, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 1986, 8, 101 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ramachandra Rao, U. Tripathi and G. A. Ravishankar, World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1999, 15, 465 CrossRef .
J. S. Yunes, S. De La Rocha, D. Giroldo, S. Bonoto da Silveira, R. Comin, M. da Silva Bicho, S. S. Melcher, X. L. Sant'ana and A. A. H. Vieira, J. Phycol., 2009, 45, 585 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Melnicki, E. Eroglu and A. Melis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 6157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cohen, Bioresour. Technol., 2001, 77, 257 CrossRef CAS .
R. Munoz and B. Guieysse, Water Res., 2006, 40, 2799 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. de Bashan and Y. Bashan, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 1611 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sawayama, K. K. Rao and D. O. Hall, J. Ferment. Bioeng., 1998, 86, 517 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takeno, Y. Yamaoka and K. Sasaki, World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2005, 21, 1385 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nagadomi, T. Hiromitsu, K. Takeno, M. Watanabe and K. Sasaki, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 1999, 87, 189 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nagadomi, T. Kitamura, M. Watanabe and K. Sasaki, Biotechnol. Lett., 2000, 22, 1369 CrossRef CAS .
C. Garbisu, J. M. Gil, M. J. Bazin, D. O. Hall and J. L. Serra, J. Appl. Phycol., 1991, 3, 221 Search PubMed .
C. Garbisu, D. O. Hall, M. J. Llama and J. L. Serra, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 1994, 16, 395 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Garbisu, H. Wen, D. O. Hall and J. L. Serra, in Current Research in Photosynthesis, ed. M. Baltscheffsky, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,  1990, vol. II, pp. 699–702 Search PubMed .
S. Sawayama, K. K. Rao and D. O. Hall, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1998, 49, 463 CrossRef CAS .
A. Blanco, B. Sanz, M. J. Llama and J. L. Serra, J. Biotechnol., 1999, 69, 227 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rangsayatorn, P. Pokethitiyook, E. S. Upatham and G. R. Lanza, Environ. Int., 2004, 30, 57 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. S. Khattar, T. A. Sarma and D. P. Singh, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 1999, 25, 564 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. S. Khattar, T. A. Sarma and A. Sharma, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2007, 82, 652 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rouillon, M. Tocabens and R. Carpentier, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 1999, 25, 230 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bloch, E. Papismedov, K. Yavriyants, M. Vorobeychik, S. Beer and P. Vardi, Artif. Organs, 2006, 30, 715 CrossRef CAS .
A. Melis, L. Zhang, M. Forestier, M. L. Ghirardi and M. Seibert, Plant Physiol., 2000, 122, 127 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. Laurinavichene, A. S. Fedorov, M. L. Ghirardi, M. Seibert and A. A. Tsygankov, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 659 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Hahn, M. L. Ghirardi and W. A. Jacoby, Biochem. Eng. J., 2007, 37, 75 CrossRef CAS .
J. Miyake, X. Y. Mao and S. Kawamura, Proc. Int. Symp. Hydrogen Syst., 1985, 1, 277 Search PubMed .
A. A. Tsygankov, Y. Hirata, M. Miyake, Y. Asada and J. Myake, J. Ferment. Bioeng., 1994, 5, 575 CrossRef .
A. A. Tsygankov, A. S. Fedorov, I. V. Talipova, T. V. Laurinavichene, J. Miyake and I. N. Gogotov, Appl. Biochem. Microbiol., 1998, 34, 362 Search PubMed .
S. N. Kosourov and M. Seibert, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 102, 50 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Rooke, A. Léonard, C. F. Meunier, H. Sarmento, J.-P. Descy and B. L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 344, 348 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Rooke, A. Léonard, H. Sarmento, C. F. Meunier, J.-P. Descy and B. L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2011 10.1039/c0jm02712j .
N. F. Y. Tam and Y. S. Wong, Environ. Pollut., 2000, 107, 145 CrossRef CAS .
R. León and F. Galván, J. Biotechnol., 1995, 42, 61 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hatanaka, T. Kudo, M. Miyataka, O. Kobayashi, M. Higashihara and K. Hiyama, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 1999, 88, 281 CrossRef CAS .
U. Tripathi, S. Ramachandra Rao and G. A. Ravishankar, Process Biochem., 2002, 38, 419 CrossRef CAS .
U. Soltmann and H. Böttcher, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2008, 48, 66 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guerin, M. E. Huntley and M. Olaizola, Trends Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 210 CrossRef .
D. Fiedler, U. Hager, H. Franke, U. Soltmann and H. Böttcher, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 261 RSC .
L. E. de-Bashan and Y. Bashan, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 74, 6797 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gautier, J. Livage, T. Coradin and P. Lopez, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4611 RSC .
S. Boninsegna, P. Bosetti, G. Carturan, G. Dellagiacoma, R. Dal Monte and M. Rossi, J. Biotechnol., 2003, 100, 277 CrossRef CAS .
G. Orive, R. M. Hernández, A. R. Gascón, R. Calafiore, T. M. S. Chang, P. De Vos, G. Hortelano, D. Hunkeler, I. Lacík and J. L. Pedraz, Trends Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 87 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Prehn, J. T. Weaver and G. H. Algire, J. Natl. Cancer I., 1954, 15, 509 Search PubMed .
T. M. S. Chang, Science, 1964, 146, 524 CrossRef CAS .
G. Orive, R. M. Hernandez, A. R. Gascon, R. Calafiore, T. M. S. Chang, P. De Vos, G. Hortelano, D. Hunkeler, I. Lacik, A. M. J. Shapiro and J. L. Pedraz, Nat. Med., 2003, 9, 104 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lim and A. M. Sun, Science, 1980, 210, 908 CrossRef CAS .
M. Löhr, A. Hoffmeyer, J.-C. Kröger, M. Freund, J. Hain, A. Holle, P. Karle, W. T. Knöfel, S. Liebe, P. Müller, H. Nizze, M. Renner, R. M. Saller, T. Wagner, K. Hauenstein, W. H. Günzburg and B. Salmons, Lancet, 2001, 357, 1591 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cirone, J. M. Bourgeois, R. C. Austin and P. L. Chang, Hum. Gene Ther., 2002, 13, 1157 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hortelano, A. Al-Hendy, F. A. Ofusu and P. L. Chang, Blood, 1996, 87, 5095 CAS .
S. Prakash and T. M. S. Chang, Nat. Med., 1996, 2, 883 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Chang, J. M. Van Raamsdonk, G. Hortelano, S. C. Barsoum, N. C. MacDonald and T. L. Stockley, Trends Biotechnol., 1999, 17, 78 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ming, X. Li, X. Fan, D. Yang, L. Li, S. Chen, Q. Gu and W. Le, J. Transl. Med., 2009, 7, 53 CrossRef .
X. Cai, Y. Lin, G. Ou, E. Luo, Y. Man, Q. Yuan and P. Gong, Cell Biol. Int., 2007, 31, 776 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kaigler, P. H. Krebsbach, Z. Wang, E. R. West, K. Horger and D. J. Mooney, J. Dent. Res., 2006, 85, 633 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Dean, Y. Yulyana, G. Williams, K. S. Sidhu and B. E. Tuch, Transplantation, 2006, 82, 1175 CrossRef .
A. Coghlan, New Scientist, 2007, 2598, 8 .
P. M. Galletti, P. Aebischer and M. J. Lysaght, ASAIO Journal, 1995, 41, 49 Search PubMed .
P. L. Chang and K. M. Bowie, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 1998, 33, 31 CrossRef CAS .
G. Orive, A. R. Gascón, R. M. Hernández, M. Iguartua and J. L. Pedraz, Trends Pharmacol. Sci., 2003, 24, 207 CAS .
P. De Vos, A. F. Hamel and K. Tatarkiewicz, Diabetologia, 2002, 45, 159 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, L. Liu and I. G. Charles, The FASEB Journal, 2002, 16, 213 CAS .
C. Hasse, G. Klöck, A. Schlosser, U. Zimmermann and M. Rothmund, Lancet, 1997, 350, 1296 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rinsch, P. Dupraz, B. L. Schneider, N. Déglon, P. H. Maxwell, P. J. Ratcliffe and P. Aebischer, Kidney Int., 2002, 62, 1395 CrossRef CAS .
M. Otterlei, K. Ostgaar, G. Skjak-Braek, O. Smidsroad, P. Soon-Shiong and T. Espevik, J. Immunother., 1991, 10, 286 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shima, H. Matsuoka, T. Iwamoto and H. Sakai, Journal of Antibiotics, 1984, 37, 1449 CAS .
A. Bartkowiak and D. Hunkeler, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1999, 875, 36 CAS .
G. Orive, R. M. Hernández, A. R. Gascón, M. Igartua, A. Rojas and J. L. Pedraz, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2001, 76, 285 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aiedeh, E. Gianasi, I. Orienti and V. Zecchi, J. Microencapsulation, 1997, 14, 567 CrossRef CAS .
R. Muzarelli, V. Baldassarre, F. Conti, P. Ferrara, C. Biagini, G. Gazzanelli and V. Vasi, Biomaterials, 1988, 9, 247 CrossRef .
D. W. Green, I. Leveque, D. Walsh, D. Howard, X. Yang, K. Partridge, S. Mann and R. O. C. Oreffo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 917 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lahooti and M. V. Sefton, Biomaterials, 2000, 21, 987 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rahfoth, J. Weisser, F. Sternkopf, T. Aigner, K. Von Der Mark and R. Bräuer, Osteoarthritis Cartilage, 1998, 6, 50 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Hunt and L. M. Grover, Biotechnol. Lett., 2010, 32, 733 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Wan, J. L. Hutter, L. Million and G. Guhados, ACS Symp. Ser., 2006, 938, 221 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sani and Y. Dahman, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 151 CAS .
B. Chevallay and D. Herbage, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., 2000, 38, 211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roche, M. C. Ronzière, D. Herbage and A. M. Freyria, Biomaterials, 2001, 22, 9 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Brown, M. Wiseman, C. B. Chuo, U. Cheema and S. N. Nahzat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1762 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tabata and Y. Ikada, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 1998, 31, 287 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Janmey, J. P. Winer and J. W. Weisel, J. R. Soc. Interface, 2009, 6, 1 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ye, G. Zund, P. Benedikt, S. Jockhoevel, S. P. Hoerstrup, S. Sakyama, J. A. Hubbell and M. Turina, Eur. J. Cardio-Thorac. Surg., 2000, 17, 587 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, I. Lacik, M. Brissová, A. M. Anilkumar, A. Prokop, D. Hunkeler, R. Green, K. Shahrokhi and A. G. Powers, Nat. Biotechnol., 1997, 15, 358 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tse, H. Uludag, M. V. Sefton and P. L. Chang, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 1996, 51, 271 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dautzenberg, U. Schuldt, G. Grasnick, P. Karle, P. Müller, M. Löhr, M. Pelegrin, M. Piechaczyk, K. V. Rombs, W. H. Günzburg, B. Salmons and R. M. Saller, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1999, 875, 46 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kobayashi, Y. Aomatsu, H. Kanehiro, M. Hisanaga and Y. Nakajima, Transplant. Proc., 2003, 35, 484 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Hardikar, M. V. Risbud and R. R. Bhonde, Transplant. Proc., 2000, 32, 824 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nieto, S. Areva, T. Wilson, R. Viitala and M. Vallet-Regi, Acta Biomater., 2009, 5, 3478 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gill and A. Ballesteros, Trends Biotechnol., 2000, 18, 282 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kuncová, O. Podrazky, S. Ripp, J. Trogl, G. S. Sayler, K. Demnerova and R. Vankova, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2004, 31, 335 CrossRef CAS .
H. Böttcher, U. Soltmann, M. Mertig and W. Pompe, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2176 RSC .
M. F. Desimone, J. Degrossi, M. D'Aquino and L. E. Diaz, Biotechnol. Lett., 2002, 24, 1557 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nassif, O. Bouvet, M. N. Rager, C. Roux, T. Coradin and J. Livage, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 42 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nassif, C. Roux, T. Coradin, M. N. Rager, O. M. M. Bouvet and J. Livage, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 203 RSC .
M. F. Desimone, G. S. Alvarez, M. L. Foglia and L. E. Diaz, Recent Pat. Biotechnol., 2009, 3, 55 Search PubMed .
E. J. A. Pope and J. D. Mackenzie, MRS Bulletin, 1987, 12, 29 CAS .
E. J. A. Pope, Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Lasers 16th, 1994, 372 Search PubMed .
E. J. A. Pope, K. Braun and C. M. Peterson, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 1997, 8, 635 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Peterson, C. M. Peterson and E. J. A. Pope, P. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 1998, 218, 365 Search PubMed .
M. Muraca, M. T. Vilei, E. Zanusso, C. Ferraresso, A. Granato, S. Doninsegna, R. Dal Monte, P. Carraro and G. Carturan, Transplant. Proc., 2000, 32, 2713 CrossRef CAS .
G. Carturan, R. Dal Toso, S. Boninsegna and R. Dal Monte, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2087 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Yi, J. D. Brennan and M. A. Brook, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5326 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lopez, E. Ortiz, P. Quintana and R. D. González, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 300, 3 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakai, T. Ono, H. Ijima and K. Kawakami, Biomaterials, 2001, 22, 2827 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakai, T. Ono, H. Ijima and K. Kawakami, J. Membr. Sci., 2002, 202, 73 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakai, T. Ono, H. Ijima and K. Kawakami, Biomaterials, 2002, 23, 4177 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Steen, Y. Kang, G. Bokinsky, Z. Hu, A. Schirmer, A. McClure, S. B. del Cardayre and J. D. Keasling, Nature, 2010, 463, 559 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Jia and P. Wang, Biotechnol. Adv., 2006, 24, 296 CrossRef CAS .
B. Willner, E. Katz and I. Willner, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2006, 17, 589 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenbaum, Z. He and L. Angenent, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 259 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Johnson, Science, 1983, 219, 632 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Pramik, C. Gen. Eng. News, 1986, 2, 9 Search PubMed .
M. Masuda, K. Takahashi, N. Sakurai, K. Yanagiya, S. Komatsubara and T. Tosa, Process. Biochem., 1995, 30, 553 CAS .
A. L. Demain, Trends Biotechnol., 2000, 18, 26 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Perkins, A. Sloma, T. Hermann, K. Theriault, E. Zachgo, T. Erdenberger, N. Hannett, N. P. Chatterjee, V. Williams II, G. A. Rufo Jr, R. Hatch and J. Pero, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1999, 22, 8 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Kusel, Y. H. Fa and A. L. Demain, J. Gen. Microbiol., 1984, 130, 835 CAS .
J. A. O'Loughlin, J. M. Bruder and M. J. Lysaght, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 2004, 15, 1447 CrossRef CAS .
S. Prakash and M. L. Jones, J. Biomed. Biotechnol., 2005, 1, 44 Search PubMed .
M. R. Benoit, D. Mayer, Y. Barak, I. Chen, W. Hu, Z. Cheng, S. X. Wand, D. M. Spielman, S. S. Gambhir and A. Matin, Clin. Cancer Res., 2009, 15, 5170 CrossRef CAS .
S. Martel, O. Felfoul, M. Mohammadi and J.-B. Mathieu, Conf. proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2008, 2497 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Part of the themed issue on hybrid materials.‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.§ FRIA Fellow/Chargé de Recherches: Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique, 5, rue d’Egmont, B-1000 Bruxelles, Belgium.¶ PLL: poly-L-lysine.|| HEMA-MMA: hydroxyethyl methylacrylate-methyl methacrylate.** APTrMOS: 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Alexandre Léonard
	Dr Alexandre Léonard received his Master's and PhD degrees under the supervision of Prof. Dr Bao-Lian Su at the University of Namur in 2000 and 2005. He was awarded the Royal Chemical Society of Belgium prize and laureate of the DSM Award for Science and Technology in 2005. His research was aimed at new synthesis pathways towards highly structured mesoporous (alumino)silicates and the preparation of hierarchical aluminosilicates, based on original spontaneous formation mechanisms. He is currently working at the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry as ‘‘Chargé de Recherches’’ on the conception of new photobioreactors based on immobilized photosynthetic microorganisms within porous inorganic matrices.

Emeric Danloy, Philippe Dandoy and Grégory Leroux
	Emeric Danloy, Philippe Dandoy and Grégory Leroux, are PhD students in Prof Su's research group, each working on projects involving cell encapsulation.

Christophe F. Meunier
	Christophe Meunier obtained his Master’s and PhD degrees under the supervision of Prof. Dr Bao-Lian Su from the laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry, University of Namur (FUNDP), Belgium, in 2006 and 2010. He received the SRC prize for his master's thesis from the Royal Belgian Society of Chemistry. He is currently working in the laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry as a Postdoctoral Researcher in the frame of the Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique (FNRS), Belgium. He is carrying out his research on the incorporation of biological functionalities within inorganic matrices and on the comprehension of the bio-mineralization processes.

Joanna C. Rooke
	Dr Joanna Rooke received a MNatSc. (Chemistry) degree from the University of Birmingham (2000). She was awarded a PhD, jointly funded by Merck and EPSRC, by the University of Southampton (2004) under the supervision of Prof. M. T. Weller. After a PDRF at the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials chemistry, University of Namur she moved to LEPMI, INP Grenoble before returning to Namur to participate in an EU INTERREG IV project concerning VOC and CO2 abatement. Her research interests include synthesis and crystallography of oxynitrides, adsorption of Pt nanoparticles on carbon aerogels and encapsulation of photosynthetic entities within porous silica gels.

Bao-Lian Su
	Prof. Bao-Lian Su joined the faculty and created the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry at the University of Namur, Belgium in 1995. He is currently a Full Professor of Chemistry, Director of the Chemistry Department and the Research Centre for Nanomaterials Chemistry. He is also Changjiang Professor at Wuhan University of Technology and ‘‘The Expert of the State’’ in the frame of ‘‘Thousands Talents’’ program, China. His current research fields include the synthesis, the property study and the molecular engineering of organized, hierarchically porous and bio-inspired materials, living materials and leaf-like materials and the immobilization of bio-organisms for artificial photosynthesis, nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology, cell therapy and biomedical applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the benefits arising from immobilisation and encapsulation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structure depicting the building blocks that make up alginate gel where G represents guluronic acid and M mannuronic acid.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic showing the formation of a hybrid material through sol–gel methodology.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic showing the core-shell principle of immobilisation.	 

 	Fig. 5  Cells on polyester fibres and immobilised in a siliceous layer (300×). [With kind permission from Springer Science + Business Media93].	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of cell-matrix interactions and (b) cell wall micrographs (TEM) of encapsulated plants cells within pure silica gel (I) and organically modified silica gels (II) after 2 days postimmobilisation. V, C, CW and M stand for vacuole, cytoplasm, cell wall and matrix, respectively [adapted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society].	 



Catharanthus roseus
	Alkaloids	Silica	∼1500–3000	
105


Cruciata glabra
	Anthra-quinone	Pectate/Chitosan	556	
108-110


Nicotiana tabacum
	Scopolin	Alginate	∼2000	
112


Papaver somniferum
	Sanginarine	Polyester shortfibres	∼7–35	
106


Solanum chrysotrichum
	Spirostanol saponin	Alginate	∼25	
111


Vitis vinifera
	Anthocyanin	Pectate/chitosan	∼100	
108, 109

 	Fig. 7  GL-CSF production by hybrid alginate beads and free cell suspension (control). [With kind permission from Springer Science + Business Media113].	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Scanning electron micrograph (cross section) of one A. thaliana cell entrapped within a porous silica-based matrix and (b) Photosynthetic production of oxygen by the hybrid material. 100% corresponds to the photosynthetic activity of free cells. [Reproduced by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry83].	 

 	Fig. 9  Time-dependent TEM images of cyanobacteria immobilised within silica gels ((i) one hour, (ii) one day, (iii) one week and (iv) one months for strain PCC6301) [Reproduced by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry122].	 

 	Fig. 10  Reflectance mode UV-Vis spectra of cyanobacteria strain PCC6301 immobilised in a silica gel (including the presence of H+ exchanged silicate, glycerol) as a function of time (numbers on the right correspond to weeks) [Reproduced by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry127].	 

 	Fig. 11  Effect of PVA concentration (top) and cell loading (bottom) on hydrogen production by a combination of cells immobilised in PVA-alginate pieces and packed in a packed bed reactor at 27 ± 1 °C with combined nitrogen-free medium passing continuously at 1 mL min−1. [Copyright 1999, with permission from Elsevier137].	 

 	Fig. 12  Glucose-stimulated insulin response from 100 encapsulated islets perifused with and without algae. Insulin response is expressed as fold stimulation compared with 100 mg dL−1 glucose: n = 5 for islets group, n = 3 for islets + algae group, n = 10 for glucose determination. [Reproduced with permission from Wiley167].	 

 	Fig. 13  Transmission electron microscopy image of C. caldarium cell within a silica matrix clearly identifying the alignment of silica colloids around the cell wall. [Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier175].	 

 	Fig. 14  Scanning electron micrograph of C. sorokiniana cells immobilised along sponge fibres. [Copyright 2003, with permission from Elsevier62].	 

 	Fig. 15  3D digital microscopic image of Chlorella vulgaris algae embedded within thin silica layers. [With kind permission from Springer Science + Business Media181].	 

 	Fig. 16  Measurement of the silica-gel dissolution index. The insert corresponds to an image of C. fusiformis after 8 days of entrapment, and illustrates the measured surfaces of the cavity and of the cells. Dissolution is reported as a function of time. Light grey, C. fusiformis (n = 4); dark grey, P. tricornutum (n = 3); and white, Nannochloropsis salina (n = 2). In each experiment from 4 to 25 surface measurements were performed. Error bars indicate s.d.) [Reproduced by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry185].	 

 	Fig. 17  Encapsulated mouse embryonic stem cells retrieved from the peritoneal cavity of BALB/c mice were encapsulated as single cells on day 0 (A). Capsules retrieved at one month (B), two months (C), and three months (D) have formed aggregates in contrast to being single cells prior to transplantation. [Reproduced with permission of Wolters Kluwer Health200].	 

 	Fig. 18  Potential diseases amenable to treatment by cell therapy.202	 


Alginate-PLO	Increased biocompatibility
Alginate-cellulose sulfate-PMCGa	Independent adjustment of capsule parameters
HEMA-MMA	Improved mass transfer, stability and durability
Agarose-polystyrene sulfonate	Blocks the activation complement via enhancing the activity of C1 inhibitors
Alginate-agarose	Increased mechanical stability
Barium-alginate	Increased mechanical and chemical stability
PDADMACb	Increased mechanical stability
Alginate-chitosan	Increased biocompatibility
PVA	Improved intracapsular nutrient transport
Photopolymerised PEG-diacrylate	Increased biocompatibility

 	Fig. 19  Mineralized polysaccharide beads. Optical micrographs showing (a) intact capsules with a mineral content (25 mM Ca2+, 30 mM phosphate) and (b) the edge of a single bead and the corresponding Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of a mineralized alginate/chitosan outer membrane (d) and Ca alginate core (c). [Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission215].	 

Diabetes	Islet cells	Alginate	
192, 205, 206


	
	Agarose	
230


	
	Chitosan	
213, 231

Hyperlipidemia	Kidney cells	Agarose	
216

Brain tumour	Kidney cells	Alginate	
42

Hemophilia	Myoblasts	Alginate	
196

Dwarfism	Myoblasts	Alginate	
196

Mucopolysaccharidosis	Fibroblasts	Alginate	
196

Anemia	Myoblasts	Alginate	
208

Parkinson's disease	RPE cells	Gelatin	
197

Footnotes
† Part of the themed issue on hybrid materials.
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
§ FRIA Fellow/Chargé de Recherches: Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique, 5, rue d’Egmont, B-1000 Bruxelles, Belgium.
¶ PLL: poly-L-lysine.
|| HEMA-MMA: hydroxyethyl methylacrylate-methyl methacrylate.
** APTrMOS: 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
