An ultrathin and highly porous silica nanochannel membrane: toward highly efficient salinity energy conversion   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA10848J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA10848J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2385-2391An ultrathin and highly porous silica nanochannel membrane: toward highly efficient salinity energy conversion†

        
          
            Fei 
            Yan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lina 
            Yao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kenxin 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Yang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Bin 
            Su
          
        
      *
      Institute of Analytical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. E-mail: subin@zju.edu.cn;  Web: http://mypage.zju.edu.cn/binsu
Received 
      11th November 2018
    , Accepted 3rd January 2019First published on 4th January 2019AbstractArtificial solid-state nanochannels are capable of regulating unipolar ion transport in their confined space and thus converting the Gibbs free energy stored in the salinity gradients to electricity. In order to achieve a large conversion efficiency, highly ion-selective and permeable nanochannel membranes are inevitably desired. In this work we report the salinity energy conversion using an ultrathin silica isoporous membrane (SIM, ∼90 nm in thickness) that consists of straight, uniform and close packed nanochannels (diameter, 2–3 nm; pore density, ∼4 × 1012 cm−2, corresponding to a porosity of 16.7%). Thanks to its unique structure and negatively charged surface, the SIM displayed excellent cation selectivity and meanwhile preserved a high ionic flux, and was capable of harnessing the osmotic energy efficiently upon mixing artificial seawater and river water. We rationalized the ion distribution inside the nanochannels in the presence of salinity gradients and the effect of the channel length on the energy conversion efficiency by finite element simulations. The simulated results suggest that short nanochannels with an ultrasmall dimeter of ∼2.3 nm and a length of ∼100 nm possess excellent cation selectivity. Both experimental and theoretical results suggest that the SIM is a highly potential material in salinity energy conversion.
Introduction
Nanofluidic energy conversion has been widely utilized in a variety of artificial solid-state nanochannels, which further enlightens the field of powering miniaturized or tiny electrical devices that usually operate on a low power level ranging from nanowatts to microwatts, such as nano-/micro-electromechanical systems, implantable biosensors and biomedical devices.1,2 Energy could be captured by nanochannels from different sources, such as salinity gradients, pressure gradients and solar light.3 Among them, salinity-gradient-driven power generation systems have received considerable attention, due to their high efficiency, high power density and comprehensive sources. In these systems, conversion of chemical energy existing in the form of salinity difference between seawater and river water, known as osmotic energy, has been displayed by nanochannel membranes with ionic selectivity, which is similar to the feature of ion channels and ion pumps embedded in the cell membranes of electric eels.4 The ionic selectivity of nanochannels arises from both the channel surface charge and confined space comparable to the Debye screening length. So the movement of counter-ions and co-ions inside nanochannels, namely that of those carrying charges opposite to and similar to the channel surface, is unbalanced, with the former being favored and the latter being inhibited, respectively. Under the salinity gradient, this unipolar ion transport will result in the generation of a net diffusion current.
Recently, many research efforts have been devoted to fabricating highly selective solid-state nanochannels for constructing salinity energy harvesting systems using different materials.3,5–9 A proof-of-concept nanochannel osmotic energy conversion system was reported on the basis of a track-etched single nanopore on polyimide, with a maximum output power of 26 pW per nanopore.10 This value has been increased later to 40 pW per nanotube by single boron nitride nanotube11 and 225 pW per nanopore by atomically thin single MoS2 nanopore,12 respectively. Towards practical applications, a large number of research studies have been carried out to fabricate macroscopic nanochannel membranes for osmotic energy conversion, from homogeneous nanoporous structures, such as anodic alumina oxide (AAO),13,14 track-etched polycarbonate,15 Nafion,16,17 graphene oxide membranes18 and kaolinite membranes,19 to heterogeneous nanostructures with asymmetric surface charge polarity, e.g. mesoporous carbon/macroporous alumina (AAO) hybrid membranes,20 porous block copolymer (BCP)/polyethylene terephthalate heterogeneous membranes,21 and two-typed BCP layers.22 Note that a high power density up to 3.46 W m−2 has been achieved with an ion-diode like mesoporous carbon/AAO heterogeneous membrane, which largely outperforms commercial ion exchange membranes by almost one order of magnitude.20
The salinity energy conversion by nanochannel membranes is usually evaluated using two important parameters, namely the energy conversion efficiency (η) and the maximum electric power (Pmax). Taking a cation selective membrane as an example, they can be expressed as, η = (2t+ − 1)2(1) (2)where t+ is the cation transfer number in nanochannels. Itot is the total ionic flux. cH and cL are the salt concentrations of concentrated and diluted solutions separated by the nanochannel membrane, respectively. And γcH and γcL are the ionic activity coefficients in two solutions. In terms of the first equation, η is solely determined using t+. A higher η expects the membrane to consist of small and uniform nanochannels, as well as an effective ion-selective surface. While the second equation indicates that a larger Pmax also requires a higher Itot, which expects the membrane to be highly porous, be ultrathin and have less channel tortuosity.
In this work, we report the use of a silica isoporous membrane (SIM) for harvesting electricity from Gibbs free energy in the form of salinity gradient. Although silica nanoporous membranes with different morphologies, including AAO supported dense silica,23 silica nanoslits,24 SBA-15,25 and three-dimensional nanopore networks formed by self-assembled silica nanoparticles,26,27 have been previously designed for salinity energy conversion, the current SIM has some advantageous features. First, it possesses a uniform and ultrasmall pore size (2–3 nm in diameter) comparable to the Debye screening length, thus displaying a high selectivity for cations (the silica surface carries negative charges due to deprotonation of silanol groups). Second, the SIM consisting of straight nanochannels is ultrathin (∼90 nm in thickness) and highly porous (4.0 × 1012 pores cm−2, corresponding to a porosity of 16.7%), thus producing a low membrane resistance and a high ion flux. Considering that the harvested power and energy conversion efficiency are related to the total ionic flux and ion selectivity of nanochannels, the SIM shows high potential for the construction of salinity energy conversion devices. We intend to measure the efficiency of salinity gradient energy conversion by the SIM and rationalize it by finite element simulations.
Results and discussion
Characterization of the SIM
The SIM was primarily grown on indium tin oxide (ITO) glass by the Stöber-solution growth approach (see ESI, Scheme S1,† for details),28 which was characterized by cyclic voltammetry (CV, see Fig. S1†). The SIM was proved to be compact without cracks. It displayed obvious ion selectivity, repelling the mass transport of negatively charged Fe(CN)63− and favoring that of positively charged Ru(NH3)63+. The ion selectivity principally arises from the ultrasmall size of silica nanochannels and their negatively charged wall (the isoelectric point of the silanol group is 2–3).29 Moreover, the current magnitude of Ru(NH3)63+ at the SIM/ITO electrode is comparable to that at a bare ITO electrode, indicating the high permeability of the SIM.
A commercial silicon nitride (SiN) coated silicon wafer, denoted as SiN for simplicity in the context, with a dimension of 1 cm × 1 cm was employed to support the SIM, using the previously reported PMMA-assisted transfer method.30 The silicon wafer has a square window of 0.5 mm × 0.5 mm, on the top of which 150 nm-thick SiN was covered with a single micrometer-sized pore of 6 μm-diameter in the center. As displayed in Fig. 1a, the obtained SIM/SiN possesses a layered structure consisting of perforated silica nanochannels on a single SiN pore. As shown in Fig. S2†, the successful transfer of the SIM to the SiN pore was proved using a metallographic microscope, scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM). The TEM and SEM images also clearly reveal that the SIM has a uniform pore size of about 2–3 nm, a high pore density of 4.0 × 1012 pores cm−2, ultrathin thickness (∼90 nm), and is intact without cracks.
 Fig. 1  (a) Photograph of a real SIM/SiN chip (left) and the cross-sectional structure of a SIM/SiN window (right). Note that the diameter of nanochannels in the SIM should be much smaller (ca. 2–3 nm) and the scale on the right does not represent the real dimension. (b) The homemade device consisting of two compartments for I–V measurements. The right side shows the corresponding electrical circuit. 
Ion transport inside the SIM
Ion transport through the SIM is remarkably different from that of large-scale channels due to the effect of the electric double layer (EDL). KCl possessing equal electrophoretic mobilities for cations and anions was employed as the electrolyte in water. At a relatively low concentration of KCl, the conductance of the SIM (GSIM) is in principle determined by counter-ions (namely K+) due to unipolar ion transport through nanochannels. To prove this electrostatic effect, the dependence of GSIM on the concentration of KCl was first investigated. A homemade device illustrated in Fig. 1b was used, which consisted of two compartments capable of mounting the membrane in between and separating two solutions without leakage. Both bare SiN and SIM/SiN were studied for comparison. The obtained current–voltage (I–V) curves are shown in Fig. S3 and S4,† respectively. The concentration of KCl in two compartments was the same and varied from 10−4 M to 1 M. At every concentration, a linear I–V response was obtained, from the slope of which GSIM was derived and plotted against the concentration of KCl (see Fig. S3k and details in ESI†). Apparently, GSIM exhibits an inflexion and reaches to a saturation plateau in the low concentration range, indicative of a surface-charge-governed ionic transport inside nanochannels of the SIM in this situation. In contrast, the conductance of bare SiN (GSiN) is always proportional to the concentration of KCl in the same concentration range without displaying an inflexion (Fig. S4j†), suggesting that the SiN functions only as the supporting material and does not influence the ion transport selectivity through the SIM. From the conductance measurements, the surface charge density of silica nanochannels was also estimated to be ca. −0.015 C m−2.
Ion current rectification (ICR) by the SIM
ICR is a nonlinear diode-like current–voltage response phenomenologically,31–33 which essentially originates from the ion selectivity of nanochannels. It is displayed by nanochannels with asymmetry of either geometry,34–36 surface charge,37–39 or ion concentration.40,41 Here the ICR behavior of the SIM under the last condition was investigated. The same device was used to measure I–V curves in the presence of a salinity difference between two compartments. The concentration of KCl in the compartment in contact with the SIM (cH) was varied from 10−4 M to 1 M, while that in the other in contact with SiN (cL) was fixed at 10−4 M. Fig. 2a shows an example I–V curve obtained for cH/cL = 30 (more can be found in Fig. S5†), which is characterized by an asymmetric current response with the current magnitude measured at positive voltages being apparently larger than that at negative voltages. This diode-like feature is a typical characteristic of ICR. The rectification ratio was defined as |I(+0.4V)/I(−0.4V)| here to describe the efficiency of ICR. Fig. 2b summarizes the rectification ratio at various cH/cL values. Apparently, with increasing cH/cL up to 1000, the rectification ratio continuously increased. When cH/cL was beyond 1000, it suddenly became smaller. This is because that the ion selectivity of the SIM becomes weaker when in contact with an exceptionally high electrolyte solution. The maximum rectification ratio was ∼23.8 at a concentration ratio of 1000 (cH/cL = 1000), which was much higher than that displayed by 4 nm silica nanoslits (∼3.5).40
 Fig. 2  (a) Measured I–V curve for SIM/SiN when cH/cL = 30. (b) Ionic current rectification ratio measured under various salinity gradients. (c) Schematic illustration of rectification phenomena by a salt gradient in a negatively charged channel under different polarities of applied potential. 

Fig. 2c schematically illustrates the ICR mechanism of a silica nanochannel with a negatively charged surface in the presence of a salinity gradient. The ionic flux (J) is the sum of transport of both cations and anions, to which both diffusion due to a concentration gradient and electro-migration due to the electric field contribute. The subscripts in Fig. 2c, “N”, “H” and “L”, represent the ionic flux inside the nanochannel, and in the exterior solutions containing a high and low concentration of KCl (cH, cL), respectively. The signs, “+” and “−”, denote cations and anions. In the presence of a salinity gradient (asymmetric bulk concentration, cH > cL), the magnitude of ionic fluxes for cations and anions in the exterior solutions is equal (JH,+ = JH,−, JL,+ = JL,−). But, inside the nanochannel, the ionic current mainly arises from the transport of cations. As shown in the top panel of Fig. 2c, when the applied voltage is positive (V > 0), the directions of the electric field and concentration gradient are the same, from the right (cH) to the left (cL), resulting in the increase of the cation flux inside the nanochannel and thus a large current. However, when the voltage is negative (V < 0, as illustrated in the bottom panel of Fig. 2c), the directions of the electric field and the concentration gradient are opposite, leading to the decrease of the net cation flux inside the nanochannel and consequently a small current.
Numerical simulation based on coupled Poisson–Nernst–Planck (PNP) equations was performed to quantitatively address the ion concentration inside the nanochannels. A two-dimensional (2D) axisymmetric single-pore model was employed. The details on this model and relevant boundary conditions are described in the ESI† (see Fig. S6 and Table S1†). Fig. 3a shows the concentrations of K+ and Cl− in the axial direction of the nanochannel (namely the concentrations along the red line shown in the left model from position α to β) for a series of cH/cL values. Clearly, the concentration of K+ inside the nanochannel is always much higher than that of Cl−. In addition, it is also higher than that in the exterior solutions, while the concentration of Cl− inside the nanochannel is smaller than that in the exterior solutions. The results coincide well with the schematic illustration in Fig. 2c, arising from the cation selectivity of the nanochannel. As further depicted in Fig. 3b and c, K+ was electrostatically accumulated near the negatively charged channel wall whereas Cl− was depleted. Note that, even at the entrance of a high concentration solution (cH = 10−1 M), Cl− is still effectively depleted, indicative of the excellent selectivity of the SIM. Therefore, although the nanochannels in the SIM are short (∼90 nm), the membrane displays a high cation selectivity, thanks to the ultrasmall and uniform pore size. As mentioned above, a high ion selectivity is particularly important for efficient osmotic power generation.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the 2D axisymmetric single-pore model (left panel) and simulated concentration distributions of K+ and Cl− in the axial direction of the nanochannel (along the red line from α to β in the model) for a series of cH/cL with cL fixed at 10−4 M (right panel). The region in the gray color (−45 nm ≤ z ≤ 45 nm) refers to the nanochannel. (b and c) The concentrations of K+ (b) and Cl− (c) inside a negatively charged nanochannel at a concentration gradient of 1000 (cH/cL = 1000). 
Salinity-gradient-based energy conversion

Energy harvesting characteristics. 
Arising from the cation-selectivity of the SIM, ion transport across silica nanochannels produces a net current even at zero voltage, namely the so-called zero-voltage current, ISC. Meanwhile, the salt concentration gradient across the SIM results in the evolution of diffusion potential difference, denoted as Ediff. Ediff can be experimentally obtained by subtracting the redox potential difference between two Ag/AgCl electrodes (Eredox) from the measured open circuit potential (Vapp), according to the equivalent circuit of the power generating system shown in Fig. S7a†. The corresponding values of Vapp, Eredox, and Ediff under different concentration gradients (namely various values of cH/cL from 3 to 3000) are summarized in Table S2.†Fig. 4a shows that Ediff increases apparently with increasing cH/cL from 3 to 1000, which however decreases suddenly with a further increase of cH/cL to 3000. From Ediff, we can basically derive the transference number of K+, t+, by the following equation, (3)
 Fig. 4  (a–c) Energy conversion characteristics under various concentration gradients: Ediff and Isc (a); Pmax (b); ηmax (c). cL was fixed at 10−4 M and cH was varied from 3 × 10−4 M to 3 × 10−1 M. (d) The output power and current as a function of the external load resistance in a mixture of artificial sea water (0.5 M NaCl) and river water (0.01 M NaCl). The maximum output power density reaches 0.024 W m−2 at a resistance of ∼220 kΩ. 
 Fig. 5  Numerical simulation of channel-length dependent energy conversion performances at a concentration gradient of 1000 (cH/cL = 1000): (a) Ediff and Isc; (b) Pmax. 
As defined, t+ can be used to evaluate the selectivity of silica nanochannels. t+ = 0 and t+ = 1 are indicative of perfectly anion-selective and cation-selective nanochannels, respectively. Because the diameter of silica nanochannels is 2–3 nm, the EDL strongly overlapped in the radial direction of nanochannels when the concentration of KCl was below 0.1 M.42 In this case, the nanochannels were cation-selective and K+ possessed a large t+. When the concentration of KCl was increased (e.g., cH = 0.3 M), the thickness of the EDL was reduced, resulting in a less cation-selectivity of nanochannels and thus a small value of t+ for K+. This is why Ediff sharply decreased even at a high concentration gradient of 3000.

Fig. 4a also displays the variation of ISC with cH/cL. ISC was obtained directly from the intercept of the current axis in the I–V curves (displayed in Fig. S5†). Obviously, the magnitude of ISC also increases with increasing cH/cL from 3 to 1000. But when cH/cL was increased to 3000, a slight decrease of ISC was observed, which can be ascribed to the weaker effect of the surface charges at a high concentration gradient. The maximum ISC was 19.8 nA at a concentration gradient of 1000 (cH/cL = 1000). For comparison, numerical simulation of Ediff and ISC under various concentration gradients was also performed (Fig. S8a†). As can be seen, Ediff first increases and then declines with increasing cH/cL, displaying the same variation trend with the experimental results. And ISC also increases with the increase of cH/cL, even at a relatively high concentration of cH (cH = 0.3 M), showing the high cation-selectivity.
The parameter often used to evaluate the performance of the osmotic power harvesting system is Pmax, which is the maximum output power when the resistance of the external load is equal to that of the nanochannel (Rload = Rchannel in the equivalent circuit, see details in ESI and Fig. S7b†). Pmax can be expressed as Pmax = ISCEdiff/4. As illustrated in Fig. 4b, the maximum value of Pmax is 0.434 nW at a concentration gradient of 1000 (cH/cL = 1000). Moreover, the variation of Pmax with cH/cL is similar to the simulated trend in the range from 3 to 1000 (see Fig. S8b†). When cH/cL is 3000, the growth trend becomes slower, displaying the slightly weaker effect of the surface charges. Fig. 4c shows the variation of t+ and maximum conversion efficiency (ηmax) with cH/cL. When cH/cL is below 1000, the magnitude of t+ varies in the range from 0.630 to 0.844 (typical cation-selective characteristic), and that of ηmax from 3.36% to 23.64%. However, t+ = 0.533 was obtained when cH/cL was 3000, which was close to the value of non-ion-selective nanochannels. Furthermore, the electricity harvested from salinity gradients by the SIM can supply resistance (RL) to the external circuit. When two compartments of the device were filled with artificial seawater (0.5 M NaCl) and river water (0.01 M NaCl), respectively, the current output on a series of resistances of RL was recorded and is shown in Fig. 4d. An inverse correlation was seen. The larger the resistance was, the smaller the output current. And the maximum output power, calculated as I2 × RL, was ca. 6.0 nW (the inflexion point of the black curve in Fig. 4d), corresponding to 0.024 W m−2 (note that the area (A) used here is the dimension of the SiN window, 0.5 mm × 0.5 mm). Table S3† compares the present SIM with some other membranes in terms of the pore size, channel length, porosity and maximum power density (Pmax/A). The present SIM exhibits a comparable or high Pmax/A whether A is the effective (the area of a single micropore of SiN) or entire (the area of the single micropore of SiN) cross-sectional area of the SIM. We believe that improved power can be achieved by increasing the area of the SIM.43


The effect of the channel length by numerical simulation. 
Ion selectivity of the nanochannel is also significantly influenced by the channel length, which plays a vital role in the osmotic energy conversion.44 We further investigated the effect of the channel length on Ediff, ISC and Pmax at a concentration gradient of 1000 (cH/cL = 1000) using finite element simulation. As shown in Fig. 5a, an obvious increase of Ediff is observed upon increasing the channel length in the range from 5 nm to 100 nm and reaches a plateau after further increasing the channel length, indicating that a long nanochannel promotes the cation selectivity and 100 nm is long enough to obtain the optimal diffusion potential. As for ISC, it gradually increases with decreasing the channel length, suggesting that the decrease of the channel length can effectively reduce the resistance of the nanochannel. Fig. 5b shows that Pmax increases with the increase of the channel length, and abruptly decreases when the length is larger than 20 nm, displaying a maximum value at ∼20 nm, because the increase of the channel length can promote the ion selectivity but simultaneously increase the resistance. According to simulated results, short nanochannels with a length of ∼100 nm are preferred to obtain the optimal diffusion potential, while shorter channels (∼20 nm) favour the achievement of high electric power.

Conclusions
In summary, we have reported the use of an ultrathin silica isoporous membrane as the cation-selective membrane for converting the Gibbs free energy stored in salinity gradients to electricity. Due to the ultrasmall and uniform nanochannel (2–3 nm in diameter), the SIM with negative surface charges displays excellent cation selectivity, favoring unipolar ion transport inside the nanochannels. Salinity-gradient-dependent ion current rectification was displayed by the SIM with a relatively high rectification ratio (23.8). Moreover, the SIM possesses a high porosity (16.7%), vertically aligned channels, and an ultrasmall thickness (∼90 nm), leading to rapid ion transport and a low membrane resistance. With above advantages, the SIM could be used as the nanofluidic power source to drive the external electrical load by mixing the artificial seawater and river water. The obtained maximum output power density was up to 0.024 W m−2. Using a more porous supporting membrane, instead of a single SiN pore, we believe that the power density can be further improved. Furthermore, modification of the SIM surface or wall with suitable functional molecules could offer a broad platform in the fields of mimicking biological ion channels, in addition to energy conversion.
Experimental
Materials and methods

Chemicals and reagents. 
All chemicals were used as received without further purification, and all aqueous solutions were prepared with ultrapure water (18.2 MΩ cm). Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS, ≥99.0%), cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB, ≥98%), hexaammineruthenium(III) chloride (Ru(NH3)6Cl3, 98%) and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA, Mw = 996000) were ordered from Sigma. Concentrated ammonia aqueous solution (25 wt%), potassium ferricyanide (K3[Fe(CN)6]), and potassium hydrogen phthalate (KHP) were bought from Aladdin. Potassium chloride (KCl, AR) was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent and the KCl solution was filtered using a polyether sulfone membrane containing pores of 0.22 μm in diameter prior to use. ITO glass (surface resistivity <17 ohm per square, thickness 100 ± 20 nm) purchased from Zhuhai Kaivo Optoelectronic Technology was first treated with 1 M NaOH aqueous solution, then sonicated in acetone, ethanol and deionized water sequentially, prior to use. A silicon nitride (SiN, 150 nm in thickness) coated silicon wafer (1 cm × 1 cm frame dimension) with a 0.5 mm × 0.5 mm window consisting of a single 6 μm-diameter pore in the window center was ordered from Risun Instrument.


Membrane characterization. 
Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images were captured on a HT7700 transmission electron microscope (Hitachi, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 100 kV. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were captured on a SU8010 scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Hitachi, Japan) operated at 5 kV. Metallographic images were recorded on a 4XGE metallographic microscope (Wanheng Precision Instrument, Shanghai). The SIM/SiN specimen for TEM was prepared by transferring the SIM to a 3 mm-dimamter SiN substrate, followed by positioning it directly onto the TEM sample holder for observation. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed on a CHI 660D electrochemical workstation (CH Instrument, Shanghai) to prove the intactness and permeability of the SIM. A conventional three-electrode system was used, with the membrane coated ITO electrodes as the working electrode, an Ag/AgCl electrode (saturated with KCl) as the reference electrode, and a platinum wire as the auxiliary electrode, respectively.



I–V measurements. 
The measurements were performed on a Keithley 6847 picoammeter (Keithley Instrument) with a home-made electrochemical cell (see Fig. 1b). The SIM/SiN was mounted between two compartments of the cell, in each of which 1 mL of KCl solution was added and an Ag/AgCl electrode was positioned. The voltage was biased via two Ag/AgCl electrodes. The concentration of KCl in the solution in contact with the SIM is higher than that in contact with SiN, unless specified otherwise. Ionic conductance was measured by scanning the voltage from −1 V to 1 V with a step of 0.1 V, while energy conversion characteristics were studied by scanning the voltages from −0.4 V to 0.4 V with a step of 0.02 V. The measurements were performed at ambient temperature (20 ± 2 °C).


Numerical calculation. 
Unipolar and salinity-gradient-driven ion transport inside the SIM was simulated on the basis of coupled PNP equations. A 2D axisymmetric single-pore model with finite reservoirs was used to quantitatively investigate the ion distributions inside the SIM. The simulation models and boundary conditions are described in the ESI.†

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21575126, 21335001) and the Zhejiang Provincial Nature Science Foundation (LZ18B050001).
Notes and references
Z. L. Wang, Sci. Am., 2008, 298, 82 CrossRef .
J. Baxter, Z. Bian, G. Chen, D. Danielson, M. S. Dresselhaus, A. G. Fedorov, T. S. Fisher, C. W. Jones, E. Maginn and U. Kortshagen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 559 RSC .
G. H. Xie, L. P. Wen and L. Jiang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 59 CrossRef .
R. L. Rosenberg, S. A. Tomiko and W. S. Agnew, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1984, 81, 5594 CrossRef .
L. P. Wen, Y. Tian, J. Ma, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4027 RSC .
R. Li, X. Fan, Z. Liu and J. Zhai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702983 CrossRef .
Y. Feng, W. Zhu, W. Guo and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702773 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, K. Zhan and X. Hou, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 908 CrossRef .
A. Siria, M.-L. Bocquet and L. Bocquet, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0091 CrossRef .
W. Guo, L. Cao, J. Xia, F.-Q. Nie, W. Ma, J. Xue, Y. Song, D. Zhu, Y. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1339 CrossRef .
A. Siria, P. Poncharal, A.-L. Biance, R. Fulcrand, X. Blase, S. T. Purcell and L. Bocquet, Nature, 2013, 494, 455 CrossRef .
J. Feng, M. Graf, K. Liu, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Dumcenco, M. Heiranian, V. Nandigana, N. R. Aluru, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, Nature, 2016, 536, 197 CrossRef .
J. Kim, S. J. Kim and D.-K. Kim, Energy, 2013, 51, 413 CrossRef .
R. Chein and B. Liu, Int. J. Green Energy, 2016, 13, 1400 CrossRef .
K. Kwon, S. J. Lee, L. Li, C. Han and D. Kim, Int. J. Energy Res., 2014, 38, 530 CrossRef .
T.-C. Tsai, C.-W. Liu and R.-J. Yang, Micromachines, 2016, 7, 205 CrossRef .
H.-K. Chang, E. Choi and J. Park, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 700 RSC .
J. Ji, Q. Kang, Y. Zhou, Y. Feng, X. Chen, J. Yuan, W. Guo, Y. Wei and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603623 CrossRef .
H. Cheng, Y. Zhou, Y. Feng, W. Geng, Q. Liu, W. Guo and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700177 CrossRef .
J. Gao, W. Guo, D. Feng, H. Wang, D. Zhao and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12265 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Y. Kong, K. Xiao, Q. Liu, G. H. Xie, P. Li, J. Ma, Y. Tian, L. P. Wen and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Sui, P. Li, G. Xie, X.-Y. Kong, K. Xiao, L. Gao, L. Wen and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8905 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, H. Kim and D.-K. Kim, Energies, 2016, 9, 49 CrossRef .
D.-K. Kim, C. Duan, Y.-F. Chen and A. Majumdar, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2010, 9, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, S. Kataoka, A. Endo and H. Daiguji, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 3824 RSC .
O. Wei, W. Wei, Z. Haixia, W. Wengang and L. Zhihong, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 345401 CrossRef .
E. Choi, K. Kwon, D. Kim and J. Park, Lab Chip, 2015, 15, 168 RSC .
Z. Teng, G. Zheng, Y. Dou, W. Li, C.-Y. Mou, X. Zhang, A. M. Asiri and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2173 CrossRef CAS .
M. Etienne, A. Quach, D. Grosso, L. Nicole, C. Sanchez and A. Walcarius, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 844 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, Q. Yang, L. Ding and B. Su, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11266 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Siwy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 735 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2834 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 322 RSC .
W.-J. Lan, M. A. Edwards, L. Luo, R. T. Perera, X. Wu, C. R. Martin and H. S. White, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2605 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, A. J. Bard and S. W. Feldberg, Anal. Chem., 1997, 69, 4627 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Jiang, H. L. Liu, S. A. Ahmed, S. Hanif, S. B. Ren, J. J. Xu, H. Y. Chen, X. H. Xia and K. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4767 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Li, F.-X. Ma, Z.-Q. Wu, H.-L. Gao, W.-T. Shao, K. Wang and X.-H. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3836 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, X. U. Kong, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1801079 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, X. Yin, M. Li, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Qin, Z. Zhu, S. Yang and Y. Shao, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 8592 CrossRef CAS .
L.-J. Cheng and L. J. Guo, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3165 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Cao, W. Guo, Y. G. Wang and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 2194 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, X. Lin, Y. Wang and B. Su, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18523 RSC .
W. H. Wu, Q. Yang and B. Su, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 558, 86 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, F. Xiao, Y. Feng, W. Zhu, W. Geng, J. Yang, X. Zhang, N. Li, W. Guo and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604302 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, preparation and characterization of the SIM, more I–V curves at various cH/cL, and numerical simulation of ion concentration distribution inside the SIM and salinity-gradient-driven energy conversion. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta10848jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
η = (2t+ − 1)2	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Photograph of a real SIM/SiN chip (left) and the cross-sectional structure of a SIM/SiN window (right). Note that the diameter of nanochannels in the SIM should be much smaller (ca. 2–3 nm) and the scale on the right does not represent the real dimension. (b) The homemade device consisting of two compartments for I–V measurements. The right side shows the corresponding electrical circuit.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Measured I–V curve for SIM/SiN when cH/cL = 30. (b) Ionic current rectification ratio measured under various salinity gradients. (c) Schematic illustration of rectification phenomena by a salt gradient in a negatively charged channel under different polarities of applied potential.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the 2D axisymmetric single-pore model (left panel) and simulated concentration distributions of K+ and Cl− in the axial direction of the nanochannel (along the red line from α to β in the model) for a series of cH/cL with cL fixed at 10−4 M (right panel). The region in the gray color (−45 nm ≤ z ≤ 45 nm) refers to the nanochannel. (b and c) The concentrations of K+ (b) and Cl− (c) inside a negatively charged nanochannel at a concentration gradient of 1000 (cH/cL = 1000).	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 4  (a–c) Energy conversion characteristics under various concentration gradients: Ediff and Isc (a); Pmax (b); ηmax (c). cL was fixed at 10−4 M and cH was varied from 3 × 10−4 M to 3 × 10−1 M. (d) The output power and current as a function of the external load resistance in a mixture of artificial sea water (0.5 M NaCl) and river water (0.01 M NaCl). The maximum output power density reaches 0.024 W m−2 at a resistance of ∼220 kΩ.	 

 	Fig. 5  Numerical simulation of channel-length dependent energy conversion performances at a concentration gradient of 1000 (cH/cL = 1000): (a) Ediff and Isc; (b) Pmax.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, preparation and characterization of the SIM, more I–V curves at various cH/cL, and numerical simulation of ion concentration distribution inside the SIM and salinity-gradient-driven energy conversion. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta10848j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
