Embracing high performance potassium-ion batteries with phosphorus-based electrodes: a review  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR05588F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR05588F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 15402-15417Embracing high performance potassium-ion batteries with phosphorus-based electrodes: a review

        
          
            Dan 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chuntai 
            Liu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xianhong 
            Rui
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Qingyu 
            Yan
          
        
      *d
aGuangzhou Key Laboratory of Low-Dimensional Materials and Energy Storage Devices, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Energy Materials, School of Materials and Energy, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China. E-mail: xhrui@gdut.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Materials Processing and Mold, Ministry of Education, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450002, China
cState Key Laboratory of Vanadium and Titanium Resources, Comprehensive Utilization, Panzhihua 617000, China
dSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore. E-mail: alexyan@ntu.edu.sg
Received 
      3rd July 2019
    , Accepted 31st July 2019First published on 5th August 2019AbstractThe ever-increasing global energy demand and rising price of raw materials adopted in currently prevalent lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have boosted the development of potassium ion batteries (KIBs). Despite the similarity in the working principle to LIBs, it remains a big challenge to select a suitable electrode material for KIBs. Phosphorus (P) and P-based composites have been identified as promising electrodes for LIBs or sodium ion batteries (NIBs) with remarkable electrochemical performance. Yet it was not until recent years that P-based materials have been explored as potential electrodes for KIBs. In this paper, we will try to provide a timely review of the current research progress of the P-based electrode materials, both cathodes and anodes, for KIBs. The synthetic strategies, electrochemical behaviours, and ion storage mechanisms will be discussed in detail. The challenges and future perspectives worth investigating will also been presented. Through timely update of the research progress and presentation of the existing arguments, it is expected that this review will help to clarify the puzzles encountered in current KIBs and benefit their future development and commercialization.
1. Introduction
Depletion of fossil fuels and intermittency of renewable energy sources such as solar and wind stimulated the rapid progress of advanced energy storage systems. Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have achieved unprecedented success among the diverse battery systems developed.1–5 To this end, LIBs of various types and forms, ranging from tiny coin cells to large scale grid storage devices, are dominating the global energy market. The extensive exploitation has resulted in more severe scarcity of lithium sources and also boosted the price of metal lithium. Recycling lithium might be one possible solution to alleviate the low reserve issue; however, the recycling process suffers from high complexity and low yield and therefore costs even higher than using the raw material. Inspired by the success of LIBs, alternative metal ion battery systems, such as sodium ion batteries (NIBs),6–11 aluminium ion batteries (AIBs),12–16 and potassium ion batteries (KIBs),17–22 also attract great research interest. Among them, NIBs have been the most extensively studied system because of the natural abundancy and low cost of sodium. However, the performance of current NIBs is still not satisfactory and is yet immature for commercialization. KIBs, which stepped into researchers’ attention only in recent years, in turn, offer a new option for people to develop novel battery systems with low cost, high power and long cycle life.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, a typical KIB shares a similar ion storage mechanism to an LIB, where the energy output is realized through the reversible commute of the metal ions between anode and cathode materials.18,22–24 As compared to Li and Na, K displays many unique advantages. First of all, K is the 8th most abundant element on the Earth (Na, 23000 ppm; and K, 17000 ppm; and Li, 20 ppm in the Earth's crust) and its price is much lower. Besides, K does not alloy with Al at a low potential, which enables the utilization of low cost Al foil as current collectors for KIBs instead of high-cost Cu foil as being used in LIBs, further reducing the manufacturing cost of KIBs. Despite the heavier atomic mass and larger ionic radius of K+ ions, the radius of solvated K cations (Stoke's radius) is smaller than that of Li and Na in solution due to the weaker Lewis acidity of K ions, which leads to higher ionic conductivity and faster diffusion kinetics of the K ions in organic electrolytes.25–27 Besides, the redox potential of the K metal anode is lower than that of Na and Li (K+/K = −2.88 V; Li+/Li = −2.79 V; Na+/Na = −2.56 V, vs. saturated calomel electrode (SCE)) in an organic electrolyte such as propylene carbonate,28,29 which brings about a wider electrochemical voltage window and thus higher energy density.
 Fig. 1  Working principle of potassium ion batteries (KIBs). 
In fact, the research progress of KIBs has lagged behind by a few decades as people initially assumed that K+ ions can't be intercalated into graphite layers. It was not until 2015 that Jian et al. made the first attempt to investigate K+ ion storage performance in carbon materials in a nonaqueous electrolyte,30 which demonstrates reversible insertion/de-insertion of K in the soft carbon anode. This work has motivated quite a number of research and mechanistic studies about the electrode materials for KIBs.
The larger radius of K+ ions brings about different thermodynamic and kinetic properties, making the selection of the electrode materials for KIBs more challenging.25 For example, elements such as Si which deliver high capacity during alloying with Li turn out to be inactive for KIBs. Fortunately, similar to LIBs, carbon materials, such as hard carbon,31–35 soft carbon,30,36,37 mesoporous carbon,38–40 carbon nanofibers,41,42 and graphene,43–46 can be adopted as anodes for most KIBs. However, the specific capacity achieved from carbon is relatively low (∼273 mA h g−1). It has been found in recent years that the element phosphorus (P) can deliver impressively high theoretical capacity through alloying with K. P is one earth-abundant element which is located diagonally opposite to carbon in the periodic table, indicating its similar chemical and physical properties to those of carbon. P has different allotropes with covalent structure motifs interconnected by van der Waals interactions (Fig. 2). Based on the crystal structure, they are classified as 0D white P, 1D P nanorods with a polymer structure, 2D black P with a layered structure, and 2D or 3D tubular structure of red P.47 White P is highly active and flammable in air and not suitable to be adopted as an electrode due to safety concerns. Black and red P (violet phosphorus) are the two allotropes that have been mostly investigated as electrodes for LIBs, NIBs or KIBs. The layer-structured black P has been widely accepted as thermodynamically the most stable. However, according to some theoretical calculation predictions reported in recent years, red P with a monoclinic tubular structure is slightly more stable than black P.47,48 The robustness in the crystal structure can effectively accommodate structural stress aroused by intercalation of the K+ ions. Therefore, black and red P, as well as their hetero-structure with carbon or metal species, have been intensively investigated as anode materials for KIBs. On the other hand, the element P often stably exists as phosphate or phosphate derivatives, among which the poly-anion oxides with open framework crystal structures have been successfully implemented as cathodes in LIBs and NIBs. With a rising number of studies devoting their efforts to P-based electrodes for KIBs, it would be quite helpful to provide a timely review of their current research progress. Here in this review, we will introduce the strategies to fabricate P-based electrodes, discuss their performance and clarify their K+ ion storage mechanism. It is also expected that this review would help solve the puzzles encountered during KIB research at the current stage.
 Fig. 2  Typical allotropes of phosphorus. 
2. P-Based cathodes for KIBs
As compared to the large number of studies that have been devoted to the development of anodes for KIBs, research on the cathode material is relatively limited and only a few materials have been investigated so far. In fact, cathode materials play a critical role in determining the overall performance of the battery, including power, cycle life, safety, cost, etc. Because of similar ion storage mechanisms, cathodes successfully implemented in LIBs or NIBs were considered in the first place when people were trying to select suitable cathodes for KIBs. However, as revealed by preliminary results that have been reported, the design guideline applicable to LIBs or SIBs may not be directly transferrable to KIBs.
It was found that some traditional cathodes exhibiting excellent performance in LIBs didn't perform well when applied in KIBs, while others with moderate performance demonstrated surprisingly good performance as electrodes for KIBs. In general, cathodes that have been evaluated in KIBs can be categorized into four types, including layered oxides,31,49–52 Prussian blue analogues,53–56 poly-anion oxides,57,58 and organic compounds.59–61 In this review, we will mainly focus on the discussion of P-based cathodes for KIBs, which mostly fall into the category of poly-anion compounds. We will try to highlight their preparation and design guidelines and, most importantly, will also present a thorough discussion about the storage mechanism of K+ ions in these materials, and clarify the similarity/difference between KIBs, LIBs and NIBs.
As reported earlier in 2014, amorphous iron phosphate (FePO4) has been considered as a possible cathode candidate for KIBs.62 As compared to crystallized cathode materials, whose performance may be significantly affected by the particle size growth upon increasing the sintering temperature, crystal growth orientation, structural stability upon metal ion insertion/de-insertion, active facets exposed, phase transition and defects within the crystal structure. The amorphous material shows a number of unique advantages such as short range ordering and large and free volume to accommodate lattice distortions, which holds great potential to deliver large specific capacity and stable cycling performance. As a matter of fact, amorphous materials have been widely investigated as cathodes in LIBs and NIBs and achieved excellent performance.63,64 When used as a cathode for KIBs, amorphous FePO4 also delivered a high discharge capacity of 156 mA h g−1 with a stable operating voltage of 2.5 V, and 70% of the theoretical capacity could be retained after 50 cycles. A smooth slope with pseudo-plateaus at 2.5 V followed by a gradual potential decrease close to the lower cut-off potentials appeared in the charge–discharge curves. As in the previous study reporting amorphous FePO4 as a cathode for NIBs, only smooth slopes were observed with the insertion/extraction of sodium ions.65 Transformation of the amorphous structure upon the insertion of K+ ions was monitored by ex situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies, which identified a reversible structural transformation between crystallized KFe2(PO4)2 and amorphous FePO4.
On the other hand, polyanionic phosphate compounds have been considered as potential cathodes for KIBs because of the high mobility of intercalated K+ ions during the charge/discharge process offered by their 3D open-framework structure. Hyoung et al. investigated the performance of VOPO4·2H2O,66 which contains two types of water (structural and crystal), as a cathode for KIBs. During the discharge process, the crystal water weakly bonded to the interlayer space would be pushed out of the lattice and its positions were occupied by K+ ions. The reversibility of this process was affected by the electrolyte. When an anhydrous electrolyte was used, a part of the crystal water was diluted by the electrolyte and as the crystal structure of the cathode couldn't be fully recovered, it resulted in structural instability during cycling (only 32% of the initial capacity was retained after 50 cycles). Surprisingly, the structural stability was significantly improved with the addition of 0.1 M H2O in the electrolyte, e.g., 86.2% capacity was retained after 100 cycles. It was later found that in the wet electrolyte, potassium ions (90%) and proton or hydronium ions (10%) were co-intercalated and contributed to the capacity of the electrode. Chihara et al. studied the performance of KVOPO4 as one class of cathode with a high operating voltage of >4 V (the charge/discharge profiles of KVOPO4 are shown in Fig. 3a).67 The electrode didn't perform as well as in LIBs or NIBs with much lower coulombic efficiency in the first several cycles. But the rate performance especially at high current densities was more outstanding, which might be due to the lower Lewis acidity of K+ ions that leads to weaker interaction between the Lewis base in the electrolyte and the interface. Continuous phase transformation was observed in the operando XRD patterns (Fig. 3b), which was later further studied by Lian et al. using first-principles calculations.68 It was demonstrated that K+ ions migrate in a 1D pathway (Fig. 3c) and extraction of K+ ions brought about variation in the oxygen coordinating environment and induced multiple and complex phase transitions. In particular, V cations acted as the redox centre determining the working voltage and K+ ion storage capacity, while O functioned as a charge transfer medium. Despite the multiple phase transformation, the crystal structure was not affected and therefore the electrode maintained excellent stability during the cycling test.
 Fig. 3  (a) Charge/discharge profiles of α-KVOPO4. (b) Operando XRD patterns of α-KVOPO4 upon initial charge to 4.8 V. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The 1D ion transportation pathway in α-KVOPO4. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Structural evolution from K0.5VOPO4·1.5H2O to layered KVOPO4. (e) Charge/discharge profiles of layered KVOPO4. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, Liao et al. reported a KVOPO4 cathode with a layered structure (Fig. 3d), which achieved a much higher capacity of 115 mA h g−1 with a voltage at 3.65 V even at a low current density.69 As shown in Fig. 3e, no obvious voltage plateau was observed in this layered KVOPO4, which is distinct from the behaviour displayed by α-KVOPO4 sintered at high temperature. Besides, one of the concerns in using the high-voltage electrode is that commonly adopted electrolytes, such as ethylene carbonate (EC), diethyl carbonate (DEC), or propylene carbonate (PC), tend to decompose at high voltage and result in poor cyclability of the system. Addition of a small amount (e.g., 2%) of fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) has proved to be efficient in suppressing this decomposition in LIBs and NIBs.70–73 However, it was found that as high as 50% of FEC was needed so as to suppress the electrolyte decomposition in the KVOPO4 system. This indicates that new guidelines are necessary to optimize the electrolyte system for KIBs.74
Cathode materials bearing a NASICON-type structure, such as Li3V2(PO4)3 (LTP), NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP), and Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP), have been extensively investigated for LIBs and NIBs.75–85 Given the similarity in the crystal structure, the cathode performance of their analogues with potassium, such as KTi2(PO4)3 (KTP),75 K3V2(PO4)3 (KVP),86 and K3V2(PO4)2F3 (KVPF),87 is thus explored for KIBs. Han et al. prepared two types of KTP electrodes (with and without carbon coating) and tested their electrochemical performance in the voltage range of 1.2–2.8 V vs. K+/K.75 Both electrodes showed discharge and charge platforms at around 1.6 and 2.14 V, respectively. Specifically, electrodes coated with carbon displayed better rate performance and capacity retention during the cycling process, indicating that carbon coating is an efficient strategy to improve ion transportation kinetics in the KTP electrode. In terms of the crystal structure of KVP, each VO6 octahedron is corner-shared with three PO4 tetrahedra, leading to an open 3D framework structure with a large interstitial space that can accommodate K+ ions. The theoretical capacity of KVP as a cathode for KIBs is 106 mA h g−1 based on V3+/V4+ redox. Han et al. first prepared KVP/C composites by a combined process of freeze-drying and high-temperature sintering.86 As a result, the composite demonstrated seven times larger surface area than the bulk material. Besides, the conductive carbon network facilitated rapid electron transport. Obvious charge (3.08 and 4.02 V) and discharge plateaus (3.06 and 3.09 V) were displayed in the discharge/charge curves at a current density of 20 mA g−1 in the voltage range of 2.5–4.03 V vs. K+/K. However, the discharge capacity for the composites was only 54 mA h g−1, which is around half of the theoretical value. Recently, Zhang et al. also fabricated KVP/C composites assisted by a freeze-drying process and they assembled symmetric full-cells.88 Such symmetric KIBs displayed a reversible capacity of around 90 mA h g−1 (@ 25 mA g−1) between 0.01–3 V. The capacity retention reached 88.6% after 500 cycles and the working potential of the full battery was as high as 2.3 V. In situ synchrotron X-ray powder diffraction (SXRD) analysis was used to monitor the reaction intermediates generated during the potassiation/depotassiation processes. The mechanistic behaviour was elucidated by dividing the structural evolution into three regions. With the increase in the concentration of K+ ions, stepwise evolution from KxVP (3 ≤ x ≤ 3.3) to KyVP (3.3 ≤ y ≤ 3.7) and KzVP (3.7 ≤ z ≤ 4) was observed, accompanied by the continuous lattice expansion upon the insertion of K+ ions. Furthermore, reversible cathodic and anodic peaks were observed below 1.0 V, which led to extra insertion of K+ ions (K5V2(PO4)3), and broadened the operating potential when the electrodes were assembled into a symmetric battery. Due to the successful implementation of its analogue Na3V2(PO4)2F3 (NVPF) in NIBs, KVPF was investigated as a cathode in KIBs.87 The production of KVPF following a similar procedure to that of NVPF was unsuccessful. Lin et al. thus built up an electrochemical cell comprised of K metal ∥1 M KPF6 in EC/PC∥ NVPF. Through the Na/K ion exchange, KVPF (or more exactly, K3−xV2(PO4)2F3, 0 < x < 1) was successfully generated. Phase transformation from K3V2(PO4)2F3 to K2V2(PO4)2F3 and then K1V2(PO4)2F3 was confirmed by the analysis of retrieved refinement of XRD results. Upon insertion/extraction of K+ ions, the volume change was only around 6.2%, demonstrating excellent stability of the electrode. As compared to KVPO4F, which needs a high voltage (up to 5 V) to activate, utilization of KVPF is more advantageous as there is no need to cope with electrolyte decomposition. Furthermore, a K-ion full cell was built by matching the KVPF with a graphite anode. The KIB full cell displayed an operating voltage of 3.4 V and an initial discharge capacity of 84 mA h g−1. Nevertheless, the coulombic efficiency in the first several cycles was low, which resulted in capacity fading and only 59 mA h g−1 capacity was retained after 50 cycles. As suggested by the authors, further improvement may be realized by optimizing the crystallography and microstructure of the electrode.
To this end, a large number of cathode materials have been investigated in LIBs or NIBs, yet their performance in KIBs is still unknown. To improve the efficiency of “scanning” and “searching” suitable cathodes for KIBs, Park et al. developed a strategy to select the cathode material through fully screening the inorganic compound structure database. A wide range of polyanionic compounds such as KTiP2O7, KVP2O7, KMoP2O7, and KFeP2O7 were examined through both theoretical calculation and electrochemical investigation.89 It showed that KVP2O7 could be regarded as a potential cathode for KIBs, as 60% of K ions could be reversibly inserted and de-inserted in KVP2O7, corresponding to a capacity around 60 mA h g−1.89
Because of their open structure, high porosity and tuneable pore sizes, metal organic framework (MOF) materials have received much attention in LIBs or NIBs.90–95 Only limited studies have reported their performance in KIBs. In particular, the K storage performance of K2[(VO)2(HPO4)2(C2O4)] (KVPC) was tested by Liao et al.,96 which achieved a reversible capacity around 81 mA h g−1 with good cycling performance. But structural transformation was observed during the extraction of K+ ions, which might be due to the instability of the MOF structure. Enhancing the structural stability might become one of the future directions in optimizing the performance of MOF based cathode materials. The performance of P-based cathode materials that have been reported is summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Electrochemical performance of P-based cathodes for KIBs




Cathode
Electrolyte
Voltage range (V)
Electrochemical performance
Ref.


Initial discharge capacity (mA h g−1)@current density (mA g−1)
Stability (retention/cycle number)




Amorphous FePO4
1 M KPF6/EC-EMC (1:1)
1.5–3.5
156@4
70%/50

62



K3V2(PO4)3/C
0.8 M KPF6/EC-DEC (1:1)
2.5–4.03
54@20
96.2%/100

86



KVOPO4
1 M KPF6/EC:PC (1:1)
2.0–5.0
84@6.6
>97%/30

67



KVOPO4F
1 M KPF6/EC:PC (1:1)
2.0–5.0
96@6.6
>97%/30

67



KVP2O7
0.5 M KPF6/EC-DEC (1:1)
2.0–5.0
60@0.25 C@50 °C
85%/20

89



VOPO4·2H2O
0.1 M H2O + 0.6 M KPF6/EC-DEC (1:1)
−0.2 to 1.3 V (vs. Ag/Ag+)
90@27
86.2%/100

66



K3V2(PO4)3/C
1 M KPF6/EC:PC (1:1)
2.0–4.0 V
91@25
93.4%/100

66



KTi2(PO4)3/C
0.8 M KPF6/EC-DEC (1:1)
1.2–2.8
75.6@64
—

75



K2[(VO)2(HPO4)2(C2O4)]
0.1 M KClO4/PC
2.0–4.6
81@5.45
83%/200

96



KVOPO4
0.5 M KPF6/EC-DEC (1:1)
2.0 to 4.6 V
114.8@24
86.8%/200

69



K3V2(PO4)2F3
1 M KPF6/EC:PC (1:1)
2.0–4.6 V
104@10
95%/180

87





3. P-Based anodes for KIBs
Graphite is the commercial anode for LIBs. Therefore, people used it as a potential anode for NIBs and KIBs in the first place.97–99 However, the capacity delivered through the formation of NaC64 is only 35 mA h g−1.100,101 Despite the fact that K+ ions could be reversibly intercalated and de-intercalated into graphite and deliver a capacity up to ∼273 mA h g−1, this value is still not sufficient and restricted the application of the derived battery system in high energy devices.102–105 Instead, P with a fairly light atomic weight and large K ion uptake capability has attracted great research attention in recent years. A wide range of phosphides can be formed through alloying K with P.106 In particular, theoretically, based on a three-electron reaction mechanism, K3P can be generated and delivers a high theoretical capacity of 2596 mA h g−1, which is as high a value as that from the uptake of Li+ and Na+ ions.11 However, to date, the presence of K3P has not been confirmed experimentally. Zhang et al. proposed a mechanism attributing the potassiation product as partly crystalline or amorphous K3−xP,106 while in some other studies, KP or K4P3 was proposed as the end product of the alloying process, which resulted in a much lower theoretical capacity of 843 and 1154 mA h g−1, respectively. But even with the formation of the KP phase, the theoretical values are still superior to those obtained from most alloy type anode materials, such as Sn (226 mA h g−1 for the KSn alloy) and Sb (660 mA h g−1 for the K3Sb alloy).107 Therefore, P stands out as an anode material with the highest gravimetric capacity. Among the allotropes of P, red and black P are chemically stable at room temperature. Despite the abundant reserve and low cost of red P, its electronic conductivity is low (1 × 10−10 S cm−1), resulting in reduced electrochemical activity for batteries.102 In comparison, black P shows higher electron mobility than red P. To date, because of their large theoretical capacity and robustness in the crystal structure, both red and black P and their derivatives (e.g., P/C composites and metal phosphides) are considered as potential anode materials for KIBs.108
3.1. Synthetic strategies
Given the large volume expansion during the charge/discharge process and the intrinsically low electrical conductivity of P, it is more desirable to hybridize them with carbonaceous materials. So far, three strategies have been developed to synthesize P or P/C composites for KIBs, including ball-milling, vaporization–condensation–conversion and thermal decomposition method. The corresponding procedures and products of each strategy are illustrated in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Synthetic strategies of P/C and MPx/C composites. (a) Typical ball-milling process. Modified from ref. 102 with permission from Elsevier. (b) P/C composites formed by the vaporization–condensation–conversion process. Modified from ref. 40 with permission from Elsevier. (c) Hot-injection method to prepare SnP0.94 nanoplates and further hybridization with GO. The magnified area illustrates the microstructure of the electrodes as prepared. Modified from ref. 123 with permission from Elsevier. 

3.1.1. Ball-milling. 
The traditional ball-milling method has been widely adopted in electrode preparation109–111 and is illustrated in Fig. 4a. It transforms mechanical energy into instantaneous high temperature and high pressure to induce phase transformation and realize the synthesis of nanomaterials. It is well known that red P can transform into black P through control over the milling parameters.112 For example, Park et al. synthesized black P through ball milling at ambient temperature and with further modification of carbon, the black P–C composite was produced, which was later used as an anode for LIBs.113 In the very first report of P-based anodes for KIBs, Guo's group also adopted a ball-milling strategy to obtain P/C and Sn4P3/C anodes.106 However, it was observed that the nanoparticles as formed in the ball-milling process were mostly aggregated to microstructures with irregular shapes and showed a broader size distribution. Besides, loss of P was also observed as a part of P added in the precursor may stick to the wall or lid of the ball-milling jar,102 leading to inaccurate stoichiometry in the as-resulted products. During the ball-milling process, it is also very hard to isolate the influence from water or air, which may bring some side reactions and by-products as certain P and related intermediates are sensitive to air and water.


3.1.2. Vaporization–condensation–conversion method. 
As illustrated by Liu et al.,40,114 in a typical vaporization–condensation–conversion process (VCC) (Fig. 4b), P and mesoporous carbon were loaded onto a single-ended glass tube and sealed after being purged with Ar three times. Then the sealed tube was heated up to 600 °C to sublime the P for 1 h. The P species formed after cooling down to 260 °C was white P. To convert it into red P, a further annealing at 260 °C for 24 h was carried out. In a modified VCC method reported recently, stainless-steel autoclave technology was also utilized to prepare P nanoparticles encapsulated by a reduced graphene oxide matrix.115 To prepare the red P on rGO, the red P and RGO powders were mixed uniformly and put into an autoclave. Then the mixture was heated at 550 °C to vaporize the RP powder, which will disperse and deposit onto the surface of the RGO layers upon cooling. With sublimation of red P, the P could be infused into an inner channel or mesopores of the carbon structures, such as CNTs,116 graphene,108 active carbon (AC),117 ordered mesoporous carbon,118etc.,119 which has proved to be efficient in improving the rate and cycling performance of P-based electrodes.


3.1.3. Thermal decomposition method. 
Thermal decomposition of organometallic precursors or reacting the metallic nanoparticles with organophosphine reagents is often adopted to generate nanocrystals of metal phosphides with a uniform size and shape distribution without implementation of high temperature and high pressure. A diversity of transition metal phosphide phases such as NiP, FeP, and MnP have been synthesized by this method and tested as anodes for LIBs or NIBs.120–122 However, the temperature range used in this method is limited by the boiling point of the solvent and may be only applicable to the synthesis of certain metal phosphides which have metal–organometallic precursors with high or reasonable reactivity. SnP0.94 nanoplates have been generated by the hot-injection method (Fig. 4c),123 and further combined with GO sheets to buffer volume changes in the cycling process, and the electrode delivered a stable capacity retention of 83% after 50 cycles.

3.2. P anodes and their K ion storage mechanisms
As reported by Zhang et al.,106 composites based on pure P/C suffered from rapid capacity fading during the cycling process; however, the initial discharge capacity for the P/C system was very intriguing and as high as 2171.7 mA h g−1. Therefore, despite the fact that the preliminary performance of the P/C electrodes was not sufficiently good, researchers still devoted great efforts to optimize the stability and long-term durability of the electrodes based on pure P. In particular, black P, a 2D semiconductor material, demonstrates several advantages, such as preeminent electron mobility, high leakage current modulation rate, and outstanding theoretical capacity, which attract great research attention.124–129 Sultana et al. prepared black P through a ball-milling process and then encapsulated them into the carbon matrix.130 Two composites with different ratios between P and carbon (with weight ratios of 7:3 and 1:1, respectively) were prepared and assembled into half-cell KIB coin cells, with 0.75 M KPF6 in EC:DEC (1:1 by vol.) as the electrolyte. As shown in the results, the one with less carbon (7:3) showed a higher initial capacity (617 mA h g−1) in the initial cycles; however, the capacity quickly dropped during the first 25 cycles. For the one with the higher carbon content, it showed a lower initial capacity of around 443 mA h g−1. But the electrode was more stable as compared to the one with the higher P content. The authors tried to conduct XRD analysis of the sample and they observed peaks from the KP phase and therefore a mechanism was proposed on the basis of P + K+ + e− ↔ KP. This mechanism is different from the previous report. As suggested by Zhang et al., the K3−xP alloy was formed at the end of the alloying process of the potassium cell. But they didn't observe the K3P peaks in the XRD pattern; instead, a partially crystalline or amorphous K3−xP phase was identified. Another interesting phenomenon observed in this work is that by tuning the potassiation rate of the electrode, the rate performance was significantly improved. For example, if the rate performance was tested under standard conditions, the capacity reserved after cycling at 500 mA g−1 was only 120 mA h g−1, while if the potassiation was conducted at a fixed slow rate of 10 mA g−1, the final capacity reached 300 mA h g−1 even at a high current density of 2 A g−1. A similar phenomenon was observed in P-carbon in sodium-ion cells, but the mechanism for this behaviour is not fully elucidated yet.
Wu et al. adopted the ball-milling method to improve the performance of the P–C composites.102 The weight ratio of P was 20% in order to achieve optimized stability of the electrodes. The presence of P–C and P–O–C bonds was confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results, which were believed to be beneficial for improving the contact between the P and C matrix. As shown in the calculated diffusion coefficient of K+ ions, the value for the P/C electrode was two times larger than that for the pure graphite, and this was attributed to the presence of a large amount of functional groups and defects introduced during the ball-milling process, not only promoting rapid diffusion of electrons, but also accelerating the penetration of the electrolyte. However, the coulombic efficiency in the initial cycle was low (50%), which might be related to the formation of SEI films. Such low ICE will result in a higher ratio of the dead cathode material. To decrease the irreversible capacity loss in the first cycle and improve the ICE of the electrode, different strategies have been reported. Addition of suitable binders such as CMCNa could improve the ICE by preforming the SEI layer without the defluorinating PVDF.104,131 Another effective strategy is to pre-potassianate the electrodes by activating them in a three-electrode system using CV or a charge–discharge process at a very slow scan rate. The ICE value was significantly improved to 91.2% with a pre-potassiation process at a small current density, i.e. 10 mA g−1. According to a study carried out by Huang et al., which investigated the potassium storage behaviour of the P/AC composites with different weight ratios of P (20–60%),114 it was demonstrated that the P content played a significant role in deciding the ICE of the electrodes. Generally, the ICE increased with the loading amount of P (a maximum value of 84.5% was achieved in the sample containing 50% P). However, when the P content exceeded 60%, it also resulted in low ICE and poor cycling stability of the electrode, since only P confined in the mesoporous carbon could be stably charged and discharged; the excessively loaded P would just form particles on the surface of AC. In brief, to increase the ICE of the P-based electrodes, strategies such as addition of suitable binders, modification of the electrolyte composition, pre-potassiation of the electrode, or optimization of the content of P might be helpful.
The performance of the P/C electrode can be further improved through hybridization with carbon materials with a unique porous structure or large surface area. For example, Liu et al. have tried to encapsulate multi-walled CNTs into the foam-like mesoporous carbon layer;40 then P was embedded into the outer mesoporous carbon shell by the VCC method. In this design, the porous carbon helps to alleviate and buffer the volume change of phosphorus during the charge and discharge process, while the elastic CNT core can act as a backbone to further maintain the integrity of the structure and promote fast electron transfer. As a result, the hybrid structure achieved excellent performance when applied as an anode for KIBs, e.g., a reversible capacity of ∼500 mA h g−1 at 0.05 A g−1 and a stable capacity of 244 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 were achieved after cycling for 200 cycles.
Recently, Yu's group designed a novel structure with fine P nanoparticles embedded into the mesopores on the carbon nanofiber.132 To achieve such a structure, polycaprolactone nanofibers were fabricated by electro-spinning and used as a template to create the hollow polypyrrole nanofibers. With chemical etching of KOH, N-doped porous hollow carbon nanofibers (N-PHCNFs) were generated. The porous hollow structure provided a remarkably large surface area for the dispersion of P fine particles. The tubular structure benefited the infiltration of the electrolyte and favours the reaction between the active material and K ions. Given this unique design, the electrode delivered a capacity as high as 465 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 800 cycles. For comparison, the performance of the carbon nanofibers with the P nanoparticles loaded onto the surface instead of the mesopores was also investigated and the electrode suffered from pulverization and lost contact with the carbon nanofibers after several cycles due to volume expansion during cycling. Comparisons of the structural transformation of the red P, red P/HCNFs, and red P/NPHCNFs are illustrated in Fig. 5a–d. Homogeneous distribution of N, P, and C was confirmed by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and the element mapping results are shown in Fig. 5e–h. Another benefiting factor in enhancing the K+ ion storage performance was the strong P–C chemical bond and nitrogen doping in the carbon fiber, which resulted in enhanced adsorption energy and better contact between phosphorus and carbon nanofiber. To get a deep insight into the excellent performance of the electrodes, in situ TEM was carried out to investigate the structural evolution of the red P@NPHCNFs during potassiation. The excellent stability of the electrode can also be well explained by the robustness of the electrode since hardly any cracking was observed during the cycling process. On the other hand, in situ Raman spectroscopy and ex situ XRD were employed to elucidate the reaction mechanism. Peaks from K4P3 were clearly observed in the ex situ XRD results and the reaction mechanism is thus proposed as 3P + 4K+ + 4e− ↔ K4P3. It is inspiring to observe K4P3 in the end products since it has a much larger theoretical capacity as compared to previously proposed KP (1154 mA h g−1vs. 843 mA h g−1), which indicates that the capacity of the P-based electrode can be further boosted to a higher value. As reported by Xiong et al., red P nanoparticles (63.9 wt%) with a size of 10–20 nm were anchored onto the 3D porous carbon framework by a vaporization–condensation process.133 A high capacity of 427.4 mA h g−1 was retained after 40 cycles, and the value for the red P@ CN composite was only 24 mA h g−1. Besides, even after cycling at different current densities, the capacity of 520.1 mA h g−1 was retained. Carbon sheets confined the P nanoparticles and suppressed their volume expansion during cycling, and as a result, the electrode swelled only 13.4% after the test (the theoretical expansion expected upon the formation of KP is 200%). Besides, the potassiation storage mechanism was investigated using ex situ TEM. Nanocrystals were clearly detected in the high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern, which can be attributed to the orthorhombic phase of KP. At the potassiation state, the peaks corresponding to the (214) and (203) planes of the KP phase were clearly presented. From the evidence shown above, the final product was decided to be KP, whose formation was also supported by the density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The lowest formation energy (−0.421 eV) is required for KP as compared to K3P (−0.218 eV) and K2P3 (−0.148 eV) (shown in Fig. 6a), which means it is more energetically favourable to form the KP phase (as illustrated in Fig. 6b).
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of red P confined in hollow carbon nanotubes with different micro-structures. (a) Potassiation/depotassiation on red P, red P coated on hollow carbon nanofibers and red P confined in the porous hollow carbon nanotubes. (b) CV curves of the red P@ N-PHCNTs. Cycling (c) and rate capability (d) of red P/N-HCNFs and red P@N-PHCNFs. (e–h) STEM images and element mapping of N, P, and C on electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 6  Results of red P anchored onto the 3D carbon network. (a) Calculated formation energy. (b) Illustration of the potassiation/depotassiation process of the red P@CN electrode. Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Through a wet-ball milling process, Chang et al. prepared an electrode comprised of multi-wall carbon nanotubes, ketjen black and sodium carboxymethyl cellulose.134 Through electrochemical activation of the carbon additives, the electrode delivered a high reversible capacity exceeding 750 mA h−1 at 25 mA g−1. It was observed that the specific capacity of the electrode decayed from the 42th cycle onwards, which was later ascribed to side reactions that accelerate the drying of the electrolytes. To suppress these side reactions, FEC (fluoroethylene carbonate) was added as an additive because it has proved to be efficient in promoting the performance of LIBs and NIBs. However, the addition of FEC in the KIB system didn't bring any positive effect. On the contrary, it was found that the presence of P–C hindered the alloying process between P and K, and resulted in low K storage capability (Fig. 7a–c). A full cell was later assembled through pairing the anode with the KMnHCF cathodes. The full cell demonstrated a higher energy density (193 W h kg−1) as compared to previously reported ones and it could be operated under a high working voltage (3.4 V). Besides, it exhibited distinctive behaviour when cycled under different current densities. For example, when cycled at a higher current density (1000 mA g−1), the cell demonstrated remarkable stability and long-term cyclability. Even after 680 cycles, the capacity retention reached 60%. Besides, the voltage plateaus moved up to 4 and 3.5 V due to the discrepant capacity between the anode and cathode material. Besides, P was also added as a dopant into the carbon material and facilitated the electrochemical performance of the carbon anode. Ma et al. have tried to dope P and O into graphene through a combined technique of freeze-drying and high temperature sintering.135 With the presence of a trace amount of P (0.63%) and O (4.86%), the performance of the electrode was significantly enhanced. A high specific capacity of 474 mA h g−1 was attained at a current density of 50 mA g−1 after 50 cycles. The electrical conductivity and the diffusion coefficient were proved to be larger than those of the pure rGO, which might be due to the presence of a large amount of defects and vacancies brought about by the O and P dopants. At the same time, the interlayer spacing between the graphene layers was also increased remarkably with the addition of P dopants, which further benefited the ion transfer in the doped samples.
 Fig. 7  Effects of P–C bonds on the electrode performance. (a) Structural configuration of the activated RP/C-based PIB electrode without the formation of P–C bonds. The comparison of CV (b) and XPS (c) results of the WBM-RP/C, DBM-RP/C, and DBM/WBM-RP/C electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Another intriguing structure worth exploring is the 2D P structure, which has been extensively investigated in Li+ and Na+ ion storage.136–138 Among the family of 2D materials that have been investigated, such as graphene, MXenes, chalcogenides, etc., phosphorene exhibited high energy densities, low diffusion barrier and high ion insertion voltage.139–145 However, the electrical conductivity of phosphorene is inherently low and structural deformation during the cycling process will hamper the electrochemical performance. In particular, due to the large radius of the K+ ions, the degradation and pulverization of the electrode material are even more severe in KIBs, which may pose a greater challenge when applying phosphorene for K+ ion storage. Bulk phosphorus carbide with a β-InS-like structure has been realized by pulsed laser deposition. Theoretical studies have predicted that the synthesis of the phosphorus carbide monolayer (PCM) is thermodynamically possible. Li et al. further investigated the adsorption and diffusion behaviour of the alkaline metal ions (AMs) on the PCM by first-principles calculations with density functional theory (DFT).146 Strong ionic interaction was verified between the metal ions (Li+, Na+ and K+ ions) and the PCM surfaces (Fig. 8a) and all three AMxPC systems displayed an average potential higher than 0.1 V, which could avoid the formation of dendrites (Fig. 8b). Besides, two diffusion pathways enabled fast ion transportation and potentially fast charge/discharge rate of the battery (Fig. 8e and f). Moreover, the defect formation energy on the PCM was much higher than on phosphorene, indicating its low defect concentration (Fig. 8g and h). In the future, developing an effective synthetic strategy and investigating the practical performance of such type of material would be intriguing and helpful in constructing advanced and novel KIB systems.
 Fig. 8  Theoretical calculations based on the PCM. (a) The differential charge density distribution for Li, Na and K atoms adsorbed on the PCM. (b–d) The voltage profiles for Li, Na and K intercalation on the PCM. Insets show the optimized structures (top and side views) of the maximal capacity. (e) Diffusion pathways of an AM atom on the PCM. (f) The diffusion pathway of an AM atom in bulk PC. Illustration of (g) a single P vacancy and (h) P–C double vacancy on the PCM. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Elsevier. 
3.3. Metal phosphide anodes and their K storage mechanisms
In the very first attempt to explore P-based anodes for KIBs,106 Zhang et al. synthesized two typical composites, P/C and Sn4P3/C, by the traditional ball-milling process and their electrochemical behaviours were systematically investigated. The as-resulted Sn4P3/C composites were comprised of agglomerated micro-sized particles, which were later confirmed to be 20–50 nm NPs evenly distributed in the amorphous carbon matrix. For the K+ ion storage behaviour, the P/C electrode delivers a very high capacity of 2171.7 mA h g−1 in the first discharge; however, only 9% of this capacity was retained after cycling for 20 cycles. In contrast, for the Sn4P3/C electrode, it delivered a discharge capacity of 588.7 mA h g−1 in the first cycle and managed to preserve 80% of the capacity even after cycling for 80 cycles. To explore the reason for the improved stability, the intermediates were checked by TEM. It was shown that during the initial 30 cycles, the nanoparticles of Sn4P3 were further broken into smaller sizes (e.g., 5–8 nm) and distributed with an intact structure within the carbon matrix. However, after 30 cycles, the effect from the volume expansion seemed to be more predominant and as a result, the nanoparticles started to grow and pulverization was observed, leading to capacity fading afterwards. Through careful investigation of the XRD results, a stepwise transformation of the discharged products was observed. Signals from K3−xP were detected when the electrode was discharged to 0.4 V and then the Sn phase appeared in combination with some K4Sn23 when it was further discharged to 0.2 V, indicating a conversion reaction process; when the electrode was further discharged to 0.01 V, the KSn phase could be detected, indicating an alloying process. Accordingly, the potassiation and depotassiation process was described as below: Sn4P3 + (9 − 3x)K+ + (9 − 3x)e− ↔ 4Sn + 3 K3−xP(1) 23Sn + 4K+ + 4e− ↔ K4Sn23(2) K4Sn23 + 19K+ + 19e− ↔ 23KSn(3)
This impressive attempt triggered a series of studies on using metal phosphides (MPx) as anode materials for KIBs. Besides Sn4P3, the K+ ion storage performance of SnP0.94,123 GeP5,147 CoP,148 and FeP149,150 has been investigated. Li et al. recently reported a low-temperature solvo-thermal process to prepare a Sn4P3/C electrode for KIBs.151 Given the more delicate control over the carbon network and Sn4P3 nanoparticles (Fig. 9a), the surface area of the composites was improved significantly (Fig. 9b). As a result, the stability and rate capability of the electrode were enhanced, e.g., a capacity of 181.5 mA h g−1 could be retained after cycling for 800 cycles at a high current density of 500 mA g−1 (Fig. 9c and d). Zhao et al. reported a hot-injection method to synthesize monodisperse SnP0.94 nanoplates and later in situ encapsulate them into GO sheets through hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions.123 As compared to bare SnP0.94, the stability of electrodes was improved. Bai et al. developed a self-template and recrystallization-self-assembly strategy to obtain core–shell-like cobalt phosphides into N,P-doped porous carbon sheets.148 Despite the fact that the electrode was stable upon long-term cycling (i.e. at 0.1 A g−1, the electrodes showed a reversible capacity of 127 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles.), the ICE (19.6%) was much lower than that of other phosphides/carbon composites. The authors attributed this low ICE to the formation of a SEI layer on the electrode surface. Recently, Guo's group tried to confine FeP nanoparticles into hollow carbon nanoboxes, forming a yolk–shell structure.150 Fe2O3 nanocubes were first synthesized through a hydrothermal process and then a layer of carbon was coated onto the nanocubes. The yolk–shell structure was formed by a HCl etching process and FeP@C composites were formed through further phosphidation. The void space in the hollow carbon nanoboxes accommodated the volume change of FeP during cycling. A specific capacity of 205 mA h g−1 was achieved at 100 mA g−1 as an anode in KIBs. Nevertheless, with an in-depth study of the reaction mechanism, it was found that the K-storage behaviour in these phosphides varied from that in LIBs or NIBs.
 Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis of Sn4P3/C. (b) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption of Sn4P3 and Sn4P3/C. (c) Rate capability of Sn4P3 and Sn4P3@C electrodes at various current densities. (d) Long-term cycling performance the Sn4P3@C electrode at 500 mA g−1. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from Elsevier. 
Despite the fact that SnPx/C demonstrated more promising cycling stability as compared to the pure MPx-based anodes, the theoretical capacity is still inferior to the system based on pure P. Therefore, Guo's group further developed a P-rich phase of GeP5 as an anode for KIBs,147 which exhibited a reversible specific capacity as high as 934.5 mA h g−1 at the second cycle. However, it has been found that the ICE for most of the P-based anode systems is low, and this low ICE has been attributed to incomplete SEI layer formation and some possible side reactions. One solution to tackle this issue is to use an alternative potassium salt (KFSI) as an electrolyte,152 which increases the ICE value of the GeP5 electrode to 58.57% from 45%. It has been confirmed that KFSI can help with the formation of a complete and continuous SEI film on the surface of electrode materials during the cycling process (Fig. 10a–c).152 In the meantime, the cycling and rate performance was also improved, i.e. a capacity of 495.1 mA h g−1 was retained after cycling at 50 mA g−1 for 50 cycles. The stability of the electrode was further improved by forming composites with carbon, e.g. a specific capacity of 213.7 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 was maintained after 2000 cycles. In contrast, the electrode cycled in the KPF6 electrolyte only lasted for 200 cycles due to the formation of thicker SEI layers on the electrode surface. To further improve the KFSI-based electrolyte system, FEC was added. However, a quick capacity fading was observed upon the addition of FEC. DFT calculations showed that the solvation energy increased upon the addition of FEC (from 0.305 to 1.281 eV) (Fig. 10d). This means that the interaction between the K+ ion and the solvent was stronger in the electrolyte with FEC, which limited the diffusion of the K+ ion in the electrolyte and compromised the performance. Besides, the addition of FEC induced inhomogeneous formation of the SEI layer on the surface of the electrode. Therefore, despite the fact that the addition of FEC could increase the cycling life to a certain extent, the overall capacity was compromised and the long-term stability of the electrode was also inferior to the one with the KFSI electrolyte (Fig. 10e). On the other hand, finding a suitable binder, with suitable prepotassiation treatment and using a potassiation salt also proved to be effective in increasing the ICE of the P-based anode. Table 2 summarizes the electrochemical performance of P-based anodes in recent reports.
 Fig. 10  Effect of different electrolytes on the electrode performance. (a) Illustration of SEI formation in KFSI and KPF6. (b) In KPF6. (c) In KFSI. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (d) Solvation energy in electrolytes with FEC. (e) Cycling behaviour of the GeP5 electrode in different electrolyte systems. Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Elsevier. 
Table 2 Electrochemical performance of P-based anodes for KIBs




Anode
Ratio of P or MPx (wt%)
Electrolyte
ICE (%)
Capacity (mA h g−1)/current density (A g−1)/after n cycles
Ref.




Red P@N-PHCNFs
66
0.7 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)
—
465/2/800

132



P@TBMC
40
0.6 M KPF6 in EC/PC
63.5
244/0.5/200

40



Red P/C
12
0.8 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)
50.3
71.5/0.5/500

102



BP–C
50
0.75 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)
60
270/0.05/50

130



PODG
0.64
1 M KClO4 + EC/DEC (1:1)
22.6
385/0.5/600

135



P@RGO
44.3
0.8 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)
52.6
253/0.5/500

115



P/AC
40
0.5 M KPF6 + EC/PC (1:1)
53
90.1/-/400

114



Red P@CN
63.9
0.8 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)
59
427.4/0.1/40

133



RP/C
64
1 M KTFSI + EC/DEC (1:1)
68.26
300/1/60

134



Sn4P3/C
87.5
0.8 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)
60
307.2/0.05/50

106



CoP⊂NPPCS
51
1 M KPF6 + EC/DMC/DEC (1:1:1)
19.6
114/0.5/1000

148



SnP0.94@GO
90
1.0 M KFSI in EC/DEC
42
106/0.2/100

123



GeP5
—
KFSI in EC/DEC
45.81
213.7/0.5/2000

147



FeP@CNBs
81
0.8 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)
47
205/0.1/300

150





4. Summary and outlook
To this end, different electrode materials have been investigated to fill in the gap between scarce and expensive LIB and cost-effective yet immature KIB technology.19 It has been accepted that KIBs won't achieve as high energy density as LIBs due to their heavier atomic mass; however, they are still one of the competitive contenders in the currently advanced battery technologies in terms of their huge potential provided by the more favourable ion mobility kinetics in the solution. Due to the larger size of the K ions, the selection of suitable cathode and anode materials for K storage is even more challenging. As they are still in their primary stage, similar systems have been investigated in the first place given the similarity between the ion storage mechanism between LIBs and KIBs. However, as compared to the much broader range of cathode materials that have been investigated in LIBs, the number of cathodes explored for KIBs is still quite limited.153 Whether it is worth exploring all the cathode materials in LIBs or the experience gained from LIB research can be transferred directly to the KIB system is still questionable. As demonstrated by Park et al.,89 it will be highly desirable and more efficient to combine the tool of theoretical calculations and the experimental study to filtrate and select suitable materials for KIBs from the tremendous number of electrode materials in the LIB library. We may tell from Table 1, which summarizes the performance of P-based cathodes, that polyanion phosphates have been mostly intensively investigated. The reason might be because the open-framework structure of such type of material could better accommodate structural stress brought about by the larger size of the K ions. On the other hand, due to the large surface area and rich porosity that exist in the MOF-derived materials, they still hold great potential to act as cathodes for KIBs, as long as more accurate control over the stability of the crystal structure can be realized. Besides, the capacity delivered in the current cathode system is moderate; in the future, the capacity may be further improved by developing cathode materials with a multi-valent redox couple centre, such as V2+/V5+, Mn2+/Mn4+, etc.154
Anode materials are more extensively investigated as compared to cathodes.155 Significant progress has been made since the first attempt in 2017. However, more questions arise with the in-depth study of the P-based anodes in KIBs. In general, people are puzzled by the following aspects. First of all, the K storage mechanism of the P-based anodes has not been elucidated despite the great efforts that have been devoted. Various advanced ex situ and in situ characterization tools, such as in situ XRD, TEM, and XPS, have been utilized to monitor the intermediates and end products during the charge and discharge process; however the reaction mechanism is still under debate. This may be ascribed to the fact that P can exist in different allotropes, both amorphous and crystalline. Tools like XRD or TEM might be more efficient in identifying crystalline phases, while for the amorphous intermediates, the information that can be collected may still be limited. Besides, some intermediates or allotropes of P, such as white phosphorus, are highly reactive and sensitive to oxygen and water. Avoiding or eliminating the effect from the environment on these intermediates would be critical and may hold the key to further clarification of the reaction mechanism. Besides, another aspect worth investigating is the electrolyte system used in KIBs with P-based anodes. It has been confirmed that the composition and concentration of the electrolyte is closely related to the initial coulombic efficiency, which determines the utilization efficiency of electrode materials and performance of the full battery as assembled. KFSI has proved to be more efficient in achieving high ICE as compared to the commonly used KPF6, and FEC, the common additive used in the NIB system, turns out to be not favourable in the KIB system. Further study of the existing electrolyte system with functional additives or the development of a novel electrolyte customized for the KIB system would be highly desirable.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21606003 and 51802044), the Singapore MOE AcRF Tier 1 Grant No. 2016-T1-002-065 and Tier 2 under Grant No. 2017-T2-2-069 and 2018-T2-01-010, and the State Key Laboratory of Vanadium and Titanium Resources Comprehensive Utilization.
References
Y. Lu, Q. Zhang and J. Chen, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 533–548 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, L. Jiang, Y. Yu and J. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 93–114 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, Y. Wang, D. Liu, V. Gariepy, C. Gagnon, A. Vijh, M. L. Trudeau and K. Zaghib, Energies, 2018, 11, 2963 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huang, Z. Pan, X. Su and L. An, J. Power Sources, 2018, 399, 274–286 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zheng, M. Kotobuki, S. Song, M. O. Lai and L. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 389, 198–213 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Kim, D.-H. Seo, X. Ma, G. Ceder and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 710–721 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, H. Wang, Z. Li, A. Kohandehghan, K. Cui, Z. Xu, B. Zahiri, X. Tan, E. M. Lotfabad, B. C. Olsen and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11004–11015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Hwang, S.-T. Myung and Y.-K. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3529–3614 RSC .
H. Tan, D. Chen, X. Rui and Y. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808745 CrossRef .
D. Zhao, L. Zhang, C. Fu, J. Zhang and C. Niu, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1–17 CrossRef .
Y. Fu, Q. Wei, G. Zhang and S. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703058 CrossRef .
M.-C. Lin, M. Gong, B. Lu, Y. Wu, D.-Y. Wang, M. Guan, M. Angell, C. Chen, J. Yang, B.-J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nature, 2015, 520, 324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Chen, H. Luo, X. Zhou and Z. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700034 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, M. Gong, M.-C. Lin, C. Yuan, M. Angell, L. Huang, D.-Y. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Yang, B.-J. Hwang and H. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9218–9222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Li, X. Huo and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2019, 422, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Das, S. Mahapatra and H. Lahan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6347–6367 RSC .
X. Bie, K. Kubota, T. Hosaka, K. Chihara and S. Komaba, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4325–4330 RSC .
X. Wu, D. P. Leonard and X. Ji, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5031–5042 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, T. Liu, X. Cheng, M. Xia, R. Zheng, N. Peng, H. Yu, M. Shui and J. Shu, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 340–361 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Hwang, S.-T. Myung and Y.-K. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802938 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. Guo, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav7412 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Pramudita, D. Sehrawat, D. Goonetilleke and N. Sharma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602911 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. C. Kim, M. Bianchini, D.-H. Seo, J. Rodriguez-Garcia and G. Ceder, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702384 CrossRef .
A. Eftekhari, Z. Jian and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4404–4419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, C. Zhang, M. Zhou, Q. Fu, C. Zhao, M. Wu and Y. Lei, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1720 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Okoshi, Y. Yamada, S. Komaba, A. Yamada and H. Nakai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A54–A60 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lei, F. Li, C. Mu, J. Wang, Q. Zhao, C. Chen and J. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 552–557 RSC .
Y.-H. Zhu, Y.-B. Yin, X. Yang, T. Sun, S. Wang, Y.-S. Jiang, J.-M. Yan and X.-B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7881–7885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Niro, U. Kisaburo and T. Zen'ichi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1974, 47, 813–817 CrossRef .
Z. Jian, W. Luo and X. Ji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11566–11569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Vaalma, G. A. Giffin, D. Buchholz and S. Passerini, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A1295–A1299 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Z. Wang, B. Zhang, L. Miao, J. Cai, L. Peng, Y. Huang, J. Jiang, Y. Huang, L. Zhang and J. Xie, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 8, 161–168 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, L. Yang, Y. Tian, L. Li, J. Li, T. Qiu, G. Zou, H. Hou and X. Ji, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 229, 303–309 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, J. Liao, Z. Tang, L. Xiao, X. Ding, Q. Hu, Z. Wen and C. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 533–541 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamamoto, S. Muratsubaki, K. Kubota, M. Fukunishi, H. Watanabe, J. Kim and S. Komaba, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16844–16848 RSC .
Z. Jian, S. Hwang, Z. Li, A. S. Hernandez, X. Wang, Z. Xing, D. Su and X. Ji, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700324 CrossRef .
X. Wang, K. Han, D. Qin, Q. Li, C. Wang, C. Niu and L. Mai, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18216–18222 RSC .
W. Wang, J. Zhou, Z. Wang, L. Zhao, P. Li, Y. Yang, C. Yang, H. Huang and S. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701648 CrossRef .
Y. Xie, Y. Chen, L. Liu, P. Tao, M. Fan, N. Xu, X. Shen and C. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702268 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Liu, X. Huang, D. Qu, D. Zheng, G. Wang, J. Harris, J. Si, T. Ding, J. Chen and D. Qu, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Adams, J.-M. Syu, Y. Zhao, C.-T. Lo, A. Varma and V. G. Pol, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17872–17881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, P. Xiong, J. Meng, Y. Liang, J. Wang and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19237–19244 RSC .
K. Share, A. P. Cohn, R. Carter, B. Rogers and C. L. Pint, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9738–9744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qiu, H. Xiao, Y. Li, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Small, 2019, 15, e1901285 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Fang, J. Xu, S. Sun, B. Lin, Q. Guo, D. Luo and H. Xia, Small, 2019, 15, 1804806 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gong and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24418–24424 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bachhuber, J. von Appen, R. Dronskowski, P. Schmidt, T. Nilges, A. Pfitzner and R. Weihrich, Z. Kristallogr. - Cryst. Mater., 2015, 230, 107 CAS .
M. Aykol, J. W. Doak and C. Wolverton, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95, 214115 CrossRef .
Y. Hironaka, K. Kubota and S. Komaba, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3693–3696 RSC .
H. Kim, J. C. Kim, S.-H. Bo, T. Shi, D.-H. Kwon and G. Ceder, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700098 CrossRef .
H. Kim, D.-H. Seo, J. C. Kim, S.-H. Bo, L. Liu, T. Shi and G. Ceder, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702480 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Xu, C. Niu, J. Meng, M. Huang, X. Liu, Z. Liu and L. Mai, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 544–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Xu, M. Zhou, L. Liang, H. Dong, M. Wu, Y. Yang and Y. Lei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604307 CrossRef .
D. Su, A. McDonagh, S.-Z. Qiao and G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604007 CrossRef PubMed .
G. He and L. F. Nazar, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1122–1127 CrossRef .
A. Eftekhari, J. Power Sources, 2004, 126, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
N. Recham, G. Rousse, M. T. Sougrati, J.-N. Chotard, C. Frayret, S. Mariyappan, B. C. Melot, J.-C. Jumas and J.-M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4363–4370 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Yakubovich, W. Massa and O. V. Dimitrova, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2005, 631, 2445–2449 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jian, Y. Liang, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, Y. Yao and X. Ji, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 71, 5–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, W. Luo, M. Carter, L. Zhou, J. Dai, K. Fu, S. Lacey, T. Li, J. Wan, X. Han, Y. Bao and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, L. Xue, S. Xin and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5449–5453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Mathew, S. Kim, J. Kang, J. Gim, J. Song, J. P. Baboo, W. Park, D. Ahn, J. Han, L. Gu, Y. Wang, Y.-S. Hu, Y.-K. Sun and J. Kim, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e138 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Prosini, M. Lisi, S. Scaccia, M. Carewska, F. Cardellini and M. Pasquali, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A297–A301 CrossRef CAS .
O. Delmer, P. Balaya, L. Kienle and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 501–505 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Xu, X. Han, C. Pellegrinelli, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, J. Wan, A. C. Chung, O. Vaaland, C. Wang and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5664–5668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hyoung, J. W. Heo, M. S. Chae and S.-T. Hong, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1069–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chihara, A. Katogi, K. Kubota and S. Komaba, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5208–5211 RSC .
R. Lian, D. Wang, X. Ming, R. Zhang, Y. Wei, J. Feng, X. Meng and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16228–16234 RSC .
J. Liao, Q. Hu, B. Che, X. Ding, F. Chen and C. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15244–15251 RSC .
K. H. Seng, L. Li, D.-P. Chen, Z. X. Chen, X.-L. Wang, H. K. Liu and Z. P. Guo, Energy, 2013, 58, 707–713 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schroder, J. Alvarado, T. A. Yersak, J. Li, N. Dudney, L. J. Webb, Y. S. Meng and K. J. Stevenson, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5531–5542 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, L. Wu, L. Xiao, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 402–408 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bouibes, N. Takenaka, T. Fujie, K. Kubota, S. Komaba and M. Nagaoka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28525–28532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Leonard, Z. Wei, G. Chen, F. Du and X. Ji, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 373–374 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, Y. Niu, S.-J. Bao, Y.-N. Yu, S.-Y. Lu and M. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11661–11664 RSC .
S. Yu, Z. Liu, H. Tempel, H. Kungl and R.-A. Eichel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18304–18317 RSC .
H. Tan, L. Xu, H. Geng, X. Rui, C. Li and S. Huang, Small, 2018, 14, 1800567 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, R. Masse, X. Nan and G. Cao, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 4, 15–58 CrossRef .
X. Rui, Q. Yan, M. Skyllas-Kazacos and T. M. Lim, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 19–38 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Rui, D. Chen, H. Tan, D. Yang, S. Huang and Y. Yu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 2556–2576 RSC .
Q. Zheng, H. Yi, X. Li and H. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1597–1617 CrossRef .
M. Wu, W. Ni, J. Hu and J. Ma, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 44 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Gao, Z. Wei, M. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Zeng, B. Zou, G. Chen and F. Du, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802684 CrossRef .
D. Wang, X. Bie, Q. Fu, D. Dixon, N. Bramnik, Y.-S. Hu, F. Fauth, Y. Wei, H. Ehrenberg, G. Chen and F. Du, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, D. Wang, M. Li, Y. Gao, C. Wang, G. Chen and F. Du, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801102 CrossRef .
J. Han, G.-N. Li, F. Liu, M. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Hu, C. Dai and M. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1805–1808 RSC .
X. Lin, J. Huang, H. Tan, J. Huang and B. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 97–101 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, B. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Dou, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Gao, M. Al-Mamun, W. K. Pang, Z. Guo, S. X. Dou and H. K. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 432–439 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Park, S. C. Han, C. Park, S. U. Hong, U. Han, S. P. Singh, Y. H. Jung, D. Ahn, K.-S. Sohn and M. Pyo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703099 CrossRef .
Y. Xue, S. Zheng, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7301–7327 RSC .
Z. Wang, R. Tan, H. Wang, L. Yang, J. Hu, H. Chen and F. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704436 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zou, H. Hou, P. Ge, Z. Huang, G. Zhao, D. Yin and X. Ji, Small, 2018, 14, 1702648 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, Q. Fu, H. Zhao, Y. Mi, W. Li, Y. Dong, M. Wu and Y. Lei, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 769, 257–263 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dühnen, R. Nölle, J. Wrogemann, M. Winter and T. Placke, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A5474–A5482 CrossRef .
R. Jin, X. Li, Y. Sun, H. Shan, L. Fan, D. Li and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14641–14648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liao, Q. Hu, J. Mu, X. He, S. Wang and C. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 659–662 RSC .
Z.-L. Xu, G. Yoon, K.-Y. Park, H. Park, O. Tamwattana, S. J. Kim, W. M. Seong and K. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2598 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Hasa, X. Dou, D. Buchholz, Y. Shao-Horn, J. Hassoun, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2016, 310, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, F. Cheng, Z. Hu, Z. Niu and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 626–634 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, F. Shen, C. Bommier, H. Zhu, X. Ji and L. Hu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 231–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wen, K. He, Y. Zhu, F. Han, Y. Xu, I. Matsuda, Y. Ishii, J. Cumings and C. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, W. Zhao, H. Wang, X. Qi, Z. Xing, Q. Zhuang and Z. Ju, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 460–467 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, J. Wan, B. Ozdemir, W. Bao, Y. Chen, J. Dai, H. Lin, Y. Xu, F. Gu, V. Barone and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7671–7677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, X. Zou, Y. Zhu, Y. Xu and C. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8103–8110 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tai, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Liu and S. Dou, Carbon, 2017, 123, 54–61 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Mao, S. Li, Z. Chen and Z. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3316–3319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Lin, H. Tan and B. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703496 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Y. Chen, Z. Xing, C. W. K. Lam, S.-S. Pang, W. Zhang and Z. Ju, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900343 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, Z. Jiang, S. Niu, S. Zhu, J. Zhou, Y. Zhu, J. Liang, D. Han, K. Xu, L. Zhu, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Chem, 2018, 4, 372–385 CAS .
Y. S. Mun, Y. Yoon, J. Hur, M. S. Park, J. Bae, J. H. Kim, Y. S. Yoon, I. S. Yoo, S. G. Lee and I. T. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2017, 362, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Li, S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 505–511 RSC .
F. Zhou, L. Ouyang, M. Zeng, J. Liu, H. Wang, H. Shao and M. Zhu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 784, 339–346 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2465–2468 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, D. Liu, X. Guo, X. Sui, D. Qu and J. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 16308–16314 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Xing, X. Wu, W. Zhao, X. Qi, Z. Ju and Q. Zhuang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 13897–13902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Y. Wen, X. Fan, T. Gao, F. Han, C. Luo, S.-C. Liou and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3254–3264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. He, J. Li, W. Sun, J. Gao, J. Guo and C. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9034–9037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Yang, M. Li, Y. Jiang, X. Wei, X. Zhong, L. Gu and Y. Yu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1546–1553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Rui, Y. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Wei, S. Chen, W. R. Leow, W. Li, Y. Liu, J. Deng, B. Ma, Q. Yan and X. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502409 CrossRef .
J. Wang, A. C. Johnston-Peck and J. B. Tracy, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4462–4467 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, X. Li, L. Chen and Y. Dan, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 144–152 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Cui, W. Yang and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22913–22932 RSC .
X. Zhao, W. Wang, Z. Hou, G. Wei, Y. Yu, J. Zhang and Z. Quan, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370, 677–683 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nakhanivej, X. Yu, S. K. Park, S. Kim, J.-Y. Hong, H. J. Kim, W. Lee, J. Y. Hwang, J. E. Yang, C. Wolverton, J. Kong, M. Chhowalla and H. S. Park, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 156–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu and Y. Yu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 323–343 CrossRef .
Z. Li and H. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24013–24030 RSC .
X. Han, J. Han, C. Liu and J. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803471 CrossRef .
R. Meng, J. Huang, Y. Feng, L. Zu, C. Peng, L. Zheng, L. Zheng, Z. Chen, G. Liu, B. Chen, Y. Mi and J. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801514 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Q. Liu, A. Zhang, J. Cai, X. Cao, Z. Li, P. D. Asimow and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8323–8329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Sultana, M. M. Rahman, T. Ramireddy, Y. Chen and A. M. Glushenkov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23506–23512 RSC .
M. Dahbi, N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, K. Tokiwa and S. Komaba, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15007–15028 RSC .
Y. Wu, S. Hu, R. Xu, J. Wang, Z. Peng, Q. Zhang and Y. Yu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1351–1358 CrossRef .
P. Xiong, P. Bai, S. Tu, M. Cheng, J. Zhang, J. Sun and Y. Xu, Small, 2018, 14, 1802140 CrossRef .
W.-C. Chang, J.-H. Wu, K.-T. Chen and H.-Y. Tuan, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801354 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Ma, K. Huang, J.-S. Ma, Z. Ju, Z. Xing and Q.-C. Zhuang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7854–7861 RSC .
S. Zhao, W. Kang and J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19046–19052 RSC .
M. Batmunkh, M. Bat-Erdene and J. G. Shapter, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8586–8617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, X. Wu and J. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4001–4006 RSC .
H. Tang, Q. Hu, M. Zheng, Y. Chi, X. Qin, H. Pang and Q. Xu, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2018, 28, 133–147 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Lee, H. Jung, B. C. Yeo, D. Kim and S. S. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 20653–20660 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, L. Chen, S. Mukherjee, J. Gao, H. Sun, Z. Liu, X. Ma, T. Gupta, C. V. Singh, W. Ren, H.-M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602734 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, G.-C. Guo, X.-L. Wei, L.-M. Liu and S.-J. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 215–222 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Y. Yang, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1691–1697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zheng, K. Rui, H. H. Hng, K. Hippalgaonkar, J. Xu, W. Sun, J. Zhu, Q. Yan and W. Huang, Small, 2017, 13, 1700661 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Luo, H. T. Tan, B. Li, S. Sun, Z. Li, Y. Zong, Z. J. Xu, Y. Yang, K. A. Khor and Q. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600453 CrossRef .
F. Li, X. Liu, J. Wang, X. Zhang, B. Yang, Y. Qu and M. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 582–590 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Z. Wu, J. Zhang, G. Liu, N.-H. Yang, R.-S. Liu, W. K. Pang, W. Li and Z. Guo, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 967–974 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, B. Xi, H. Mao, Y. Lin, X. Ma, J. Feng and S. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802310 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Tan, W. Zhao, K. Han, P. Li, W. A. Wang, D. He, Z. Liu, Q. Yu, M. Qin and X. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15673–15682 RSC .
F. Yang, H. Gao, J. Hao, S. Zhang, P. Li, Y. Liu, J. Chen and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808291 CrossRef .
D. Li, Y. Zhang, Q. Sun, S. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. Liang, P. Si and L. Ci, Energy Storage Mater., 2019 DOI:10.1016/j.ensm.2019.04.037 .
Q. Zhang, J. Mao, W. K. Pang, T. Zheng, V. Sencadas, Y. Chen, Y. Liu and Z. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703288 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, T. Zhou, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 625–658 CrossRef .
H. Kim, H. Ji, J. Wang and G. Ceder, Trends Chem. DOI:10.1016/j.trechm.2019.04.007 .
H. Lin, M. Li, X. Yang, D. Yu, Y. Zeng, C. Wang, G. Chen and F. Du, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900323 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Working principle of potassium ion batteries (KIBs).	 

 	Fig. 2  Typical allotropes of phosphorus.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Charge/discharge profiles of α-KVOPO4. (b) Operando XRD patterns of α-KVOPO4 upon initial charge to 4.8 V. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The 1D ion transportation pathway in α-KVOPO4. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Structural evolution from K0.5VOPO4·1.5H2O to layered KVOPO4. (e) Charge/discharge profiles of layered KVOPO4. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


Amorphous FePO4	1 M KPF6/EC-EMC (1:1)	1.5–3.5	156@4	70%/50	
62

K3V2(PO4)3/C	0.8 M KPF6/EC-DEC (1:1)	2.5–4.03	54@20	96.2%/100	
86

KVOPO4	1 M KPF6/EC:PC (1:1)	2.0–5.0	84@6.6	>97%/30	
67

KVOPO4F	1 M KPF6/EC:PC (1:1)	2.0–5.0	96@6.6	>97%/30	
67

KVP2O7	0.5 M KPF6/EC-DEC (1:1)	2.0–5.0	60@0.25 C@50 °C	85%/20	
89

VOPO4·2H2O	0.1 M H2O + 0.6 M KPF6/EC-DEC (1:1)	−0.2 to 1.3 V (vs. Ag/Ag+)	90@27	86.2%/100	
66

K3V2(PO4)3/C	1 M KPF6/EC:PC (1:1)	2.0–4.0 V	91@25	93.4%/100	
66

KTi2(PO4)3/C	0.8 M KPF6/EC-DEC (1:1)	1.2–2.8	75.6@64	—	
75

K2[(VO)2(HPO4)2(C2O4)]	0.1 M KClO4/PC	2.0–4.6	81@5.45	83%/200	
96

KVOPO4	0.5 M KPF6/EC-DEC (1:1)	2.0 to 4.6 V	114.8@24	86.8%/200	
69

K3V2(PO4)2F3	1 M KPF6/EC:PC (1:1)	2.0–4.6 V	104@10	95%/180	
87


 	Fig. 4  Synthetic strategies of P/C and MPx/C composites. (a) Typical ball-milling process. Modified from ref. 102 with permission from Elsevier. (b) P/C composites formed by the vaporization–condensation–conversion process. Modified from ref. 40 with permission from Elsevier. (c) Hot-injection method to prepare SnP0.94 nanoplates and further hybridization with GO. The magnified area illustrates the microstructure of the electrodes as prepared. Modified from ref. 123 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of red P confined in hollow carbon nanotubes with different micro-structures. (a) Potassiation/depotassiation on red P, red P coated on hollow carbon nanofibers and red P confined in the porous hollow carbon nanotubes. (b) CV curves of the red P@ N-PHCNTs. Cycling (c) and rate capability (d) of red P/N-HCNFs and red P@N-PHCNFs. (e–h) STEM images and element mapping of N, P, and C on electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Results of red P anchored onto the 3D carbon network. (a) Calculated formation energy. (b) Illustration of the potassiation/depotassiation process of the red P@CN electrode. Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  Effects of P–C bonds on the electrode performance. (a) Structural configuration of the activated RP/C-based PIB electrode without the formation of P–C bonds. The comparison of CV (b) and XPS (c) results of the WBM-RP/C, DBM-RP/C, and DBM/WBM-RP/C electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Theoretical calculations based on the PCM. (a) The differential charge density distribution for Li, Na and K atoms adsorbed on the PCM. (b–d) The voltage profiles for Li, Na and K intercalation on the PCM. Insets show the optimized structures (top and side views) of the maximal capacity. (e) Diffusion pathways of an AM atom on the PCM. (f) The diffusion pathway of an AM atom in bulk PC. Illustration of (g) a single P vacancy and (h) P–C double vacancy on the PCM. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Elsevier.	 
Sn4P3 + (9 − 3x)K+ + (9 − 3x)e− ↔ 4Sn + 3 K3−xP	(1)
23Sn + 4K+ + 4e− ↔ K4Sn23	(2)
K4Sn23 + 19K+ + 19e− ↔ 23KSn	(3)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis of Sn4P3/C. (b) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption of Sn4P3 and Sn4P3/C. (c) Rate capability of Sn4P3 and Sn4P3@C electrodes at various current densities. (d) Long-term cycling performance the Sn4P3@C electrode at 500 mA g−1. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Effect of different electrolytes on the electrode performance. (a) Illustration of SEI formation in KFSI and KPF6. (b) In KPF6. (c) In KFSI. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (d) Solvation energy in electrolytes with FEC. (e) Cycling behaviour of the GeP5 electrode in different electrolyte systems. Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Elsevier.	 

Red P@N-PHCNFs	66	0.7 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)	—	465/2/800	
132

P@TBMC	40	0.6 M KPF6 in EC/PC	63.5	244/0.5/200	
40

Red P/C	12	0.8 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)	50.3	71.5/0.5/500	
102

BP–C	50	0.75 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)	60	270/0.05/50	
130

PODG	0.64	1 M KClO4 + EC/DEC (1:1)	22.6	385/0.5/600	
135

P@RGO	44.3	0.8 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)	52.6	253/0.5/500	
115

P/AC	40	0.5 M KPF6 + EC/PC (1:1)	53	90.1/-/400	
114

Red P@CN	63.9	0.8 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)	59	427.4/0.1/40	
133

RP/C	64	1 M KTFSI + EC/DEC (1:1)	68.26	300/1/60	
134

Sn4P3/C	87.5	0.8 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)	60	307.2/0.05/50	
106

CoP⊂NPPCS	51	1 M KPF6 + EC/DMC/DEC (1:1:1)	19.6	114/0.5/1000	
148

SnP0.94@GO	90	1.0 M KFSI in EC/DEC	42	106/0.2/100	
123

GeP5	—	KFSI in EC/DEC	45.81	213.7/0.5/2000	
147

FeP@CNBs	81	0.8 M KPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1)	47	205/0.1/300	
150


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
