A review of synthetic approaches to hollow nanostructures  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00879F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00879F
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 2552-2587A review of synthetic approaches to hollow nanostructures

        
          
            Maiyong 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yikun 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiao 
            Luo
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad 
            El-khateeb
          
          
        
      *bc and 

        
          
            Quan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b
aResearch School of Polymeric Materials, School of Materials Science & Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, 212013, P. R. China. E-mail: maiyongzhu@ujs.edu.cn
bDivision of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. E-mail: zhangquan2014@kuchem.kyoto-u.ac.jp
cChemistry Department, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid 22110, Jordan. E-mail: kateeb@just.edu.jo
Received 
      28th October 2020
    , Accepted 28th December 2020First published on 30th December 2020AbstractDuring the past decades, hollow nanostructures have been developed as a vital class of functional materials in various areas owing to their advantageous characteristics over solid materials. To date, many efficient strategies have been explored to synthesize hollow nanostructures. These methods could be broadly divided into hard template, soft template, self-template, and template free methods. In this review, a tutorial summary of the recent progress in the synthesis of hollow nanostructures is provided. Considering the authors’ backgrounds, the applications of some typical examples mentioned here in electrochemical energy conversion/storage and catalysis are also simultaneously discussed. In the end, some current challenges and future development trends of this hot area are also outlined.
Maiyong Zhu
Maiyong Zhu received his PhD degree from Yangzhou University (China) in 2011. In 2012, he joined the School of Materials Science & Engineering, Jiangsu University (China), as an assistant professor. In 2015, he was promoted to associate professor. Currently, under the support of the China Scholarship Council he is simultaneously working as a visiting professor hosted by Prof. Hiroshi Kitagawa at Kyoto University (Japan). His research interests cover inorganic/organic hybrid materials for energy and environment related applications.
Yikun Cheng
Yikun Cheng is a student majoring in Polymer Materials & Engineering at Jiangsu University. Currently he is carrying out research under the supervision of Dr Zhu. His research mainly focuses on design and synthesis of hollow nanostructures.
Qiao Luo
Qiao Luo received his bachelor's degree in June 2020 from Jiangsu University. Currently he is a graduate student under Dr Zhu. His research mainly covers metal–organic frameworks for energy storage and conversion.
Mohammad El-khateeb
Prof. Mohammad El-khateeb earned his PhD degree from McGill University (Canada) in 1996. Later he joined Jordan University of Science and Technology (Jordan) as a professor. Currently he is carrying out academic research at Kyoto University (Japan) as an invited JSPS fellow hosted by Professor Hiroshi Kitagawa. His research interest lies in inorganic/organic hybrid materials for energy and sensor applications.
Quan Zhang
Quan Zhang received his PhD in 2018 from Kyoto University under the supervision of Prof. Hiroshi Kitagawa. Since then, he has worked as a specific research fellow at Kyoto University in Prof. Hiroshi Kitagawa's laboratory. His current research interests focus on the synthesis of functional inorganic nanomaterials and their applications.
1 Introduction
Hollow nanostructures, referred to as nanosized materials with interior voids/cavities as well as well-defined boundaries, have always been a hot topic in both the fundamental scientific research and engineering technical application fields. Compared to solid counterparts, hollow nanostructures exhibit some intrinsic features including low density, high surface area-to-volume ratios, and abundant inner void space. These characteristics endow them with low mass transport resistance, short charge transport pathways, and high mass/volume loading capacity toward guest species. Hollow nanostructures have found application in a wide range of areas including energy storage/conversion, catalysis, environmental remediation, drug delivery, chemical sensors, surface enhanced Raman spectra, and so on.1–8 When used as electrodes for energy storage devices, hollow nanostructures are expected to provide more accessible storage sites and huge electrode/electrolyte contact area, benefiting mass/charge transport and offering high specific capacity. Meanwhile, the cycling performance may be improved since the interior cavity space may buffer the destructive volume expansion.9,10 As catalysts, hollow nanostructures can provide both outer surfaces and inner surfaces for reaction sites. Besides, supported active species (especially nanocatalysts and single atom metal catalysts) are more dispersed on hollow supports given that the loading amount is defined. Additionally, sometimes the catalytically active species may be loaded inside the hollow structures, which provide a confinement effect to boost the catalytic performance besides improving the stability of the catalysts.11–16 Similar to catalysts, hollow nanostructures can also provide large surfaces/space to adsorb higher amounts of pollutants.17–19
Considering the above advantages, great effort has been made towards fabricating hollow nanostructures. Up to now, numerous techniques have been developed for the synthesis of hollow nanostructures, which can be divided into four categories based on their operation principles. They are known as hard template, soft template, self template, and template free methods. A wide range of hard templates, such as silica, polymers, carbon, metal-based compounds, and some natural materials, have been developed to fabricate various kinds of hollow nanostructures with well-defined shapes and sizes.20 Soft templates, usually referred to as organic molecule assemblies in solution such as micelles, vesicles, and bubbles, show advantages in operation procedures compared to hard templates.21 During the past decades, self template and template free approaches have also been developed to synthesize hollow nanostructures.22–24 Some theories combined with experimental studies have also been carried out to explain the formation mechanism of hollow nanostructures.25
Great progress has been achieved in both synthesis and application of hollow nanostructures during the past decades. Several nice review papers about hollow nanostructures with special compositions/synthetic techniques and typical applications have been published recently. For example, Prieto and co-workers provided a critical survey of applications of hollow nanostructures in various branches of catalysis.26 Feng et al. summarized the advances in the self template synthesis of hollow nanostructures. Jiang et al., Luo et al. and Liu et al. provided comprehensive reviews of hollow carbon nanomaterials for rechargeable batteries.27–29 Mao et al. discussed sequential templating approaches to multishelled hollow structures.30 Huang et al. highlighted recent advances of hollow nanostructures as sulfur host cathodes for lithium–sulfur batteries.31 Zhu et al. summarized the multifunctional merits and synthetic approaches for hollow array structures in application of electrochemical energy storage.32 Liu et al. summarized the general synthesis of multi-shelled hollow transition metal-based microspheres with an emphasis on their applications in batteries and supercapacitors.33 Zhou et al. and Wang et al. have discussed the applications of hollow nanostructures in some emerging areas.34,35 Li et al. demonstrated the architecture designs of hollow nanostructures as catalytic devices.36 Yu et al. highlighted the application of molybdenum sulfides in electrochemical energy storage and conversion.37 Recently, the authors’ group also provided a comprehensive review of the synthetic methods of multi-shelled hollow nanostructures and their applications in some emerging fields.38 Though most of the above publications put their focus on specific methods or application sections, it is easy to conclude that hollow nanostructures exhibit promising prospects in many areas. Meanwhile, the development of this area is faster and faster. The synthesis of desired hollow nanostructures is absolutely in the forefront of significance. It is necessary to provide a systematic summary of the synthetic approaches, providing some general guidelines for future development. Taking this consideration into account, we here try to provide an updated comprehensive review of the synthetic approaches towards hollow nanostructures. For convenience, by citing numerous typical examples we discuss the methods according to the traditional classification: hard template, soft template, self template and template free. Additionally, fully taking the authors’ backgrounds into account, the applications of some typical examples mentioned here in electrochemical energy conversion/storage and catalysis are also simultaneously discussed. Finally, some current challenges and future development directions of this area are also outlined.
2 Hard template methods
The hard template method is the most direct and effective method to prepare hollow adjustable structures and gives the final shape of the hollow materials. Materials of different sizes and shapes may be obtained by this method. There are four steps to synthesize hollow structure materials by this method: (i) preparation of the required hard framework, (ii) surface modification so that the surface of the hard template is charged and the corresponding functional groups are introduced, (iii) coating the hard template to form composite target materials, and finally (iv) the removal of the hard template. If the hard template can be well combined with the coating, step (ii) can be skipped. The types of hard templates that are used for the preparation of hollow materials are summarized in the following sections. For example, silicon dioxide, polymers, biomass, metal particles and inorganic salts have been used as hard templates. In addition, some rare hard templates are also introduced. These templates can be removed by reagent etching or calcination. Although this method is difficult to operate, the prepared material structure is stable and does not need expensive equipment, so it is regarded as a relatively economic method. At present, it is still one of the main methods to prepare hollow structures.
2.1 Silica based hard templates
SiO2 is widely used in sacrificial templates of hollow structures due to its adjustable size, excellent mechanical properties and thermal stability. SiO2 particles can be obtained by the classical Stöber method or its improved ones.39 The particle diameter can be controlled from nanometers to micrometers. SiO2, as a supporting template, can be removed by directly etching with hydrofluoric acid or by a hydrothermal method using sodium hydroxide.
It is noted that the surface of SiO2 is rich in hydroxide groups which may bind to numerous targeted guests, such as organic molecules and metallic ions. Accordingly, SiO2 particles without any treatment might be a versatile template to prepare hollow materials.40 For example, Zhang et al. prepared hollow poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) using monodispersed SiO2 nanospheres as a template. The preparation process includes the polymerization of EDOT on the surfaces of the SiO2 spheres, oxidation by ammonium peroxysulfate (APS) and removal of SiO2 by HF etching.41 Similarly, Chen et al. successfully prepared highly dispersed and homogeneous SiO2 nanospheres by an improved Stöber method.42 Taking such SiO2 nanospheres as a sacrificial template, Ti(OH)x was uniformly coated on SiO2 nanospheres to form Ti(OH)x@SiO2. Finally, interconnected urchin like hollow Na2Ti3O7 nanospheres were directly obtained by one-step hydrothermal reaction with the assistance of H2O2 and NaOH to remove the hard core of SiO2.43
Besides creating hollow polymers and metallic oxides/hydroxides, other nanomaterials such as carbon, as well as some composites with hollow structures, can also be obtained using SiO2 templates. Ye et al. prepared hollow carbon composites using solid monodisperse SiO2 nanospheres as sacrificial templates.44 The major steps in their process include the following. First, pre-synthesized SiO2 nanospheres reacted with an aqueous solution of nickel nitrate to form SiO2@Ni-silicate nanospheres. Afterwards, under the catalysis of ammonia, resorcinol–formaldehyde (RF) resion was coated on the surfaces of the SiO2@Ni-silicate nanospheres through the polymerization of resorcinol formaldehyde, forming SiO2@Ni-silicate@RF spheres. After high temperature carbonization, Ni nanoparticles were incorporated into the carbon layer. Finally, on addition of Na2S, the Ni particles were transformed into NiS in situ by a hydrothermal reaction process and the SiO2 template was removed owing to the suitable alkaline environment created by the hydrolysis of Na2S. As a result, hollow NiS@C nanospheres were obtained successfully. Wang et al. using uniform size SiO2 nanospheres (300 nm) as a template and RF as a carbon source, a carbon layer was successfully coated on the surface of the SiO2 template. Then, by a hydrothermal method, MoS2 nanosheets were grown vertically on the surfaces of the SiO2@C spheres to obtain SiO2@C@MoS2. Finally, C@MoS2@NC hollow spheres were prepared by etching in 5% HF solution.45
Though the surface of SiO2 is often rich in hydroxide groups, the affinity to some target precursors is not very strong, limiting the application performance/range of SiO2 templates. Accordingly, surface functionalization of SiO2 is necessary. For example, Abdollahi et al. used amino-functionalized solid SiO2 nanospheres as templates to obtain hollow spherical gold shells.46 In their work, the 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) functionalized SiO2 showed a good binding ability to gold nanoparticles. The hollow spherical gold shell was obtained by removing the silica core with 5% HF solution. Wu et al. took a similar approach to obtain dual-porosity hollow carbon spheres (DPHCs), using SiO2–NH2 as the hard template. The preparation process is shown in Fig. 1a. Due to the electrostatic interaction between small silica nanoparticles (SNPs) and SiO2–NH2 nanospheres, SNPs are adsorbed on SiO2–NH2 nanospheres. At the same time, dopamine (DA) molecules self-polymerized to cover the surface of SiO2–NH2 under ammonia-catalysis to yield SiO2–NH2@PDA precursor. In order to gain DPHCs, the PDA shell layer were carbonized at 800 °C and the SiO2–NH2 was eliminated by HF etching. For delivering protein bovine serum albumin, the authors further oxidized DPHCs with H2SO4/HNO3 to make them hydrophilic. Interestingly, the size of the SiO2 template used has a great impact on the microstructure of the final DPHCs. As displayed in Fig. 1b–d, DPHCs obtained using 5 and 10 nm SiO2 templates showed only some pits on the shells without through-holes since the size of the template particles is smaller than the thickness of the carbon shells, while DPHCs obtained using a 40 nm SiO2 template exhibited obvious through-holes on the shell.47 Recently, using SiO2 solid spheres as a template and dopamine as a N and carbon source, Niu et al. prepared an N-doped hollow carbon sphere intercalated graphene (GNC) film, in which the hollow carbon spheres separated the graphene nanosheets, ensuring maximum accessible surface areas for ion crossing. The GNC film could further be used as a substrate to deposit MnO2, boosting the specific capacity of the electrode. When evaluated as a binder-free electrode of the supercapacitor, the GNC/MnO2 offered an ultrahigh volumetric capacitance of 532.7 F cm−3 at 2 mV s−1. The assembled GNC/MnO2//GNC asymmetric supercapacitor device exhibited a volumetric energy density of 45.9 W h L−1 at 1024 W L−1. Additionally, the cycling stability of the device was excellent, with 93.1% of its initial capacitance being maintained after 5000 charge/discharge cycles.48 Besides MnO2, Co9S8 nanoparticles could also be deposited on the above mentioned GNC, which also demonstrated to offer satisfactory electrochemical performance as a supercapacitor electrode.49
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration for the preparation of DPHCs. (b–d) TEM images of DPHCs obtained using SiO2 templates with different sizes: (b) 5 nm; (c) 10 nm; and (d) 40 nm. Reprinted from ref. 47 with permission. 
In addition to amine groups, the CC double bond can also be used to modify SiO2 to improve the affinity to or ability to target precursors. Li et al. used CC double bond modified silica nanospheres as templates. SiO2@P(MAA-co-PMA-co-DVB) core–shell nanospheres were prepared by distillation–precipitation copolymerization of propargyl methacrylate (PMA), methylacrylic acid (MAA) and divinylbenzene (DVB) on the SiO2 surface by dispersion-precision copolymerization. Subsequently, hairy hollow Air@P(MAA-co-PMA-co-DVB)-click-PS/PEG nanospheres were obtained by combined alkyne–azide and thiol–ene surface click reactions and the traditional HF etching process.50
In order to prevent the structural collapse during the post conversion and template removal steps, surface protection might be a promising solution. In 2008, Hyeon's group presented a wrap–bake–peel process for the transformation of β-FeOOH nanorods into iron oxide nanocapsules. It is well known that direct thermal treatment on metallic hydroxides often leads to shape change. In order to maintain the initial whole shape, the authors initially coated a protective layer of SiO2 on the surfaces of the β-FeOOH nanorods. The thin protective layer of SiO2 limited the expansion of the metallic hydroxide core during the subsequent thermal treatment step.51 TiO2 is a promising photocatalyst candidate and has been widely used in photocatalytic H2 evolution and degradation of organic dyes in waste water. The hollow structures are demonstrated to be superior to the solid ones. As a successive study, Hyeon et al. recently extended the wrap–bake–peel principle to prepare hollow TiO2 supported single atom metal nanocatalysts, which exhibited an excellent reversible and cooperative photoactivation process. In a typical synthesis, through a sol–gel process, amorphous TiO2 was initially coated on the surface of SiO2, which here acted as a hard template. After absorbing metallic atoms by adding a very small amount of metal chloride (such as 4 mg) into a colloidal solution of SiO2@TiO2 nanoparticles, a wrap process for coating a thin protective layer of SiO2 was carried out by a typical Stöber method with the assistance of PVP. Due to the excellent affinity of PVP to both SiO2 and metallic oxide, the wrap procedure can be easily realized. Subsequently, a heating treatment at 900 °C (baking) and etching of SiO2 with NaOH (peel) were performed to give single atom metal/TiO2 photocatalysts. It should be noted that the initially amorphous TiO2 was converted into crystalline TiO2 after thermal treatment. The authors demonstrated that such a wrap–bake–peel process can be used for preparing a wide range of single atom metal/TiO2 photocatalysts with hollow structures, such as Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Rh. When used as photocatalysts for H2 evolution, these single atom metal/TiO2 photocatalysts exhibited higher production rates than pure TiO2. Especially the activity of Cu/TiO2 with a Cu loading of 0.75% was verified to be 34.0 times higher than that of pure TiO2.52
Besides solid SiO2, mesoporous silica is an ideal template for hollow structure preparation. Cheng et al. used mesoporous silica spheres (MSS) as a hard template to successfully prepare porous coral reef like carbon nanostructures. The synthetic steps are as follows. Firstly, the mesoporous silica template was encapsulated in stainless steel meshes by self-assembly. Then, PDA was coated on the surfaces of the MSS and carbonized. Finally, the MSS were removed by etching with sodium hydroxide to obtain continuous porous core reef like nanostructured electronic materials. The composite has excellent mechanical stability, which proves the superiority of using MSS as a template material. The superiority of MSS can be attributed to the following three factors. First, MSS can be packaged continuously and intensively by the stainless steel meshes. Second, MSS have functional groups on their surfaces, which can adhere to PDA tightly. Third, MSS can leave a stable cavity after being etched with NaOH.53
Silica shells are also widely used in template materials. Zhang et al. manufactured uniform hollow silica spheres using a modified Stöber/Mg-thermal reduction combination method. Using the pre-synthesized hollow SiO2 shells as templates, a hollow structured Si/C composite was successfully prepared by simple solidification followed by a pyramiding method employing flake graphite as a substrate and conductive phenolic resin as a carbon source and coagulant. Such a Si/C hollow structure has good cycling performance and has the ability to withstand large volume expansion.54 Xu et al. used the soft template method to synthesize hollow SiOx (HSiO2) spheres. Due to the large specific surface area and affinity of HSiO2 spheres, phenolic resin can be easily deposited on the surfaces of the HSiO2 spheres and then carbonized to obtain a HSiO2/C composite. There is no need for etching reagents to remove the HSiO2 template. Finally, a simple spray drying method was used to distribute the GO wafer evenly and wrap it on the HSiOx/C spheres. After further high-temperature transformation, a dual carbon conductive network-encapsulated hollow SiOx (DC-HSiOx) composite was obtained.55
Mesoporous and hollow silica templates are often used in the preparation of multi-shell hollow materials. Huo et al. prepared N-doped mesoporous carbon hollow spheres (N-MCHSs) using dopamine as a carbon and nitrogen source as shown in Fig. 2. In their process, mesoporous hollow SiO2 (MHSiO2) spheres were first prepared, which was followed by polydopamine (PDA) coating. It was noted that the self-polymerization of dopamine can occur on both the inner and outer shells of the MHSiO2 spheres, forming interconnected PDA bridges. Afterwards, N-MCHSs were obtained by carbonization at high temperature and HF etching. Owing to the mesoporous hollow spherical structure and high level of pyridinic nitrogen doping, the final N-MCHs exhibits high specific surface area and excellent conductivity. When used as anode for lithium ion battery, such N-MCHs delivered a high reversible capacity of 485 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 1100 cycles and an outstanding rate capability of 214 mA h g−1 at a current density of 4.0 A g−1.56
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for N-MCHSs. Reprinted from ref. 56 with permission. 
In another study, Tong et al. adopted multi-shell SiO2 nanospheres as the template to prepare multi-shell g-C3N4 (MSCN) nanocapsules.57Fig. 3a shows the synthetic procedure for MSCN nanocapsules, which mainly involves three steps. Initially, cyanamide (CY) was used as a carbon and nitrogen source to coat the multi-shell SiO2 nanospheres, forming SiO2/CY. Subsequently, SiO2/CY was converted into SiO2/g-C3N4 nanospheres via calcination at 550 °C for 3 h in a nitrogen atmosphere. Finally, Na2CO3 was used as the etchant to remove the multi-shell SiO2 template, yielding MSCN. The SiO2 template with a hollow structure has the same stability as the solid SiO2 template. This may be due to the easy removal of the SiO2 template with a hollow structure compared to that of the solid SiO2 template, proving the advantage of this template material. The shell layer number of the SiO2 template was adjusted by altering the addition times of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) and 1,2-bis(triethoxysilyl)ethane (BTSE) to the reaction system. The authors prepared three hollow g-C3N4 hollow spheres with different shell numbers: single-shelled (SSCN), double-shelled (DSCN), and triple-shelled (TSCN). When used as photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution and degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB), these hollow nanostructures exhibited advantages over their bulk counterparts, as displayed in Fig. 3b and c. Meanwhile, the catalytic performance increased with the shell number. The high photocatalytic performance arises from efficient visible light absorption, charge transport capability and high specific surface area.
 Fig. 3  (a) Multi-shell g-C3N4 (MSCN) nanocapsule synthetic strategy, (b) visible light driven photocatalytic H2 evolution and (c) degradation of RhB over bulk CN, SSCN, DSCN, and TSCN. Reprinted from ref. 57 with permission. 
Though many reliable hollow nanostructures have been prepared via a SiO2 hard template approach, one of the largest disadvantages of such methods is multiple steps needed, which increase the cost. In order to simplify the procedures of hard template methods, it is desirable to incorporate the formation of the template and the coating of target materials/precursors in a single step. For this purpose, Liu and co-workers designed a SiO2 hard template process avoiding the pre-synthesis of SiO2 to prepare N-doped hollow carbon spheres with a single-shell structure and a yolk–shell structure (Fig. 4). In their innovative synthesis, SiO2 was used as a hard template, resorcinol–formaldehyde resin as a carbon precursor, and melamine as a dopant providing nitrogen. The main interesting point lies in the hydroxylation/condensation of TEOS, and condensation polymerization of resorcinol and formaldehyde occurred simultaneously with the assistance of CTAC, resulting in the formation of hollow polymer/silica spheres. After calcination and silica etching, N-doped hollow carbon spheres can be obtained directly. For obtaining N-doped yolk–shell hollow carbon spheres, the hollow polymer/silica spheres should be hydrothermally treated before carbonization and silica etching. The authors further investigated these N-doped hollow carbon spheres for supercapacitors and capacitive desalination. Interestingly, the simple hollow spheres were demonstrated to show better capacitive properties than the yolk–shell ones, though yolk–shell nanostructures are usually more interesting in many cases.58,59 By changing the carbon and nitrogen precursors to dopamine, the same research group also obtained a series of N-doped hollow carbon spheres including single-shelled, double-shelled, and yolk-shelled structures.60 In another study, Zhang et al. also used dopamine and TEOS as starting materials. Interestingly, they first obtained core–shell–shell polydopamine@SiO2@polydopamine layered spherical precursors. Subsequently, after carbonization and HF etching, N-doped yolk–shell hollow carbon spheres were also obtained.61 Recently, Yi et al. also carried out similar work to prepare coarse bowl-like hollow carbon submicrospheres, smooth bowl-like hollow carbon submicrospheres and their hollow carbon submicrospheres by adjusting the proportion of TEOS in the system and reaction temperature.62
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the preparation procedures for N-doped hollow carbon spheres and N-doped yolk–shell hollow carbon spheres. Reprinted from ref. 58 with permission. 
The advantages of SiO2 as a hard template include its good mechanical properties, easy preparation, and distinct tolerance to high temperature and many acids except for HF. The excellent mechanical properties ensure the good shape of the final target hollow nanostructures. The high tolerance to high temperature and many acids make it usable under some acute conditions. The disadvantages of SiO2 mainly lie in its lower tolerance to alkaline media, making it unsuitable for constructing hollow nanostructures in alkaline media. Additionally, the removal of SiO2 usually consumes a large amount of HF or some alkaline agents, and sometimes a hydrothermal process is needed.
2.2 Polymer based hard templates
In 1998, Caruso et al. successfully prepared hollow silica spheres or inorganic polymer composite spheres using PS latex particles as the template.63 Since then, the use of polymers as templates has become more and more popular to prepare hollow structures. This is due to the fact that the surfaces of the polymer template particles can easily be activated and the polymer can be removed by a simple solvent etching or high-temperature calcination process. In the following subheading, some commonly used polymer templates are introduced, including homopolymers, and two-component copolymer and some multicomponent copolymer particles.

2.2.1 Homopolymers as hard templates. 
2.2.1.1 Polystyrene particles as hard templates. 
Morphology- and size-controlled polystyrene (PS) spheres are widely used to prepare hollow structures. This may be due to the easy preparation and large surface area of PS. Considering plenty of CC and benzene rings in the structure, numerous organic polymers were selected for coating on the surfaces of the PS spheres to yield polymer@PS core@shell composites. Such polymer@PS could be converted into carbon materials by calcination at high temperature in an inert atmosphere.64 For example, Chen et al. used PS particles as the template, without any surface modification, and controlled the polymerization of different concentrations of pyrrole on the surfaces of the PS particles; after pyrolysis and activation, three kinds of hollow carbonaceous spheres with different shapes were obtained: hollow carbonaceous spheres with a partly ruptured carbonaceous shell, hollow carbonaceous spheres with a hole and intact hollow carbonaceous spheres.65 Similarly, Zhu et al. prepared PS@PPy/PVP core–shell nanoparticles with pyridine (Py) as a monomer, FeCl3 as an oxidant and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as a monomer anchoring agent. Then, buckled hollow carbon nanospheres (BHCSs) were prepared by mechanical compression.66 In recent years, a large number of single-component hollow structures with element doping have emerged. For example, Arif et al. provided a method for preparing N-doped hollow carbon spheres.67 Polystyrene latex (PSL) was used as the template, and hexamethoxymethylmelamine (HMMM) as the carbon and nitrogen source. After crosslinking of PSL and HMMM through a microwave-assisted process, N-doped hollow carbon spheres were obtained by carbonization.
Besides coating organic polymer followed by carbonization to give hollow carbon based materials, some inorganic hollow materials can also be prepared using PS as a hard template. Wang et al. prepared Sn-doped hollow TiO2 spheres using PS as a hard template. The whole preparation process can be divided into three steps. Firstly, PS spheres were prepared by the method of emulsifier-free emulsion polymerization. Secondly, Sn-doped TiO2/PS core–shell spheres were prepared with SnCl2 as the Sn source and TBOT as the Ti source. Finally, the PS core was removed by high temperature calcination to obtain Sn-doped TiO2 hollow spheres.68
In addition to the hollow particles composed of a single material, hollow structures composed of a variety of components have also been reported one after another. For example, Shi et al. utilized cationic polystyrene microspheres as a hard template to prepare a Bi2O3-sensitized TiO2 hollow composite, which exhibits excellent photocatalytic performance and recyclability toward the complete degradation (100%) of antibiotics under visible light (λ > 420 nm). Such outstanding photocatalytic performance was ascribed to the superior characteristics of hollow structures and the synergistic effect of the p–n heterjunction.69 Composite hollow nanostructures have also shown great promise in energy conversion and storage. Compared with solid composites, hollow ones with huge surface areas are favorable for supplying abundant transport channels in both outer and inner surfaces, leading to low charge transport resistance and easy diffusion/transport of electrolyte ions.70 Tian et al. prepared double-layer nitrogen-doped microporous hollow carbon@MoS2/MoO2 nanospheres (NCs@MoS2/MoO2) using PS spheres as a template.71 The synthetic strategy is shown in Fig. 5a, in which aniline was used as a nitrogen and carbon source to conduct aniline polymerization on the template surface to form PSs/PANi with a core–shell structure. Because PANi is positively charged, MoS2/MoO2 nanosheets can grow on the surfaces of PSs/PANi through the typical hydrothermal process. Subsequently, under high temperature calcination, PANi was transformed into a nitrogen-doped carbon shell. The PS template was also converted into a carbon shell with abundant micropores. Owing to such a unique structure, the obtained NCs@MoS2/MoO2 offered a high specific capacitance of 569 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and an excellent rate capability (312 F g−1 at a current density of 20 A g−1). Significantly, the NCs@MoS2/MoO2 based symmetric supercapacitor device delivered the maximum capacitance of 347 F g−1 (Fig. 5b), which is superior to that of previously reported pristine MoS2. Additionally, the authors further demonstrated that the unique carbon core can adjust the strain released and prevent the structural collapse, so the obtained NCs@MoS2/MoO2 based supercapacitor device exhibited outstanding cycling performance (81.0% capacitance retention) and high coulombic efficiency (91.4%) after 5000 cycles at 5 A g−1, as displayed in Fig. 5c.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of NCs@MoS2/MoO2. (b) Ragone plot and (c) cycling performance of the symmetric NCs@MoS2/MoO2 based supercapacitor device. Reprinted from ref. 71 with permission. 
Similar to other polymers, PS can also easily lose absorbed solvent when dried in an oven or at room temperature. Utilizing this unique property, Liang et al. prepared bowl-like SnO2@C hollow particles. The process mainly includes three steps as displayed in Fig. 6a. Initially, solid PS spheres (Fig. 6b) obtained by emulsion polymerization were dried at room temperature to give a bowl like hollow PS template (Fig. 6c). The driving force for the shape conversion from a solid sphere to deflated bowl like structure was ascribed to the capillary force during the solvent evaporation and the soft nature of the PS shell. Subsequently, a simple precipitation reaction was employed to deposit a SnO2 layer on the surface, forming SnO2@PS (Fig. 6d). Owing to the deposition of SnO2, the diameter of the SnO2@PS was found to be slightly increased compared with that of pristine PS. Finally, the resulting SnO2@PS was converted to a bowl like SnO2@C hollow nanocomposite (Fig. 6e) via calcination treatment in a nitrogen atmosphere at 550 °C. The morphological observation reveals that the bowl like structure of the PS template was well maintained in spite of the numerous steps involved in the process. When used as an anode for the lithium ion battery, the bowl like SnO2@C hollow nanocomposite exhibited high reversible capacity, excellent cycling stability and outstanding rate performance.72
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure of bowl-like SnO2@carbon. SEM images of PS hollow spheres (b), bowl-like PS particles (c), bowl-like SnO2@PS particles, and bowl-like SnO2@C nanocomposites. Reprinted from ref. 72 with permission. 
Starting from PS spheres in another study, Sheng et al. reported a step-by-step self-assembly strategy to form TiO2@MIL-101 double-shell hollow composites.73 As displayed in Fig. 7a, hollow TiO2 particles were prepared by hydrolysis of TBOT in the presence of a PS template in a similar way to the work of Wang et al.52 In order to deposit MIL-101 on the surfaces of the hollow TiO2 particles, the authors used 3-aminopropyl-triethoxysilane (APTES) and succinic anhydride to modify hollow TiO2 particles. In this way, the carboxylate terminated shell of the hollow TiO2 particles can coordinate with metal ions. After adding terephthalic acid (PTA), MIL-101 gradually self-assembled on the surfaces of the hollow TiO2 particles. After a period of time, TiO2@MIL-101 double shell hollow composites were obtained. Fig. 7b and c are TEM images of hollow TiO2 particles and TiO2@MIL-101, respectively, which clearly show that TiO2@MIL-101 double shell hollow particles contain a large number of spherical shells.
 Fig. 7  (a) The preparation process of hollow TiO2@MIL-101, (b) TEM image of hollow TiO2 particles and (c) TEM image of hollow TiO2@MIL-101. Reprinted from ref. 73 with permission. 
Choi et al. presented a sequential process to incorporate PdCo nanoparticles into hollow ZIF (HZIF) and hollow carbon spheres (HCS). As shown schematically in Fig. 8a, they initially deposited Co-ZIF (ZIF-67) on the surfaces of carboxylic acid functionalized PS spheres. Afterward, Pd2+ was loaded into the micropores of ZIF-67 by immersing PS@ZIF-67 in a methanolic solution of Na2PdCl4. Finally, a thermal treatment was carried out to convert the sample into hollow nanostructures. It is noticeable that the formation mechanism of the hollow structures lies in the decomposition of the PS core but not the decomposition of ZIF. Meanwhile, only some Co2+ ions from ZIF-67 were released to form PdCo nanoparticles at 400 °C. Accordingly, the product obtained at 400 °C was confirmed to be PdCo@HZIF. The cases at 600 and 800 °C were different, where the ZIF-67 shell can be completely carbonized so that PdCo@HCS (hollow carbon spheres) were obtained. The prepared PdCo@HZIF and PdCo@HCS exhibited excellent catalytic activity toward the reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) to 4-aminophenol (4-AP) as shown in Fig. 8b and c. Owing to the well-dispersed and confined ultrafine bimetallic PdCo nanoparticles in the HZIF support, PdCo@HZIF showed higher activity than PdCo@HCS-600/800. The authors also confirmed the synergistically bimetallic effect by comparing the results with those of Pd@HZIF.74 Taking advantage of a similar principle, Yang et al. coated Zn-ZIF (ZIF-8) on the surface of PS, yielding ZIF-8@PS, which can be converted into a Zn atomic catalyst supported on hollow N-doped carbon (Zn/HPC). The Zn/HPC exhibited excellent catalytic performance toward CO2 cycloaddition with epoxides.75 Recently, Tian et al. coated bimetallic (ZnCo) ZIF (ZIF-67/8) on the surface of PS. Owing to the evaporation properties of Zn at high temperature, the PS@ZIF-67/8 can be converted into an atomic cobalt catalyst supported on N-doped hollow porous carbon, which can activate selenium reactivity and immobilize selenium and polyselenides. The authors pointed out that the Zn/Co ratio in the precursors has a significant impact on the dispersionality of cobalt on the N-doped hollow porous carbon support. Only when the content of Co2+ in the metallic precursor was very low, a single atomic dispersed Co electrocatalyst was obtained. At a high concentration of Co2+, the product was Co nanoparticles dispersed on the N-doped hollow porous carbon support.76
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthetic procedures of PdCo@HZIF and PdCo@HCS. (b) UV/vis spectra obtained during the reduction of 4-NP to 4-ZP catalyzed by PdCo@HZIF-400. (c) First-order kinetic plots of the reduction reaction over PdCo@HZIF-400, PdCo@HCS-600, and PdCo@HCS-800. Reprinted from ref. 74 with permission. 
2.2.1.2 Other homopolymer particles as hard templates. 
In addition to polystyrene, some other homopolymers are widely used as hard templates to form hollow nanomaterials. Cai et al. successfully prepared Co-N@HCS using PMMA as a template. The synthesis route to Co-N@HCS mainly includes four steps, as shown in Fig. 9a. The synthesis involved PMMA@PDA nanospheres which were prepared by coating a uniform PDA shell on the surfaces of the PMMA nanospheres. Then, cobalt acetate was used as a cobalt source and coordinated with polydopamine. After calcination at high temperature, the PMMA template was decomposed, resulting in a hollow cavity. Polydopamine coordinated with cobalt was converted to Co-N@HCS.77 The authors demonstrated that the 3D porous sphere structure is favorable for enhancement of both oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) activity. The onset potential and the limiting diffusion current density for the ORR were checked to be ∼0.962 V (vs. RHE) and 5.55 mA cm−2, which are superior to those of the benchmark Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 9b). The smaller Tafel slope for the ORR (56 mV dec−1) suggested a faster rate-determining step for the ORR on Co-N@HCS compared to Pt/C (106 mV dec−1) and N@HCS (78 mV dec−1), as revealed in Fig. 9c. For the OER, the Co-N@HCS catalyst showed a lower potential (1.72 V vs. RHE) at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and the Tafel slope was as low as 81 mV dec−1 (Fig. 9d and e). The authors also further tested the stability of the Co-N@HCS catalyst, which was confirmed to show excellent methanol tolerance and remarkable long-term stability under working conditions.
 Fig. 9  (a) The synthesis route to Co-N@HCS. Electrocatalytic performance of Co-N@HCS toward the ORR (b and c) and OER (d and e). Reprinted from ref. 77 with permission. 
Chen et al. synthesized nitrogen-doped hollow mesoporous spherical carbon capsules (N-HMSCCs) using a dissolution–capture process based on polyacrylonitrile nanospheres (PANs) as a template. The principle of the synthesis is shown in Fig. 10a. Because of the electrostatic effect, the PAN surface adsorbed both TEOS and CTAB evenly. With the assistance of the sol–gel process, TEOS hydrolysis and polymerization occurred on the surface of the PAN nucleus, which directly resulted in the formation of a mesoporous SiO2 shell on the PAN core. The PAN core was removed by dissolving it in DMF. Interestingly, the dissolved PAN core would penetrate into the thin pipe of the mesoporous SiO2 shell to obtain PAN@SiO2 hollow nanospheres (PAN@SiO2-HNS). Finally, uniform mesoporous N-HMSCCs were obtained by etching the carbonated CPAN@SiO2-HNS in HF solution. The diameter and the shell thickness of the resulting N-HMSCCs were determined to be 165 and 15 nm (Fig. 10b). Benefitting from their high specific surface area (718 m2 g−1) and high N content (8.08%), N-HMSCCs exhibited a high specific capacitance (206.0 F g−1 at 1 A g−1) and excellent rate performance (61.5% capacitance retention) from 1 A g−1 to 10 A g−1 (Fig. 10c). After 3000 cycles at 5 A g−1, N-HMSCCs exhibited only 7.7% capacitance loss, indicating good cycling stability as EDLC electrode materials (Fig. 10d). The authors attributed such promising properties to their unique hollow structure, which contains both macropores and mesopores. The macropores can act as ion reservoirs, ensuring that the ions cannot be depleted at high rates, while the mesopores may promote ion transport by providing large access channels for electrolyte and ions.78
 Fig. 10  (a) The synthesis principle of N-HMSCCs. (b) TEM image of N-HMSCCs. Supercapacitive performance of N-HMSCCs: (c) specific capacitances at different current densities and (d) cycling stability at a current density of 5 A g−1. Reprinted from ref. 78 with permission. 
In order to prolong the cycle life and reversible capacity of potassium ion batteries (KIBs), Wu et al. developed a strategy to embed red P into N-doped porous hollow carbon nanofibers (P@N-PHCNFs). In their process, polycaprolactone (PCL) nanofibers were used as the template.79 Hollow polypyrrole (PPy) nanofibers were prepared by etching the PCL core. Then, through the chemical activation process with KOH, N-doped porous hollow carbon nanofibers (N-PHCNFs) were obtained. Finally, red P was infiltrated into N-PHCNFs by using the mesoporous structure of N-PHCNFs, and a red P@N-PHCNF composite was obtained. When used as the anode for KIBs, the P@N-PHCNFs exhibited high reversible capacity with a superior long cycle life as well as excellent rate capability. Through in situ TEM and ex situ XRD, the authors demonstrated that the P–C chemical bonds and the N doping were both favorable for alleviating the volume change during the charge–discharge process and K4P3 was formed at the end of discharge.


2.2.2 Two-component copolymers as hard templates. 
The copolymers prepared by polymerization of two different monomers or assembly of two polymers with different properties are called two-component copolymers. This section mainly introduces some two-component copolymers, such as RF, MF, PMV, and PSPAN, as templates for hollow structure materials.
Melamine formaldehyde resin (MF) derived from formaldehyde and melamine copolymerization has been demonstrated to be a versatile template for preparing hollow nanostructures. For example, using MF as hard template Choi et al. synthesized hollow SiO2, which can be further utilized to encapsulate metal nanoparticles. The preparation process involves several steps as shown in Fig. 11. MF core-in-SiO2 shell particles were prepared, and their exposure time to NH4OH solution was controlled. With the gradual dissolution of the MF core-in-SiO2 shell, a hollow SiO2 shell was obtained (Fig. 11a). The partially dissolved MF core-in-SiO2 shell was used as the template to encapsulate gold nanoparticles (Fig. 11b), which were adsorbed on the MF surface. When the MF core was completely dissolved, the gold nanoparticles adsorbed on the MF core surface were released to the inner surface of the SiO2 shell to obtain Au NPs-in-SiO2 shell particles.80
 Fig. 11  Schematics for (a) the formation of MF core-in-SiO2 shell particles with controllable core size and (b) the encapsulation of gold nanoparticles into the interior of the SiO2 shell. Reprinted from ref. 80 with permission. 
Similarly, Jiu et al. also used MF microspheres as templates for the synthesis of hollow MF@SiO2@Y(OH)CO3:Eu.81 Initially, the SiO2 layer was coated on the surface of the MF template by an improved Stöber method. Then, the MF@SiO2@Y(OH)CO3:Eu precursor was prepared by a simple homogeneous precipitation method. The hollow SiO2@Y2O3:Eu3+ mesoporous microspheres were obtained after treatment of MF@SiO2@Y(OH)CO3 at high temperature in air. In addition to MF, PMV (PMV = narrowly dispersed nanoparticles) was also used as a template candidate. Raza et al. put forward a route to synthesize BHHPs using PMV as a hard template as demonstrated in Fig. 12a. Monodisperse PMV nanoparticles were prepared by using maleic anhydride (MAH) and vinyl acetate (VAC) as monomers through a free radical precipitation copolymerization technique (Fig. 12b).82 Then, PMV@polymer core/shell particles were prepared with ANE (ANE = available biophenyl-propene trans-anethole) and MAH as precursors and DVB (DVB = divinylbenzene) as a crosslinking agent (Fig. 12c). After removing the PMV core with acetone as an etchant, hollow polymer particles were obtained. From the SEM and TEM images (Fig. 12b–d), the spherical shape and hollow structure of the particles can be clearly seen. Finally, the bio-based hydrolyzed hollow particles (BHHPs) with rich carboxyl groups were obtained by the surface hydrolysis of NH3·H2O and HCl. Fig. 12e shows that the morphology of the particles is still well preserved after hydrolysis.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic strategy for preparing ANE-based hollow polymeric particles; SEM images of (b) the PMV template, (c) core/shell particles, (d) hollow particles, and (e) BHHPs. The insets in parts d and e present TEM images of corresponding particles. The scale bars are 500 nm. Reprinted from ref. 82 with permission. 
Based on previous work, Raza et al. further combined amino-modified Fe3O4 nanoparticles and BHHPs to successfully obtain bio-based magnetic hollow particles (BMHPs).83 Fe3O4 particles were prepared by a co-precipitation method. After coating with APTES, amino-modified Fe3O4 NPs were obtained. Using EDC/NHS, amide moieties, amino-modified Fe3O4 NPs and BHHPs were obtained. Finally, amino-modified Fe3O4 NPs were successfully coated on the surfaces of the BHHPs to obtain BMHPs. Interestingly, Raza et al. developed a new synthetic strategy to attach chiral functional groups to hollow polymer particles and prepare four new materials.84 The same method was used to synthesize bio-based hollow polymer particles (BHPs). Following this step, BHPs were further modified with R-/S-PEA and R-/S-CHEA, respectively. Four types of optically active bio-based hollow particles were prepared: R-PEA-HPs, S-PEA-HPs, R-CHEA-HPs and S-CHEA-HPs.
Recently, the preparation of mesoporous hollow materials with solid polymer particles as templates has become more and more popular. For example, Fang et al. prepared double-shelled cage-like hollow carbon spheres (DCHCSs) using crosslinked polystyrene (CLPS) microspheres as templates (Fig. 13).85 The synthesis started from the preparation of CLPS microspheres by soap-free emulsion polymerization with styrene and divinylbenzene as monomers. Then, raspberry-like CLPS/SiO2 composite microspheres were obtained by sol–gel reaction with tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) as the precursor and ammonium hydroxide as the catalyst. A uniform PDA layer was coated on the surfaces of the CLPS/SiO2 composite microspheres to obtain CLPS/SiO2/PDA. Finally, carbonization was carried out at different temperatures, and the inner layer of the DCHCSs was formed, while the CLPS core decomposed to form a hollow cavity in which PDA formed the outer layer of the DCHCSs. As HF was used, it corroded the SiO2 particles, forming large mesoporous holes on the double-carbon shell layer, and DCHCSs were successfully prepared. As shown in Fig. 13b, the DCHCSs were clearly shaped into double-shell hollow structures with abundant mesopores on the shells. Obviously, the hollow core was formed by the releasing linear PS from the CLPS template, while the inner and out double shells originated from the cross-linked PS shell and the outmost PDA layer. As for the mesopores on the shell, they absolutely came from the cavities replaced from the SiO2 particles. The authors further applied the prepared DCHCSs as supercapacitor electrodes and the results reveal that DCHCS-800 (obtained at 800 °C) exhibited high specific capacitance (229.3 F g−1 at 1 A g−1) with outstanding rate capability (160 F g−1 at 10 A g−1) as shown in Fig. 13c. Significantly, an ultrahigh cycling performance was observed (100% retention after 10000 cycles, Fig. 13d), indicating a promising electrode candidate for high performance energy storage devices.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the route for the synthesis of DCHCSs. (b) TEM image of DCHCSs, and (c and d) electrochemical performance of DCHCSs as a supercapacitor electrode. Reprinted from ref. 85 with permission. 
Since the pioneering work of Lu's group on the preparation of resin formaldehyde (RF) via a modified Stöber method, many hollow nanostructures have been prepared using RF as a hard template.86 For example, Meng et al. prepared hollow mesoporous SiO2 particles using acid dissolvable RF particles as a template.87 Making use of the faster hydrolysis rate of 3-aminophenol/formaldehyde than that of TEOS, Song et al. proposed a one-pot sol–gel method to prepare hollow mesoporous SiO2 particles. In their process, the sol–gel process of 3-aminophenol/formaldehyde takes place first, forming the RF template. Afterwards, the formed RF particles will act as a template and substrate for the growth of SiO2 with the assistance of a surfactant, leading to uniform silica shells with mesostructures. Finally, the phenolic resin and residual surfactant could be removed by calcination, resulting in highly monodisperse hollow mesoporous silica spheres.88 Qi et al. synthesized thin/thick, single/double/triple-shell NiCo2O4 hollow microspheres using carboxy group terminated RF (RF-COOH) as a hard template (Fig. 14a).89 Initially, RF microspheres were synthesized from 2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid and formaldehyde as monomers; as RF microspheres contain a large number of –COOH and –OH functional groups, they can absorb Ni2+ and Co2+. Then, using deionized water as the solvent and at a heating rate of 2 °C min−1, thin single-shell NiCo2O4 hollow microspheres were prepared as shown in Fig. 14e. It is worth noting that in order to obtain thin double/triple-shell NiCo2O4 hollow microspheres, ethylene glycol is used instead of deionized water. As the radii of the hydrated nickel and cobalt ions are large, they cannot penetrate the RF microspheres. When the heating rate is controlled to 2 °C min−1 or 5 °C min−1, respectively, NiCo2O4 hollow microspheres with double shells (as shown in Fig. 14f) and triple shells (as shown in Fig. 14g) can be obtained by calcination at 550 °C. When the total precursor concentration of Ni2+ and Co2+ is increased from 0.05 to 0.1 M, hollow microspheres with thicker shells and higher porosity can be obtained (Fig. 14b–d). Similarly, Li et al. also used RF microspheres as a hard template to adsorb Ni2+/Co2+. By changing the Ni2+/Co2+ ion ratio in solution, triple shells of NiO, Co3O4 and their mixed oxide (Ni–Co–O) hollow spheres with different porosities were successfully obtained.90 Zhu et al. also used RF as the template with different cobalt/iron ratios to prepare porous cobalt–iron oxide spheres with different shells.91
 Fig. 14  (a) Formation process of multiple shell NiCo2O4 hollow microspheres. TEM images of (b) thick single-shell, (c) thick double-shell, and (d) thick triple-shell hollow microspheres. TEM images of (e) thin single-shell, and (f) thin double-shell, and (g) thin triple-shell hollow microspheres. Reprinted from ref. 89 with permission. 
2.2.2.1 Hollow two-component copolymers as hard templates. 
Similar to SiO2 templates, polymer templates can also be shaped into hollow structures. Using hollow polymer templates to synthesise other hollow materials especially carbon based materials, the subsequent core removal step can be omitted, simplifying the synthesis procedure. For example, Xu et al. provided a method for preparing porous hollow carbon nanospheres without sacrificing the template core.92 The preparation process involved the carbon precursor PACP hollow nanospheres, synthesized by the copolymerization of aniline and pyrrole, then carbonization in a mixed atmosphere of NH3/N2 to obtain nitrogen-enriched hollow carbon nanospheres (PN-HCNs). In addition, Yang et al. also synthesized N-enriched hollow polymer nanospheres (N-hPSs) with a mirror texture through the polymerization of aniline. The high number of N atoms in these nanospheres provides abundant lone pairs of electrons, resulting in a conducive environment for the adsorption of metal cations by N-hPSs. If the N-hPSs were immersed into cobalt nitrate solution for a period of time, abundant Co2+-containing species (Co2+/N-hPSs) were obtained after high temperature carbonization and pickling.93 Polyaniline/pyrrole hollow nanospheres were synthesized similarly by Chi et al. Addition of (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O as a Mo source and NaH2PO2·H2O as a P source produced a Mo–P polyaniline/pyrrole precursor. After carbonization of the latter, a MoP@NPC–H composite was obtained.94


2.2.3 Multicomponent copolymers as hard templates. 
Multicomponent copolymers are made of three or more components by polymerization or assembly. This section mainly introduces the strategy for preparing hollow structures with three-component copolymers as templates. Wang et al. made a composite called nitrogen-doped graphene/hollow PPy-nanospheres (NG/H-PPy). The synthesis is divided into three steps. Firstly, PMMA–PBMA–PMAA template particles were prepared by seed emulsion polymerization. Because the PMMA–PBMA–PMAA surface contains a large number of negative charge functional groups and hydrophobic functional groups, pyrrole can be easily polymerized on the template surface. Then, the hollow PPy nanospheres (H-PPy) were obtained by etching the template with DMF. Finally, the H-PPy was embedded in NG layer via a simple approach, leading to the formation of NG/H-PPy.95 Similarly, Xu et al. used PMMA–PBAA–PMAA as a template and coated a polypyrrole layer on its surface to prepare hollow polypyrrole spheres through a swelling effect. Then, the hollow polypyrrole spheres were combined with (NH4)2MoS4 by reflux. Finally, N-doped hollow carbon sphere coated MoS2 (NHCS@MoS2) nanocomposites were obtained after carbonization at high temperature.96
Polymers as hard templates show some superior characteristics over SiO2 hard templates. For one thing, polymers usually are rich in functional groups. These functional groups may have an excellent binding ability toward target precursors/materials. For example, there is no need to further modify polymer hard templates when preparing metallic oxide hollow nanostructures using polymers as hard templates. For another thing, the polymer template may also contribute carbon to the final product when we are aiming at preparing carbon based materials. There are also at least two disadvantages of polymer hard templates. First of all, most polymers are poor in mechanical strength, making the structure of the hard template not very stable. A common concern is the swelling of polymers in liquid media. Furthermore, the removal of polymer hard templates usually consumes plenty of organic solvents (such as toluene or DMF for PS) and energy (such as calcination at high temperature). These treatment procedures are not environmentally friendly and energy efficient.


2.2.4 Metal organic frameworks (MOFs) as hard templates. 
MOFs, also called coordination polymers which consist of metal ions/clusters and organic linkers, have been proved to be versatile precursors for synthesizing numerous functional materials. When serving as hard templates, MOFs show a superior binding ability to the precursors of target materials since the metallic organic compounds are often rich in functional materials, such as –NH2, –OH, –COOH, and heterocycles. As an important class of metallic organic compounds, metal organic frameworks (MOFs) have attracted increasing attention owing to both their inherent characteristics and their various derived functional materials. MOFs are traditionally regarded as unstable in aqueous solution since MOFs tend to hydrolyse to form metal ions and organic linkers. Taking advantage of this unique principle, Pan et al. presented a ZIF-8 (zinc based zeolitic imidazole framework) templated avenue to synthesizing double layer hollow manganese silicate (DHMS). The synthetic process is shown schematically in Fig. 15a. The authors started from the ZIF-8 hard template. In weakly alkaline medium, mesoporous SiO2 (mSiO2) was formed by the hydrolysis of TEOS and coated on the surface of ZIF-8. Owing to its amphoteric characteristic, ZIF-8 might be selectively etched. As a result, yolk–shell ZIF-8@mSiO2 nanoparticles would be yielded (Fig. 15b). With the reaction proceeding, the formed yolk–shell ZIF-8@mSiO2 nanoparticles might further act as hard templates and double layer mSiO2 was expected to be produced. By adding Mn(II) ions into the system, manganese silicate might be formed in situ on both the inner and outer surfaces of the mSiO2 layer with the complete etching of ZIF-8, giving DHMS (Fig. 15c).97 By adapting ZIF-8 with large sizes as hard templates, triple- and even multi-layer hollow nanostructures were expected to be formed, though the authors did not perform such research studies.
 Fig. 15  (a) Scheme for the synthesis process of DHMS. TEM images of (b) yolk–shell ZIF-8@mSiO2 and (c) DHMS. Reprinted from ref. 97 with permission. 
Utilizing the hydrolytic properties of Fe(III)-based MOFs (MIL-88(Fe)) to generate Fe(III), Chen et al. presented a modified hard template approach to prepare hollow PPy nanospindles (NSs), which is illustrated in Fig. 16a. In their approach, MIL-88(Fe) shaped into nanospindles (Fig. 16b), serving as a hard template, was initially synthesized by a reflux process in a mixture of ethanol and DMF. Afterward, the MIL-88(Fe) was dispersed in a mixed solvent of water and methanol. After adding pyrrole, the Fe3+ centers in MIL-88(Fe) would induce the polymerization of pyrrole to form PPy covered on the surface of MIL-88(Fe), while MIL-88(Fe) was gradually decomposed by the solvent water, resulting in hollow PPy nanospindles. In order to reveal the formation mechanism of hollow PPy NSs, the authors further carried out time-dependent experiments. Fig. 16c–e display the TEM images of hollow PPy NSs at different reaction times. At the initial stage of the reaction (1 h), the surface of MIL-88 turned translucent (Fig. 16c) compared to its original morphology (Fig. 16b), indicating the coverage of PPy on the surface. When the reaction time was prolonged to 3 h, holes could be found in the sample (Fig. 16d), indicating that the hydrolysis of the template MIL-88(Fe) occurred. Upon further prolonging the reaction time to 6 h, the hydrolysis of MIL-88(Fe) and polymerization of pyrrole further occurred. As a result, hollow structures were formed and the hollow structures were mainly made up of PPy shells (Fig. 16e). Owing to the reversibility of hydrolysis reaction of MIL-88(Fe), the template MIL-88(Fe) could not be decomposed completely. By dispersing the final PPy NSs in HCl solution, the residual MIL-88(Fe) could be completely removed. However, without residual MIL-88(Fe), the as-prepared PPy NSs could not retain their original shape. Interestingly, the residual MIL-88(Fe) played key roles in holding the shape of hollow PPy NSs.98
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis approach to hollow PPy NSs through a MIL-88(Fe) template. TEM images of MIL-88(Fe) (b) and the prepared hollow PPy NSs at different reaction times: 1 h (c), 3 h (d), and 6 h (e). Reprinted from ref. 98 with permission. 

2.3 Metallic (oxide) based hard templates
The metallic based particles described in this section include pure metal particles and metal oxide particles. Both solid metal particles and hollow metal particles can be used as hard template materials. The strategy for preparing hollow structures with solid metal particles as hard templates involves preparing metal particles on the shell first, and then removing the metal core by various etching methods to obtain the required hollow structures; the strategy for preparing hollow composite materials with hollow metal particle shells is relatively simple. The required composite materials are obtained by directly growing polymer or other metal particles on the surface of hollow metal.
Zhang et al. reported the method of synthesizing Ag–Pt hollow nanospheres by using Ag nanoparticles as a template.99 Ag+ ions were reduced to Ag nanoparticles in the presence of ascorbic acid. The synthesized Ag nanoparticles have chemical activity, which makes PtCl62− reduced on the surfaces of the Ag nanoparticles, forming a thin layer of tiny Pt nanoparticles. Due to the Kirkendall effect, the Pt layer grows with the continuous dissolution of Ag nanoparticles. Interestingly, the Ag+ and some PtCl62− produced by the reaction can also be reduced by ascorbic acid, making the Ag and Pt tiny nanoparticles get deposited on the shell together. Other particles of pure metal as templates have also been reported. For example, Marinakos et al. used gold nanoparticles as a template, the gold core was removed with KCN/K3[Fe(CN)6] solution, and then hollow nanoscopic polypyrrole and poly(N-methylpyrrole) caps were obtained.100 Chen et al. synthesized Ru hollow metallic nanoparticles with monodispersed Ni nanoparticles as a template, oleylamine and oleic acid as capping agents and HNO3 solution as an etchant.101 Guo et al. used hollow Pt nanostructures with Ag nanowires as sacrificial templates by current displacement reaction.102
Recently, much attention has been paid to developing hollow composites with multi-components for energy storage devices. Liu et al. developed a multi-step process to prepare a ternary composite, G/CNT/PANI. The detailed preparation process is shown schematically in Fig. 17a. The authors started from Ni nanowires which are utilized as a hard template for initial in situ growth of graphene to form G/Ni wires, which was followed by the deposition of Fe/Al2O3. The Fe/Al2O3 acted as a catalyst for the growth of CNTs. After growth of CNTs on the surfaces of the G/Ni wires, the hard template (Ni wire) was eliminated by etching. Accordingly, G/CNT hollow fibers were obtained. Finally, PANI was coated onto the G/CNT hollow fibers, yielding G/CNT/PANI. Owing to the hollow structures, the PANI (as electrochemically active species) can be easily functionalized on both the inner surface and outer surface of the G/CNTs, leading to a high mass loading (up to 90%) of PANI. As displayed in Fig. 17b–d, the G/CNT/PANI composite hollow fibers deliver more enhanced electrochemical performance than G/CNTs when used as supercapacitor electrodes. Interestingly, the specific capacitance and mass/charge transformation are dependent on the mass loading of PANI. Especially, under an optimized loading (84.5%) of PANI, the specific capacitance of G/CNT/PANI reached up to 472 mF cm−2. In addition, such G/CNT/PANI composite hollow fibers were further demonstrated to be efficient electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells with a high power conversion efficiency of 4.20%.103
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of G/CNT/PANI hollow fibers. (b–d) Electrochemical performance of supercapacitors based on G/CNT and G/CNT/PANI hollow fibers. (b) CV curves (scan rate of 10 mV s−1), (c) GCD curves (current density of 0.6 mA cm−2) and (d) Nyquist plots of the supercapacitors based on G/CNT/PANI hollow fibers with different mass loadings of PANI. Reprinted from ref. 103 with kind permission. 
Metal oxide particles have been widely used to prepare hollow structures. Among all metal oxides, an anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) template is very popular for synthesizing self-organized and highly ordered nanostructures owing to its unique advantages such as cost-efficiency, hardness, outstanding chemical/thermal stability, and easy preparation. By precisely controlling the anodization conditions such as the employed potential/current, type/concentration of electrolyte, pH, anodization duration and temperature, the porosity of AAO arrays can be well tailored.104 Yoo et al. synthesized SiO2 hollow nanorods using AAO as a hard template. The obtained SiO2 hollow nanorods were further demonstrated to be efficient in accommodating large strain stemming from the alloying reaction and preventing pulverization when employed as anode materials for lithium ion batteries.105 Samanta et al. prepared hollow poly(L-lactic acid) (PLLA) nanofibers using AAO as a hard template.106 Besides single component hollow nanostructures, some composite hollow nanostructures can also be obtained using AAO as a template. For example, Wang et al. produced CNT-encapsulated Sn nanoparticles with ∼100% particle encapsulation and high filling uniformity. As shown in Fig. 18a, the whole process involves three steps: deposition of SnCl4 on AAO, chemical decomposition of C2H2 to form CNTs, and removal of the AAO template by NaOH etching. It is noted that the concentration of SnCl4 affects the final product. Especially at a low concentration (0.4 M), the final product was Sn@CNT (Fig. 18b), while at a high concentration (1.0 M) the final product was Sn@C@CNT (Fig. 18c). The authors also pointed out that the introduction of the SnCl4 aqueous solution was critical for the formation of the final product structure. In order to prevent the CNT formation on the Al upper surface and inhibit the uniform uptake of the SnCl4, the SnCl4 aqueous solution should be introduced before CNT formation.107
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of Sn@CNT and Sn@C@CNT using AAO as a template. TEM images of Sn@CNT (b) and Sn@C@CNT (c). Reprinted from ref. 107 with kind permission. 
Similar to aluminium, zinc is also an amphoteric element, whose oxide is also often used as a hard template to synthesize some materials with desired shapes. For example, Zhang et al. reported a classic method for preparing hollow porous organic polymer materials using ZnO nanoparticles as a template and AlCl3 as a catalyst, and tetraphenyl porphyrin (TPP), tetrabiphenyl porphyrin (TBPP), or triphenylbenzene (TPB) was polycondensed on the surface of the template respectively. Three kinds of hollow porous organic polymers were obtained using HCl solution as an etchant. The synthesis schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 19a. These hollow polymers show much enhanced adsorption performance towards organic dyes (Rhodamine B) from aqueous solution. As displayed in Fig. 19b, we can find that the adsorption capacities of these non-hollow polymers are poorer than those of commercial activated carbon, while the hollow polymers are better than activated carbon. Especially, the dye solution became nearly colourless within 1 h when a hollow polymer based on TBPP (h-COP-P) was used as the adsorbent. The capacity of h-COP-P was further demonstrated to be as high as 460 mg g−1, which is about three times larger than that of the corresponding pristine POPs (COP-P). Obviously, such outstanding adsorption performance was ascribed to its unique hydrophobic hollow structure.108 In a similar way, Wang et al. prepared a hollow covalent organic polymer (h-COP-P) for removing organic dyes from water through the sulfonation process.109
 Fig. 19  (a) Formation process of hollow porous organic polymer materials. (b) Visible comparison of the adsorption performance of Rhodamine onto different polymer adsorbents. Reprinted from ref. 108 with permission. 
Wang et al. reported the successful synthesis of large-scale single-walled polypyrrole (PPy) nanotube arrays based on two-stepped electrodeposition followed by chemical etching using ZnO nanorod arrays as a hard template. The synthesis process involves several major steps as depicted in Fig. 20a. First, ZnO nanorod arrays attached on a conductive substrate were obtained by galvanostatic electrolysis of a solution containing Zn(NO3)2 and NH4NO3. The SEM image of the electrodeposited ZnO nanorod arrays is shown in Fig. 20b. The diameters of the ZnO nanorod arrays could be controlled by adjusting the electrodeposition time. Then ZnO@PPy core–shell nanorod arrays (Fig. 20c) were synthesized via electropolymerization of pyrrole on the surfaces of the ZnO nanorod arrays. Similarly, the thickness of the PPy layer could be controlled by adjusting the electropolymerization time. Finally, the ZnO nanorod array template was etched using ammonia (25%) to form PPy nanotube arrays (Fig. 20d). Additionally, the authors extended this technique to synthesise MnO2@PPy@MnO2 triple-walled nanotube arrays by sequential electrodeposition of MnO2, PPy, and MnO2 followed by etching removal of ZnO nanorod arrays. The middle layer of PPy in such a three-layered structure can not only act as a conductive bridge connecting the MnO2 shells but also be used as an efficient support facilitating the redox reactions in the active two-double MnO2 layer. When used as a supercapacitor electrode, the fabricated MnO2@PPy@MnO2 delivers a high specific capacitance of 379 F g−1 at the scanning rate of 5 mV s−1, which is superior to those of the MnO2 NTAS (277 F g−1) and PPy NTAS (250 F g−1). Meanwhile, a high energy density of a MnO2@PPy@MnO2 based symmetric supercapacitor device was confirmed to be −25 W h kg−1 at a power density of −37 kW kg−1.110 Also from the same research group, Pd–Pt hollow nanorods were further prepared through a similar layer-by-layer electrodeposition process. Interestingly, it is not necessary in this work to remove ZnO nanorods via chemical etching since they can be partly dissolved during the last electrodeposition process (electrodeposition of Pt). Benefitting from the synergistic effect of Pd–Pt bimetal, such Pd–Pt hollow nanorods exhibit enhanced photocatalytic activity for the electro-oxidation of a methanol and ethanol mixture. Additionally, the residual ZnO nanorods were demonstrated to promote the electrocatalytic performance of the Pd–Pt hollow nanorods.111
 Fig. 20  (a) Illustration for the synthesis of PPy nanotubes using ZnO nanorod arrays as a hard template. SEM images of the ZnO nanorod template (b), ZnO@PPy core@shell nanorods (c), and PPy nanotubes (d). Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission. 
In addition, iron oxide can also be used as a template. Yang et al. prepared hollow luminescent capsules composite (HMSC@GD2O3:Yb/TM) by the classical sacrificial template method (Fig. 21) using Fe3O4 as hard template.112 Firstly, the SiO2 layer was coated on the surfaces of Fe3O4 particles with different morphologies/sizes by a typical Stöber sol–gel route. Then, the core of Fe3O4 was removed with HCl solution, and well-dispersed hollow silicon capsules with a mesoporous layer were obtained. The last step is to coat the material with the luminescent particles (Gd2O3:Yb/TM).
 Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure for a HMSC@Gd2O3:Yb/TM composite. Reprinted from ref. 112 with permission. 
Yang et al. previously prepared HMSs@YBO3:Eu3+ by a similar process.113 Quoc Cuong Do et al. used Fe3O4 nanoparticles as a template, and Fe3O4@SiO2 yolk–shell structures were prepared by a modified Stöber sol–gel method and spontaneous self-transformation. Fe3O4@SiO2@Cu was obtained by modification of Cu nanoparticles.114 For example, Chen et al. prepared three types of ellipsoid hollow nanostructures with α-Fe2O3 as a template. An α-Fe2O3@SiO2@SnO2@TiO2 cocoon-like architecture was obtained by sequentially coating SiO2, SnO2 and TiO2 nanosheets from bottom to top. Finally, α-Fe2O3@SnO2@TiO2 was obtained by removing the SiO2 layer with HF solution. Similarly, an α-Fe2O3@TiO2 core–shell nanomaterial can be obtained by the same method, and anatase TiO2 hollow nanostructures can be obtained by removing α-Fe2O3 with oxalic acid.115 Lou et al. prepared double walled SnO2 nanococoons in a similar way. Consequently, TiO2 hollow colloids were prepared by a sacrificial template method.116,117
Manganese oxides can also be used as hard template materials. Using solid MnO2 microspheres as templates, Sun et al. prepared double layered hollow composite nanostructures, in which the inner layer is composed of dense MnO2 nanoneedles and the outer layer consists of a loose Zr-based coordination polymer (Zr–CP). Their synthetic process includes two major steps as illustrated in Fig. 22a. Initially, Zr–CP was coated on the surface of solid MnO2via the coordination effect of Zr(IV) ions and 2-methylimidazole, forming core–shell MnO2/Zr–CP. Afterward, EDTA-2Na was used to etch the inner core of MnO2, yielding hollow MnO2/Zr–CP (h-MnO2/Zr–CP). TEM images of the templates and intermediates are shown in Fig. 22b and c. The obvious hollow structure and regular spherical morphology of h-MnO2@Zr–CP can be seen from the TEM image in Fig. 22d.118 Considering the good binding ability of metal oxides toward various organic ligands, and using Mn3O4 nanoparticles as a template and dopamine as a carbon precursor, Lee et al. successfully prepared hollow carbon nanospheres through sequential surface coating, carbonization, and HNO3 etching. In their work, by incorporating galvanic replacement reaction, a series of metal nanocrystals were further deposited on the hollow carbon spheres.119
 Fig. 22  (a) Illustration of the process for fabricating hollow-shell structure h-MnO2@Zr–CP. TEM images of (b) a solid MnO2 microsphere, (c) a MnO2@Zr–CP core–shell microsphere, and (d) a h-MnO2@Zr–CP hollow-shell microsphere. Reprinted from ref. 118 with permission. 
In addition to solid metallic oxide-based particles, hollow metal oxide shells can also be used as hard templates. For example, Lu et al. proposed a simple method to prepare NMOHS hollow microspheres with MnO2 hollow microspheres as templates (Fig. 23).120 Firstly, MnO2 hollow microspheres and solid NaOH were mixed, ground and calcined at high temperature to obtain homogeneous Na0.7MnO2.05 hollow microspheres (NMOHS). Later, a chemical bath process was used to successfully coat polypyrrole (PPy) on the surfaces of the NMOHS to obtain an NMOHS@PPy composite. Such a designed composite material is expected to show several advantages when utilized as a cathode for sodium ion batteries. Firstly, the PPy coating layer boosts the electrical conductivity of the whole electrode. Secondly, the hollow structure can offer huge contact area with electrolyte, thus shortening the ion/electron diffusion path. Thirdly, the volume expansion and electrochemically active Mn dissolution may be efficiently prevented during the cycling. As a result, an excellent performance of the obtained cathode was achieved with a high capacity of 165.1 mA h g−1, a long cycle life (88.6% at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles), and outstanding rate capability (29.6 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1).
 Fig. 23  Schematic illustration for fabrication of NMOHS and NMOHS@PPy. Reprinted from ref. 120 with permission. 
Li et al. successfully coated ZnFe2O4 nanosheets on the surface of a ZnO hollow microsphere template after hydrothermal reaction of the template with a metal precursor solution and calcination at high temperature. Therefore, ZnO/ZnFe2O4 composites were prepared.121 Similarly, Kondratowicz et al. used hollow ZrO2 spheres as a template. The dispersion and chemical state of Pt nanoparticles on ZrO2 are much dependent on the employed deposition method. After calcination, Pt nanoparticles were deposited on the outer surfaces of the hollow ZrO2 spheres or dispersed in the whole shell, and Pt doped ZrO2 hollow spheres were successfully prepared.122
As discussed above, both the target shell coating and template core removal are critical for the formation of final hollow structures. In order to simplify the procedures and improve the production efficiency, the coexistence of shell coating and core etching might be preferred. Keeping the above consideration in mind, Wang et al. designed a strategy combining electrosynthesis of FeOOH nanotubes (NTs) and electro-etching of Co-based nanowire arrays (NWAs) to fabricate FeOOH-NTs deposited on carbon cloth (CC@FeOOH-NTs). The whole synthesis process is illustrated in Fig. 24.123 Initially, a hydrothermal procedure was applied to grow Co-based NWAs as hard templates on CC. Subsequently, FeOOH NTs were fabricated via a controlled electrosynthesis in FeCl2 aqueous solution at 1.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). During the electrosynthesis step, the Co-based NWAs were not etched directly and an intermediate (CoO) was confirmed to be formed. Consequently, electrosynthesis time is an important parameter for the formation of CC@FeOOH NTs. When the electrosynthesis time was 200 s, core@shell CoO@FeOOH was formed and the shell of FeOOH was shaped into a particulate. Though the authors failed to provide the reason for this transformation, we guess it can be explained as follows. Firstly, the Co-based NWAs (nanowire arrays) may be expected to be cobalt carbonate hydroxide since it is synthesized from Co2+ reacting with urea under hydrothermal conditions. Secondly, at the initial stage of electrosynthesis, the hydrolysis of Fe2+ results in an acidic environment. As a result, the Co-based NWA template can be easily converted into CoO. If the electrosynthetic time was extended to 400 s, the intermediate CoO can be dissolved owing to the decreased pH value of the system. By controlling the electrosynthesis time at 400 s, structure-defined FeOOH NTs could be uniformly grown on CC. However, upon further prolonging the electrosynthesis time to 600 s or 800 s, the newly formed FeOOH nanoparticles would fill in the inner sides of the tubes, leading to FeOOH–NT half filled and FeOOH nanorods (NRs). The authors further investigated the catalytic activity of the formed CC@FeOOH–NTs toward the oxygen evolution reaction. The result demonstrated that a low overpotential of 328 mV was obtained at 10 mA cm−2 with a small Tafel slope (42 mV dec−1) under optimized conditions. Besides acting as electrocatalysts, the formed CC@FeOOH–NTs could also offer high photocatalytic performance. Under visible light irradiation, the overpotential caused by the photo-excited charge carriers decreased to 280 mV and the current density increased to 16 mA cm−2. Such high catalytic performance was determined by the structural stability of the nanotubes’ morphology and phase conversion from β-FeOOH to amorphous.
 Fig. 24  Schematic illustration for the synthesis of FeOOH nanotubes on CC using Co-based nanowires as a hard template. Adapted from ref. 123 with permission. 
2.4 Carbonaceous materials as hard templates
In recent years, carbonaceous materials have been widely used as hard templates. Because the precursor materials used as carbon sources are abundant and affordable, carbonaceous materials are usually obtained by carbonizing some organic matter (such as sugars and polymers). The carbon template can also be removed by a simple one-step carbonization process. The surface of the carbon material contains a large number of functional groups, which can facilitate the construction of more complex morphological structures by electrostatic interaction.

2.4.1 Solid carbon as hard templates. 
Solid carbon as a hard template seems to be one of the best choices for the synthesis of single or bimetallic oxide hollow spheres.124 For example, Li et al. synthesized carbon microspheres (CMSs) by emulsion polymerization. Al-Stabilized CaO-based hollow microspheres were prepared on the basis of this template.125 The synthesis process is shown in Fig. 25. The good adsorption of Ca2+ and Al3+ on the template surface first occurs due to the strong electrostatic interaction. Subsequently, pores on the surfaces of the carbon microspheres may facilitate Ca2+ and Al3+ to penetrate into these template microspheres. Carbonaceous microspheres are calcined in air. This step is the key to the formation of double-shell hollow microspheres. Decomposition of carbonaceous microspheres during calcination and oxidation of Ca2+ and Al3+ may occur during the last step. Because of the different radially heated temperatures and the different shrinkage rates of the carbon particles compared to the oxidation rates of Ca2+ and Al3+, gradual decomposition of the carbon microsphere template occurs, resulting in double-shell Al-stabilized CaO-based hollow microspheres.
 Fig. 25  Graphical model of the formation process of the Al-stabilized double-shelled hollow CaO-based microspheres. Reprinted from ref. 125 with permission. 
Liu et al. used a slightly different method than the traditional one for obtaining metal precursors. Metal precursors wrapped in carbon spheres’ surfaces may be obtained by microwave irradiation technology. A metal sulfide continuous phase was prepared by this method.126 Besides single metallic oxides, bimetallic oxide hollow spheres could also be prepared via carbon templates. Wang et al. used carbon spheres (CSs) with smooth surfaces as hard templates, and a series of mixed metal oxide (MMO) porous hollow spheres, including ZnCo2O4, NiFe2O4, and ZnSnO3, were prepared by such an adsorption–calcination process.127 The schematic diagram (taking ZnCo2O4 as an example) of the synthesis of these mixed oxides is shown in Fig. 26. CS surfaces contain a large number of oxygen-containing functional groups (such as CO, COOH, and OH).128,129 The metal cations in these solutions were adsorbed on the CS surfaces by electrostatic interaction, and the precursor of the MMCSs was obtained, Finally, the CS template was calcined at high temperature to get mixed metal oxide (MMO) hollow spheres with uniform porous structures. Fig. 26b presents the SEM image of the obtained ZnCo2O4 hollow spheres, which had an average diameter of ∼200 nm. The authors also noted that the diameter of the ZnCo2O4 hollow spheres was demonstrated to be less smaller compared to the precursor (carbonaceous spheres adsorbed metal ions) owing to the slightly shrunken in the duration of post calcination procedure. By adjusting the size of the carbohydrate sphere templates and the solution concentration of metallic precursors, MMO hollow spheres with desired size and shell thickness may be obtained. Benefiting from their small size, ultrathin shells, and fine porous structure, these MMO hollow spheres possess high specific surface area, excellent mass/charge transport properties, and volume buffer capability. As revealed by Fig. 26c–f, these advantages are all beneficial for the hollow nanostructures to deliver high discharge capacitance, excellent rate performance, long cycle lives and high coulombic efficiency. Coincidentally, Zhou et al. prepared MCo2O4 multishelled hollow twin spheres (M = Mn, Ni, or Zn) by a similar process using carbon twin spheres as templates.130
 Fig. 26  (a) Synthesis of porous MMO hollow spheres (ZnCo2O4 as an example). SEM image (b) and electrochemical performance as a supercapacitor electrode (c–f) of ZnCo2O4. Reprinted from ref. 127 with permission. 


2.4.2 Mesoporous carbon as the hard template. 
Mesoporous carbon materials have high void ratios, large specific surface area, regular pore structures, strong mechanical stability, thermal stability and other beneficial physical and chemical properties. So ordered mesoporous carbon materials are also used as hard templates for preparing hollow structures. Zhang et al. used melamine and phytic acid (PA) as N and P sources; using self-assembly methods, supramolecular polymers were successfully coated with mesoporous hollow carbon spheres. Porous hollow carbon spheres (N,P-HCS) with mesoporous structures co-doped with N and P were obtained by calcining porous hollow carbon spheres with a mesoporous structure as shown in Fig. 27.131 Purwajanti et al. reported the synthesis of MgO hollow spheres using mesoporous carbon as the hard template. It is noted that their process is advantageous since the MgO hollow structures are formed via combustion in air during which the mesoporous carbon template can be easily eliminated simultaneously. The mesoporous hollow carbon spheres are promising as template materials.132
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the preparation process of N,P-HCS. Reprinted from ref. 131 with permission. 


2.4.3 Carbon shell as a hard template. 
A carbon shell is also one of the most direct hard templates for synthesizing hollow materials. Yuan et al. fabricated a beautiful hollow NiCo2O4/HCS flower-shaped composite using hollow carbon spheres (HCS) as hard templates.133 The whole synthesis diagram is shown in Fig. 28a. First, cobalt acetate and nickel acetate were added to form the NiCo precursor which was coated on the surfaces of the HCS by electrostatic interaction and water heat treatment. Finally, a NiCo2O4/HCS hollow microflower composite was formed by calcining under different atmospheres. The SEM image of these microflower composites is shown in Fig. 28d. The shape of this material is shown in the SEM image of the HCS and NiCo precursors (Fig. 28b and c). It is found that the two materials have regular morphologies as a result of carbon shells as hard templates.
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of NiCo2O4/HCS. SEM images of (b) HCS, (c) the NiCo/HCS precursor and (d) NiCo2O4/HCS microflowers. Reprinted from ref. 133 with permission. 
Interestingly, there is great interest in hollow structures with novel morphologies and compositions. Wang et al. reported an in situ oxidative polymerization approach; three-dimensional (3D) hollow capsules/polyaniline (GCs/PANI) were synthesized from protonic PANI modified on the surface of the GC template.134 First of all, there are a large number of oxygen-containing functional groups on the surfaces of the GCs, and aniline is more likely to be adsorbed on the surfaces of the GCs during the reaction in an ice bath. Then dopants and oxidants are added, and the aniline begins to polymerize in situ. Due to the strong electron interaction and hydrogen bonding, three-dimensional (3D) hollow composites were obtained.
From the above discussions, it is concluded that hard templates are one of the most versatile tools for the formation of hollow nanostructures. Despite their high reliability and numerous hard templates available, different hard templates may have different advantages/disadvantages, which are summarized in Table 1. As a result, one should consider more factors when deciding to employ hard template methods. It should be noted that there may be other hard templates for preparing hollow nanostructures which are not mentioned here, such as inorganic salts and natural materials. Readers who are interested in these studies are encouraged to refer to specific studies.135–141
Table 1 Summary of the advantages and disadvantages of some typical hard templates




Hard template
Advantages
Disadvantages




SiO2
Low cost of precursors, easy preparation, high mechanical strength, tolerance to most acids
Not suitable for preparing materials in moderately/strongly alkaline environments, removal consumes HF, NaOH, or other agents


Polymers
No surface modification needed in most cases, high binding ability toward target materials/precursors, easy removal
Poor mechanical strength, consumes plenty of organic solvent or energy in the removal step


Metal nanoparticles
Highly stable, excellent mechanical strength
Most metal templates are noble metals, lack surface functional groups to bind to organic precursors


Carbon
A wide range of available raw materials
The removal step often needs calcination


Metal oxides
Easy synthesis and wide application in forming hollow polymer/carbon
Most are not stable in acidic environments and may cause secondary environmental pollutants after removal since they are mostly transition/heavy metals





3 Soft template method
The soft template method is another most common method to prepare materials with hollow structures. This method offers hollow materials of different sizes as the hollow size may be controlled by the size of the soft template. In the soft template method, emulsions, micelles/vesicles and bubbles are usually used as templates. The soft template is easily affected by various external parameters, such as the pH value, temperature, solvent, ionic strength and concentration of inorganic additives. The hollow structure material can be obtained after removing the template. Compared with the hard template, the soft template is easy to remove, avoids the collapse and damage of the target material structure caused by the template removal, and avoids the use of a highly corrosive etchant which is relatively safe.
3.1 Bubbles as soft templates
The preparation process using air bubbles as soft templates to synthesize hollow structures generally includes three steps: firstly, the generation of bubble templates, which could be achieved by chemical reactions in the system, injecting gas, and other strategies; secondly, the deposition/adsorption of precursors around the bubbles to further grow/aggregate into target materials; and finally, the removal of the bubble template to generate hollow target materials. In this section, we will discuss the application of bubble templates in synthesizing hollow nanostructures based on the generation principle of bubbles.
Chemical reactions that produce bubbles are relatively common and represent a simple way to make soft templates.142 In 2017, Chen et al. tried to use hexamethylenetetramine (HMT) as the bubble source and prepared a honeycomb-like hollow microsphere architecture.143 In a bubble-bath reaction system, HMT was chemically decomposed at a temperature of 130 °C to produce a large amount of CO2. Subsequently, transition metal (TM) ions (Ni2+, CO2+, and Mn2+), acetic acid and the produced CO2 interacted to deposit Ni0.25Co0.1Mn0.65CO3 around CO2 bubbles. After several hours of mutual adsorption nucleation, the Ni0.25Co0.1Mn0.65CO3 microspheres were continuously grown. Finally, a honeycomb-hollow Li1.2Mn0.52Ni0.2Co0.08O2 microsphere cathode material was obtained after chemical lithium reaction. This green, simple bubble-bath reaction not only controls the size of the microspheres but also prevents metal ions (Na+, K+, etc.) from entering the final product. Sun et al. provided a method for the synthesis of hollow structures using NH3 as the bubble template, which was generated by the decomposition of urea under hydrothermal conditions.144 In their work, monoclinic scheelite (M-BiVO4) octahedral crystals were initially synthesized by a simple hydrothermal method. Owing to the presence of NH3 in the system, M-BiVO4 crystals tended to attach to the surfaces of the NH3 bubbles in a directional manner which kept growing. After a duration of Ostwald ripening, M-BiVO4 compact hollow spheres were formed.
In addition to single gas bubbles, mixed gas bubbles can also serve as soft templates. For example, Ding et al. successfully prepared MIn2S4 (M = Cd, Zn, Ca, Mg, Mn) yolk–shell as shell or hollow spheres using CO2/NH3 bubbles as the template.145Fig. 29 shows the formation mechanism of the hollow structure. M2+ and In3+ can react with biomolecule glutathione (GSH) to form a relatively stable metal complex M–GSH in which glutathione plays a key role in the reaction system, not only as a bubble template source but also as a sulfur source. Then, due to the pyrolysis reaction, a large number of M and In sulfide nuclei are unstable and MIn2S4 crystals are formed. With the increase of temperature, GSH undergoes chemical reaction and decomposes to produce CO2/NH3 bubbles. Finally, due to the high surface energy of the MIn2S4 nanocrystalline structure, its aggregation on the formed bubble template, the continuous aggregation process and the subsequent growth process lead to the formation of MIn2S4 yolk–shell or hollow spheres.
 Fig. 29  Illustration of the formation of ternary sulfide hollow and yolk–shell microspheres. Reprinted from 145 with permission. 
Besides CO2 and NH3, other gases can also be used as templates for particle aggregation. For example, Zhang et al. used oxidized formaldehyde (HCHO) bubbles after pyrolysis of C6H12N4 as a soft template. The hollow ZnCo2O4 microspheres were successfully prepared by self-assembling orderly stratified microspheres using the Ostwald ripening mechanism.146 Li et al. used the visible light catalysis method and used Ni2+ as a bubble source to control the wavelength and intensity of visible light at room temperature. They successfully created Nih–QD hollow nanospheres using the in situ generated hydrogen bubbles as the template.147 By a hydrothermal method, Wang et al. reduced N2H4 and VO3− ions in alkaline solution to produce a large number of N2 bubbles. Ring-like VO2(M) was successfully prepared using N2 bubbles as the soft template.148
Besides chemical reactions generating bubbles, gas injection is another effective method to provide bubble templates. Han et al. synthesized hollow CaCO3 particles using the bubble template by the gas injection method.149 In their work, CO2/N2 bubbles are pumped into CaCl2 solution, resulting in the formation of a white precipitate. The resulting white precipitate accumulates on the bubble surface and forms the initial shell. With the gas mixture continuously bubbling, Ca2+ and CO32− continue to combine and deposit on the outer surface of the original shell, resulting in an increase of shell thickness. During the process, the pH of the solution keeps decreasing owing to the increasing concentration of CO2 in the system since the CO2 consumption rate is slower than its injection rate. When the pH value reaches 7.5, the reaction ends and hollow CaCO3 particles are obtained.150 Tomioka et al. prepared hollow CaCO3 particles by a similar method and studied their synthesis mechanism, which includes the following processes.151 First, amorphous CaCO3 forms a precipitate with the drum of CO2 and becomes primary particles. At pH 9.1, the primary particles are converted into secondary particles, resulting in turbidity of the solution. The secondary particles then form the original shell, where the pH of the solution decreases rapidly as CO2 is continuously pumped in, forming a highly dense shell on the surface of the original shell. As the shell grows, the inside amorphous particles rapidly dissolve, and new particles are precipitated and attached to the shell. At this point, the volume of the sphere shrinks, forming a hollow structure. Finally, when the pH value is lower than 7.5, the content of Ca2+ in the solution increases. This is because the content of carbonic acid in the solution increases, and the secondary particles dissolve again to form a clear hollow shell structure.
In addition to chemical reaction and gas injection, there may be other techniques available to generate bubbles. For example, with the help of an ultrasonic generator, Shchukin et al. prepared polyelectrolyte microcapsules on the surfaces of air microbubbles and realized the assembly of multiple electrostatic layers of polyelectrolytes.152 Yan et al. used a laser induced bubble template to synthesize hollow Al2O3 micro/nanoparticles.153
3.2 Micelles/vesicles as soft templates
Surfactants with a hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic tail can form some ordered aggregates, such as vesicles, and micelles by self-assembly in aqueous solution. These formed vesicles and micelles are often flexible in structure, so they are usually referred to as soft templates when used to synthesize hollow structures. To date, some infusive progress has been achieved in constructing hollow nanostructures using vesicles or micelles as soft templates. Ding et al. prepared a polypeptide grafted with a polycation precursor. Subsequently, the precursor formed cationic vesicles in phosphate buffer solution (PBS). The hydrophilic DOX·HCl was encapsulated within cationic vesicles as carriers. These DOX·HCl loaded vesicles have a good pH control release ability.154 There is no doubt that this kind of cationic vesicle is also a template material with an excellent hollow structure. Both the interaction between surfactants and the molecular structure have a significant impact on the structure of the hollow material.155 Luo et al. chose anionic surfactants with opposite molecular configurations, aerosol OT (AOT) and sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate (SDBS) to form vesicles. The formed AOT/SDBS vesicles can act as soft templates for preparing hollow Cu2O nanoparticles. Their synthetic process can be broadly divided into 3 steps as illustrated in Fig. 30. Initially, owing to their opposite molecular geometries, the AOT and SDBS geometrically optimized vesicles by a self-assembly process. Afterward, Cu2+ complexes will be enriched on the surfaces of the AOT/SDBS vesicles through the electrostatic interaction. Finally, by adding ascorbic acid (AA) to a solution of AOT/SDBS/Cu-complex, Cu2O crystal nuclei will be formed in situ at the surfaces of the vesicles.156
 Fig. 30  Schematic illustration for the synthesis of Cu2O hollow nanospheres via AOT/SDBS soft templates. Reprinted from ref. 156 with permission. 
Kim et al. studied the synthesis strategies of different monomer vesicles, which were concurrent loading and diffusion loading.157 The synthetic process is shown in Fig. 31a, in which the method of concurrent loading, controlling the ratio of anionic and cationic surfactants to the hydration of acrylic monomers. Then, in the presence of photoinitiators, the precursor was irradiated with ultraviolet light, and then polymerization occurred to form vesicle template nanocapsules. Finally, the surfactant scaffold was removed by washing with methanol. A similar method is the diffusion loading used for the synthesis of hollow structural materials. The monomers were added to the prepared vesicles in aqueous solution (Fig. 31b) and were diffused into the hydrophobic interior of the bimolecular layer through water. Similarly, Dergunov et al. also used vesicles formed by anionic and anionic surfactants and organic monomers as templates, to build vesicle-templated porous polymer nanocapsules.158
 Fig. 31  Schematic representation of the synthesis of polymer nanocapsules: (a) concurrent loading and (b) diffusion loading. Reprinted from ref. 157 with permission. 
During the last few years, doped carbon materials have been demonstrated to be promising functional materials in many areas such as catalysis and energy storage.159–162 Xu et al. adopted the micelle template method to prepare nitrogen-doped double-shelled hollow mesoporous carbon spheres (N-DHMCSs) as depicted in Fig. 32a.163 Firstly, anionic block copolymer poly(acrylic acid) (PS-b-PAA) micelles as a soft template, tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) as a silicon source, and dopamine (DA) as a carbon and nitrogen source were mixed to obtain PS-b-PAA/DA/silica colloidal spheres. Then, after high temperature calcination and etching processes, hollow double shell structures with high specific surface area were obtained. The authors further demonstrated that the final carbonization temperature has a significant impact on the content as well as the chemical state of doped N in the N-DHMCSs, as displayed in Fig. 32b. Owing to the poor stability of pyridinic N and pyrrolic N, high temperature was not favorable for the formation of these two state doped N, leading to a content decrease of pyridinic N and pyrrolic N in the product with the increase of temperature. As for quaternary N and oxidized pyridinic N, they remained hardly changed when varying the temperature. The impact of doped N atoms on the electrochemical performance of carbon materials is very complicated. Usually the pyridinic N and pyrrolic N are able to improve the electrochemical performance of carbon due to their pseudocapacitive behaviors, while quaternary N is considered to enhance the conductivity of carbonaceous materials. After experimental investigation, they revealed that N-DHMCSs-800 (product obtained at 800 °C) exhibited superior performance over N-DHMCSs-700 and N-DHMCSs-900 when used as anode materials for lithium ion batteries in terms of specific capacity, rate capability and cycling performance (Fig. 32c and d).
 Fig. 32  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of nitrogen-doped double-shelled hollow mesoporous carbon spheres (N-DHMCSs). (b) Contents of four doped N in N-DHMCSs obtained at different temperatures. (c) Rate capability and (d) cycling performances of N-DHMCSs obtained at different temperatures. Reprinted from ref. 163 with permission. 
Cho et al. used CBABC type poly(lactic acid-co-glycolic acid)-b-poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly(propylene oxide)-b-poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly(lactic acid-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA-b-PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO-b-PLGA) pentablock copolymer micelles as soft templates. Hollow mesoporous ethane-silica and benzene-silica nanospheres were successfully prepared by controlling the acidity of the solution and the hydrophobic block length of the copolymer micelles.164 Wei et al. used polymer micelles coordinated with manganese ions as soft templates; silica was coated on the surface of the template and calcined to prepare manganese oxide nanoparticles in their caves (MnxOy@HMSNs).165
It is noted that organic surfactants often have complicated behaviors in solutions which are much dependent on their concentration. Besides forming micelles, surfactants can also self assemble into reverse micelles. Different from micelles, the hydrophobic chains of reverse micelles usually form the inner layer, while the hydrophilic heads form the outer layer. Recently reverse micelles have also been demonstrated to be versatile soft templates for synthesizing numerous nanomaterials. Zhao et al. synthesized sub-100 nm hollow carbon nanospheres in a unique reverse micelle system. Their preparation process includes several steps. Initially, the reverse micelles allowed the formation of uniform sub-100 nm SiO2 nanospheres (∼20–50 nm) through the spatial confinement of the reaction. Afterwards, the resorcinol and formaldehyde were introduced to form an RF resin coating on the SiO2 nanosphere with the assistance of ammonia. RF is a popular carbon precursor that can be post-transformed into a carbon shell by calcination in a N2 atmosphere. Innovatively, the authors coated an additional SiO2 layer to prevent the sintering of RF@SiO2 core/shell nanospheres before thermal treatment. Finally, the SiO2 (both the core and outer layer) was etched using diluted NaOH solution. By adjusting the amount of resorcinol in the presence of excessive formaldehyde, the thickness of the carbon shell may be tuned from ∼3.9 to 10.2 nm. It is noticeable that SiO2 acted as a hard template in this work to form hollow carbon, but the role of the reverse micelles cannot be ignored. For one thing, the reverse micelles provided a spatial confinement for the formation of SiO2, leading to uniform SiO2 nanospheres. For another thing, utilizing the reverse micelle system, the sol–gel chemistry of RF resin became highly controllable, allowing the further coating of a SiO2 layer. Consequently, hollow carbon nanospheres with unprecedented shell thickness and a hollow cavity can be obtained.166 Making use of a similar principle, Zhao et al. extended such a reverse micelle approach to prepare some composite hollow nanostructures including Pt@TiO2 yolk@shell composites and Pt@FeOx confined in SiO2 nanoshells, and these composite hollow nanostructures were demonstrated to be excellent catalysts for some reactions such as water–gas shift and CO oxidation.167,168 The unique hollow structure produced confined highly concentrated active species, so the duration of the catalysts may be greatly prolonged. Such an effect is also obtained in other cases such as electrocatalysis and photocatalysis.169–175
3.3 Emulsions as soft templates
Besides vesicles and bubbles, emulsions are also efficient soft templates for synthesizing hollow nanostructures. An emulsion is a dispersive system consisting of water, surfactants, and oil (organic solvent). Koshino et al. provided an emulsion-directing method for producing controlled PMMA hollow particles. The experimental steps for the preparation of size controlled PMMA hollow particles are shown in Fig. 33. Firstly, the MMA monomer and AAPH initiator were added into perfluoromethylcyclohexane (PFMCH) aqueous emulsion. Since MMA and PFMCH are not miscible with each other, MMA was adsorbed on PFMCH droplets. Under ultraviolet light, MMA began to polymerize in the presence of the initiator (AAPH) under ultraviolet light irradiation, forming PFMCH@PMMA composite nanoparticles. The PFMCH core disappeared after hydrothermal reaction for a period of time, and size-controlled PMMA hollow particles were successfully prepared.176 Interestingly, the control of PMMA particle size is embodied in the PFMCH emulsion droplet template. By changing the steps of tandem acoustic emulsification, different sizes of PFMCH emulsion droplets can be obtained. Ji et al. provided a method to prepare hollow structures using an O/W/O multiple emulsion template. Using poly(amic acid) salt (PAAS) aqueous solution as a water phase and liquid paraffin (LP) as an oil phase, and by adjusting the contents of OP-10 and Span-80, porous polyimide hollow microspheres with different sizes and morphologies can be obtained.177 Shen et al. successfully prepared hollow silica spheres (PSM0.1D-T3-C) by using PS emulsions as soft templates and after calcination.178
 Fig. 33  Schematic illustration of the experimental procedure for synthesis of PMMA hollow nanoparticles. Reprinted from ref. 176 with permission. 
Different from hard template approaches, soft template ones usually show advantages in removal of templates. In most cases, the soft templates can be easily eliminated via gentle evaporation or dissolution with appropriate solvent. It should be noted that there are at least two disadvantages for soft template methods. On one hand, soft templates, as the name defines, lack mechanical strength to ensure the final shape of the final products. On the other hand, the removal of soft templates may consume plenty of organic solvents, which may not be preferred in environmental protection.
4 Self-template methods
In view of complicated procedures and high cost involved in hard/soft template approaches, scientists realized that if solid materials could be directly converted into hollow structures by orientation etching, the controlled fabrication of hollow nanostructures will be feasible. Accordingly, the concept of self templates came into being in the synthesis of hollow nanomaterials.179 The largest difference between hard templates and self templates lies in that the template might be completely sacrificed in hard template systems, while the materials of the final hollow shell can be the same as the template or derivatives of the template in self template systems. Early in 2004, Yin et al. pioneered a series of cobalt based oxide/chalcogenide hollow nanostructures via reaction of cobalt nanocrystals with oxygen and either sulfur or selenium.180 Since then, much progress has been made in the self template approach to hollow nanostructures.
Anisotropic properties refer to the phenomenon that some materials exhibit different properties in different directions owing to their specific atomic arrangements in three dimensional space. The anisotropic properties of nanocrystals are widely applied in the catalysis area since different facets of nanocrystals may show different activities toward given reactions and different binding abilities toward given reactants or intermediates or products. Inspired by this principle, Elias and co-workers designed a self template approach to synthesize single crystal ZnO nanotubes. As displayed in Fig. 34 top, the procedure started from ZnO nanowires supported on a TCO substrate, which could be easily obtained by electrodeposition of ZnO nanowire arrays from the O2 reduction in an aqueous solution of zinc chloride (ZnCl2) and potassium chloride (KCl) at a charge density of 2.5 or 10 C cm−2. Selective etching of the core of the ZnO nanowires to form ZnO nanotubes was further achieved by immersing the TCO substrate covered with ZnO nanowires into KCl aqueous solution. A series of control experiments revealed that the concentration of KCl has a significant impact on the dissolution of the ZnO nanowire core. The conversion mechanism of the ZnO nanowires into ZnO nanotubes could be explained as follows. The two appositively charged polar surfaces of the ZnO nanowires are terminated by Zn2+ and O2− on the (0001) and (000) facets, which preferably adsorb anions and cations, respectively. Owing to neither Zn2+ nor O2− terminated, the (100) facet is expected to be very stable in KCl solution. As a result, Cl− preferably adsorbs on the (0001) facet of the ZnO nanowire, forming ZnCl+. When the Cl− concentration reaches a critical value, the (0001) facet might be etched. In this work, the authors found that the conversion of ZnO nanowires to ZnO nanotubes can be achieved only when the concentration of KCl is above 1 M. As displayed in Fig. 34 bottom, it was seen that the ZnO nanotubes maintained the same outer diameter as the ZnO nanowire template. At a low concentration of KCl, the ZnO nanowires were only particle dissolved. Upon increasing the concentration of KCl, the wall of the ZnO nanotube became thin. Additionally, the etching time and temperature also have an impact on the formation of ZnO nanotubes. Especially, the etching degree could be controlled by adjusting the reaction temperature and time.181
 Fig. 34  (Top) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of ZnO nanotubes using ZnO nanowires as self-templates. (Bottom) SEM images of the as-deposited ZnO nanowires (a) and (b–d) those immersed in different [KCl] aqueous solutions (1, 2, and 3.4 M, respectively) for 8 h at 80 °C. Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission. 
Xu et al. developed a coordination-assisted dissolution method to convert ZnO nanorods into ZnO nanotubes. The major steps in the synthesis process are illustrated in Fig. 35a. Firstly, ZnO nanorods were deposited on an ITO substrate via electrodeposition of an aqueous solution of Zn(NO3)2, NH4Ac, and ethylenediamine (EDA) at an applied potential of −1.2 V vs saturated calomel electrode (SCE). Subsequently, an electro-etching procedure was performed in the EDA aqueous solution using the ITO substrate covered with ZnO nanorods as a working electrode, SCE as a reference electrode and a platinum plate as a counter electrode. In order to reveal the etching mechanism, some control experiments were carried out. The results indicated that EDA played a vital role in the formation of ZnO nanotubes. For one thing, only a narrow range of EDA concentrations is suitable for the formation of ZnO nanotubes. In the absence of EDA or at a low dosage of EDA, no ZnO nanotubes can be obtained. The high concentration of EDA leads to a high pH value of the system, which is beneficial for the dissolution of the ZnO nanorods. The dissolution mechanism could be described as the following equations:(CH2NH2)2 + 2H2O → (CH2NH3+)2 + 2OH−ZnO + 2OH− + H2O → Zn(OH)42−
 Fig. 35  (a) Schematic illustration for etching ZnO nanorods to nanotubes with the assistance of EDA. SEM images of ZnO nanorods (b), and ZnO nanotubes by etching nanorods for different reaction times: 2 h (c), 5 h (d), 10 h (e), and 15 h (f). Adapted from ref. 182 with permission. 
For another thing, the authors found that EDA preferably coordinates with ZnO on the {110} facets rather than the (0001) ones. Meanwhile, the (0001) surfaces preferably adsorb OH– anions, which is similar to Elias’ result. As a result, the etching rate in the center of the ZnO nanorod (0001) surface is much faster than that at the edge of the (0001) surface, leading to the selective dissolution of ZnO along the c-axis to form ZnO nanotubes. It should be pointed out that the OH− anions may compete with EDA to adsorb onto the lateral surface to dissolve the walls of the ZnO nanotubes. This consideration requires precise control over the concentration of EDA in the system. In addition, they also indicated that the applied potential was also important for perfecting ZnO nanotubes. Especially, small positive bias was favorable for the production of smooth ZnO nanotubes, while negative bias may cause some electrochemical reaction in the system to accelerate the dissolution of ZnO nanorods, resulting in less tubular structures. By precisely controlling the etching time, ZnO nanotubes with controlled wall thicknesses and tube depths can be obtained at 0.1 M concentration of EDA under a bias of −0.2 V vs SCE (Fig. 35b–f).182
However, the above mentioned selective etching along the designed direction may not suitable for some materials with highly symmetric shapes which showed no obvious anisotropic properties toward the given etching reaction, such as spherical particles. Furthermore, it is not easy to control the etching rate on the surface lower than that at the center. Consequently, surface protected etching emerged to make sure that the hollow process of solid materials would not destroy the surface shell. Representatively, Liu et al. proposed a surface-protected etching method to prepare hollow Ag nanocrystals using solid Ag nanocrystals as precursors. In their approach, a minor amount of Pt was deposited on the surfaces of the Ag nanocrystals, so that the chemical stability of the Ag nanocrystal surface was enhanced. When immersing the modified Ag nanocrystals into strongly oxidative etchants such as H2O2, the etching reaction could only occur in the center of the Ag nanocrystal and the surface could survive, leading to hollow Ag nanostructures. Experimentally, they successfully obtained both Ag hollow spheres and Ag hollow nanotubes. Unfortunately, they failed to research the removal of external added Pt on the Ag surface, though the existence of Pt may improve the properties of Ag hollow nanostructures, such as distinctive optical properties.183
Pan et al. generalized a surface PVP protected etching process to prepare hollow metal oxides (h-MO) from solid colloidal metal oxides (c-MO), as shown in Fig. 36a. The surfaces of the hydrophilic and amorphous c-MO are rich in hydroxyl, which can bond with carboxyl groups from PVP. The coating of PVP on the surfaces of the c-MO makes the exterior of the c-MO more stable than the interior to corrosive etchants, such as alkaline media. As a result, on etching treatment, the hollowing process preferably occurs in the interior rather than the exterior of the spherical c-MO, leading to the formation of h-MO. Taking h-Al2O3 as an example, the shell thickness of the final h-MO can be adjusted by controlling the etching time as shown in Fig. 36b–d. They also extended this general surface-protected etching process to ZnO hollow spheres.184
 Fig. 36  Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure for h-MO by surface-protected etching of c-MO (a). TEM images of time-dependent h-Al2O3 samples obtained by etching c-Al2O3 with NaOH solution: 1 (b), 3 (c), and 5 min (d). Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission. 
Utilizing the different solubilities of mono-/multi-nuclear complexes in different solvents, Yang et al. presented an innovative dialysis strategy for synthesizing hollow complex nanoparticles without the addition of templates. The synthetic process includes two steps. The iridium complex was initially dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Afterwards, the complex was exposed to aqueous solution for dialysis. The formation of hollow structures was concluded to be driven by self-assembly. As shown in Fig. 37, owing to the low solubility of the complex in water and the low surface energy of the nanoparticles, Ir–Dy hollow nanoparticles were first self-assembled at the interface between DMSO during the dialysis process. Meanwhile, the exchange of water and DMSO may occur, leading to the precipitation on the inner-shell and outer-shell of the hollow nanoparticles. As a result, hollow nanostructures would be formed with increase of the thickness.185 Using a similar principle, the authors also prepared Ho(III)–Ir(III) hollow bimetallic complex nanoparticles.186
 Fig. 37  Schematic mechanism of a dialysis approach to complex hollow nanoparticles. Reprinted from ref. 185 with permission. 
Compared to hard and soft template methods, self template ones do not require pre-synthesis of template in most cases. Meanwhile, heterogeneous coating to form core–shell structured intermediates are also not needed for self template methods.
5 Template-free methods
Although the template method plays an important role in the manufacture of hollow structures, it faces challenges due to its relatively complex template preparation steps. The free-templating method seems to be more popular than template methods. Here we have to point out that template free is only a term referring to no addition of template materials into the system. In fact, some solid intermediates may be formed in the formation process of hollow nanostructures for some template free systems. The formed solid intermediates, usually metastable, may further act as hard templates or self templates to direct the fabrication of final hollow products. Take the work of Feng et al. as an example. They presented a classical template free process to synthesise Co9S8 hollow spheres using thiourea and CoSO4·7H2O as precursors. The formation mechanism is shown schematically in Fig. 38a. Firstly, under solvothermal conditions in a mixed solvent of ethylene glycol and DMF, thiourea could be partially decomposed to urea and H2S and CoSO4·7H2O to Co2+ and SO42−. Urea may be further partially decomposed to NH3 and CO2. Both ethylene glycol and NH3 can coordinate with Co2+, forming [Co(NH3)n]x+ (x = 2 or 3) and Co–ethylene glycol complexes. Owing their metastable properties, the formed [Co(NH3)n]x+ and Co–ethylene glycol complexes can be easily decomposed to CoO and Co3O4. Subsequently, CoO and Co3O4 would react with S2− (pyrolyzed by H2S) through ion-exchange to form Co9S8. Fig. 38b shows the phase evolution of the product collected at different reaction times. The formation of hollow structures may be attributed to the slower inward diffusion rate of S2− and the fast outward diffusion rate of cobalt ions. Fig. 38c–g show the shape evolution of the products with the reaction process. Combining with the XRD analysis, it is easy to conclude that the formation process of Co9S8 hollow spheres is from nanoparticles (CoO and Co3O4), to microspheres (CoO and Co3O4), to core@shell structures (mixture of Co9S8 and cobalt oxides) and to the final hollow Co9S8. Considering the advantages of the subtle internal cavities and functional shell component of such hollow structures, the authors further investigated the electrocatalytic performance of such hollow Co9S8 spheres toward the oxygen evolution reaction. Their results showed that the as-prepared hollow Co9S8 spheres deliver a low overpotential of 285 mV, and exhibit a small Tafel slope of 58 mV dec−1. Significantly, the hollow Co9S8 spheres exhibit excellent durability in 1 M KOH (only a slight current attenuation of 15% after 10 h). Such performance surpasses those of IrO2 (35%) and NiFe LDH nanosheets (31%), which are usually regarded as benchmark electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction.187
 Fig. 38  (a) Schematic illustration for the formation of Co9S8 hollow spheres. (b) XRD patterns of products at different reaction times during the formation of Co9S8 hollow spheres. (c–g) SEM images of time-dependent products: 1.5 h (c), 2 h (d), 4 h (e), 8 h (f), and 12 h (g). Reprinted from ref. 187 with permission. 
Using a similar principle, Yin et al. prepared Co9S8 hollow boxes employing Co(Ac)2·4H2O and sulfur powder as raw materials in a mixture of ethanol and DMF. However, they only obtained Co9S8 hollow box precursors (also shaped into hollow boxes) directly through a solvothermal process, which could be easily converted to Co9S8 hollow boxes.188 Similarly, Wang et al. reported that SnO2 was the intermediate during the attempts to prepare SnS2 hollow spheres via reaction of SnCl2 with Na2S2O3.189 For preparing hierarchical hollow MoS2 nanoparticles directly from MoO3 and KSCN in the presence of NaF, Wang et al. also found that an intermediate (K2NaMoO3F3) was formed, which subsequently acted as a sacrificial self-template for the formation of hierarchical hollow MoS2 nanoparticles. Interestingly, the K2NaMoO3F3 intermediate could not be removed during the reaction process but should be eliminated by washing with diluted acid and absolute ethanol.190
Different from template methods, template-free methods avoid removing templates, providing uniform hollow spheres both in morphology and in size. In fact, some solid intermediates may be formed in some cases, and these solid intermediates may act as self templates to construct the final hollow products. As a result, some scientists often incorporate template free methods into self template ones. However, only a few special hollow materials were successfully synthesized via template-free approach owing to the short of fundamental evidence to the formation mechanism. In a word, further comprehensive research on these aspects is needed.

Table 2 summarises the advantages and disadvantages of the above discussed methods for synthesizing hollow nanostructures. It seems that the above mentioned four categories of methods may include all approaches. Nevertheless, some novel methods are being developed with the rapid development of nanoscience and nanotechnology, which are not discussed above. For example, Pan et al. developed a spray-drying method to prepare hollow spherical carbon using corncob lignin as the precursor.191 Lou et al. and Yamauchi et al. as well as other groups pioneered thermal decomposition/chemical conversion of metallic compounds to prepare a series of functional hollow materials including carbon and inorganic metal compounds and their composites.192–195 Additionally, in order to obtain some hollow nanomaterials with complex structures and/or components, which may not be achieved via a single method, the combination of some techniques may be necessary. Zhao et al. developed a template method combined with carbothermal reduction nitridation to prepare Si3N4 hollow microspheres.196
Table 2 Advantages and disadvantages of some typical methods discussed here




Methods
Advantages
Disadvantages




Hard template
Straightforward, simple, and efficient in concept
Necessary for heterogeneous coating, multi-stepped procedure required, high cost and time/energy consuming, necessary to take special care for preventing shell collapse during template removal


Soft template
Less sensitive to reaction conditions, high quality in morphology and size
Consuming plenty of organic solvent, most soft templates are thermodynamically metastable, precise control needed in the synthesis process, residual organic molecules of templates affecting the performance of the final product


Self template
No complicated synthesis procedure, high reproducibility, low production cost, no need for heterogeneous coating, allowing uniform product with high purity
Precise control on experiments needed, only focused on limited compounds


Template free
Easy operation, products usually with high crystallinity
Only focused on specific compounds, lack of copious evidence for the formation mechanism




6 Summary and outlook
In this review, various preparation methods of hollow structure nanomaterials are summarized and discussed with their advantages and disadvantages. Due to their unique structure, strong designability and attractive potential applications, the study on hollow structure materials will certainly attract much more attention in the future. Even though great progress in the synthesis of hollow structure nanomaterials has been achieved, there are still several challenges that need to be solved effectively. (1) For hard template methods, it is important to find a suitable solution to avoid the collapse of hollow structures. (2) For industrial applications, it is necessary to explore a relatively easier and low-cost soft template method since the soft template methods developed until now are too complicated and cost too much. (3) Further improvements for self template methods are also needed. For example, it is a great challenge to ensure that the etching process occurs preferentially in the inner surface of the template. Though surface protection may work in some cases, it is much dependent on the external environment. (4) Developing an easily operated template-free method is also needed. Although there are various issues in the preparation of hollow structure materials that need to be solved, we believe that with the progress of science and technology, these problems will be certainly overcome. Meanwhile, no matter what techniques, the formation mechanisms of hollow nanostructures are always the focuses. Morphological observations (SEM/TEM) and crystalline/structure characterization (XRD, Raman, XPS, element mapping and so on) can give much information on the product. To date, most formation mechanisms have been inferred from the data obtained through the above techniques. Obviously, there is lack of in situ characterization techniques to reveal the real-time formation process of hollow nanostructures. As for applications, it is out of the question that such promising structures may find great promising application in various areas, such as biomedicine, catalysis, energy, and environmental remediation. For applications, some complicated hollow structures (such as more components, multi-shelled, stimulation–responsivity, and multi-function) may be desired to fulfil the requirements. Also, the interaction between the hollow nanostructures and guest species may be the hot topic of future research, including support-active species in catalysis, affinity between drug molecules and hollow carries in biomedicine, and so on. Finally, it should be pointed out that the integration of different methods into one synthesis system can also be one of the possibilities in this field besides developing other new methods.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21403091) and China Scholarship Council (201908320230).
References
J. Hu, M. Chen, X. Fang and L. Wu, Fabrication and application of inorganic hollow spheres, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5472–5491 RSC .
S. S. Park and C. S. Ha, Hollow mesoporous functional hybrid materials: Fascinating platforms for advanced applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703814 CrossRef .
M. Xiao, Z. Wang, M. Lyu, B. Luo, S. Wang, G. Liu, H. M. Cheng and L. Wang, Hollow nanostructures for photocatalysis: Advantages and challenges, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801369 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, F. Y. H. Kutsanedzie, M. M. Hassan, J. Zhu, H. Li and Q. Chen, Functionalized hollow Au@Ag nanoflower SERS matrix for pesticide sensing in food, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 324(2020), 128718 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. M. Hassan, W. Ahmad, T. Jiao, Y. Xu, H. Li, Q. Ouyang, Z. Guo and Q. Chen, A highly structured hollow ZnO@Ag nanosphere SERS substrate for sensing traces of nitrate and nitrite species in pickled food, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 285, 302–309 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, Y. Ma, O. J. Kingsford, J. Qian and Y. Yi, Electrochemical sensing based on nitrogen-doped hollow carbon nanospheres wrapped with MoS2 nanosheets, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, B1392–B1399 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Lu, Y. G. Sun, Y. S. Xu, S. J. Guo, A. M. Cao and L. J. Wan, Hollow-structured electrode materials: Self-templated synthesis and their potential in secondary batteries, ChemNanoMat, 2020, 6, 1298–1314 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, S. A. Monny and L. Wang, Hollow structure for photocatalytic CO2 reduction, ChemNanoMat, 2020, 6, 881–888 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Cui and D. Wang, Design of hollow nanostructures for energy storage, conversion and production, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801993 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, S. Cao, Z. Yin, L. Cheng and L. Wu, Design and synthesis of hierarchical SiO2@C/TiO2 hollow spheres for high performance supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29982–29991 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Z. Yin, L. Xie, J. Yi, W. Tang, T. Tang, J. Chen and Shunsheng Cao, Facet engineered TiO2 hollow sphere for the visible-light-mediated degradation of antibiotics via ligand-to-metal charge transfer, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 8949–8957 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, X. Xue, J. Zhang, X. Liu, C. Dai, Q. Xu, J. Lian, Y. Zhao, G. Li, H. Li and S. Yuan, Molten salt “boiling” synthesis of surface decorated bimetallic-nitrogen doped carbon hollow nanospheres: An oxygen reduction catalyst with dense active sites and high stability, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 395, 125064 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, Q. Zhou, A. Cao, A. Wang and H. Yin, Preparation of hollow SiO2@BiOI nanocomposites and their photocatalytic performance in ammonia nitrogen degradation, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2020, 20, 6368–6375 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, X. Jing, K. Zhu, Z. Peng, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, W. Zhang, L. Ni and Z. Liu, Ta3N5 nanoparticles/TiO2 hollow sphere (0D/3D) heterojunction: facile synthesis and enhanced photocatalytic activities of levofloxacin degradation and H2 evolution, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 13113–13125 RSC .
Y. Tian, L. Xu, J. Bao, J. Qian, H. Su, H. Li, H. Gu, C. Yan and H. Li, Hollow cobalt oxide nanoparticles embedded in nitrogen-doped
carbon nanosheets as an efficient bifunctional catalyst for Zn–air battery, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 33, 59–66 CrossRef .
Z. Yin, Y. Xiao, H. Li, G. Chen, N. Feng, J. Wu, H. Li, H. Xu and S. Cao, Metal nanoparticles confined within an inorganic−organic framework enable superior substrate-selective catalysis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 42739–42748 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li and H. C. Zeng, Architecture and preparation of hollow catalytic devices, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801104 CrossRef .
S. Li, A. Pasc, V. Fierro and A. Celzard, Hollow carbon spheres, synthesis and applications – a review, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12686–12713 RSC .
G. Prieto, H. Tüysüz, N. Duyckaerts, J. Knossalla, G.-H. Wang and F. Schüth, Hollow nano- and microstructures as catalysts, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14056–14119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Templated synthesis of nanostructured materials, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610–2653 RSC .
R. R. Poolakkandy and M. M. Menamparambath, Soft-template-assisted synthesis: a promising approach for the fabrication of transition metal oxides, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 5015–5045 RSC .
G. Wang, J. Qin, X. Zhou, Y. Deng, H. Wang, Y. Zhao and J. Wei, Self-template synthesis of mesoporous metal oxide spheres with metal-mediated inner architectures and superior sensing performance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1806144 CrossRef .
X. Liu, S. Deng, P. Liu, J. Liang, M. Gong, C. Lai, Y. Lu, T. Zhao and D. Wang, Facile self-template fabrication of hierarchical nickel–cobalt phosphide hollow nanoflowers with enhanced hydrogen generation performance, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1675–1684 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Guan, D. Tang, X. Wang, T. Wang, B. Zhi, D. Wang, X. Li, Y. Liu and Q. Huo, Tailored synthesis of hierarchical spinous hollow titania hexagonal prisms via a self-template route, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13915–13920 RSC .
X. Fang, X. Zhao, W. Fang, C. Chen and N. Zheng, Self-templating synthesis of hollow mesoporous silica and their applications in catalysis and drug delivery, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2205–2218 RSC .
G. Prieto, H. Tüysüz, N. Duyckaerts, J. Knossalla, G. H. Wang and F. Schüth, Hollow nano- and microstructures as catalysts, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14056–14119 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Luo, Y. G. Sun, S. J. Guo, Y. S. Xu, B. B. Chang, C. T. Liu, A. M. Cao and L. J. Wan, Hollow carbon nanospheres: syntheses and applications for post lithium-ion batteries, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 2283–2306 RSC .
T. Liu, L. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Hollow carbon spheres and their hybrid nanomaterials in electrochemical energy storage, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803900 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, G. Nie, P. Nie, Z. Li, Z. Pan, Z. Kou, H. Dou, X. Zhang and J. Wang, Nanohollow carbon for rechargeable batteries: Ongoing progresses and challenges, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 183 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mao, J. Wan, J. Wang and D. Wang, Sequential templating approach: A groundbreaking strategy to create hollow multishelled structures, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802874 CrossRef .
X. Huang, T. Qiu, X. Zhang, L. Wang, B. Luo and L. Wang, Recent advances of hollow-structured sulfur cathodes for lithium–sulfur batteries, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 2517–2547 RSC .
C. Zhu, H. Wang and C. Guan, Recent progress on hollow array architectures and their applications in electrochemical energy storage, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 1188–1199 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Li, W. Shen, Y. Dai, W. Kou, W. Zheng, X. Jiang and G. He, Multishelled transition metal-based microspheres: Synthesis and applications for batteries and supercapacitors, Small, 2019, 15, 1804737 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, H. Zhao, M. Lin, D. Zhao and L. Mai, Intricate hollow structures: Controlled synthesis and applications in energy storage and conversion, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602914 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Y. Cui and D. Wang, Design of hollow nanostructures for energy storage, conversion and production, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801993 CrossRef .
B. Li and H. Ch. Zeng, Architecture and preparation of hollow catalytic devices, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801104 CrossRef .
X. Y. Yu, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Hollow nanostructures of molybdenum sulfides for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1600020 CrossRef .
M. Zhu, J. Tang, W. Wei and S. Li, Recent progress in the syntheses and applications of multishelled hollow nanostructures, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1105–1149 RSC .
W. Stöber, A. Fink and E. Bohn, Controlled growth of monodisperse silica spheres in the micron size range, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1968, 26, 62–69 CrossRef .
B. Hu, L. Chen, Z. Yu, Y. Xu, J. Dai, Y. Yan and Z. Ma, Hollow molecularly imprinted fluorescent sensor using europium complex as functional monomer for the detection of trace 2,4,6-trichlorophenol in real water samples, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2021, 246, 119051 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Ren, Y. Zhang, H. Peng, S. Chen, F. Yang and Y. Cao, PEDOT hollow nanospheres for integrated bifunctional electrochromic supercapacitors, Org. Electron., 2020, 77, 105497 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, T. Liu, M. Li, M. Yu, Y. Luo, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Multiscale pore network boosts capacitance of carbon electrodes for ultrafast charging, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3097–3104 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Y. Wu, J. Duan, R. Zhan, W. Wang, M. Q. Wang, Y. Chen, M. Xu and S. J. Bao, (001) Facet-dominated hierarchically hollow Na2Ti3O7 as a high-rate anode material for sodium-ion capacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42197–42205 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ye, L. Zhang, C. Guo, D. Li, A. Vasileff, H. Wang and S. Z. Qiao, A 3D hybrid of chemically coupled nickel sulfide and hollow carbon spheres for high performance lithium–sulfur batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702524 CrossRef .
F. Wang, F. Li, L. Ma and M. Zheng, Few-layer MoS2 nanosheets encapsulated in N-doped carbon hollow spheres as long-life anode materials for lithium-ion batteries, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 14598–14603 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Abdollahi, M. Naderi and G. Amoabediny, Synthesis and characterization of hollow gold nanoparticles using silica spheres as templates, Physicochem. Eng. Aspects, 2013, 436, 1069–1075 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Si, Y. Zou, Y. Mao, Q. Li, S. Zhou, M. Chen and L. Wu, Dual-porosity hollow carbon spheres with tunable through-holes for multi-guest delivery, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31664–31673 CrossRef CAS .
H. Niu, B. Luo, N. Xin, Y. Liu and W. Shi, N-Doped hollow carbon spheres intercalated graphene film induced macroporous frameworks for ultrahigh volumetric energy density supercapacitor, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 785, 374–381 CrossRef CAS .
H. Niu, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Luo, N. Xin and W. Shi, MOFs-derived Co9S8-embedded graphene/hollow carbon spheres film with macroporous frameworks for hybrid supercapacitors with superior volumetric energy density, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8503–8509 RSC .
G. L. Li, D. Wan, K. G. Neoh and E. T. Kang, Binary polymer brushes on silica@polymer hybrid nanospheres and hollow polymer nanospheres by combined alkyne–azide and thiol–ene surface click reactions, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 10275–10282 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Piao, J. Kim, H. B. Na, D. Kim, J. S. Baek, M. K. Ko, J. H. Lee, M. Shokouhimehr and T. Hyeon, Wrap–bake–peel process for nanostructural transformation from β-FeOOH nanorods to biocompatible iron oxide nanocapsules, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 242–247 CrossRef CAS .
B.-H. Lee, S. Park, M. Kim, A. K. Sinha, S. C. Lee, E. Jung, W. J. Chang, K.-S. Lee, J. H. Kim, S.-P. Cho, H. Kim, K. T. Nam and T. Hyeon, Reversible and cooperative photoactivation of single-atom Cu/TiO2 photocatalysts, Nat. Mater., 2020, 18, 620–626 CrossRef .
H.-Y. Cheng, P.-Y. Cheng, X. F. Chuah, C.-L. Huang, C. T. Hsieh, J. Yu, C. H. Lin and S. Y. Lu, Porous N-doped carbon nanostructure integrated with mesh current collector for Li-ion based energy storage, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 374, 201–210 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Li, H. Guo, Z. Wang and Y. Zhou, Hollow Si/C composite as anode material for high performance lithium-ion battery, Powder Technol., 2016, 299, 178–184 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xu, Q. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Xie and B. Xia, Green synthesis of dual carbon conductive network-encapsulated hollow SiOx spheres for superior lithium-ion batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 19959–19967 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huo, W. An, J. Fu, B. Gao, L. Wang, X. Peng, G. J. Cheng and P. K. Chu, Mesoporous nitrogen-doped carbon hollow spheres as high-performance anodes for lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 233–238 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tong, D. Yang, Z. Li, Y. Nan, F. Ding, Y. Shen and Z. Jiang, Thylakoid-inspired multishell g-C3N4 nanocapsules with enhanced visible-light harvesting and electron transfer properties for high-efficiency photocatalysis, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1103–1112 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, J. Wang, J. Li, M. Zeng, R. Luo, J. Shen, X. Sun, W. Han and L. Wang, Synthesis of N-doped hollow-structured mesoporous carbon nanospheres for high-performance supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(11), 7194–7204 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Qi, J. Li, J. Shen, Y. Liu, X. Sun, J. Shen, W. Han and L. Wang, Nitrogen-doped hollow mesoporous carbon spheres for efficient water desalination by capacitive deionization, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 6635–6644 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, J. Wang, J. Li, R. Luo, J. Shen, X. Sun, W. Han and L. Wang, Controllable synthesis of functional hollow carbon nanostructures with dopamine as precursor for supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18609–18617 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, K. Sun, L. Zhan, Y. Wang and L. Ling, N-Doped yolk-shell hollow carbon sphere wrapped with graphene as sulfur host for high-performance lithium–sulfur batteries, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 427, 823–829 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yi, X. Chen, Y. Zhu, H. Chen and J. Liu, Self-organized bowl-like hollow carbon submicrospheres with hierarchical mesopore-rich structure as superior electrode materials for supercapacitors, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 509, 144841 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, R. A. Caruso and H. Möhwald, Nanoengineering of inorganic and hybrid hollow spheres by colloidal templating, Science, 1998, 282, 1111–1114 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, X. Sun, L. Li, J. Chen, S. Zhao, C. Jiang, L. Yang, L. Cheng and S. Cao, Simultaneous formation of a C/N-TiO2 hollow photocatalyst with efficient photocatalytic performance and recyclability, Chin. J. Catal., 2019, 40, 765–775 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, R. Cao, Y. Ge, Y. Tu, Y. Xia and X. Yang, N- and O-doped hollow carbonaceous spheres with hierarchical porous structure for potential application in high-performance capacitance, J. Power Sources, 2017, 363, 356–364 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, Z. Chen, G. Lin, Y. Ge, Y. Tu, H. Chen, S. Ye and X. Yang, Buckled amorphous hollow carbon spheres: Facile fabrication, buckling process, and applications as electrode materials for supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30116–30124 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Arif, Y. Kobayashi, E. M. Schneider, S. C. Hess, R. Balgis, T. Izawa, H. Iwasaki, S. Taniguchi, T. Ogi, K. Okuyama and W. J. Stark, Selective low-energy carbon dioxide adsorption using monodisperse nitrogen-rich hollow carbon submicron spheres, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Ren, W. F. Chen, P. Koshy and C. C. Sorrell, Fabrication and photocatalytic performance of Sn-doped titania hollow spheres using polystyrene as template, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 4981–4989 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, Y. Zhang, D. Sun, S. Zhang, T. Tang, X. Zhang and S. Cao, Bi2O3-Sensitized TiO2 hollow photocatalyst drives the efficient removal of tetracyclines under visible light, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 18131–18140 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhu, W. Liu, Y. Liu and W. Shi, Self-supported hierarchical core–shell Co9S8@NiCo2O4 hollow nanoneedle arrays for asymmetric supercapacitors, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 982–987 RSC .
J. Tian, H. Zhang and Z. Li, Synthesis of double-layer nitrogen-doped microporous hollow carbon@MoS2/MoO2 nanospheres for supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29511–29520 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, X. Y. Yu, H. Zhou, H. B. Wu, S. Ding and X. W. Lou, Bowl-like SnO2@carbon hollow particles as an advanced anode material for lithium-ion batteries, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 13017–13021 CrossRef .
H. Sheng, D. Chen, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He and J. Lu, Urchin-inspired TiO2@MIL-101 double-shell hollow particles: Adsorption and highly efficient photocatalytic degradation of hydrogen sulfide, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5612–5616 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi and M. Oh, Well-arranged and confined incorporation of PdCo nanoparticles within a hollow and porous metal–organic framework for superior catalytic activity, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 866–871 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, C.-C. Yang, C.-H. Lin and H.-L. Jiang, Metal–organic-framework-derived hollow N-doped porous carbon with ultrahigh concentrations of single Zn atoms for efficient carbon dioxide conversion, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3511–3515 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, H. Tian, S. Wang, S. Chen, F. Zhang, L. Song, H. Liu, J. Liu and G. Wang, High-power lithium–selenium batteries enabled by atomic cobalt electrocatalyst in hollow carbon cathode, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5025 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cai, Z. Meng, H. Tang, Y. Wang and P. Tsiakaras, 3D Co–N-doped hollow carbon spheres as excellent bifunctional electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction and oxygen evolution reaction, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 477–484 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chen, K. Xia, L. Zhang, Y. Yu, Y. Li, H. Sun, Y. Wang, Y. Li and S. Li, Fabrication of nitrogen-doped hollow mesoporous spherical carbon capsules for supercapacitors, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 8934–8941 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, S. Hu, R. Xu, J. Wang, Z. Peng, Q. Zhang and Y. Yu, Boosting potassium-ion battery performance by encapsulating red phosphorus in free-standing nitrogen-doped porous hollow carbon nanofibers, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1351–1358 CrossRef .
W. S. Choi, H. Y. Koo and D. Y. Kim, Facile fabrication of core-in-shell particles by the slow removal of the core and its use in the encapsulation of metal nanoparticles, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4633–4636 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiu, W. Jia, L. Zhang, C. Huang, H. Jiao and J. Chang, Synthesis, luminescent and drug-release properties of SiO2@Y2O3:Eu hollow mesoporous microspheres, J. Porous Mater., 2015, 22, 1511–1518 CrossRef CAS .
S. Raza, X. Yong, B. Yang, R. Xu and J. Deng, Biomass trans-anethole-based hollow polymer particles: Preparation and application as sustainable absorbent, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10011–10018 CrossRef CAS .
S. Raza, X. Yong, M. Raza and J. Deng, Synthesis of biomass trans-anethole based magnetic hollow polymer particles and their applications as renewable adsorbent, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 352, 20–28 CrossRef CAS .
S. Raza, X. Yong and J. Deng, Optically active biobased hollow polymer particles: Preparation, characterization, and adsorption toward chiral amines, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 4090–4098 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fang, Z. Chen, Y. Liu, W. Liu and Q. Xu, Uniform discrete nitrogen-doped double-shelled cage-like hollow carbon spheres with direct large mesopores for high-performance supercapacitors, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 2198–2204 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, H. Liu, J. Chen, A. Orpe, D. Zhao and G. Q. Lu, Extension of the Stöber method to the preparation of monodisperse resorcinol–formaldehyde resin polymer and carbon spheres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5947–5951 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Meng, K. Wang, X. Xu, Y. Tang, Z. Han, K. Zhao, G. Zhang, J. Cui and Y. Ji, Synthesis of hollow silica particles using acid dissolvable resorcinol-formaldehyde resin particles as template, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 8919–8925 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Song, F. F. Xue, Z. Y. Lu and Z. Y. Sun, Controllable synthesis of hollow mesoporous silica particles by a facile one-pot sol–gel method, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10517–10520 RSC .
X. Qi, W. Zheng, G. He, T. Tian, N. Du and L. Wang, NiCo2O4 hollow microspheres with tunable numbers and thickness of shell for supercapacitors, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 309, 426–434 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, L. Wang, J. Shi, N. Du and G. He, Multishelled nickel–cobalt oxide hollow microspheres with optimized compositions and shell porosity for high-performance pseudocapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17276–17283 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, C. Jin, C. Zhao, R. Hu, Z. Klencsár, G. A. Sundaram, D. F. Srankó, R. Ge and J. Wang, Modulation synthesis of multi-shelled cobalt–iron oxides as efficient catalysts for peroxymonosulfate-mediated organics degradation, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 359, 1537–1549 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, B. Ding, Y. Qiu, J. Wu, Z. Cheng, G. Jiang, H. Li, X. Liu, B. Wei and H. Wang, Hollow carbon nanospheres with developed porous structure and retained N doping for facilitated electrochemical energy storage, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 12889–12897 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, X. Xu, L. Hou, Z. Li, B. Deng, J. Tian, F. Yang and Y. Li, Nitrogen-enriched hollow carbon spheres coupled with efficient Co–Nx–C species as cathode catalysts for triiodide reduction in dye-sensitized solar cells, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 2679–2685 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Chi, W. K. Gao, L. M. Zhang, B. Dong, K. L. Yan, J. H. Lin, B. Liu, Y. M. Chai and C. G. Liu, Induced phosphorization-derived well-dispersed molybdenum phosphide nanoparticles encapsulated in hollow N-doped carbon nanospheres for efficient hydrogen evolution, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 7676–7686 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, C. Zhang, C. Xu, Z. Zhu and C. Chen, Hollow polypyrrole nanosphere embedded in nitrogen-doped graphene layers to obtain a three-dimensional nanostructure as electrode material for electrochemical supercapacitor, Ionics, 2017, 23, 147–156 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, W. Song, F. Liu, Z. Wang, G. Jin, C. Li, X. Yang and C. Chen, Facile synthesis of N-doped hollow carbon spheres@MoS2via polymer microspheres template method and one-step calcination for enhanced hydrogen evolution reaction, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 1101–1106 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, W. Wang, Z. Huang, S. Liu, J. Guo, F. Zhang, H. Yuan, X. Li, F. Liu and H. Liu, MOF-derived double-layer hollow nanoparticles with oxygen generation ability for multimodal imaging-guided sonodynamic therapy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13557–13561 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Xiang, L. Wang, M. Wang, C. Wang, S. Liu, K. Zhang and B. Yang, Hollow polypyrrole nanospindles for highly effective cancer therapy, ChemPlusChem, 2018, 83, 1127–1134 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Li, H. Rong, X. Tong and Z. Wang, Self-template synthesis of Ag–Pt hollow nanospheres as electrocatalyst for methanol oxidation reaction, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 5991–5997 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Marinakos, J. P. Novak, L. C. Brousseau, A. B. House, E. M. Edeki, J. C. Feldhaus and D. L. Feldheim, Gold particles as templates for the synthesis of hollow polymer capsules. Control of capsule dimensions and guest encapsulation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 8518–8522 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, S. Desinan, R. Rosei, F. Rosei and D. Ma, Hollow ruthenium nanoparticles with small dimensions derived from Ni@Ru core@shell structure: Synthesis and enhanced catalytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8009–8011 RSC .
S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, A general method for the rapid synthesis of hollow metallic or bimetallic nanoelectrocatalysts with urchinlike morphology, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4689–4695 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, Z. Chen, T. Lv, Y. Yao, N. Li, H. Li and T. Chen, A self-supported graphene/carbon nanotube hollow fiber for integrated energy conversion and storage, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 64 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei, Y. Fu, G. Zhang, D. Yang, G. Meng and S. Sun, Rational design of novel nanostructured arrays based on porous AAO templates for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 234–259 CrossRef CAS .
G.-W. Yoo, C. Kim, B.-C. Jang, S.-B. Yang and J.-T. Son, Synthesis of hollow nanorods of SiO2 anode material by AAO template synthesis method for lithium ion battery, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2015, 15, 8773–8776 CrossRef CAS .
P. Samanta, R. Srivastava and B. Nandan, Fabrication and crystallization behavior of hollow poly(L-lactic acid) nanofibers, Polym. Cryst., 2020, 3, e10147 CAS .
Y. Wang, M. Wu, Z. Jiao and J. Y. Lee, Sn@CNT and Sn@C@CNT nanostructures for superior reversible lithium ion storage, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3210–3215 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Zhang, J. H. Wang, Y. H. Zhang and T. L. Hu, Hollow porous organic polymer: High-performance adsorption for organic dye in aqueous solution, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2017, 55, 1329–1337 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. C. An, W. H. Wang, Y. H. Zhang and X. H. Bu, Sulfonated hollow covalent organic polymer: Highly-selective adsorption toward cationic organic dyes over anionic ones in aqueous solution, Chin. J. Chem., 2018, 36, 826–830 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, R. Guo, L. X. Ding, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Controllable template-assisted electrodeposition of single- and multi-walled nanotube arrays for electrochemical energy storage, Sci. Rep., 2014, 3, 1204 CrossRef .
H. Yang, L. Q. He, Z. H. Wang, X. Lu, G. R. Li, P. P. Fang and Y. Tong, Enhanced photocatalytic activity from mixture-fuel cells by ZnO template-assisted Pd–Pt hollow nanorods, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 9842–9846 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, R. Lv, S. Gai, Y. Dai, F. He and P. Yang, Multifunctional SiO2@Gd2O3:Yb/Tm hollow capsules: Controllable synthesis and drug release properties, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 10917–10927 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, S. Gai, F. Qu and P. Yang, SiO2@YBO3:Eu3+ hollow mesoporous spheres for drug delivery, Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5788–5796 CrossRef CAS .
Q. C. Do, D. G. Kim and S. O. Ko, Nonsacrificial template synthesis of magnetic-based yolk–shell nanostructures for the removal of acetaminophen in Fenton-like systems, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28508–28518 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, C. Chen, J. Liu, R. Xu, S. Z. Qiao and X. W. Lou, Ellipsoidal hollow nanostructures assembled from anatase TiO2 nanosheets as a magnetically separable photocatalyst, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2631–2633 RSC .
X. W. Lou, C. Yuan and L. A. Archer, Double-walled SnO2 nano-cocoons with movable magnetic cores, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3328–3332 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou and L. A. Archer, A general route to nonspherical anatase TiO2 Hollow colloids and magnetic multifunctional particles, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1853–1858 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Y. Fu, R. Li and W. Feng, Multifunctional hollow–shell microspheres derived from cross-linking of MnO2 nanoneedles by zirconium-based coordination polymer: Enzyme mimicking, micromotors, and protein immobilization, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1625–1634 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Lee, S. M. Kim, H. Jeong, J. Kim and I. S. Lee, Surface-specific deposition of catalytic metal nanocrystals on hollow carbon nanospheres via galvanic replacement reactions of carbon-encapsulated MnO nanoparticles, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4510–4521 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lu, Z. Yao, Y. Zhong, X. Wang, X. Xia, C. Gu, J. Wu and J. Tu, Polypyrrole-coated sodium manganate hollow microspheres as a superior cathode for sodium ion batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15630–15637 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Wang, H. Guo, P. Sun, F. Liu, X. Liang and G. Lu, Double-shell architectures of ZnFe2O4 nanosheets on ZnO hollow spheres for high-performance gas sensors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17811–17818 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kondratowicz, M. Drozdek, M. Michalik, W. Gac, M. Gajewska and P. Kuśtrowski, Catalytic activity of Pt species variously dispersed on hollow ZrO2 spheres in combustion of volatile organic compounds, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 513, 145788 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Ni, X. Wang, N. Zhang, P. Li, J. Dong, B. Liu, J. Liu, M. Cao and C. Hu, Template electro-etching-mediated FeOOH nanotubes as highly efficient photoactive electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution reaction, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5718–5725 CAS .
Z. Peng, Y. Jiang, X. Wang, R. Zhang, H. Xu, Y. Xiao, X. Jing, J. Zhang, Y. Liu and L. Ni, Novel CdIn2S4 nano-octahedra/TiO2 hollow hybrid heterostructure: In situ synthesis, synergistic effect and enhanced dual-functional photocatalytic activities, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 15942–15953 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, J. Feng, X. Kou, Y. Zhao, X. Ma and S. Wang, Al-Stabilized double-shelled hollow CaO-based microspheres with superior CO2 adsorption performance, Energy Fuels, 2018, 32, 9692–9700 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Hu and C. Guo, Carbon/metal-sulfide composite template: A new facile route toward well-defined oxide hollow nanospheres, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94(6), 1667–1669 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Zhu, J. Xue, X. Zhao, Z. Guo and C. Wang, General synthesis of porous mixed metal oxide hollow spheres with enhanced capacitive properties, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17226–17232 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Titirici, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, A generalized synthesis of metal oxide hollow spheres using a hydrothermal approach, Chem. Mater., 2006, 808–3812 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, N. Yang, H. Tang, Z. Dong, Q. Jin, M. Yang, D. Kisailus, H. Zhao, Z. Tang and D. Wang, Accurate control of multishelled Co3O4 hollow microspheres as high-performance node materials in lithium-ion batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6417–6420 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhou, S. Cao, R. Zhang, J. Tu, T. Fei and T. Zhang, Effect of cation substitution on the gas-sensing performances of ternary spinel MCo2O4 (M = Mn, Ni, and Zn) multishelled hollow twin spheres, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28023–28032 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, L. Hou, C. Cheng, Z. Zhuang, F. Zheng and W. Chen, Nitrogen and phosphorus Co-doped hollow carbon spheres as efficient metal-free electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1891–1898 CrossRef CAS .
S. Purwajanti, H. Zhang, X. Huang, H. Song, Y. Yang, J. Zhang, Y. Niu, A. K. Meka, O. Noonan and C. Yu, Mesoporous magnesium oxide hollow spheres as superior arsenite adsorbent: Synthesis and adsorption behavior, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25306–25312 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuan, J. Li, W. Yang, Z. Zhuang, Y. Zhao, L. He, L. Xu, X. Liao, R. Zhu and L. Mai, Oxygen vacancy-determined highly efficient oxygen reduction in NiCo2O4/hollow carbon spheres, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16410–16417 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, S. Nie, H. Li, R. Ali, J. Fu, H. Xiong, J. Li, Z. Wu, W. M. Lau, N. Mahmood, R. Jia, Y. Liu and X. Jian, 3D hollow quasi-graphite capsules/polyaniline hybrid with a high performance for room-temperature ammonia gas sensors, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 2343–2350 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rehman, T. Tang, Z. Ali, X. Huang and Y. Hou, Integrated design of MnO2@carbon hollow nanoboxes to synergistically encapsulate polysulfides for empowering lithium sulfur batteries, Small, 2017, 13, 1700087 CrossRef .
J. Fei, Y. Cui, X. Yan, W. Qi, Y. Yang, K. Wang, Q. He and J. Li, Controlled preparation of MnO2 hierarchical hollow nanostructures and their application in water treatment, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 452–456 CrossRef .
X. Huang, J. Yang, S. Mao, J. Chang, P. B. Hallac, C. R. Fell, B. Metz, J. Jiang, P. T. Hurley and J. Chen, Controllable synthesis of hollow Si anode for long-cycle-life lithium-ion batteries, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4326–4332 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, L. N. Lin, Y. Lu, S. F. Chen, L. Dong and S. H. Yu, Templating synthesis of preloaded doxorubicin in hollow mesoporous silica nanospheres for biomedical applications, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5255–5259 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, C. Lu, D. Xiao, H. Zhang, C. Chen, L. Xie, Y. Liu, S. Yuan, Q. Kong, K. Zheng and J. Yin, β-Ni(OH)2 nanosheet arrays grown on biomass-derived hollow carbon microtubes for high-performance asymmetric supercapacitors, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1279–1287 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, J. Wang, C. Liu, S. M. Fakhrhoseini, D. Liu, L. Zhang, W. Lei and M. Naebe, Controlled design of a robust hierarchically porous and hollow carbon fiber textile for high-performance freestanding electrodes, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900762 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu and E. Fong, Botanic chemistry enabled synthesis of 3D hollow metal oxides/carbon hybrids for ultra-high performance metal-ion batteries, Mat. Today Energy, 2017, 4, 89–96 CrossRef .
X. Bai, J. Liu, Y. Xu, Y. Ma, Z. Liu and J. Pan, CO2 Pickering emulsion in water templated hollow porous sorbents for fast and highly selective uranium extraction, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124096 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, X. Yan, M. Xu, K. Cao, H. Zhu, L. Li and J. Duan, Building honeycomb-like hollow microsphere architecture in a bubble template reaction for high-performance lithium-rich layered oxide cathode materials, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30617–30625 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, G. Chen, J. Wu, H. Dong and G. Xiong, Bismuth vanadate hollow spheres: Bubble template synthesis and enhanced photocatalytic properties for photodegradation, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 132–133, 304–314 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ding, X. Liu, Y. Shi, Y. Liu, T. Zhou, Z. Guo and J. Hu, Generalized synthesis of ternary sulfide hollow structures with enhanced photocatalytic performance for degradation and hydrogen evolution, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17911–17922 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Zheng, P. Dou, W. Wang, J. Cheng and X. Xu, Bubble-induced lychee-shaped hollow ZnCo2O4@polypyrrole/sodium alginate ternary microsphere as novel anode materials for lithium-ion batteries, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 10365–10373 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Li, X. B. Fan, X. B. Li, J. X. Li, C. Ye, J. J. Wang, S. Yu, C. B. Li, Y. J. Gao, Q. Y. Meng, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Visible light catalysis-assisted assembly of Nih-QD hollow nanospheres in situ via hydrogen bubbles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8261–8268 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Z. Cui, Y. Xue and R. Zhang, Template-free synthesis and crystal transition of ring-like VO2(M), Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 4220–4225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Han, G. Hadiko, M. Fuji and M. Takahashi, A novel approach to synthesize hollow calcium carbonate particles, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 152–153 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, M. Fuji, D. Shchukin, H. Moöhwald and M. Takahashi, A new model for the synthesis of hollow particles via the bubble templating method, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3771–3775 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tomioka, M. Fuji, M. Takahashi, C. Takai and M. Utsuno, Hollow structure formation mechanism of calcium carbonate particles synthesized by the CO2 bubbling method, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 771–776 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Shchukin, K. Köhler, H. Möhwald and G. B. Sukhorukov, Gas-filled polyelectrolyte capsules, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3310–3314 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, R. Bao, Y. Huang and D. B. Chrisey, Hollow particles formed on laser-induced bubbles by excimer laser ablation of Al in liquid, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11370–11374 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, C. Xiao, X. Zhuang, C. He and X. Chen, Direct formation of cationic polypeptide vesicle as potential carrier for drug and gene, Mater. Lett., 2012, 73, 17–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kim, S. A. Dergunov and E. Pinkhassik, Directed assembly of vesicle-templated polymer nanocapsules under near-physiological conditions, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 2561–2568 CrossRef .
X. Luo, Z. Pan, F. Pei, Z. Jin, K. Miao, P. Yang, H. Qian, Q. Chen and G. Feng, 
            In situ growth of hollow Cu2O spheres using anionic vesicles as soft templates, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 59, 410–415 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kim, S. A. Dergunov, A. G. Richter, J. Durbin, S. N. Shmakov, Y. Jia, S. Kenbeilova, Y. Orazbekuly, A. Kengpeiil, E. Lindner, S. V. Pingali, V. S. Urban, S. Weigand and E. Pinkhassik, Facile directed assembly of hollow polymer nanocapsules within spontaneously formed catanionic surfactant vesicles, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 7061–7069 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Dergunov, M. D. Kim, S. N. Shmakov and E. Pinkhassik, Building functional nanodevices with vesicle-templated porous polymer nanocapsules, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 189–198 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, B. Wang, P. Ding, Y. Ye, W. Wei, W. Zhu, L. Xu, J. Xia and H. Li, Reactable ionic liquid in situ-induced synthesis of Fe3O4 nanoparticles modified N-doped hollow porous carbon microtubes for boosting multifunctional electrocatalytic activity, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 797, 849–858 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Q. Chen, J. Tang, W. Wei and S. Li, Core@shell β-FeOOH@polypyrolle derived N,S-codoped Fe3O4@N-doped porous carbon nanococoons for high performance supercapacitors, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 480, 582–592 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, L. Xu, Y. Deng, X. Zhu, J. Deng, J. Lian, J. Wu, J. Qian, H. Xu, S. Yuan, H. Li and P. M. Ajayan, Metallic cobalt nanoparticles embedded in sulfur and nitrogen co-doped rambutan-like nanocarbons for the oxygen reduction reaction under both acidic and alkaline conditions, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14291–14301 RSC .
M. Zhu, Q. Chen, J. Kan, J. Tang, W. Wei, J. Lin and S. Li, Cobalt oxide nanoparticles embedded in N-doped porous carbon as efficient electrode for supercapacitor, Energy Technol., 2019, 1800963 CrossRef .
C. Xu, D. Niu, N. Zheng, H. Yu, J. He and Y. Li, Facile synthesis of nitrogen-doped double-shelled hollow mesoporous carbon nanospheres as high-performance anode materials for lithium ion batteries, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5999–6007 CAS .
E. B. Cho, E. Choi, S. Yang and M. Jaroniec, Hollow mesoporous organosilica nanospheres templated with flower-like micelles of pentablock copolymers, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 528, 124–134 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, K. Li, H. Yu, H. Yin, M. A. C. Stuart, J. Wang and S. Zhou, Controlled synthesis of manganese oxide nanoparticles encaged in hollow mesoporous silica nanoreactors and their enhanced dye degradation activity, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 6852–6861 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, F. Zhang, S. Zhang, S. He, F. Shen, X. Han, Y. Yin and C. Gao, Scalable synthesis of sub-100 nm hollow carbon nanospheres for energy storage applications, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1822–1833 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, S. Yao, M. Zhang, F. Huang, Q. Fan, S. Zhang, H. Liu, D. Ma and C. Gao, Ultra-small platinum nanoparticles encapsulated in sub-50 nm hollow titania nanospheres for low-temperature water–gas shift reaction, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36954–36960 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, D. Wang, C. Gao, H. Liu, L. Han and Y. Yin, Ultrafine platinum/iron oxide nanoconjugates confined in silica nanoshells for highly durable catalytic oxidation, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1366–1372 RSC .
M. Ji, J. Di, Y. Liu, R. Chen, K. Li, Z. Chen, J. Xia and H. Li, Confined active species and effective charge separation in Bi4O5I2 ultrathin hollow nanotube with increased photocatalytic activity, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118403 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jiang, L. Yang, N. Song, X. Zhang, C. Liu and H. Dong, Multi-shelled hollow cube CaTiO3 decorated with Bi12O17Cl2 towards enhancing photocatalytic performance under the visible light, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 576, 21–33 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Yi, J. Chen, Z. Yin, T. Tang, W. Wei, S. Cao and H. Xu, Spatially confined Fe2O3 in hierarchical SiO2@TiO2 hollow sphere exhibiting superior photocatalytic efficiency for degrading antibiotics, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122583 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, J. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang, C. Jiang, Z. Yin, Y. Xiao and S. Cao, Silver nanoparticles confined in shell-in-shell hollow TiO2 manifesting efficiently photocatalytic activity and stability, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 367, 249–259 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Ye, L. Xu, Y. Quan, W. Wei, W. Zhu, H. Li and J. Xia, Space-confined yolk-shell construction of Fe3O4 nanoparticles inside N-doped hollow mesoporous carbon spheres as bifunctional electrocatalysts for long-term rechargeable zinc–air batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2005834 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, H. Yin, A. Wang and Y. Si, Preparation of hollow B-SiO2@TiO2 composites and their photocatalytic performances for degradation of ammonia-nitrogen and
green algae in aqueous solution, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2019, 27, 2535–2543 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, Y. Xiao, X. Wan, Y. Jiang, G. Chen, Q. Shi and S. Cao., High photocatalytic activity of Cu2O embedded in hierarchically hollow SiO2 for efficient chemoselective hydrogenation of nitroarenes, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 3874–3886 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koshino, Y. Shiraishi and M. Atobe, Size-controlled synthesis of polymer hollow nanoparticles using emulsion templates prepared by tandem acoustic emulsification, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2019, 54, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ji, C. Deng, X. Liu and J. Qin, Fabrication of porous polyimide hollow microspheres through O/W/O multiple emulsion, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 591, 124537 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Shen, M. L. Hsieh, H. Y. Chen and J. Y. Wu, The preparation of hollow silica spheres with mesoporous shell via polystyrene emulsion latex template and the investigation of ascorbic acid release behavior, J. Polym. Res., 2013, 20220 Search PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Zhao, J. Bao, J. Lian, M. Cheng and H. Li, Lawn-like FeCo2S4 hollow nanoneedle arrays on flexible carbon nanofiber film as binder-free electrodes for high-performance asymmetric pseudocapacitors, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 772, 337–347 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, R. M. Rioux, C. K. Erdonmez, S. Hughes, G. A. Somorjai and P. Alivisatos, Formation of hollow nanocrystals through the nanoscale Kirkendall effect, Science, 2004, 304, 711–714 CrossRef CAS .
J. Elias, R. Tena-Zaera, G. Y. Wang and C. Lévy-Clément, Conversion of ZnO nanowires into nanotubes with tailored dimensions, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6633–6637 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, Q. Liao, J. Zhang, X. Ai and D. Xu, Single-crystalline ZnO nanotube arrays on conductive glass substrates by selective disolution of electrodeposited ZnO nanorods, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4549–4552 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, H. Liu, Q. Fan, S. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. Han, H. Li and C. Gao, Solid-to-hollow conversion of silver nanocrystals by surface-protected etching, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 19038–19044 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Pan, Y. Bai and Q. Wang, Reconstruction of colloidal spheres by targeted etching: A generalized self-template route to porous amphoteric metal oxide hollow spheres, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 4566–4572 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cui, C. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Ma, G. Deng, Z. Zhou, J. Lin, H. Yang and S. Yang, Facile one-step dialysis strategy for fabrication of hollow complex nanoparticles, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 9120–9123 RSC .
T. Zhai, C. Wang, L. Cui, J. Du, Z. Zhou, H. Yang and S. Yang, Hollow bimetallic complex nanoparticles for trimodality imaging and photodynamic therapy in vivo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 37470–37476 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, Q. Jiao, T. Liu, Q. Li, M. Yin, Y. Zhao, H. Li, C. Feng and W. Zhou, Facile synthesis of Co9S8 hollow spheres as a high performance electrocatalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1863–1871 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yin, D. Zhao, C. Feng, W. Zhou, Q. Jiao, X. Feng, S. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Li and T. Feng, Construction of porous Co9S8 hollow boxes with double open ends toward high-performance half/full sodium-ion batteries, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 6305–6314 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Q. Li, Z. Wang, H. Qi, T. Zuo, X. He and P. Hu, SnS2 hollow spheres: Template-free synthesis and growth mechanism, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 13, 1900185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, G. Li, H. Xu, Y. Qian and J. Yang, Enhanced lithium storage performances of hierarchical hollow MoS2 nanoparticles assembled from nanosheets, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1003–1008 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Pan, L. Dong, W. Lv, D. Zheng, Z. Li, C. Luo, C. Zheng, Q. H. Yang and F. Kang, A hollow spherical carbon derived from the spray drying of corncob lignin for high-rate-performance supercapacitors, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 503–506 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Metal–organic-frameworks-derived general formation of hollow structures with high complexity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10664–10672 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, X. Yu and X. W. Lou, Formation of hierarchical Cu-doped CoSe2 microboxes via sequential ion exchange for high-performance sodium-ion batteries, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706668 CrossRef .
Z. X. Cai, Z. L. Wang, J. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, Hollow functional materials derived from metal–organic frameworks: Synthetic strategies, conversion mechanisms, and electrochemical applications, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804903 CrossRef .
J. Ye, C. Li and Y. Yan, Core–shell ZIF-67/ZIF-8-derived sea urchin-like cobalt/nitrogen Co-doped carbon nanotube hollow frameworks for ultrahigh adsorption and catalytic activities, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2020, 112, 202–211 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, L. Cheng, F. Ye, S. Cheng and X. Cui, Preparation and performance of Si3N4 hollow microspheres by the template method and carbothermal reduction nitridation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 39054–39061 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Maiyong Zhu
	Maiyong Zhu received his PhD degree from Yangzhou University (China) in 2011. In 2012, he joined the School of Materials Science & Engineering, Jiangsu University (China), as an assistant professor. In 2015, he was promoted to associate professor. Currently, under the support of the China Scholarship Council he is simultaneously working as a visiting professor hosted by Prof. Hiroshi Kitagawa at Kyoto University (Japan). His research interests cover inorganic/organic hybrid materials for energy and environment related applications.

Yikun Cheng
	Yikun Cheng is a student majoring in Polymer Materials & Engineering at Jiangsu University. Currently he is carrying out research under the supervision of Dr Zhu. His research mainly focuses on design and synthesis of hollow nanostructures.

Qiao Luo
	Qiao Luo received his bachelor's degree in June 2020 from Jiangsu University. Currently he is a graduate student under Dr Zhu. His research mainly covers metal–organic frameworks for energy storage and conversion.

Mohammad El-khateeb
	Prof. Mohammad El-khateeb earned his PhD degree from McGill University (Canada) in 1996. Later he joined Jordan University of Science and Technology (Jordan) as a professor. Currently he is carrying out academic research at Kyoto University (Japan) as an invited JSPS fellow hosted by Professor Hiroshi Kitagawa. His research interest lies in inorganic/organic hybrid materials for energy and sensor applications.

Quan Zhang
	Quan Zhang received his PhD in 2018 from Kyoto University under the supervision of Prof. Hiroshi Kitagawa. Since then, he has worked as a specific research fellow at Kyoto University in Prof. Hiroshi Kitagawa's laboratory. His current research interests focus on the synthesis of functional inorganic nanomaterials and their applications.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration for the preparation of DPHCs. (b–d) TEM images of DPHCs obtained using SiO2 templates with different sizes: (b) 5 nm; (c) 10 nm; and (d) 40 nm. Reprinted from ref. 47 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for N-MCHSs. Reprinted from ref. 56 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Multi-shell g-C3N4 (MSCN) nanocapsule synthetic strategy, (b) visible light driven photocatalytic H2 evolution and (c) degradation of RhB over bulk CN, SSCN, DSCN, and TSCN. Reprinted from ref. 57 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the preparation procedures for N-doped hollow carbon spheres and N-doped yolk–shell hollow carbon spheres. Reprinted from ref. 58 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of NCs@MoS2/MoO2. (b) Ragone plot and (c) cycling performance of the symmetric NCs@MoS2/MoO2 based supercapacitor device. Reprinted from ref. 71 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure of bowl-like SnO2@carbon. SEM images of PS hollow spheres (b), bowl-like PS particles (c), bowl-like SnO2@PS particles, and bowl-like SnO2@C nanocomposites. Reprinted from ref. 72 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The preparation process of hollow TiO2@MIL-101, (b) TEM image of hollow TiO2 particles and (c) TEM image of hollow TiO2@MIL-101. Reprinted from ref. 73 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthetic procedures of PdCo@HZIF and PdCo@HCS. (b) UV/vis spectra obtained during the reduction of 4-NP to 4-ZP catalyzed by PdCo@HZIF-400. (c) First-order kinetic plots of the reduction reaction over PdCo@HZIF-400, PdCo@HCS-600, and PdCo@HCS-800. Reprinted from ref. 74 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The synthesis route to Co-N@HCS. Electrocatalytic performance of Co-N@HCS toward the ORR (b and c) and OER (d and e). Reprinted from ref. 77 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The synthesis principle of N-HMSCCs. (b) TEM image of N-HMSCCs. Supercapacitive performance of N-HMSCCs: (c) specific capacitances at different current densities and (d) cycling stability at a current density of 5 A g−1. Reprinted from ref. 78 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematics for (a) the formation of MF core-in-SiO2 shell particles with controllable core size and (b) the encapsulation of gold nanoparticles into the interior of the SiO2 shell. Reprinted from ref. 80 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic strategy for preparing ANE-based hollow polymeric particles; SEM images of (b) the PMV template, (c) core/shell particles, (d) hollow particles, and (e) BHHPs. The insets in parts d and e present TEM images of corresponding particles. The scale bars are 500 nm. Reprinted from ref. 82 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the route for the synthesis of DCHCSs. (b) TEM image of DCHCSs, and (c and d) electrochemical performance of DCHCSs as a supercapacitor electrode. Reprinted from ref. 85 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Formation process of multiple shell NiCo2O4 hollow microspheres. TEM images of (b) thick single-shell, (c) thick double-shell, and (d) thick triple-shell hollow microspheres. TEM images of (e) thin single-shell, and (f) thin double-shell, and (g) thin triple-shell hollow microspheres. Reprinted from ref. 89 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Scheme for the synthesis process of DHMS. TEM images of (b) yolk–shell ZIF-8@mSiO2 and (c) DHMS. Reprinted from ref. 97 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis approach to hollow PPy NSs through a MIL-88(Fe) template. TEM images of MIL-88(Fe) (b) and the prepared hollow PPy NSs at different reaction times: 1 h (c), 3 h (d), and 6 h (e). Reprinted from ref. 98 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of G/CNT/PANI hollow fibers. (b–d) Electrochemical performance of supercapacitors based on G/CNT and G/CNT/PANI hollow fibers. (b) CV curves (scan rate of 10 mV s−1), (c) GCD curves (current density of 0.6 mA cm−2) and (d) Nyquist plots of the supercapacitors based on G/CNT/PANI hollow fibers with different mass loadings of PANI. Reprinted from ref. 103 with kind permission.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of Sn@CNT and Sn@C@CNT using AAO as a template. TEM images of Sn@CNT (b) and Sn@C@CNT (c). Reprinted from ref. 107 with kind permission.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Formation process of hollow porous organic polymer materials. (b) Visible comparison of the adsorption performance of Rhodamine onto different polymer adsorbents. Reprinted from ref. 108 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Illustration for the synthesis of PPy nanotubes using ZnO nanorod arrays as a hard template. SEM images of the ZnO nanorod template (b), ZnO@PPy core@shell nanorods (c), and PPy nanotubes (d). Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure for a HMSC@Gd2O3:Yb/TM composite. Reprinted from ref. 112 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Illustration of the process for fabricating hollow-shell structure h-MnO2@Zr–CP. TEM images of (b) a solid MnO2 microsphere, (c) a MnO2@Zr–CP core–shell microsphere, and (d) a h-MnO2@Zr–CP hollow-shell microsphere. Reprinted from ref. 118 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic illustration for fabrication of NMOHS and NMOHS@PPy. Reprinted from ref. 120 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic illustration for the synthesis of FeOOH nanotubes on CC using Co-based nanowires as a hard template. Adapted from ref. 123 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 25  Graphical model of the formation process of the Al-stabilized double-shelled hollow CaO-based microspheres. Reprinted from ref. 125 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Synthesis of porous MMO hollow spheres (ZnCo2O4 as an example). SEM image (b) and electrochemical performance as a supercapacitor electrode (c–f) of ZnCo2O4. Reprinted from ref. 127 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the preparation process of N,P-HCS. Reprinted from ref. 131 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of NiCo2O4/HCS. SEM images of (b) HCS, (c) the NiCo/HCS precursor and (d) NiCo2O4/HCS microflowers. Reprinted from ref. 133 with permission.	 

SiO2	Low cost of precursors, easy preparation, high mechanical strength, tolerance to most acids	Not suitable for preparing materials in moderately/strongly alkaline environments, removal consumes HF, NaOH, or other agents
Polymers	No surface modification needed in most cases, high binding ability toward target materials/precursors, easy removal	Poor mechanical strength, consumes plenty of organic solvent or energy in the removal step
Metal nanoparticles	Highly stable, excellent mechanical strength	Most metal templates are noble metals, lack surface functional groups to bind to organic precursors
Carbon	A wide range of available raw materials	The removal step often needs calcination
Metal oxides	Easy synthesis and wide application in forming hollow polymer/carbon	Most are not stable in acidic environments and may cause secondary environmental pollutants after removal since they are mostly transition/heavy metals

 	Fig. 29  Illustration of the formation of ternary sulfide hollow and yolk–shell microspheres. Reprinted from 145 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 30  Schematic illustration for the synthesis of Cu2O hollow nanospheres via AOT/SDBS soft templates. Reprinted from ref. 156 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 31  Schematic representation of the synthesis of polymer nanocapsules: (a) concurrent loading and (b) diffusion loading. Reprinted from ref. 157 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of nitrogen-doped double-shelled hollow mesoporous carbon spheres (N-DHMCSs). (b) Contents of four doped N in N-DHMCSs obtained at different temperatures. (c) Rate capability and (d) cycling performances of N-DHMCSs obtained at different temperatures. Reprinted from ref. 163 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 33  Schematic illustration of the experimental procedure for synthesis of PMMA hollow nanoparticles. Reprinted from ref. 176 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 34  (Top) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of ZnO nanotubes using ZnO nanowires as self-templates. (Bottom) SEM images of the as-deposited ZnO nanowires (a) and (b–d) those immersed in different [KCl] aqueous solutions (1, 2, and 3.4 M, respectively) for 8 h at 80 °C. Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission.	 
(CH2NH2)2 + 2H2O → (CH2NH3+)2 + 2OH−
ZnO + 2OH− + H2O → Zn(OH)42−

 	Fig. 35  (a) Schematic illustration for etching ZnO nanorods to nanotubes with the assistance of EDA. SEM images of ZnO nanorods (b), and ZnO nanotubes by etching nanorods for different reaction times: 2 h (c), 5 h (d), 10 h (e), and 15 h (f). Adapted from ref. 182 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 36  Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure for h-MO by surface-protected etching of c-MO (a). TEM images of time-dependent h-Al2O3 samples obtained by etching c-Al2O3 with NaOH solution: 1 (b), 3 (c), and 5 min (d). Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 37  Schematic mechanism of a dialysis approach to complex hollow nanoparticles. Reprinted from ref. 185 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Schematic illustration for the formation of Co9S8 hollow spheres. (b) XRD patterns of products at different reaction times during the formation of Co9S8 hollow spheres. (c–g) SEM images of time-dependent products: 1.5 h (c), 2 h (d), 4 h (e), 8 h (f), and 12 h (g). Reprinted from ref. 187 with permission.	 

Hard template	Straightforward, simple, and efficient in concept	Necessary for heterogeneous coating, multi-stepped procedure required, high cost and time/energy consuming, necessary to take special care for preventing shell collapse during template removal
Soft template	Less sensitive to reaction conditions, high quality in morphology and size	Consuming plenty of organic solvent, most soft templates are thermodynamically metastable, precise control needed in the synthesis process, residual organic molecules of templates affecting the performance of the final product
Self template	No complicated synthesis procedure, high reproducibility, low production cost, no need for heterogeneous coating, allowing uniform product with high purity	Precise control on experiments needed, only focused on limited compounds
Template free	Easy operation, products usually with high crystallinity	Only focused on specific compounds, lack of copious evidence for the formation mechanism

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
