Fabrication of a highly efficient and stable nano-modified photoanode for solar H 2 generation   - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3RA42632G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3RA42632G
(Communication)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 19905-19908Fabrication of a highly efficient and stable nano-modified photoanode for solar H2 generation†Alka Pareek, Neha Y. Hebalkar and Pramod H. Borse*International Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New Materials, Balapur PO, Hyderabad, AP 500 005, India. E-mail: phborse@arci.res.in;  Fax: +91 4024442699;   Tel: +91 4024452426Received 29th May 2013, Accepted 12th August 2013First published on 15th August 2013AbstractA highly efficient and stable CdS–TiO2 nano-modified photoanode (NMP) was achieved by a simple chemical linking method. Both efficiency and stability were enhanced by attaching thioglycerol linked TiO2 nanoparticles over CdS. The NMP generated twice the photocurrent than an as-made CdS photoanode and displayed a photoelectrochemical stability of minimum 9h of PEC testing.CdS is considered to be one of the potentially visible active semiconductors useful for photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical applications.1 Its suitable bandgap of 2.4 eV makes it more desirable for the utilization of the visible part of the solar spectrum.2 Further, thermodynamically, the conduction band-edge of CdS is located at the sufficiently cathodic potential to reduce water, and thus yields a higher hydrogen evolution than other competing semiconductors.3 Consequently, its flat-band potential at −1.8 eV (SCE) in the dark makes it very suitable for the cleavage of water.4Efficiency as well as long term stability are crucial factors for achieving the desired photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells for practical applications. Efficiency directly depends on the capability of capturing a large fraction of the solar spectrum. It requires the chosen semiconductor to have preferably a small bandgap (1.2 eV < Eg < 2.4 eV). Unfortunately, most low bandgap semiconductors as Si, GaAs, CdS, CdSe etc. are susceptible to photoelectrochemical corrosion during the water-splitting reaction. Thus, it is challenging to simultaneously achieve the dual target of efficiency and stability in photoelectrodes. Most of the efforts in the past have been focused independently on (1) efficiency improvement, or (2) stability of the photoelectrode. However, no reports have focused on simultaneously achieving efficiency and stability of the semiconducting photoelectrodes in PEC cells.Nonetheless, though CdS has yielded a conversion efficiency greater than 1% in liquid junction solar cells,5 its irreversible decomposition in aqueous media is a serious obstacle to utilize it for energy generation. Briefly, when CdS is exposed to light, it undergoes a photocorrosion process in aqueous media containing oxygen,6 given by the reaction: CdS + 4h+ + 2H2O + O2 → Cd2+ + SO42− + 4H+(1)The photocorrosion process is attributed to a chemical reaction in which the surface of the illuminated electrode deteriorates itself. The above process is accompanied by a chemical reaction in which the Cd2+ ions dissociate in the electrolyte and, consequently, free sulphur is left as a by-product over the electrode surface. Thus, it is necessary to tackle the stability problem for such an efficient CdS system.In the past, there have been different strategies adopted to curb the photocorrosion viz., (1) the use of sacrificial agents in the electrolyte which act as scavenging agents and consume the holes participating in the photocorrosion reaction;7,8 (2) loading some inert metal on the semiconductor surface so that it behaves as a catalyst to increase the rate of oxygen or hydrogen evolution;9 (3) the modification of the semiconductor surface with metal oxide/polymers to protect the semiconductor from the electrolyte.10 Among all the strategies, the most attractive is the protection of the semiconductor surface by a very thin film that resists the electrolyte and at the same time allows sunlight to be absorbed by the electrode. Nanotechnology and nano-engineering of materials have been sought in the present work to address such a problem.Generally TiO2 is regarded as the most promising metal oxide system in PEC research due to its high photocatalytic activity (under UV light), photochemical stability, non-toxicity and low cost. Although its large bandgap (Eg ∼ 3.2 eV) makes it incapable of utilizing the visible part of the solar spectrum, its outstanding stability makes it the most suited metal oxide for the role of passivation layer to protect the chemically unstable semiconductor. Thus, we have selected a nano-TiO2 system to modify the efficient CdS electrode system in the present study.As discussed above, it is highly challenging to simultaneously achieve high efficiency and stability for a sustainable PEC reaction. Thus, it becomes necessary to know the factors that can lead to performance improvement and alter those factors. Charge transport properties at junctions (solid–liquid and solid–solid) play a decisive role in yielding the desired efficiency and stability. Nano-engineering of hetero-junctions has been reported in the past to improve PEC efficiencies.11 Analogously, we have attempted to utilize colloid chemistry and nano-engineering for the first time to simultaneously improve the efficiency as well as the stability of a CdS electrode. Accordingly, we have devised a CdS photoanode by modifying a CdS base electrode simply by attaching nano-sized TiO2 particles, thus obtaining a nano-modified photoanode (NMP). Thus, the selection of the adequate TiO2–CdS combination may provide stable nano-engineered metal oxides that satisfy the criteria of easy charge transport via a protective layer over the semiconductor photoanode in line with their band-energetics.In short, the above criteria could be fulfilled by applying one or both strategies simultaneously. Either (1) the valence band-edge of the metal oxide is above to that of the semiconductor that has to be protected, and/or (2) the thickness of the protective layer is thin enough to allow tunnelling. Since transparent metal oxides are generally large bandgap materials, their valence band-edge is always below the valence band-edge of the photoanode.12 This implies that quantum tunnelling is the only way for the hole to reach the interface and oxidize the electrolyte. The desirable tunnelling depth for metal oxide coatings thus should be less than 2 nm.12 Consequently, there is the need to form an over-layer coverage, which is formed by several nano-junctions over the electrode surface. These facts motivated us to nano-engineer the CdS photoanode by using nanosized TiO2 particles. This concept yielded a nano-modified photoanode (NMP) in the present work.In the present work, TiO2 nanoparticles were used to form an over-layer on the CdS thin film by a simple chemical approach. A linking agent was used to attach the nanoparticles to the metal chalcogenide thin film13–16 and also to cap the nanoparticles.17 Anatase TiO2 nanoparticles of size 5 nm were synthesized by hydrolysis of titanium tetrachloride. The spray pyrolysis deposition method was used to achieve a highly uniform and adherent nanostructured CdS thin film.18 Briefly, equimolar CdCl2 and (NH2)2CS were used as precursors and a film was deposited at 350 °C on a FTO (fluorine doped tin oxide) substrate. This film was treated with thioglycerol (TG) acting as the linking agent. Then, TiO2 nanoparticles were attached to the TG treated CdS thin film. The linking agent is a bifunctional organic molecule, which can be utilized for chemically linking two semiconductors. TG has thio and hydroxyl functional groups. TiO2 has affinity towards the hydroxyl group and CdS towards the thio group of TG. This chemical approach was used to attach TiO2 nanoparticles to the CdS photoanode surface.19 The amount of TiO2 nanoparticle adsorption depends upon the number of hydroxyl groups present on the TG treated CdS surface. In such chemically linked systems, the charge transfer depends on the chain length of the organic molecule. The thin layer of TiO2 does not affect the structural and optical properties of the CdS photoanode (Fig. SI 1 and 2, ESI†). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used for the quantitative elemental analysis of the NMP and bare CdS photoelectrode. The photoelectrodes were fabricated using these thin films and photoelectrochemical measurements were carried out using a PARSTAT 2273. All the measurements were carried out under an AM 1.5 solar simulator light source. An irradiance of 80 mW cm−2 was used in the present study.Fig. 1 shows the schematic representation of the deposition of the CdS thin film and the procedure used for its modification using TiO2 nanoparticles to form the NMP. During the CdS film deposition, the optimization of the different deposition parameters was carried out to obtain the nanostructured CdS photoanode. The nanostructured morphology clearly shows the formation of aligned rod structures.18 Such a morphology enhances the PEC performance due to improved absorption. In the FESEM image of the NMP, agglomeration of TiO2 nanoparticles can be seen on the surface of CdS. The TEM image of as-synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles clearly shows the size of TiO2 nanoparticles to be 5 nm. Further, a schematic illustration of the simple setup of the PEC cell has been shown. The PEC cell used in this study comprises of the NMP and a graphite/Pt as working and counter electrodes, respectively. Na2S and Na2SO3 aqueous media were used as the electrolyte. All the measurements were done with respect to SCE as the reference electrode with an applied bias of 0.2 V. Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the adsorption of TiO2 nanoparticles via a linking agent to fabricate the NMP. Fig. 2(a) shows the chronoamperometric curves of the NMP and the unmodified photoelectrode. The NMP shows a photocurrent density of ∼1 mA cm−2 which is around twice as high the photocurrent density of the bare CdS photoanode. This enhancement in the PEC performance is attributed to the reduction of the recombination process due to e–h recombination and passivation of surface states,20 which is also validated by the negative shift in the flat-band potential (Fig. SI 3, ESI†). The surface state acts as an electron trapping centre which in turn increases the rate of recombination. The inset in Fig. 2(a) shows the I–V curves of the modified and unmodified photoanodes. The higher photocurrent indicates a better performance of the modified photoanode compared to bare CdS. Fig. 2  (a) Chronoamperometry and I–V plots of the NMP and bare CdS. Inset shows the photocurrent potential curve of the corresponding photoanodes; (b) photocurrent versus time plot for 9 hours. Fig. 2(b) shows the real-time dependent photocurrent variation for the NMP to demonstrate its stability. The photocurrent was measured for 9 hours. The slope of the curve was used as a measure of the stability of the photoanode in the electrolyte. Accordingly, a zero slope would account for a highly stable photoanode at a particular pH and at a given applied bias. It is clearly seen from the I–t curve that NMP shows a straight line, i.e. a constant photocurrent after 9 hours that can be matched with the ideal straight line drawn for comparison in the figure. In contrast, bare CdS shows a comparatively faster photocurrent decay with time i.e. it shows a significant slope. This depicts the degradation of CdS with time and the higher chemical instability of CdS in aqueous media. This study clearly indicates that the nano-modification via TiO2 acts as a passivation layer over the unstable semiconductor photoanode and improves the stability for 9 hours. To analyze the efficiency of the photoanode in a PEC cell device, the solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency (STH) was calculated from the photocurrent generated using the formula:21  here Vrev is the standard reversible potential i.e. 1.23 V, I0 is the power intensity of source i.e. 80 mW cm−2 andVapp = Vmeas − Vocwhere Voc is the open circuit potential and Vmeas is the potential at which the photocurrent measurements are carried out with respect to the SCE reference electrode. Comparison of STH efficiencies of bare CdS and the NMP electrode shows that NMP is ∼3.6 times better than bare CdS electrode (0.19). Our preliminary hydrogen evolution experiments do support the STH calculations and thereby yield an enhanced hydrogen release using the NMP electrode in the PEC cell.Fig. 3(a) shows the XPS survey spectra of CdS and the NMP. The presence of Ti 2p at 457.90 eV and O 1s at 529.56 eV clearly confirms the assumed model. Fig. 3(b) shows Ti 2p3/2 and Ti 2p1/2 at 458.31 eV and 464.17 eV, respectively, which correspond to the Ti–O bond. As shown in Fig. 3(c), there are two peaks observed for oxygen. One O 1s peak corresponds to the oxygen of the hydroxyl group (O–H) at 529.04 eV and the second peak at 531.75 eV corresponds to that of the metal oxide (Ti–O). The XPS analysis was also carried out for the CdS film before and after modification. Fig. 3(d) clearly shows the presence of S 2p at 164.27 eV which corresponds to the thio group (R–S–R) of the linking agent. This peak is not seen in the XPS spectrum of bare CdS. This proves that chemical linking of TiO2 nanoparticles over CdS was achieved via TG. The studies also revealed that NMP shows no dissolution. Thus, the XPS studies validate the proposed model. Thus the communication clearly demonstrates that NMP is an efficient and stable photoanode for the PEC cells. Fig. 3  XPS plots of (a) survey spectra of bare CdS and NMP; (b) Ti (c) O regions; and (d) S region, particularly for the comparative study before and after the modification of the CdS surface in NMP. ConclusionsA nanostructured CdS photoanode has been chemically linked with TiO2 nanoparticles via thioglycerol as a linking agent. The modified CdS photoanode, i.e. NMP, exhibits a photocurrent more than twice as high as that of bare CdS photoanodes. The stability has been enhanced drastically and a constant current has been achieved up to 9 hours in the present study. The improved stability is due to the coating of nano-junctioned TiO2 as a thin protective layer over the CdS photoanode. This achievement shows practical potential for sustainable hydrogen generation with an efficient PEC performance.AcknowledgementsThe authors wish to thank Dr P. Paik, SEST, Hyderabad Central University for useful help and discussions. Permission granted by Director, ARCI to publish the work is also gratefully acknowledged.Notes and referencesD. R. Rauh, in Semiconductor electrodes, ed. H. O. Finkela, Elseiver, Amsterdam,  1988, ch. 6 Search PubMed .H. Zhang and Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5822–5826 CAS .R. Memming, Electrochim. Acta, 1980, 25, 77 CrossRef CAS .D. Meissner, R. Memming and B. Kastening, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 3476–3483 CrossRef CAS .R. K. Pandey, S. Misra, S. Tiwari, P. Salu and B. P. Chandra, Sol. Cells, 2000, 60, 59–72 CAS .D. Meissner, P. Bendrof and R. Memming, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1987, 27, 423–436 CrossRef CAS .T. Inoue, T. Watanabe, A. Fujishima, K. Honda and K. Kohsyakawa, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 719–722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Kalyanasundaraman, E. Boragarello, D. Duonghong and M. Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1981, 20, 987–988 CrossRef .R. M. Navarro, F. D. Valle and J. L. G. Fierro, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4265–4273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. R. Darwent and G. Porter, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1981, 145–146 RSC .H. G. Kim, P. H. Borse, W. Choi and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4585–4589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Campet, J. P. Manand, C. Puprichitkun and Z. W. Sun, Act. Passive Electron. Compon., 1989, 13, 175–189 CrossRef .I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2385–2389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. S. Dibbell and D. F. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3139–3149 CAS .R. S. Dibbell, D. G. Youker and D. F. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18643–18651 CAS .S. K. Kulkarni, U. Winkler, N. Deshmukh, P. H. Borse, R. Fink and E. Umbach, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2001, 169, 438–446 CrossRef .A. Pareek, R. Dom and P. H. Borse, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 36–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Barker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664–6688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Zhang, J. Shi, F. Xiong, W. Zhang and C. Li, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 756–763 CrossRef PubMed .S. Kumari, C. Tripathi, A. P. Singh, D. Chauhan, R. Shrivastav, S. Dass and V. R. Satsangi, Curr. Sci., 2006, 91, 1062–1064 CAS .Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra42632gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
CdS + 4h+ + 2H2O + O2 → Cd2+ + SO42− + 4H+	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the adsorption of TiO2 nanoparticles via a linking agent to fabricate the NMP.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Chronoamperometry and I–V plots of the NMP and bare CdS. Inset shows the photocurrent potential curve of the corresponding photoanodes; (b) photocurrent versus time plot for 9 hours.	 

 		 
Vapp = Vmeas − Voc

 	Fig. 3  XPS plots of (a) survey spectra of bare CdS and NMP; (b) Ti (c) O regions; and (d) S region, particularly for the comparative study before and after the modification of the CdS surface in NMP.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra42632g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
