Photocatalytic transformations of lignocellulosic biomass into chemicals  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00314J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00314J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6198-6223Photocatalytic transformations of lignocellulosic biomass into chemicals

        
          
            Xuejiao 
            Wu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nengchao 
            Luo
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shunji 
            Xie
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Haikun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qinghong 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Ye 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials, National Engineering Laboratory for Green Chemical Productions of Alcohols, Ethers and Esters, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. E-mail: wangye@xmu.edu.cn; shunji_xie@xmu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, P. R. China. E-mail: wangfeng@dicp.ac.cn
Received 
      1st April 2020
    First published on 5th August 2020AbstractAs the largest renewable carbon resource, lignocellulosic biomass has great potential to replace fossil resources for the production of high-value chemicals, in particular organic oxygenates. Catalytic transformations of lignocellulosic biomass using solar energy have attracted much recent attention, because of unique reactive species and reaction patterns induced by photo-excited charge carriers or photo-generated reactive species as well as the mild reaction conditions, which may enable the precise cleavage of target chemical bonds or selective functionalisation of specific functional groups with other functional groups kept intact. Here, we present a critical review on recent advances in the photocatalytic transformation of lignocellulosic biomass with an emphasis on photocatalytic cleavage of C–O and C–C bonds in major components of lignocellulosic biomass, including polysaccharides and lignin, and the photocatalytic valorisation of some key platform molecules. The key issues that control the reaction paths and the reaction mechanism will be discussed to offer insights to guide the design of active and selective photocatalytic systems for biomass valorisation under mild conditions. The challenges and future opportunities in photocatalytic transformations of lignocellulosic biomass are also analysed.
Xuejiao Wu
Xuejiao Wu received her BSc degree from Xiamen University in June 2015. She is currently a PhD candidate in Professor Ye Wang's group in the Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials (iChEM) at Xiamen University. Her research interest focuses on the valorisation of lignocellulose, in particular by photocatalytic approaches.
Nengchao Luo
Nengchao Luo received his BSc at Huazhong University of Science and Technology (2014) and PhD at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (2020) under the supervision of Prof Feng Wang. He then joined Prof. Feng Wang's group at DICP, where he was selected as the Excellent Graduate Student of DICP in 2020, and was promoted to an associate professor. His research interests focus on photoreactor design and photocatalysis for biomass upgrading and the dehydrocoupling of small molecules.
Shunji Xie
Shunji Xie received his BS and MSc degrees from Hunan University of China in 2008 and 2011, and obtained his PhD degree from Xiamen University in 2014. He then carried out postdoctoral research at the Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials (iChEM). He is currently a senior engineer in State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces of Xiamen University. His research interest focuses on photocatalysis and electrocatalysis for C1 and sustainable chemistry, including CO2 reduction, CH4 oxidation, biomass conversion and ethylene glycol synthesis.
Haikun Zhang
Haikun Zhang received his BSc degree from Xiamen University in June 2016. He is currently a PhD candidate in Professor Ye Wang's group. His research interest focuses on photocatalytic C–C coupling reactions of small molecules.
Qinghong Zhang
Qinghong Zhang received her BSc and MSc degrees from Nanjing University in 1989 and 1992, and obtained her PhD degree from Hiroshima University of Japan in 2002. She joined Xiamen University in October 2002 and was promoted to a full professor in 2010. Her research interests include the synthesis and characterizations of novel materials with advanced catalytic properties.
Feng Wang
Feng Wang received his BSc at Zhengzhou University (1999) and PhD at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (2005). He spent 2005–2006 as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of California at Berkeley in USA and 2006–2009 at the Catalysis Research Center of Hokkaido University in Japan. He serves as a full professor and an independent PI at DICP (2009), a joint professor in the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis at DICP (2013), and is the director of the Division of Biomass Conversion & Bio-Energy at DICP (2018 to present). He served as the Cheung Kong Professor at Dalian University of Technology in 2016. His current research focuses on heterogeneous catalysis and biomass conversion.
Ye Wang
Ye Wang received his BS degree from Nanjing University and obtained his PhD degree in 1996 from Tokyo Institute of Technology. He then worked at Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tohoku University and Hiroshima University, and was promoted to an associate professor at Hiroshima University in 2001. He became a full professor of Xiamen University in the August of 2001. He serves as an associate editor of ACS Catalysis and council member of International Association of Catalysis Societies. The research interest of Prof. Ye Wang's group is catalysis for C1 and sustainable chemistry, including C–O/C–C cleavage chemistry for cellulose/lignin valorization, C–H activation and C–C coupling of C1 molecules.
1. Introduction and the scope of this review
As an abundant and easily accessible resource, biomass provided essential materials to support mankind for thousands of years until the rise of fossil resources about two centuries ago.1 The diminishing fossil resources and the growing concerns about environmental issues have stimulated the utilisation of renewable and clean resources to supply energy and chemicals. In fact, the importance of renewable energy resources like solar energy, wind power and hydropower in energy sector has been increasing significantly in recent decades. However, the chemical market remains largely relying on fossil resources, in particular petroleum. The renaissance of biomass utilisation but in a much more efficient manner is expected.2,3 As the largest renewable carbon resource on earth, biomass would be the most promising alternative to partially replace fossil resources for sustainable production of carbon-based chemicals.4,5
Usually, a chemical with higher functionality implies that it is more difficult to make because of the requirement of more synthetic steps or better control in synthesis and thus higher value. The general trend of the functionality increases in the order of petroleum-based feedstock < bulk chemicals < specialized or fine chemicals.6 The petroleum-based feedstock predominantly consists of hydrocarbons, the transformation of which to high-value functionalised chemicals requires addition of functionality (Fig. 1). For example, the current production of organic oxygenates such as alcohols, aldehydes and carboxylic acids, which are key intermediates in the chemical industry or monomers of some important polymers, generally involves the selective oxidation of hydrocarbons, which is quite challenging and may lead to the formation of CO2 as a by-product. In contrast, biomass is a highly functionalised feedstock with heteroatoms like oxygen bonded to most carbon atoms. Thus, biomass is more suitable for the production of functionalised bulk and fine chemicals, in particular organic oxygenates.1,7,8
 Fig. 1  Degree of functionality of petroleum, biomass and typical carbon-based chemicals. Chemical structures of major components of lignocellulosic biomass, including cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, are displayed in the right panel. 
Lignocellulosic biomass represents more than 90% of all plant biomass and is the most abundant renewable carbon source without competing with food reserves.2 Lignocellulosic biomass is a functionalised biopolymer consisting of three major components, i.e., lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose with weight fractions of 15–30%, 40–60% and 10–40%, respectively (Fig. 1).9 Cellulose and hemicellulose are carbohydrate polymers, also known as polysaccharides. D-Glucose is the monomeric unit of cellulose, which is linearly connected through β-1,4-glycosidic bonds with a degree of polymerisation (DP) ranging from 800 to 10000.10 Hemicellulose is a highly branched polysaccharide that is composed of C5 and C6 sugars as well as sugar acids. Hemicellulose in hardwoods and herbaceous plants is mainly composed of xylose, whereas mannose is the major monomer in softwoods. Other sugars, e.g., arabinose, galactose and glucose, are also present with different percentages in hemicellulose. These units are randomly polymerised with a DP of 50–600.11 Lignin is an irregular polymer composed of monolignols, which contain p-coumaryl, coniferyl and sinapyl alcohols, as building blocks. The monomers are connected by labile C–O (e.g., β-O-4 and α-O-4) bonds and recalcitrant C–C (e.g., β-5 and 5–5′) bonds. The most frequent linkage in lignin is the β-O-4 bond, which varies from 43% to 65% in natural lignocellulosic biomass. For lignin obtained from plants with bioengineering, the abundance of β-O-4 bonds may increase to as high as 89%.12 The three key components in lignocellulosic biomass are associated with each other through both physical interactions and chemical bonding. Cellulose is the core of the lignocellulosic matrix and is packed into semi-crystalline microfibres, which are bundled together.13 Hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces are the major interactions within and between the cellulose microfibers. Hemicellulose and lignin fill the spaces between cellulose fibres, and they act like a resin that holds the lignocellulose matrix together. Lignin is the key component of vascular systems in plants, which imparts strength and rigidity to plants and hinders the accessibility of cellulose to enzymes and microorganisms. Cellulose fibres bind to hemicellulose and lignin by hydrogen bonding, while hemicellulose is covalently bound to lignin. Besides the conventional sources such as woody and herbaceous plants, lignocellulose also exits as by-products in the present agricultural and food-processing streams, but most of these types of residual lignocellulosic biomass are utilized as fertilizer, burnt to generate power or simply tossed as waste.14 The development of efficient methods for selective transformation of abundant lignocellulosic biomass is the key to the production of bio-based high-value chemicals.
A lot of studies have been devoted to the transformations of lignocellulosic biomass by conventional homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis. The most applied chemical strategies include pyrolysis, gasification, acid catalysis and hydrogenolysis, and a few processes have been developed into commercial-scale techniques.15–18 The catalyst, which interacts with the reactant or intermediate by surface adsorption or chemical bonding and decreases the activation energy from Ea1 in an un-catalysed process into Ea2 and Ea3 (Fig. 2a), is essential for the successful implementation of these thermo-driven approaches. The decrease in activation energy can change the activity and selectivity of the reaction. In these thermo-catalytic approaches, heat or high temperature is typically required to overcome the activation barrier. For example, pyrolysis is mostly conducted at a temperature higher than 300 °C17 and the temperature for hydrogenolysis is often higher than 150 °C.18 The heating is generally unselective, and thus the energy cannot be passed precisely to the targeted reactant or chemical bond. Biomass reactants typically have multiple functional groups and the conditions applied during thermocatalysis are usually too severe to activate one specific functional group selectively. These can lead to low selectivity of target products or even the formation of dark substances, known as humins. The reactive but valuable products, such as aldehydes or acids, are difficult to achieve with considerable selectivity under high reaction temperatures.
 Fig. 2  Energy diagram for the transformation of reactant (R) to product (P). (a) Thermocatalysis. (b) Photocatalysis. C, E and S refer to the catalyst, molecules in the environment, such as solvent and atmosphere, and by-products, respectively. 
On the other hand, photocatalysis harnessing solar energy has emerged as a promising method for selective chemical synthesis under mild conditions.19,20 As illustrated in Fig. 2b, photocatalysis is generally initiated by light absorption to activate a photocatalyst to its excited state. The excited photocatalyst can then activate the reactant to overcome the energy barrier, giving target products. Photocatalysis is mostly performed under mild and environmentally-benign conditions. By using a selective photocatalyst, other chemicals or functional groups in the system or the biomass reactant may remain intact during the photocatalytic reaction. Thus, photocatalysis has the potential to perform selective transformation of a selected reactant or to carry out selective cleavage or functionalisation of the targeted chemical bond or the specific functional group with other functional groups preserved.
Furthermore, a large number of transformations in biomass valorisation are redox reactions, and thus stoichiometric reductant (e.g., H2) and/or oxidant (e.g., H2O2) are usually required in thermocatalysis. Semiconductors, transition metal complexes and plasmonic metals are the most applied catalysts in photocatalytic biomass valorisation. Photo-excitation of these catalysts can produce charge carriers (electrons and holes) or excited chemicals with high redox ability, and thus may replace the stoichiometric reductant/oxidant, efficiently driving a number of redox reactions (Fig. 3).19
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of mechanisms for photocatalysis. (a) Semiconductor-based photocatalysis. (b) Transition metal complex (TMC)-based photocatalysis. (c) Plasmonic metal-based photocatalysis. The orange and blue lines denote reductive and oxidative transformations, respectively. ENFE in (c) represents electric near-field enhancement of the plasmonic effect. 
The localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect has also attracted much recent attention. In brief, upon light illumination, free electrons of plasmonic metal nanoparticles can oscillate in resonance with the frequency of light and such resonant electronic oscillation can induce excitation of hot electrons, heat generation and electric near-field enhancement (ENFE) (Fig. 3c).21–23 Furthermore, plasmonic nanomaterials may harvest the infrared part of the solar spectrum that cannot be utilized by semiconductor or metal complex photocatalysts.24
Radical species can generally be produced by the photoredox approach under mild conditions, whereas the conventional generation of radicals typically requires the addition of hazardous/toxic additives (e.g., BEt3, Bu3SnH) or high temperatures.25 The subsequent reactions related to radical intermediates are usually fast, rendering the transformation highly efficient. Despite the highly reactive feature of radical intermediates, the selective transformation is feasible when one reaction is significantly faster than the other possible reactions. The rate constants of radical reactions can be varied from 10−1 to 1010 s−1 (for unimolecular reactions) or dm3 mol−3 s−1 (for bimolecular reactions),26 and the distinct differences enable some radical reactions to proceed in a highly selective manner. The rate constants are typically determined by the polarity, stereo-electronic and steric structure of the transition states of radical species, which can be manipulated by changing the nature of the radical species, reaction conditions and catalysts.27,28
More generally, the advantages of photocatalysis as compared to thermocatalysis can be considered from the following aspects. First, photocatalysis can drive the thermodynamically unfavourable reactions by using photo energy. For example, some endothermic reactions, which can only proceed at high temperatures by thermocatalysis, can be operated at room temperature by photocatalysis.29,30 Second, the generation of reactive intermediates like radical species is possible in photocatalysis, which may perform kinetically difficult or high energy-barrier transformations under mild conditions. Furthermore, the unique mechanism of photocatalysis offers diverse possibilities to create new chemistry that can reach beyond the conventional thermocatalysis. For example, reduction and oxidation are usually difficult to be performed simultaneously by thermocatalysis, and thus multiple steps are required for the transformations involving both reduction and oxidation. The cleavage of β-O-4 bond in lignin or lignin model compounds represents one example of such kind of transformations. The oxidation of Cα–OH to a ketone intermediate and the reductive cleavage of the weakened β-O-4 bond has been proven to be an effective strategy to cleave the β-O-4 bond in lignin under milder conditions than the conventional hydrogenolysis.31 These two steps may be realized concurrently in one step by the photogenerated electrons and holes over semiconductor photocatalysts. We will discuss the photocatalytic cleavage of a β-O-4 bond in lignin or its model compounds using this strategy later.
Many studies have been devoted to photocatalytic transformations of lignocellulosic biomass and the related platform compounds. Comprehensive reviews dealing with the selective cleavage of C–O and C–C bonds in both polysaccharides and lignin by photocatalysis are still very limited.32–35 The present article provides a critical review on photocatalytic transformations of polysaccharides, lignin and the related bio-based platform compounds to high-value chemicals with an emphasis on the selective formation of high-value oxygenated products (Fig. 4). The unique photocatalytic mechanism and the chemistry for the selective C–O and C–C bond cleavage will be discussed to advance the emerging research field of solar energy-driven biomass valorisation.
 Fig. 4  Photocatalytic transformations of lignocellulosic biomass and the related platform compounds involved in this article. 
2. Photocatalytic conversion of polysaccharides and the related platform compounds
Cellulose and hemicellulose are both polymeric materials with sugars as building blocks and glycosidic bonds as linkages. These polysaccharides constitute over 60% of lignocellulosic biomass, representing a very abundant renewable carbon resource for sustainable production of chemicals. Depolymerisation of the highly functionalised polysaccharides into their constituents, i.e., C5 and C6 sugars, and subsequent transformations of the sugars as well as the sugar-derived platform chemicals could afford diverse oxygenates as end products.
2.1. Photocatalysis for depolymerisation of cellulose
Hydrolysis in the presence of an acid catalyst is the most popular method for the depolymerisation of polysaccharides. Hemicellulose can easily undergo depolymerisation by acid hydrolysis, but cellulose is quite recalcitrant because of its crystalline structure and insoluble feature in most solvents. Hydrolysis of cellulose is usually performed at temperatures higher than 150 °C with a homogeneous mineral acid or solid acid as a catalyst.36 The yield of glucose is limited because of the formation of by-products, in particular humins, at such high temperatures. Photocatalysis offers an alternative method to assist the hydrolysis of cellulose under mild conditions.
Studies using photocatalysis for biomass transformations mainly focus on redox reactions, in which the photo-excited charge carriers or photo-generated reactive species are utilized as reductants or oxidants. The use of photocatalysis for non-redox reactions like hydrolysis is unique. Recent studies have shown that the LSPR effect offers an opportunity for photocatalysis to facilitate the non-redox reaction. As compared to the conventional thermocatalysis, the LSPR-induced temperature increment, which occurs on the nanometer scale around the surface, is quicker and can be better targeted on the intended substrate. The activity or even selectivity of LSPR-driven reactions can be conveniently manipulated by changing the wavelength and intensity of the incident light.
The first example for the enhancement in hydrolysis of crystalline cellulose to glucose under visible-light irradiation was reported by using TiO2 nanofibre (T)-supported zeolite HY decorated with Au nanoparticles (NPs), denoted as Au-HYT.37 A glucose yield of 48% was achieved after 16 h of reaction under visible-light irradiation at 140 °C. 5-Hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF) was also formed as a product, and the total yield of glucose and HMF reached ∼60%. Au NPs were found to play a key role. The yield of glucose over the catalyst without Au NPs became much lower and the enhancement by light irradiation was not as significant as in the presence of Au NPs (Fig. 5a). Moreover, the activity of Au-HYT was significantly higher under light irradiation than that in the dark reaction, confirming the effect of light irradiation. In addition, the yield of products increased with an increase in light intensity over the Au-HYT. These results indicate that the boosted hydrolysis mainly arises from the LSPR effect of Au NPs. It was proposed that the acid strength might be enhanced by the polarized electric field of zeolites owing to the LSPR effect of plasmonic Au NPs (Fig. 5b).37
 Fig. 5  (a) Hydrolysis of cellulose with Au–zeolite composites.37 (b) Proposed light-promoted mechanism for Au–zeolite composites.37 (c) Hydrolysis of cellulose with Ir–zeolite composites.38 (d) Proposed light-promoted mechanism for Ir–zeolite composites.38 
Li and co-workers reported another plasmonic meal (Ir)/zeolite composite for the cleavage of the β-1,4-glycosidic bond in cellobiose, the dimer of glucose and a simple model of cellulose.38 The composite showed high efficiency for the cleavage of the β-1,4-glycosidic bond at a temperature not exceeding 100 °C under visible-light irradiation. The Ir/HY catalyst could also catalyse the hydrolysis of crystalline cellulose, offering cellobiose, glucose and HMF as major products. Control experiments showed that the light irradiation played a key role in the hydrolysis of cellulose under such mild conditions (Fig. 5c). The temperature of the Ir–zeolite composite was between 80 and 110 °C, while the temperature of the zeolite was about 40 °C. The increased temperature was attributed to the plasmonic thermal effect, in which Ir NPs converted light into thermal energy. Thus, the enhanced hydrolysis activity under light irradiation was attributed to the plasmonic thermal effect (Fig. 5d).38 The unique ability of metal NPs to convert the incident light into heat through plasmonic dissipation could drastically increase the local temperature at the nanometer scale. As compared with the conventional heating, the photo-thermal heating provided a rapid heating targeted on the intended substrate. Although the mechanisms proposed for Au– and Ir–zeolite composites are different,37,38 there is no doubt that the photo-excitation of the plasmonic metal–zeolite composite is able to accelerate the hydrolysis of cellulose to glucose.
Photocatalytic degradation of cellulose by photogenerated holes or other reactive species has also been investigated. Actually, for the photo-reforming of lignocellulose including cellulose for the purpose of H2 production using semiconductors, the photo-excited electrons function for the reduction of H2O to H2, while the holes or the further generated reactive species like OH˙ are assumed to be responsible for the oxidation of cellulose or other types of biomasses.39 CO2 is typically the dominant carbon-based product. Besides CO2, glucose and formic acid, which might be the intermediate products, were also observed in spite of low selectivity, when Pt/TiO2 was used as a photocatalyst for cellulose conversion under UV-light irradiation.40 It was found that the conversion of cellulose in 0.6 M H2SO4 in the presence of Pt/TiO2 under light irradiation produced HMF as a major product with a yield of 12.8%.41 Glucose was a predominant product under the identical reaction conditions but without light irradiation. It can be expected that the photogenerated holes or the further generated OH˙ radicals were responsible for the oxidative breaking of the glucose monomer formed by hydrolysis catalysed by H2SO4 to smaller molecules and CO2. However, the enhanced formation of HMF under light irradiation remains elusive. It is noteworthy that an early work also disclosed the formation of HMF as a major product during the conversion of cellulose into concentrated ZnCl2 (66%), which could dissolve cellulose, in the presence of TiO2 under UV-light irradiation.42 Besides acid-catalysed β-1,4-glycosidic bond cleavage, the HO˙ generated by photogenerated holes on TiO2 was supposed to participate in the cleavage of the β-1,4-glycosidic bond through a radical mechanism, while ZnCl2 could function as a Lewis acid for the isomerisation of glucose to fructose, which was converted to HMF by dehydration. The carbon balances in these systems were quite low and the mechanism of photocatalysis for the formation of HMF was speculative. Nevertheless, these results have indicated the possibility of achieving different value-added products directly from cellulose by photocatalysis.
2.2. Photocatalytic transformations of monosaccharides
C5–C6 monosaccharides (sugar monomers) derived from cellulose or hemicellulose are promising platforms for sustainable production of organic oxygenates due to their high oxygen/carbon molar ratios.43 The control of selectivity to specific products with targeted functional groups or chemical bonds activated or cleaved is challenging. Photocatalysis has been harnessed for the oxidation of alcoholic or aldehydic groups to carboxylates, C–C bond cleavage and the dehydration of fructose to 5-HMF (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Photocatalytic approaches for the transformations of C5 and C6 monosaccharides. The blue lines denote the oxidation of an alcohol or aldehyde group to carboxylate; the red lines denote C–C bond cleavage; the grey line denotes the formation of C1 chemicals; the green line denotes dehydration. 
Photocatalytic oxidation using semiconductor catalysts offers a useful approach to upgrading biomass-derived chemicals.44 Different types of reactive oxidation species (ROS) can be produced by light irradiation of semiconductor photocatalysts in the presence of O2 or H2O. OH˙ radicals may be originated from the oxidation of water (or hydroxide) by photogenerated holes or reduction of O2 by photogenerated electrons after a sequence of reactions. Other ROS such as H2O2 and superoxide radicals (O2˙−) may also be generated in noticeable quantity by the propagation of free radicals. The generation of various types of ROS results in a complex network of solution and surface oxidations (Fig. 7). In addition to the reactions with ROS, oxidations may also proceed directly by the photogenerated holes. In this case, the potential of the valence band should be more positive than that of the oxidation reaction (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the direct and indirect pathways in semiconductor-catalysed photocatalytic oxidation performed in the presence of O2 and H2O solvent. 
Photocatalytic oxidation of glucose to gluconic acid and glucaric acid, which are important chemicals widely used in the cosmetics, food and pharmaceutical industries, could be performed by using TiO2-based photocatalysts.45–48 The oxidative potential of the photogenerated holes in TiO2 is around 3.2 eV versus standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), while that of the formed OH˙ radicals is 2.8 eV versus SHE.32 Both can be viewed as strong oxidants. These photo-induced oxidants can oxidize or even mineralise (i.e., oxidise completely to CO2) a wide variety of chemicals, and thus the selectivity for organic acids is typically not high. A nanostructured TiO2 synthesized by a sonication-induced sol–gel method was disclosed to catalyse the formation of organic acids including glucaric and gluconic acids with more than 50% selectivity at 11% glucose conversion, significantly higher than that on the commercial TiO2 (P25).45 The higher selectivity of the nanostructured TiO2 might be contributed by the lower affinity of glucaric and gluconic acids on its surface, which results in facile desorption of products from the catalyst, thus preventing the organic acids from undergoing subsequent mineralisation.45 A zeolite Y-supported TiO2 was also found to exhibit higher selectivity of glucaric and gluconic acids than P-25 during the photocatalytic conversion of glucose under UV-vis light irradiation, offering ∼70% selectivity to organic acids at a 15% glucose conversion.46 The negative-charged zeolite framework under the reaction conditions might favour the desorption of organic acids, thus enhancing their selectivity. Ultrasonic-assisted impregnation of TiO2/SiO2 or TiO2/zeolite-Y with transition metal cations could further enhance the photocatalytic oxidation of glucose to glucaric and gluconic acids.47 A Cr-doped TiO2/zeolite-Y showed a selectivity of organic acids of 87% at a 7% conversion. A Fe-doped TiO2/zeolite-Y offered 94% selectivity to glucaric and gluconic acids at a 7% conversion.48 The incorporation of Cr3+ or Fe3+ into the TiO2 lattice would narrow the optical bandgap down to 3.04 or 2.3 eV, and this might reduce the oxidation potential of TiO2, leading to higher selectivity of organic acids.
Metallothioporphyrzines (MPz)-based photocatalysts have also been reported for the conversion of glucose to organic acids.49–51 MPz is a macrocyclic compound with a sulphur group in the macrocyclic periphery and is considered as a biomimetic photocatalyst with strong ability to absorb and utilise visible light. Under visible-light irradiation, MPz could activate H2O2 or O2 to drive oxidation reactions. H-ZSM-5-supported FePz,49 ZnO-supported CoPz50 and SnO2-supported FePz51 could catalyse the oxidation of glucose in the presence of H2O2 under visible-light irradiation. The best result was achieved on the SnO2-supported FePz catalyst and the selectivity of carboxylates reached 52.2% at a 34.2% glucose conversion.51
Han and co-workers reported photocatalytic oxidation of glucose and xylose as well as other biomass-derived platform compounds such as ethanol, 2-furaldehyde, furfural alcohol and HMF using TiO2-supported Au NPs.52 The yields of gluconic acid and xylonic acid reached >95% during the conversions of glucose and xylose after 4 h of reaction under both UV-light and visible-light irradiation. The presence of plasmonic Au NPs was proposed to account for the visible-light activity. Under visible light, the LSPR-induced electrons on the Au NPs were injected into the conduction band of TiO2 and then participated in the activation of O2, forming active oxygen species for the selective oxidation of glucose and xylose into gluconic acid and xylonic acid, respectively (Fig. 8). Na2CO3 added in aqueous solution might play a role in inhibiting the reactive oxygen species with strong oxidation power such as OH˙ radicals generated under UV light, thus promoting the selectivity.52 Au/CeO2 was reported to catalyse the selective oxidations of glucose into gluconic acid and several oligosaccharides into the corresponding aldonates using H2O2 in basic media under simulated-sunlight irradiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2).53 The system was very efficient and >95% yields of sodium mono- and oligo-aldonates could be achieved with a very small amount of catalyst (0.003–0.006 mol% Au in the reaction system) in less than 10 min of standard photovoltaic AM 1.5G light exposure (100 mW cm−2) at room temperature. Au/CeO2 was found to be more active and selective than Au/TiO2 probably because of the stronger LSPR effect and more efficient separation of photogenerated electrons and holes. NaOH also played a role in the selective formation of aldonates by inhibiting the strongly oxidising species and enhancing desorption of organic acids from the catalyst surfaces. While the active species for glucose selective oxidation is still under study, it is proposed that H2O2 works as an electron scavenger after Au has injected electrons into the conduction band of CeO2, and this electron-scavenging effect would enhance the charge separation.53
 Fig. 8  Photocatalytic oxidation of monosaccharides to carboxylates with Au/TiO2 in aqueous Na2CO3 solution.52 (a) Under visible light. (b) Under UV light. Reproduced from ref. 52, with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. 
Photocatalytic conversion of monosaccharides in aqueous solution may also lead to C–C bond cleavage under anaerobic conditions. Li and co-workers found that arabinose (C5 monosaccharide) and erythrose (C4 monosaccharide) were obtained as major products along with H2, formic acid, CO and CO2 during the conversion of glucose in H2O without additional acid or base in the presence of a TiO2-based catalyst under UV-vis light irradiation.54 The best selectivity of arabinose and erythrose reached 91% at a glucose conversion of 65% with a Rh/TiO2-R (rutile) catalyst. Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) results suggested that the high selectivity of C5 and C4 monosaccharides arose from the mild active peroxy radical species formed on Rh/TiO2-R. Control experiments using arabinose and erythrose as substrates offered erythrose (C4) and glyceraldehyde (C3) as major products, respectively. These results illustrated that the reaction proceeded by the cleavage of the C1–C2 bond (α-scission) in monosaccharides, and the α-scission is a common feature for photocatalytic conversion of sugar aldoses on TiO2-R.54
Oxidative cleavage of glucose to short-chain saccharides and smaller oxygenates was further reported by using TiO2-supported Ag NPs under visible-light irradiation.55 The mineralization pathway, i.e., the complete oxidation, was nearly suppressed, affording 98% selectivity to short-chain monosaccharides and organic oxygenates. A series of catalysts with different Ag loadings from 0.5 to 1.5 wt% were investigated, and the main products are arabinose (>35%), formic acid (∼30%) and gluconic acid (15–18%) as well as erythrose and glyceraldehyde. In addition to the α-scission, the cleavage of the C3–C5 bond pathway was also observed. Time-course analyses revealed that gluconic acid behaved as an oxidative intermediate for the bond cleavage of glucose by an oxidative decarboxylation mechanism.55
As mentioned above, formic acid was observed in several photocatalytic systems for glucose conversion.54,55 Using a TiO2 photocatalyst, formic acid was formed from the conversions of glucose and xylose in aqueous solutions containing NaOH.56 In a 0.03 M NaOH solution, the yield of formic acid reached 35% from glucose. The active species such as O2˙− and OH˙ in the presence of hydroxyl ions under light irradiation were proposed for the formation of formic acid. Moreover, the surface of TiO2 in alkaline solution was negatively charged. Thus, the hydroxyl group on the surface of TiO2 would increase the adsorption of glucose and induce the repulsive force between the TiO2 surface and formate (HCOO−) anions, facilitating the transformation of glucose but avoiding the subsequent conversion of formate to CO2.56
Photocatalytic conversion of biomass resources including several monosaccharides to methanol and syngas has recently been reported by Wang and co-workers.30 A photocatalyst with 2 wt% Cu dispersed on TiO2 nanorods (TNRs) was found to be efficient for selective cleavage of C–C bonds with the C–H/C–O bonds remaining intact. A variety of biomass-related compounds including C2 to C6 polyols and fructose could be converted into methanol in a yield of 10–40%. A decrease in the loading of Cu significantly increased the formation of CO, and a 0.1 wt% Cu/TNR catalyst offered a high yield of CO varying from 32% to 52% accompanied by the co-production of H2 during the conversion of polyols, glucose, fructose and sucrose.30 Cellulose and beech sawdust could also be converted via a two-step strategy with the hydrolysis or hydrogenolysis as the first step prior to photocatalysis. For the conversion of cellulose, a 14% yield of methanol was obtained over the 2 wt% Cu/TNR catalyst, while a 45% yield of CO was achieved over the 0.1 wt% Cu/TNR catalyst. The 0.1 wt% Cu/TNR catalyst offered 25% yield of CO and 6% yield of methanol for the conversion of beech sawdust. DFT calculations and characterizations revealed that the oxygen vacancy on the TNRs facilitates the adsorption and activation of polyols, and thus plays a key role in the C–C bond cleavage to produce methanol as the major product. Formic acid was found to be the reaction intermediate for the formation of CO. For the 0.1 wt% Cu/TNR catalyst, Cu2+ mainly existed as a dopant, which preferably catalysed the dehydration of formic acid to CO.30
Visible-light irradiation in the presence of a semiconductor was found to enhance the Brønsted acid-catalysed dehydration of fructose to HMF.57 A Si semiconductor coated with silanol groups showed better performance for the conversion of fructose to HMF in acid solution than metal oxides such as α-Fe2O3, WO3 and TiO2, and a yield of HMF of 97% was achieved after reaction at 80 °C for 5 h under visible-light irradiation in H3PO4 solution. It was proposed that the Si semiconductor converted light energy into thermal energy. The hydroxyl group on the Si surfaces may contribute to the adsorption of fructose selectively by hydrogen bonding (Fig. 9).57 Meanwhile, HMF is less polar than fructose, and thus can be released from the hydrophilic Si surfaces to avoid further rehydration or condensation side reactions.57
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of visible-light-enhanced dehydration of fructose to 5-HMF catalysed by Si. Reproduced from ref. 57, with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2014. 
2.3. Photocatalytic transformations of monosaccharide-derived platforms
HMF and furfural, which can be obtained from the dehydration of C6 and C5 monosaccharides, respectively, are two key platforms for the production of various important or potentially important bio-based oxygenates in the chemical industry. Photocatalytic oxidation and reduction of HMF and furfural to carboxylic acids and alcohols have both been carried out under mild conditions, and some photocatalytic systems have demonstrated unique performances.
Various products can be obtained from the oxidation of HMF (Fig. 10), among which 2,5-diformylfuran (DFF) and 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA) have attracted particular interest. DFF is a key monomer of furan-based biopolymers and can be used as a synthetic intermediate of different targets such as pharmaceuticals and antifungal agents, while FDCA is a promising renewable alternative to terephthalic acid for the production of polyethylene furandicarboxylate (PEF) plastic to replace the petroleum-derived polyethylene terephthalate (PET). Although DFF and FDCA could be synthesized by thermocatalysis, the harsh reaction conditions and the use of expensive noble metal catalysts and excess amounts of alkaline additives as well as the low productivity hinder the large-scale application of thermocatalytic processes. Photocatalysis with photogenerated holes and other active oxygen species generated in the presence of O2 are capable of driving the oxidation of HMF under mild conditions, but the control of the reactive species to gain high selectivity of a specific target product still remains challenging.
 Fig. 10  Potential products from the oxidation of HMF. 
TiO2 samples in different crystalline phases, i.e., rutile, anatase and brookite, were found to catalyse the formation of DFF with selectivity of 20–25% at an HMF conversion of 50% under UV-light irradiation.58 The doping of nitrogen into TiO2 could enhance the selectivity of DFF to >30%.59 It is likely that the N-species decreased the hydroxylation degree of TiO2 surfaces and suppressed the formation of unselective OH˙ radicals, contributing to increasing the selectivity of DFF. Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), a visible-light responsive photocatalyst, was found to catalyse the selective oxidation of HMF to DFF under visible-light irradiation.60,61 The conversion of HMF in an aqueous suspension of g-C3N4 offered a DFF selectivity of 30% and the exfoliated g-C3N4 showed higher DFF selectivity of 42–45%.62 The photocatalytic conversion of HMF in the presence of g-C3N4 in an organic solvent (mixture of benzotrifluoride and acetonitrile) offered DFF with selectivity of 86% at an HMF conversion of 31% under irradiation of light with wavelength >400 nm and atmospheric pressure of O2 at ambient temperature. The g-C3N4 catalyst could be used repeatedly 5 times without losing its activity.61 A WO3/g-C3N4 composite was reported to exhibit DFF selectivity of 87% at an HMF conversion of 27% under irradiation of visible light and atmospheric pressure of O2 at 30 °C.62 The photogenerated holes on WO3 and O2˙− formed by the activation of O2 with photogenerated electrons on g-C3N4 were proposed to participate in the selective oxidation of HMF to DFF.
The irradiation of Au–Ru/r-GO (r-GO, reduced graphene oxide) under visible light or sunlight also accelerated the selective oxidation of HMF to DFF in the presence of O2.63 The yield of DFF could reach 91% under an O2 pressure of 5 bar and 80 °C under visible-light irradiation, while the dark reaction only provided a DFF yield of 17% under the same conditions. O2˙− was proposed to play a key role in the formation of DFF. No measurable loss in the yield of DFF was observed for the Au–Ru/r-GO catalyst after recycling 5 times. MnO2 nanorods could also catalyse the conversion of HMF to DFF and a 98% yield of DFF was achieved under UV-light irradiation for 4 h without an additive (e.g., a base).64 The oxidation was realized by the redox cycle between Mn4+ and Mn3+, which was facilitated by light-promoted activation of lattice oxygen. In the absence of O2, the conversion and DFF selectivity decreased to 21% and 67%, respectively, after 6 h of reaction. The presence of O2 played a key role. H2O in the system may block the active site, and the use of an aprotic and less polar organic solvent (e.g., acetonitrile) could enhance the activity.64
An intriguing photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) has been designed for the selective transformation of HMF to FDCA.65 In the PEC system, the Pt-based cathode works for H2 evolution, whereas a BiVO4-based photoanode can function for the oxidation of HMF in the presence of 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiper-idinyloxyl (TEMPO) mediator. Under simulated solar illumination (AM 1.5 G), the photogenerated holes initiated the oxidation of TEMPO to TEMPO+, which could then oxidise both the alcohol and aldehyde groups in HMF into carboxylate groups in an aqueous solution with a pH of 9.2. As compared to the electrochemical-only system, the applied bias to initiate the TEMPO oxidation was reduced considerably by using the photogenerated holes of semiconductor BiVO4. Nearly 100% yield of FDCA and a 93–94% faradaic efficiency were achieved by using such a PEC system.
Photocatalytic oxidation of HMF to FDCA has recently been accomplished by using cobalt thioporphyrazine (CoPz) dispersed on g-C3N4.66 CoPz (Fig. 11a) is a biomimetic molecular photocatalyst with high redox ability. CoPz alone could catalyse the conversion of HMF in aqueous solution with a pH of 9.18 in the presence of air flow (1 bar) at room temperature under UV-visible-light irradiation. The FDCA selectivity was 90%, but the conversion of HMF was not high (40%) after 14 h of reaction. This is because CoPz is hydrophobic and is prone to aggregate in aqueous solution. On the other hand, g-C3N4 alone showed high HMF conversion (99.6%) but no FDCA was formed. The complete oxidation product, i.e., CO2, was observed as the major product. Remarkable synergistic effects existed between CoPz and g-C3N4, and the CoPz/g-C3N4 composite offered an FDCA yield of 96% with the HMF conversion and FDCA selectivity being 99% and 97%, respectively (Fig. 11b). It is revealed that the low selectivity of g-C3N4 is due to the highly reactive OH˙ radical generated under UV-visible light in the presence of H2O. The dispersion of CoPz on g-C3N4 not only improves the accessibility of the CoPz sites by reducing the aggregation but also disables the generation of OH˙. The CoPz/g-C3N4 photocatalyst could be used repeatedly 5 times without significant decreases in performance, probably because of the reduced degradation of CoPz by the highly reactive OH˙ species. Through EPR measurements and control experiments, it is proposed that the singlet oxygen (1O2) is the active and selective species for the oxidation of HMF to FDCA. The light irradiation of the pyrrole ring in CoPz results in excited CoPz*, which may activate the adsorbed 3O2 molecule to 1O2 and the CoPz* returns back to its ground state (Fig. 11c).66
 Fig. 11  (a) Chemical structure of CoPz. (b) Oxidation of HMF under different conditions. (c) Proposed mechanism for the transformation of HMF to FDCA over CoPz/g-C3N4 catalysts with 1O2 as active species. Reproduced from ref. 66, with the permission of the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Ultrathin CdS nanosheets (thickness ∼1 nm) decorated with Ni were demonstrated to be efficient for the selective oxidation of HMF with simultaneous evolution of H2 in aqueous solution under visible-light irradiation.67 It is of interest that the pH of the system exerts a critical effect on product selectivity. The oxidation of HMF resulted in DFF as the major product when neutral water was utilized as the solvent. The same catalyst could also catalyse the oxidation of furfural alcohol to furfural and the conversion of furfural alcohol was more efficient than that of HMF probably because of the slightly stronger affinity of the aldehydic group in HMF to Ni/CdS. FDCA and furoic acid were obtained as the major products during the conversion of HMF and furfural alcohol, respectively, in alkaline solution.67 The high selectivity of carboxylate under alkaline conditions probably arose from the Cannizzaro mechanism, because the aldehydic group was not stable at high pH and would disproportionate to form alcohols and carboxylates.
In addition to the selective oxidation reactions, a few studies have also been devoted to photocatalytic reduction of furfural or HMF under mild conditions. An Au/SiC catalyst showed high yields (>90%) of alcoholic products in the hydrogenation of furfural and 5-HMF in the presence of isopropyl alcohol as a hydrogen donor under visible-light irradiation at 20 °C. Recycling of Au/SiC 5 times did not show decreases in the performance.68 There is a remarkable synergistic effect between Au and SiC, and the LSPR effect of Au NPs has been proposed to contribute to the high efficiency of this composite. In addition, Au NPs may also participate in abstracting hydrogen from isopropyl alcohol to form surface H atoms. It should be noted that the selective hydrogenation of the aldehydic group without affecting the furanic ring requires careful control of selectivity. The steric effect at the interface, which favours the end-adsorption mode of the aldehydic group should also contribute to the high selectivity of Au/SiC.68
Methylfurans can be derived from HMF and furfural, which are important candidates for production of bio-based diesel fuel.69 Photocatalytic coupling of methylfurans including 2,5-dimethylfuran (2,5-DMF) and 2-methylfuran (2-MF) with the co-production of H2 has been achieved by using a Ru-doped ZnIn2S4 catalyst under visible-light irradiation.70 The further hydrodeoxygenation of coupling products by the themocatalytic approach offered straight- and branched-chain C10–C18 alkanes (∼41% of which are branched-chain alkanes), which could be used as high-quality diesel fuels. Mechanistic studies revealed that the furfuryl C–H bond was first activated by photo-generated holes to produce furfuryl radical intermediate and protons, and the protons accepted the photo-generated electrons to produce H2 (Fig. 12). The radical underwent C–C coupling reaction. The formation of branched-chain alkanes was mainly contributed by the effect of radical resonance. A small amount of trimers and tetramers was also formed as a result of radical coupling and radical resonance. It should be noted that the thermocatalytic C–C coupling of biomass-derived chemicals is usually performed by homogenous acid catalysis, which requires harsh reaction conditions.71 Because photocatalysis can generate radical intermediates facilely by photogenerated electrons or holes,72 photocatalytic coupling is expected to become a promising tool in valorisation of bio-platforms.
 Fig. 12  Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic dehydrogenative coupling of 2,5-dimethylfuran catalysed by Ru–ZnIn2S4 under visible-light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 70, with permission of Springer-Nature, copyright 2019. 
3. Photocatalytic conversion of lignin and lignin-derived aromatics
Traditional biorefineries of lignocellulosic biomass have focused on the carbohydrate components without efficient uses of lignin, which is either released as a waste product or burnt to supply heat. The valorisation of lignin to produce high-value chemicals, in particular aromatic monomers, has attracted much recent attention, since lignin is the most abundant resource of renewable aromatics.8,14 Many homogeneous and heterogeneous catalytic systems have been reported for the conversion of lignin or its model compounds in the past decade,7,9,18,73–75 but the highly selective conversion of lignin to high-value functionalised aromatics remains challenging due to the complex structure and recalcitrant nature of lignin.
Lignin is known to be sensitive to light irradiation due to the presence of aromatic monomers.76,77 Highly reactive species generated during photochemical processes, e.g., OH˙, are known to attack lignin causing a photoyellowing phenomenon, because of the unsaturated nature of aromatic rings. Photocatalytic degradation of lignin without being targeted on useful organic products has also been investigated.78–80
Photocatalytic depolymerisation of lignin by precisely breaking targeted C–O or C–C bonds to obtain aromatic monomers has emerged as a new field in recent years. Because of the irregular and complex structure of native lignin polymers, relatively simple model compounds with typical lignin-bonding patterns are employed to develop efficient photocatalysts and to investigate the reaction mechanism in most studies. Generally, different photocatalytic systems are required to facilitate the cleavage of different types of target chemical bonds. Therefore, here we summarize the photocatalytic methods or systems based on the target bond to be cleaved, i.e., C–O or C–C bonds. Then, several examples for photocatalytic valorisation of aromatic monomers further to high-value chemicals are highlighted.
3.1. Lignin depolymerisation by photocatalytic C–O bond cleavage
The cleavage of the β-O-4 bond, which is the most abundant linkage in lignin, by photocatalysis has attracted much attention. Many studies have been devoted to photocatalytic conversions of lignin model compounds or Organosolv lignin with β-O-4 bonds. These studies can be largely divided into two categories, i.e., stepwise and direct conversions.81 The stepwise conversion usually includes two individual steps. The first oxidation step, which is either thermocatalytic,82,83 photocatalytic84 or electrocatalytic,85 is adopted for the dehydrogenation of the hydroxyl group at the Cα position (CαH–OH) into a carbonyl group (CαO). The second step is the photocatalytic reduction, in which the photogenerated electrons are directly or indirectly used to cleave the Cβ–O bond in the β-O-4 linkage. The oxidation of CαH–OH into CαO decreases the BDE of the Cβ–O bond,86 and thus the Cβ–O bond can be cleaved more easily. In the direct conversion, a photocatalyst is designed to accomplish the Cβ–O bond cleavage, and the whole reaction would work in a redox-neutral manner.87 Besides the Cβ–O bond, the Cα–O bond can also be cleaved by using proper reductive photocatalysis.

3.1.1. Stepwise photocatalytic cleavage of the lignin Cβ–O (β-O-4) bond. 
The pre-oxidation of CαH–OH in lignin model compounds to ketone was first identified in thermocatalytic systems as a useful strategy to break the Cβ–O bond under milder conditions.31,88 Stephenson and co-workers introduced photocatalysis into the stepwise conversion of lignin model compounds in 2014.83 In a series of papers published by the group of Stephenson, photocatalysis was harnessed for reductive cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in the oxidised intermediate, which was formed by oxidising β-O-4 model compounds. The pre-oxidation was conducted at room temperature by a stoichiometric oxidant, i.e., [4-AcNH-TEMPO]BF4 in the early work.83 Latter studies showed that the first step could also be performed catalytically using Pd(OAc)2 under an oxygen atmosphere.82 Electrocatalytic oxidation using a reticulated vitreous carbon electrode in the presence of a hydrogen-atom-transfer (HAT) mediator could also accomplish the pre-oxidation of the CαH–OH in model compounds.85 For the photocatalytic reductive cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in the oxidized intermediate or β-O-4 ketone, a molecular photocatalyst, [Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]PF6, exhibited excellent performance under visible-light irradiation in the presence of an organic base (diisopropylethylamine, DIPCA) and a hydrogen source (HCOOH). It is of interest that the first step could also be operated by Ir-based molecular photocatalysis and palladium-based catalysis in the presence of 2.0 equiv. of Na2S2O8 additive.89 The two-step process successfully fragmented a wide range of dimeric lignin models containing β-O-4 linkages through the Cβ–O bond cleavage. It is of interest that the elegant combination of the two reaction steps in a flow catalytic system can dramatically improve the depolymerisation rates of the dimeric lignin β-O-4 ketone, perhaps through enhanced light absorption and mass transfer under flow conditions.82 The intentional addition of light-shielding reagents only slightly impacted the depolymerisation rates of the β-O-4 ketone.
Mechanistic studies through quenching experiments and redox potential analyses by electrochemical measurements suggest that the absorption of visible light by the Ir photocatalyst would lead to a metal-to-ligand charge transfer to generate an excited state Ir3+* (Fig. 13).82 The estimated redox potentials of Eox(IrVI/IrIII*) and Ered(IrIII*/IrII) were −1.31 and +0.96 V vs. saturated calomel electrode (SCE), respectively. Thus, the excited IrIII* would accept an electron from amine, i.e., diisopropylethylamine (iPr2NEt), which was added to the system as a sacrificial reagent, generating a reduced photocatalyst (IrII), a strong reductant with Epc(IrIII/IrII) of −1.53 vs. SCE. Meanwhile, the amine was converted to the corresponding aminium radical cation, which might undergo a series of subsequent reactions to form enamines (e.g., iPr2NCHCH2) as by-products.90 Single-electron transfer from strongly reducing IrII to dimeric β-O-4 ketone could result in a ketyl radical anion, which would easily undergo Cβ–O bond cleavage, affording 3-hydroxy-1-phenylpropan-1-one and phenol after the hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) and protonation, respectively (Fig. 13).82
 Fig. 13  Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in dimeric lignin β-O-4 ketone by the [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6 complex. Reproduced from ref. 82, DOI: http://10.1021/acscatal.8b04172, with permission of the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019; further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS. 
The immobilization of the [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6 complex onto a mesoporous cellular silica foam (MCF) by a thiol–ene click reaction between pre-fabricated thiol-functionalised mesoporous cellular silica foams and a vinyl-tagged [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6 complex resulted in an efficient molecular heterogeneous photocatalyst for the reductive cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in dimeric lignin β-O-4 ketones under visible-light irradiation.91 Almost the same activity and selectivity were achieved by using the immobilized catalyst to replace the complex catalyst. It was demonstrated that only slight decreases in activity were observed after recycling 6 times.
A series of π-conjugated porous organic frameworks (POFs) fabricated by copolymerizing a carbazolic electron donor (D) and electron acceptor (A) were found to be efficient photocatalysts for the cleavage of the β-O-4 bond in dimeric lignin model compounds owing to their unique redox properties.92 The redox potentials of carbazolic copolymers (CzCPs) could be finely tuned by altering the ratio of D/A. It is of interest that the CzCPs with suitable D/A ratios could function in both the photocatalytic pre-oxidation of dimeric lignin models to dimeric β-O-4 ketones and the subsequent reductive cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in ketones. As a consequence, the CzCP100 with a D/A ratio of 0:100 and the strongest oxidative ability was the most efficient for the pre-oxidation photocatalysis, whereas the CzCP33 with a D/A ratio of 66:33 exhibited the best performance for the reductive Cβ–O bond cleavage.92
Besides the work by the group of Stephenson,89 several other groups also developed photocatalysts for the first step, i.e., the oxidation of CαH–OH to CO in lignin model β-O-4 compounds. A metal-free photocatalytic system composed of a donor-substituted aromatic ketone, e.g., 4,4′-bis(diphenylamino)-benzophenone (DPA-BP), and N-hydroxyphthalimide (NHPI) was found to work for the conversion of a wide range of lignin β-O-4 alcohols to the corresponding ketones in 81–99% isolated yields under blue LED irradiation in the presence of O2 at room tempertuare.93 The DPA-BP interacted with NHPI through hydrogen bonding, which could oxidise NHPI into phthalimide-N-oxyl (PINO) radicals under irradiation. PINO radicals were very active and selective in breaking the Cα–H bond of β-O-4 alcohols, finally offering β-O-4 ketones after reaction with O2. The combination of (NH4)2S2O8 and CuBr2 enabled the selective oxidation of dimeric β-O-4 alcohols under visible-light irradiation, affording β-O-4 ketones in 26% to 99% yields.94 Semiconductor δ-MnO2 was found to oxidise dimeric β-O-4 alcohols selectively to the corresponding ketones in 89–90% yields under the irradiation of blue light (470 nm).95 The γ-CH2OH in lignin model compounds could be sustained by photocatalytic oxidation with δ-MnO2. The transformation of several technical lignin samples such as Organosolv lignin, Kraft lignin and Alkali lignin were also examined. The δ-MnO2 catalyst could be reused by heating treatment.
One challenge for the two-step conversion route is the tedious separation of the products from the first step for subsequent reactions. Thus, one-pot conversion using two catalysts working in tandem would be more desirable than the two separated steps. Wang and co-workers developed a one-pot photocatalytic system composed of two photocatalysts, i.e., Pd/ZnIn2S4 catalysing the oxidative dehydrogenation of β-O-4 lignin models and TiO2(anatase)–HCOONa that catalysed the reductive cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in the resulting β-O-4 ketones (Fig. 14).96 The Pd/ZnIn2S4 and TiO2 catalysts worked under the irradiation of 455 nm and 365 nm LEDs, respectively. Thus, the two catalysts could work in an intriguing switchable tandem manner. In other words, by switching irradiation between 455 nm and 365 nm LEDs, the oxidative dehydrogenation and the reductive Cβ–O bond cleavage occurred in tandem, offering phenols and acetophenones (Fig. 14). The effectiveness of the TiO2 (P25) catalyst in the reductive cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in the dimeric β-O-4 ketones was also claimed in another work.97
 Fig. 14  One-pot photocatalytic fragmentation of dimeric β-O-4 model compounds using two photocatalysts working in tandem by a dual-wavelength switching strategy. Reproduced from ref. 96, with permission of American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. 
Typically, aromatic ketones and phenols are obtained as the major products through the cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in β-O-4 lignin model compounds. The fragmentation of dimeric lignin models with β-O-4 linkage through cleavage of the aryl ether C–O bond may provide other types of aromatic compounds. However, due to the resonance effect, the aryl ether C–O bond is robust and is much more difficult to be cleaved than the aliphatic ether Cβ–O bond. Wang and co-workers developed an aryl migration strategy by installing an internal nucleophile in the β-O-4 linkage, facilitating the cleavage of the aryl ether C–O bond and offering an arylamine product (Fig. 15).98 The internal nucleophile was obtained by stepwise oximation and acylation reactions from β-O-4 ketone. The internal nucleophile is photo-oxidised by phenothiazine (PTH), an organic molecular photocatalyst, through a single-electron-transfer (SET) mechanism, delivering an iminyl radical that experienced aryl migration from the O to N atom through a speculated five-membered ring (Fig. 15) and fulfilling the whole reaction by aryl ether C–O bond cleavage. Hydrolysis of the imine intermediate offers arylamine in the last step (Fig. 15). It is noteworthy that the addition of ascorbic acid (HA) and HCOOH is important to accomplish the photocatalytic cycle by reducing PTH and to donate protons for the hydrolysis of the imine intermediate, respectively, which guarantees the high selectivity of aryl ether C–O bond cleavage. This aryl migration strategy was applicable to the fragmentation of a wide range of lignin β-O-4 models, affording arylamine in isolated yields of 14–64%. By using the same strategy, the Dioxasolv poplar lignin could also be depolymerised into arylamine monomers in 1.9 wt% yield, containing 1.5 wt% G monomer and 0.4 wt% S monomer according to 2D NMR and GC results.
 Fig. 15  Cleavage of the aryl ether C–O bond by an aryl migration strategy to produce primary arylamine. Reproduced from ref. 98, with permission of American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 


3.1.2. Direct photocatalytic cleavage of the lignin Cβ–O bond. 
As compared with the stepwise conversion route for Cβ–O bond cleavage, a direct photocatalytic cleavage of the Cβ–O bond of β-O-4 linkages would not only be simpler but also be more energy-saving without the separation and purification of ketone intermediates. More importantly, sacrificial reagents are usually required for the separated photocatalytic oxidation and reduction processes. Thus, if the photocatalytic cleavage of the Cβ–O bond can proceed directly in a redox-neutral manner, the consumption of expensive sacrificial reductants and oxidants could be avoided.99,100
König and co-workers reported a homogeneous photocatalytic system composed of a photocatalyst (PC), [Ir(ppy)2dtbpy]PF6 or 4CzIPN (an organic dye), and a hydrogen-atom-transfer (HAT) catalyst, e.g., HSCH2CO2Me, for the fragmentation of dimeric lignin β-O-4 models.101 A dual-cycle mechanism with the HAT catalyst for the oxidative dehydrogenation of lignin β-O-4 models to ketones and PC for the reductive cleavage of the Cβ–O bond has been proposed (Fig. 16). Under blue-light irradiation, the PC was activated to the excited state (PC*), which was reductively quenched by the HAT catalyst, generating a thiyl radical. The thiyl radical activates the Cα–H of the dimeric β-O-4 model to give a ketyl radical, which is further oxidised to the corresponding β-O-4 ketone. The generation of the ketone intermediate was proven by GC analysis of the crude reaction mixture after 4 h of irradiation. The β-O-4 ketone accepts an electron from the reduced photocatalyst, resulting in a ketyl radical anion, which is not stable so that the Cβ–O bond cleavage occurs, eventually producing the final fragmentation products. It is noteworthy that the reaction could proceed under an inert atmosphere in a redox-neutral manner when [Ir(ppy)2dtbpy]PF6 was used as the photocatalyst. The O2 atmosphere is required to accelerate the reaction in the case of using 4CzIPN.101
 Fig. 16  The fragmentation of dimeric β-O-4 lignin models in an integrating system composed of a photocatalyst (PC = [Ir(ppy)2dtbpy]PF6 or 4CzIPN) and a hydrogen-atom-transfer (HAT = HSCH2CO2Me) catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 101, with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 
Heterogeneous photocatalytic systems have also been developed for the depolymerization of lignin β-O-4 models and Organosolv lignin under an inert atmosphere. It would be of interest if one catalyst can accomplish a so-called self-transfer or borrowing-hydrogen hydrogenolysis mechanism.99,102 In other words, the oxidative dehydrogenation of the CαH–OH moiety and the reductive cleavage of the Cβ–O bond can proceed on the same catalyst, and the hydrogen generated in the oxidative dehydrogenation can be used for the reductive cleavage of the Cβ–O bond. Wang and co-workers found that a ZnIn2S4 photocatalyst could work for the fragmentation of β-O-4 lignin models under blue LED irradiation via a self-transfer hydrogenolysis mechanism.103 In this system, the alcoholic group (CαH–OH) of dimeric lignin models acted as a hydrogen donor, which was selectively oxidized by the hole generated by irradiation of semiconductor ZnIn2S4, delivering a ketone intermediate and protons. The protons were then reduced by photogenerated electrons to hydrogen adsorbed on ZnIn2S4 surfaces that could reductively break the Cβ–O bond in the β-O-4 ketone intermediate. The deuterium experiments suggest that the adsorbed hydrogen is the key species for the cleavage of the Cβ–O bond. The ZnIn2S4 photocatalytic system was also used for the depolymerisation of Organosolv poplar lignin and isopropanol was added as an additional hydrogen donor in the system. About 10% yield of monomeric products was achieved after 20 h irradiation and the formation of p-hydroxyl acetophenone derivatives was confirmed.103 A similar borrowing-hydrogen strategy was reported for the cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in dimeric β-O-4 lignin model compounds by using a Pd/C catalyst.102 The self-transfer hydrogenolysis mechanism was also proposed for the Ni/CdS nanosheet-catalysed fragmentation of β-O-4 lignin models.104 In this system, the simplest dimeric β-O-4 model, i.e., 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanol (PP-ol), was oxidatively dehydrogenated to the corresponding ketone, 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanone (PP-one), under blue-light (440–460 nm) irradiation using sole MeCN as the solvent. H2 was formed at the same time. When the solvent was altered to a mixture of MeCN and 0.1 M KOH in a volume ratio of 2:8, the cleavage of the Cβ–O bond took place, offering acetophenone and phenol as final products. In this case, the adsorbed H species participated in the reductive cleavage of the Cβ–O bond instead of being released as H2.104
Wang and co-workers discovered a new redox-neutral photocatalytic system, which was different from the self-transfer hydrogenolysis, for depolymerisation of lignin models, Organosolv lignin and even native lignin in lignocellulosic biomass through precise cleavage of the β-O-4 linkage.87,105,106 Among different types of semiconductor photocatalysts, CdS NPs with a cubic zinc blende structure were found to be highly active and selective for the fragmentation of PP-ol under visible-light irradiation, offering acetophenone and phenol as two predominant products. CdS quantum dots (QDs) with smaller sizes (<6.5 nm) showed higher activity than CdS NPs (20–40 nm) because of the increased surface sites and the enhanced redox capability. Both the CdS NPs and CdS QDs were highly stable during repeated uses.
Experimental and computational studies have pointed out a new C–O bond cleavage mechanism, which is called the electron–hole coupled (EHCO) mechanism.87 In brief, both photogenerated electrons and holes participate in the cleavage of the β-O-4 bond via a Cα radical intermediate (Fig. 17a). The Cα–H bond is cleaved upon oxidation by photogenerated holes, forming a Cα radical intermediate. The formation of the Cα radical markedly decreases the BDE of the Cβ–O bond in the lignin model compound (PP-ol) from 55 to 7.8 kcal mol−1, whereas the oxidation of the CαH–OH to CαO only causes a decrease in the BDE of the Cβ–O bond of PP-ol from 55 to 47 kcal mol−1. The remarkably lower BDE of the Cβ–O bond in the Cα radical intermediate contributes to the high activity and selectivity of the CdS photocatalyst. Upon further accepting an electron, the Cα radical undergoes facile cleavage of the markedly weakened Cβ–O bond, selective affording acetophenone and phenol after protonation under mild conditions.
 Fig. 17  (a) Proposed EHCO mechanism for CdS-catalysed fragmentation of a dimeric β-O-4 model through a Cα radical intermediate. (b) Yields of aromatic monomers for photocatalytic conversion of lignins with different β-O-4 contents. The content of β-O-4 bonds is shown in brackets. (c) Schematic diagram of the reversible aggregation–colloidization strategy. (d) Retention of glucans and xylans in different processes. Reproduced from ref. 87 and 105, with the permission of Springer-Nature and American Chemical Society, copyright 2018 and 2019. 
CdS QDs could also catalyse the conversion of various dimeric lignin models.87 Functionalised groups including the γ-hydroxyl group, which easily underwent degradation, could be sustained, further demonstrating the high selectivity of the present catalytic system. Different types of technical lignins could also be depolymerised at ambient temperature under visible-light irradiation.105 During the extraction process for preparing technical lignins, highly robust C–C cross-linked structures (for example, β–β′, β-1′, and β-5′) would be formed by unselective radical coupling at the expense of more reactive β-O-4 linkages. Thus, the abundance of β-O-4 linkages in technical lignins is different from each other and is lower than that in the native lignin. The yield of aromatic monomers was found to increase with the content of β-O-4 linkages and nearly theoretical maximum yields of monomeric aromatics were obtained during the conversion of both native and technical lignins (Fig. 17b). The highest yield of functionalised monomeric aromatics (27 wt%) was obtained during the transformation of native lignin in birch woodmeal. This is the first example of photocatalysis applied to selective depolymerisation of native lignin. The result also confirms that the catalytic valorisation of native lignin in biomass in the first step, which is also known as lignin-first strategy, is beneficial for the production of aromatic monomers from native lignocellulosic biomass.
Further in-depth studies revealed that organic ligands attached on CdS QD surfaces played key roles in the conversion of the solid native lignin.105 The hydrophilic/hydrophobic property of surface ligands could control the colloidal stability of QDs, which determined the contact between QDs and solid native lignin. The use of hydrophilic organic ligands such as mercaptoalkanoic acid, HS(CH2)nCOOH, on CdS QDs could result in a highly dispersed or “solubilized” catalyst in polar CH3OH/H2O solution, and the pseudo homogeneous catalyst worked efficiently for the depolymerisation of native birch lignin owing to the intimate contact between the catalyst and solid lignin. Otherwise, the solid–solid reaction led to very low photocatalytic efficiency. Furthermore, because the lignin reactant was not in direct contact with the inorganic core of CdS QDs, ligands also participated in mediating the interfacial charge transfer between the QDs and lignin.105 The femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy studies suggest that the rate constant of charge transfer decreases exponentially with the length of HS(CH2)nCOOH (n = 2, 5, 10) ligands, indicating an electron-tunnelling mechanism for the charge-transfer process via the organic ligand.
A reversible aggregation-colloidization strategy was devised to enable facile separation of the CdS QD catalyst from the liquid aromatic monomer products and from the remaining solid cellulose/hemicellulose (Fig. 17c). The preservation of cellulose/hemicellulose in the solid residue from the photocatalytic lignin-first process was compared with those from the technical processes. Cellulose was preserved well in all processes with a glucan retention of 96–98% (Fig. 17d). However, the fractions of xylans, the major components of hemicellulose in birch lignocellulosic biomass, were below 55% for the technical processes. In contrast, 90% of xylans were preserved after photocatalytic conversion of native lignin. It is well known that hemicellulose easily undergoes degradation in the conventional high-temperature biorefinery or lignin-first process (dominated by hydrogenolysis). These results clearly demonstrate that the photocatalytic lignin-first conversion at ambient temperature has offered a promising approach to producing bio-based functionalised aromatics and the full utilization of all three components of lignocellulosic biomass.
In a subsequent work, Wang and co-workers synthesized a series of ZnmIn2Sm+3 (m = 1–6) semiconductors by a low-temperature hydrothermal method and used them for the conversion of β-O-4 lignin models or Organosolv lignin.106 Zn4In2S7 was found to be an efficient photocatalyst for the fragmentation of dimeric β-O-4 models under visible-light irradiation, affording phenols and aromatic ketones (acetophenone in the case of PP-ol) in high yields. A high yield of functionalised aromatic monomers (18.4%) was obtained in photocatalytic conversion of Dioxasolv birch lignin. Control experiments pointed out that the fragmentation of lignin β-O-4 models mainly proceeded by the mechanism via the Cα radical, similar to that proposed for a CdS-catalysed system (Fig. 17a).87 The two-step self-hydrogen or borrowing-hydrogen mechanism via the CαO intermediate might also occur but was a minor pathway. Further mechanistic studies suggested that the –SH group on Zn4In2S7 surfaces played a key role in the cleavage of β-O-4 linkages.106 The surface –SH group may trap holes to generate a thiyl radical, which is proposed to be responsible for selective activation of the Cα–H bond to form a Cα radical intermediate.


3.1.3. Direct photocatalytic cleavage of lignin Cα–O bonds. 
A few studies have been devoted to the cleavage of α-O-4 bonds under mild conditions by photocatalysis. Imamura et al. reported that TiO2 (P25)-based photocatalysts could work for the cleavage of the Cα–O bond in benzyl phenyl ether, which is the simplest model compound with an α-O-4 linkage.107 Toluene and phenol were formed with ∼99% yields after 2 h irradiation under UV light in the presence of 2-propanol-containing water. Pd was found to be the best co-catalyst among various noble metal co-catalysts, and the Pd/TiO2 photocatalyst enabled the reductive cleavage of the Cα–O bond by using 2-propanol as a hydrogen donor. The photocatalytically generated Pd–H species was proposed to participate in the reductive cleavage of the Cα–O bond.
The LSPR effect of noble metals was also found to be applicable to the cleavage of α-O-4 linkages.108 The co-immobilization of plasmonic Au or Ag NPs and Ni(II) complex on Al2O3 nanofibres grafted with an amino group-containing silane (ASN) resulted in Au–ASN–NiII or Ag–ASN–NiII photocatalysts, which were called plasmonic-antenna-promoted catalysts. By using isopropanol as the sacrificial reagent, either photocatalyst could work for the fragmentation of benzyl phenyl ether under visible-light irradiation at 80–90 °C in the presence of KOH, affording phenol and toluene in high selectivity and precluding the over-hydrogenation of aromatic rings due to the relatively mild conditions. The synergistic effects between the catalytic reduction ability of the NiII complex and the hot electrons generated by irradiation of Au or Ag NPs accelerated the hydrogenolysis of the Cα–O bond. Concentrated light irradiation of the Au(Ag)–ASN–NiII promoted the chemisorption of benzyl phenyl ether on the NiII complex. The transfer of photo-induced hot electrons from Au or Ag NPs to the NiII complex through the unoccupied anti-bonding π* orbitals of aromatic rings of benzyl phenyl ether or molecular bridge of the aromatic ring of reactants resulted in the reduction of NiII to catalytically active Ni0. The latter catalysed the reductive cleavage of the Cα–O bond in a thermocatalytic manner.108

3.2. Lignin depolymerisation by photocatalytic C–C bond cleavage
The sole cleavage of the C–O linkages in lignin can only afford monomeric aromatics in a theoretical yield of usually no more than 50%.109,110 To obtain higher yields of monomeric products from lignin depolymerisation, the interlinking C–C bonds are also required to be cleaved. Generally, the C–C bond is more difficult to split because of its non-polar and robust features. Moreover, the C–C bond cleavage may give aldehydes, which can be very reactive to phenolic aromatics, inducing the re-condensation of products or intermediates to afford more recalcitrant structures under reaction conditions for C–C bond cleavage.110 Photocatalysis is a useful strategy to cleave the robust C–C bond under mild conditions, under which the aldehydes and phenols may remain in the reaction system, and thus may enormously improve the yield of products from lignin depolymerisation. Until now, the targeted lignin linkages via C–C bond scission mainly include β-O-4 and β-1 linkages (cleavage of Cα–Cβ bond), which are the most and the second most abundant linkages in most lignins.
Hirao, Soo and co-workers reported a homogeneous vanadium VV-oxo complex for the cleavage of the Cα–Cβ bond in dimeric β-O-4 lignin models under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm, AM 1.5 solar intensity) and aerobic conditions.111 This unique functional group-tolerant C–C cleavage photocatalyst offered benzyl aldehyde and benzyl formate derivatives as the major products, and their yields could reach 70% and 61%, respectively, under optimized conditions. Other products included benzoic acid (24% yield), phenol (6% yield) and formaldehyde (32% yield) due to the over-oxidation of benzaldehyde and decomposition of phenyl formate, respectively. In the subsequent work, the same group found that by incorporating electron-withdrawing groups at selected sites of the ligand, the photocatalytic activity of C–C bond cleavage could be accelerated with the rates of 2.5–17 times faster than the original VV oxo complex.112
The above VV oxo complexes tended to be poisoned by the phenolic hydroxyl groups present in lignin. Wang and co-workers disclosed a robust VO(iPrO)3 photocatalyst for the cleavage of the Cα–Cβ bond in dimeric β-1 lignin models.113 The conversion of 1,2-diphenylethanol under visible-light irradiation provided benzaldehyde as the major product with minor benzoic acid. A benzaldehyde yield of 86% was obtained with 7% benzoic acid after 6 h of irradiation with blue LEDs (λ = 455 nm) under O2. VO(acac)2 was found to be a more efficient photocatalyst for the fragmentation of the β-O-4 linkage by cleaving the Cα–Cβ bond than VO(iPrO)3.113 The presence of N-hydroxyphthalimide (NHPI), which might accelerate the photo-assisted oxidation of VO(acac)2 to generate VV, further enhanced the photocatalytic activity for the fragmentation of the β-O-4 linkage. Both VO(iPrO)3 and VO(acac)2 could be applied to the depolymerisation of Dioxasolv lignin, including birch-, straw- and poplar-derived lignin samples, although the monomer yields were still unsatisfactory at this moment. The best result was achieved from the depolymerisation of birch lignin using VO(acac)2, and vanillin and syringaldehyde were obtained with yields of 0.6 wt% and 0.79 wt%, respectively.113
The general mechanism for vanadium-based homogeneous photocatalysts for Cα–Cβ bond cleavage is illustrated using a β-1 model substrate (1,2-diphenylethanol) as an example (Fig. 18).113 The interaction of VV-species with the hydroxyl group of the substrate forms a VV-β-1 complex. Under light irradiation, the ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) induces reduction of vanadium, which simultaneously drives the direct Cα–Cβ bond cleavage, forming a VIV-benzaldehyde complex and a benzyl radical. The benzyl radical would be oxidised to benzaldehyde in the presence of O2 through a peroxide intermediate. The dissociation of the VIV-benzaldehyde complex affords another molecule of benzaldehyde. The reduced vanadium is re-oxidised to VV. The oxidation of VIV back to VV by O2 or alkyl peroxides might be kinetically slow, thereby resulting in the uncontrollable aggregation of the vanadium photocatalyst and limiting the rate of β-1 model compound fragmentation.
 Fig. 18  Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic fragmentation of the Cα–Cβ bond in the dimeric β-1 model with VO(iPrO)3. Reproduced from ref. 113, with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 
Heterogeneous photocatalysts have also been developed for the rupture of the Cα–Cβ bond in β-O-4 and β-1 linkages. A visible-light responsive mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride (mpg-C3N4) semiconductor was found to catalyse the fragmentation of both β-O-4 and β-1 lignin models through the cleavage of the Cα–Cβ bond under the irradiation of blue LEDs (λ = 455 nm) in the presence of O2.114
The conversions of PP-ol (β-O-4 model compound) and 1,2-diphenylethanol (β-1 model) both afforded benzaldehyde and benzoic acid as the major products, and the combined yield of the two products reached 66–90%. Phenol formate was also formed as a major product during the conversion of PP-ol. Mechanistic studies indicate that the depolymerisation of lignin β-O-4 models is initiated by direct activation of the Cβ–H bond by photogenerated holes on mpg-C3N4, forming a Cβ radical intermediate (Fig. 19).114 This was proven by the hydrogen kinetic isotope experiments, where deuteration of the hydrogen linked to β-C dramatically decreased the conversion of the β-O-4 models. The Cβ radical intermediate then reacted with O2 and the H˙ radical that was produced by proton reduction with photogenerated electrons, forming a hydroperoxide intermediate. The hydroperoxide intermediate could undergo C–C bond cleavage, producing benzaldehyde and phenol formate as products (Fig. 19). Solid-state NMR characterizations and DFT calculations suggest that π–π stacking interactions exist between the corrugated mpg-C3N4 surface and lignin models, which play a crucial role in improving the activity of the mpg-C3N4 photocatalyst in addition to its large surface area. This system represents an interesting example of C–C cleavage induced by hole-initiated C–H activation.
 Fig. 19  Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic rupture of the Cα–Cβ bond in β-O-4 linkages over mpg-C3N4 catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 114, with permission of American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. 
It is noteworthy that the pre-oxidation of the CαH–OH group to CαO in 1,2-diphenylethanol (β-1 model) would increase the BDE of the Cα–Cβ bond from 295 to 354 kJ mol−1, and thus increase the difficulty in C–C bond cleavage.115 Thus, an efficient catalyst for cleavage of the Cα–Cβ bond in the β-1 linkage should selectively activate the Cβ–H bond and suppress the oxidation of CαH–OH. This is one challenge for developing heterogeneous photocatalysts for selective C–C cleavage. Wang and co-workers developed a three-component CuOx/CeO2/TiO2 catalyst, which was capable of selectively catalysing the C–C bond cleavage rather than the oxy-dehydrogenation reaction of β-1 models.115 The conversion of 1,2-diphenylethanol under irradiation of a 455 nm LED in the presence of O2 for 10 h resulted in >99% yield of benzaldehyde. The photocatalytic conversion of a more complicated β-1 model compound with γ-hydroxyl and methoxyl substituents, i.e., 1-(3,4-dimethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-methoxyphenyl)-propane-1,3-diol, offered a 96% yield of veratraldehyde and a >99% yield of anisic aldehyde after 24 h irradiation under 455 nm LEDs in the presence of O2. These results indicate the very high Cα–Cβ cleavage selectivity of this catalyst. Further studies revealed that the C–C bond cleavage was initiated by the preferential activation of the Cβ–H bond induced by photogenerated holes. The produced Cβ radical was inclined to react with protons and the peroxide radical anion derived from the reduction of O2 by photogenerated electrons, delivering a peroxide that underwent C–C bond cleavage and afforded monomeric aromatics (Fig. 20a). In parallel to the oxidative Cβ–H bond cleavage, Cα–H bond cleavage might be possible, affording a carbon radical that was finally dehydrogenated to deoxybenzoin without C–C bond cleavage (Fig. 20a).
 Fig. 20  (a) Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic rupture of the Cα–Cβ bond in the β-1 linkage over the CuOx/CeO2/TiO2 catalyst. (b) Photocatalytic conversion of 1,2-diphenylethanol under UV light. 1a = benzaldehyde, 1b = diphenylethanone. Reproduced from ref. 115, DOI: http://10.1021/acscatal.7b00629, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017, further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS. 
The functions of each component in the CuOx/CeO2/TiO2 catalyst were investigated.115 A 16% yield of diphenylethanone and a 22% yield of benzaldehyde were obtained over TiO2 under 365 nm UV-light irradiation, indicating the presence of both C–C bond cleavage and oxy-dehydrogenation reactions (Fig. 20b). The decoration of TiO2 with CuOx clusters decreased the activity of TiO2 due to the upward shift of the TiO2 valence-band edge. On the other hand, the CeO2/TiO2 showed higher selectivity of benzaldehyde. This further revealed that the defective CeO2 clusters containing Ce3+ and oxygen vacancies were inclined to catalyse the Cβ–H bond cleavage, thus promoting the selectivity for C–C bond cleavage. CuOx clusters present on CeO2 domains could further increase the density of surface defects, thereby further improving the selectivity of the photocatalyst (Fig. 20b). Yields of >90% aromatic aldehydes through Cα–Cβ bond cleavage were obtained during the conversions of several dimeric β-1 model compounds under 455 nm LED irradiation over CuOx/CeO2/TiO2.115
The pre-oxidation of CαH–OH to CαO is detrimental to the cleavage of C–C bonds according to studies reported by Wang and co-workers.114,115 A metal-free photocatalytic method was recently reported for the cleavage of C–C bonds in β-O-4 model ketones with CαO bonds.116 Under UV-light irradiation and air, the combination of [PrHSO3Mim][OTf] and [PMim][NTf2] ionic liquids afforded benzoic acid and phenol in 87% and 78% yields, respectively, from diphenylethanone. The fragmentation of β-O-4 ketone is proposed to be also initiated by the cleavage of the Cβ–H bond and is assisted by [PMim][NTf2] (Fig. 21). The reaction of the Cβ radical with O2 generates a peroxide radical that oxidizes water, delivering a peroxide radical and OH˙ that may abstract hydrogen from the Cβ–H bond to fulfil the propagation of radical reactions. The peroxide radical finally experiences C–C bond cleavage with the participation of protons and the catalytic function of [PrHSO3Mim][OTf] to afford benzoic acid and phenol.116
 Fig. 21  Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic cleavage of the Cα–Cβ bond in β-O-4 ketone in ionic liquids. Reproduced from ref. 116, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc, Copyright 2019. 
The cleavage of the C–C bond in lignin β-O-4 and β-1 linkages can also be initiated by photo-oxidation of aryl rings similar to that in natural ligninolytic peroxidases through a radical cation intermediate.117–119 Mariano and co-workers reported the use of 9,10-dicyanoanthracene (DCA) as a photocatalyst, which could oxidise the aryl rings in β-1 and β-O-4 models to their radical cation intermediates after light irradiation.120,121 The intermediates experienced C–C bond cleavage, being cleaved in a homolytic way and delivering a radical and a carbon cation that were finally converted to benzaldehydes and phenols. The fragmentation of β-1 models was found to proceed faster than those of β-O-4 models regardless of the substituents at the aryl rings, owing to the lower BDE of the C–C bond according to DFT calculations. The number of methoxy groups at the aryl rings also affected the reaction rate of C–C bond cleavage, and the radical cations derived from less-methoxy-substituted dimeric β-O-4 models underwent C–C bond cleavage more readily. However, for both the DCA and ligninolytic peroxidase, the fragmentation of lignin β-O-4 models provided very low yields of the phenolic segments or even no such products were detected. This may be caused by the over-oxidation of the resulting phenolic intermediates.
An acridinium salt (Mes-Acr+), possessing a high oxidation potential in its excited state (Mes-Acr+*), was used as the photocatalyst for the oxidation of the aryl rings in β-O-4 lignin models (Fig. 22, 1st step).122 The resulting radical cation was deprotonated with the assistance of AcO−, together with the radical being transferred from an aryl ring to an oxygen atom. The formed alkoxy radical then experienced C–C bond cleavage, delivering benzaldehyde and a carbon radical. The further reaction of a carbon radical with O2 afforded a peroxide radical that was reduced to an alkoxy anion by Mes-Acr˙. The alkoxy anion was finally converted to phenol formate with the catalysis of Cu(OAc)2 (Fig. 22, 2nd step). The merging of photocatalysis and Cu catalysis enabled the fragmentation of other lignin models through C–C bond cleavage. However, perhaps due to the very large oxidation potential required to oxidise aryl rings, only lignin models containing benzene rings with two –OMe substituents were found to be feasible to be fragmented.
 Fig. 22  Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic fragmentation of dimeric β-O-4 lignin models by a relay method with photocatalysis and copper catalysis. Reproduced from ref. 122, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc, Copyright 2018. 
Metal complexes have also been reported for the cleavage of the Cα–Cβ bond in lignin β-O-4 and β-1 linkages. An Ir complex was found to catalyse the fragmentation of dimeric β-O-4 models through Cα–Cβ bond cleavage, forming benzyl aldehydes and phenyl ethers under blue LED irradiation under a N2 atmosphere.123 It was found that the yields of products were highly dependent on the alkalinity of the base added into the system. Among different base additives, collidine (pKa = 14.98) afforded the highest yields of products (71–97%) from Cα–Cβ bond cleavage. It is proposed that the excitation of the IrIII complex and the presence of the base enable the one-electron oxidation of β-O-4 models from the phenyl moiety to the adjacent α-OH group (Fig. 23). The generated radical cation is transformed to an alkoxy radical intermediate through a proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) mechanism. The Cα–Cβ bond becomes weakened in the alkoxy radical, and thus the alkoxy radical intermediate experiences a facile β-scission, producing benzaldehyde and a carbon radical that can be finally converted to anisole. The IrII complex is restored by the generated PhS˙ radical. It is noteworthy that the γ-CH2OH group could be sustained by the present photocatalytic system. This photocatalytic system was also applied to the degradation of Dioxalignin, but the result was not satisfactory possibly because the presence of phenolic hydroxyl groups might inhibit the activity of the Ir complex photocatalyst. To solve this problem, the protection of possible phenolic hydroxyl groups in extracted birch lignin by reacting with MeI/K2CO3 was carried out and a yield of ∼5 wt% was achieved for the degradation products.123
 Fig. 23  Proposed reaction mechanism of Cα–Cβ bond cleavage by an Ir complex via a PCET process. Reproduced from ref. 123, with permission of Elsevier B.V., copyright 2019. 
The integration of photocatalysis with electrocatalysis and biocatalysis enables the fragmentation of dimeric lignin model compounds.124 The integrated photo-electro-biocatalytic system contained three compartments: a TiO2 photoanode that harvests light and oxidises water to O2, a Co-N/CNT electrode that employs generated photoelectrons to reduce O2 to H2O2 and a biocatalyst optimized to be LiPH8 to oxidise lignin β-O-4 models using H2O2 into benzaldehyde in 98.7% selectivity. A Nafion membrane and cellulose membrane were necessary for the separation of the three compartments to guarantee the high selectivity and activity of the enzymes because the UV-light irradiation or the oxidation by reactive oxygen species or bubbled O2 may deactivate the enzyme. The depolymerisation of native lignin or Organosolv lignin has not been performed by the integrated catalytic system. Nevertheless, this work offers an opportunity to depolymerise lignin models by means of integrated catalysis.
3.3. Photocatalytic transformations of lignin-derived aromatics
As described above, photocatalysis enables the depolymerisation of polymeric lignin to produce aromatic ketones and aldehydes as well as phenols, which are usually difficult to obtain by the conventional thermocatalysis. Here, we will highlight some recent advances in harnessing photocatalysis to further valorise monomeric aromatic compounds.
Photocatalytic single-electron reduction of carbonyl compounds can form ketyl radicals, which may then undergo various C–C or C–N coupling reactions for synthetic chemistry.125 The C–C coupling of the ketyl radicals could offer aromatic diols, which are important building blocks in pharmaceuticals and key structural motifs in natural products. The major challenge of the dimerization lies in the high reduction potential of carbonyl compounds to produce ketyl radicals, e.g., Ered1/2 = 1.93 V vs. SCE for benzaldehyde and Ered1/2 = 2.11 V vs. SCE for acetophenone.125 Rueping and co-workers reported that the presence of a tertiary amine (NBu3), which was a sacrificial co-reducing agent in the system, could facilitate the reduction of a carbonyl group to a ketyl radical by an Ir complex photocatalyst under visible-light (λ = 450 nm) irradiation.126 Mechanistic studies revealed that the reductive single-electron-transfer (SET) of the photo-excited Ir complex converted NBu3 into its cation radical (NBu3˙+), which was a Lewis acid and could interact with the weakly basic carbonyl group by a two-centre/three-electron bond (Fig. 24). In addition, the α-ammonium radical, an isomer of NBu3˙+, may be engaged in the reduction of a carbonyl group by H-bond activation. Both mechanisms contributed to the formation of ketyl radicals under mild conditions. The photocatalytic system was compatible with a wide range of carbonyl aromatics bearing different functional groups, providing a variety of diols in good yields (50–90%).126
 Fig. 24  Proposed reaction mechanism for tertiary amine-promoted photocatalytic coupling of carbonyl aromatics through ketyl radicals. Reproduced from ref. 126, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc, Copyright 2015. 
The same group further disclosed a cross coupling of ketyl radicals with amino radicals generated from aromatic aldehyde and aniline by photocatalysis in the presence of an Ir complex under visible-light irradiation.127 A tertiary amine, N,N-dimethyl-4-methylaniline, which was employed as the reducing agent, also facilitated the generation of ketyl radicals. Different from the system for the coupling of ketyl radicals,126 in which the amine was a sacrificial electron donor and might be converted to enamine by-products,90 the tertiary amine in the present system was the nitrogen source for the C–N cross coupling reaction. The tertiary amine, after being oxidised, underwent deprotonation to form a neutral α-amino radical with high nucleophilicity, which could couple with the ketyl radical efficiently, suppressing the self-coupling reactions. Through this cross-coupling approach, a series of biologically active amino alcohols were synthesized. The amino alcohol produced by cross coupling of benzaldehyde and nitrone could further be converted into commercial medicines, i.e., ephedrine and selegiline, in an overall yield higher than 70%.128
Ketyl radicals generated from aromatic aldehydes or ketones by photocatalysis could also couple with other nucleophilic reagents such as aryl radicals,129 olefins130,131 and alkenylpyridines.132 Photocatalytic cross coupling of a (hetero)aromatic aldehyde and two other components, i.e., (hetero)aromatic amine and electron-deficient olefin, could result in the direct synthesis of γ-amino acid derivatives, which could find applications in the pharmaceutical industry.133
Aromatic aldehydes or ketones formed during catalytic depolymerisation of lignin can be easily transformed into the corresponding alcohols, which may also undergo C–C coupling via radical intermediates generated by photocatalysis. Heterogeneous semiconductors, zinc indium sulphides (Zn–In–S), were found to catalyse the activation of the Cα–H bond in benzyl alcohol to a benzylic radical, which subsequently experienced C–C coupling reactions (Fig. 25a).134 It is of interest that the selectivity of the coupling products could be controlled by changing the Zn/In ratio; a higher Zn/In ratio favoured the formation of deoxybenzoin (DOB), while a lower Zn/In ratio resulted in benzoin (BZ) (Fig. 25b). It is noteworthy that DOB is currently manufactured by AlCl3-catalysed C–C coupling of benzene and phenylacetyl chloride, which is produced by the functionalisation of phenylacetic acid through the reaction with a stoichiometric amount of toxic PCl3 or SOCl2. Time-course analyses showed that hydrobenzoin (HB) formed by the direct coupling of benzylic radicals is the reaction intermediate for DOB and BZ (Fig. 25c). A series of control experiments with different substrates illustrated that the reductive cleavage of the C–OH bond is likely the key to tuning the selectivity for oxidation to BZ or dehydration to DOB. The cleavage of the C–OH bond requires sufficient reduction potential and the increase in the Zn/In ratio can lead to a lower conduction-band-bottom potential of Zn–In–S, which means a higher reduction ability, and thus a higher selectivity to the reductive C–OH bond cleavage. Mott–Schottky measurements verified that the conduction-band potential decreased from −2.68 V for Zn0.2In2S3.2 to −2.85 V for Zn0.6In2S3.6. Therefore, the Zn–In–S catalyst with a higher Zn/In ratio can drive the cleavage of the C–OH bond and lead to a higher selectivity to the coupling-dehydration product.134 A recent work reported that the Zn–In–S semiconductor could catalyse the coupling of methanol and ethanol to ethylene glycol and 2,3-butanol, respectively.135
 Fig. 25  (a) Photocatalytic coupling of benzyl alcohol over zinc indium sulphides. (b) Influence of Zn/In ratio on product yields in photocatalytic coupling of BAL to deoxybenzoin (DOB) and benzoin (BZ). (c) Time-course profile of photocatalytic coupling of BAL over Zn0.6In2S3.6 catalysts. BAL and HB denote benzyl alcohol and hydrobenzoin, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 134, with permission of American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 
The oxidative activation of the aromatic ring has offered another approach to valorising the lignin-derived aromatic compounds, in particular phenols. For example, oxidative coupling of aromatic rings with amines could produce anilines, which are important building blocks in the fertilizer, pesticide and pharmaceutical industries. In thermocatalysis, four steps are required for the production of anilines from lignin-derived aromatic phenols.136 A one-step route for the synthesis of anilines from phenols has been developed by photocatalysis. Xia and co-workers disclosed a feasible cross-dehydrogenative coupling protocol that could be applied to synthesizing a wide range of ortho-aminated phenols by using persulfate (S2O82−) as the external oxidant.137 The reaction was initiated by light irradiation of persulfate (S2O82−) to afford easily handled oxidant SO4−,138 which could oxidise both phenol and phenothiazine (a secondary amine) to give a C-radical and a N-radical (Fig. 26).137 The radical–radical cross coupling followed by the isomerisation of the coupling products offered anilines.
 Fig. 26  Proposed mechanism for the cross-dehydrogenative coupling of phenols and phenothiazine. Reproduced from ref. 137, with permission of American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. 
By changing amines, a series of anilines were synthesized. However, the candidates of amines that could be oxidised by SO4− are quite limited. The use of an animation reagent with high nucleophilicity, such as pyrazoles139 and azoles,140 could circumvent the requirement of amine-derived radicals. Alternatively, the use of an oxidant with a higher oxidation potential could also expand the scope of aniline products. For example, organic 2,4,6-triphenylpyrylium (TPT) could efficiently drive the oxidation of various electron-rich acyclic diarylamines, and the amination reaction between phenol and phenothiazine resulted in complex (+)-δ-tocopherol in a high yield of 82%.141
Acetalization of benzaldehydes with alcohols, which is a common strategy to protect the unstable aldehyde group from further chemical transformations, has been demonstrated by photocatalysis. An Au/NaY or Au/M-ZSM-5 (M = H+, Na+, Ca2+ or La3+) catalyst with plasmonic effect of Au NPs was found to be efficient for the acetalization of benzaldehyde with different substituents in the aromatic ring under visible-light irradiation.142,143 The mechanistic studies suggest that the light-assisted acetalization could mainly be attributed to the LSPR-induced electric near-field enhancement (ENFE) effect. The polarized electric fields of zeolites created by extra-framework cations could be intensified by the ENFE effect. The CO bond was stretched and was thus activated in the intensified polarized electric fields, resulting in a boosted activity for acetalization.
4. Conclusion and outlook
The development of efficient methods for selective valorisation of biomass to target products is a highly attractive but challenging research goal. The present article has demonstrated that photocatalysis is a promising approach to transforming lignocellulosic biomass into high-value chemicals, in particular organic oxygenates, by precisely cleaving specific C–O/C–C bonds using solar energy under mild reaction conditions. The photo-excited charge carries or photogenerated reactive species can drive reduction or oxidation reactions without consuming additional reagents, enabling the environmental benign transformations.
The cleavage of C–O–C ether bonds that connect the monomeric unit in polysaccharides such as cellulose or hemicellulose is the key to their depolymerisation. Studies on photo-reforming of lignocellulosic biomass with the aim to produce H2 pointed out that the photogenerated OH˙ radicals could work for the cleavage of the C–O–C ether bond and the degradation of lignocellulose, but OH˙ was non-selective, resulting in CO2 and small molecules.39,40 Useful organic products such as HMF could also be obtained from cellulose using TiO2-based photocatalysts in combination with liquid Brønsted or Lewis acids.41,42 Several pieces of recent work disclosed that the light-induced LSPR effect using a plasmonic metal (Au or Ir)/zeolite photocatalyst could accelerate the hydrolysis of cellulose through selective cleavage of β-1,4-glycosidic C–O bonds in cellulose to produce glucose as well as HMF under visible-light irradiation and relatively mild conditions, probably because of the plasmonic thermal effect or the polarized-electric-field enhancement effect.37,38
The selective oxidation of aldehydic/hydroxyl groups in monosaccharides or monosaccharide-derived platforms (e.g., HMF or furfural) plays a crucial role in synthesizing bio-based carbonyl compounds or organic acids, which are important synthetic intermediates for fine chemicals or monomers for key polymers. Photocatalytic oxidation offers an alternative route to thermocatalytic oxidation, and both molecular photocatalysts (e.g., MPz49–51 and CoPz66) and semiconductor photocatalysts (e.g., TiO2,45–48,58,59 plasmonic metal/TiO2,52,53 g-C3N4,60,61 WO3/g-C3N4,62 Au–Ru/r-GO63 and Ni–CdS nanosheets67) have been developed for photocatalytic oxidation of aldehydic/hydroxyl groups. O2˙− generated by reductive activation of O2 or photo-excited holes may participate in the selective oxidation reaction, but OH˙ is likely to be responsible for the low selectivity of selective oxidation products.45,52,59,62,63,66
Photocatalysis could be applied to cleaving the C–C bond in monosaccharides under aerobic or anaerobic conditions to afford shorter-chain oxygenates or C3–C5 aldoses, and Rh/TiO2 or Ag/TiO2 was reported to catalyse such C–C cleavage reactions.54,55 The α-scission is a unique pattern for photocatalytic C–C bond cleavage, which may be exploited as a helpful tool for selective synthesis of C4 or C5 carbohydrates. Another interesting application of photocatalysis is C–C coupling of cellulose- or hemicellulose-derived bio-platforms such as methyl furfurals (e.g., 2,5-DMF, 2-MF) to produce C10–C18 products as diesel fuel precursors.70
The cleavage of C–O bonds, in particular β-O-4 linkages, is the key to the selective depolymerisation of lignin. Photocatalysis plays crucial roles in selective cleavage of β-O-4 linkages under mild conditions. Stepwise fragmentation of β-O-4 linkages in lignin models or Organosolv lignin with photocatalysts for oxidation of CαH–OH to CαO and/or for reductive cleavage of the β-O-4 bond in the ketone intermediate has been investigated intensively (Fig. 27, path a).83–86,89,91–97 Sacrificial reagents are required when photocatalytic oxidation or reduction is performed separately. The direct fragmentation of β-O-4 linkages in a redox neutral manner is a more attractive approach (Fig. 27, paths b and c). In particular, the development of a single photocatalyst for this purpose is a promising research direction. A few recent breakthroughs have been achieved by developing sulphide semiconductors (e.g., CdS QDs, ZnIn2S4 and Zn4In2S7).87,103,105,106 The CdS QD catalyst could also work for the conversion of native lignin in solid lignocellulosic biomass into functionalised aromatic monomers, while cellulose and hemicellulose could be preserved; this offers a promising method for full utilisation of lignocellulosic biomass under mild conditions.87 A few studies have also been devoted to photocatalytic cleavage of the α-O-4 bond in lignin model compounds using Pd/TiO2 or Au(Ag)–ASN–NiII catalysts (Fig. 27, path d).107,108
 Fig. 27  Summary of photocatalytic approaches for the depolymerisation of lignin or its model compounds by C–O and C–C bond cleavage. Schemes highlighted in red represent paths that are applicable to polymeric lignin. 
Photocatalysis has been applied to the selective cleavage of C–C bonds, which is a more challenging task than the cleavage of C–O bonds. Photocatalytic systems that are capable of cleaving C–C bonds in β-O-4 and β-1 linkages have been developed (Fig. 27, paths e–h). For example, VV oxo-based molecular photocatalysts and the mpg-C3N4 semiconductor are efficient for the cleavage of C–C bonds in both types of linkages under visible-light irradiation and aerobic conditions.111–114
Aromatic ketones, aromatic aldehydes and phenols are typically products formed during photocatalytic depolymerisation of lignin under mild conditions. This is quite different from the conventional thermocatalytic lignin depolymerisation, where defunctionalised aromatics or over-hydrogenated alkanes are usually obtained. Photocatalysis can further transform these aromatic monomers with carbonyl or phenol groups into high-value chemicals. Ketyl aromatic radicals formed by single-electron reduction of carbonyl aromatics are versatile platforms for a diverse range of C–C and C–N coupling reactions for synthetic chemistry.125–133 Photocatalytic cross-dehydrogenative coupling of aromatic rings with amines provides a direct path for the production of anilines. High-value products, such as γ-amino acid derivatives, could also be synthesized by photocatalytic transformations of functionalised aromatics.
Many photocatalysts reported for the valorisation of biomass exhibited good stability and could be used repeatedly.61,63,66,68,87,91 The mild reaction conditions are beneficial for the catalyst stability by avoiding problems like leaching and coke or humin poisoning that are normally caused by severe reaction conditions in biomass valorisation. Although metal sulphides would undergo photo-corrosion by photogenerated holes, the quick consumption of the photogenerated holes could enable the sulphide catalyst to remain stable during the photocatalytic conversion of lignin model compounds or native lignin.87 Molecular catalysts may also suffer from deactivation due to the aggregation or oxidative degradation of the organic moiety. Dispersion of molecular complex photocatalysts on appropriate supports has been demonstrated to be a useful strategy to improve the stability of these photocatalysts by decreasing the aggregation of the molecular complexes and suppressing the generation of too reactive species to prevent the oxidative degradation.66,91
Although significant progress has been achieved in the field of photocatalytic valorisation of lignocellulosic biomass, most of the products reported up to date can still be reached by thermocatalysis. Many important but challenging targets remain unexplored. Future effort should be put into exploring some photocatalytic transformations that may circumvent the difficulty encountered in the current thermocatalytic transformation routes or may obtain unique products (Fig. 28). For example, hemicellulose, the most thermochemically sensitive component of lignocellulosic biomass, has not been studied widely as a reactant by photocatalysis. Important chemicals such as furfural can be obtained from hemicellulose. The thermocatalytic conversion of hemicellulose relies on a mineral acid catalyst at >100 °C and the yield of furfural is generally not high (∼50%) due to side reactions such as condensation with xylose and homopolymerisation, which lead to the production of undesired solid humins.144 To perform photocatalytic transformation of hemicellulose under mild conditions would circumvent the undesirable side reactions.
 Fig. 28  Schematic illustration of photocatalytic approaches for selective valorisation of lignocellulosic biomass. Red lines denote the photocatalytic routes that would be promising for future studies. 
For lignin valorisation, so far the photocatalytic cleavage of the C–O or C–C bond has mostly been investigated for dimeric lignin model compounds, and the efficient photocatalysts that are applicable to valorisation of solid native lignin in lignocellulosic biomass are very limited. Furthermore, almost all of the photocatalytic studies reported to date have only considered the cleavage of C–O or C–C bonds. Considering the cleavage of only one kind of linkage would limit the yield of monomeric aromatics. For example, although the CdS QD catalyst is highly efficient for the cleavage of β-O-4 bond, the highest yield of monomeric aromatics is only 27 wt%, which is close to the theoretical maximum value (32 wt%) by taking into account the abundance of β-O-4 linkages.87 Therefore, bifunctional or even multifunctional photocatalysts or integrated photocatalytic systems that are capable of working for selective cleavage of both C–O and C–C bonds should be developed in the future for further enhancing the yield of aromatic products.
It should be mentioned that the products obtained from lignin depolymerisation are usually a mixture of organic compounds. Although the selectivity of a specific aromatic product may be increased to some extent by photocatalysis, the separation of aromatic mixtures to obtain pure functionalised aromatics would be energy-demanding and costly. An alternative strategy to decrease the complexity of lignin products is by funnelling, that is to convert a broad and heterogeneous mixture towards chemicals with similar functionality and produce bulky chemicals as products.145 A typical example of such transformations is hydrodeoxygenation of the depolymerized products from lignin to produce phenol. New catalysts, in particular those that are efficient for photocatalytic hydrogenolysis of aromatic monomers, should be designed to achieve this purpose.
Photocatalysis has emerged as an important method for selective C–C coupling via radical intermediates.70,72,125,126,134,135 The transformations of lignocellulose-derived monomers or platform compounds into high-value dimers or liquid fuel (high-quality diesel or jet fuel) precursors through photocatalytic C–C coupling has been becoming a promising direction in biomass valorisation. Current studies are mainly focused on the homo-coupling of lignocellulose-based platforms. Future effort should be put into the cross-coupling studies to enrich the potential products and applications.
Direct transformation and full utilisation of raw biomass to produce high-value chemicals or high-quality liquid fuels are the ultimate goal of biomass valorisation. A thermocatalytic approach with two-steps could convert all three components of lignocellulosic biomass into aromatics and aliphatic alcohols.146 Direct transformation of native birch lignocellulosic biomass by photocatalysis under milder conditions led to depolymerisation of lignin into aromatic ketones in the first step, and the subsequent acid- and enzyme-catalysed hydrolysis offered glucose and xylose with high yields.87 To develop photocatalytic systems that are efficient for selective cleavage of C–O and C–C bonds in native lignin or native cellulose without pre-fractionation is also an important research direction in the future.
In photocatalytic valorisation of biomass, in particular for the systems focusing on oxidative transformations of biomass or biomass-derived platforms, H2 is often released as a co-product.40,41,54,55,65,67,70,134 For large-scale processes, the collection, storage and utilisation of the produced H2 should be considered to increase the safety and the profit of the process.147 One potential use of such pure H2 is for the proton-exchange-membrane hydrogen fuel cell.148 Alternatively, the produced H2 can be concurrently used as a reductant for chemical synthesis, and this can avoid the high-cost hydrogen storage and transport. For example, the coupling of mehylfurans over Ru-doped ZnIn2S4 was accompanied by co-production of H2, and the produced H2 might be utilized directly in the subsequent hydrodeoxygenation of the coupling products to produce diesel fuels.70
Designing prototype fluidic reactors represents a potential strategy to improve the performance of photocatalytic systems for valorisation of lignocellulosic biomass.149 The enhanced heat- and mass-transfer abilities of the fluidic system can increase the interaction between biomass-related reactants and photocatalysts, and thus can boost the activity. The capability of timely separation of products in fluidic systems may avoid the over-oxidation or other side reactions, leading to higher selectivity of target products.149–151 However, the studies devoted to photocatalytic biomass valorisation with fluidic reactors are still scarce. The development of fluidic reactors to enhance the photocatalytic conversion of biomass is an important research direction in the future.
With the flourishing development of photocatalytic valorisation of biomass, it is also essentially important to standardize the data reporting. The performances of photocatalysts for biomass valorisation reported to date are mostly presented by the yield and selectivity of products. Besides the yield and selectivity of products, the quantum efficiency, i.e., the rate of a given photochemical process divided by the absorbed photon flux,152 is also an important parameter to evaluate the efficiency of a photocatalyst in harvesting and harnessing the incident light for the targeted transformation. Reporting the quantum efficiency would allow comparison among various materials, and thus would be useful to guide the design and modification of photocatalysts for efficient transformation of biomass into valuable chemicals by photon energy.152
The present article has clearly demonstrated that photocatalysis is a powerful tool to harvest functionalized chemicals from lignocellulosic biomass using solar energy. The development of efficient photocatalysts and environmental benign systems is the key. As compared to other targets that photocatalysis is engaged in, lignocellulosic biomass is very complex and recalcitrant with different kinds of C–O and C–C bonds as well as various functional groups. Many challenges still remain, and we hope that the present article can stimulate further studies on solar energy-driven valorisation of lignocellulosic biomass.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21690082, 21972115, 21721004 and 21991094), the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDB17000000), the CAS-NSTDA Joint Research Project (No. GJHZ2075), the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (No. 2018YFE0118100) and Dalian Science and Technology Innovation Fund (No. 2019J11CY009) is greatly acknowledged.
Notes and references
A. Deneyer, T. Ennaert and B. F. Sels, Curr. Opin. Green SustainableChem., 2018, 10, 11–20 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, J. Song and B. Han, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6834–6880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sudarsanam, R. Zhong, S. Van den Bosch, S. M. Coman, V. I. Parvulescu and B. F. Sels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8349–8402 RSC .
C.-H. Zhou, X. Xia, C.-X. Lin, D.-S. Tong and J. Beltramini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5588–5617 RSC .
P. Gallezot, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1538–1558 RSC .
K. Barta and P. C. Ford, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1503–1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rinaldi, R. Jastrzebski, M. T. Clough, J. Ralph, M. Kennema, P. C. Bruijnincx and B. M. Weckhuysen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8164–8215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Ragauskas, G. T. Beckham, M. J. Biddy, R. Chandra, F. Chen, M. F. Davis, B. H. Davison, R. A. Dixon, P. Gilna, M. Keller, P. Langan, A. K. Naskar, J. N. Saddler, T. J. Tschaplinski, G. A. Tuskan and C. E. Wyman, Science, 2014, 344, 1246843 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Schutyser, T. Renders, S. Van den Bosch, S. F. Koelewijn, G. T. Beckham and B. F. Sels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 852–908 RSC .
D. Klemm, B. Heublein, H. P. Fink and A. Bohn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3358–3393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Girio, C. Fonseca, F. Carvalheiro, L. C. Duarte, S. Marques and R. Bogel-Lukasik, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 4775–4800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shuai, M. T. Amiri, Y. M. Questell-Santiago, F. Héroguel, Y. Li, H. Kim, R. Meilan, C. Chapple, J. Ralph and J. S. Luterbacher, Science, 2016, 354, 329–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. B. Agbor, N. Cicek, R. Sparling, A. Berlin and D. B. Levin, Biotechnol. Adv., 2011, 29, 675–685 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Tuck, E. Pérez, I. T. Horváth, R. A. Sheldon and M. Poliakoff, Science, 2012, 337, 695–699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liao, S.-F. Koelewijn, G. Van den Bossche, J. Van Aelst, S. Van den Bosch, T. Renders, K. Navare, T. Nicolaï, K. Van Aelst, M. Maesen, H. Matsushima, J. Thevelein, K. Van Acker, B. Lagrain, D. Verboekend and B. F. Sels, Science, 2020, 367, 1385–1390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1377–1386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Liu, W.-W. Li, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6367–6398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, X. Zhao, A. Wang, G. W. Huber and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11559–11624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Yoon, M. A. Ischay and J. Du, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 527–532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Schultz and T. P. Yoon, Science, 2014, 343, 1239176 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Baffou and R. Quidant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3898–3907 RSC .
C. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7188–7216 RSC .
X. G. Zhang, X. B. Ke and J. F. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1941–1966 RSC .
V. Nair, M. J. Muñoz-Batista, M. Fernández-García, R. Luque and J. C. Colmenares, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2098–2116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Staveness, I. Bosque and C. R. J. Stephenson, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2295–2306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yan, J. C. Lo, J. T. Edwards and P. S. Baran, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12692–12714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. J. Beckwith, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1993, 22, 143–151 RSC .
A. Studer and D. P. Curran, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 58–102 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimura and H. Yoshida, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2467–2481 RSC .
M. Wang, M. Liu, J. Lu and F. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1083 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rahimi, A. Ulbrich, J. J. Coon and S. S. Stahl, Nature, 2014, 515, 249–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Colmenares and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 765–778 RSC .
S. H. Li, S. Q. Liu, J. C. Colmenares and Y. J. Xu, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 594–607 RSC .
L. I. Granone, F. Sieland, N. Zheng, R. Dillert and D. W. Bahnemann, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 1169–1192 RSC .
X. Q. Liu, X. G. Duan, W. Wei, S. B. Wang and B. J. Ni, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 4266–4289 RSC .
A. Shrotri, H. Kobayashi and A. Fukuoka, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 761–768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Wang, Z. Y. Zhang, L. X. Zhang, S. Xue, W. O. S. Doherty, I. M. O'Hara and X. B. Ke, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 85242–85247 RSC .
B. Zhang, J. Li, L. Guo, Z. Chen and C. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 660–664 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Wakerley, M. F. Kuehnel, K. L. Orchard, K. H. Ly, T. E. Rosser and E. Resner, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17021 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, C. Ni, X. Huang, A. Welgamage, L. A. Lawton, P. K. J. Robertson and J. T. S. Irvine, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1673–1676 RSC .
J. Zou, G. Zhang and X. X. Xu, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 563, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fan, G. Li, F. Yang, L. Yang and S. Zhang, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2011, 86, 1107–1112 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, W. Deng, S. Wang, P. Wang, D. An, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1995–2028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kou, C. Lu, J. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Xu and R. S. Varma, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1445–1514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Colmenares, A. Magdziarz and A. Bielejewska, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 11254–11257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Colmenares and A. Magdziarz, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2013, 366, 156–162 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares, A. Magdziarz, K. Kurzydlowski, J. Grzonka, O. Chernyayeva and D. Lisovytskiy, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 134-135, 136–144 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares, A. Magdziarz, O. Chernyayeva, D. Lisovytskiy, K. Kurzydłowski and J. Grzonka, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 2270–2277 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, C. J. Yang, Q. Q. Zhang, B. G. Zhang and K. J. Deng, J. Catal., 2019, 374, 297–305 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cheng, Q. Q. Zhang, C. J. Yang, B. G. Zhang and K. J. Deng, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 6909–6919 RSC .
Q. Q. Zhang, Y. C. Ge, C. J. Yang, B. G. Zhang and K. J. Deng, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 5019–5029 RSC .
B. Zhou, J. Song, Z. Zhang, Z. Jiang, P. Zhang and B. Han, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1075–1081 RSC .
M. Omri, F. Sauvage, Y. Busby, M. Becuwe, G. Pourceau and A. Wadouachi, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1635–1639 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Chong, J. Li, Y. Ma, B. Zhang, H. X. Han and C. Li, J. Catal., 2014, 314, 101–108 CrossRef CAS .
L. Da Via, C. Recchi, T. E. Davies, N. Greeves and J. A. Lopez-Sanchez, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 3475–3483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Jin, G. D. Yao, X. G. Wang, K. F. Ding and F. M. Jin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 6377–6381 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tsutsumi, N. Kurata, E. Takata, K. Furuichi, M. Nagano and K. Tabata, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 1009–1014 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yurdakal, B. S. Tek, O. Alagoz, V. Augugliaro, V. Loddo, G. Palmisano and L. Palmisano, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
I. Krivtsov, M. Iikaeva, E. Salas-Colera, Z. Amghouz, J. R. García, E. Díaz, S. Ordóñez and S. Villar-Rodil, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 6770–6780 CrossRef CAS .
I. Krivtsov, E. I. García-López, G. Marcì, L. Palmisano, Z. Amghouz, J. R. García, S. Ordóñez and E. Díaz, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 430–439 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, Y. M. He, H. L. Zhang, Z. Y. Feng, Y. Wu and T. H. Wu, Mol. Catal., 2017, 436, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. Feng, Y. Zhu, Y. Wu and T. Wu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2019, 371, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ma, Y. Y. Wang, X. N. Guo, X. L. Tong, C. Liu, Y. W. Wang and X. Y. Guo, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 552, 70–76 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Giannakoudakis, V. Nair, A. Khan, E. A. Deliyanni, J. C. Colmenares and K. S. Triantafyllidis, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117803 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Cha and K. S. Choi, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 328–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, P. Zhou, Z. Zhang, C. Yang, B. Zhang, K. Deng, S. Bottle and H. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14775–14782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Han, Y.-H. Jin, R. A. Burgess, N. E. Dickenson, X.-M. Cao and Y. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15584–15587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Hao, X. N. Guo, Y. T. Pan, S. Chen, Z. F. Jiao, H. Yang and X. Y. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9361–9364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shylesh, A. A. Gokhale, C. R. Ho and A. T. Bell, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2589–2597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Luo, T. Montini, J. Zhang, P. Fornasiero, E. Fonda, T. T. Hou, W. Nie, J. M. Lu, J. X. Liu, M. Heggen, L. Lin, C. T. Ma, M. Wang, F. T. Fan, S. Y. Jin and F. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 575–584 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zang, K. Wang, M. Zhang, R. Xie, L. Wang and E. Y. X. Chen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 1777–1798 RSC .
S. Xie, Z. Shen, J. Deng, P. Guo, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, C. Ma, Z. Jiang, J. Cheng, D. Deng and Y. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1181 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zakzeski, P. C. A. Bruijnincx, A. L. Jongerius and B. M. Weckhuysen, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3552–3599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, R. A. D. Arancon, J. Labidi and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7485–7500 RSC .
Y. Jing, Y. Guo, Q. Xia, X. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem, 2019, 10, 2520–2546 Search PubMed .
C. Fabbri, M. Bietti and O. Lanzalunga, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 2720–2728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. Kandanarachchi, T. Autrey and J. A. Franz, J. Org. Chem., 2002, 67, 7937–7945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kansal, M. Singh and D. Sud, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 153, 412–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Song, X. Zhao, L. Cao, J.-W. Moon, B. Gu and W. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16695–16703 RSC .
W. Li, M. Zhang, Z. Du, Q. Ma, H. Jameel and H.-M. Chang, BioResources, 2015, 10, 1245–1259 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3071–3080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Magallanes, M. D. Karkas, I. Bosque, S. Lee, S. Maldonado and C. R. J. Stephenson, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2252–2260 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Nguyen, B. S. Matsuura and C. R. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1218–1221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Mitchell and C. J. Moody, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 11091–11100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Bosque, G. Magallanes, M. Rigoulet, M. D. Karkas and C. R. J. Stephenson, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 621–628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, S. C. Chmely, M. R. Nimlos, Y. J. Bomble, T. D. Foust, R. S. Paton and G. T. Beckham, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2846–2852 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, X. Fan, S. Xie, J. Lin, J. Cheng, Q. Zhang, L. Chen and Y. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 772–780 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rahimi, A. Azarpira, H. Kim, J. Ralph and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6415–6418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Karkas, I. Bosque, B. S. Matsuura and C. R. Stephenson, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 5166–5169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ci, R. Silveira da Silva, D. Nicodem and D. G. Whitten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 1337–1343 CrossRef CAS .
Z. K. Hao, S. Y. Li, J. R. Sun, S. Li and F. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 366–372 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, X. Zhang, J. Z. Lu and J. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5062–5070 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo and J. Zhang, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 9131–9137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, N. Wang, X. He, H. R. Li and L. N. He, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15032–15039 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Dai, A. F. Patti, G. N. Styles, S. Nanayakkara, L. Spiccia, F. Arena, C. Italiano and K. Saito, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 2005–2014 RSC .
N. C. Luo, M. Wang, H. J. Li, J. Zhang, H. F. Liu and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7716–7721 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, P. Ye, M. Y. Wang, D. M. Wu, A. H. Xu and X. X. Li, Catal. Commun., 2018, 107, 18–23 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Li, A. Bunrit, J. M. Lu, Z. Y. Gao, N. C. Luo, H. F. Liu and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8843–8851 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Nichols, L. M. Bishop, R. G. Bergman and J. A. Ellman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12554–12555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Son and F. D. Toste, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3791–3794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, J. Schwarz, T. A. Karl, A. Chatterjee and B. König, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 13144–13147 RSC .
F. Gao, J. D. Webb, H. Sorek, D. E. Wemmer and J. F. Hartwig, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7385–7392 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Luo, M. Wang, H. J. Li, J. Zhang, T. T. Hou, H. J. Chen, X. C. Zhang, J. M. Lu and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4571–4580 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Han, T. Yan, W. Zhang, Y. C. Zhang, D. Y. Lee, Z. Cao and Y. J. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11341–11349 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wu, S. J. Xie, C. X. Liu, C. Zhou, J. C. Lin, J. C. Kang, Q. H. Zhang, Z. H. Wang and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8443–8451 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, X. Wu, S. Xie, L. Chen, Q. Zhang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 5023–5031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Imamura, H. Kato, Y. Wada, K. Makabe, A. Onda, A. Tanaka, H. Kominami, K. Sato and K. Nagaoka, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7298–7301 RSC .
P. F. Han, T. N. Tana, Q. Xiao, S. Sarina, E. R. Waclawik, D. E. Gomez and H. Y. Zhu, Chem, 2019, 5, 2879–2899 CAS .
T. Renders, S. Van den Bosch, S. F. Koelewijn, W. Schutyser and B. F. Sels, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1551–1557 RSC .
M. V. Galkin and J. S. Samec, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1544–1558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gazi, W. K. Hung Ng, R. Ganguly, A. M. Putra Moeljadi, H. Hirao and H. S. Soo, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 7130–7142 RSC .
S. Gazi, M. Đokić, A. M. P. Moeljadi, R. Ganguly, H. Hirao and H. S. Soo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4682–4691 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H. Li, N. Luo and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 632–643 CrossRef .
H. F. Liu, H. J. Li, J. M. Lu, S. Zeng, M. Wang, N. C. Luo, S. T. Xu and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4761–4771 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Hou, N. C. Luo, H. J. Li, M. Heggen, J. M. Lu, Y. H. Wang and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3850–3859 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kang, X. Lu, G. Zhang, X. Yao, J. Xin, S. Yang, Y. Yang, J. Xu, M. Feng and S. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 4005–4013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. ten Have and P. J. Teunissen, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 3397–3413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Cho, J. A. Latham, H. J. Park, U. C. Yoon, P. Langan, D. Dunaway-Mariano and P. S. Mariano, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 2840–2852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tien and T. K. Kirk, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1984, 81, 2280–2284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lim, K. Nahm, C. S. Ra, D. W. Cho, U. C. Yoon, J. A. Latham, D. Dunaway-Mariano and P. S. Mariano, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 9431–9443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Cho, R. Parthasarathi, A. S. Pimentel, G. D. Maestas, H. J. Park, U. C. Yoon, U. C. Yoon, D. Dunaway-Mariano, S. Gnanakaran, P. Langan and P. S. Mariano, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 6549–6562 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, J. Nakahashi, T. Miura and M. Murakami, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2018, 7, 2431–2434 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, J. He and Y. Zhang, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1658–1666 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ko, L. T. M. Pham, Y. J. Sa, J. Woo, T. V. T. Nguyen, J. H. Kim, D. Oh, P. Sharma, J. Ryu, T. J. Shin, S. H. Joo, Y. H. Kim and J. W. Jang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5123 CrossRef PubMed .
K. N. Lee and M.-Y. Ngai, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 13093–13112 RSC .
M. Nakajima, E. Fava, S. Loescher, Z. Jiang and M. Rueping, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8828–8832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fava, A. Millet, M. Nakajima, S. Loescher and M. Rueping, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6776–6779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-X. Ye, Y. Y. Melcamu, H.-H. Li, J.-T. Cheng, T.-T. Zhang, Y.-P. Ruan, X. Zheng, X. Lu and P.-Q. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 410 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chen, X. Zhao, C. Yang and W. Xia, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 3807–3810 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, K. L. Skubi, D. M. Schultz and T. P. Yoon, Science, 2014, 344, 392–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du and T. P. Yoon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14604–14605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Lee, Z. Lei and M.-Y. Ngai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5003–5006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Fuentes de Arriba, F. Urbitsch and D. J. Dixon, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 14434–14437 RSC .
N. Luo, T. Hou, S. Liu, B. Zeng, J. Lu, J. Zhang, H. Li and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 762–769 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, S. Xie, J. Hu, X. Wu, Q. Zhang, J. Cheng and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1776–1779 RSC .
E. Blondiaux, J. Bomon, M. Smoleń, N. Kaval, F. Lemière, S. Sergeyev, L. Diels, B. Sels and B. U. W. Maes, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 6906–6916 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, B. Huang, C. Yang and W. Xia, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 3326–3329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Blum, Y. Zhu, S. A. Nordeen and T. P. Yoon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11056–11059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Romero, K. A. Margrey, N. E. Tay and D. A. Nicewicz, Science, 2015, 349, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Niu, H. Yi, S. Wang, T. Liu, J. Liu and A. Lei, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14226 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, B. Huang, C. Yang, B. Li, B. Gou and W. Xia, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2446–2451 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, A. Du, H. Zhu, J. Jia, J. Wang and X. Ke, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13893–13895 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Ke, A. Du and H. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3805 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dutta, S. De, B. Saha and M. I. Alam, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 2025–2036 RSC .
Z. Sun, B. Fridrich, A. de Santi, S. Elangovan and K. Barta, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 614–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, G. Bottari, A. Afanasenko, M. C. A. Stuart, P. J. Deuss, B. Fridrich and K. Barta, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 82–92 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Kuehnel and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3290–3296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Authayanun, K. Im-orb and A. Arpornwichanop, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 473–483 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares, R. S. Varma and V. Nair, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6675–6686 RSC .
V. Nair, J. C. Colmenares and D. Lisovytskiy, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 1241–1246 RSC .
S. R. Pradhan, V. Nair, D. A. Giannakoudakis, D. Lisovytskiy and J. C. Colmenares, Mol. Catal., 2020, 486, 110884 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qureshi and K. Takanabe, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 158–167 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Xuejiao Wu
	Xuejiao Wu received her BSc degree from Xiamen University in June 2015. She is currently a PhD candidate in Professor Ye Wang's group in the Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials (iChEM) at Xiamen University. Her research interest focuses on the valorisation of lignocellulose, in particular by photocatalytic approaches.

Nengchao Luo
	Nengchao Luo received his BSc at Huazhong University of Science and Technology (2014) and PhD at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (2020) under the supervision of Prof Feng Wang. He then joined Prof. Feng Wang's group at DICP, where he was selected as the Excellent Graduate Student of DICP in 2020, and was promoted to an associate professor. His research interests focus on photoreactor design and photocatalysis for biomass upgrading and the dehydrocoupling of small molecules.

Shunji Xie
	Shunji Xie received his BS and MSc degrees from Hunan University of China in 2008 and 2011, and obtained his PhD degree from Xiamen University in 2014. He then carried out postdoctoral research at the Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials (iChEM). He is currently a senior engineer in State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces of Xiamen University. His research interest focuses on photocatalysis and electrocatalysis for C1 and sustainable chemistry, including CO2 reduction, CH4 oxidation, biomass conversion and ethylene glycol synthesis.

Haikun Zhang
	Haikun Zhang received his BSc degree from Xiamen University in June 2016. He is currently a PhD candidate in Professor Ye Wang's group. His research interest focuses on photocatalytic C–C coupling reactions of small molecules.

Qinghong Zhang
	Qinghong Zhang received her BSc and MSc degrees from Nanjing University in 1989 and 1992, and obtained her PhD degree from Hiroshima University of Japan in 2002. She joined Xiamen University in October 2002 and was promoted to a full professor in 2010. Her research interests include the synthesis and characterizations of novel materials with advanced catalytic properties.

Feng Wang
	Feng Wang received his BSc at Zhengzhou University (1999) and PhD at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (2005). He spent 2005–2006 as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of California at Berkeley in USA and 2006–2009 at the Catalysis Research Center of Hokkaido University in Japan. He serves as a full professor and an independent PI at DICP (2009), a joint professor in the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis at DICP (2013), and is the director of the Division of Biomass Conversion & Bio-Energy at DICP (2018 to present). He served as the Cheung Kong Professor at Dalian University of Technology in 2016. His current research focuses on heterogeneous catalysis and biomass conversion.

Ye Wang
	Ye Wang received his BS degree from Nanjing University and obtained his PhD degree in 1996 from Tokyo Institute of Technology. He then worked at Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tohoku University and Hiroshima University, and was promoted to an associate professor at Hiroshima University in 2001. He became a full professor of Xiamen University in the August of 2001. He serves as an associate editor of ACS Catalysis and council member of International Association of Catalysis Societies. The research interest of Prof. Ye Wang's group is catalysis for C1 and sustainable chemistry, including C–O/C–C cleavage chemistry for cellulose/lignin valorization, C–H activation and C–C coupling of C1 molecules.

 	Fig. 1  Degree of functionality of petroleum, biomass and typical carbon-based chemicals. Chemical structures of major components of lignocellulosic biomass, including cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, are displayed in the right panel.	 

 	Fig. 2  Energy diagram for the transformation of reactant (R) to product (P). (a) Thermocatalysis. (b) Photocatalysis. C, E and S refer to the catalyst, molecules in the environment, such as solvent and atmosphere, and by-products, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of mechanisms for photocatalysis. (a) Semiconductor-based photocatalysis. (b) Transition metal complex (TMC)-based photocatalysis. (c) Plasmonic metal-based photocatalysis. The orange and blue lines denote reductive and oxidative transformations, respectively. ENFE in (c) represents electric near-field enhancement of the plasmonic effect.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photocatalytic transformations of lignocellulosic biomass and the related platform compounds involved in this article.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Hydrolysis of cellulose with Au–zeolite composites.37 (b) Proposed light-promoted mechanism for Au–zeolite composites.37 (c) Hydrolysis of cellulose with Ir–zeolite composites.38 (d) Proposed light-promoted mechanism for Ir–zeolite composites.38	 

 	Fig. 6  Photocatalytic approaches for the transformations of C5 and C6 monosaccharides. The blue lines denote the oxidation of an alcohol or aldehyde group to carboxylate; the red lines denote C–C bond cleavage; the grey line denotes the formation of C1 chemicals; the green line denotes dehydration.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the direct and indirect pathways in semiconductor-catalysed photocatalytic oxidation performed in the presence of O2 and H2O solvent.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photocatalytic oxidation of monosaccharides to carboxylates with Au/TiO2 in aqueous Na2CO3 solution.52 (a) Under visible light. (b) Under UV light. Reproduced from ref. 52, with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of visible-light-enhanced dehydration of fructose to 5-HMF catalysed by Si. Reproduced from ref. 57, with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 10  Potential products from the oxidation of HMF.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Chemical structure of CoPz. (b) Oxidation of HMF under different conditions. (c) Proposed mechanism for the transformation of HMF to FDCA over CoPz/g-C3N4 catalysts with 1O2 as active species. Reproduced from ref. 66, with the permission of the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 12  Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic dehydrogenative coupling of 2,5-dimethylfuran catalysed by Ru–ZnIn2S4 under visible-light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 70, with permission of Springer-Nature, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 13  Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in dimeric lignin β-O-4 ketone by the [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6 complex. Reproduced from ref. 82, DOI: http://10.1021/acscatal.8b04172, with permission of the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019; further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS.	 

 	Fig. 14  One-pot photocatalytic fragmentation of dimeric β-O-4 model compounds using two photocatalysts working in tandem by a dual-wavelength switching strategy. Reproduced from ref. 96, with permission of American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 15  Cleavage of the aryl ether C–O bond by an aryl migration strategy to produce primary arylamine. Reproduced from ref. 98, with permission of American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 16  The fragmentation of dimeric β-O-4 lignin models in an integrating system composed of a photocatalyst (PC = [Ir(ppy)2dtbpy]PF6 or 4CzIPN) and a hydrogen-atom-transfer (HAT = HSCH2CO2Me) catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 101, with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Proposed EHCO mechanism for CdS-catalysed fragmentation of a dimeric β-O-4 model through a Cα radical intermediate. (b) Yields of aromatic monomers for photocatalytic conversion of lignins with different β-O-4 contents. The content of β-O-4 bonds is shown in brackets. (c) Schematic diagram of the reversible aggregation–colloidization strategy. (d) Retention of glucans and xylans in different processes. Reproduced from ref. 87 and 105, with the permission of Springer-Nature and American Chemical Society, copyright 2018 and 2019.	 

 	Fig. 18  Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic fragmentation of the Cα–Cβ bond in the dimeric β-1 model with VO(iPrO)3. Reproduced from ref. 113, with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 19  Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic rupture of the Cα–Cβ bond in β-O-4 linkages over mpg-C3N4 catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 114, with permission of American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic rupture of the Cα–Cβ bond in the β-1 linkage over the CuOx/CeO2/TiO2 catalyst. (b) Photocatalytic conversion of 1,2-diphenylethanol under UV light. 1a = benzaldehyde, 1b = diphenylethanone. Reproduced from ref. 115, DOI: http://10.1021/acscatal.7b00629, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017, further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS.	 

 	Fig. 21  Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic cleavage of the Cα–Cβ bond in β-O-4 ketone in ionic liquids. Reproduced from ref. 116, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 22  Proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic fragmentation of dimeric β-O-4 lignin models by a relay method with photocatalysis and copper catalysis. Reproduced from ref. 122, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 23  Proposed reaction mechanism of Cα–Cβ bond cleavage by an Ir complex via a PCET process. Reproduced from ref. 123, with permission of Elsevier B.V., copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 24  Proposed reaction mechanism for tertiary amine-promoted photocatalytic coupling of carbonyl aromatics through ketyl radicals. Reproduced from ref. 126, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Photocatalytic coupling of benzyl alcohol over zinc indium sulphides. (b) Influence of Zn/In ratio on product yields in photocatalytic coupling of BAL to deoxybenzoin (DOB) and benzoin (BZ). (c) Time-course profile of photocatalytic coupling of BAL over Zn0.6In2S3.6 catalysts. BAL and HB denote benzyl alcohol and hydrobenzoin, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 134, with permission of American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 26  Proposed mechanism for the cross-dehydrogenative coupling of phenols and phenothiazine. Reproduced from ref. 137, with permission of American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 27  Summary of photocatalytic approaches for the depolymerisation of lignin or its model compounds by C–O and C–C bond cleavage. Schemes highlighted in red represent paths that are applicable to polymeric lignin.	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic illustration of photocatalytic approaches for selective valorisation of lignocellulosic biomass. Red lines denote the photocatalytic routes that would be promising for future studies.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
