Photocatalytic methane decomposition over vertically aligned transparent TiO 2  nanotube arrays   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CC02570D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CC02570D
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2613-2615Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPhotocatalytic methane decomposition over vertically aligned transparent TiO2 nanotube arrays†

        
          
            Su-il 
            In
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Morten G. 
            Nielsen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Peter C. K. 
            Vesborg
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yidong 
            Hou
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Billie L. 
            Abrams
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Toke R. 
            Henriksen
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Ole 
            Hansen
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Ib 
            Chorkendorff
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Electrical Engineering, and Materials Research Institute, 217 Materials Research Laboratory, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
bCenter for Individual Nanoparticle Functionality, Department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. E-mail: ibchork@fysik.dtu.dk;  Fax: +45 4593 2399;   Tel: +45 4525 3170
cDepartment of Micro- and Nanotechnology, Technical University of Denmark, DTU Nanotech Building 345 East, DK-2800 Kongen, s, , Lyngby, Denmark
Received 
      14th July 2010
    , Accepted 20th December 2010First published on 13th January 2011AbstractWe report here on a study of vertically aligned TiO2 nanotube arrays grown by the one-step anodic oxidation technique and their photocatalytic performance for methane decomposition. Quantitative activity data as a function of film thickness is obtained.
Recently, vertically aligned TiO2 nanotube arrays (VATNTs) have received considerable attention because they showed remarkable performances within a variety of applications such as sensors,1,2water photoelectrolysis1,3 and dye-sensitized solar cells.4,5 This is due to their high surface area, stability and excellent charge transfer properties.6,7 Transparent VATNTs are also very promising for the photocatalytic self-cleaning window application.8Growth of transparent VATNTs has been reported using electrochemical anodization of Ti on FTO or ITO glass substrates in an aqueous hydrofluoric acid solution.6 However, the nature of VATNTs formed on an expensive, conductive glass substrate has restricted their use in many applications.

        Methane is an effective greenhouse gas. Its emission has about 25 times the impact on the global temperature than an equal mass of carbon dioxide. Hence, the control of methane release into the atmosphere is required to alleviate global warming. Being an ambient temperature and environmentally friendly technique, photocatalysis might be a viable technology for the removal of very dilute methane from various exhaust gas streams (e.g. in agriculture).9 The principle is, naturally, also applicable to removal of other very diluted, but undesired hydrocarbons such as ethylene which is known to be a fruit ripening hormone.10 It is, however, difficult to experimentally quantify the photocatalytic activity of a surface for such gas-phase reactions. In this work we demonstrate an experimental approach and its usefulness in measuring the activity of VATNTs effectively. Anatase phase VATNTs of various thicknesses were synthesized by a potentiostatic anodization technique. Their application in methane oxidation was evaluated in a single-pass micro-fabricated reactor (μ-reactor) under UV light.

        CINF at DTU has developed μ-reactors to investigate nano-scale heterogeneous catalysts and photocatalysts.11,12 The advantage of using a μ-reactor is that very small volumes of gas and catalysts can be handled at a time, making the response very fast. At typical experimental conditions, the total gas flow through the reaction zone is around 6 × 1015 molecules s−1, corresponding to a gas residence time in the reaction zone of about 1 s. The details of the fabrication process are explained in a previous publication.11
In order to study various thicknesses of VATNTs in μ-reactors a novel electrochemical technique has been developed (see ESI† for more details). Titanium films (400 nm–1000 nm-thick, 8 mm diameter) were deposited on Pyrex lids (20 × 16 × 1 mm) viaEBPVD (electron beam physical vapor deposition). VATNTs were formed on the Pyrex lids by potentiostatic anodization at 10 V using the “bottom contact” method.8 The bottom contact anodization technique is perfectly suited for this work since it allows TiO2 nanotubes to be grown directly on non-conductive supports such as the Pyrex lids for the μ-reactors. In the bottom contact technique, the electrical contact is provided under the electrolyte without any conductive materials between the Ti and Pyrex (see Fig. S1 in the ESI†). A teflon-coated titanium wire was used in order to prevent evolution of oxygen which could result in local oxidation of the titanium and thus a premature loss of electrical contact. The electrolyte was a mixture of 0.3 wt% NH4F (98%, ACS reagent, Sigma Aldrich) and 2 vol% DI water in ethylene glycol (Reagentplus®, ≥99%, Sigma Aldrich) at room temperature (298 K).8 The anodization was stopped once the current density of the electrode dropped to zero, which occurred after 1.5–6.1 hours depending on the thicknesses of the titanium film on the Pyrex lids.

Fig. 1a shows a schematic diagram of VATNTs preparation in the μ-reactor. The sealing of the μ-reactor was done using an anodic cold bonding technique,12 which ensures that the catalyst is protected from the severe heating of the bonding technique (the catalyst is kept below 50°C while bonding). Two inlet holes in the reactor (I1, I2) connect to a meander shaped mixing channel (250 μm deep and 150 μm wide) which allows the two gas streams to mix via diffusion. The main flow of gas (6 × 1015 molecules s−1) then passes through the circular reactor area and reaches the outlet, O2, which is connected directly to a quadrupole mass spectrometer for analysis. The main flow is defined by a 54.7 μm wide capillary channel. The (larger) bypass flow which leaves the chip via O1 allows gas mixing to be accomplished by off-the-shelf mass-flow controllers. The volume of the circular reactor chamber is 240 nl, and the entire device measures 20 × 16 × 0.85 mm. Fig. 1b shows a digital photograph of the VATNTs sealed inside the μ-reactor. The photograph is taken at an angle in order to clearly display the etched channels in the Si. Fig. 1c shows a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM) image of the VATNTs in a cross section view. The actual thicknesses of VATNTs after anodization were measured by FESEM. For this purpose, samples similarly prepared to the ones used for activity measurements were sputter coated with 3 nm of Au to prevent charging during microscopy. However, the actual VATNT thicknesses were different from the original Ti thicknesses. The actual length of the nanotubes compared to the initial thickness of the Ti film is shown in the inset of Fig. 2. The deviation in thickness becomes more pronounced with increasing thickness of the Ti film, which can be ascribed to the dissolution of the tubes during the long anodization time. Fig. 1d shows a TEM image of the VATNTs from the top. TEM images indicate that the VATNTs have an average inner pore diameter near 20 nm and wall thickness of approximately 10 nm (see ESI† for more details).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the process of sealing the μ-reactor with a catalyst-coated Pyrex lid. (b) Photograph of a sealed μ-reactor. (c) FESEM image of the VATNTs on a Pyrex substrate. (d) TEM image of the VATNTs from the top. 
 Fig. 2  
UV-vis
absorbance spectra as a function of thickness. The samples are measured in transmission and the absorption due to the Pyrex support is compensated by having a blank Pyrex lid in the reference beam of the spectrophotometer. The inset shows the actual thickness (FESEM measurement) after anodization. 
As-prepared VATNTs were amorphous. After calcination at 450°C in air (30 ml min−1) for 2 hours, a significant growth of the anatase phase (2θ = 25.3°) was observed in the XRD patterns (XRD data are shown in ESI†). To investigate the Ti states in the VATNTs, Ti 2p core levels of the samples were measured with X-ray Photoemission Spectroscopy (XPS). There is no peak attributed to metallic Ti at around 454 eV (XPS data are shown in ESI†). This confirms a successful preparation of titania.
In order to test the photocatalytic activity of the VATNT samples, 2 vol% of methane gas (in 2∶5 gas mixture of He and atmospheric air) was chosen. Photocatalytic measurements were carried out under UV irradiation (∼367 nm, 410 mW cm−2, ∼250 mW total power) using a Hamamatsu LED (model LC-L2). At 367 nm the Pyrex lids transmit about 92% of the incident light and during illumination the temperature increase of the reactor is <4 K.13 Any thermal effect from the light source was negligible because the temperature inside the reactor was about 25°C during irradiation (see ESI† for more details).
The UV-Vis absorption spectra of the VATNTs are shown in Fig. 2. For each sample, the absorbance reaches a plateau below about 350 nm as the photon energy surpasses the band gap energy of each sample. From these spectra, it is clear that there is a significant difference in scattering (visible region) for the different thicknesses. For the thin nanotube samples, slight fringes can be observed in the spectrum, which is an indication that dissolution during anodization is very small in this case. Fringes only occur for samples of high uniformity and since the nanotubes grow non-uniformly during the oxidation and down, this indicates that no significant dissolution of the earliest formed nanotube-sections has occurred. For the thicker films, the fringing effect however disappears, which is to be expected.
The photocatalytic activity trend as a function of thickness is shown in Fig. 3. The activity displays a volcano-shaped curve with an optimal thickness (even though the dataset is limited to 4 points). An optimum thickness is expected since the photocatalytic film is illuminated from the backside with respect to the reactants: UV light passing through the Pyrex lid and into the VATNT film will decay (be absorbed) exponentially according to Beer–Lambert law. Hence, the photocatalyst is excited strongest near the glass lid and weaker near the surface facing the reactor chamber (where the reactants are). Since the excited electrons and holes have a limited lifetime (and diffusion length) the activity is expected to drop above a certain thickness for any given wavelength due to diffusion limitations of the reactants through the film. Too low film thickness, on the other hand, lets too many photons pass unabsorbed leading to decreased activity. Therefore, under back-illumination an optimal film thickness should exist for any fixed wavelength. This phenomenon has previously been studied theoretically by Chen et al.14
 Fig. 3  Photocatalytic activity trend concerning decomposition of methane as a function of VATNTs thickness. 
From Fig. 3 it seems plausible that the optimal thickness of the VATNTs is around 500–600 nm (for 367 nm illumination and an irradiance of 410 mW cm−2). At this point, the methane conversion is about 24 × 10−9 mmol s−1 (1.4 × 1013 CH4 s−1) and the absorbed photon to product conversion efficiency (APPE)7 is about 2.5 × 10−4CO2 molecules per photon. The error bars in the plot have been estimated from the normal standard deviation of the activity measured on 3 different samples. Comparison of Fig. 2 and 3 indicates that in the present case the optimum activity occurs when absorption is about 0.4 abs. units (∼60% of the light is absorbed).
In conclusion, a straightforward, low-cost and reproducible method for assessing the activity of the VATNTs in microfabricated reactors was developed. The optimal VATNT thickness for methane oxidation under 367 nm illumination can be estimated to be about 575 nm. There is a clear indication that as the thickness of the VATNTs increases, the photogenerated electron–hole pairs have to travel through an increasing amount of film to reach the gas exposed on the front side, reducing the activity due to recombination in the film.
Notes and references
S. Rani, S. C. Roy, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, S. Kim, S. Yoriya, T. J. LaTempa and C. A. Grimes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 2780 RSC .
S. Yoriya, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, G. K. Mor, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Sens. Lett., 2006, 4, 334 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Allam, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2341 RSC .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 592 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, G. K. Mor, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12445 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1451 RSC .
J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, A. Ghicov, K. Yasuda, R. Hahn, S. Bauer and P. Schmuki, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2007, 11, 3 CrossRef CAS .
S.-I. In, Y. D. Hou, B. L. Abrams, P. C. K. Vesborg and I. Chorkendorff, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, E69 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Pitesky, K. R. Stackhouse and F. M. Mitloehner, Adv. Agron., 2009, 103, 1 Search PubMed .
S. P. Burg and E. A. Burg, Science, 1965, 148, 1190 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Henriksen, J. L. Olsen, P. C. K. Vesborg, I. Chorkendorff and O. Hansen, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2009, 80, 124101 CrossRef .
P. C. K. Vesborg, J. L. Olsen, T. R. Henriksen, I. Chorkendorff and O. Hansen, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2010, 81, 016111 CrossRef .
P. C. K. Vesborg, J. L. Olsen, T. R. Henriksen, I. Chorkendorff and O. Hansen, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 160, 738–741 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Chen, F. M. Li and A. K. Ray, Catal. Today, 2001, 66, 475 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: [DETAILS]. See DOI: 10.1039/c0cc02570dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the process of sealing the μ-reactor with a catalyst-coated Pyrex lid. (b) Photograph of a sealed μ-reactor. (c) FESEM image of the VATNTs on a Pyrex substrate. (d) TEM image of the VATNTs from the top.	 

 	Fig. 2  
UV-vis
absorbance spectra as a function of thickness. The samples are measured in transmission and the absorption due to the Pyrex support is compensated by having a blank Pyrex lid in the reference beam of the spectrophotometer. The inset shows the actual thickness (FESEM measurement) after anodization.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photocatalytic activity trend concerning decomposition of methane as a function of VATNTs thickness.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: [DETAILS]. See DOI: 10.1039/c0cc02570d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
