Self-supported MoP nanocrystals embedded in N,P-codoped carbon nanofibers via a polymer-confinement route for electrocatalytic hydrogen production   - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9QM00409B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9QM00409B
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 1872-1881Self-supported MoP nanocrystals embedded in N,P-codoped carbon nanofibers via a polymer-confinement route for electrocatalytic hydrogen production†

        
          
            Jin-Tao 
            Ren
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chen-Chen 
            Weng
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Zhong-Yong 
            Yuan
          
        
      *ab
aNational Institute for Advanced Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China. E-mail: zyyuan@nankai.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China
Received 
      23rd June 2019
    , Accepted 12th July 2019First published on 12th July 2019AbstractThe development of a controlled synthesis strategy for hierarchical nanostructures with ultrafine metal-based nanocomposites is fundamentally important for high-performance energy technologies. Herein, well-designed nanofiber-like heteroatom-doped carbons with MoP nanocrystals coated on carbon cloth (MoP@NPCF/CC) were prepared through the direct pyrolysis of organophosphonic moiety-modified polyaniline with molybdate. The polymer-confinement effect and in situ phosphorization of this synthetic approach not only impedes the aggregation of metal nanocrystals, but also achieves significantly intimate interaction between the MoP nanocrystals and the conductive carbon nanofibers. Benefiting from the abundant MoP nanocrystals and the doped N and P atoms, and the hierarchical nanofiber structure with binder-free properties, the resultant MoP@NPCF/CC exhibits extraordinary electrocatalytic activity for hydrogen production with the low overpotentials of 115 and 182 mV to afford the current density of 10 mA cm−2 in H2SO4 and KOH electrolytes, together with robust operation durability. In particular, the N,P-codoped carbon nanofibers (NPCF/CC) display high oxygen evolution performance in a KOH medium. Furthermore, employing MoP@NPCF/CC as a cathode and NPCF/CC as an anode, an alkaline electrolyzer configuration achieves the overall current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.64 V, associated with excellent stability. This approach for fabricating such nanostructures will provide new inspiration for exploring advanced electrocatalysts for various energy-related applications.
1. Introduction
The increasingly severe energy crisis compels us to explore fossil alternative energy sources. Hydrogen (H2), as a sustainable and green fuel, has been considered as the most effective and attractive energy carrier.1,2 Electrocatalytic water splitting derived by regenerative energy input (e.g., solar and wind energy) to obtain gaseous hydrogen and oxygen renders an efficient and reasonable technique toward hydrogen production.3,4 To accelerate the reaction kinetics for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), electrocatalysts with high activity and stability are essential. To date, the noble metal-based materials, such as Pt and its alloys, are still identified as the state-of-the-art HER electrocatalysts, but their unfavorable cost and poor durability prohibit their wide commercial application. To achieve large-scale hydrogen production, searching for cost-effective catalysts with excellent electrocatalytic performance from earth-abundant materials for the HER becomes highly imperative.5,6
Owing to their Pt-like physicochemical properties, molybdenum (Mo)-based materials, such as carbides, oxides, chalcogenides, phosphides and nitrides, have been considered as one of the promising electrocatalyst systems toward the HER.7–12 Recently, the molybdenum phosphides (MoP) have exhibited good performance for the HER in both acidic and alkaline media and aroused growing interest.13–17 For example, Zhang et al. reported MoP/carbon nanotube (MoP/CNT) hybrids featuring ultrasmall-sized MoP (∼20 nm), which exhibited excellent HER activities in the whole-pH range.16 Unfortunately, the particle sintering/aggregation during preparation and the low electrical conductivity of MoP-based electrocatalysts limits the further enhancement of their activities. In addition, the traditional high-temperature phosphorization strategy associated with complexity and potential harmfulness presents another challenge for the development of MoP-based electrocatalysts for further industrial applications.18,19 In this regard, novel but facile strategies for preparing MoP-based materials featuring controlled structures and sufficient active sites are urgently required.
To enhance the electrical conductivity and structural robustness of Mo-based materials, the construction of Mo-based nanocrystals on conductive carbon scaffolds has been proved as one of the efficient approaches. The traditional synthesis methods associated with high thermolysis temperature make it difficult to obtain high pure phase and uniform-sized nanocrystals on carbonaceous materials. Currently, various methods, such as the colloid-confinement route, and the metal organic framework (MOF) induced strategy, have been developed to prepare nanostructured Mo-based catalysts with controllable particle size.20–22 On the other hand, a sufficiently developed nanoarchitecture with an advanced structure, for instance, nanowires, nanofibers, nanocubes, and nanospheres, can provide additional structural advantages of facilitated electron transfer pathways, abundant reactive surface area, and excellent mechanical stability.23–25 Moreover, compared with conventional powdery electrocatalysts, self-supported electrodes with a hierarchical nanostructure, producing enhanced electrical conductivity and more electroactive surface area, always exhibit improved electrocatalytic performance.19,24,26 Taken together, the integration of ultrafine MoP nanocrystals with nanostructured carbons as a binder-free electrode could reasonably boost electrocatalytic performance. Though, at present, the rational design and preparation of such electrode structures have been seldom reported.
In this work, ultrafine MoP nanocrystal-dispersed N,P-codoped porous carbon nanofibers coated on carbon cloth (MoP@NPCF/CC) are fabricated as self-supported electrocatalysts through an easy and scalable electrochemical induced polymerization followed by a carbothermal-phosphorization treatment. The atomic-scale dispersion of molybdate in the supermolecules formed from organophosphonic acid-incorporated polyaniline ensures the production of well-dispersed MoP nanocrystals on sufficient N,P heteroatom-modified carbon nanofibers. And the feasible electropolymerization of aniline monomer on carbon cloth facilitates the formation of a binder-free electrode. Benefiting from the self-supported configuration, hierarchical porous structure, sufficient heteroatom-doping, and ultrafine nanocrystals MoP, the fabricated MoP@NPCF/CC exhibits outstanding activity and durability for the HER in an acidic and alkaline medium, which are comparable to the mostly reported nonprecious metal-based catalysts. Coupling N,P-doped nanofibers on carbon cloth (NPCF/CC) as an anode and MoP@NPCF/CC as a cathode, the two-electrode alkaline electrolyzer achieves a low cell voltage of 1.64 V to offer a current density of 10 mA cm−2, and this device can continuously operate powered by a commercial silicon photovoltaic system illuminated by sunlight.
2. Experimental section
2.1. Material synthesis

2.1.1. Synthesis of NPCF/CC. 
A piece of carbon cloth (CC) was used as a substrate for electrodeposition. Before each experiment, the carbon cloth was firstly immersed into HCl solution (10 wt%), then washed with water. Prior to electrodeposition, the calculated amount of aniline was added into an aqueous solution containing organophosphonic acid (1-hydroxyethylidene-1,1-diphosphonic acid, HEDP) with continuous stirring to obtain a homogeneous solution. Then, the polymer supermolecule was electrodeposited on the carbon cloth in the above solution at a potential of 0.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) for 30 min on an electrochemical workstation, wherein carbon cloth was directly used as a working electrode, and graphitic rod and Ag/AgCl acted as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. And the obtained material was denoted as PANI-HEDP/CC. To obtain the NPCF/CC, the PANI-HEDP/CC was pyrolyzed at 900 °C for 3 h in N2 flow.


2.1.2. Synthesis of MoP@NPCF/CC. 
First, the fabricated PANI-HEDP/CC was immersed into ammonium molybdate ((NH4)6Mo7O24, 0.1 M) aqueous solution overnight to fully adsorb molybdate anions. Then, the obtained PANI-HEDP-Mo7O246−/CC was treated at 900 °C for 3 h in N2 flow, producing the MoP@NPCF/CC. The loading amount of MoP@NPCF on carbon cloth is 2.2 mg cm−2, which was determined by the mass increase of pristine carbon cloth.


2.1.3. Synthesis of NCF/CC. 
The fabricated process was similar to the synthesis of NPCF/CC, except replacing HEDP with HCl in the mixture solution. The finally obtained material was named as NCF/CC.


2.1.4. Powder MoP@NPCF nanofibers coated on carbon cloth (P-MoP@NPCF/CC). 
MoP@NPCF nanofibers were carefully scratched off from MoP@NPCF/CC. The powder of the MoP@NPCF nanofibers was dispersed into a solution contained 980 μL ethanol and 20 μL of Nafion (5 wt%) solution with continuous sonication to obtain a homogeneous ink. The obtained catalyst ink was dropped onto carbon cloth, and dried in air, producing the final electrode P-MoP@NPCF/CC.


2.1.5. Synthesis of o-NPCF. 
For comparison, N,P-doped carbon nanofibers obtained from the traditional oxidation–polymerization method were also fabricated. Simply, the calculated ammonium persulfate aqueous solution was added into the aniline solution contained HEDP with vigorous stirring in an ice bath. After stirring for 24 h, the precipitates were collected, followed by carbonization at 900 °C in a N2 atmosphere, and the obtained material was denoted as o-NPCF.

2.2. Physical characterization
The structure and morphology of the developed catalysts were detected by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Jeol JSM-7500L) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Jeol JSM-2800). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected on a Bruker D8 Focus diffractometer at 40 kV with Cu-Kα radiation. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on a Thermo Scientific ESCALAB 250Xi. Raman spectra were obtained on a TEO RTS-HiR-AM spectrometer with a 532 nm wavelength. Thermogravimetry analysis (TGA) was carried out on a TA SDT Q600 instrument with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms were obtained on a Quantachrome Nove2000e sorption analyzer at liquid nitrogen temperature. The specific surface area was obtained by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method using adsorption data at a relative pressure range of P/P0 = 0.05–0.30, the pore size distribution curve was determined by the BJH method using the adsorption branch, and the total pore volume was calculated from the adsorbed volume at a relative pressure P/P0 of 0.99.
2.3. Electrochemical measurements
All electrochemical measurements were tested on a Zennium (Zahner, Germany) workstation in a typical three-electrode configuration, wherein Ag/AgCl and graphitic rod were used as the reference and counter electrodes, respectively. For the self-supported catalysts, they were directly used as the working electrodes for electrocatalytic measurements. For the powder catalysts, the catalyst suspension was firstly prepared by dispersing the catalyst (5 mg) in a solution containing ethanol (980 μL) and 5 wt% Nafion (20 μL) with sonication. Then, the catalyst ink was drop-coated onto carbon cloth for electrochemical tests.
The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) polarization curves were obtained in 0.5 M H2SO4, and 1.0 M KOH with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. Before recording the electrochemical data, the working electrodes were scanned for several cycles until the current was stabilized. The obtained current was normalized with the geometric surface area of the working electrode to obtain the current density. The measured potentials (vs. Ag/AgCl) were converted to potentials (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode, RHE) based on the equation E(RHE) = E(Ag/AgCl) + 0.197 + 0.059pH. Prior to the electrochemical tests, N2 or O2 was purged into the electrolyte at least 20 min before the HER or OER tests, and maintained during the tests. All measured polarization curves were corrected by iR compensation within the cell.
The Tafel slope was calculated according to the Tafel equation as follows:η = a + b·logJwhere η is the overpotential, J is the current density and b is the Tafel slope.
The electrochemical double layer capacitance (Cdl) of the prepared electrodes was obtained from double-layer charging curves using cyclic voltammograms (CVs) in a non-faradaic potential region. The slope of the plot of the current density at a certain potential against scan rate is Cdl. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed in potentiostatic mode from 0.01 to 100 kHz with an AC voltage of 5 mV on an electrochemical workstation.
For the overall water splitting test, a two-electrode alkaline electrolyzer was fabricated, wherein the MoP@NPCF/CC and NPCF/CC worked as cathode and anode catalysts, respectively. The polarization curves were collected with a sweep rate of 2 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH. For the solar-driven overall water splitting, the alkaline electrolyzer was directly powered by a commercial silicon photovoltaic system stimulated by sunlight.
3. Results and discussion
The ultrafine MoP nanocrystals wrapped in nanofiber-like N,P-doped porous carbon (MoP@NPCF/CC) were synthesized through three steps, namely electrodeposition, adsorption and high-temperature carbothermal-phosphorization. The total synthetic procedures are illustrated in Scheme 1, the polymerization of the aniline units to polyaniline (PANI) nanofibers was initiated by electrodeposition with the existence of 1-hydroxyethylidene-1,1-diphosphonic acid (HEDP), forming the organophosphonic species-incorporated polymer (PANI-HEDP) on the basis of acid-based interaction.11,27 Then, the sufficient amine groups of polyaniline ensured the strong chelation of molybdate (Mo7O246−) moieties into the resultant supermolecules.19,22,28 The energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping images of PANI-HEDP-Mo7O246−/CC show that the C, N, P, and Mo are evenly dispersed over the nanofibers (Fig. S1, ESI†). The subsequent pyrolysis of these polymeric analogues resulted in the formation of heteroatom-doped carbonaceous materials and simultaneous conversion of Mo7O246− species into MoP nanocrystals via the carbothermal-phosphorization process.29,30 The presence of Mo7O246− moieties at the molecular scale in the supermolecules ensures that the obtained porous carbon nanofibers wrap the in situ formed MoP nanocrystals and thus effectively prevent aggregation and sintering during the high-temperature pyrolysis, producing MoP nanocrystal dispersed N,P-doped carbon nanofiber hybrids. The presence of organophosphonic acid not only facilitates the protonation of aniline, but also acts as the direct phosphorus source for in situ phosphorization to produce MoP nanocrystals under the high-temperature carbothermal process.
 Scheme 1  Schematic drawing of fabricating MoP@NPCF/CC and NPCF/CC. 
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) for PANI-HEDP-Mo7O246−/CC (Fig. S2, ESI†) exhibits two weight loss stages. The first weight loss stage is caused by the desorption of adsorbed water molecules at a temperature below 200 °C. And the second weight loss from 300 to 800 °C can be ascribed to the decomposition of organic species and the formation of MoP nanocrystals. And further increasing the temperature to 900 °C, there is also a slight weight loss which can be assigned to the combustion of coke.
Scanning electron microscopic (SEM) images (Fig. S3a–c, ESI†) of NPCF/CC exhibit the integrated network formed from the randomly oriented nanofibers, similar to the morphology of NCF/CC (Fig. S4, ESI†) prepared with HCl instead of HEDP, which are directly deposited on carbon cloth (Fig. S5a, ESI†). Transition electron microscopic (TEM) images (Fig. S3d and e, ESI†) of NPCF/CC show serrated sheets with a porous structure, which evidently facilitates the exposure of active sites and is available for the improvement of electrocatalytic activity. Further magnification (Fig. S3f, ESI†) displays the interconnected microporous structure of NPCF/CC, as consistent with the following N2 sorption isotherms. The EDS elemental mapping images (Fig. S3g–j, ESI†) exhibit the homogeneous dispersion of C, N, O, and P elements, and the corresponding elemental spectrum (Fig. S6, ESI†) indicates the presence of 3.6 at% N, and 2.4 at% P in NPCF/CC.
Following the chelation of Mo7O246− and then pyrolysis at 900 °C, the black carbon layers still maintained on the surface of carbon cloth (Fig. S5b, ESI†). Upon inspection of the surface using low-magnification SEM, the nanofibers forming a macroporous morphology are firmly coated on the carbon cloth (Fig. S7, ESI†), which is evidently different to the smooth surface of pristine carbon cloth. The high-magnification SEM images (Fig. 1a and b) of MoP@NPCF/CC show that these nanofibers preserve their original structure with a rough surface. This result indicates that the presence of Mo7O246− has little effect on the architecture of the final products. The TEM images (Fig. 1c) of MoP@NPCF/CC show the integrated nanofibers with an average diameter of approximately 300 nm. High-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) images (Fig. 1d and e) clearly reveal that the nanoparticles are encapsulated in carbon matrix and these nanoparticles exhibit a well-crystalline structure. In particular, the fabricated nanoparticles have a uniform grain size of approximately 10 nm calculated from the particle-size distribution histogram in Fig. S8 (ESI†). The high P content (30 wt%) of HEDP not only facilitates the doping of P elements into the carbon frameworks but also ensures the in situ phosphorization of Mo7O246− to obtain the MoP nanoparticles under pyrolytic carbonization at high-temperature. In the magnification observation (Fig. 1f), dispersive nanocrystals in the darker contrast are well-embedded in carbon matrix with a brighter contrast, and the typical interlayer distance of 0.210 nm for nanoparticles is ascribed to the (101) crystallographic plane of hexagonal MoP. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. 1e inset) of MoP@NPCF/CC shows the typical diffraction rings, ascribed to (100), (101), and (110) crystal planes for MoP. The wrapped MoP nanoparticles with a controlled particle size in carbon matrix, on one hand, provide the protection to resist corrosion, and on the other hand, facilitate the transport of electron from the graphitic carbon backbones to MoP nanocrystals. The elemental mapping images (Fig. 1g–j) confirm that the C, N, P and Mo elements are uniformly distributed in the separated nanofibers with the element content of 3.9 at% N, 2.7 at% P, and 1.6 at% Mo as detected on the corresponding EDS spectrum (Fig. S9, ESI†).
 Fig. 1  (a and b) SEM and (c–f) TEM images of MoP@NPCF/CC; inset in (e) is the SAED pattern. (g–j) EDS mapping images of MoP@NPCF/CC. 
The crystal information of the formed products was detected by X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in Fig. 2a, MoP@NPCF/CC shows the characteristic diffraction peaks ascribed to the hexagonal MoP (JCPDS No. 65-6487). And the evident broad peak of NPCF/CC at approximately 26° (2θ) corresponds to the (002) peak of graphitic carbon with a low graphitization degree. Therefore, together with the TEM and XRD results, it is strongly concluded that the fabricated MoP@NPCF/CC is the hybrid of low-degree graphitic carbon and MoP nanocrystals with a high pure phase. Raman spectroscopy was also used to detect additional skeleton information of the fabricated materials. With respect to the MoP@NPCF/CC and NPCF/CC, the Raman spectra (Fig. 2b) exhibit two evident signals at about 1360 and 1590 cm−1, ascribed to the typical D and G bands for carbon materials. The D band relates to disordered carbon structures, ascribed to the introduction of N and P dopants causing disorder or defect in the carbon skeletons. And the G band originates from the sp2-hybridized graphitic carbon. The evident D bands of all samples give indirect evidence for the existence of abundant defects originated from heteroatom doping, which has a positive effect on the electrochemical reactions.
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns and (b) Raman spectra of MoP@NPCF/CC and NPCF/CC. (c) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of MoP@NPCF/CC and NPCF/CC. High resolution XPS spectra of (d) P 2p and (e) N 1s for MoP@NPCF/CC and NPCF/CC, and (d) Mo 3d for MoP@NPCF/CC. 
The N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms were employed to characterize the textual properties of the fabricated materials. The sorption isotherms (Fig. 2c) of all samples demonstrate significant hysteresis loops in the relative pressure (P/P0) range from 0.4 to 1.0, revealing the existence of mesopores, in accordance with the pore size distribution curves (Fig. S10, ESI†). The BET specific surface area of NPCF/CC is 178 m2 g−1 with a large pore content of 0.44 cm3 g−1, slightly higher than that of the N-doped carbon nanofibers (NCF/CC) (165 m2 g−1, and 0.42 cm3 g−1) synthesized with the use of inorganic acid. This result indicates that the presence of organophosphonic acid has a positive effect to tailor the textural properties of carbon nanofibers. While the MoP@NPCF/CC has a decreased specific surface area (128 m2 g−1) and pore volume (0.33 cm3 g−1), which are reasonable due to the partial occlusion of the carbon framework after loading MoP nanocrystals. The high specific surface area with a porous structure can expose a large number of reactive sites for electrocatalytic processes and provide enough space for mass transfer. In addition, the N,P-codoped carbon (o-NPCF) with featureless morphology (Fig. S11, ESI†) prepared by the traditional oxidation–polymerization method has a specific surface area of only 91 m2 g−1 and pore volume of 0.14 cm3 g−1, demonstrating the superiority of this organophosphonic acid-induced electrochemical-polymerization strategy on a porous architecture.
The surface chemical composition and electronic states of the fabricated samples were further detected by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) analysis. The wide-scan XPS spectrum (Fig. S12, ESI†) of MoP@NPCF/CC displays the evident signals ascribed to the C, N, P and Mo elements, implying that the N and P dopants are successfully introduced into the prepared sample. The N 1s spectrum (Fig. 2d) for NPCF/CC presents four types of nitrogen species including pyridinic (398.2 eV), pyrrolic (400.1 eV), graphitic (401.8 eV), and oxidized (404.3 eV) nitrogen on the basis of their binding energies.31,32 After the introduction of molybdenum, a new peak located at 394.4 eV, ascribed to Mo–N bonds, is observed for MoP@NPCF/CC, verifying the intimate interaction between Mo-based species and carbon substrates.33,34 In the P 2p region of NPCF/CC (Fig. 2e), the signals at 132.8 and 134.3 eV are ascribed to P–C and P–O bonds, respectively, implying the successful doping of P elements into carbon skeletons.11,20 For MoP@NPCF/CC, besides the peaks related to P–C and P–O bonds, the fitted peaks at 129.1 and 130.4 eV correspond to P–Mo bonds.11,35 The high-resolution Mo 3d spectrum (Fig. 2f) is fitted into six signals including Moδ+ (227.9 and 232.3 eV), Mo4+ (228.9 and 231.1 eV), and Mo6+ (232.9 and 235.4 eV) species.19,36 The Moδ+ (0 < δ < 4) is greatly related to Mo of MoP. The Mo6+ corresponds to molybdenum oxides which are possibly formed by the surface oxidation of Mo-based species.37,38 Usually, the Moδ+ and Mo4+ are the active species for hydrogen evolution, while the Mo6+ is inactive for hydrogen production.28,36 The above XPS observations collectively indicate the formation of MoP on the N,P dual-doped carbon substrates. These physicochemical characterizations demonstrate that the well-dispersed MoP nanoparticles on heteroatom-doped carbon nanofibers (MoP@NPCF/CC) are prepared, and their fascinating properties such as self-supported architecture, ultrafine nanoparticles, dual-doping and porous nanofiber morphology, are favorable for electrochemical reactions.
Indeed, the self-supported architecture of the fabricated MoP@NPCF/CC allows it to be directly employed as a working electrode for electrochemical reactions, as shown in Fig. S13 (ESI†). The electrochemical HER activities of the fabricated catalysts were firstly evaluated in an acidic electrolyte (0.5 M H2SO4), and commercial Pt/C catalyst (20 wt%) coated carbon cloth was also used as a self-supported electrode. For comparison, commercial MoP (com-MoP), NPCF/CC, and NCF/CC were tested under identical conditions. The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of the catalysts in an acidic medium are shown in Fig. 3a. The Pt/C catalyst exhibits impressive catalytic activity with a small onset potential (Eonset) of about −25 mV. The fabricated NPCF/CC shows an enhanced electrocatalytic activity and smaller onset potential as compared with the single-doped NCF/CC. The introduction of dual-heteroatoms into the carbon framework can evidently tailor the charge properties in comparison to the single-doping, and thus supply a sufficient number of electroactive sites and more catalytically active catalytic surface area for hydrogen evolution.27,39 In contrast, MoP@NPCF/CC exhibits an obviously earlier onset potential and higher current density as compared with the metal-free NPCF/CC and NCF/CC counterparts, demonstrating the significantly positive effect of MoP nanocrystals on electrocatalytic activity. However, the com-MoP catalyst exhibits an evidently decreased performance, which is even inferior to that of metal-free NPCF/CC. Such results indicate that the intimate coupling between heteroatom-doped carbon and MoP nanocrystals is essential for the impressive electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution activities.
 Fig. 3  (a) Polarization curves, and (b) Tafel slopes of the fabricated materials in 0.5 M H2SO4. (c) Chronoamperometry curves of the prepared MoP@NPCF/CC and P-MoP@NPCF/CC at a hold overpotential of 150 mV in 0.5 M H2SO4. Inset: Polarization curves of MoP@NPCF/CC before and after 1000 CV cycles. (d) Polarization curves of the fabricated materials and (e) Tafel slopes in 1.0 M KOH. (f) Chronoamperometry curve of the MoP@NPCF/CC at the overpotential of 200 mV in 1.0 M KOH. 
Although the noble Pt/C benchmark possesses a slightly smaller onset potential as compared with MoP@NPCF/CC, the cathodic current density of MoP@NPCF/CC increases evidently compared to that of the Pt/C catalyst when the applied potential is beyond −250 mV. The potential to provide the current density of 10 mA cm−2 (η10) is a vital parameter to estimate the electrochemical activity of electrocatalysts, since it is related to the 10% efficiency of solar fuel configurations.40 MoP@NPCF/CC can obtain the η10 at the overpotential of 115 mV, higher than that of the Pt/C catalyst (57 mV), whereas it is comparable or even superior to most of the active Mo-based electrocatalyst, for example, uf-Mo2C/CF,21 N,P-doped Mo2C@C nanosphere,28 NS-doped Mo2C nanosheets,41 3D Mo2C/C hybrids,42 MoNi4/MoO3−x nanorod arrays,43 and MoxC@N–C,44 and other transition-metal electrocatalysts in previously reported studies, for instance, Co2P@NPC,45 FeNiP@C,46 and Co/CoP@NC nanofibers.47 A detailed comparison of a series of impressive HER catalysts with different chemical composition and catalyst configuration is presented in Table S1 (ESI†). These comparisons further indicate the considerable electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution properties of MoP@NPCF/CC in an acidic medium.
The HER reaction kinetics of the fabricated electrocatalysts was determined by their Tafel curves. From the linear fitting of the Tafel plot (Fig. 3b), the Tafel slope of MoP@NPCF/CC is 37 mV dec−1, higher than that of the Pt/C catalyst (33 mV dec−1), but superior to that of NPCF/CC (86 mV dec−1), NCF/CC (141 mV dec−1), and previously reported highly efficient HER electrocatalysts (Table S1, ESI†), implying the favorable electrochemical HER kinetics occurring on MoP@NPCF/CC, in accordance with the larger cathodic current density of MoP@NPCF/CC in the higher potential region. Besides the high activities, the long-term durability is another vital parameter to evaluate HER catalysts. The chronoamperometric curve, as displayed in Fig. 3c, reveals the impressive durability of MoP@NPCF/CC, showing a little current decay of 9.8% over 12 h of continuous operation. In addition, an accelerated degradation test for MoP@NPCF/CC in an acidic electrolyte demonstrates slight cathodic current attenuation after continuous CV scanning for 1000 cycles, as shown in Fig. 3c (inset), verifying the superior structure robustness to resist the accelerated electrochemical operation. The MoP@NPCF/CC maintains the original nanoparticle character after the long-term stability test, revealed from the TEM observation (Fig. S14, ESI†). The in situ growth of electroactive materials on the conductive carbon substrates ensures the outstanding stability for continuous measurement.27,48
The unique nanofiber structure and the binder-free configuration are responsible for the impressive electrochemical performance of the fabricated MoP@NPCF/CC electrocatalysts. On one hand, the uniform dispersion of MoP nanoparticles into the carbon network and the binder-free configuration would lead to enhanced charge transfer capability and structure robustness.26,49 The decreased semicircular diameter of MoP@NPCF/CC in Nyquist plots (Fig. S15, ESI†) as compared with post-coated powder MoP@NPCF on carbon cloth (P-MoP@NPCF/CC) suggests lower change transfer impedance of MoP@NPCF/CC. Consistent results are also reflected in the hydrogen evolution performance of MoP@NPCF/CC and P-MoP@NPCF/CC. Compared with the MoP@NPCF/CC, an inferior catalytic performance is observed from the corresponding LSVs of P-MoP@NPCF/CC (Fig. 3a) in terms of onset potential and cathodic current densities, and the poorer long-term stability on the chronoamperometry curve (Fig. 3c). The usage of polymer binders and the disordered morphology of nanofibers on carbon cloth may be the main reasons responsible for the decreased catalytic performance of P-MoP@NPCF/CC. On the other hand, the well-developed porosity of dual-heteroatom doped carbon provides more active surface area, and ultrafine MoP nanoparticles embedded in self-supported carbon nanofibers can impart more exposure of electroactive sites, together permitting the favorable ability for efficient water evolution to produce hydrogen.31,50 The electrochemical double layer capacitance (Cdl) of electrodes proves this conclusion. The Cdl of NPCF/CC (Fig. S16, ESI†) is 70.2 mF cm−2, larger than that of NCF/CC (58.2 mF dec−1), in accordance with the order of electrochemical activity on the corresponding LSV curves, revealing the significantly positive effect of dual-heteroatom doping on the electrochemical capability. In addition, the Cdl of MoP@NPCF/CC (44.8 mF cm−2) is largely higher than that of P-MoP@NPCF/CC (31.6 mF cm−2) (Fig. S16, ESI†). This result indicates that the oriented growth of nanofibers permits more accessible active sites as compared with the random electrode of P-MoP@NPCF/CC. The enhanced Cdl of NPCF/CC than that of MoP@NPCF/CC can be explained by the fact that the higher electrochemical capacitance of carbonaceous materials compared with metal components always leads to a larger Cdl. These results demonstrate the significantly positive effect of dual-heteroatom doping and ultrafine MoP nanocrystals in enhancing the elecrocatalytically active surface area, thus obtaining excellent electrocatalytic performance.
Usually, the chemical environment of transition metal catalysts can significantly affect the catalytic activity. For Mo-based electrocatalysts, the Moδ+ and Mo4+ species are the active components for the HER, while the Mo6+ species are always related to the inactive molybdenum oxides.21,36 Therefore, the molar ratio of (Mδ+ + M4+)/M6+ based on XPS spectra can provide valuable information to explore the electrochemistry difference among those developed electrocatalysts. The (Mδ+ + M4+)/M6+ ratios for MoP@NPCF/CC and com-MoP (Fig. S17, ESI†) are 1.15 and 1.12, which indicates that there are more active species on the MoP@NPCF/CC surface than on com-MoP. In this regard, the higher content of Moδ+ and Mo4+ species for MoP@NPCF/CC may be the nature of the enhanced HER activity.
Cost-efficient HER electrocatalysts with impressive electrocatalytic activity under alkaline conditions are also essential to the utilization of hydrogen energy. In particular, hydrogen evolution by water electrolysis in alkaline media is one of the promising routes for large-scale production of H2. HER catalytic activities of the fabricated MoP@NPCF/CC electrocatalyst were further investigated in an alkaline 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. As observed on LSV curves (Fig. 3d), though different HER pathways occurred under alkaline conditions, MoP@NPCF/CC still exhibits the highest electrocatalytic activity as compared with other counterparts. For MoP@NPCF/CC, the η10 can be obtained at the overpotential of 182 mV, which is lower than those of other prepared samples, associated with a favorable Tafel slope, as shown in Fig. 3e. Besides the excellent activity, MoP@NPCF also exhibits a robust durability under alkaline conditions. As shown on the corresponding chronoamperometric response (Fig. 3f), no significant current decay for MoP@NPCF/CC is detected over 12 h in an alkaline electrolyte.
According to the abovementioned discussion, the high electrochemical performance of the fabricated MoP@NPCF/CC for the HER can be attributed to the following several factors: (1) the self-supported porous nanofiber structure provides a favorable tri-phase interface (liquid electrolyte, solid catalysts and gaseous hydrogen) for effective mass transfer, and abundant reactive sites during reaction; (2) the graphitic carbon wrapped metal components and interconnected carbon matrix facilitate the electron transfer to MoP nanocrystals, and ensure the robust resistance ability for long-term operation; (3) the homogeneous doping of heteroatoms into carbon frameworks and the uniform dispersion of MoP nanocrystals on the graphitic carbon substrates would generate a synergetic effect to contribute to the improvement of electrochemical performance.
Besides the binding-free property, the flexibility of the electrode is another critical issue determining the actual applications. As displayed in Fig. 4a, the fabricated MoP@NPCF/CC can be bent under different bending angles. The corresponding polarization curves of MoP@NPCF/CC at different bending angles are shown in Fig. 4b. The catalytic activities in terms of the onset potential and current density of MoP@NPCF/CC under different bending angles are consistent with the initial one with no significant difference, revealing superior electrocatalytic flexibility and stability. Fig. 4c exhibits the optical images of the fabricated MoP@NPCF/CC with different bending angles at the applied overpotential of 200 mV, and vast bubbles are released from the electrode surface. These results indicate the significant potential for MoP@NPCF/CC as a flexible and self-supported electrode for electrocatalytic hydrogen production.
 Fig. 4  (a) Digital photographs of the bent MoP@NPCF/CC electrode with different bending angles. (b) Polarization curves of the MoP@NPCF/CC electrode at different bending angles. (c) Optical images of the MoP@NPCF/CC electrode at −0.2 V (vs. RHE) at different bending angles. All the measurements were carried out in 0.5 M H2SO4. 
The efficient anodic electrocatalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is another criterion to determine the overall electrocatalytic performance for water splitting. Metal-free heteroatom-doped carbon materials have been proved as one of the promising alternatives for the OER.51,52 Therefore, the N,P-codoped carbon nanofibers (NPCF/CC) were measured in the oxygen evolution potential region to discuss their OER performance in 1.0 M KOH. The OER electrocatalytic performance of the fabricated NCF/CP and commercial IrO2 coated carbon cloth (IrO2/CC) were also tested under identical conditions. The noble metal IrO2/CC presents enhanced catalytic activity with a low onset potential of approximately 1.48 V, as shown in the polarization curves (Fig. S18a, ESI†), which is lower than that of NPCF/CP (1.54 V) and NCF/CP (1.66 V), verifying the outstanding OER process. In addition, compared with just N-doped NCF/CP, N,P-dual-doped NPCF/CP exhibits a much higher anodic current with the enhancement of the operating potential, demonstrating the good OER activity. Furthermore, NPCF/CC obtains 10 mA cm−2 and 100 mA cm−2 at the applied potential of 1.58 V and 1.67 V, respectively, which are both lower than those of NCF/CC, and even better than some recently reported metal-free heteroatom-doped carbon materials (Table S2, ESI†). These differences of NPCF/CC and NCF/CC indicate clearly that the synergistic effect of the co-doped N and P heteroatoms boosts the OER electrocatalytic activity. Furthermore, the electrocatalytic kinetics of NPCF/CC were measured by its Tafel plot (Fig. S18b, ESI†). The Tafel slope value of NPCF/CC is 90 mV dec−1, lower than that of NCF/CC (128 mV dec−1), revealing the favorable electrocatalytic process toward the OER. The stability of NPCF/CC was further explored under alkaline media by the chronoamperometric response (Fig. S18c, ESI†). The NPCF/CC exhibits stable current density for the OER over 12 h, suggesting the outstanding stability toward oxygen evolution.
Taking into consideration the excellent electrocatalytic activity of MoP@NPCF/CC for the HER and NPCF/CC for the OER in alkaline media, it is reasonable to develop a two-electrode electrolyzer by directly using the MoP@NPCF/CC and NPCF/CC as self-supported cathodic and anodic electrodes, respectively, in 1.0 M KOH. As shown in Fig. 5a, the noble metal combination of Pt/C/CC//IrO2/CC exhibits impressive water splitting activity and needs the overall cell potential of 1.59 V to afford 10 mA cm−2. The MoP@NPCF/CC//NPCF/CC electrolyzer exhibits 10 mA cm−2 at 1.64 V, which is lower than that of MoP@NPCF/CC//NCF/CC (1.69 V) and some recently reported catalyst couples for overall water splitting under alkaline conditions (Table S3, ESI†), indicating the superiority of this electrode combination for overall water splitting. Furthermore, this electrolyzer maintains the current density of 10 mV cm−2 at a stable applied potential with negligible increase over 10 h (Fig. 5b). The overall water splitting derived by the output of sustainable solar energy to large-scale hydrogen production is a fascinating route to generate clean fuels for future energy supply. Finally, the performance of this electrolyzer for overall water splitting powered by solar energy was still investigated. As illustrated in Fig. 5c, the positive and negative electrodes of a commercial silicon photovoltaic system were directly connected to the electrolyzer assembled by MoP@NPCF/CC as a cathode and NPCF/CC as an anode. As shown in Fig. 5d, a large amount of gaseous bubbles generate on the electrode surface when energy is directly inputted from the silicon photovoltaic system. In particular, the LSV curve recorded after 10 h photovoltaic water splitting has a little change compared with the initial one (Fig. 5e), demonstrating the robust stability of the MoP@NPCF/CC and NPCF/CC in an alkaline electrolyte. These results demonstrate that this electrolyzer based on MoP@NPCF/CC as a cathode and NPCF/CC as an anode can be considered as an attractive device with high performance for solar-driven water splitting.
 Fig. 5  (a) Polarization curves of the couple of MoP@NPCF/CC//NPCF/CC in a two-electrode model. (b) Chronoamperometry curve of MoP@NPCF/CC//NPCF/CC at the holding current density of 10 mA cm−2. (c) Schematic illustration of the operation of two-electrode overall water splitting powered by commercial silicon photovoltaic devices. (d) Optical image of the water splitting by MoP@NPCF/CC//NPCF/CC under the electric-energy supply from commercial silicon photovoltaic devices, and the representative photograph of the production of O2 and H2 during water splitting. (e) Polarization curves of the fabricated water splitting electrolyzer of MoP@NPCF/CC//NPCF/CC initially and after long-term operation under power from a commercial silicon photovoltaic system. 
4. Conclusions
In this contribution, MoP nanocrystal interspersed N,P-dual-doped carbon nanofibers on carbon cloth (MoP@NPCF/CC) have been prepared by using a facile electrodeposition technique followed by a carbothermal-phosphorization approach. The obtained MoP@NPCF/CC exhibits enhanced HER electrocatalytic performance in a wide-pH range, associated with outstanding stability. The excellent electrocatalytic capabilities of MoP@NPCF/CC are ascribed to the following reasons: (1) the dual-doping of N and P heteroatoms into carbon nanofibers increases the active sites of the prepared electrodes; (2) the self-supported architecture with porous carbon nanofibers ensures sufficient exposed reactive sites, efficient electron transfer, and outstanding mechanical robustness; (3) the uniform dispersion of MoP nanocrystals on the carbon matrix increases the electron transfer among them, and the intimate connection between the two sides leads to a synergistic effect. In particular, N,P-codoped carbon nanofibers on carbon cloth (NPCF/CC) were also prepared according to a similar two-step electrodeposition-pyrolysis approach, and they exhibit excellent OER electrocatalytic activity in alkaline media. Furthermore, when coupled with MoP@NPCF/CC as a cathode and NPCF/CC as an anode in two-electrode configuration, the electrolyzer exhibits high efficiency and stability for overall water splitting. This electrolyzer can operate from the power energy supplied by a silicon photovoltaic system. When coupled with a silicon photovoltaic system for solar energy conversion, this electrolyzer exhibits high photoconversion efficiency and stability, thus demonstrating significant potential for efficient solar-driven water splitting. This work provides a significant and effective method for the fabrication of well-designed carbon or carbon-metal hybrids for renewable energy applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21421001, 21573115, and 21875118), and the 111 project (B12015).
Notes and references
V. R. Stamenkovic, D. Strmcnik, P. P. Lopes and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 57–69 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, H. Wang, X. Bo and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8018–8024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Q. Lv, F. Jing, K. Chi and S. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 223–230 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Cui, W. Yang and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22913–22932 RSC .
P. Yu, F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, X. Zhan, X. Lou, F. Xia and J. He, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 244–276 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kibsgaard and T. F. Jaramillo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14433–14437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Li, X. R. Wang, J. Y. Li, S. Zhang, J. Q. Sha, G. D. Liu and B. Tang, Carbon, 2018, 139, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Bae, I. Y. Jeon, J. Mahmood and J. B. Baek, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18158–18179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Ma, C. X. Wu, X. J. Feng, H. Q. Tan, L. K. Yan, Y. Liu, Z. H. Kang, E. B. Wang and Y. G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 788–798 RSC .
J. T. Ren, L. Chen, C. C. Weng and Z. Y. Yuan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1987–1996 RSC .
Y. Huang, Y. Sun, X. Zheng, T. Aoki, B. Pattengale, J. Huang, X. He, W. Bian, S. Younan, N. Williams, J. Hu, J. Ge, N. Pu, X. Yan, X. Pan, L. Zhang, Y. Wei and J. Gu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 982 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Li, S. Zhang, J. Q. Sha, H. Wang, M. Z. Liu, L. X. Kong and G. D. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17140–17146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Li, J. Y. Li, X. R. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Q. Sha and G. D. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10252–10259 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Y. Sun, J. Rao, J. Wu, A. Kumar, Q. N. Xu, C. Fu, E. Liu, G. R. Blake, P. Werner, B. Shao, K. Liu, S. Parkin, X. Liu, M. Fahlman, S. C. Liou, G. Auffermann, J. Zhang, C. Felser and X. Feng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801258 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Yu, L. Zhang, F. Zhou, Y. Liang and R. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706523 CrossRef .
J. Yang, F. Zhang, X. Wang, D. He, G. Wu, Q. Yang, X. Hong, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12854–12858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qin, H. Jang, L. Chen, G. Nam, X. Liu and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801489 CrossRef .
B. Liu, H. Li, B. Cao, J. Jiang, R. Gao and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801527 CrossRef .
M. Kong, H. Song and J. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801489 CrossRef .
Z. Kou, T. Wang, Y. Cai, C. Guan, Z. Pu, C. Zhu, Y. Hu, A. M. Elshahawy, J. Wang and S. Mu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700396 CrossRef .
J. T. Ren, L. Chen, C. C. Weng, G. G. Yuan and Z. Y. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 33276–33286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Weng, C. R. Grice, W. Meng, L. Guan, F. Xu, Y. Yu, C. Wang, D. Zhao and Y. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1434–1442 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, M. Jiang, Q. Zhang, P. He and X. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702513 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y. Bu, X. Chen, T. Zhu, J. Wang, S. Kawi and Q. Zhong, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 1320–1327 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, C. Tang, D. Liu, J. Wang, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7169–7173 RSC .
Y. P. Zhu, Y. Jing, A. Vasileff, T. Heine and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602928 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, W. J. Jiang, X. Zhang, Z. Dai, L. J. Wan and J. S. Hu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8851–8860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Zhu, X. Xu, H. Su, Y. P. Liu, T. Chen and Z. Y. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28369–28376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Ren, G. G. Yuan, C. C. Weng and Z. Y. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 261, 454–463 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, Y. Chen, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3824–3831 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, Q. Xi, X. A. Chen, D. Guo, F. Ding, Z. Yang, S. Wang, J. Li and S. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700733 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Pu, I. S. Amiinu, X. Liu, M. Wang and S. Mu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17256–17261 RSC .
Y. Leng, J. Li, C. Zhang, P. Jiang, Y. Li, Y. Jiang and S. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17580–17588 RSC .
Y. Yang, M. Luo, Y. Xing, S. Wang, W. Zhang, F. Lv, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Wang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706085 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. R. Anjum and J. S. Lee, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3030–3038 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Li, J. Q. Sha, B. Du and B. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12576–12579 RSC .
J. M. McEnaney, J. C. Crompton, J. F. Callejas, E. J. Popczun, A. J. Biacchi, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4826–4831 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qu, Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, X. Zhang, S. Dai and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602068 CrossRef .
J. Wang, F. Xu, H. Jin, Y. Chen and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605838 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Kwak, K. C. Lau, C.-D. Shin, K. Amine, L. A. Curtiss and Y.-K. Sun, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4129–4137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, H. Jiang, H. Jiang, H. Zhang, S. Guo, Y. Hu and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602782 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, T. Tang, H. Luo, S. Niu, Z. H. Dai, L. J. Wan and J. S. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703311 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liu, F. Li, D. Wang, C. Huang, Y. Zhao, J.-B. Baek and J. Xu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800040 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, Z. Pu, I. S. Amiinu, Y. Zhao, J. Zhu, Y. Tang and S. Mu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2902–2907 RSC .
B. Zhang, Y. H. Lui, A. P. S. Gaur, B. Chen, X. Tang, Z. Qi and S. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8739–8748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Li, K. Cao, T. Jin, X. Wang, H. Sun, J. Ning, Y. Wang and L. Jiao, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 44–53 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, X. Xia, X. Cao, B. Zhang, T. Nguyen Huy, H. He, S. Chen, Y. Huang and H. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700220 CrossRef .
C. C. Hou, Q. Q. Chen, C. J. Wang, F. Liang, Z. Lin, W. F. Fu and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23037–23048 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, Y. Xiao, C. Luan, J. Yang, H. Qiao, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Dai, Y. Yang and H. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6890–6899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Ren and Z. Y. Yuan, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 3260–3268 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Li, P. X. Hou, S. Y. Zhao, C. Liu, D. M. Tang, M. Cheng, F. Zhang and H. M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3079–3084 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9qm00409bThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2019
Table Content:
η = a + b·logJ

 	Scheme 1  Schematic drawing of fabricating MoP@NPCF/CC and NPCF/CC.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a and b) SEM and (c–f) TEM images of MoP@NPCF/CC; inset in (e) is the SAED pattern. (g–j) EDS mapping images of MoP@NPCF/CC.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns and (b) Raman spectra of MoP@NPCF/CC and NPCF/CC. (c) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of MoP@NPCF/CC and NPCF/CC. High resolution XPS spectra of (d) P 2p and (e) N 1s for MoP@NPCF/CC and NPCF/CC, and (d) Mo 3d for MoP@NPCF/CC.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Polarization curves, and (b) Tafel slopes of the fabricated materials in 0.5 M H2SO4. (c) Chronoamperometry curves of the prepared MoP@NPCF/CC and P-MoP@NPCF/CC at a hold overpotential of 150 mV in 0.5 M H2SO4. Inset: Polarization curves of MoP@NPCF/CC before and after 1000 CV cycles. (d) Polarization curves of the fabricated materials and (e) Tafel slopes in 1.0 M KOH. (f) Chronoamperometry curve of the MoP@NPCF/CC at the overpotential of 200 mV in 1.0 M KOH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Digital photographs of the bent MoP@NPCF/CC electrode with different bending angles. (b) Polarization curves of the MoP@NPCF/CC electrode at different bending angles. (c) Optical images of the MoP@NPCF/CC electrode at −0.2 V (vs. RHE) at different bending angles. All the measurements were carried out in 0.5 M H2SO4.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Polarization curves of the couple of MoP@NPCF/CC//NPCF/CC in a two-electrode model. (b) Chronoamperometry curve of MoP@NPCF/CC//NPCF/CC at the holding current density of 10 mA cm−2. (c) Schematic illustration of the operation of two-electrode overall water splitting powered by commercial silicon photovoltaic devices. (d) Optical image of the water splitting by MoP@NPCF/CC//NPCF/CC under the electric-energy supply from commercial silicon photovoltaic devices, and the representative photograph of the production of O2 and H2 during water splitting. (e) Polarization curves of the fabricated water splitting electrolyzer of MoP@NPCF/CC//NPCF/CC initially and after long-term operation under power from a commercial silicon photovoltaic system.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9qm00409b

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2019
