A novel photoelectrode based on eosin Y–rhodamine B duo-dye sensitized Au nanoparticles by in situ reduction  - Analytical Methods (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7AY01743J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7AY01743J
(Paper)
Anal. Methods, 2017, 9, 5586-5592A novel photoelectrode based on eosin Y–rhodamine B duo-dye sensitized Au nanoparticles by in situ reduction

        
          
            Y. L. 
            Yuan
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            G. M. 
            Pang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            X. K. 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            W. Y. 
            Zhu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            H. C. 
            Pan
          
        
      *abc
aCollege of Chemistry and Bioengineering, Guilin University of Technology, 12 Jiangan Road, Guilin 541004, P. R. China. E-mail: hcpan@163.com
bGuangxi Colleges and Universities Key Laboratory of Food Safety and Detection, Guilin University of Technology, 12 Jiangan Road, Guilin 541004, P. R. China
cGuangxi Key Laboratory of Electrochemical and Magneto-chemical Functional Materials, Guilin University of Technology, 12 Jiangan Road, Guilin 541004, P. R. China
Received 
      18th July 2017
    , Accepted 5th September 2017First published on 5th September 2017AbstractA novel and facile method for the fabrication of an indium tin oxide (ITO) photoelectrode modified with eosin Y–rhodamine B duo-dye sensitized Au nanoparticles is presented. After mixing with HAuCl4, a precipitate emerged in the duo-dye solution of eosin Y and rhodamine B. The precipitate was collected, dispersed in ethanol and spin-coated onto the ITO electrode. Different techniques were used to characterize the precipitate, including scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-Vis), infrared spectroscopy (IR) and photoluminescence (PL). Results of the characterizations showed that HAuCl4 was reduced to Au nanoparticles in situ, which were transformed by rhodamine B, while eosin Y retained its original molecular structure, forming an eosin Y–rhodamine B–Au nanocomposite. Compared with a solution containing only HAuCl4 and rhodamine B, the solution containing all three components produced more eosin Y–rhodamine B–Au nanocomposite precipitate, and exhibited an appreciable photocurrent response in the photoelectrochemical system. Furthermore, the modified ITO photoelectrode gave a specific response in the presence of Hg2+, which offers potential in the fields of environmental monitoring and food safety.
1. Introduction
Nowadays, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are attracting much attention, as one of the most extensive and promising photovoltaic techniques for the production of renewable, clean, and affordable energy with a simple fabrication procedure. The peculiar molecular properties, relatively easy assembly process, as well as the ability to extend the light absorption range to the visible region, make organic dyes a possible alternative to organometallic derivatives, such as Ru and Os polypyridyl complexes.1–4 Recently, a cosensitization strategy using two kinds of dyes has attracted more and more interest because it offers a higher energy conversion efficiency and broader light response region. Thus, numerous excellent cosensitization systems, including eosin Y (EY)/rose Bengal,5 EY/coumarin 343 (ref. 6 and 7) and EY/rhodamine B (RhB),8 have been fabricated, showing obvious synergistic effects between the two dyes. EY, a well-known organic dye which is characterized by a large π conjugated system, has attracted the attention of electrochemists as one of the possible candidate dyes for application in molecular-based photovoltaic devices.9–13 Similar to EY, RhB is a common sensitizer, and the energy conversion efficiency of solar energy materials can be greatly enhanced if they are cosensitized by EY and RhB.8
Numerous dyes have been utilized in combination with metal oxides as photoanodes in photovoltaic applications.14,15 As an alternative to metal oxides and metal chalcogenides,15,16 metal nanoparticles and/or other carbon nanomaterials5,8 are emerging as materials for next generation DSSCs. DSSCs are a type of metal-oxide wide-band-gap solar cell based on a dye-modified wide-band-gap semiconductor photoelectrode.17,18 It is interesting to note that as a replacement for traditional semiconductor metal oxides such as TiO2 and/or ZnO, the newly arising materials such as Pt and graphene5,8 have attracted broad interest while the usage of Au nanoparticles (Au NPs) has remained largely unexplored.19–23 When involved, Au NPs have always played an assisting role, such as in modifying semiconductor NPs for maximizing the efficiency of photocatalytic reactions,24 or by acting as a sink for photoinduced charge carriers and promoting interfacial charge-transfer processes25–27 in composite systems. The possibility of substituting semiconductor metal oxides with Au NPs has rarely been discussed.
Our work stems from interesting studies of the effective use of Au NPs inside the light harvesting layer of DSSCs for achieving enhanced quality factors. To achieve dye sensitization of the aforementioned materials, several typical methods have been used, for example, immersing a modified photoelectrode in dye solution to absorb dye molecules onto the electrode materials,28 or using the dye solution directly as the electrolyte. Herein, we present a novel and straightforward method with higher dye sensitization efficiency on an indium tin oxide (ITO) conductor. By mixing HAuCl4 solution together with EY and RhB, Au NPs were easily produced in situ as a precipitate composite with EY and RhB. This obtained composite was spin-coated onto an ITO slide to fabricate a photoelectrode which emitted photocurrent under the irradiation of simulated sunlight. Intriguingly, this photoelectrode also showed an obvious current increase when Hg2+ was added into the photoelectrical system. A linear relationship was achieved between the added Hg2+ concentration and the photocurrent intensity, which was successfully used to detect the mercury content in waste water from the laboratory and a pool. Hence this work provides a novel photoelectrochemical (PEC) sensing strategy for Hg2+.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Materials
ITO slides were obtained from Kaiwei Electronic Components Co., Ltd (Zhuhai). Before use, the ITO glass slides were cut into 2 cm × 2 cm squares and sonicated successively in acetone, ethanol and deionized water for 5 min each, and then dried in an oven at 60 °C for around 1 h. Hydrogen tetrachloroaurate hydrate (HAuCl4·3H2O) and RhB (C28H31ClN2O3) were purchased from Shanghai Baoman Biotech Co., Ltd. EY (C20H6Br4Na2O5) was purchased from Shanghai Jinsui Biotech Co., Ltd. Lead nitrate (Pb(NO3)2), mercuric nitrate (Hg(NO3)2), cadmium nitrate (Cd(NO3)2) and copper sulfate (CuSO4) were obtained from Nanning Chemical Group Co., Ltd. All of the other reagents were of analytical grade and were used without further purification.
2.2 Preparation of EY–RhB–Au and RhB–Au nanocomposites and fabrication of the ITO photoanode
EY (20 mL 0.01 mol L−1) and RhB (10 mL 0.01 mol L−1) were first mixed together, and then 25 mL distilled water and 5 mL 1% HAuCl4 were successively added into the duo-dye solution. The solution was immediately placed in the dark and stirred for 8 h, and then allowed to stand for another 16 h at ambient temperature to make sure that the precipitation was complete. After that, the precipitate was filtered and washed twice with distilled water, and then with ethanol once. Solvent evaporation was performed in an oven at about 60 °C for 3 h to get the dry powder. The RhB–Au composite was obtained in the same way but in the absence of EY. When mixing EY with HAuCl4, no precipitate was produced in solution. Therefore in the following procedures, only EY–RhB–Au and RhB–Au nanocomposites were used and studied.
EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite thin films on ITO were prepared by spin-coating using an appropriate procedure. First, suitable quantities of precipitate were mixed with 0.5 mL ethanol to obtain variable concentrations, and sonicated for 5 min to get well-dispersed solutions. Next, 0.05 mL of each ethanol solution was dropped onto a 2 cm × 2 cm ITO slide, previously cleaned as described before, and spin-coated three times. Solvent evaporation was performed in an oven at about 60 °C. The modified ITO photoanodes were then stored at room temperature ready for use.
2.3 Photoelectrochemical measurements
Photocurrent measurements were carried out under the illumination of simulated sunlight from a solar simulator (xenon lamp with AM-1.5 filter, radiant power 100 mW cm−2) in a three-electrode electrochemical cell using a CHI660B electrochemical system (Shanghai Chenhua Instruments, China). The distance between the light source and the electrode was fixed at 10 cm. The EY–RhB–Au or RhB–Au nanocomposite-loaded ITO substrates were used as the photoelectrode, with a Pt electrode as the counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl electrode as the reference electrode at an applied potential of +0.05 V. Acetate buffered saline (0.10 mol L−1, pH = 5) was used as the supporting electrolyte. To study the analytical performance of the modified electrode for Hg2+, different concentrations of Hg(NO3)2 were added into the electrolyte solution, stirred for 30 s and incubated for 10 s, before successive measurements of photocurrent.
2.4 Characterization
The crystallinity and phase purity of the synthesized nanocomposites were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) recorded at room temperature (X'pert PRO, PANalytical, Netherlands). The morphology, size distribution, and the elemental compositions of the nanostructures were determined by field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S4800, Japan), energy dispersive X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) operating at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2100F) with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. UV-Vis absorption measurements were carried out using a UV-Vis absorption spectrometer (Shimadzu-2450). The room temperature photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded using a spectrofluorophotometer (Hitachi F-7000) with the excitation wavelength of 540 nm for EY and the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite, and 555 nm for RhB and the RhB–Au composite.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Characterization of the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite
To get the dye sensitized nanocomposite, a simple and convenient method was applied by mixing EY, RhB and HAuCl4 aqueous solution together in the dark. The solution color subsequently changed from bloody red to light orange with the emergence of a precipitate (Fig. 1, inset). The obtained precipitate was characterized by different techniques to discover detailed information on its composition.
 Fig. 1  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite. Inset: photo images of the solution mixture (#1) before and (#2) after reaction. 

Fig. 1a is an SEM image showing that the precipitate had a layered structure with nanoparticles distributed on the surface with good monodispersity. The layered structure was assumed to be formed by the organic dyes while the nanoparticles were considered to be Au NPs. TEM was also used to investigate the morphology of the precipitate (Fig. 1b), from which it can be seen clearly that different nanoparticle shapes with sizes ranging from 20–30 nm were dispersed on thin nanosheets, consistent with the SEM result. In order to confirm the observed nanoparticles as Au NPs, XRD was used to characterize the obtained nanocomposite. The XRD pattern in Fig. 2 reveals 4 diffraction peaks at 38.2°, 44.4°, 64.6° and 77.5°, well matched with the (111), (200), (220) and (311) crystalline planes of a face-centered cubic phase of Au (JCPDS 89-3697), which indicates that the nanoparticles dispersed on the dye nanosheets were highly crystalline Au NPs. Fig. 3 displays the XPS spectrum of the nanocomposite, giving specific peaks for O 1s, N 1s, C 1s, Au 4f and Br 3d. The Au 4f peak at 84 eV was assigned to the 4f feature of Au(0), which is accordant with the previous conclusion. Since the elemental sources of N and Br are RhB and EY, respectively, we can tell that both dyes exist in the precipitate in certain forms, thus the prepared composite is noted as the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite. Based on the atomic percentage information provided by XPS, preliminary quantitative analysis can be made for the nanocomposite. The content percentages of Br, Au, C, N, O are 6.94%, 0.42%, 76.42%, 3.18% and 13.03%, respectively. The molecular ratio of EY:RB:Au in the composite is calculated to be around 4:4:1. Since the reaction mixture was composed of only EY, RhB and HAuCl4, further techniques were used to discover which of the dyes reduced HAuCl4 to Au NPs.
 Fig. 2  XRD pattern of the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite. 
 Fig. 3  Survey XPS spectrum of the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite. 

Fig. 4 shows the UV-Vis absorption spectra of the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite, the RhB–Au composite, EY and RhB (all dispersed in ethanol), all of which exhibited strong absorption in the visible region. The absorption peak of EY and RhB were 535 nm and 560 nm, respectively. These absorption peaks may be attributed to the π–π* transitions of the conjugated molecules.29 When the RhB–Au composite was formed, there was a 10 nm blue shift in the absorption peak to 550 nm compared with RhB itself. The absorption peak of the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite also blue shifted by about 10 nm compared with the free EY solution, and was far from that of the free RhB solution. Based on this, we assume that EY plays a dominant role in the produced EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite. The absorption spectrum of an EY and RhB mixture was almost the superposition of the spectra of the individual dyes, implying no electron transfer between EY and RhB.8 It can be deduced that the structure which emerged in the nanocomposite and caused the blue shift of the UV-Vis spectra could be ascribed to an interaction of EY and HAuCl4 or RhB and HAuCl4.
 Fig. 4  UV-Vis absorption spectra of EY–RhB–Au, EY, RhB–Au and RhB. 
IR spectroscopy was used to further investigate the structure of the nanocomposite. In Fig. 5, the characteristic absorption bands of the individual dyes are compared with those of the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite. It can be seen that more functional groups of EY were retained in the nanocomposite while most of the characteristic bands of RhB disappeared or weakened. This observation agrees well with the UV-Vis result that more EY exists in the final product. This result was further proven by PL characterization (Fig. 6). It is obvious that the emission peak of EY overlaps with the absorption band of RhB. If there were still free RhB molecules in the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite, it would be rational to expect that the EY emission would be quenched at the excitation wavelength of EY due to Főster resonance energy transfer (FRET) from EY to RhB, leading to PL emission of RhB. In contrast, the observed PL excitation and emission of the obtained EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite are grossly similar to those of EY (Fig. 6a and c) which indicates either that few free RhB molecules exist in the nanocomposite or that the original RhB molecule structure has been destroyed due to an interaction with HAuCl4. Combined with the UV-Vis and IR results, we were more inclined to accept the latter interpretation. When mixed with HAuCl4, we conclude that RhB was oxidized by reducing Au(III) to Au(0). This reaction intensity was rather weak since the excitation and emission spectra of RhB–Au changed only slightly compared with the spectra of RhB, and the presence of EY greatly enhanced the reduction process (Fig. 6a). Generally, it is concluded that during the whole reaction process, it is EY that remains almost unchanged, acting as a catalyst and sensitizing the Au NPs which are reduced by RhB and form the precipitate.
 Fig. 5  IR spectra of (a) the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite, (b) EY and (c) RhB. 
 Fig. 6  Fluorescence excitation and emission spectra of EY–RhB–Au, EY, RhB–Au and RhB. 
3.2 Photoelectrochemical behavior of modified ITO electrodes

Fig. 7 shows the transient photocurrent–time profile of the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite modified ITO electrode, as well as the RhB–Au modified ITO electrode for comparison. A stable photocurrent appeared immediately upon irradiation of the ITO electrode at an applied potential of +0.05 V. As can be seen from Fig. 7A, the EY–RhB–Au modified ITO electrode exhibited an obvious higher PEC response (around 14 times) in comparison with that of the RhB–Au electrode. This result is consistent with the aforementioned conclusion that only when EY was present was the reduction reaction producing Au NPs by RhB effectively enhanced, and thus sensitization of the Au NPs was achieved by EY in the nanocomposite. The obtained nanocomposite possesses good stability. After modification of the ITO, the collected photocurrent remained steady after repeated excitation under the Xe lamp for 20 cycles. Furthermore, the photocurrent response remained at 98% after the modified ITO was kept in an ambient environment for 15 days.
 Fig. 7  (A) Transient photocurrent–time curves of (a) EY–RhB–Au and (b) RhB–Au modified ITO electrodes. (B) Transient photocurrent–time curve of the EY–RhB–Au modified ITO electrode with successive addition of Hg2+ into the cell system. 
A mechanism of photocurrent generation is proposed based on the experimental results above, and is shown in Scheme 1. As concluded from the aforementioned results, the obtained nanocomposite is composed of Au NPs, oxidized RhB, and EY. Recently, EY has attracted the attention of electrochemists as one of the possible dye candidates for application in molecular-based photovoltaic devices. In our PEC system, acetate buffer solution was used as the electrolyte. Based on these facts, we infer that EY, working as a sensitizer, absorbs the light (i.e., the incoming photons) creating the excited state EY* and then injects an electron to the Au NPs, leaving the EY*+ species. This electron is then transferred to the ITO to emit a photocurrent. To complete the reaction cycle, a redox pair is needed to regenerate the native form EY from EY*+. Considering the whole composition of this system, only oxidized RhB and acetate are candidates for the role of sacrificial donor. Obviously, oxidized RhB is much more likely than acetate to be involved in the reaction. Therefore we presume that with the assistance of RhB, EY*+ is reduced to EY. As displayed in Fig. 7b, there was a specific photocurrent response when Hg2+ was added into the electrolyte. The photocurrent progressively increased as the concentration of Hg2+ was increased. Taking advantage of this phenomenon, a new strategy for Hg2+ detection was proposed.
 Scheme 1  The proposed photoelectrochemical mechanism based on the EY–RhB–Au modified ITO electrode. 
3.3 Optimization of experimental conditions
To find out the optimum conditions under which the highest photocurrent could be generated at the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite modified ITO electrode, different parameters were examined. The type of electrolyte had an important effect on the PEC signal. Three kinds of buffered saline (0.1 mol L−1, pH 5), namely acetate buffer solution (ABS), phosphate buffer solution (PBS) and citrate buffer solution (CBS), were used as electrolytes to measure the produced photocurrent (data not shown). It was found that the photocurrent was stronger in ABS than in PBS and that the spin-coated EY–RhB–Au film on the ITO slides dissolved in CBS, so ABS was chosen as the electrolyte for further experiments due to the obtained high and stable photocurrent and compatibility with the modified electrode.
As depicted in Fig. 8A, the pH of the ABS electrolyte was also investigated to study the acidity effect on PEC behavior. From pH 4 to 6, as the pH increased, the relevant photocurrent decreased to a small extent. Considering the buffer preparation and desired signal response, pH 5 was chosen as the pH of the electrolyte. To fabricate the modified photoelectrode, the obtained EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite was first dissolved in given solvents and then spin-coated onto ITO glass. Different dispersion states of the nanocomposite in different solvents have non-negligible effects on the photocurrent response. Thus several solvents, namely ethanol, dimethyl sulfoxide, diacetone alcohol, and dimethylformamide were used to prepare nanocomposite solutions. Fig. 8B illustrates that the nanocomposite dissolved in dimethylformamide generated the highest photocurrent. When dissolving in diacetone alcohol, the dispersity was not good and less nanocomposite was able to modify the surface of the ITO. Dimethylformamide dissolved the nanocomposite well and gave an appreciable photocurrent response, however, the undesirable volatility of dimethylformamide impeded the spin-coating process and the obtained film gradually dissolved in the ABS electrolyte during the following photocurrent measurements, leading to unstable signal collection. Ethanol had acceptable dispersity towards the nanocomposite and the fabricated film showed good stability on the ITO slides. Based on the different performances of the solvents, ethanol was selected to dissolve the nanocomposite in later experiments.
 Fig. 8  Effect of (A) pH, (B) solvent used for dissolving the nanocomposite, (C) concentration of the nanocomposite (0.1 mg nanocomposite in 2 ml, 1 ml and 0.5 ml ethanol was taken as concentrated factor 1, 2 and 4, respectively), and (D) film thickness, on the photocurrent produced on the modified ITO electrode. 
The EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite (0.10 g) dissolved in 2 mL, 1 mL or 0.5 mL ethanol was spin-coated on ITO electrodes and the relevant photocurrent was checked. It is obvious that a higher concentration of nanocomposite with the same film thickness would generate a stronger photocurrent, which is consistent with the result displayed in Fig. 8C. Taking material cost and signal intensity into account, 0.10 g nanocomposite dispersed in 0.5 mL ethanol was used. The thickness of the film was controlled by the spin-coating time and speed. Increasing the frequency of spin-coating would definitely increase the film thickness, thus increasing the total amount of nanocomposite on the modified ITO electrode. When the spin-coating process was repeated 3 or more times, the produced photocurrent remained stable (Fig. 8D), probably because the thicker non-conductive dye layer inhibited the electron transfer, leading to charge recombination in the interior of nanocomposite.
3.4 Analytical performance of the modified ITO photoelectrode
Under optimized experimental conditions, Hg2+ detection was carried out in a three electrode system in ABS electrolyte at an applied potential of 0.05 V under irradiation. The assay for Hg2+ was based on the principle that the photocurrent would increase with an increasing concentration of Hg2+. As can be seen in Fig. 9A, the photocurrent showed good linearity with the concentration of added Hg2+. This PEC strategy exhibited a linear detection range of 1.0 × 10−6 mol L−1 to 1.0 × 10−5 mol L−1, with a detection limit of 5.3 × 10−7 mol L−1 (R2 = 0.998). It has to be noted that this detection limit is higher than the upper concentration limit of Hg2+ (3 × 10−8 mol L−1) in water samples recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO).30 Therefore the PEC strategy is currently not able to meet the requirements for Hg2+ determination. Further work, focusing on improving the sensitivity of this PEC sensor, is being done now.
 Fig. 9  (A) Calibration curve for mercury ions. (B) Interferences of other metal ions on photocurrent generation (the photocurrent value produced by Hg2+ is set as 1). 
The complexity of real samples poses great challenges to analytical methods in terms of selectivity in the detection of metal ions. In order to evaluate the potential for interference in this PEC strategy when detecting Hg2+, relative photocurrent signals of the modified ITO electrode were measured for diverse metal ions, namely Bi2+, Ni2+, Ca2+, Cd2+, Co2+, Mn2+, Cu2+ and Pb2+, at 10 times higher concentrations than were used for Hg2+ (2.0 × 10−6 mol L−1). The interference with the signal for Hg2+ was negligible in all cases (<8.7%), suggesting the high selectivity of the present method for Hg2+ detection relative to that for other metal ions (Fig. 9B). In order to evaluate the feasibility of the proposed detection strategy, we further tested the performance of the sensor in real samples from laboratories and a local pool by a standard addition method. The average recovery results for waste laboratory water and pool water were 89.73% and 101.37%, respectively, indicating the potential practicality of this PEC sensor for environmental and food samples.
4. Conclusions
In this work, an in situ approach involving two dyes, EY and RhB, was used to produce Au NPs which were successfully adopted to fabricate a PEC system and act as an Hg2+ sensing platform. Simply by mixing three components together, HAuCl4 was reduced in situ to Au NPs by RhB while EY remained unchanged and worked as a sensitizer. The resulting nanocomposite with a high density of dyes greatly accelerated the PEC process and photocurrent generation. It is novel to apply material containing only dyes and Au NPs to fabricate a photoelectrode, and this work provides a new approach for preparing photoelectrodes of DSSCs. Furthermore, the fabricated ITO photoelectrode exhibited a specific and linear response to Hg2+ within a certain range, with acceptable selectivity against other metal ions, indicating the possibility of constructing a PEC sensing platform. The detection limit so far obtained by the proposed strategy is higher than that required by WHO for the determination of Hg2+ in water samples. However, we are now making efforts to push down the detection limit by trying different modifications, such as the addition of other electron acceptors in the electrolyte, optimizing the component ratio, and so on.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21265005, 21565011), the Guangxi Natural Science Foundation (2013GXNSFBB053009, 2015GXNSFAA139020), the project of high level innovation team and outstanding scholars in Guangxi colleges and universities, Guangxi colleges and universities key laboratory of food safety and detection, the collaborative innovation center for water pollution control and water safety in the karst area, the Guangxi key laboratory of environmental pollution control theory and technology, and the Research Funds of the Guangxi Key Laboratory of Electrochemical and Magneto-chemical Functional Materials (No. EMFM20161202).
References
B. Wenger, M. Grätzel and J. E. Moser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yoshida, J. Zhang, D. Komatsu, S. Sawatani, H. Minoura, T. Pauporte, D. Lincot, T. Oekermann, D. Schlettwein, H. Tada, D. Wohrle, K. Funabiki, M. Matsui, H. Miura and H. Yanagi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 17 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lin, Y. Lai, H. Chen, J. Chen, C. Kung, R. Vittal and K. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3448 CAS .
H. Tan, D. Cai, Z. Liu, F. Zhong, H. Lv, X. Zhang, S. Yang and C. Pan, Synth. Met., 2016, 214, 56 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, B. Peng, T. Peng, L. Yu, R. Li and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 298, 30 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, K. Sayama and H. Sugihara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Baviskar, D. Dubal, S. Majumder, A. Ennaoui and B. R. Sankapal, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2016, 318, 135 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, S. Kang, D. Wang, X. Li, L. Qin and J. Mu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 105969 RSC .
T. Yoshida, M. Iwaya, H. Ando, T. Oekermann, K. Nonomura, D. Schlettwein, D. Wöhrle and H. Minoura, Chem. Commun., 2004, 4, 400 RSC .
T. Yoshida, K. Terada, D. Schlettwein, T. Oekermann, T. Sugiura and H. Minoura, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1214 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ramakrishna and H. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 7000 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pelet, M. Grätzel and J. Moser, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 3215 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshida, T. Pauporté, D. Lincot, T. Oekermann and H. Minoura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, C608 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Wu, D. Wu, Z. Gao and K. Jiang, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 574, 227 CrossRef CAS .
P. Baviskar, A. Ennaoui and B. Sankapal, Sol. Energy, 2014, 105, 445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lei, X. Wang, B. Li, J. Kang, Y. He, A. George, L. Ge, Y. Gong, P. Dong, Z. Jin and G. Brunetto, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pan, I. Mora-Seró, Q. Shen, H. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, X. Li, W. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Li and H. Pan, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2017, 12, 4970 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, S. Huang, X. Li, P. Li and W. Zhu, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2016, 11, 3364 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J. Li, C. Zhou, W. Zhu and H. Pan, Optoelectron.: Adv. Mater. Devices, 2014, 8, 1200 CAS .
H. Pan, D. Li, J. Li, W. Zhu and L. Fang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 12883 CAS .
H. Pan, D. Li, J. Liu, J. Li, W. Zhu and Y. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14461 CAS .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 99117 CrossRef .
A. Bard and M. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. Wolf and P. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11439 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nagamani, G. Kumarasamy, M. Song, C. S. Kim, D. H. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Kang and S. Jin, Synth. Met., 2016, 217, 117 CrossRef CAS .
R. Naphade, M. Tathavadekar, J. Jog, S. Agarkar and S. Ogale, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 975 CAS .
P. Raksa, S. Nilphai, A. Gardchareon and S. Choopun, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 4741 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sharma, S. Singh, R. Kurchania and R. Ball, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6036 RSC .

          http://www.who.int/en/
        .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite. Inset: photo images of the solution mixture (#1) before and (#2) after reaction.	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD pattern of the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite.	 

 	Fig. 3  Survey XPS spectrum of the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite.	 

 	Fig. 4  UV-Vis absorption spectra of EY–RhB–Au, EY, RhB–Au and RhB.	 

 	Fig. 5  IR spectra of (a) the EY–RhB–Au nanocomposite, (b) EY and (c) RhB.	 

 	Fig. 6  Fluorescence excitation and emission spectra of EY–RhB–Au, EY, RhB–Au and RhB.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Transient photocurrent–time curves of (a) EY–RhB–Au and (b) RhB–Au modified ITO electrodes. (B) Transient photocurrent–time curve of the EY–RhB–Au modified ITO electrode with successive addition of Hg2+ into the cell system.	 

 	Scheme 1  The proposed photoelectrochemical mechanism based on the EY–RhB–Au modified ITO electrode.	 

 	Fig. 8  Effect of (A) pH, (B) solvent used for dissolving the nanocomposite, (C) concentration of the nanocomposite (0.1 mg nanocomposite in 2 ml, 1 ml and 0.5 ml ethanol was taken as concentrated factor 1, 2 and 4, respectively), and (D) film thickness, on the photocurrent produced on the modified ITO electrode.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Calibration curve for mercury ions. (B) Interferences of other metal ions on photocurrent generation (the photocurrent value produced by Hg2+ is set as 1).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
