A strategic review of MXenes as emergent building blocks for future two-dimensional materials: recent progress and perspectives  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC06029E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC06029E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 4096-4123A strategic review of MXenes as emergent building blocks for future two-dimensional materials: recent progress and perspectives

        
          
            B. Moses 
            Abraham
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Vanshree 
            Parey
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jayant K. 
            Singh
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur-208016, India
bPrescience Insilico Private Limited, Bangalore 560049, India. E-mail: jayantks@iitk.ac.in
Received 
      18th December 2021
    , Accepted 8th February 2022First published on 14th February 2022AbstractThe breathtaking success of MXenes arising from a library of unique and fascinating properties has triggered world-wide research interest and opened up several new directions in understanding the science and technology of two-dimensional materials. This review provides a holistic evaluation of relevant properties across a wide range of MXene families. The key points of modern approaches applied to MXenes are presented with special emphasis to cover their pitfalls, peculiarities and applications. By considering experimental and theoretical studies, we describe the fundamental structure–property–performance inter-relationships with the goal of providing a better understanding of these MXenes at the atomic level. A final note on immediate research needs along with future directions and major challenges in developing these MXenes is discussed.
B. Moses Abraham
B. Moses Abraham received his PhD in 2020 from the School of Physics, University of Hyderabad, India. He obtained BSc (2011) and MSc (2013) degrees from Acharya Nagarjuna University, India. He is currently working as a Project Scientist in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. His primary interest lies in the fundamental understanding of the chemistry and physics of materials, probed via novel first-principles computational methods.
Vanshree Parey
Vanshree Parey received her BSc (2011), MSc (2013) and PhD (2021) degrees from the Department of Physics, Barkatullah University, India. She is currently working as a Project Scientist in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. She is interested in studying the interactions and reactions of molecules adsorbed on surfaces, and the energetics of defects on surfaces (as well as interfaces) using density functional theory calculations.
Jayant K. Singh
Jayant K. Singh is currently Poonam and Prabhu Goel Chair Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Dean of Resources and Alumni at Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. Prof. Singh received his BTech in Chemical Engineering from IIT Kanpur in 1997. He subsequently completed his MS degree in Computer Science and Engineering, in 2002, and PhD in Chemical Engineering, in 2004, in the area of molecular simulation from SUNY Buffalo, USA. Prof. Singh has provided significant insights into the phase equilibria and interfacial behavior of bulk fluids and fluids confined in nanopores using statistical mechanics and molecular simulations. His current research interests include material modelling, machine learning, self-assembly, energy storage, wetting transition, selective adsorption and development of novel molecular simulations tool.
1 Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) materials have experienced exponential growth in scientific research because of their outstanding physical and chemical properties, leading to the innovation of novel interdisciplinary branches in nanotechnology and materials engineering. 2D materials are mainly composed of one or two constituent elements, such as oxides,1 transition-metal dichalcogenides,2 germanene,3,4 borophene,5–7 phosphorene,8,9 silicene10–12 and graphene.13 These 2D materials provided a promising platform for exploiting and exploring the internal degrees of freedom of electrons: spin, orbital, charge and the corresponding interplay for device applications. Beyond the traditional 2D semiconducting materials, MXenes, also known as transition-metal carbides/nitrides/carbonitrides, stand out as a trending class of 2D materials because of their incredible contribution to various applications. For instance, theoretically MXenes are found to be useful in nanoscale superconductivity,14 hydrogen storage media,15,16 catalytic and photocatalytic reactions,17–22 and sensing,23 thermoelectric,24–29 optical,30,31 magnetic32–36 and electronic devices.37–39 Experimentally, various applications have been already proposed for MXenes such as in cancer therapy,40 promising substrates for catalysts,41,42 dyes,43 purifiers,44,45 fillers in polymeric composites,46 electromagnetic interface shielders,47 dual-responsive surfaces,48 hybrid nano-composites,49 photocatalysts for hydrogen production,50 suitable materials for methane storage,51 field effect transistors,52 transparent conductors,53–55 Li-ion batteries56 and supercapacitors.57–59
The general formula of MXenes is Mn+1XnTx (n = 1–3), where M corresponds to early transition metals, X can be either carbon or nitrogen and Tx represents surface terminations (e.g.: fluorine, oxygen or hydroxyl).60–67 MXenes are nontoxic, low-cost and rich in content68 with an ideal electronic structure,69 tunable bandgap,70 excellent structural stability, high thermal and chemical stability, strong conductivity, superior anisotropic mobility of holes and electrons and many other attractive properties.71–73 They are atomically thin but theoretically possess infinite lateral dimensions, whose surface atoms (functionalization) make them exhibit promising properties. Recently, double transition metal based MXenes are included into this family, where different combinations of M elements are used to obtain atomically/vacancy ordered structures.63 The explosive popularity of MXenes not only depends on their tenability but also highly relies on the intrinsic properties. Due to the “all-surface” crystal structure and high anisotropy, the intrinsic properties of MXenes can be significantly tuned in a broader regime through various approaches, including structural tuning, external field tuning, composition tuning, and by varying the dimensions.
It is of fundamental importance to explore how MXenes can truly live up to the anticipation of being certified as the key 2D materials for future-generation applications. In this review, first, we will overview the holistic evaluation of MXene families and then offer an explicit guideline on the various strategies involved in tuning their properties and applications, followed by a final note on major challenges and future directions in developing advanced MXenes.
2 Emerging MXenes and their families
The discovery of MXenes and their families with staggering properties has given birth to a novel class of two-dimensional materials. The timeline chart containing major developments of MXene materials is shown in Fig. 1. Typically, MXenes are derived by removing the “A” element from the chemical formula MAX (M = transition metals: Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf and Ta; A = element from groups 13–16: Al, Si, P, S, Ga, Ge, As, In and Sn; and X = C and N) as shown in Fig. 2a and b. The most interesting feature of MXenes includes surface functionalization. As mentioned, these MXene surfaces are terminated by -O, -OH and -F groups. Experimentally, the determination of possible terminal configurations, especially at the atomic scale level, is highly complicated due to the composition and complexity of the structures. Hope et al. studied the effect of functional groups on the Ti3C2 surface using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Halim et al.74 analysed the amount of each functional group (O, OH, and F) using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and found that they are distributed randomly on the surface of Ti3C2. Tang et al.75 theoretically investigated the orientations of -F and -OH functional groups on Ti3C2 and proposed three possible configurations. The functional groups in configuration I directly face the middle M-atom and are placed at the top of vacancy (i.e., between three adjacent carbon atoms), representing asymmetrical distribution. In configuration II, the functional groups are distributed symmetrically right above the C/N-atoms. Configuration III is a combination of I and II, where the OH- or F-groups are arranged asymmetrically in such a way that they are located above the top sites of C atoms on one side and above the hollow sites of C atoms on the other side. Including these two configurations, the distribution in configuration III is asymmetric. The stability of functionalized MXenes is confirmed by the phonon frequency analysis.76–81 The stability of MXenes can also be increased with an increase of NaCl concentration in aqueous solution, tending to the increase of the Ti–C bond ratio but a reduction of the Ti–O bond ratio in XPS spectra.82
 Fig. 1  Timeline chart showing the major developments of MXene materials. In 2011, the HF etching method was used to obtain the first MXene (Ti3C2Tx). Subsequently, new MXene members were successfully synthesized through several novel etching methods including in situ HF etching, electrochemical etching, alkali etching, Lewis acid molten salt etching etc. With time, MXenes have been widely promoted in various applications such as electromagnetic shielding, optical applications, energy-related applications, catalysis, electronics, sensors, membranes, biomedical and many others. 
 Fig. 2  (a) Elements used to build MAX phases (with the general molecular formula Mn+1AXn) and MXenes (Mn+1XnTx), where n = 1, 2, and 3. The A elements in the MAX phases can be selectively etched to make MXenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of MXene structures with general formula Mn+1XnTx (n = 1–3), where M corresponds to early transition metals, and X can be either carbon or nitrogen. Subsequently, the family of double transition metal MXenes with general formula  and  and their structures with surface terminations are represented. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. Total energy diagram of (c) Mo2TiC2, (d)  and (e)  type MXenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
The discovery of multi-metal atom based carbides/nitrides greatly expanded the range of possible compositions and configurations of MXenes. The ordered Cr2TiAlC2, Cr2TiC2Tx, Mo2Ti2C3Tx, and Mo2TiC2Tx come under this category.63 Anasori et al.63 computed the energy difference between partially ordered and fully ordered Mo2TiC2 configurations and found that the latter configuration with Mo–Ti–Mo stacking has a lower energy (see Fig. 2c–e). In case of  compositions, the stability of the structure depends on the chosen elements, where the partially ordered Nb2TiC2, Ta2TiC2 and Nb2VC2 MXenes have more stability than their fully ordered configurations. On the other hand, the energy of the  configurations monotonically increases from one ordered composition to the other. The nonstoichiometric transition metal carbides/nitrides are new a class of MXene family, where the metal–atom layer displays an ordered array of divacancies.83 The (Mo2/3Sc1/3)2AlC, (Cr2/3Sc1/3)2AlC, (Mo2/3Y1/3)2AlC, and (V2/3Zr1/3)2AlC systems belong to this type of MXenes.83–86 On the basis of MXene structures, novel analogues to MXenes were also designed both theoretically and experimentally. The transition metal carbonitrides (M3CN),87 and transition metal borides (MBenes) with the M2B2 formula88 possess a similar structural composition to that of MXenes. Such a large MXene family can offer an incredible platform to perform fundamental research in discovering novel properties.
3 Synthesis strategies to obtain MXenes
3.1 Top-down and bottom-up techniques
The most common method to fabricate MXenes is by washing out the “A” element from the MAX phases in the presence of acid solutions such as hydrofluoric acid (HF). Since the bonding between elements M and X of MAX phases is stronger than that between elements M and A, selective etching is the most acceptable approach to obtain weakly bonded MXenes.91 Chemically exfoliated MXenes by etching methods are often functionalized with F, O, and OH groups on the surface.92 In a simple scenario, the type of etching method and the structure of the precursor MAX phase determine the building block of MXenes and their functionalized structures (see Table 1). Outline for the synthesis of Ti3C2Tx MXenes is shown in Fig. 3a.93 The etching techniques mainly include fluoride-free (F-free) and fluoride-containing (F-containing) methods. In the F-free approach, the electrochemical etching strategy uses a mixture of tetramethylammonium hydroxide and NH4Cl, while the alkaline etching strategies employ sodium hydroxide solution. The F-containing etching techniques include the combination of hydrochloric acid and lithium fluoride, or NH4HF2 and hydrofluoric acid. Yang et al.64 prepared single or double layer Ti3C2Tx by electrochemical etching of Ti3AlC2 with 0.2 M tetramethylammonium hydroxide and 1 M NH4Cl as the electrolyte (see Fig. 3b and c). Although electrochemical etching processes are potential strategies to prepare high quality MXenes, they deserve further investigations. Li et al.94 fabricated NaOH-Ti3C2Tx by employing a hydrothermal alkaline strategy to etch Ti3AlC2 as shown in Fig. 3d. Besides, etching various MAX phases requires some conditions such as pH of the etching solution, etching time and the means of further treatment to obtain MXenes with high quality and specific properties.95,96 For instance, Rajavel et al.97 prepared Ti3C2Tx by maintaining certain conditions and found that 5 wt% Ti3AlC2 etched for 36 hours at 50 °C can produce highly exfoliated MXenes. Apart from the wet etching method, MXenes can also be synthesised using the chemical vapour deposition technique without terminating the surface.98 However, the synthesis methods through fluorine based etching strategies are still the main stream for fabricating MXenes. Much attention should be paid to F-free etching techniques to have more potential applications.
Table 1 Summary of various precursor MAX phases that determine the building block of MXenes under different synthetic conditions




MAX phase precursors
MXenes
Etchants
Temperature (°C)
Time (h)
Ref.




Ti2AlC
Ti2CTx
0.9 M LiF + 6 M HCl
40
15

103



Mo2Ga2C
Mo2CTx
3 M LiF + 12 M HCl
35
384

104



V2AlC
V2CTx
2 g LiF + 40 M HCl
90
48

105



(Nb0.8Zr0.2)4AlC3
(Nb0.8Zr0.2)4C3Tx
LiF + 12 M HCl
50
168

106



Ti3AlC2
Ti3C2Tx
1 M NH4HF2
80
12

54



Ti3AlCN
Ti3CNTx
0.66 g LiF + 6 M HCl
35
12

107



Cr2TiAlC2
Cr2TiC2Tx
5 M LiF + 6 M HCl
55
42

108



Ti4AlN3
Ti4N3Tx
59% KF + 2 9% LiF + 12% NaF
550
0.5

109



Ti3AlC2
Ti3C2Tx
NH3F
24
150

110



Hf3[Al(Si)]4C6
Hf3C2Tx
35% HF
RT
60

111



(Ti0.5Nb0.5)2AlC
(Ti0.5Nb0.5)2CTx
51% HF
RT
28

65



Ti3AlCN
Ti3CNTx
30% HF
RT
18

65



V4AlC3
V4C3Tx
40% HF
RT
165

112



Zr3Al3C5
Zr3C2Tx
50% HF
RT
60

113



Ti2AlC
Ti2CTx
10% HF
RT
10

114



(V0.5Cr0.5)3AlC2
(V0.5Cr0.5)3C2Tx
50% HF
RT
69

65



Ti3AlC2
Ti3C2Tx
50% HF
RT
2

91



(W2/3Sc1/3)2AlC
W4/3CTx
48% HF
RT
30

115



Nb2AlC
Nb2CTx
50% HF
RT
90

56



Nb4AlC3
Nb4C3x
50% HF
RT
96

116



(Mo2/3Y1/3)2AlC
Mo4/3CTx
48% HF
RT
60

83



Ti2AlN
Ti2NTx
5% HF
RT
24

117



(Nb2/3Sc1/3)2AlC
Nb4/3CTx
48% HF
RT
30

117



V2AlC
V2CTx
50% HF
RT
90

104



Mo2TiAlC2
Mo2TiC2Tx
50% HF
RT
48

63





 Fig. 3  (a) Outline for the synthesis of Ti3C2Tx MXenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of the etching and delamination process of Ti3AlC2 in a binary aqueous electrolyte. (c) The electrochemical cell configuration, the as-received bulk Ti3AlC2 optical image, aqueous dispersion of delaminated Ti3C2Tx and X-ray diffraction patterns. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) The reaction between NaOH water solution and Ti3AlC2 under various conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Schematic diagram illustrating the fabrication of the rGO-MoS2/Acc-TiO2/C hybrid. (f) SEM image, (g) TEM image and (h) HRTEM image of rGO-MoS2/Acc-TiO2/C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Depending on the interaction between component materials and MXenes, the composite engineering techniques such as self-assembly methods and bottom-up strategies can also be used to combine MXenes with other classes of functional materials to form composites. This approach not only enhances their efficiency in specific applications, but also improves the stability, subsequently widening the scope of their usage in different fields. The self-assembly methods used to prepare MXene based nanocomposites are composed of chemical bonds or van der Waals interactions. Cui et al.100 prepared a nanocomposite by anchoring nano or atom-scale Pt on Ti3C2Tx by assembling with single walled carbon nanotubes. In this complex, the presence of the Ti3C2Tx substrate with excellent conductivity along with abundant highly active sites promotes the fast HER-involved electron transfer. In addition, the heterojunction like interaction between the Ti3C2Tx substrate and Pt atoms can improve the stability of HER catalysts. The nanocomposite rGO-MoS2/MD-TiO2/C99 exhibited significant resistance to strong acid because of strong chemical bonds between MoS2 and MD-TiO2 (see Fig. 3e–h). The excellent conductivity of rGO enhanced the dispersion of MoS2 and improved the HER activity. This self-assembly not only restrained the aggregation of MoS2 but also facilitated the anchoring of MoS2 on MD-TiO2. On the other hand, the bottom-up growth approaches consist of wet-chemistry methods and physical or chemical techniques. Lim et al.101 developed a nanohybrid 2H-MoS2/Mo2CTxvia a novel approach of in situ sulfidation. After sulfidation, the X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) show attenuation of the O 1s signal, indicating the decreased contribution of -O termination or MoO3−x species. The strong interfacial relationship of the nanohybrid 2H-MoS2/Mo2CTx displayed better durability and prevented the further inherent oxidation of Mo2CTx.102 These scalable properties obtained from a large library of MXenes will open up wide possibilities through atomic-level heterogeneous interactions, thereby generating advanced hybrid structures that enable unique functionality with completely new physics. Since the crystal phase, defects, size, and thickness play a major role in understanding their chemical, physical and electronic properties, it is of prime concern to synthesize MXene nanosheets with advanced structural features for particular applications.
3.2 Composite fabrication techniques
MXenes are often integrated with other materials (polymers, graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), etc.) through structural design methods (core–shell structure, bridged-segregated, sandwich etc.) and via surface modification. These types of composites based on MXenes are considered as new-generation materials due to their ease of applicability in interdisciplinary fields and the presence of high electrical conductivity that is almost equal to that of metals. They possess well-designed structures due to strong interactions, which in turn improve the mechanical properties and thereby making them suitable materials for real-time applications such as nanogenerators, EMI shielding and sensors. Such composites already have been extensively used in varies fields such as antibacterial materials, water purification, self-healing composites, batteries, sensors, actuators, photocatalysts, fire safety materials, supercapacitors, environmental remediations, electrical and thermal conductors, electronics, electromagnetic shielding and other advanced materials and structures. In this section, recent manufacturing approaches for making MXene-based composites are briefly described. To date, solution mixing techniques are widely used to produce MXene based nanocomposites due to the hydrophilic behavior of MXene nanosheets. In this approach, MXene and polymer are generally dispersed, mixed and blended in a polar media such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF),118 dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO),119 and water, among others. Several MXene based nanomaterials have been integrated with various polymers like polyacrylate acrylic resin, polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), polybenzimidazole, chitosan, polyvinyl alcohol, polyethylene oxide, cellulose, polyacrylamide, Nafion, polyethyleneimine, polylactic acid, polyfluorenes, polyurethane, etc. However, the solubility of MXenes with weakly polar groups or in nonpolar polymers is still challenging and thus an appropriate surface premodification is required for improving dispersibility.
The hot-pressing technique is also an efficient method to create MXene based composites under a controlled temperature. This approach is economical, flexible, solvent-free, and environmentally friendly, and thus it is considered as a most commonly used technique in scalable manufacturing systems. Polymers such as polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), polyaniline (PANI), polystyrene (PS), polyurethane (PU), linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE), and ultrahigh molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) were filled with MXenes through the hot-press manufacturing process.120–122In situ polymerization blending is another approach which can provide better interfacial strength between the MXene nanosheets in a polymeric matrix, thereby resulting in superior electrical, thermal, tribological and mechanical properties. In this approach, initiators and polymer monomers are well blended with MXene nanoflaxes under wet processing conditions.123,124 Using in situ polymerization, polypyrrole, polydopamine, polyaniline and polythiophene were imbued in MXene sheets. It should be noted that this technique is mainly significant for polymers, thermosets with heterocyclic compound or those with linear molecules. Several studies also produced MXene composite fiber mats by employing electrospinning, which includes MXene/PAN,125 MXene/alginate,126 MXene/polyvinyl alcohol (MXene/(PVA)),126 MXene/polyethylene oxide (PEO)126,127 and MXene/chitosan.128 However, one can expect loss in conductivity due to the decrease of inter-flake contact because of the intercalation of polymers between MXenes.129 Small variation in the quantity of MXenes in the spinning solution can lead to the modulation of electrochemical performance, electrical conductivity, and mechanical strength to match the target application. For instance, a MXene/PU composite with high stretchability and high conductivity was found to have good strain sensing performance at a low percolation threshold (1 wt%).130 Moreover, the negatively charged MXene surface due to the presence of -O and -OH groups can strongly bond to the positively charged polymers such as polyethyleneimine (PEI) and poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) through electrostatic interactions. In addition to the above-mentioned techniques, there are some other approaches, such as electrochemical deposition, electrospinning, emulsification, vacuum-assisted filtration (VAF), assembly, layer-by-layer (LbL) deposition and powder metallurgy with hot/cold pressing process techniques. Overall, the preference for selecting a strategy to prepare MXene-based composites mainly depends on their practical applications.
4 Computational screening and machine learning approaches
4.1 Introduction to machine learning
Discovering novel materials is the most fundamental translation science activity that contributes to the development of science and engineering. In this regard, designing new MXene materials is a continuous exercise of tailoring the structure and composition of materials to obtain appropriate or even unparalleled properties. However, the complexity of topological and compositional structures of MXenes can easily give rise to gigantic design challenges that cannot be solved within the limit of conventional design algorithms and other brute force approaches, which necessitates the need for disruptive and novel techniques. Over the past few decades, machine learning (ML) has influenced various fields of materials sciences and engineering, such improving molecular models and discovering novel materials, with likely many more incredible and evolutionary discoveries to come. Property prediction through ML can enable discovering, designing, and developing new 2D MXenes by understanding the physico-chemical relationships that govern the properties of interest. Moreover, the exponential growth in computing power combined with the improvement in algorithms and the availability of large datasets has led to an unprecedented surge of interest in the field of machine learning. Typically, the traditional materials databases such as the Crystallography Open Database (COD)131 and the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ISCD132) are now complemented with more sophisticated computational materials databases such as the AFLOW database,133 the Novel Materials Discovery (NOMAD) Laboratory,134 the Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD)135 and the Materials Project (MP)136 database. Using this approach, several promising tools were developed for predicting structures137–139 and properties140–146 of materials such as free energy,145 entropy, band gaps,140,142,143 heat capacity142 within reasonable time, lattice thermal conductivity146 and cohesive energy.
4.2 Machine learning strategies applied to MXenes
As mentioned, the large variety of chemical compositions, ordered phases (more than one M element), solid solution, pure (single transition element, M-atom) and the number of layers define a vast materials search space of MXenes. Nathan et al.147 performed a positive and unlabelled (PU) ML approach to quantify the experimental synthesizability of theoretically predicted transition metal carbides, nitrides, and carbonitrides along with their layered MAX precursor phases. As shown in Fig. 4a, elemental data and descriptors from first-principles simulations were employed to characterize each system and performed thorough testing to optimize the hyper-parameters of the model for achieving validated predictions. Later, statistical learning was performed in the form of principal component analysis to isolate model inputs such as lattice parameters, atomic Bader charges and formation energies. Finally, 18 MXenes and 111 MAX phases were predicted to be synthesizable, including W4C3, Sc3C2 and Hf4N3. They also proposed 20 most promising MAX systems that can be chemically exfoliated to generate MXenes. Rajan et al.148 developed statistical learning models using the Gaussian process (GPR), support vector (SVR), kernel ridge (KRR) and bootstrap aggregating regression algorithms by utilizing intuitive information from chemical repositories and computed properties (see Fig. 4b–e). They generated the database with 23870 MXenes, out of which 30% of MXenes were selected randomly to calculate the ground state structural properties. The GPR model was found to produce accurate band gap values with the lowest root-mean-squared error of 0.14 eV and found that the ML models can overcome the band gap underestimation problem of standard density functional theory (DFT) calculations (local and semi-local functionals), without implementing the time-consuming GW approach.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of chemical search space and theoretical workflow along with positive and unlabelled (PU) ML. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic work flow of filtering semiconducting materials from the MXene database, thereby feeding its subset as the input to the ML algorithm. (c) Cooks distance is calculated to perform outlier analysis on 76 MXenes and 6 of them are removed due to influential outliers. For the remaining 70 MXenes, (d) computed PBE and G0W0 level band gaps and (e) the distribution of G0W0 band gaps corresponding to the data set for ML are presented. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Structural representation of M3X2, M2M′X2 and M2M′X2O2 structures as well as possible surface O adsorption configurations, (g) distribution of O stable adsorption positions and (h) the Gibbs free energy (δGH) distribution of hydrogen adsorbed by M2M′X2 and . (i) The OBA cohesive energy statistics of 2D MXenes. ML schematic for 1/4 H coverage with (j) the feature significance of 5 reduced features. (k) The feature correlation of 5 reduced features. (l) The performance of AdaBoost regression. Reprinted with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Wang et al.149 performed high-throughput DFT simulations in combination with the ML method to screen the activity trends of ordered binary alloy (OBA) MXenes for designing HER catalysts. The amount of HER activity after alloying increases drastically when the monometallic MXenes are within the range of |DGH| < 0.2 eV. Among 420 types of stable O-functionalized OBA MXenes, 188 types of HER catalysts are found to be synthesizable (see Fig. 4f–i). An integrated strategy is designed for searching representative features via the elimination method by taking significant features into account and choosing the feature correlation as a criterion. As shown in Fig. 4j and k, the distance between the nearest neighbor O atoms (dO−O) and the bond length (dM−O) of surface oxygen and surface metal atoms are the top two descriptors. The next two are the average value of affinity energy (EAMm), reflecting the electron losing and gaining capability of the alloy element and the ionization energy difference (IEMd), followed by the valence electron number descriptor. Based on these descriptors, we could observe a consistency between the AdaBoost-predicted results of 1/4 H coverage and the DFT calculated results (see Fig. 4l). These results highlight the importance of combined DFT simulations and ML models in rationalizing and accelerating the chemical design and discovery of new MXene materials. However, it is very important to understand which MAX phases are potential sources for exfoliation into 2D MXenes.
Typically, the bond strength between the M early transition metal and the p-block A element in a given MAX phase can be related to the easiness of MXene extraction.150 Simulations on mechanical exfoliation of M2AlC (M = Zr, Ti, V, Hf, Ta, Cr, Nb, W and Mo,) MAX phases into M2C MXenes demonstrate that the application of a large tensile strain breaks the interlayer M–Al bonds, thereby leading to the separation between Al and M2C layers.151 However, it should be noted that the process of chemical exfoliation is a dynamically complicated process, which is very hard to simulate and model with complete details. Still, we can get information through understanding exfoliation energy and bond strength because it is anticipated that weaker M–A bond lengths of MAX phases are potential candidates for the exfoliation process. In addition, harsher etching conditions, such as exposure, temperature, and HF concentration, are required when the bond of A element is stronger to the MXene layers.152,153 In this regard, the determination of exfoliation energies can encapsulate such interactions to predict whether the proposed MXene is easily achievable or not. For instance, the smaller the exfoliation energies are, the weaker the interactions among M and A elements, indicating higher MXene stability. To isolate MXenes from other MAX phases under mild conditions, one should remember that there are other factors that influence MXene synthesis, such as MAX phase intrinsic thermodynamic stability and other competing phases.
5 Promising properties of MXenes
5.1 Structural properties
2D Materials exhibit a potential diversity in properties that have been a fundamental key to industrial and technological revolutions. In the world of materials, the origin of diversity comes from chemical constituents (combination of elements or atoms) and the structure of a material (organization of atoms and their electrons). Designing these types of novel materials is always a challenging task. The hexagonal close-packed MXenes contain M atoms in the close packed position, while the X atoms are arranged in the octahedral interstitial sites.62 In M2X, the hexagonal configuration of close-packed stacking is adopted by M atoms with a ABABAB ordering; while the face-centered configuration of cubic stacking is preferred by M atoms of M3X2 and M4C3 systems with a ABCABC ordering.154 The properties of MXenes are strongly coupled with functional groups and found to integrate with various organic ligands/materials. While functionalizing MXenes, it should be noted that what termination is preferable and what are the factors that govern the configurational stability? Khazaei et al.155 demonstrated that the terminal groups (-O, -OH, F) on M2X-type MXenes prefer to occupy either fcc or hpc positions. Seh et al.156 found that the -O and -OH terminal groups prefer to choose the fcc site for Sc, Ti, V, Zr and Hf based MXenes, while the hcp site is preferred for Cr, Mo, and W based MXenes. The functionalized MXene surfaces show quite large negative formation energy, indicating the formation of strong bonds between the attached groups and transition metals, thus supporting the synthesis of surface functionalized MXenes.155
5.2 Electronic properties
The characteristics of MXenes are highly dependent on transition metal atoms, X elements (carbon/nitrogen) and surface functional groups. For instance, carbide MXenes based on group IIIB transition metals (Sc and Y) with any type of surface termination are found to be semiconductors, while group IVB transition metals (Ti, Zr, Hf) open the band gap with divalent oxygen termination. The OH-terminated Sc2C MXenes show direct band gap nature, while the band structure of OH-functionalized Ti, Zr, Hf MXenes exhibits indirect band gaps. This behavior is obvious for elements with a same partially filled outermost atomic orbital shell ([Ar]3d24s2 for Ti, [Kr]4d25s2 for Zr, and [Xe]4f145d26s2 for Hf).157 Furthermore, the OH- and F-terminated MXenes show a similar band structure to that of their pure counterpart; while O-functionalized structures exhibit different behavior as they are capable of receiving two electrons from the surface. Many attempts were made to enhance the metallic conductivity of MXenes; the first discovered Ti3C2Tx is still the most conductive MXene. The conductivity depends on their synthesis routes, delamination technique and sample preparation, and generally ranges from less than 1 S cm−1 to thousands of S cm−1. For instance, HF-etched Ti3C2Tx has a low conductivity of 2 S cm−1 due to higher F terminations and more defects.158 In the case of ML-Ti3C2Tx MXene particles, the conductivity was improved by an order of magnitude. A threefold increase in conductivity is observed through vacuum annealing of ML-HF-etched Ti3C2Tx due to removal of surface terminations. The LiF + HCl-etched Ti3C2Tx sample has significantly improved the conductivity to almost 1500 S cm−1. It is observed that the delamination of Ti3C2Tx without sonication can lead to higher conductivity values, which can even reach 5000 S cm−1 through free-standing films.47 However, the measurements of conductivity through freestanding films, compressed discs, or supported films mainly rely on intra- and inter-flake resistances. In single-flake measurements, the electronic conduction comes solely from contact resistance and intra-flake. The electrical conductivity can also be increased through intercalation- and termination-engineering. James et al.159 performed electrical biasing and in situ vacuum annealing (up to 775 °C) of MXenes using a transmission electron microscope (TEM) and observed surface de-functionalization and de-intercalation with ex situ thermogravimetric analysis with mass spectroscopy (TGA-MS) and in situ electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). These experiments increased the MXene conductivity due to desorption of O, -F and -OH termination groups.
The atomically thick MXenes (M3X2Tx and M4X3Tx) are predicted to be metallic due to the presence of additional states near the Fermi level and thus possess a more complex band structure. In particular, in most of the band structures, the d bands of metal atoms appear above the p bands of carbon/nitrogen atoms separated by a small bandgap. When it is functionalized with O-, OH-, F-groups, new bands are originated from p orbitals of terminated groups well below the Fermi energy level, which leads to the hybridization between F or O p orbitals and M d orbitals. These electronic structures are strongly affected by relativistic spin orbital coupling (SOC) due to the presence of heavy 4d and 5d transition metals. In the absence of SOC, M2CO2 (M = Mo, W) and  (M′ = Mo, W; M′′ = Ti, Zr, W) type MXenes are semi-metallic with a zero gap because the conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM) touch only at the Γ point, where the conduction and valence bands are both parabolic. With SOC, the degeneracy of CBM and VBM at the Fermi energy is lifted, thereby opening the bandgap at the Γ point. Subsequently, the corresponding MXenes transform into indirect bandgap semiconductors.78,160 It should be noted that the bandgap of semiconducting MXenes can be tuned by a mechanical strain. The uniaxial strain of 6% and biaxial strain of 4% can result in bandgap transition (indirect to direct) in Ti2CO2, whereas the bandgap modulation of Hf2CO2 and Zr2CO2 requires 14% and 10% biaxial strains, respectively.161 A similar behavior is also observed in Sc2CO2 by a small strain of 2%.162 The conductivity can be tuned by impregnating organic molecules to enhance the resistance of the device.
MXenes functionalized with hydroxyl groups were found to give low work functions because of their high surface dipole moment, while oxygen and fluorine groups give ultrahigh work function values because of their strong electronegativity.163,164 Thus, MXenes cover a wide range of work functions from 1.6 eV (Sc2C(OH)2) to 8.0 eV (Cr2CO2).164,165 The OH-functional groups on the surface of MXenes show nearly free electron states at the highest positive charge region, thereby providing appropriate transmission channels for electron transport.166 The density of states of transition metals is lower at the Fermi level due to the transition of electrons from metal atoms to the terminated surface.167,168 The band structures near the Fermi level of MXenes display massless Dirac dispersions, thereby opening wide opportunities for Dirac-based applications.78,79,160,169,170 The choice of metal atom combinations and their lower symmetry in double transition metal MXenes increased the range of potential properties. For instance, metal to semiconducting transition is observed in Ti4C3(OH)2 and Ti3C2(OH)2 by replacing the outer Ti layer with Mo atoms.171 As shown in Fig. 5a, the strong spin orbital coupling between M′ and M′′ (M′ = Mo, W; M′′ = Ti, Zr, Hf) in  MXenes makes them promising topological insulators.78 In this category, MXenes exhibit insulating properties on the surface even though their edge states are conducting.160 Furthermore, the termination dependent TiMn2N2 and TiCr2N2 MXenes exhibit metal–insulator transitions.172 It is also noteworthy that topologically non trivial MXenes exhibit band inversion not only among s and p orbitals as previously predicted,173–176 but also involving d orbitals of the transition metals.78,160
 Fig. 5  (a) Bottom (top) panels: calculated projected band structures for W2CO2, W2HfC2O2, and W2Hf2C3O2 with (without) the relativistic spin–orbit coupling. The Fermi energy is located at zero energy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2016, American Physical Society. (b) UV-vis absorption spectrum in solution, and (c, d) schematic illustration of the excitation of multi-wavelength MXene NS's and the observation of the ultrafast temporal evolution in the VIS-NIR region. The dynamics at (e) 510 nm, (f) 650 nm and (g) 950 nm of the temporal evolution of the photoinduced absorption variation for MXene NS's. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic to explain the local magnetic moment of M2NT2 MXenes with different transition-metal groups. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (i) Spherical plot of Mn2NO2 representing the increase in energy because of rotating the spin axis away from the easy axis. (j) Schematic diagram of spin symmetries accessible through tuning of electron localization and spin–orbit interaction. (k) Magneto-crystalline anisotropy in the Heisenberg-like Ti2NO2 MXene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
5.3 Optical properties
MXenes exhibit diverse interesting features such as superior photothermal conversion, plasmonic behavior and optical transparency. The feasibility of MXene based systems to interact with light in different possible ways has led to a prominent impact on the scientific community. The Ti3C2Tx MXene intercalated with NH4HF2 (Ti3C2.3O1.2F0.7N0.2) obtains 90% transmittance, while Ti3AlC2 thin film possesses only 30% transmittance.54 However, a transmittance of 77% is observed in visible light for Ti3C2Tx with a wavelength of 550 nm.53 It should be noted that the intercalated films and thickness of Ti3C2Tx control the absorbance of a material.54 With the help of energy loss curve and reflectivity, the plasmon energy of Ti3N2, Ti3C2, Ti2N and Ti2C is predicted to be 11.38, 10.81, 11.63 and 10.00 eV, respectively. When an electric field is applied parallel to the surface, the reflectivity becomes 100% at extremely low energy of less than 1 eV, which represents the ability to transmit electromagnetic waves.31 The effect of functional groups on the optical properties of Ti2C and Ti3C2 type MXenes was examined and OH- and F-terminated MXenes were found to have a lower in-plane absorption coefficient than pure and O-functionalized structures.30 Halim et al.177 investigated Nb2CTx and Ti2CTx films and found that the Nb-based films enhanced the absorption at the IR spectral range, which is a different behavior when compared with that of MAX phase Nb2AlC. The prominent variations in the optical properties come from the difference in bonding nature between transition metals (Nb and Ti) and C atoms, surface terminations and their electronic configurations (Nb is in group 5 and Ti is in group 4 of the periodic table). Berdiyorov178 compared the optical properties of bare Ti3C2 with those of surface functionalized Ti3C2T2 (T = OH, O, F) MXenes and found that the terminations reduce refractive index at low photon energies, while the refractive index is increased at higher photon energies (>1 eV). The functionalization also reduced the extinction coefficient at any photon energy range and strengthened the absorption at larger photon energies (E > 5 eV) when compared to those of bare MXene. Li et al.179 observed superior capability of MXenes to absorb light to that of carbon nanotubes. Three interrelated binary solid-solution MXene systems were recently studied based on V, Nb and/or Ti at the M-site in a M2XTx structure (V2−yNbyCTx, Ti2−yVyCTx and Ti2−yNbyCTx) and it was found that the optical properties change in a nonlinear manner as a function of composition.180 The increase of the Ti amount red shifts the absorbance peaks in the UV-vis region. Ultrafast spectroscopy studies were performed on Ti3C2 MXene to understand the light excitation at different wavelengths181 (see Fig. 5b–g). The transient spectra displayed that the light excitation in the UV to NIR range can induce two transient absorption regions in the NIR and visible ranges. The thermal diffusion dynamic process is nearly independent of the excitation wavelength and is sensitive to the surroundings, while temporal signatures depend linearly on the absorption efficiency and the excitation fluence. These results demonstrate that the absorption (linear) and refractive index (non-linear) of MXenes are mainly dependent on the band structures (e.g., topological insulators, direct/indirect band gap etc.).
5.4 Magnetic properties
Materials with controllable and strong magnetic moments are highly desirable for spintronic devices. Most of the pure MXene materials are intrinsically magnetic. For instance, pure Cr2N and Cr2C are magnetic in nature, where the d electrons of Cr are responsible for magnetism. However, an antiferromagnetic semiconducting nature is observed in Cr2C after functionalization with F, H, OH or Cl groups.35 Attempts were also made to induce magnetism by doping with Mn, Cr, V or Ti atoms into non-magnetic MXenes such as Sc2CT2 (T = O, Oh and F) and Cr and Mn atoms were found to be potential dopants for inducing magnetism in Sc2CT2.32 Pure Ti2N and Ti2C with magnetic moments of 1.00 and 1.91 νB display nearly half metallic ferromagnetism. The monolayer Ti2C with nearly half metallic ferromagnetism behavior transforms into a perfect half-metal with increasing biaxial strain.33 The monolayers of V2N and V2C MXenes are nonmagnetic and antiferromagnetic metals, respectively. The application of compressive strains and biaxial tensile leads to a large magnetic moment in monolayers of V2N and V2C, respectively.33 The functionalization of V2C with F or OH groups induces small gap antiferromagnetic semiconducting behavior.182 In the case of nitride MXenes, the presence of an extra valence electron in N atom reduces their prominence in semiconducting materials. Particularly, Sc2NO2 MXene is predicted to be a gapless ferromagnetic semiconductor,183 while Mn2NO2, Cr2NO2, Ti2NO2, Mn2NF2 and Mn2N(OH)2 are found to be ferromagnetic half-metals184,185 (see Fig. 5h–k), which are potential candidates for spintronic applications. Bandyopadhyay et al.186 found magnetic nature in defective MXenes due to unpaired electrons in the spin split d-orbitals and proposed that the intrinsic point defects can be utilized to tune the magnetic properties. Scheible et al.187 observed paramagnetic nature in F or S functionalized TiC MXenes, similar to that of bare sample; while the system with two types of functionalization leads to paramagnetic/ferromagnetic behavior. Ordered double transition metal carbides such as Cr2M′′C2T2 (M′′ = Ti and V, T = O, OH and F) were recently investigated to understand the magnetic properties.188 Cr2M′′C2T2 can be metallic or semiconducting and either ferromagnetic, anti-ferromagnetic or nonmagnetic based on M′′ and T. It is found that Cr2VC2O2, Cr2VC2F2, and Cr2VC2(OH)2 are ferromagnetic, whereas Cr2TiC2(OH)2 and Cr2TiC2F2 are anti-ferromagnetic and Cr2TiC2O2 is nonmagnetic. Furthermore, Ti2MnC2T2 (T = O, OH and F), Hf2VC2O2 and Hf2MnC2O2 were found to exhibit a high Curie temperature in the range of 495–1133 K and a large magnetic moment in the range of 3–4 mB per cell.189 Even though prodigious and stunning optical and magnetic properties of MXenes continue to emanate, there is still huge scope to underpin future technologies.
6 Potential applications of MXenes
6.1 Energy storage applications
The key scientific challenges in the field of energy storage and conversion applications are that the materials should be conductive, flexible, and light and possess a large specific surface area (SSA; m2 g−1). Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have a surface-to-mass ratio in the range of 100 to 900 m2 g−1, while that of carbon black is <900 m2 g−1. On the other hand, graphene possesses a theoretically large SSA of 2630 m2 g−1, which is typically smaller than that of activated carbon.190 In combination with graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), such as WS2, are other 2D materials that are employed in the energy storage applications.191

6.1.1 MXenes in ion batteries. 
MXenes are recently introduced into energy applications, where their surface-to-mass ratio is much smaller than that of graphene like materials. For instance, Ti3C2TX can theoretically reach a SSA of up to 496 m2 g−1, while experimentally can produce only 66 m2 g−1. Ren et al.192 managed to increase the SSA of Ti3C2TX from 19.6 to 93.6 m2 g−1 by treatment with transition metal salt and acid. Hassoun et al. showed a SSA of 1500 m2 g−1 using Cu-supported graphene nanoflakes.193 When compared with the pure counterpart, hybridization of MXenes with carbon nanotubes can enhance the charge capacity.194 Also, the capacity of MXenes can be improved by introducing a large quantity of fluorine.195 The lithium capacity can be further strengthened through the introduction of sizable pores on MXene flakes.192 A wide range of computational modelling was performed to understand the design and working principles of new battery methods (ion diffusion,196 phase transition,197 ion partition198 and ion-electrode interaction199). Schematic diagram demonstrating the progress in the applications of MXenes in Li–S batteries, including Li anode, sulfur cathode, chemical modification and structure control of MXenes and their hybridization with other materials for electrochemical performance is shown in Scheme 1. A recently developed porous N-doped Ti3C2 MXene (P-NTC) with a large surface area, superb electron conductivity and strong interaction with lithium polysulfides can act as an active electrocatalyst for Li–S chemistry.200 The homogenous nitrogen doping on Ti3C2 eventually lowers the dissociation barrier for Li2S and enhances the interfacial interaction with Li atom. The designed P-NTC is not only responsible for effective LiPS immobilization but also acts as a multifunctional electrocatalyst to propel the decomposition and nucleation of Li2S in charge and discharge processes, respectively. The experimental and theoretical results demonstrating the capture and conversion of LiPSs by a P-NTC based electrocatalyst are displayed in Fig. 6a. The charge density difference analysis (see Fig. 6b) demonstrates the gain of an electron by N atoms due to the large electronegativity, while both the Li atom and Li2S cluster lose charge after introducing a N-atom. As shown in Fig. 6c, the Li2S on the P-NTC surface shows a lower dissociation barrier (0.14 eV) than that on TC (0.19 eV), indicating enhanced electrocatalytic activity of NTC. The open circuit voltage coupled with ion–electrode interaction can greatly predict the stability and capacity of a metal ion. The effect of functional groups was quantitatively demonstrated using combined experimental and theoretical studies on Li adsorbed transition metal carbides (Ti2C, Cr2C, Nb2C, Ti3C2, V2C and Sc2C) and proposed highest charge capacity and strongest binding of lithium on O-terminated MXenes.201 Thus, it should be noted that the configuration of functional groups on MXene surfaces is very important for storage capacity as well as Li-adsorption studies.
 Scheme 1  Schematic diagram demonstrating the progress in the applications of MXenes in Li-S batteries, including Li anode, sulfur cathode, chemical modification and structure control of MXenes and their hybridization with other materials for electrochemical performance. 
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the MF-templating synthesis of P-NTC and the role of P-NTC electrocatalyst in Li–S cell. (b) Charge density difference analysis of adsorbed Li2S on P-NTC and TC monolayers. (c) Dissociation barrier of the Li2S cluster on P-NTC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. (d) Schematic illustration of MXene based “symmetric” supercapacitors. (e) Contributions of the positive electrodes to the total gravimetric capacitance in different electrolytes. (f) Ragone plots for supercapacitors in H2SO4 and the mixed electrolytes. (g) Cycling performance of the Ti3C2x-based supercapacitors in the mixed electrolyte at 10 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 


6.1.2 MXenes as supercapacitors. 
MXene based systems also show excellent efficiency in capacitive energy storage, owing to their outstanding redox activity, large surface area and conductivity. Bar chart of various MXene-based electrodes for gravimetric capacitance enhancement is shown in Scheme 2. These type of MXene-based composites offer high rate capability, favourable cycle stability, pseudocapacitive behaviour and ultrahigh volumetric capacitance, and thus can be utilized as electrode materials for supercapacitor applications. Ti3C2Tx exhibits enhanced capacitive behavior in neutral aqueous electrolytes, associated with the volume expansion/shrinking during the charging/discharging process.59 The largest volumetric capacitance of ∼400 F cm−3 was observed for pure MXenes (without additives and no hybridizing with other materials) in the KOH electrolyte. Beyond traditional Ti3C2Tx MXene, nonstoichiometric MXene Mo4/3C shows a very strong capacitance of 1310 F cm−3 in 1 M H2SO4;85 V2CTx displays a capacitance of 487 F g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte; and a capacitance of 700 F cm−3 is reported for Mo2CTx in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte.202 MXenes also exhibit intercalation capacitance in neutral electrolytes and pseudocapacitance in acidic electrolytes, which indicates that the choice of electrolyte is very important to understand the capacitive mechanism of MXenes. As shown in Fig. 6d, the Ti3C2Tx-based symmetric supercapacitors significantly enhanced the energy storage capacity by the introduction of redox-active species into the conventional H2SO4 electrolyte.203 An asymmetric split is confirmed in the voltage between the positive and negative electrodes in the H2SO4 electrolyte, where the lower energy storage capacity of the positive electrode limits the energy storage performance of the supercapacitors. The electrochemical reaction of the positive electrode involves the adsorption/desorption of HSO4− and SO42, while the bonding/debonding of hydronium ions accompanied by the redox of TiO is present in the negative electrode. As shown in Fig. 6e, the capacitive capacitances for the electrodes in mixed and H2SO4 electrolytes are reported to be 107.5 and 202.7 F g−1, which contribute 29.5 and 91.7% to the total capacitance, respectively. The Ti3C2Tx-based supercapacitor tensed in the H2SO4 and mixed electrolyte show an energy density of 14.3 and 33.2 W h L−1, respectively (see Fig. 6f). The mixed electrolyte even retains 113.5% of the initial capacity after 10000 cycles (as shown in Fig. 6g), which is due to the outstanding layered features of Ti3C2Tx. All these studies highlight the importance of physical and chemical processes behind MXenes’ energy storage and also support further theoretical and experimental research to propose novel insights.
 Scheme 2  Bar chart of various MXene-based electrodes for gravimetric capacitance enhancement. These types of MXene-based composites offer high rate capability, favourable cycle stability, pseudocapacitive behaviour and ultrahigh volumetric capacitance, and thus can be utilized as electrode materials for supercapacitor applications. 

6.2 MXenes for electrochemical water splitting

6.2.1 Hydrogen evolution reaction. 
The major concern in the electrochemical conversion of H2O to H2 is underlined in lowering the overpotentials of the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in water splitting with high efficiency and by relatively cheap methods. Several inorganic materials show superior catalytic performance for water splitting, such as sulfides,204,205 phosphides,206,207 transition-metal carbides,208–211 nitrides212 and borides.211,213 The increase of F-groups on the surface of Ti2CTx can strengthen the HER activity, which is due to the reduction of charge transfer resistance and enhancement of surface proton binding ability.214 The HER activity can also be greatly improved by doping nitrogen215 or phosphors.216 Different properties of the MXene Ti3C2 cocatalyst towards photocatalytic hydrogen generation (HG) are shown in Scheme 3. M2XTx MXenes were theoretically studied as HER catalysts and an overpotential of 283 mV at 10 mA cm−2 was found for Mo2CTx under acidic conditions.41 Mo2C and Ti2C MXenes were doped with heteroatoms (N, B, P or S) and it was found that the effect of N doping increased the sorts of H2 adsorption sites.217 Furthermore, a strong interaction is observed between Ti and N atoms due to the transfer of electrons from the Ti atom to the N atom, thereby shifting the Fermi energy level towards the conduction band. As shown in Fig. 7a, the decoration of transition metals on MXene surfaces weakens the binding between oxygen and hydrogen group, thereby enhancing the HER activity.218 The ultra low overpotential of Ti2CO2 MXene under hydrogen coverage make it a superior HER catalytic candidate.219 A summary of the photocatalytic performance of Ti3C2Tx-based MXenes for the hydrogen evolution reaction is presented in Table 2. The choice of surface termination was predicted under varying pH values with different electrode potentials and it was found that the -O terminal group is energetically preferable for Nb2C and Nb4C3, while the mixture of -O and -OH groups is favorable for Ti2C, Ti3C2 and V2C MXenes.219 Recently Jinxing et al.234 proposed an effective and simple stratagem for anti-MXenes made of one M atomic layer sandwiched between two X atomic layers (see Fig. 7b). These anti-MXenes are demonstrated as excellent electrode materials for HER activity because of their metallicity and an active basal plane.234 As shown in Fig. 7c, CoP, CoB, CoSi and FeB exhibit excellent HER at some specific H coverages, while CuS can enhance the HER in the whole range of H coverages, while noble-metal free anti-MXenes show favorable H-binding.
 Scheme 3  Schematic diagram summarizing different properties of a MXene Ti3C2 cocatalyst towards photocatalytic hydrogen generation (HG) 
 Fig. 7  (a) The schematic diagram of V2CO2 for improving the performance of HER by introducing a transition metal onto the surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) The schematic structure of AM2X2 and anti-MXene, and the procedure to extract anti-MXenes for screening HER electrocatalysts. (c) Adsorption of free energy for H atom on 24 stable anti-MXenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (d) Comparison of total overpotential, for MXene surfaces as a function of the number of atomic layers and functional groups along with the optimized geometries and minimum energy pathways of the adsorbed lithium oxides on bare, O- and F-terminated MXenes. (e) The final configuration of atoms during the ORR on fully F-terminated MXene surfaces from rMD simulations at T = 300 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
Table 2 Summary of the photocatalytic performance of Ti3C2Tx-based MXenes for the hydrogen evolution reaction




Photocatalyst
Preparation methods
Sacrificial reagent
H2 production [μmol g−1 h−1]
AQY (%)
Ref.




Pt/UCN/Ti3C2Tx/BQD
Stepwise approach
TEOA
18 420
17.6 (420 nm)

220



Pt/HCN/Ti3C2
Ionothermal method
TEOA
4225
14.6 (420 nm)

221



CdLa2S4/Ti3C2
Hydrothermal procedure
0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
11 182.4
15.6 (420 nm)

222



CdS nanorods/Ti3C2Tx
Hydrothermal procedure
TEOA
63.53
2.28

223



TiO2–Ti3C2/Ru
Stepwise approach
Methanol
235.3
14.33 (350 nm)

224



Cd0.5Zn0.5S/Ti3C2
Hydrothermal procedure
0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
9.07
43.28 (420 nm)

225



Pt/ZnIn2S4/Ti3C2Tx
Solvothermal procedure
TEOA
6482
20.41 (400 nm)

226



BiVO4@ZnIn2S4/Ti3C2
Ultrasonic assisted self assembly process
No scavenger
102.67
2.9 (460 nm)

227



Pt/TiO2@C
Calcination
TEOA
160.42
np

228



Chlorophyll-Ti3C2Tx
Electrostatic self assembly process
AA
52
np

229



p-g-C3N4/Ti3C2Tx
Electrostatic self assembly process
TEOA
982.8
np

230



g-C3N4/Ti3C2
Stepwise approach
TEOA
116.2
np

231



TiO2-C/CdS
Calcination
Lactic acid
1480
np

232



MXene@Au@CdS
Stepwise approach
0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
17 070.43
np

233







6.2.2 Oxygen reduction/evolution reaction. 
Because of the superior electrical conductivity of MXenes, the Mn3O4/MXene nanocomposite235 can enhance the ORR activity due to the strong binding between metal oxide particles and the MXene surface. A similar behavior is also observed in Ag/MXene236 and FeN4/MXene237 composites. A metal monolayer (Cu, Pd, Pt, Ag, and Au) was tested for ORR activity on Mo2C MXenes and ORR intermediates were found to exhibit high adsorption energy in the case of Au-monolayer/Mo2C due to strong interaction between Mo2C and Au monolayer.238 The charge overpotential is reduced by up to 70% and 80% in the functionalized Ti4N3–MXene catalyst by increasing the ratio of fluorine vs. oxygen termination, which is much superior to that of commercial graphene and platinum-on-carbon catalysts.239 The evaluated charge overpotential and discharge overpotential of Tin+1XnTx (X = N, C and n = 1, 2, 3) of surface terminated MXenes notably reduce the total overpotential. The free energy diagrams along the ORR and OER pathways on bare, F- and O-terminated, Ti4N3Tx MXene surfaces with the most stable adsorption configurations are presented in Fig. 7d, which demonstrate fluorinated MXenes as the best electrochemical catalysts. The final configuration of atoms during the ORR on fully F-terminated MXene surfaces from rMD simulations at T = 300 K is presented in Fig. 7e. A bifunctional HER-ORR catalyst designed from the heterostructure of MXene and N-doped graphene shows high activity in both HER and ORR due to the strong coupling between MXene and N-graphene layers.240 MXenes can also improve the performance of hybrid OER catalysts by acting as a substrate or matrix hybridizing with other materials. The cobalt-borate-MXene (Co–Bi–Ti3C2Tx) hybrid catalyst exhibits an even lower overpotential of 250 mV at 10 mA cm−2 current.241 The titaniumcarbon-g-C3N4 (TCCN) nanosheets show better OER activity with an onset potential of 1.44 V.242 The Ti3C2Tx supported FeOOH quantum dots show synergic enhancement of OER activity.243 To date, how the MXenes substrate/matrix improves the OER activity is not clearly understood. Therefore, high throughput screening of MXene based electrochemical catalysts is highly required at the atomic scale level to accelerate the exploration of MXenes for HER, OER, and ORR activity.

6.3 MXenes for CO2 conversion
The capability to bind or adsorb CO2 is a key point in the electrochemical CO2RR and also a prerequisite to activate the reaction. The strong CO2 capture ability by MXene based systems can be ascribed to the higher adsorption energy, MXene to CO2 charge transfer, more adsorption sites, and higher surface area.244 The CO2 conversion efficiency on MXenes is very high even at a low CO2 partial pressure and high temperatures because of strong adsorption capacity. Once again, specific surface functionalization of MXenes favors CO2 adsorption. The formation of F- and OH-type terminators consumes less energy than that of an O-type termination.245 Guo et al.246 studied a series of MXenes (W2CTx, Mo2CTx, Cr2Tx, Ta2CTx, Nb2CTx, V2CTx, Hf2CTx, Zr2CTx, and Ti2CTx) and found that the surface lone pair electrons of MXenes are responsible for the high CO2 absorption capacity of MXenes. Ti3C2Tx show theoretical a CO2 capture capacity of 44.2 mmol g−1 for the highest surface area, which indicates that the surface area modification can favor the improvement of CO2 capture capacity.247 The carbon capture ability is further enhanced on single sheets of Ti3C2 MXene,248 where the exposure of CO2 on Ti3C2Tx resulted in the adsorption of ≈12 mol kg−1 even at low pressures. The chemical and thermal stability, together with the adsorption efficiency combined with the CO2/N2 selectivity enables Ti3C2 MXene as a novel system for carbon capture applications. Illas and co-workers249 have employed newly developed kinetic phase diagram models to understand the carbon capture and utilization activity of the MXene family and observed a reverse water gas shift (RWGS) reaction -CO2 + H2 → CO + H2O-. The direct formation of CO from CO2 is highly promoted on M2X MXenes. MXene-based nanocomposites can also be effectively used as electrocatalysts for CO2 electro-reduction. For instance, a larger current density (18.7 mA cm−2) of CO2 electro-reduction is achieved for the ZnO-Fe@MXene nanocomposite when compared to that of MXene, ZnO, ZnO–MXene and ZnO–Fe due to the presence of many active sites, high conductivity and high surface area.250 Under simulated solar light irradiation, the CsPbBr3@Ti3C2Tx composite can reduce CO2 to CH4 and CO with the yield of 7.25 and 26.32 mmol g−1 h−1, respectively, which is higher than that of CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3 based heterostructures.251 Zhao et al.252 employed selective etching of hybrid A layers (Al and Cu) in MAX phases (Ti3(Al1xCux)C2) to produce a single atom copper immobilized MXene for electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to methanol (see Fig. 8a–e). A low energy barrier for the conversion of HCOOH* to absorbed CHO* intermediate (rate-determining step) is observed for single atom Cu with an unsaturated electronic structure (Cuδ+, 0 < δ < 2). CO2 reduction can be significantly enhanced by MXene quantum dots (QDs). The heterostructure formed by combining 1D Cu2O nanowires and Ti3C2Tx MXene QDs is the best example for such studies.253 This type of hybrid combination improved the photo-conversion efficiency of CO2 to CH3OH because of the improved light absorption/carrier density/charge transfer, stabilization of the Cu2O nanowires and the suppression of charge recombination. TiO2@MXene,254 perovskite@MXene,251 CeO2@MXene,255 C3N4@MXene,256 Co-Co@MXene,257 TiO2@C3N4@MXene,258 and Bi2WO6@MXene259 are reported as favorable combinations for improving the photoreduction of CO2. Although several reports demonstrate efficient CO2 photoreduction on MXenes under visible light radiation, hardly there is any absorption of light above 450 nm, indicating the necessity for modifying MXenes for absorbing a wide range of light.
 Fig. 8  (a) Top view and side view of the charge density difference of a SA-Cu-MXene. Orange and green regions indicate electron depletion and accumulation, respectively. (b) Reaction pathway for the functionalization of CO2 to methanol on isolated Cu of a SA-Cu-MXene. (c) Free energy diagram of CO2 to CH3OH on the Cu–O3 structure. faradaic efficiencies of (d) SA-Cu-MXene and (e) Cu-particles-MXene at different applied potentials from 1.1 to 1.8 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (f) Heatmap of CO2 adsorption energies on pure and defect induced M2X-type MXenes. (g) Adsorption energies of CO2 on different 2D materials. (h) Adsorption energies and the amount of charge transferred between pure/defective M2N type MXene surfaces and CO2 molecule. (i) The charge density difference of CO2 adsorption on pure and defective Ti2C/Ti2N and Zr2C/Zr2N surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 264 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (j) DFT scheme showing the effect of surface functionalization in CO2RR to CH4. (k) Energy barriers along the elementary step of (l) *(H)COOH *CO and (e) *CO *(H)CHO. (m) Scaling relations for the electronic binding energies of intermediates on OH-terminated MXenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 265. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The Cu2O nanowires decorated with quantum dots of Ti3C2 showed excellent photocatalytic activity by improving the stability, light adsorption, carrier density, and charge transfer ability.253 The heterostructure Ti3C2/Bi2WO6 enhanced the photocatalytic CO2 reduction with strong interfacial charge transfer ability.259 Handoko et al.260 studied the CO2 electro-conversion on a M2XO2-type MXene and found that Ti2CO2 and W2CO2 with overpotentials of 0.69 and 0.52 V can be used as electrocatalysts for the conversion of CO2 to CH4. Interestingly, the MXenes that catalyze CO2 conversion prefer to follow the *HCOOH path rather than the *CO route. The O-terminated groups on MXenes stabilize the intermediates of the CO2 electro-reduction, thereby allowing the reduction to proceed under mild conditions. The scaling reaction between kinetic barriers and thermodynamic binding energy indicates that the conversion selectivity and catalytic activity of nitride MXenes are more favorable than those of carbides. Li et al.261 investigated the CO2RR activity on a series of transition metal based MXenes and found that the CO2 molecule binds strongly on the MXene surfaces. The computed free energies of the intermediates demonstrate the high selective conversion ability to CH4, which further increased for -O and -OH terminated MXenes. The electrochemical CO2 conversion on Mo3C2Tx and Cr3C2Tx MXenes to CH4 delivered best efficiency among all the M3C2Tx MXenes investigated. Although, MXenes have been exemplified as the most emerging catalysts for chemical reactions, the research concerned with the corresponding applications is still limited to theoretical study. The creation of intrinsic defects in MXenes can also favor CO2 adsorption, where defect sites can spontaneously bind the CO2 molecules via an exothermic process. On the other hand, the perfect sites interact non-spontaneously with CO2via an endothermic process.245 Our recent studies264 on defective MXenes demonstrate unprecedented high adsorption energies and charge transfer from M2X to CO2 for group IV based M2X systems as shown in Fig. 8f–i. We observed that the strong CO2 capture, activation and dissociation abilities of M2X-type MXenes are emanated from Dewar interactions involving hybridization between metal d-orbitals and π orbitals of CO2. Interestingly, the increasing ratio of atomic defects enhances the CO2 capture ability of MXenes. Pt1@Ti3−XC2Ty can catalyze 1 atm CO2 with almost 100% selectivity and 100% conversion rate to produce formamides.262 However, the re-usage after five times leads to 20% loss of the CO2 conversion rate, which indicates the improvement of the recyclable capacity of the Pt1@Ti3−XC2Ty system. CO2 can be reduced to colorful products (such as CH4, HCOOH, CO, HCHO and CH3OH) by M3C2Tx MXene through bicarbonate species.263 Zhang et al.265 performed DFT simulations to understand CO2 electro-reduction on different OH-terminated MXenes as shown in Fig. 8j–m and found ScC(OH)2 with the least negative limiting potential (−0.53 V) as the most favorable electrocatalyst. It should be noted that the synthesized MXenes were different from the theoretically modeled structures and hence one should follow proper guidelines while designing MXenes for achieving the target products. The electrolyte is also a fundamental factor that influences CO2 electroreduction;266–268 perhaps, theoretical simulations could not precisely account the effect of electrolyte on CO2 electro-conversion.
Table 3 Summary of MXene based humidity, VOC and gas sensors




Composite with
MXenes
Target gas
Other specifications
Test range
Sensitivity
Op.tem. (°C)
Ref.




Ti3C2Tx-Na+
Ti3C2Tx
C2H5OH
LiF/HCl etchant
0.1%
9.99%
25

280



MXene/Co3O4
Ti3C2
HCHO
LiF/HCl etchant
0.01–10 ppm
9.2 (10 ppm)
RT

281



Ti3C2Tx/TiO2
Ti3C2Tx
C2H5OH
LiF/HCl
10–800 ppm
22.47 (100 ppm)
25

282



Ti3C2Tx/polyurethane
Ti3C2Tx
CH3COCH3
LiF/HCl route
0.05–50 ppm
0.25% (50 ppb)
RT

283



Ti3C2Tx/TiO2 spaced RGO
Ti3C2Tx
NO2
LiF/HCl etchant
0.05–20 ppm
165% (1 ppm)
RT

284



Ti3C2/TiO2 nanowires
Ti3C2
Humidity
40 wt% HF
7–97% RH
∼280 (7–33% RH)
—

285



TiO2/Ti3C2
Ti3C2
NO2
LiF/HCl etchant
0.125–5 ppm
∼37% (5 ppm)
RT

286



Co3O4PEI/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
NOx
HCl/LiF etchant
0.03–100 ppm
∼28% (100 ppm)
RT

287



Ti3C2Tx/K2Ti4O9
Ti3C2Tx
Humidity
40 wt% HF
11–95% RH
1.49 (95% RH)
RT

288



Ti3C2Tx/WSe2
Ti3C2Tx
C2H5OH
30% HF
1–40 ppm
9 (40 ppm)
RT

289



TiO2 NPs/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
HF etchant
10 ppm
3.1%
RT

290



In2O3/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
CH3OH
40 wt% HF
5–100 ppm
29.6% (5 ppm)
RT

291



TiOF2Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
Humidity
40 wt% HF
11–95% RH
993
—

292



rGO/N-MXene/PEI
Ti3C2Tx
CO2
LiF/HCl route
8–3000 ppm
∼1% (8 ppm)
20

293



α-Fe2O3/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
CH3COCH3
HF etching
5–200 ppm
7.5% (100 ppm)
RT

294



Ti3C2/Ag
Ti3C2
Humidity
40 wt% HF
35–95% RH
106.800%
RT

295



Ti3C2Tx/V2O5/CuWO4
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
HF etching
5 ppm
6.4
RT

296



Polyaniline/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
HF etching
2–10 ppm
1.7% (10 ppm)
20

297



Ti3C2Tx-FOTS
Ti3C2Tx
C2H5OH
LiF/HCl etching
5–120 ppm
14% (120 ppm)
RT

298



MXene/rGO/CuO
Ti3C2Tx
CH3COCH3
40 wt% HF
10–500 ppm
52% (100 ppm)
RT

299



Ti3C2Tx/CuO
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
LiF/HCl route
1–100 ppm
24.8 (100 ppm)
RT

300



Polyaniline/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
C2H5OH
50 wt% HF
50–200 ppm
27.4% (150 ppm)
RT

301



CuO NPs/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
C6H5CH3
HF(40% v/v)
10–50 ppm
11.4 (50 ppm)
250

302



Ti3C2Tx/PEDOT:PSS
Ti3C2Tx
CH3OH
LiF/HCl etching
180–500 ppm
5.54 (300 ppm)
RT

303



Ti3C2Tx derived lamellar TiO2-C/g-C3N4
Ti3C2Tx
C2H5OH
LiF/HCl etching
10 ppm
91%
RT

304



Ti3C2Tx/PANI/bacterial cellulose
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
—
2.5–12.5 ppm
56.63% (7.5 ppm)
RT

305



Ti3C2Tx/TiO2
Ti3C2Tx
CH3COCH3
LiF/HCl route
2–10 ppm
180% (2 ppm)
RT

306



Ni(OH)2NPs/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
40 wt% HF
1–80 ppm
6.2% (10 ppm)
RT

307



Organ-like Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
45 wt% HF
10–500 ppm
28.87% (100 ppm)
RT

308



Ti3C2Tx/graphene
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
LiF/HCl route
10–50 ppm
6.77% (50 ppm)
RT

309



Ti3C2Tx/WO3 NP
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
HF solution
1–5 ppm
22.3% (1 ppm)
RT

310



Fe2(MoO4)3/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
n-C4H9OH
—
100 ppm
43.1
120

311



Ti3C2Tx/chitosan
Ti3C2Tx
Humidity
LiF/HCl etchant
14–73% RH
∼0.16 (73% RH)
RT

312



TiO2/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
H2
40 wt% HF
100–500 ppm
70 (500 ppm)
150

313



Ti3C2Tx-PVA/PEI
Ti3C2Tx
CH3COCH3
LiF/HCl
50 ppb-30 ppm
0.10–0.17 ppm−1
RT

314



Ti3C2TxPd CNC
Ti3C2Tx
H2
LiF/HCl etchant
0.5–40% H2
(23.0 ± 4.0)%4% H2
RT

315



Ti3C2Tx-TiO2
Ti3C2Tx
Hexanal
40 wt% HF
10–40 ppm
∼3.4% (10 ppm)
25

316



S-Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
C6H5CH3
LiF/HCl etching
1–50 ppm
79.5% (50 ppm)
RT

317



rGO/N-MXene/TiO2
Ti3C2Tx
HCHO
LiF/HCl route
4–20 ppm
26–132
20

318



SnO-SnO2/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
CH3COCH3
40 wt% HF
10–100 ppm
12.1 (100 ppm)
RT

319



TiO2/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
(LiF/HCl and HF)
1–100 ppm
∼0.4% (0.1 ppm)
25

320



PVA/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
Humidity
LiF/HCl etchant
11–97% RH
40 (90% RH)
RT

321



Ti3C2-K/Mg
Ti3C2
Humidity
10 wt% HF
0–85% RH
∼3% (∼0–85% RH)
27

322



Polyacrylamide/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
50 wt% HF
50–200 ppm
4.7% (200 ppm)
RT

323



MXene/polyelectrolyte
Ti3C2Tx
Humidity
HCl + LiF etchant
20–70% RH
1.6% (70% RH)
RT

324



W18O49/Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx
CH3COCH3
HF etching
0.17–500 ppm
11.6 (20 ppm)
300

325



Ti3C2Tx/Ag nanowires
Ti3C2Tx
Humidity
LiF/HCl etchant
57% RH
∼3%
20

326



PEDOT:PSS/MXene
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
LiF/HCl route
10–1000 ppm
36.6% (100 ppm)
27

327



Ti3C2Tx/ZNO Spheres
Ti3C2Tx
NO2
LiF/HCl etchant
5–100 ppm
41.93%
RT

328



Ti3C2Tx/SnO2 NPs
Ti3C2Tx
NH3
LiF/HCl route
0.5–100 ppm
40% (50 ppm)
25

329





6.4 MXenes for sensor applications

6.4.1 Gas sensors. 
The quantification and identification of gaseous species, such as NO, CO, NH3, NO2, CO2, SOx and H2S are very important for air quality monitoring, emission, industry safety and human health.269–272 The adjustable surface terminations and tunable 2D layered structure make MXenes as an ideal platform for gas sensing applications.37,273 DFT calculations were performed to understand the suitability of M2CO2 (M = Sc, Ti, Zr, Hf) for sensing NH3 gas and revealed a superior trapping/release of NH3 on the corresponding substrate.274 Khakbaz et al.275 studied the efficiency of Ti3C2TX towards sensing NH3 in the presence of different water molecules and surface terminations. They observed a 60–180% larger binding energy between Ti sites near the O atoms and NH3 than that of adjacent F atoms, indicating that the low content of F terminated Ti3C2TX is preferable for NH3 sensing. Unlike typical semiconducting sensors, the gas sensing mechanism of metallic MXenes shows unique character upon exposure to both reducing and oxidizing type gases. Metallic MXenes (Ti3C2Tx) are used in gas-sensing applications for detecting volatile organic compounds276 (see Fig. 9a–d). In addition to Ti3C2TX, other MXene NSs, especially V4C3Tx and V2CTx, have been studied for gas sensing applications.23,332 The detection limits of V2CTx to CH4 and H2 were found to be 9 and 1 ppm, respectively.277 Recently, V4C3Tx was used as a sensor for the selective detection of acetone and exhibited a LOD of ∼1 ppm because of the difference in adsorption energy.333 In particular, the hydrogen bonding gases show high sensitivity, indicating a strong interaction between surface termination and gas molecules. Recently, the high sensitivity of V2CTx-type MXene was found towards nonpolar gases, where their gas response for the detection of hydrogen is three times greater than that of ethanol277 (see Fig. 9e–g). These studies recommend MXene families as promising candidates for gas sensing channel with broad range of tunability and gas sensitivity (see Table 3). However, the role of surface functional groups and transition metal elements is the obvious remaining question for their gas sensing mechanism.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the Ti3C2Tx films showing structural and surface characterizations. (b) Maximal resistance change and (c) resistance variation upon exposure to 100 ppm of acetone, ethanol, ammonia, propanal, NO2, SO2, and 10000 ppm of CO2 at room temperature. (d) Maximal SNR values of acetone, ethanol, ammonia, and propanal upon exposure to 100 ppm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of V2CTx synthesis and delamination along with the structure and the resultant surface-functionalized V2CTx MXene. (f) Hydrogen and (g) methane, denoting lowest LoD of the V2CTx-based sensor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 


6.4.2 Electrochemical sensors. 
MXenes can be used as efficient electrochemical sensors because of their selective interaction with target species, mechanical robustness, good electrical conductivity, tunable lateral size, rich surface chemistry, large specific surface area and biocompatibility.279,334 They are used as redox electrocatalysts and transducers for detecting biomarkers, environmental pollutants, pharmaceutical drugs and small molecules. The combination of Ti3C2Tx/Au/MnO2/Mn3O4/GCE is used for the electrochemical detection of methamidophos.335 Organophosphorus pesticides were electrochemically detected by using Ti3C2Tx/Au–Pd as the sensing material.336,337 Drop-casted Ti3C2Tx on glass carbon electrode (GCE)338 and hybridized Ti3C2Tx/electrochemically reduced graphene oxide (ERGO)339 were utilized to detect carbendazim. Various sensing applications using MXenes are presented in Scheme 4. The prominent features of MXenes, including good hydrophilicity, excellent flexibility, and high electrical conductivity, enable their promising applications in stress/strain sensors.63,155,278 A thin film made of sandwich-like alternatively spray-coating hydrophilic single-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and Ti3C2TX nanosheets displays good reliability, tunable sensing range between 30% and 130%, a detection limit of 0.1% strain, high sensitivity (GF = 772.6) and stability over 5000 cycles.279 The hybrid network of a Ti3C2TX NP and NS based tensile strain sensor exhibits stable response under a 20% strain, a detection limit of 0.025%, a sensing range within 0–53% and a gauge factor (GF) of >178.4 without obvious degradation over 5000 cycles.330 Under compression, the resistance changes for MXene-based assemblies due to decrease in the distance between adjacent nanosheets, which can be used in designing piezoresistive sensors. For instance, the hybrid films made of Ti3C2TX nanosheets and elastic P(VDF-TrFE) (a mass ratio of 1.6:1) exhibited a GF of 2213.68 kPa−1 under a high force level of 0.74–3.083 kPa and a GF of 817.4 kPa−1 at the low loading level of 0.072–0.74 kPa, together with a response time of 16 ms.331 However, MXene based sensors suffer from permanent degradation due to irreversible oxidation, which hinders their practical applications. To sum up, MXene-based sensors require further improvement in terms of surface engineering for better catalytic activity and specific adsorption towards a particular molecule.
 Scheme 4  Schematic illustration of different gas sensing applications using MXenes. 

6.5 MXenes as photodetectors
In spite of their intriguing electronic and optical properties, such as high conductivity, saturable absorption and transparency, MXenes are very less explored for photodetectors like plasmonic materials, photoabsorbers, Schottky contacts and transparent electrodes. MXenes provide excellent flexibility in terms of vdW integration, where the generated crystals are physically stacked and transferred through the vdW interactions onto the target substrates. For instance, Kang et al.340 fabricated self-powered photodetectors based on vdW Ti3C2Tx/n-Si heterostructures. The generated metal/semiconductor junction and the metallic nature of Ti3C2Tx are able to provide Schottky behavior. The band alignment of the MXene/Si heterostructure was determined by ultraviolet photodetection spectroscopy (UPS), where the work functions of n-Si and Ti3C2Tx were found to be ≈3.71 and ≈4.35 eV, respectively, thereby leading to a built-in potential of ≈0.64 eV. The large WF, good metallic conductivity and optical transmittance allow Ti3C2Tx to work as both Schottky contacts and transparent electrodes for the heterostructure photodetectors. MXenes can also be incorporated with perovskites due to their excellent air stability, long electron–hole diffusion, tunable electronic bandgaps, carrier mobility and optical absorption coefficient. For instance, 2D perovskite/MXene heterojunctions with flexible photodetector configuration serve as transparent Schottky contacts and light absorbing agents for photodetectors.341 The well-matched WFs between perovskites and MXenes allow the photodetectors to deliver excellent performance parameters, such as a specific detectivity of ≈108 Jones, photoresponsivity of 44.9 mA W−1, photoresponse decay time down to 18 ms and an on/off ratio of ≈103. MXenes are also integrated with III–V semiconductors. For example, The Ti3C2Tx–GaAs–Ti3C2Tx (MX-S-MX342) photodetectors operated in the VIS-NIR spectral range using spin-coated Ti3C2Tx as electrodes enhanced the device performance when fabricated with standard Au electrodes, including specific detectivity, quantum efficiency and photoresponsivity. It is also noteworthy that the UV photodetectors made of hybrid structures can provide faster response (ZnO/MoS2 photodetectors with a response time of ≈66 ms) and larger photoresponsivity (perovskite/ZnO photodetectors with a photoresponsivity of 4 A W−1). To improve the plasmonic photodetector performance and hot carrier transfer efficiency, metallic MXene/semiconductor heterostructures such as Mo2C/MoS2 photodetectors have been fabricated with high mobility.343 Such types of combinations achieved best device performance parameters like LtDR up to ≈102 and photoresponsivity of ≈103 A W−1. However, photodetection devices are mainly dependent on metallic Ti3C2Tx and hence more efforts are required to understand the full potential of MXenes as photodetectors.
6.6 Biomedical applications
The diverse clinical and biomedical applications typically require a variety of nanoarchitectures and nanostructures for designing materials with acceptable efficacy and biocompatibility. The advanced devices made of MXenes can be employed in diagnostic and biosensing applications (particularly for cancer diagnosis/therapy), emerging as innovative anticancer gene/drug delivery nanocarriers and nanoplatforms. A novel ultrathin Nb2C MXene was developed through a two-step liquid exfoliation approach by combining delamination (HF etching) and disintegration (TPAOH intercalation) for cancer phototherapeutic applications344 (see Fig. 10a and b). The Nb2C nanosheets display excellent photothermal stability and PCE (36.4% at NIR-I and 45.65% at NIR-II) as shown in Fig. 10c–e. The intrinsic features of surface-engineered 2D Nb2C nanosheets include high biocompatibility, low phototoxicity and specific enzyme-responsive biodegradability to human myeloperoxidase. As shown in Fig. 10f, the ultrathin (∼100 nm) Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets can be used in cancer therapy as an efficient photodynamic/photothermal system.345 Here, layer-by-layer exterior alterations were employed to fabricate these multifunctional nanoplatforms with doxorubicin and hyaluronic acid. The Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets exhibited excellent effective singlet oxygen creation (1O2), remarkable efficiency of photothermal alteration (∼58.3%) and mass extinction coefficient (28.6 L g−1 cm−1 at 808 nm). The fluorescence images (see Fig. 10g) of HCT-116 cells treated with Ti3C2–DOX indicate high selectivity toward CD44+ overexpressed tumor tissues for HA modified Ti3C2–DOX. The addition of Al3+ during etching significantly enhanced the near-infrared absorption of Ti3C2 nanosheets, as shown in Fig. 10h–j. Surface modified Ti3C2 MXene Nanosheets showed improved biocompatibility, tumor specific accumulation and stimuli-receptive drug release behavior, which could destroy tumor tissues via chemo/photodynamic/photothermal synergistic therapy technique. Dai et al.346 fabricated ultrathin MXene-based tantalum carbide (Ta4C3) composite nanosheets for photothermal tumor ablation. The Ta4C3 surface was activated through redox reaction for in situ growth of MnOx/Ta4C3 nanoparticles (see Fig. 10k). The UV-vis spectra in the NIR region exhibited particular concentration-dependent light absorption (see Fig. 10l). The in vitro photothermal performance at various concentrations after exposure to an NIR laser (808 nm) is shown in Fig. 10m. From these analyses, the photothermal-conversion efficiency (PCE) of the studied composite not only demonstrated tumor-growth suppression through photothermal hyperthermia but also enabled contrast-improved photoacoustic imaging. As shown in Fig. 10n, cancer cells can be effetely treated by MnOx/Ta4C3SP through triggering the intracellular hyperpyrexia, leading to the death of cancer cells. These findings provide new understanding of diverse biomedical and biological applications due to their high biocompatibility and inherent physico-chemical characteristics. Nevertheless, several factors such as stability (intracellularly and extracellularly), morphology, particle size, permeability, targeting and diffusion of drugs need to be studied in detail for developing anticancer formulations with appropriate applicability. Furthermore, to address toxicity, biosafety, and biocompatibility of MXene-based systems for advanced biomedical studies (particularly, cancer chemo-PTT), it is evident that in vitro/in vivo related investigations are required.
 Fig. 10  (a) Synthesis and characterization of ultrathin Nb2C nanosheets. (b) Schematic illustration of 2D biodegradable Nb2C in NIR-I and NIR-II biowindows for in vivo photothermal tumor ablation. Energy intensities of (c) NIR-I laser (808 nm) and (d) NIR-II laser (1064 nm) penetrating through tissues of various thicknesses. (e) Temperature elevations of dispersed Nb2C nanosheet aqueous suspensions upon exposures to tissue-penetrating NIR-I and NIR-II laser via photothermal conversion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 344. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the nanoplatform preparation based on Ti3C2 and the synergistic chemotherapy/photothermal/photodynamic of tumor. (g) Fluorescence images of Ti3C2–DOX treated HCT-116 cells along with intracellular ROS generation detection under 808 nm laser irradiation by using DCFH-DA as the probe. (h) Ti3AlC2 and Ti3C2 XRD patterns after intercalation and further delamination. (i) Normalized UV-vis absorbance of Ti3C2 nanosheets with/without Al3+ addition during etching. (j) UV-vis spectra of Ti3C2 nanosheets dispersed in water at various concentrations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 345. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (k) Schematic diagram of the MnOx/Ta4C3-SP composite synthetic procedure and photothermal tumor therapy by MnOx/Ta4C3-SP composite nanosheets through MR/CT/PA imaging-guiding. (l) UV-vis spectra at elevated concentrations (5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 ppm) of MnOx/Ta4C3 composite nanosheets dispersed in an aqueous solution. (m) The photothermal-heating curves at elevated concentrations of MnOx/Ta4C3 nanosheets under 808 nm laser irradiation. (n) 3D illustration of photothermal agent MnOx/Ta4C3-SP composite nanosheets after exposure to 808 nm laser irradiation for 4T1 cell ablation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 346. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
7 Summary and future outlooks
The unique combination of MXene properties opens the door for the possibilities of new compositions to explore the MXene families. Although many members of the MXene families have been subject of academic interest, very few materials are being considered for practical applications because of their attractive properties. Besides technological importance, thorough studies on 2D transition metal carbides/nitrides are highly required to shed more light on understanding the physico-chemical properties of MXenes. In a simple scenario, their discovery is pivotal for the promising evolution of MXene chemistry that was not feasible earlier in designing a large number of layered 2D structures. The issues related to the repeatable and reliable synthesis techniques, low contact resistance and large-area growth still remain as key challenges for the suitability of commercially viable products. The fabrication of MXenes is still quite inefficient and complicated for real-time applications because of the unreliability and complexity of transition metal carbide/nitrides, especially due their heterostructures. The large scale synthesis of 2D MXene nano-materials with high purity and high quality is one of the major interests. Nevertheless, the controllable fabrication of high-quality and large-area MXenes on different nonmetal substrates for electronic applications is highly required. Diverse synthetic techniques can be used to prepare MXenes with a variety of structural features, including vacancy, alloying, doping and dimensions in each direction. The solution-based deposition methods (such as printing, transfer, stamping, drop-casting, layer-by-layer, dip/spray/spin coating, etc.) are low energy processes that can bypass unnecessary interfacial defects produced by traditional high energy techniques (sputtering, evaporation, etc.), thereby avoiding unexpected damage in the underlying layers. Progress in MXene families requires the controllable assembly and reliable fabrication of high-quality and large-scale transition metal carbides/nitrides combinations to fully exploit their unique properties in the two-dimensional limit. The next generation MXene families should have more functional modifications and concurrent synthesis with cost-effective and facile processing techniques. More work should be dedicated to understanding the fundamental advantages of MXenes by analyzing the effect of composition and thickness on chemical properties. Therefore, designing a reliable and novel process on large scale should be the ultimate goal for prosperously integrating MXenes into mainstream applications.
Although MXenes have been continuously ameliorating and revitalizing their chemical and physical properties, we need to understand that the materials with fixed properties may not reach the required challenges for versatile applications. Due to the unique crystal structures, one can achieve MXenes building blocks for specific applications by tuning the physical and chemical properties through different strategies: structure tunings, such as crystal structure deformation, edge structure reconstruction and phase transition, while chemical composition tunings, such as atomic vacancy, alloying, doping and physical field tunings through lightning electric field, can help to regulate the properties of MXenes. Because of the huge size and scope of the MXene family, the ML techniques and high-throughput computational screening can accelerate the search of unearthed MXenes for particular applications. The combination of theoretical prediction (or analysis) and experimental investigation (both ex situ and in situ observations) deserves great endeavors in the future. The fundamental understanding of the interface properties between other substances and MXene nanosheets, such as hybrid phase, water molecule, gas molecule and surface functional groups, requires further investigations. The high reactivities and permeabilities of nonstoichiometric MXenes with a lower density can provide promising results in energy storage and conversion applications. Transparent electronic devices based on MXenes need to be fabricated in large quantity to illustrate their promising applications in high performing optoelectronics. The idea of nonstoichiometric MXenes phases can be highly potential for electronic-structure dependent properties. Designing hybrid electrodes by combining MXenes (carbides/nitrides with multiple metal atoms) with other redox-active materials can be a rational strategy because of its stability and high electrical conductivity. More attention should be paid to designing hybrid HER, OER and ORR catalysts based on MXenes. The design of an intermonomer heterostructure, such as lateral or vertical van der Waals heterostructure with highly distinct and atomically sharp interface electronic functions can offer a rich playground for probing the phonons, photons, excitons, confinement, generation and transport of charges at the limit of atomic thickness. The promising properties in the assembly of distinct layering structures with MXenes advance the necessity of novel optoelectronic devices, including photovoltaics, photodetectors and light emitting devices as well as electronic devices, referring to flexible electronics, barristors, and tunneling transistors with unique functionalities or unprecedented characteristics. External field tuning methods are highly required due to their atomic thickness for remodelling the properties of the MXenes. In addition, highly disparate 2D MXenes with one or several atom thickness can be assembled together to create macro-ordered structures or heterostructures without the constraints of processing compatibility and lattice matching. Overall, MXenes display a broad range of potential applications in energy storage, catalyzation, and electronics and will be a key class of material in the near future.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available within the article.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Government of India under the proposal MTR/2019/000194. Authors would like to thank the HPC centre, IIT Kanpur for providing the computational facilities.
References
Z. Sun, T. Liao, Y. Dou, S. M. Hwang, M. S. Park, L. Jiang, J. H. Kim and S. X. Dou, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Derivaz, D. Dentel, R. G. Stephan, M. C. Hanf, A. Mehdaoui, P. Sonnet and C. Pirri, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2510–2516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, S. Z. Lu, J. Pan, Z. Qin, Y. Q. Wang, Y. Wang, G. Y. Cao, S. Du and H. J. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4820–4824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhong, L. Kong, J. Gou, W. Li, S. Sheng, S. Yang, P. Cheng, H. Li, K. Wu and L. Chen, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2017, 1, 021001 CrossRef .
A. J. Mannix, B. Kiraly, M. C. Hersam and N. P. Guisinger, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0014 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Mannix, X. F. Zhou, B. Kiraly, J. D. Wood, D. Alducin, B. D. Myers, X. Liu, B. L. Fisher, U. Santiago, J. R. Guest, M. J. Yacaman, A. Ponce, A. R. Oganov, M. C. Hersam and N. P. Guisinger, Science, 2015, 350, 1513–1516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Brent, N. Savjani, E. A. Lewis, S. J. Haigh, D. J. Lewis and P. OBrien, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13338–13341 RSC .
A. H. Woomer, T. W. Farnsworth, J. Hu, R. A. Wells, C. L. Donley and S. C. Warren, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8869–8884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lalmi, H. Oughaddou, H. Enriquez, A. Kara, S. Vizzini, B. Ealet and B. Aufray, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 223109 CrossRef .
A. Fleurence, R. Friedlein, T. Ozaki, H. Kawai, Y. Wang and Y. Yamada-Takamura, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 245501 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Vogt, P. De Padova, C. Quaresima, J. Avila, E. Frantzeskakis, M. C. Asensio, A. Resta, B. Ealet and G. Le Lay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 155501 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Zhang and S. Dong, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 146, 034705 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Hu, H. Wang, Q. Wu, X. Ye, A. Zhou, D. Sun, L. Wang, B. Liu and J. He, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 10606–10612 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, H. Wang, Q. Wu, X. Ye, A. Zhou, D. Sun, L. Wang, B. Liu and J. He, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 14253–14260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Yang, X. Zuo, H. Tang, Q. Yang and G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12913–12920 RSC .
C. Ling, L. Shi, Y. Ouyang and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 9026–9032 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Gan, D. Huang and U. Schwingenschlogl, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13672–13678 RSC .
A. Morales-Garcia, F. Calle-Vallejo and F. Illas, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 13487–13503 CrossRef CAS .
N. Govindarajan, G. Kastlunger, H. H. Heenen and K. Chan, Chem. Sci., 2022, 13, 14–26 RSC .
H. Wei, Q. Jiang, C. Ampelli, S. Chen, S. Perathoner, Y. Liu and G. Centi, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 5614–5619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-F. Yu, Y. Li, J.-B. Cheng, Z.-B. Liu, Q.-Z. Li, W.-Z. Li, X. Yang and B. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13707–13713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-H. Zha, J. Yin, Y. Zhou, Q. Huang, K. Luo, J. Lang, J. S. Francisco, J. He and S. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15082–15088 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar and U. Schwingenschlogl, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 035405 CrossRef .
X.-H. Zha, Q. Huang, J. He, H. He, J. Zhai, J. S. Francisco and S. Du, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27971 CrossRef PubMed .
A. N. Gandi, H. N. Alshareef and U. Schwingenschlogl, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1647–1652 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, M. Estili and Y. Sakka, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7841–7849 RSC .
X.-H. Zha, J. Zhou, Y. Zhou, Q. Huang, J. He, J. S. Francisco, K. Luoa and S. Du, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6110–6117 RSC .
Y. Bai, K. Zhou, N. Srikanth, J. H. L. Pang, X. He and R. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 35731–35739 RSC .
H. Lashgari, M. R. Abolhassani, A. Boochani, S. M. Elahi and J. Khodadadi, Solid State Commun., 2014, 195, 61–69 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, X. Luo, S. Zhang and L. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12914–12919 RSC .
G. Gao, G. Ding, J. Li, K. Yao, M. Wu and M. Qian, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8986–8994 RSC .
J. He, P. Lyu, L. Z. Sun, A. M. Garcia and P. Nachtigall, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6500–6509 RSC .
C. Si, J. Zhou and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17510–17515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Je, Y. Lee and Y.-C. Chung, Thin Solid Films, 2016, 619, 131–136 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khazaei, A. Ranjbar, M. Ghorbani-Asl, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, Y. Liang and S. Yunoki, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 205125 CrossRef .
Y. Xie and P. R. C. Kent, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 235441 CrossRef .
A. N. Enyashin and A. L. Ivanovskii, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13637–13643 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, X. Wang, L. Yu, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 384–391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, J. Kibsgaard, A. L. Strickler, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Vojvodic, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fan, X. Li, Y. Ma, Y. Zhang, J. Wu, B. Xu, T. Sun, D. Gao and J. Bi, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 2793–2799 RSC .
O. Mashtalir, K. M. Cook, V. N. Mochalin, M. Crowe, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14334–14338 RSC .
J. Guo, Q. Peng, H. Fu, G. Zou and Q. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 20923–20930 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Peng, J. Guo, Q. Zhang, J. Xiang, B. Liu, A. Zhou, R. Liuand and Y. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4113–4116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Xu, H. Wang, J. Zhang, H. Yan, B. Pan, J. Zhou and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4361–4365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. M. Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, K. Chen, D. Tong, Y. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Xue, Q. Huang and T. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 314–317 RSC .
M. Xue, Z. Wang, F. Yuan, X. Zhang, W. Wei, H. Tang and C. Li, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 4312–4319 RSC .
J. Ran, G. Gao, F.-T. Li, T.-Y. Ma, A. Du and S.-Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 13907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, A. Zhou, J. Chen, J. Cao, L. Wang and Q. Hu, Adsorption, 2016, 22, 915–922 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lai, J. Jeong, S. K. Jang, J. Xu, Y. J. Choi, J.-H. Park, E. Hwang and S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19390–19396 RSC .
M. Mariano, O. Mashtalir, F. Q. Antonio, W.-H. Ryu, B. Deng, F. Xia, Y. Gogotsi and A. D. Taylor, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16371–16378 RSC .
J. Halim, M. Lukatskaya, K. M. Cook, J. Lu, C. R. Smith, L. A. Naslund, S. J. May, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi, P. Eklund and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2374–2381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Umrao, S. Lai and S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 859–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Halim, J. Lu, K. M. Cook, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15966–15969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Rakhi, B. Ahmed, M. N. Hedhili, D. H. Anjum and H. N. Alshareef, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5314–5323 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. DallAgnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Magnuson and M. Mattesini, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 621, 108–130 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Lei, X. Zhang and Z. Zhou, Front. Phys., 2015, 10, 276–286 CrossRef .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. C. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9507–9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, P. Zhang, F. Wang, A. G. Ricciardulli, M. R. Lohe, P. W. M. Blom and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15491–15495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mallakpour, V. Behranvand and C. M. Hussain, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 26585–26597 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, W. Tao, L. Yuan, Z. Liu, Q. Huang, Z. Chai, J. K. Gibson and W. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12084–12087 RSC .
W. Bao, X. Tang, X. Guo, S. Choi, C. Wang, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 778–787 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rasool, R. P. Pandey, P. A. Rasheed, S. Buczek, Y. Gogotsi and K. A. Mahmoud, Mater. Today, 2019, 30, 80–102 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Z. Wang, M. Yu, L. Xiu and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607017 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Guo, J. Zhou, L. Zhu and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11446–11452 RSC .
M. Khazaei, A. Ranjbar, M. Arai, T. Sasaki and S. Yunoki, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2488–2503 RSC .
J. Halim, K. M. Cook, M. Naguib, P. Eklund, Y. Gogotsi, J. Rosen and M. W. Barsouma, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 362, 406–417 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and P. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16909–16916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ashton, K. Mathew, R. G. Hennig and S. B. Sinnott, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3550–3556 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ashton, R. G. Hennig, S. R. Broderick, K. Rajan and S. B. Sinnott, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 054116 CrossRef .
M. Khazaei, A. Ranjbar, M. Arai and S. Yunoki, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 125152 CrossRef .
C. Si, J. You, W. Shi, J. Zhou and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11524–11529 RSC .
T. Hu, J. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Li, M. Hu and X. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 9997–10003 RSC .
U. Yorulmaz, A. Ozden, N. K. Perkgoz, F. Ay and C. Sevik, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 335702 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Wang and J. Qiu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 26587–26591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tao, M. Dahlqvist, J. Lu, S. Kota, R. Meshkian, J. Halim, J. Palisaitis, L. Hultman, M. W. Barsoum and P. O. Persson, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14949 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Dahlqvist, J. Lu, R. Meshkian, Q. Tao, L. Hultman and J. Rosen, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700642 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Qin, Q. Tao, A. El Ghazaly, J. Fernandez-Rodriguez, P. O. Persson, J. Rosen and F. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703808 CrossRef .
J. Lu, A. Thore, R. Meshkian, Q. Tao, L. Hultman and J. Rosen, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 5704–5711 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Z. Kong, N. Li, X. Zhao and C. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 32937–32943 RSC .
Z. Guo, J. Zhou and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23530–23535 RSC .
Y. Gogotsi and B. Anasori, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8491–8494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Mohammadi, J. Rosen and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2021, 372, eabf1581 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Hope, A. C. Forse, K. J. Griffith, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Ghidiu, Y. Gogotsi and C. P. Grey, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5099–5102 RSC .
M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, L. Clark, S. Sin and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7633–7644 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Li, L. L. Yao, Q. L. Liu, J. J. Gu, R. C. Luo, J. H. Li, X. D. Yan, W. Q. Wang, P. Liu, B. Chen, W. Zhang, W. Abbas, R. Naz and D. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6115–6119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, J. F. Zhu, C. H. Yang and F. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A1975–A1982 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Li, L. B. Wang, D. D. Sun, Y. D. Zhang, B. Z. Liu, Q. K. Hu and A. G. Zhou, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2015, 191, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rajavel, T. Ke, K. Yang and D. H. Lin, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 095609 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1079–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Z. Wen, Z. X. Hui, Z. W. Chen, C. C. Yang and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14223–14233 RSC .
C. Cui, R. Cheng, H. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Ma, C. Shi, B. Fan, H. Wang and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 200693 Search PubMed .
K. R. G. Lim, A. D. Handoko, L. R. Johnson, X. Meng, M. Lin, G. S. Subramanian, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi, A. Vojvodi and Z. W. Seh, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 16140–16155 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, X. Lv, X. Sun, C. Yang, Y.-Z. Zheng, L. Yang, S. Li and X. Tao, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 284, 119708 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kajiyama, L. Szabova, H. Iinuma, A. Sugahara, K. Gotoh, K. Sodeyama, Y. Tateyama, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601873 CrossRef .
A. VahidMohammadi, A. Hadjikhani, S. Shahbazmohamadi and M. Beidaghi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11135–11144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, J. Zhou, S. Wang, B. Wang, C. Shen, L. Wang, Q. Hu, Q. Huang and A. Zhou, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164(4), A709 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, M. Naguib, M. Ghidiu, L. M. Pan, J. Gu, J. Nanda, J. Halim, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 99, 660–666 CrossRef CAS .
F. Du, H. Tang, L. Pan, T. Zhang, H. Lu, J. Xiong, J. Yang and C. J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 690–699 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tao, J. Lu, M. Dahlqvist, A. Mockute, S. Calder, A. Petruhins, R. Meshkian, O. Rivin, D. Potashnikov and E. A. N. Caspi, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(7), 2476–2485 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, T. S. Mathis, A. Sarycheva, C. B. Hatter, S. Uzun, A. Levitt and Y. Gogotsi, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130(19), 5542–5546 CrossRef .
L. Wang, H. Zhang, B. Wang, C. Shen, C. Zhang, Q. Hu, A. Zhou and B. Liu, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2016, 12(5), 702–710 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, X. Zha, X. Zhou, F. Chen, G. Gao, S. Wang, C. Shen, T. Chen, C. Zhi and P. Eklund, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(4), 3841–3850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Tran, T. Schüfer, A. Shahraei, M. Dürrschnabel, L. Molina-Luna, U. I. Kramm and C. S. Birkel, ACS Appl. Energy Mater, 2018, 1(8), 3908–3914 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, X. Zha, F. Y. Chen, Q. Ye, P. Eklund, S. Du and Q. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(16), 5008–5013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhu, Y. Jin, F. Du, S. Gao, Z. Gao, X. Meng, G. Chen, Y. Wei and Y. Gao, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 31, 11–18 CrossRef .
R. Meshkian, M. Dahlqvist, J. Lu, B. Wickman, J. Halim, J. Thornberg, Q. Tao, S. Li, S. Intikhab and J. Snyder, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706409 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhao, X. Meng, K. Zhu, F. Du, G. Chen, Y. Wei, Y. Gogotsi and Y. Gao, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 8, 42–48 CrossRef .
B. Soundiraraju and B. K. George, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(9), 8892–8900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, Q. Deng, Z. Liu, D. Shen, T. Wang, Q. Huang, S. Du, N. Jiang, C.-T. Lin and J. Yu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 20494–20501 RSC .
R. Han, X. Ma, Y. Xie, D. Teng and S. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 56204–56210 RSC .
X. Cao, M. Wu, A. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. He and L. Wang, e-Polymers, 2017, 17, 373–381 CAS .
R. Sun, H. B. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Xie, R. Yang, Y. Li, S. Hong and Z. Z. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702807 CrossRef .
X. Sheng, Y. Zhao, L. Zhang and X. Lu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 181, 107710 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Han, T. Li, X. Zhang, T. Wang and Z. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2018, 220, 305–308 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, M. Miao, Y. Li, J. Zhang, S. Cao and X. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44787–44795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Levitt, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, A. Sarycheva, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 269–277 RSC .
E. A. Mayerberger, O. Urbanek, R. M. McDaniel, R. M. Street, M. W. Barsoum and C. L. Schauer, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134, 45295 CrossRef .
W. Shao, M. Tebyetekerwa, I. Marriam, W. Li, Y. Wu, S. Peng, S. Ramakrishna, S. Yang and M. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 683–690 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Mayerberger, R. M. Street, R. M. McDaniel, M. W. Barsoum and C. L. Schauer, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 35386–35394 RSC .
K. A. S. Usman, J. Zhang, D. Y. Hegh, A. O. Rashed, D. Jiang, P. A. Lynch, P. Mota-Santiago, K. L. Jarvis, S. Qin, E. L. Prime, M. Naebe, L. C. Henderson and J. M. Razal, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2002043 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seyedin, S. Uzun, A. Levitt, B. Anasori, G. Dion, Y. Gogotsi and J. M. Razal, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910504 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grazulis, A. Daskevic, A. Merkys, D. Chateigner, L. Lutterotti, M. Quiros, N. R. Serebryanaya, P. Moeck, R. T. Downs and A. Le, Bail, Nucleic Acids Res., 2012, 40, D420–D427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Karlsruhe. Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD).
S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, G. L. W. Hart, M. Jahnatek, R. V. Chepulskii, R. H. Taylor, S. Wang, J. Xue, K. Yang, O. Levy, M. L. Mehl, H. T. Stokes, D. O. Demchenko and D. Morgan, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2012, 58, 218–226 CrossRef CAS .

          http://h
          http://ttps://nomad-lab.eu/
        .
S. Kirklin, J. E. Saal, B. Meredig, A. Thompson, J. W. Doak, M. Aykol, S. Ruhl and C. Wolverton, npj Comput. Mater., 2015, 1, 15010 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder and K. A. Persson, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 011002 CrossRef .
D. Xue, P. V. Balachandran, J. Hogden, J. Theiler, D. Xue and T. Lookman, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Raccuglia, K. C. Elbert, P. D. F. Adler, C. Falk, M. B. Wenny, A. Mollo, M. Zeller, S. A. Friedler, J. Schrier and A. J. Norquist, Nature, 2016, 533, 73–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Bialon, T. Hammerschmidt and R. Drautz, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2550–2556 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pilania, A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, B. P. Uberuaga, R. Ramprasad, J. E. Gubernatis and T. Lookman, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kim, G. Pilania and R. Ramprasad, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1304–1311 CrossRef CAS .
O. Isayev, C. Oses, C. Toher, E. Gossett, S. Curtarolo and A. Tropsha, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, A. Seko, K. Shitara, K. Nakayama and I. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 93, 115104 CrossRef .
G. Pilania, C. Wang, X. Jiang, S. Rajasekaran and R. Ramprasad, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2810 CrossRef .
F. Legrain, J. Carrete, A. van Roekeghem, S. Curtarolo and N. Mingo, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6220–6227 CrossRef CAS .
A. Seko, H. Hayashi, K. Nakayama, A. Takahashi and I. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2017, 95, 144110 CrossRef .
N. C. Frey, J. Wang, G. Ivan, V. Bellido, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3031–3041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Rajan, A. Mishra, S. Satsangi, R. Vaish, H. Mizuseki, K.-R. Lee and A. K. Singh, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4031–4038 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, C. Wang, S. Ci, Y. Ma, T. Liu, L. Gao, P. Qian, C. Jif and Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 23488–23497 RSC .
D. Dolz, A. Morales-Garcia, F. Vines and F. Illas, Nanomater., 2021, 11, 127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, L. Zhu, J. Zhou and Z. Sun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 25403–25408 RSC .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib and Y. Gogotsi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 128–135 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Peng, X. Z. Chen, W. J. Ong, X. J. Zhao and N. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 18–50 CAS .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, C. Y. Chung, N. S. Venkataramanan, M. Estili, Y. Sakka and Y. Kawazoe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2185–2192 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, J. Kibsgaard, A. L. Strickler, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Vojvodic, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Borysiuk, V. N. Mochalin and Y. Gogotsi, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 265705 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Hu, H. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Li, M. Hu, J. Tan, P. Hou, F. Li and X. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Hart, K. Hantanasirisakul, A. C. Lang, B. Anasori, P. David, Y. Pivak, J. T. V. Omme, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi and M. L. Taheri, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Weng, A. Ranjbar, Y. Liang, Z. Song, M. Khazaei, S. Yunoki, M. Arai, Y. Kawazoe, Z. Fang and X. Dai, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 075436 CrossRef .
X. F. Yu, J. B. Cheng, Z. B. Liu, Q. Z. Li, W. Z. Li, X. Yang and B. Xiao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 30438–30444 RSC .
Y. Lee, S. B. Cho and Y. C. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14724–14728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, A. Ranjbar, Y. Y. Liang and S. Yunoki, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 075411 CrossRef .
H. A. Tahini, X. Tan and S. C. Smith, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7016–7020 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15853–15856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, Y. Hong, S. Yazdanparast and M. A. Zaeem, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 045004 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Ivanovskii and A. N. Enyashin, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2013, 82, 735–746 CrossRef .
K. Hantanasirisakul and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804779 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Si, K.-H. Jin, J. Zhou, Z. Sun and F. Liu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6584–6591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2016, 124, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anasori, C. Shi, E. J. Moon, Y. Xie, C. A. Voigt, P. R. Kent, S. J. May, S. J. Billinge, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 227–234 RSC .
W. Sun, Y. Xie and P. Kent, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11962–11968 RSC .
X. L. Qi and S. C. Zhang, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2011, 83, 1057–1110 CrossRef CAS .
H. Weng, R. Yu, X. Hu, X. Dai and Z. Fang, Adv. Phys., 2015, 64, 227–282 CrossRef .
B. Yan and S. C. Zhang, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2012, 75, 096501 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2010, 82, 3045–3067 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halim, I. Persson, E. J. Moon, P. Kuhne, V. Darakchieva, P. O. A. Persson, P. Eklund, J. Rosen and M. W. Barsoum, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2019, 31, 165301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Berdiyorov, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 055105 CrossRef .
R. Li, L. Zhang, L. Shi and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3752–3759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Han, K. Maleski, C. E. Shuck, Y. Yang, J. T. Glazar, A. C. Foucher, K. Hantanasirisakul, A. Sarycheva, N. C. Frey, S. J. May, V. B. Shenoy, E. A. Stach and Y. Gogotsi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19110–19118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, L. Yan, M. Yang, G. Wu, M. Hu, J. Li, K. Yuan and X. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 6441–6447 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, B. Xu, C. Ouyang, S. A. Yang and Y. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24274–24281 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Liu, X. Kan, B. Amin, L. Y. Gan and Y. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 32253–32261 RSC .
H. Kumar, N. C. Frey, L. Dong, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7648–7655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Frey, H. Kumar, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6319–6325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bandyopadhyay, D. Ghosh and S. K. Pati, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 4012–4019 RSC .
B. Scheibe, K. Tadyszak, M. Jarek, N. Michalak, M. Kempinski, M. Lewandowski, B. Peplinska and K. Chybczynska, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 479, 216–224 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, X. Zhou, X. Luo, S. Zhang and L. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 203109 CrossRef .
L. Dong, H. Kumar, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 422–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y. J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. C. Neto and K. S. Novosolov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Ren, M. Q. Zhao, T. Makaryan, J. Halim, M. Boota, S. Kota, B. Anasori, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 689–693 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, F. Bonaccorso, M. Agostini, M. Angelucci, M. G. Betti, R. Cingolani, M. Gemmi, C. Mariani, S. Panero, V. Pellegrini and B. Scrosati, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4901–4906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Mashtalir, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Q. Zhao, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3501–3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, M. Wang, Z. Li, G. Fan, L. Z. Fan and A. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 47, 80–83 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao and G. Henkelman, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 844–851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xiao, J. Song, L. Wang, J. B. Goodenough and G. Henkelman, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3763–3768 CrossRef CAS .
A. Van der Ven, M. Aydinol, G. Ceder, G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 2975–2987 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, Y. DallAgnese, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, H. L. Zhuang and P. R. Kent, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9606–9615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, Z. Sun, Z. Fan, W. Cai, Y. Shao, G. Sheng, M. Wang, L. Song, Z. Liu, Q. Zhang and J. Sun, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104555 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, X. Yu, K. W. Nam, X. Q. Yang, A. I. Kolesnikov and P. R. Kent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6385–6394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Halim, S. Kota, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M. Q. Zhao, E. J. Moon, J. Pitock, J. Nanda, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3118–3127 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, C. Yang, Y. Luo, H. Zhao, Y. Du, L. B. Kong and W. Que, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 5006–5014 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jorgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, B. You, M. Sheng and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 6349–6352 CrossRef .
N. Jiang, B. You, M. Sheng and Y. Sun, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Chen, C. H. Wang, K. Sasaki, N. Marinkovic, W. Xu, J. Muckerman, Y. Zhu and R. Adzic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 943–951 RSC .
S. Meyer, A. V. Nikiforov, I. M. Petrushina, K. Kohler, E. Christensen, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 2905–2911 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liao, S. Wang, J. Xiao, X. Bian, Y. Zhang, M. D. Scanlon, X. Hu, Y. Tang, B. Liu and H. H. A. Girault, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 387–392 RSC .
H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 12875–12878 CrossRef .
W. F. Chen, K. Sasaki, C. Ma, A. I. Frenkel, N. Marinkovic, J. T. Muckerman, Y. Zhu and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6131–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Masa, P. Weide, D. Peeters, I. Sinev, W. Xia, Z. Sun, C. Somsen, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502313 CrossRef .
S. Li, P. Tuo, J. Xie, X. Zhang, J. Xu, J. Bao, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yoon, A. P. Tiwari, M. Lee, M. Choi, W. Song, J. Im, T. Zyung, H. K. Jung, S. S. Lee, S. Jeon and K. S. An, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20869–20877 RSC .
G. Qu, Y. Zhou, T. Wu, G. Zhao, F. Li, Y. Kang and C. Xu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 7206–7212 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ding, W. J. Ong, J. Jiang, X. Chen and N. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 500, 143987 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ling, L. Shi, Y. Ouyang, Q. Chen and J. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600180 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Gao, A. P. OMullane and A. Du, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 494–500 CrossRef CAS .
T. Song, L. Hou, B. Long, A. Ali and G. J. Deng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 584, 474–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, J. Li, C. Wu, Z. Li, L. Cai, H. Tang, Z. Zhou, G. Wang, J. Wang, L. Zhao and S. Wang, Carbon, 2021, 179, 387–399 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, Q. Chen, J. Li and H. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118379 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, P. Qiu, Z. Liang, Y. Xue, X. Zhang, L. Yang, H. Cui and J. Tian, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 406, 127177 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y.-H. Li, X. Li, Q. Zhang, H. Yu, X. Peng and F. Peng, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 14181–14189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zeng, Y. Cao, Y. Wu, H. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Zeng and S. Huang, Appl. Mater. Today, 2021, 22, 100926 CrossRef .
G. Zuo, Y. Wang, W. L. Teo, A. Xie, Y. Guo, Y. Dai, W. Zhou, D. Jana, Q. Xian, W. Dong and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11287–11292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, T. Zhao, Z. Xiu, Z. Xing, Z. Li, K. Pan, S. Yang and W. Zhou, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 20, 100719 CrossRef .
J. Liu, X. Kong, Y. Li, S. Zhu, Y. Liang, Z. Li, S. Wu, C. Chang, Z. Cui and X. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 530, 147283 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Chen, Y. Sun, X. Meng, Y. Dall'Agnese, G. Chen, C. Dall'Agnese, H. Ren, S. Sasaki, H. Tamiaki and X. Wang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1902080 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, S. Byun, S. Kim, J. Lee, M. Jung, H. Hwang, T. W. Kim, S. H. Song and D. Lee, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9226–9233 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Zhao, S. Wang, J. Li, G. Wang and J. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 515, 145922 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhao, Y. Hu, J. Du, G. Liu, B. Dong, Y. Yang, J. Peng, J. Li and M. Zhai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 530, 147247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, F. Zhan, T. Jiao, W. Wang, G. Zhang, J. Jiao, G. Jiang, Q. Zhang, J. Gu and Q. Peng, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 2228–2238 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, Z. Zhao, J. Huang, B. G. Sumpter and Z. Chen, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 6233–6242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xue, Z. Pei, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Tang, H. Li, Y. Huang, N. Li, H. Zhang and C. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20818–20823 RSC .
Z. Zhang, H. Li, G. Zou, C. Fernandez, B. Liu, Q. Zhang, J. Hu and Q. Peng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 6763–6771 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Z. Zhuang, F. Lv, H. Zhu, L. Zhou, M. Luo, J. Zhu, Z. Lang, S. Feng, W. Chen, L. Mai and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803220 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Cheng, X. Zhang, Z. Fu and Z. Yang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2018, 30, 475201 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ostadhossein, J. Guo, F. Simeski and M. Ihme, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2, 95 CrossRef .
S. Zhou, X. Yang, W. Pei, N. Liu and J. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 10876–10883 RSC .
J. Liu, T. Chen, P. Juan, W. Peng, Y. Li, F. Zhang and X. Fan, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3758–3765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Ma, J. L. Cao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1138–1142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, S. Wei, Y. Xu, J. Liu, J. Wu, G. Jia and X. Cui, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 290, 364–368 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morales-Garcia, A. Fernandez Fernandez, F. Vines and F. Illas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3381–3385 RSC .
R. Khaledialidusti, A. K. Mishra and A. Barnoush, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 4771–4779 RSC .
Z. Guo, Y. Li, B. Sa, Y. Fang, J. Lin, Y. Huang, C. Tang, J. Zhou, N. Miao and Z. Sun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 521, 146436 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, A. Zhou, F. Liu, J. Cao, L. Wang and Q. Hu, J. Adv. Ceram., 2018, 7, 237–245 CrossRef CAS .
I. Persson, J. Halim, H. Lind, T. W. Hansen, J. B. Wagner, L. Naslund, V. Darakchieva, J. Palisaitis, J. Rosen and P. O. A. Persson, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805472 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Morales-Salvador, J. D. Gouveia, A. Morales-Garcia, F. Vines, J. R. B. Gomes and F. Illas, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 11248–11255 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kannan, M. H. Sliem, A. M. Abdullah, K. K. Sadasivuni and B. Kumar, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 549 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pan, X. Ma, S. Huang, Y. Wu, M. Jia, Y. Shi, Y. Liu, P. Wangyang, L. He and Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 6590–6597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, C. Zhang, R. Hu, Z. Du, J. Gu, Y. Cui, X. Chen, W. Xu, Z. Cheng, S. Li, B. Li, Y. Liu, W. Chen, C. Liu, J. Shang, L. Song and S. Yang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 4927–4936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zeng, Y. Yan, J. Chen, P. Zan, Q. Tian and P. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806500 CrossRef .
M. Ye, X. Wang, E. Liu, J. Ye and D. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1606–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, J. Shen, W. Zhang, X. Yu, H. Tang, M. Zhang, Zulfiqar and Q. Liu, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 24146–24153 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, Z. Sun, S. Deng, H. Wang and Z. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 564, 406–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, B. Han, Y. Xie, S. Liang, H. Deng and Z. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123519 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu, W. Ho and W. Macyk, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 119006 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, B. Shen, T. Tong, J. Fu and J. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800136 CrossRef .
A. D. Handoko, K. H. Khoo, T. L. Tan, H. Jin and Z. W. Seh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21885–21890 RSC .
N. Li, X. Chen, W. J. Ong, D. R. MacFarlane, X. Zhao, A. K. Cheetham and C. Sun, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10825–10833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, Z. Chen, W. Yang, S. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Yu, W. C. Cheong, L. Zheng, F. Ren, G. Ying, X. Cao, D. Wang, Q. Peng, G. Wang and C. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4086–4093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao and W. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7660–7673 RSC .
V. Parey, B. M. Abraham, S. H. Mir and J. K. Singh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 35585–35594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, A. D. Handoko, J. Xiao, X. Feng, Y. Fan, T. Wang, D. Legut, Z. W. Seh and Q. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 36571–36579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhu, J. Ma, X. Kang, X. Sun, H. Liu, J. Hu, Z. Liu and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9012–9016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhu, D. Yang, H. Liu, X. Sun, C. Chen, J. Bi, J. Liu, H. Wu and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8896–8901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, Q. Zhu, C. Chen, H. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, S. Liu and B. Han, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, H. Mei, M. Lu and L. Cheng, Composites, Part A, 2020, 139, 106100 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jacoby, Chem. Eng. News, 2018, 96, 11 Search PubMed .
K. Rui, X. Wang, M. Du, Y. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Ma, Q. Zhang, D. Li, X. Huang, G. Sun, J. Zhu and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2837–2842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lee and D. J. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 037515 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Soomro, S. Jawaid, Q. Zhu, Z. Abbas and B. Xu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 922 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xiao, Y. C. Li, X. F. Yu and J. B. Cheng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 235, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
P. Khakbaz, M. Moshayedi, S. Hajian, M. Soleimani, B. B. Narakathu, B. J. Bazuin, M. Pourfath and M. Z. Atashbar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 29794–29803 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kim, H. J. Koh, C. E. Ren, O. Kwon, K. Maleski, S. Y. Cho, B. Anasori, C. K. Kim, Y. K. Choi, J. Kim, Y. Gogotsi and H. T. Jung, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 986–993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lee, A. VahidMohammadi, Y. S. Yoon, M. Beidaghi and D. J. Kim, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 1603–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Enyashin and A. L. Ivanovskii, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2012, 989, 27–32 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, J. Shen, G. Ge, Y. Zhang, W. Jin, W. Huang, J. Shao, J. Yang and X. Dong, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 56–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Koh, S. J. Kim, K. Maleski, S. Y. Cho, Y. J. Kim, C. W. Ahn, Y. Gogotsi and H. T. Jung, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 1365–1372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, Q. Mi, D. Wang and T. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 339, 129923 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hou, S. Guo, L. Yang, J. Gao, T. Hu, X. Wang and Y. Li, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 7728–7737 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, Y. Xu, J. Yang, Y. Song, F. Yin and W. Yuan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 346, 130500 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, Y. Xu, Q. Guo, Z. Hua, F. Yin and W. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 39772–39780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Y. Jiang, C. Zhou, Y. Xiao, B. Meng, Z. Wang, D. Huang, C. Xing and Z. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 38116–38125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, Y. J. Kim, S. Y. Cho, K. Park, H. Kang, S. J. Kim and H. T. Jung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–9 Search PubMed .
B. Sun, H. Lv, Z. Liu, J. Wang, X. Bai, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, K. Kan and K. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6335–6344 RSC .
J. Wu, P. Lu, J. Dai, C. Zheng, T. Zhang, W. W. Yu and Y. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 326, 128969 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Chen, X. Jiang, S. N. Lai, D. Peroulis and L. Stanciu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–10 Search PubMed .
H. Tai, Z. Duan, Z. He, X. Li, J. Xu, B. Liu and Y. Jiang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 298, 126874 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Song, Z. Yang and Q. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 23028–23037 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, K. Yu, Y. Feng, R. Qi, J. Ren and Z. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 496, 143729 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, Y. Wang and X. Li, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 16033–16042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, J. Ji, P. Song, M. Liu and Q. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 349, 130782 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Y. Jiang, Y. Xiao, B. Meng, C. Xing, H. Zhang and Z. Peng, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 21522–21531 RSC .
F. Ranjbar, S. Hajati, M. Ghaedi, K. Dashtian, H. Naderi and J. Toth, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 416, 126196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Xu, Y. Jiang, Z. He, B. Liu, H. Xie, H. Li, Z. Li, Y. Wang and H. Tai, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 316, 128144 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Chen, S. N. Lai, C. C. Yen, X. Jiang, D. Peroulis and L. A. Stanciu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 11490–11501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Song, Z. Yang and Q. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 340, 129946 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, L. Yu, D. Wang, Y. Yang, Q. Mi and J. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 2911–2919 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhao, K. Wang, W. Wei, L. Wang and W. Han, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 407–416 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hermawan, B. Zhang, A. Taufik, Y. Asakura, T. Hasegawa, J. Zhu, P. Shi and S. Yin, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 4755–4766 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Sun, K. Li, X. Li and Y. Gogotsi, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 1018–1021 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hou, J. Gao, L. Yang, S. Guo, T. Hu and Y. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 535, 147666 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhi, X. Zhang, F. Wang, P. Wan and L. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 45987–45994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pazniak, I. A. Plugin, M. J. Loes, T. M. Inerbaev, I. N. Burmistrov, M. Gorshenkov, J. Polcak, A. S. Varezhnikov, M. Sommer, D. V. Kuznetsov, M. Bruns, F. S. Fedorov, N. S. Vorobeva, A. Sinitskii and V. V. Sysoev, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 3195–3204 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kuang, X. Guo, Z. T. Zhu, Y. Ding, X. Sun, Z. Wu, L. Zhang, Y. Zhou and Y. He, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 19471–19480 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, A. Liu, C. Wang, F. Liu, J. He, S. Li, J. Wang, R. You, X. Yan, P. Sun, Y. Duan and G. Lu, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 1261–1269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, W. Eom, H. Shin, R. B. Ambade, J. H. Bang, H. W. Kim and T. H. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10434–10442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, Y. Ding, D. Kuang, Z. Wu, X. Sun, B. Du, C. Liang, Y. Wu, W. Qu, L. Xiong and Y. He, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 595, 6–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zou, J. Gao, L. Liu, Z. Lin, P. Fu, S. Wang and Z. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 817, 152785 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, Y. Li, S. Hao, Y. Cheng, Y. Zhan, C. Zhang, Y. Meng, Q. Xie and H. Xia, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 243, 116467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. M. Chachuli, M. N. Hamidon, M. Ertugrul, M. S. Mamat, O. Coban, F. N. Tuzluca, Y. O. Yesilbag and N. H. Shamsudin, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 882, 160671 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yuan, K. Yang, H. Peng, F. Li and F. Yin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18116–18124 RSC .
Z. Zhu, C. Liu, F. Jiang, J. Liu, X. Ma, P. Liu, J. Xu, L. Wang and R. Huang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 399, 123054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kuang, L. Wang, X. Guo, Y. She, B. Du, C. Liang, W. Qu, X. Sun, Z. Wu, W. Hu and Y. He, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 416, 126171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Shuvo, A. M. Ulloa Gomez, A. Mishra, W. Y. Chen, A. M. Dongare and L. A. Stanciu, ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 2915–2924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhou and Y. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 323, 128695 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, F. Wang, A. Hermawan, Y. Asakura, T. Hasegawa, H. Kumagai, H. Kato, M. Kakihana, J. Zhu and S. Yin, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2021, 73, 128–138 CrossRef .
Q. Sun, J. Wang, X. Wang, J. Dai, X. Wang, H. Fan, Z. Wang, H. Li, X. Huang and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 16987–16994 RSC .
D. Wang, D. Zhang, P. Li, Z. Yang, Q. Mi and L. Yu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 1–13 CAS .
E. S. Muckley, M. Naguib, H. W. Wang, L. Vlcek, N. C. Osti, R. L. Sacci, X. Sang, R. R. Unocic, Y. Xie, M. Tyagi, E. Mamontov, K. L. Page, P. R. C. Kent, J. Nanda and I. N. Ivanov, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11118–11126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, Y. Zheng, K. Wang, C. Lv, W. Wei, L. Wang and W. Han, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. An, T. Habib, S. Shah, H. Gao, A. Patel, I. Echols, X. Zhao, M. Radovic, M. J. Green and J. L. Lutkenhaus, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 948–955 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, M. Wang, X. Chang, Y. Jiang, D. Zhang, D. Wang, Y. Zhang and Y. Lei, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 304, 127274 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Liu, W. Chen, H. Bin Zhang, Q. W. Wang, F. Guan and Z. Z. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–10 Search PubMed .
L. Jin, C. Wu, K. Wei, L. He, H. Gao, H. Zhang, K. Zhang, A. M. Asiri, K. A. Alamry, L. Yang and X. Chu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 12071–12079 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, L. Jiang, J. Wang, F. Liu, J. He, A. Liu, S. Lv, R. You, X. Yan, P. Sun, C. Wang, Y. Duan and G. Lu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 326, 128828 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, W. Liu, T. Lv, M. Ma, Z. Liu, A. Vasiliev and X. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 329, 129275 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, L. Shi, Z. Cao, R. Wang and J. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807882 CrossRef .
L. Li, X. Fu, S. Chen, S. Uzun, A. S. Levitt, C. E. Shuck, W. Han and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 15362–15369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, X. Fan, D. Zhao, Y. An, Y. Hu and Z. Luo, Phys. E, 2019, 111, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
W. N. Zhao, N. Yun, Z. H. Dai and Y. F. Li, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 1261–1270 RSC .
B. Scheibe, J. K. Wychowaniec, M. Scheibe, B. Peplinska, M. Jarek, G. Nowaczyk and L. Przysiecka, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 5, 6557–6569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Song, X. Jiang, Y. Li, X. Lu, S. Luan, Y. Wang, Y. Li and F. Gao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 373, 367–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, Y. Yao, C. Jiang, Y. Shao, D. Barcelo, Y. Ying and J. Ping, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 384, 121358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Xu, F. Y. Li, F. Ndikuryayo, W. C. Yang and H. M. Wang, Sensors, 2018, 18, 4281 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wu, M. Wu, J. Yang, H. Zhang, K. Xie, C. Lin, A. Yu, J. Yu and L. Fu, Mater. Lett., 2019, 236, 412–415 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, F. Gao, X. Tu, X. Ma, Q. Xu, R. Dai, X. Huang, Y. Yu and L. Lu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, B1673–B1680 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kang, Y. Ma, X. Tan, M. Zhu, Z. Zheng, N. Liu, L. Li, Z. Zou, X. Jiang, T. Zhai and Y. Gao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700165 CrossRef .
W. Deng, H. Huang, H. Jin, W. Li, X. Chu, D. Xiong, W. Yan, F. Chun, M. Xie, C. Luo, L. Jin, C. Liu, H. Zhang, W. Deng and W. Yang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801521 CrossRef .
K. Montazeri, M. Currie, L. Verger, P. Dianat, M. W. Barsoum and B. Nabet, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jeon, H. Choi, S. Choi, J. H. Park, B. H. Lee, E. Hwang and S. Lee, Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905384 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, S. Gao, C. Dai, Y. Chen and J. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16235–16247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Zou, Q. Tang, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. Huang, P. Chen, J. Shao and X. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40077–40086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dai, Y. Chen, X. Jing, L. Xiang, D. Yang, H. Lin, Z. Liu, X. Han and R. Wu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12696–12712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

B. Moses Abraham
	B. Moses Abraham received his PhD in 2020 from the School of Physics, University of Hyderabad, India. He obtained BSc (2011) and MSc (2013) degrees from Acharya Nagarjuna University, India. He is currently working as a Project Scientist in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. His primary interest lies in the fundamental understanding of the chemistry and physics of materials, probed via novel first-principles computational methods.

Vanshree Parey
	Vanshree Parey received her BSc (2011), MSc (2013) and PhD (2021) degrees from the Department of Physics, Barkatullah University, India. She is currently working as a Project Scientist in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. She is interested in studying the interactions and reactions of molecules adsorbed on surfaces, and the energetics of defects on surfaces (as well as interfaces) using density functional theory calculations.

Jayant K. Singh
	Jayant K. Singh is currently Poonam and Prabhu Goel Chair Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Dean of Resources and Alumni at Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. Prof. Singh received his BTech in Chemical Engineering from IIT Kanpur in 1997. He subsequently completed his MS degree in Computer Science and Engineering, in 2002, and PhD in Chemical Engineering, in 2004, in the area of molecular simulation from SUNY Buffalo, USA. Prof. Singh has provided significant insights into the phase equilibria and interfacial behavior of bulk fluids and fluids confined in nanopores using statistical mechanics and molecular simulations. His current research interests include material modelling, machine learning, self-assembly, energy storage, wetting transition, selective adsorption and development of novel molecular simulations tool.

 	Fig. 1  Timeline chart showing the major developments of MXene materials. In 2011, the HF etching method was used to obtain the first MXene (Ti3C2Tx). Subsequently, new MXene members were successfully synthesized through several novel etching methods including in situ HF etching, electrochemical etching, alkali etching, Lewis acid molten salt etching etc. With time, MXenes have been widely promoted in various applications such as electromagnetic shielding, optical applications, energy-related applications, catalysis, electronics, sensors, membranes, biomedical and many others.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Elements used to build MAX phases (with the general molecular formula Mn+1AXn) and MXenes (Mn+1XnTx), where n = 1, 2, and 3. The A elements in the MAX phases can be selectively etched to make MXenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of MXene structures with general formula Mn+1XnTx (n = 1–3), where M corresponds to early transition metals, and X can be either carbon or nitrogen. Subsequently, the family of double transition metal MXenes with general formula  and  and their structures with surface terminations are represented. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. Total energy diagram of (c) Mo2TiC2, (d)  and (e)  type MXenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

Ti2AlC	Ti2CTx	0.9 M LiF + 6 M HCl	40	15	
103

Mo2Ga2C	Mo2CTx	3 M LiF + 12 M HCl	35	384	
104

V2AlC	V2CTx	2 g LiF + 40 M HCl	90	48	
105

(Nb0.8Zr0.2)4AlC3	(Nb0.8Zr0.2)4C3Tx	LiF + 12 M HCl	50	168	
106

Ti3AlC2	Ti3C2Tx	1 M NH4HF2	80	12	
54

Ti3AlCN	Ti3CNTx	0.66 g LiF + 6 M HCl	35	12	
107

Cr2TiAlC2	Cr2TiC2Tx	5 M LiF + 6 M HCl	55	42	
108

Ti4AlN3	Ti4N3Tx	59% KF + 2 9% LiF + 12% NaF	550	0.5	
109

Ti3AlC2	Ti3C2Tx	NH3F	24	150	
110

Hf3[Al(Si)]4C6	Hf3C2Tx	35% HF	RT	60	
111

(Ti0.5Nb0.5)2AlC	(Ti0.5Nb0.5)2CTx	51% HF	RT	28	
65

Ti3AlCN	Ti3CNTx	30% HF	RT	18	
65

V4AlC3	V4C3Tx	40% HF	RT	165	
112

Zr3Al3C5	Zr3C2Tx	50% HF	RT	60	
113

Ti2AlC	Ti2CTx	10% HF	RT	10	
114

(V0.5Cr0.5)3AlC2	(V0.5Cr0.5)3C2Tx	50% HF	RT	69	
65

Ti3AlC2	Ti3C2Tx	50% HF	RT	2	
91

(W2/3Sc1/3)2AlC	W4/3CTx	48% HF	RT	30	
115

Nb2AlC	Nb2CTx	50% HF	RT	90	
56

Nb4AlC3	Nb4C3x	50% HF	RT	96	
116

(Mo2/3Y1/3)2AlC	Mo4/3CTx	48% HF	RT	60	
83

Ti2AlN	Ti2NTx	5% HF	RT	24	
117

(Nb2/3Sc1/3)2AlC	Nb4/3CTx	48% HF	RT	30	
117

V2AlC	V2CTx	50% HF	RT	90	
104

Mo2TiAlC2	Mo2TiC2Tx	50% HF	RT	48	
63


 	Fig. 3  (a) Outline for the synthesis of Ti3C2Tx MXenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of the etching and delamination process of Ti3AlC2 in a binary aqueous electrolyte. (c) The electrochemical cell configuration, the as-received bulk Ti3AlC2 optical image, aqueous dispersion of delaminated Ti3C2Tx and X-ray diffraction patterns. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) The reaction between NaOH water solution and Ti3AlC2 under various conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Schematic diagram illustrating the fabrication of the rGO-MoS2/Acc-TiO2/C hybrid. (f) SEM image, (g) TEM image and (h) HRTEM image of rGO-MoS2/Acc-TiO2/C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of chemical search space and theoretical workflow along with positive and unlabelled (PU) ML. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic work flow of filtering semiconducting materials from the MXene database, thereby feeding its subset as the input to the ML algorithm. (c) Cooks distance is calculated to perform outlier analysis on 76 MXenes and 6 of them are removed due to influential outliers. For the remaining 70 MXenes, (d) computed PBE and G0W0 level band gaps and (e) the distribution of G0W0 band gaps corresponding to the data set for ML are presented. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Structural representation of M3X2, M2M′X2 and M2M′X2O2 structures as well as possible surface O adsorption configurations, (g) distribution of O stable adsorption positions and (h) the Gibbs free energy (δGH) distribution of hydrogen adsorbed by M2M′X2 and . (i) The OBA cohesive energy statistics of 2D MXenes. ML schematic for 1/4 H coverage with (j) the feature significance of 5 reduced features. (k) The feature correlation of 5 reduced features. (l) The performance of AdaBoost regression. Reprinted with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Bottom (top) panels: calculated projected band structures for W2CO2, W2HfC2O2, and W2Hf2C3O2 with (without) the relativistic spin–orbit coupling. The Fermi energy is located at zero energy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2016, American Physical Society. (b) UV-vis absorption spectrum in solution, and (c, d) schematic illustration of the excitation of multi-wavelength MXene NS's and the observation of the ultrafast temporal evolution in the VIS-NIR region. The dynamics at (e) 510 nm, (f) 650 nm and (g) 950 nm of the temporal evolution of the photoinduced absorption variation for MXene NS's. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic to explain the local magnetic moment of M2NT2 MXenes with different transition-metal groups. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (i) Spherical plot of Mn2NO2 representing the increase in energy because of rotating the spin axis away from the easy axis. (j) Schematic diagram of spin symmetries accessible through tuning of electron localization and spin–orbit interaction. (k) Magneto-crystalline anisotropy in the Heisenberg-like Ti2NO2 MXene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic diagram demonstrating the progress in the applications of MXenes in Li-S batteries, including Li anode, sulfur cathode, chemical modification and structure control of MXenes and their hybridization with other materials for electrochemical performance.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the MF-templating synthesis of P-NTC and the role of P-NTC electrocatalyst in Li–S cell. (b) Charge density difference analysis of adsorbed Li2S on P-NTC and TC monolayers. (c) Dissociation barrier of the Li2S cluster on P-NTC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. (d) Schematic illustration of MXene based “symmetric” supercapacitors. (e) Contributions of the positive electrodes to the total gravimetric capacitance in different electrolytes. (f) Ragone plots for supercapacitors in H2SO4 and the mixed electrolytes. (g) Cycling performance of the Ti3C2x-based supercapacitors in the mixed electrolyte at 10 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 2  Bar chart of various MXene-based electrodes for gravimetric capacitance enhancement. These types of MXene-based composites offer high rate capability, favourable cycle stability, pseudocapacitive behaviour and ultrahigh volumetric capacitance, and thus can be utilized as electrode materials for supercapacitor applications.	 

 	Scheme 3  Schematic diagram summarizing different properties of a MXene Ti3C2 cocatalyst towards photocatalytic hydrogen generation (HG)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The schematic diagram of V2CO2 for improving the performance of HER by introducing a transition metal onto the surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) The schematic structure of AM2X2 and anti-MXene, and the procedure to extract anti-MXenes for screening HER electrocatalysts. (c) Adsorption of free energy for H atom on 24 stable anti-MXenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (d) Comparison of total overpotential, for MXene surfaces as a function of the number of atomic layers and functional groups along with the optimized geometries and minimum energy pathways of the adsorbed lithium oxides on bare, O- and F-terminated MXenes. (e) The final configuration of atoms during the ORR on fully F-terminated MXene surfaces from rMD simulations at T = 300 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

Pt/UCN/Ti3C2Tx/BQD	Stepwise approach	TEOA	18 420	17.6 (420 nm)	
220

Pt/HCN/Ti3C2	Ionothermal method	TEOA	4225	14.6 (420 nm)	
221

CdLa2S4/Ti3C2	Hydrothermal procedure	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	11 182.4	15.6 (420 nm)	
222

CdS nanorods/Ti3C2Tx	Hydrothermal procedure	TEOA	63.53	2.28	
223

TiO2–Ti3C2/Ru	Stepwise approach	Methanol	235.3	14.33 (350 nm)	
224

Cd0.5Zn0.5S/Ti3C2	Hydrothermal procedure	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	9.07	43.28 (420 nm)	
225

Pt/ZnIn2S4/Ti3C2Tx	Solvothermal procedure	TEOA	6482	20.41 (400 nm)	
226

BiVO4@ZnIn2S4/Ti3C2	Ultrasonic assisted self assembly process	No scavenger	102.67	2.9 (460 nm)	
227

Pt/TiO2@C	Calcination	TEOA	160.42	np	
228

Chlorophyll-Ti3C2Tx	Electrostatic self assembly process	AA	52	np	
229

p-g-C3N4/Ti3C2Tx	Electrostatic self assembly process	TEOA	982.8	np	
230

g-C3N4/Ti3C2	Stepwise approach	TEOA	116.2	np	
231

TiO2-C/CdS	Calcination	Lactic acid	1480	np	
232

MXene@Au@CdS	Stepwise approach	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	17 070.43	np	
233


 	Fig. 8  (a) Top view and side view of the charge density difference of a SA-Cu-MXene. Orange and green regions indicate electron depletion and accumulation, respectively. (b) Reaction pathway for the functionalization of CO2 to methanol on isolated Cu of a SA-Cu-MXene. (c) Free energy diagram of CO2 to CH3OH on the Cu–O3 structure. faradaic efficiencies of (d) SA-Cu-MXene and (e) Cu-particles-MXene at different applied potentials from 1.1 to 1.8 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (f) Heatmap of CO2 adsorption energies on pure and defect induced M2X-type MXenes. (g) Adsorption energies of CO2 on different 2D materials. (h) Adsorption energies and the amount of charge transferred between pure/defective M2N type MXene surfaces and CO2 molecule. (i) The charge density difference of CO2 adsorption on pure and defective Ti2C/Ti2N and Zr2C/Zr2N surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 264 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (j) DFT scheme showing the effect of surface functionalization in CO2RR to CH4. (k) Energy barriers along the elementary step of (l) *(H)COOH *CO and (e) *CO *(H)CHO. (m) Scaling relations for the electronic binding energies of intermediates on OH-terminated MXenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 265. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

Ti3C2Tx-Na+	Ti3C2Tx	C2H5OH	LiF/HCl etchant	0.1%	9.99%	25	
280

MXene/Co3O4	Ti3C2	HCHO	LiF/HCl etchant	0.01–10 ppm	9.2 (10 ppm)	RT	
281

Ti3C2Tx/TiO2	Ti3C2Tx	C2H5OH	LiF/HCl	10–800 ppm	22.47 (100 ppm)	25	
282

Ti3C2Tx/polyurethane	Ti3C2Tx	CH3COCH3	LiF/HCl route	0.05–50 ppm	0.25% (50 ppb)	RT	
283

Ti3C2Tx/TiO2 spaced RGO	Ti3C2Tx	NO2	LiF/HCl etchant	0.05–20 ppm	165% (1 ppm)	RT	
284

Ti3C2/TiO2 nanowires	Ti3C2	Humidity	40 wt% HF	7–97% RH	∼280 (7–33% RH)	—	
285

TiO2/Ti3C2	Ti3C2	NO2	LiF/HCl etchant	0.125–5 ppm	∼37% (5 ppm)	RT	
286

Co3O4PEI/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	NOx	HCl/LiF etchant	0.03–100 ppm	∼28% (100 ppm)	RT	
287

Ti3C2Tx/K2Ti4O9	Ti3C2Tx	Humidity	40 wt% HF	11–95% RH	1.49 (95% RH)	RT	
288

Ti3C2Tx/WSe2	Ti3C2Tx	C2H5OH	30% HF	1–40 ppm	9 (40 ppm)	RT	
289

TiO2 NPs/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	HF etchant	10 ppm	3.1%	RT	
290

In2O3/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	CH3OH	40 wt% HF	5–100 ppm	29.6% (5 ppm)	RT	
291

TiOF2Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	Humidity	40 wt% HF	11–95% RH	993	—	
292

rGO/N-MXene/PEI	Ti3C2Tx	CO2	LiF/HCl route	8–3000 ppm	∼1% (8 ppm)	20	
293

α-Fe2O3/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	CH3COCH3	HF etching	5–200 ppm	7.5% (100 ppm)	RT	
294

Ti3C2/Ag	Ti3C2	Humidity	40 wt% HF	35–95% RH	106.800%	RT	
295

Ti3C2Tx/V2O5/CuWO4	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	HF etching	5 ppm	6.4	RT	
296

Polyaniline/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	HF etching	2–10 ppm	1.7% (10 ppm)	20	
297

Ti3C2Tx-FOTS	Ti3C2Tx	C2H5OH	LiF/HCl etching	5–120 ppm	14% (120 ppm)	RT	
298

MXene/rGO/CuO	Ti3C2Tx	CH3COCH3	40 wt% HF	10–500 ppm	52% (100 ppm)	RT	
299

Ti3C2Tx/CuO	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	LiF/HCl route	1–100 ppm	24.8 (100 ppm)	RT	
300

Polyaniline/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	C2H5OH	50 wt% HF	50–200 ppm	27.4% (150 ppm)	RT	
301

CuO NPs/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	C6H5CH3	HF(40% v/v)	10–50 ppm	11.4 (50 ppm)	250	
302

Ti3C2Tx/PEDOT:PSS	Ti3C2Tx	CH3OH	LiF/HCl etching	180–500 ppm	5.54 (300 ppm)	RT	
303

Ti3C2Tx derived lamellar TiO2-C/g-C3N4	Ti3C2Tx	C2H5OH	LiF/HCl etching	10 ppm	91%	RT	
304

Ti3C2Tx/PANI/bacterial cellulose	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	—	2.5–12.5 ppm	56.63% (7.5 ppm)	RT	
305

Ti3C2Tx/TiO2	Ti3C2Tx	CH3COCH3	LiF/HCl route	2–10 ppm	180% (2 ppm)	RT	
306

Ni(OH)2NPs/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	40 wt% HF	1–80 ppm	6.2% (10 ppm)	RT	
307

Organ-like Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	45 wt% HF	10–500 ppm	28.87% (100 ppm)	RT	
308

Ti3C2Tx/graphene	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	LiF/HCl route	10–50 ppm	6.77% (50 ppm)	RT	
309

Ti3C2Tx/WO3 NP	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	HF solution	1–5 ppm	22.3% (1 ppm)	RT	
310

Fe2(MoO4)3/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	n-C4H9OH	—	100 ppm	43.1	120	
311

Ti3C2Tx/chitosan	Ti3C2Tx	Humidity	LiF/HCl etchant	14–73% RH	∼0.16 (73% RH)	RT	
312

TiO2/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	H2	40 wt% HF	100–500 ppm	70 (500 ppm)	150	
313

Ti3C2Tx-PVA/PEI	Ti3C2Tx	CH3COCH3	LiF/HCl	50 ppb-30 ppm	0.10–0.17 ppm−1	RT	
314

Ti3C2TxPd CNC	Ti3C2Tx	H2	LiF/HCl etchant	0.5–40% H2	(23.0 ± 4.0)%4% H2	RT	
315

Ti3C2Tx-TiO2	Ti3C2Tx	Hexanal	40 wt% HF	10–40 ppm	∼3.4% (10 ppm)	25	
316

S-Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	C6H5CH3	LiF/HCl etching	1–50 ppm	79.5% (50 ppm)	RT	
317

rGO/N-MXene/TiO2	Ti3C2Tx	HCHO	LiF/HCl route	4–20 ppm	26–132	20	
318

SnO-SnO2/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	CH3COCH3	40 wt% HF	10–100 ppm	12.1 (100 ppm)	RT	
319

TiO2/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	(LiF/HCl and HF)	1–100 ppm	∼0.4% (0.1 ppm)	25	
320

PVA/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	Humidity	LiF/HCl etchant	11–97% RH	40 (90% RH)	RT	
321

Ti3C2-K/Mg	Ti3C2	Humidity	10 wt% HF	0–85% RH	∼3% (∼0–85% RH)	27	
322

Polyacrylamide/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	50 wt% HF	50–200 ppm	4.7% (200 ppm)	RT	
323

MXene/polyelectrolyte	Ti3C2Tx	Humidity	HCl + LiF etchant	20–70% RH	1.6% (70% RH)	RT	
324

W18O49/Ti3C2Tx	Ti3C2Tx	CH3COCH3	HF etching	0.17–500 ppm	11.6 (20 ppm)	300	
325

Ti3C2Tx/Ag nanowires	Ti3C2Tx	Humidity	LiF/HCl etchant	57% RH	∼3%	20	
326

PEDOT:PSS/MXene	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	LiF/HCl route	10–1000 ppm	36.6% (100 ppm)	27	
327

Ti3C2Tx/ZNO Spheres	Ti3C2Tx	NO2	LiF/HCl etchant	5–100 ppm	41.93%	RT	
328

Ti3C2Tx/SnO2 NPs	Ti3C2Tx	NH3	LiF/HCl route	0.5–100 ppm	40% (50 ppm)	25	
329


 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the Ti3C2Tx films showing structural and surface characterizations. (b) Maximal resistance change and (c) resistance variation upon exposure to 100 ppm of acetone, ethanol, ammonia, propanal, NO2, SO2, and 10000 ppm of CO2 at room temperature. (d) Maximal SNR values of acetone, ethanol, ammonia, and propanal upon exposure to 100 ppm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of V2CTx synthesis and delamination along with the structure and the resultant surface-functionalized V2CTx MXene. (f) Hydrogen and (g) methane, denoting lowest LoD of the V2CTx-based sensor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 4  Schematic illustration of different gas sensing applications using MXenes.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Synthesis and characterization of ultrathin Nb2C nanosheets. (b) Schematic illustration of 2D biodegradable Nb2C in NIR-I and NIR-II biowindows for in vivo photothermal tumor ablation. Energy intensities of (c) NIR-I laser (808 nm) and (d) NIR-II laser (1064 nm) penetrating through tissues of various thicknesses. (e) Temperature elevations of dispersed Nb2C nanosheet aqueous suspensions upon exposures to tissue-penetrating NIR-I and NIR-II laser via photothermal conversion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 344. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the nanoplatform preparation based on Ti3C2 and the synergistic chemotherapy/photothermal/photodynamic of tumor. (g) Fluorescence images of Ti3C2–DOX treated HCT-116 cells along with intracellular ROS generation detection under 808 nm laser irradiation by using DCFH-DA as the probe. (h) Ti3AlC2 and Ti3C2 XRD patterns after intercalation and further delamination. (i) Normalized UV-vis absorbance of Ti3C2 nanosheets with/without Al3+ addition during etching. (j) UV-vis spectra of Ti3C2 nanosheets dispersed in water at various concentrations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 345. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (k) Schematic diagram of the MnOx/Ta4C3-SP composite synthetic procedure and photothermal tumor therapy by MnOx/Ta4C3-SP composite nanosheets through MR/CT/PA imaging-guiding. (l) UV-vis spectra at elevated concentrations (5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 ppm) of MnOx/Ta4C3 composite nanosheets dispersed in an aqueous solution. (m) The photothermal-heating curves at elevated concentrations of MnOx/Ta4C3 nanosheets under 808 nm laser irradiation. (n) 3D illustration of photothermal agent MnOx/Ta4C3-SP composite nanosheets after exposure to 808 nm laser irradiation for 4T1 cell ablation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 346. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
