Electrochemically reduced graphene porous material as light absorber for light-driven thermoelectric generator   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM33530A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM33530A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17800-17804Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsElectrochemically reduced graphene porous material as light absorber for light-driven thermoelectric generator†

        
          
            Yunqiang 
            Chen‡
, 
      
        
          
            Kaiwu 
            Chen‡
, 
      
        
          
            Hua 
            Bai
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Lei 
            Li
          
        
      *
      College of Materials, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361005, P. R. China. E-mail: baihua@xmu.edu.cn; lilei@xmu.edu.cn
Received 
      1st June 2012
    , Accepted 6th July 2012First published on 9th July 2012AbstractChemically converted graphene–room temperature ionic liquid (CCG–RTIL) porous materials were prepared by electrochemical reducing graphene oxide followed by solvent exchange. The resulted CCG–RTIL materials possess 3D porous structure with textured surface, and show good stability in air. Under laser irradiation the temperature of CCG–RTIL materials increased rapidly and significantly, indicating the high photothermal conversion ability of these materials. The influence of CCG–RTIL thickness on the photothermal conversion performance was investigated. These CCG–RTIL materials were used as light absorbers to modify thermoelectric devices, forming light-driven thermoelectric generators, and significantly enhanced the performance of these devices. This work suggests that CCG–RTIL porous materials prepared by this electrochemical method are promising light absorbers for solar electric generation and other photo-thermo-electric conversion devices.
Introduction
Enormous effects have been made to develop new technologies which can provide safe and clean energy, to satisfy the increasing energy consumption while reduce the usage of depleting and environmentally harmful fossil fuels. Thermoelectric (TE) devices are a kind of solid state heat engine which can directly convert heat into electricity without any intermediate chemical or mechanical procedures, and thus are considered as reliable power generators with wide-ranging prospects.1,2 The heat used to drive TE devices comes from different sources, including industrial waste heat, terrestrial heat and solar heat. Using a light to heat TE device is an alternative way to utilize solar energy.3 Since TE devices have excellent stability and long life, these light-driven thermoelectric generators (LTEGs) are considered to be attractive for some special applications, such as the power supply for spaceships in near-sun orbit. Also an LTEG can be integrated with a solar cell, forming a hybrid device.4 Recently, it has been reported that the power conversion efficiency of an LTEG reached as high as 4.6%, close to that of a solar cell,5 suggesting the possibility of using LTEGs for highly distributed power generation.
The total power conversion efficiency of an LTEG can be expressed as the product of photothermal efficiency and thermoelectric efficiency, which represent the efficiency of converting light energy into heat and heat to electric energy, respectively.5 Thus, both efficiencies will strongly influence the total power conversion efficiency, although the TE module, which decides the thermoelectric efficiency, is the heart of an LTEG. In order to enhance the photothermal efficiency, the hot end of the TE module, which accepts the light energy, should be modified with a light absorber. Many dark colored materials can be used as light absorbers, such as metal sulfides and metal oxides.6 Graphitic carbon, including glassy carbon and graphite, have been reported to be good light absorbers,7 and more recently carbon nanotube (CNT) based gels and composites were also utilized to modify TE modules.8,9 These graphitic carbon materials exhibit strong light absorbing ability and high thermal conductivity, and thus serve well as light absorbers in LTEGs and other applications. However, the photothermal conversion efficiencies of CNT based materials are not very high and some special and expensive components were included to improve the conversion efficiency.9 Graphene, the construction unit of all graphitic carbons and a member of the nanostructured carbon family, is expected to be a good light absorber. Graphene has low production costs (especially for chemically converted graphene, CCG), and strong light absorbing ability as well as high thermal conductivity. It has been exploited in many thermal and thermoelectric applications, including highly thermo-conductive composites,10in vivo photothermal therapy11,12 thermoelectric materials13 and transparent heaters.14 Here, we report the application of an electrochemically reduced chemically converted graphene–room temperature ionic liquid (CCG–RTIL) porous material as a light absorber for LTEGs. The electrochemical method allows us to directly grow a CCG network on copper foil, leading to close contact between CCG and the substrate, and this method also provides good control over the thickness of the produced CCG layer. It will be demonstrated that CCG–RTIL materials have stronger photothermal conversion ability compared with the previously reported CNT based materials, and after incorporation of the CCG–RTIL porous light absorber, the performance of TE devices can be improved significantly.
Experimental
Preparation of Graphene Oxide (GO) and CCG colloids
GO was prepared by oxidation of natural graphite powder (325 mesh) according to a modified Hummers' method.15,16 Briefly, graphite (3.0 g) was added to concentrated sulfuric acid (70 mL) under stirring at room temperature, then sodium nitrate (1.5 g) was added, and the mixture was cooled to 0 °C. Under vigorous agitation, potassium permanganate (9.0 g) was added slowly to keep the temperature of the suspension lower than 20 °C. Successively, the reaction system was transferred to a 35–40 °C water bath for about 0.5 h, forming a thick paste. Then, 140 mL of water was added, and the solution was stirred for another 15 min. An additional 500 mL of water was added followed by a slow addition of 20 mL of H2O2 (30%), turning the color of the solution from brown to yellow. The mixture was filtered and washed with 1:10 HCl aqueous solution (250 mL) to remove metal ions followed by repeated washing with water and centrifugation to remove the acid. The resulting solid was dispersed in water by stirring overnight to make a GO aqueous dispersion. The obtained brown dispersion was purified by dialysis for 2 weeks to remove the remaining acid and salt impurities. Finally, it was subjected to centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 30 min to remove aggregates.
Fabrication of CCG–RTIL porous materials
Firstly, CCG–water porous materials were prepared on the working electrode by the electrochemical reduction of concentrated GO aqueous suspension. The process was carried out on a CHI 660D electrochemical workstation (CH Instruments, Shanghai, China) in a three-electrode system. A 1 cm × 1 cm copper foil, saturated calomel electrode (SCE) and a Pt foil were used as the working, reference and counter electrodes, respectively. The electrochemical reduction of GO was carried out at a certain potential (−1.1 V, vs. SCE) in 7.4 mg mL−1 GO solution containing 0.15 M LiClO4 as electrolyte for a certain period. The obtained CCG–water porous materials on copper foil were washed repeatedly with deionized water to remove the remaining GO and then immersed in an RTIL, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([Emim]BF4) (Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou, China) overnight to exchange their interior water with RTIL. The CCG compact film supported on copper foil was prepared by drying the CCG–water porous material at 50 °C in air for 12 h.
Temperature measurements and LTEG tests
To measure the temperature change of CCG materials under laser irradiation, a Pt100 thermal resistor (A grade, Heraeu, Germany) was fixed on the back side of the copper foil which carries the CCG materials, with thermally conductive double-faced adhesive tape (8810, 3M). The Pt resistor was connected to a digital thermometer, by which the temperature data were monitored. The CCG–RTIL porous material was irradiated by 650 nm (spot diameter ∼ 2 mm) lasers at various power levels (180, 370, 540 and 720 mW) for 2 min, while the temperature change was recorded.
The LTEG was assembled as follows: copper foil with CCG materials was adhered to the hot side of a commercial TE module (1 × 1 cm) with thermally conductive double-faced adhesive tape, and an aluminium substrate (10 × 15 cm) was attached to the cold end of the module also with the thermally conductive tape. A digital multimeter was used to measure the output voltage. The performance of LTEG was tested under laser and simulated sun light, which was produced by a solar cell simulator with a xenon lamp (94022A, Newport, USA) and an AM1.5 filter. All the tests were carried out at room temperature (ca. 20 °C).
Characterizations
Scanning electron micrographs (SEMs) were recorded on a LEO 1530 scanning electron microscope operated at 20 kV. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra were acquired with a PHI Quantum 2000 spectrometer using monochromated X-rays from an Al Kα source with a takeoff angle of 45° from the surface plane. The current–voltage curves of the LTEG were measured with a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter controlled by a computer.
Results and discussion
Usually a light absorber is produced as a thin film supported by metal foil or directly deposited on the TE module. Surface texture has been reported to benefit the light absorbing efficiency of a light absorber layer.17 However, although a CCG coating is easy to produce by casting a CCG dispersion, the resulting film is rather smooth because of the stacking of CCG sheets. It remains difficult to control the surface morphology of a CCG film. Chemically reducing a concentrated GO solution can yield CCG porous materials,18–20 but this method is not suitable to prepare porous thin films. Recently, electrochemical reduction of GO was found to be able to produce a CCG porous layer on the surface of an electrode.21 Electrochemical methods are environmentally friendly and highly adjustable, thus we used this method to prepare a CCG-based light absorber. The details of the electrochemical deposition process are described in the Experimental section. In brief, the CCG porous material is deposited onto copper foil (Fig. 1a left) by electrochemical reduction of GO (7.4 mg mL−1) in 0.15 M LiClO4 at a potential of −1.1 V vs. SCE.21 The GO sheets near the working electrode are reduced at negative potential and lose their hydrophilicity, and therefore precipitate onto the electrode. Due to their large lateral size, the reduced graphene sheets prop up each other and form a 3D porous structure.18,22 The partial overlapping or coalescing of graphene sheets resulted in the formation of physical crosslinking sites of the network. The SEM image of the lyophilized electrochemically deposited CCG is shown in Fig. 1b, in which a 3D network constituted of 2D sheets can be observed. In the X-ray photoelectron spectrum (XPS, Fig. S1†) of the CCG, the C–O component in the C1s peak is reduced, confirming the reduction of GO. Noticing that the 3D network is constituted solely of thermoconductive CCG sheets which are in close contact with each other, and that this CCG layer is directly grown from the substrate copper foil, heat generated anywhere in the CCG layer could be easily conducted to the substrate through the highly thermoconductive network. However, the wet CCG–water porous material is unstable in the air because water will evaporate gradually especially at high temperature, leading to collapse of the porous structure (whose morphology can be found in Fig. S2†). To maintain the porous structure of electrochemically reduced CCG materials, water was replaced with room temperature ion liquid (RTIL), 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EmimBF4), by soaking the CCG–water porous material in EmimBF4 overnight. No marked change in the shape of CCG porous materials was observed during this soaking process, and the SEM image (Fig. 1c) confirms that the 3D network of CCG was not damaged by solvent exchange. These results suggest that the CCG porous material is robust in RTIL, mainly because of the stiffness of the CCG sheets and strong π–π interactions between these sheets.18 The CCG–RTIL porous material can be stored in the air for three months without obvious change, indicating that after solvent exchange the stability of CCG porous material is improved significantly.
 Fig. 1  Optical and SEM images of electrochemically deposited CCG materials. (a) Optical images of CCG porous material (left) and compact CCG film (right) on copper foil. The CCG porous material was prepared by electrochemically reducing GO at −1.1 V vs. SCE for 50 s (CCG50), and the compact CCG film was prepared by air drying CCG50. (b) SEM image of lyophilized as-prepared CCG50 porous material. (c) SEM image of lyophilized CCG50 porous material after water–RTIL–water solvent exchange. Scale bars: 1 cm for (a) and 5 μm for (b) and (c). 
The photothermal conversion performances of CCG–RTIL porous materials were first investigated by monitoring the temperature change of these materials under the laser irradiation. Several samples with different electrochemical deposition times were tested. As shown in Fig. 2a, under irradiation from a 650 nm laser at a power of 190 mW cm−2, the temperatures of each CCG–RTIL porous material increased rapidly. Within 120 s the temperatures of all the samples reached a plateau. This temperature increase rate is much higher than those of previously reported CNT based gels and composite materials, for which after 3 minutes the temperatures still did not reach equilibrium values.8,9 In fact, as discussed above, the 3D porous material forms due to the partial overlapping of 2D CCG sheets. These overlapping sites provide good thermal contact between these sheets, and allow a quick establishment of thermal equilibration. However, although the thermal conductivity of an individual CNT is high, the heat conduction between these tubes is limited by the small contact area. In this regard, 3D CCG porous materials are better heat conductors than CNT based composites.
 Fig. 2  Photothermal conversion behaviours of CCG–RTIL porous materials under laser irradiation. (a) Temperature change curves of different CCG–TRIL porous materials and bare copper foil under laser irradiation at 190 mW cm−2. (b) Temperature increases of different CCG–TRIL porous materials under laser irradiation at different powers. (c) Comparison of temperature increases of CCG50–RTIL porous material and CCG50 film under laser irradiation at 720 mW cm−2. 
Among the five different CCG–RTIL samples, the one with a deposition time of 50 s (CCG50–RTIL) shows the largest temperature change (ΔT), which is 22.0 °C. The large temperature increase indicates that CCG–RTIL porous materials can efficiently convert light energy into heat. This conversion is because graphene can transfer the energy of photo-excited electrons into lattice vibratios. Reducing the deposition time to 10 s (CCG10–RTIL) only slightly lowers the ΔT, to a value of 21.0 °C. Since the deposition time is related to the thickness of the produced materials, these results reveal that the high performance of CCG–RTIL porous light absorbers is tolerant of the thickness in a wide range. According to the report by Geim et al., the opacity of a single layer of graphene is 2.3 ± 0.1% over a wide wavelength range.23 Therefore, a film composed of 100 layers of graphene (35 nm for a tightly packed CCG film, assuming the interlayer space is 0.35 nm (ref. 24)) can absorb 90% of the light impinged on it. If we further consider the reflection at the surface of a copper substrate, the light absorbance will be 99% for a 35 nm CCG film. Therefore, a very thin CCG film is effective for light absorbing. However, when the deposition time is further decreased to 2 s (CCG2–RTIL), the ΔT value dwindles to 15.6 °C. This is because in such a short reducing time the deposited CCG porous material layer is too thin to completely absorb the incident light, and the non-uniformity of the CCG layer caused by the copper electrode also becomes notable for the very thin layer. In fact the color of the copper electrode can be easily distinguished from the dark CCG materials, indicating incomplete absorbing of incident light. If the deposition time is further increased to 200 and 500 s (CCG200–RTIL and CCG500–RTIL), the ΔT's of produced CCG–RTIL porous materials also drop to lower values of 13.8 and 12.4 °C, respectively. These decreases in ΔT can be ascribed to strong heat dissipation, resulting from increased thickness and surface area.

Fig. 2b represents the ΔT's of CCG–RTIL porous materials at different laser power levels. The ΔT increased with the laser power for each materials in a near linear manner, suggesting that the light energy can be efficiently absorbed and converted into heat by the CCG light absorber. Under irradiation from a 720 mW cm−2 laser the temperature of CCG50 increases by 80.6 °C. As a comparison, a CNT–polymer composite exhibited a temperature increase of only ∼45 °C under irradiation from a 1500 mW cm−2 laser.9 We also investigated the influence of surface morphology on the light absorbing performance. Copper foil covered by a flat CCG film was prepared by drying the as-prepared CCG–water porous material in air. During the drying process, CCG sheets are brought together by capillarity of water between them, and form a compact CCG film (Fig. S2†). Fig. 2c compares the ΔT values of CCG50–RTIL and CCG50 films under laser irradiation. The ΔT value of the CCG50 film is about 10 °C lower than that of CCG50–RTIL. This is because the CCG film is quite smooth and rather shiny, showing a metallic luster,25,26 which can be observed in Fig. 1a (right), thus a considerable portion of light is reflected from this mirror-like surface. The surface of CCG–RTIL is textured, so the reflection of light is reduced. Therefore, the temperature increase of the CCG–RTIL porous material is larger than that of the CCG film.
CCG–RTIL porous materials were used as a light absorber layer for LTEGs. The testing apparatus is illustrated in Fig. 3a. CCG light absorber covered copper was fixed onto the hot end of a commercially available TE conversion module with thermal conductive tape, forming a LTEG, and the cold end of the TE module was attached onto a large aluminium plate, which served as a heat sink. A digital multimeter was used to measure the output voltage. Since the internal resistance of the TE module is only 2.0 Ω, far smaller than that of the digital multimeter (∼106 Ω), the measured output voltage equals the electromotive force (emf) of the LTEG. The emf values of LTEGs under laser irradiation are depicted in Fig. 3b, and they increase with laser power, in a similar manner as ΔT, as shown in Fig. 2b. CCG50 modified TEG shows a emf of 28 mV at 720 mW cm−2 laser irradiation, and for comparison, the emf of bare TEG without any light absorber layer is only 12 mV, because the white ceramics surface of the TE module leads to inefficient collection of light energy. Therefore, the CCG–RTIL porous materials can significantly improve the performance of LTEGs, by enhancing the light absorbance and increasing the temperature difference. The peak output power (Pm) of the CCG50–RTIL modified LTEG is calculated to be 98 μW, five times higher than that of the bare TEG (18 μW). We also tested the performance of the CCG50–RTIL modified LTEG under simulated sun light. Current–voltage curves of the devices were measured under illumination using a solar cell simulator with a xenon lamp passing through a filter to simulate sun light at 75 mW cm−2. As shown in Fig. 3c, the LTEG devices show linear I–V profiles, indicating the LTEGs are constant voltage sources under the experimental conditions. The open circuit voltage (Voc, equal to the emf) of the CCG50–RTIL modified TEG is 6.8 mV, higher than that of bare TEG (5.0 mV). Although the absolute values of emf and Pm are limited by the efficiency of the commercial TE module, the high light-induced temperature increase of CCG–RTIL porous materials and the obvious improvement of TEG performance after CCG modification can reveal that these electrochemically reduced CCG porous materials are suitable candidates for light absorbers in LTEG systems.
 Fig. 3  Performance of LTEG. (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the apparatus for the testing of LTEGs. (b) Emf values of TEGs with and without CCG50–RTIL as light absorber at different laser power levels. (c) Current–voltage curves of the two LTEGs in (b) under simulated sun light (75 mW cm−2). 
It is worth noting that the potential of CCG based light absorber layers has not been fully exploited. Graphitic carbons usually have a relatively high emission factor, thus it is speculated that a certain portion of heat in the CCG–RTIL layer is lost due to infrared radiation.27 This can be solved by covering the CCG layer with a selectively transmitting coating, such as highly doped semiconductors which are transparent to visible light but highly reflective to infrared radiation, and thus can reduce the energy loss and further increase the temperature.27 Besides, for a LTEG device, air convection is another pathway leading to heat loss, especially at high temperature. Therefore, to eliminate the convection, the device can be enclosed inside a vacuum.5 The improvement of CCG-based light absorbers and corresponding LTEG devices will be subjects of our future investigations.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we prepared CCG–RTIL porous materials by electrochemically reducing GO followed by solvent exchange. The formation of the porous materials is believed to result from the assembly of CCG sheets during the reduction process. The microstructure of CCG porous materials is resistant in RTIL and after solvent exchange the resulting CCG–RTIL porous materials show good stability in air. Under laser irradiation the temperature of CCG–RTIL composite materials increased rapidly and significantly. The high photothermal conversion performance of these materials is attributed to the large absorbance and textured surface. The CCG–RTIL porous materials were used as light absorbers to modify LTEGs, and significantly enhance the performances of these devices under both laser and simulated sun light irradiation. The results in this work demonstrate that CCG–RTIL porous materials prepared by electrochemical reduction may be useful in solar electric generation and other photo-thermo-electric conversion devices.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21104041).
Notes and references
F. J. DiSalvo, Science, 1999, 285, 703–706 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Bell, Science, 2008, 321, 1457–1461 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xi, L. Luo and G. Fraisse, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 923–936 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, L. Han, H. He, N.-H. Park and K. Koumoto, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3676–3679 RSC .
D. Kraemer, B. Poudel, H. P. Feng, J. C. Caylor, B. Yu, X. Yan, Y. Ma, X. W. Wang, D. Z. Wang, A. Muto, K. McEnaney, M. Chiesa, Z. F. Ren and G. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 532–538 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wäckelgård, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 56, 35–44 Search PubMed .
G. L. Harding and S. Craig, Sol. Energy Mater., 1981, 4, 413–420 Search PubMed .
E. Miyako, H. Nagata, R. Funahashi, K. Hirano and T. Hirotsu, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 740–742 CrossRef CAS .
E. Miyako, C. Hosokawa, M. Kojima, M. Yudasaka, R. Funahashi, I. Oishi, Y. Hagihara, M. Shichiri, M. Takashima, K. Nishio and Y. Yoshida, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 12266–12270 Search PubMed .
J. R. Potts, D. R. Dreyer, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Polymer, 2011, 52, 5–25 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, S. A. Zhang, G. X. Zhang, X. M. Sun, S. T. Lee and Z. A. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3318–3323 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Z. Y. Guo, D. Q. Huang, Z. M. Liu, X. Guo and H. Q. Zhong, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 8555–8561 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Balandin, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 569–581 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, H. Kim, K. S. Kim, S.-K. Lee, S. Bae, J.-H. Ahn, Y.-J. Kim, J.-B. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5154–5158 Search PubMed .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Xu, L. Zhao, H. Bai, W. J. Hong, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13490–13497 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Cuomo, J. F. Ziegler and J. M. Woodall, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1975, 26, 557–559 Search PubMed .
Y. X. Xu, K. X. Sheng, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, S. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4603–4607 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Sheng, Y. X. Xu, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, New Carbon Mater., 2011, 26, 9–15 Search PubMed .
K. X. Sheng, Y. Q. Sun, C. Li, W. J. Yuan and G. Q. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 247,  DOI:10.1038/srep00247 .
H. Bai, X. L. Wang, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Phys.
Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5545–5551 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Xu, H. Bai, G. W. Lu, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5857 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Müller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, M. B. Müller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557–3561 CrossRef CAS .
P. Beucherie, Electr. Power Syst. Res., 1980, 3, 125–137 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XPS and additional SEM images. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm33530a‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Optical and SEM images of electrochemically deposited CCG materials. (a) Optical images of CCG porous material (left) and compact CCG film (right) on copper foil. The CCG porous material was prepared by electrochemically reducing GO at −1.1 V vs. SCE for 50 s (CCG50), and the compact CCG film was prepared by air drying CCG50. (b) SEM image of lyophilized as-prepared CCG50 porous material. (c) SEM image of lyophilized CCG50 porous material after water–RTIL–water solvent exchange. Scale bars: 1 cm for (a) and 5 μm for (b) and (c).	 

 	Fig. 2  Photothermal conversion behaviours of CCG–RTIL porous materials under laser irradiation. (a) Temperature change curves of different CCG–TRIL porous materials and bare copper foil under laser irradiation at 190 mW cm−2. (b) Temperature increases of different CCG–TRIL porous materials under laser irradiation at different powers. (c) Comparison of temperature increases of CCG50–RTIL porous material and CCG50 film under laser irradiation at 720 mW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 3  Performance of LTEG. (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the apparatus for the testing of LTEGs. (b) Emf values of TEGs with and without CCG50–RTIL as light absorber at different laser power levels. (c) Current–voltage curves of the two LTEGs in (b) under simulated sun light (75 mW cm−2).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XPS and additional SEM images. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm33530a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
