ESR spectroscopy as a powerful tool for probing the quality of conjugated polymers designed for photovoltaic applications   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CC06197G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CC06197G
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2239-2241ESR spectroscopy as a powerful tool for probing the quality of conjugated polymers designed for photovoltaic applications†

        
          
            Diana K. 
            Susarova
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Natalia P. 
            Piven
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Alexander V. 
            Akkuratov
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lyubov A. 
            Frolova
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Marina S. 
            Polinskaya
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Sergey A. 
            Ponomarenko
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Sergey D. 
            Babenko
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Pavel A. 
            Troshin
          
        
      *a
aIPCP RAS, Semenov Prospect 1, Chernogolovka, 141432, Russia. E-mail: troshin2003@inbox.ru;  Fax: +7 496515 5420;   Tel: +7 496522 1418
bInstitute of Energy Problems for Chemical Physics (Branch) RAS, Semenov Prospect 1, Chernogolovka, 142432, Russia
cISPM RAS, 70 ul. Profsoyuznaya, Moscow 117393, Russia
dChemistry Department, Moscow State University, Leninskie Gory 1-3, Moscow 119991, Russia
Received 
      7th August 2014
    , Accepted 23rd October 2014First published on 23rd October 2014AbstractHere we report the application of the Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) spectroscopy as a highly sensitive analytical technique for assessment of the electronic quality of organic semiconductor materials, particularly conjugated polymers. It has been shown that different batches of the same conjugated polymer might contain substantially different amounts of radical species which were attributed to structural defects and/or impurities behaving as traps for mobile charge carriers. Good correlations between the concentrations of radicals in various batches of conjugated polymers and their performances in organic solar cells have been revealed.
Conjugated polymers represent a family of high-performance materials for organic solar cells, light emitting diodes, field-effect transistors, photodetectors, sensors and other types of electronic devices.1 Poor reproducibility of physical and electronic properties of polymer-based semiconductors is one of the most significant drawbacks for their industrial implementation. Different samples of the same polymer might differ by the molecular weight characteristics, concentrations of defects and chemical impurities, charge carrier mobilities etc. As a result, different batches of conjugated polymers might perform quite differently in organic electronic devices, in particular, solar cells.2
Conjugated polymers are usually designed using palladium catalyzed cross-coupling reactions, e.g. Suzuki or Stille polycondensation routes.3 The impurities resulting from the catalyst decomposition, e.g. palladium nanoparticles, strongly affect the electrical performance of the resulting material.4 Purification of conjugated polymers requires application of specific reagents and might be still challenging.5
Besides the residual palladium, polymers might be polluted with small amounts of starting reagents (e.g. boronic acids) or have some chemically active functions such as –B(OH)2 or halogen atoms as end groups on the polymer backbone. At the same time, conjugated polymers typically undergo rapid oxidation in air breaking their conjugated backbones and producing active oxygen-containing species (hydroxyl, ketone or carboxyl functions). Alternatively, polymers can be doped easily with electron deficient molecules (e.g. halogens, oxygen).6 All these processes result in degradation of the semiconductor properties of conjugated polymers.
The problem becomes even more severe due to insufficient sensitivity of the most common analytical methods (e.g. NMR, HPLC, FTIR, chemical analysis and etc.) which can hardly be applied for characterization of conjugated polymers. Therefore, there is a strong demand for novel techniques which could reveal trace impurities and structural defects affecting the electrical properties of conjugated polymers. We reported previously the application of impedance measurements for this purpose.7 However, this approach is rather complicated and time consuming and can hardly be applied to many polymer samples.
Here we report the application of ESR spectroscopy as a simple tool for assessment of the electronic quality of different batches of conjugated polymers. ESR spectroscopy was applied previously for investigation of the photoinduced charge separation in fullerene–polymer blends,8 charge recombination kinetics,9 degradation of conjugated polymers in air,10 and revealing the traps for mobile charge carries in inorganic nanocrystals.11 In the present work we used ESR spectroscopy to characterize more than fifty batches of eleven different conjugated polymers whose molecular structures are shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Molecular structures of investigated polymers. 
The information regarding the preparation and characteristics of the investigated polymer samples is provided in the ESI.† Conjugated polymers P1–P12 (Fig. 1) do not incorporate any spin-active units in their molecular frameworks. Therefore, no signals should be expected in their ESR spectra. In contrast, the experimental ESR spectra of almost all polymer samples measured in the dark at room temperature revealed the presence of the radical species. The concentrations of such species could differ significantly for different batches of the same polymer. This effect is clearly illustrated in Fig. 2 by exemplary sets of the ESR spectra obtained for various samples of polymers P1 (P3HT) and P2 (F8TBT). It should be noted that these spectra are normalized to the weight of the material; therefore, the intensity of the observed signals reflects the concentrations of the radical species in the analyzed polymer samples.
 Fig. 2  The ESR spectra of different batches of P1 (P3HT) (a) and P2 (F8TBT) (b) normalized to the weight of the material. 
We strongly believe that appearance of the signals in the dark ESR spectra of conjugated polymers is related to the presence of some structural defects or chemical impurities possessing unpaired electrons. These radical species are expected to behave as deep traps for mobile charge carriers thus affecting the electrical performance of conjugated polymers in devices. In order to prove this hypothesis, we have investigated the performance of all samples of conjugated polymers in bulk heterojunction solar cells using [60]PCBM or [70]PCBM as electron acceptor counterparts (both acceptors did not show ESR signals). It has been shown that different batches of the same polymer reveal different photovoltaic performances which correlate well with the respective concentrations of the radical species. It is seen from Fig. 3 that the efficiency of the solar cells based on PCDTBT–[60]PCBM composites decreases with an increase in the concentration of the radical species CR in the polymer defined as the number of spins per gram (spin g−1).
 Fig. 3  
J–V curves for organic bulk heterojunction solar cells based on different batches of PCDTBT (with different CR) blended with [60]PCBM. 
Very similar results were also obtained for other investigated conjugated polymers. Fig. 4 shows that photovoltaic performances of P1 (P3HT), P2 (F8TBT) and P3 (PCDTBT) decrease with increase in the concentration of the radical species. The experimental points can be approximated reasonably well by linear dependences. It is very likely that the sensitivity of the polymers towards the presence of radical species is influenced considerably by peculiarities of their molecular structures and their optoelectronic properties. Therefore, the same concentration of radicals deteriorates the photovoltaic performance of different conjugated polymers to a different extent. This effect might explain the different slopes of the linear fits obtained for PCDTBT and F8TBT as compared to P3HT.
 Fig. 4  The influence of the radical species on the photovoltaic performance of conjugated polymers P1–P3. 
It is known that various conjugated polymers might show distinctly different optoelectronic properties and, therefore, yield very different performances in organic solar cells (even if their properties are not affected by impurities or defects). For instance, the solar cells based on P3HT–[60]PCBM blends give reproducible power conversion efficiencies of ca. 4.0%. At the same time, PCDTBT–[60]PCBM and PCDTBT–[70]PCBM systems yield η of ∼5.0% and ∼6.5%, respectively. The PTB7–[70]PCBM blends reveal efficiencies of 7–8%. For purpose of comparison of different systems we introduce here “normalized efficiency” of solar cells defined as ηexp/ηmax, where ηexp is the experimentally obtained efficiency of organic solar cells based on a certain batch of the material, while ηmax is the estimated ultimate performance of this material. The latter value is taken from the literature as the highest reproducible efficiency of a certain material obtained in the same device architecture or calculated using a theoretical approach presented by Scharber et al.12 if experimental data are not available. The ηexp and ηmax values for all polymer samples used in this study are given in Table S1 (see ESI†) together with the determined concentrations of the radical species CR.

Fig. 5 illustrates the influence of radical impurities and defects on the photovoltaic performance of different conjugated polymers. It should be emphasized that this graph summarizes the data obtained for 58 batches of 11 structurally different conjugated polymers. It is seen from this graph that a few polymer samples characterized by log(CR) lying in the range between 17.5 and 19.5 typically demonstrate very low photovoltaic performance (with an exception for P3HT) presumably due to massive trapping of charge carriers. The photovoltaic performance of the samples characterized by log(CR) lying between 16.5 and 17.5 depends strongly on the structure and properties of conjugated polymers. Some polymers which are less sensitive with respect to the radical species (e.g. P3HT) might demonstrate reasonably good photovoltaic performance. In contrast, the photovoltaic performance of more sensitive materials (e.g. PCDTBT) deteriorates dramatically when log(CR) approaches the level of ca. 16.2. Finally, all batches of conjugated polymers characterized by log(CR) < 16 demonstrate appreciably good photovoltaic performance. Therefore, the concentrations of the radical species in the samples of conjugated polymers have to be kept below ∼2 × 1016 spins per gram in order to achieve the best solar cell efficiencies.
 Fig. 5  Influence of the radical impurities and defects on the photovoltaic performance of the conjugated polymer. 
It is known that the efficiency of organic solar cells might be affected by multiple parameters such as fullerene–polymer ratio, active layer morphology, active layer thickness, quality of contacts and interfaces, presence of ESR-silent impurities, molecular weights and polydispersity of polymers and etc. However, if the above listed parameters are optimized, the concentration of the radical species can be considered as a crucially important factor governing the photovoltaic performance of conjugated polymers.
In conclusion, we have shown that ESR spectroscopy can be used as a very informative and simple technique for assessment of the quality of different conjugated polymers applied as electron donor materials for organic solar cells. This method might be considered as a potentially very useful tool for probing the quality of different types of semiconductor materials used in organic electronics.
This work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation (grant no. 14-13-01031). We gratefully aknowledge participation of Dr V. A. Kostyanovskiy in the synthesis of some polymers and thank Prof. A. V. Kulikov for helpful discussions.
Notes and references
in Organic Electronics II: More Materials and Applications., ed. H. Klauk, Wiley VCH,  2012 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; D. S. Correa, E. S. Medeiros, J. E. Oliveira, L. G. Paterno and L. H. C. Mattoso, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 14, 6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; L. Ye, S. Zhang, L. Huo, M. Zhang and J. Hou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1595 CrossRef PubMed ; X. Guo, M. Baumgarten and K. Müllen, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1832 CrossRef PubMed ; J. Chen and Y. Cao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1709 CrossRef PubMed .
H. K. H. Lee, Z. Li, I. Constantinou, F. So, S. W. Tsang and S. K. So, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201400768 .

Design and Synthesis of Conjugated Polymers, ed. M. Leclerc and J. F. Morin, Wiley VCH,  2010 Search PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, R. B. Nyberg and M. Jørgensen, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1313 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard and F. C. Krebs, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 658 CrossRef CAS ; K. T. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard and F. C. Krebs, Synthesis, 2006, 1639 CrossRef PubMed .

Handbook of Conducting Polymers, Conjugated Polymers: Theory, Synthesis, Properties, and Characterization, ed. T. A. Skotheim and J. Reynolds, CRS Press, 3rd edn,  2006 CrossRef PubMed ; M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580 CrossRef PubMed .
P. A. Troshin, D. K. Susarova, Y. L. Moskvin, I. E. Kuznetsov, S. A. Ponomarenko, E. N. Myshkovskaya, K. A. Zakharcheva, A. A. Balakai, S. D. Babenko and V. F. Razumov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4351 CrossRef CAS .
L. Franco, A. Toffoletti, M. Ruzzi, L. Montanari, C. Carati, L. Bonoldi and R. Po, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1554 Search PubMed ; N. Camaioni, F. Tinti, L. Franco, M. Fabris, A. Toffoletti, M. Ruzzi, L. Montanari, L. Bonoldi, A. Pellegrino, A. Calabrese and R. Po, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tanaka, N. Hasegawa, T. Sakamoto, K. Marumoto and S. I. Kuroda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2007, 46, 5187 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sperlich, H. Kraus, C. Deibel, H. Blok, J. Schmidt and V. Dyakonov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 13513 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; A. Konkin, H.-K. Roth, P. Scharff, A. Aganov, O. Ambacher and S. Sensfuss, Solid State Commun., 2009, 149, 893 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Keeble, E. A. Thomsen, A. Stavrinadis, I. D. W. Samuel, J. M. Smith and A. A. R. Watt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17306 CAS .
M. C. Scharber, D. Muhlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Numerical data on the concentrations of radical species in the analyzed samples of conjugated polymers and their photovoltaic performances. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cc06197gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structures of investigated polymers.	 

 	Fig. 2  The ESR spectra of different batches of P1 (P3HT) (a) and P2 (F8TBT) (b) normalized to the weight of the material.	 

 	Fig. 3  
J–V curves for organic bulk heterojunction solar cells based on different batches of PCDTBT (with different CR) blended with [60]PCBM.	 

 	Fig. 4  The influence of the radical species on the photovoltaic performance of conjugated polymers P1–P3.	 

 	Fig. 5  Influence of the radical impurities and defects on the photovoltaic performance of the conjugated polymer.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Numerical data on the concentrations of radical species in the analyzed samples of conjugated polymers and their photovoltaic performances. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cc06197g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
