Engineering of transition metal dichalcogenide-based 2D nanomaterials through doping for environmental applications  - Molecular Systems Design & Engineering (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8ME00116B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8ME00116B
(Review Article)
Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2019, 4, 804-827Engineering of transition metal dichalcogenide-based 2D nanomaterials through doping for environmental applications

        
          
            Bhuvaneshwari 
            Balasubramaniam
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Narendra 
            Singh
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Prasenjit 
            Kar
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ankit 
            Tyagi
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jai 
            Prakash
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Raju Kumar 
            Gupta
          
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India. E-mail: guptark@iitk.ac.in;  Fax: +91 5122590104;   Tel: +91 5122596972
bDepartment of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh, India
cCenter for Environmental Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India
Received 
      30th December 2018
    , Accepted 16th May 2019First published on 16th May 2019AbstractTwo-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have received significant research attention due to their rich contribution in many emerging fields. Furthermore, TMDs have shown great potential for the possibility of engineering their properties through doping to provide structural and functional tunability. Recently, environmental related applications have gained attention in utilizing the full potential of doped TMDs. The present article reviews the potential environmental applications of engineered 2D TMDs through doping. The article mainly reviews several possible doping strategies for engineering 2D TMD nanomaterials towards enhancing their performance.Bhuvaneshwari BalasubramaniamDr. Bhuvaneshwari Balasubramaniam is a Woman Scientist at the Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India. She completed her Ph.D. in Chemistry (2013) in India. Her research interests include polymer synthesis, corrosion analysis, nanocomposites for energy applications, cryogenic treatment of metals, repair and retrofitting of structures, computational modelling and environmental applications. She is the recipient of a Quick Hire Scientist Fellowship and Ad hoc Scientist Position at the CSIR Structural Engineering Research Centre (SERC), Chennai, India. She received a certificate of merit for research conducted at CSIR-SERC, Chennai. Dr. Bhuvaneshwari has authored more than 10 research articles in SCI journals and 2 book chapters.Narendra SinghDr. Narendra Singh pursued his Ph.D. degree in Chemical Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. He completed postdoctoral research at AIST Nagoya, Japan. Moreover, he received a B.Tech. in Biochemical Engineering (2010) from Harcourt Butler Technological Institute, Kanpur, India, and M.Tech. in Chemical Engineering (2012) from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India. He has authored 11 research articles in reputable international journals, and 2 book chapters. His research interests are the fabrication of nanostructures (metal nanoparticles, metal oxide nanofibers, quantum dots, etc.) and the surface treatment of polymer/metal surfaces for applications such as photocatalysis, sensors, energy devices, oil/water separation, omniphobic surfaces, etc.Prasenjit KarDr. Prasenjit Kar received his PhD degree from the S. N. national Centre For Basic Sciences (Calcutta University). He is currently working as an Institute Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of Chemical Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. His research interests focus on the design of novel functional nanomaterials, the understanding of charge carrier dynamics and their application towards wastewater treatment.Ankit TyagiAnkit Tyagi received his Bachelor degree in 2010 from the Institute of Engineering and Technology Lucknow and Master's degree in 2012 from the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, both in Chemical Engineering. He is currently pursuing his doctoral degree at the Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. His current research interests focus on the development of metal oxide nanostructures for high energy density supercapacitor applications.Jai PrakashDr. Jai Prakash is working as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology (NIT) Hamirpur, India. He worked as an ‘INSPIRE Faculty’ member at IIT Kanpur, India. He completed his PhD in Chemistry (India) and did postdoctoral research at AMU, Marseille (France), ULB (Belgium), UFS (South Africa) and INRS-EMT (Canada). He has received several scientific national/international awards including DAAD (Germany), Merit Scholarship Award (Canada), Promising Young Researcher Award (South Africa), Guest scientist (NIMS Japan), etc. He has published more than 50 research articles. His major research fields are functional nanomaterials for energy and environmental applications.Raju Kumar GuptaDr. Raju Kumar Gupta is currently an Associate Professor at the Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. He received his Ph.D. degree in 2010 from the National University of Singapore. His current research interests are photocatalysis, perovskite solar cells, supercapacitors, and nanostructured materials for energy and environmental applications. He has been a recipient of several fellowships and awards for his outstanding career in the academic and research fields. Dr. Gupta is an editorial board member of several international journals, as well as a member of scientific bodies. Some of his significant appointments include Associate Editor for ‘Solar Energy’, Editorial board member for ‘IET Nanodielectrics’ and Advisory board member for ‘Molecular Systems Design & Engineering’.

Design, System, Application
The present article reviews the potential environmental applications of engineered 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). The emergent 2D TMDs and their enhanced performance through doping have been focused upon primarily in this review as doping alters the structural and electronic properties in the TMD systems. The photocatalytic efficiencies of doped TMDs ensure their high active state densities and tunable bandgaps. Also, the tunable photoluminescence properties of TMDs make them unique candidates for the detection of nitro explosives and toxic metals. The possibility of metal and non-metal doping in 2D TMDs has shown enhanced properties towards HER as well as OER applications.

Introduction
Due to the successful entry of graphene into many niche applications,1–4 other types of two dimensional (2D) materials, mainly transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), are finding similar applications in many fields, e.g. electronic, energy, sensing, and environmental, because of their tunable band gaps and natural abundancy.5–11 2D nanomaterials possess unique structural features, fascinating physiochemical properties, and show promise for applications in various fields.12 The special features of 2D nanomaterials are that they usually contain only one or a few atomic layers in their structure. However, unlike graphene, many 2D TMDs have huge potential to be realized for ultra-small and efficient low power transistors as well as with flexible substrates under different types of mechanical loadings.9,13,14 Their main applications are in general electronics, optics, sensing and energy devices (Fig. 1).7,15–18 In recent years, TMD nanomaterials (Fig. 1) have extended to the other emerging fields19,20 such as energy,21–26 solar cells,27–32 and the environment.33–39 In particular, 2D TMDs have been well considered as novel 2D nanomaterials for addressing environmental related issues as a result of their potential applications in environmental sensors, reduction of toxic gases, removal of air/water pollutants, and water splitting, etc.
 Fig. 1  Electronic, opto-electronic and energy devices based on 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs).9 Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright© 2017 Elsevier Inc. 
Surprisingly, the growth of the 2D materials library every year exhibits more than 150 exotic layered materials and these are divided into subnanometer-thick materials.7 The well-known 2D TMDs are molybdenum diselenide (MoSe2), molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), tungsten disulfide (WS2), and tungsten diselenide (WSe2). The other categories include silicene (2D silicon), borophene (2D boron), hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), germanene (2D germanium), and MXenes (2D carbides/nitrides).7,40–43
2D TMDs are clearly different from traditional bulk materials and exhibit a breadth of new properties. However, the bottleneck mainly lies in their large-scale synthesis and producing thickness controlled defect-free 2D TMDs on the desired substrate.9 Many synthetic methods via bottom-up and top-down approaches have been attempted for the bulk synthesis of TMDs. Among those, mechanical exfoliation44,45 and chemical vapour deposition (CVD) techniques46–53 find their way for the synthesis of high quality, ultrathin, uniform and controlled morphology of 2D TMDs. Currently, metal–organic CVD (MOCVD)54–56 and atomic layer deposition (ALD)57–59 are the well-known techniques for the growth of wafer-scale and high quality TMD films. The uniqueness of these two emerging techniques is that the TMD films grown using these techniques are entirely uniform over the substrate, which shows the equal performance to the atomic layers of TMDs synthesized by the standard exfoliation method.60 Heteroatom doping is another possible approach that can be used in order to modify the properties of TMD nanosheets.61 Generally, the dopant atoms are introduced into the crystal lattice of TMDs through either substitution of the lattice atoms or by squeezing into the interstitial sites of the lattice.62 It is extremely difficult to achieve the controlled synthesis of heteroatom-doped TMDs.62 The quantification of the dopant distribution is another critical factor that limits the understanding of the doping behavior of heteroatoms in TMDs. In the past, doping of metal atoms into MoS2 and WS2 films was mainly carried out via sputtering and pulsed laser evaporation methods. Recently, new methods have been formulated which have improved the metal doping (e.g. Re, Au, Co, Mn, Nb, Er, Cr, V and Pt) into the TMD lattice. Furthermore, ultrathin heteroatom-doped TMD nanosheets were prepared firstly via a mechanical exfoliation method. Also, large scale synthesis of heteroatom-doped TMD nanosheets was also proposed using wet-chemical methods.62 Recent research by Zhou W. et al.63 explained the outstanding performance of N self-doped MoS2 as a catalyst in the hydrogen evolution reaction, prepared by separate nitridation and sulfuration processes. However, none of these methods were successful in incorporating heteroatoms into MoS2 nanosheets in a controlled manner and there is an urgent need for further attention and detailed investigations.62–64 It was noted in MoTe2 and TaS2 that upon high concentration charge injection, transition phenomena occur with the changes in both the electrical and crystal structure properties.65,66 The performance of TMDs is mainly dependent on the properties of exposed edges and it has been realized that their basal plane is mostly catalytically inactive.67 Therefore, it is important to focus on increasing the number of active sites of 2D TMDs via the creation of defects or doping with foreign materials.
As stated in the literature,61,62,64,68 doping of TMDs potentially improves the electronic properties, thereby enhancing their catalytic activities. For example, Suh et al.64 reported on the unusual effects of Nb dopants in modifying the electronic, optical and structural characteristics of MoS2 crystals. It was inferred from their studies that doping in MoS2 induces structural transformations in MoS2, thereby resulting in 2H stacking to 3R stacking due to the renormalization of the valence band structure. Hence, it can be understood that doping engineering in TMDs is a promising approach as it dramatically tunes the chemical and physical properties of 2D materials. In addition, doping engineering also plays a predominant role in the functionalization of 2D TMDs through the creation of defects or the introduction of other impurities. Functional improvements of the charge carrier mobilities in field-effect transistors (FET) by the addition of TMDs have been extensively reported by Ahmed and Yi.69 The charge transport behavior and the importance of preparing high purity 2D TMDs are highlighted in the following sections of this paper.
The present review focuses on the engineering of 2D TMD materials through various doping strategies and their potential environmental related applications, particularly in the field of CO2 reduction, photocatalysis, the sensing of toxic metals/gases, and water splitting. Moreover, doping mechanisms are discussed in detail with greater emphasis on their improved functional properties due to doping engineering.
Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs): basic structures and properties
TMDs are a large class of novel layered materials with the formula MX2, where M is a transition metal element, and X is a chalcogen atom.70,71 The basic 2D TMD compounds are mainly composed of cationic elements from the transition metal group (Nb, Mo, W, Ta etc.) and groups IIIA (In, Ga) and IVA (Sn, Pb). Further, the anionic elements of chalcogenides (O, S, Se, Te), are basically represented by the chemical formula MXn with n = 2, for the most part, e.g. for MoS2, WS2, etc., and n = 1, e.g. InSe, SnS, SnSe, etc.72–74 The typical structures of layered TMDs and their respective bandgaps are shown in Fig. 2a and b respectively. Generally, TMDs are made up of a single layer thickness of 0.6–0.7 nm. Based on their chemical compositions, unique structural or electron rich molecular configurations (mainly the d-orbitals of both the metal elements as well as the chalcogenides, i.e. Se, Te),74 2D TMDs are categorized as metallic (NbS2),75 semi-metallic, semiconducting (MoS2, WS2),76 insulating (HfS2),76 or superconducting materials. In particular, TMDs with a hexagonal prismatic structure with group VIB transition-metals are semiconducting in nature.77,78 Semiconductor TMDs possess sizable bandgaps with high carrier mobility and also a high on/off current ratio in transistor switching. These are very stable in air. TMDs exhibit unique and versatile chemical, electrical, optical and mechanical properties.79–83
 Fig. 2  (a) Typical structures of layered transition metal dichalcogenides. Cleavable 2H, 1T and 1T0 structures in layered TMDs are shown. (b) Bandgap of 2D layered materials varying from the zero band gap of graphene (white color) to the wide bandgap of hBN. The color in the column represents the corresponding wavelength of the bandgap, for example, the bandgap for MoS2 (1.8 eV) is red in color and WS2 (2.0 eV) is orange in color. Indirect materials are represented on the left (SnS2, ZrS2, HfS3, ZrS3, ZrSe3, HfS2, HfSe3, HfSe2, ZrSe2 and ZrTe2) and direct bandgap materials are represented on the right hand side of the column (h-BN, WS2, MoS2, WSe2, MoSe2, 2H–MoTe2, TiS3 and TiSe3).9 Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright© 2017 Elsevier Inc. 
Since 2D materials are an ever-expanding area of research, in addition to 2D materials such as graphene and TMDs, other new 2D materials such as phosphorene and silicene are rapidly stepping into the 2D materials family. The functional characteristics of these new 2D materials are only theoretically proven, but no doubt their entry into experimental research is welcome and they will be strong contenders in the fast growing realm of 2D materials.
TMDs contain unique electronic structures and high specific surface areas because of their sheet-like structures.84–87 It is reported that the charge carrier confinement in the basal plane directions of 2D TMDs, for example MoS2, has influenced the physicochemical properties of exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets, making them quite different compare to those of bulk MoS2. Bulk MoS2, which is a semiconductor, has an indirect bandgap of 1.29 eV, and a decrease in overall thickness was observed for monolayer 2H–MoS2 with a shift to a direct bandgap of 1.9 eV, thereby resulting in strong photoluminescence occurring in the monolayer of 2H–MoS2. Hence, the benefit of the direct bandgap properties of TMDs shows promise for fundamental and device-based applications in the research areas of electronics and photonics. The fabrication of mono- or few layer-MoS2 mainly finds greater application in FET sensors for detecting environmental contaminants.16,33,88–92
In TMDs, it has been reported that intralayer M–X bonds are created between the transition metal atom and chalcogen atoms by covalent bonds. Also, the individual layers of MX2 are bound together through noncovalent and relatively weaker interlayer van der Waals (vdW) forces. This would aid easy cleavage along the surface of the individual planes/layers.93 Also, metal coordination observed in the TMD semiconductor layer are trigonal prismatic or octahedral that are mainly as a result of the building elements used, such as the type of metal and chalcogen elements. It is widely known that the change in their electronic band structure, i.e. indirect band gap (bulk materials) to direct band gap (single layer) changes, is one of the most fascinating features of TMD semiconductors. The unique physical and chemical properties of TMDs have been reported in detail by a number of research groups.94–96 These properties are discussed in detail in the next sections. The recently emerged novel structured TMD nanosheets were presented by Zhang et al. and can be seen in Fig. 3.62
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the recently emerged novel-structured TMD nanosheets.62 Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright© 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
There are several studies which demonstrate that through doping, various properties of 2D TMD materials can be potentially altered for technological applications. In the next section, we discuss the various doping strategies in 2D TMDs along with the detailed mechanisms and related properties.
Doping strategies in 2D TMDs
The doping of TMDs is a process which involves local manipulation of their conductivity and charge density, therefore it is taken as one of the challenging key technologies in terms of electronic device development.7,15,97 It is fascinating that one can dramatically tune the chemical and physical properties of a material through doping, which is a promising approach for the functionalization of materials.7 According to doping strategies, dopants can donate electrons to the host TMDs that are called n-type dopants or donors under ambient conditions. Otherwise, dopant materials that leave holes on their host TMDs by accepting electrons from them to form a covalent bond are called p-type dopants or acceptors.98–104 Doping engineering in 2D TMDs is always application specific and the selection of appropriate strategies can help in making the right choices in terms of doping sources and processing methods.9,19 As far as doping in TMDs is concerned, charge transfer and substitutional doping play a vital role compared to the other types of doping strategies. In charge transfer doping, it is noticed that electron exchange occurs between MoS2 and the dopant material adsorbed on the MoS2 surface. In substitutional doping, the Mo or S atoms in the MoS2 honeycomb network are substituted by other atoms with different valence electrons.97,105,106 In the former case, the MoS2 structure will not be damaged and has the potential for reversible doping by adsorbing different dopant materials onto the MoS2 surface. At the same time, in the latter case, the sp2 honeycomb structure of the dopant will be disturbed due to the substitution of different atoms into the MoS2 structure. Literature shows that the doping of transition metals can change the electronic properties, resulting in the enhanced catalytic activity of MoS2.9,97 However, only a few studies have been reported on the effect of non-metal light element doping in MoS2, which are yet to be explored.107–111 Computational studies like ab initio approaches have evidenced the effect of doping over the electronic properties of MoS2 along with significant modifications in their magnetic and electronic properties.102,112–115
The principles of the doping strategy can be mainly categorized as (i) charge transfer, (ii) substitutional, (iii) intercalation and (iv) electrostatic doping. An in-depth discussion on the ongoing research efforts on the doping engineering of 2D TMDs towards functional engineering and the challenges involved have been reported by Peng Luo et al.97 Here, we summarize the doping strategies of TMDs. A schematic of the doping strategies for 2D MXs and their potential applications are shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Doping strategies for 2D MXs and their potential applications.97 Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright© 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Substitutional doping
In general, both cationic and anionic elements are substitutionally replaced in TMDs by foreign atoms that have comparable radii.102 N-type and p-type doping are achieved based on the number of valence electrons present in the dopant atom. Here, the metal atoms in the crystal lattice of MX2 are usually sandwiched between the outer chalcogenide layers, which mainly helps in screening the incorporated metal atoms into the substitutional sites. In the case of non-metal dopants in MX2, preference to occupy the anionic sites always occurs at the outer layers due to the length limitation of ionic bonds. Whereas in metal dopants, the total dependency of the thermodynamically favourable position is on the radii of the foreign dopant atoms. For light metals such as Li and Na with smaller radii, the interlayer spaces (e.g. 0.615 nm for MoS2) are large enough for intercalation doping. However, for heavy dopants, i.e. the transition metals,102 the thermodynamically preferred doping is substitutional doping due to the presence of larger radii. Many theoretical studies, like density functional theory (DFT),116,117 on substitutional doping provide detailed information on the resulting electronic density of states (DOS), band structures, and magnetic moments. These data are further utilized as a reference for predicting the thermal stability of the doping as well as for the final electronic or magnetic properties of the material.99,102,112–114,118,119
Substitutional doping on the cation sites is usually achieved through in situ experiments, because during post-treatment processes, the chalcogenide encapsulated blocking layers hinder the incorporation of foreign metal elements. From the detailed studies conducted on metal-sulphides and doping at the metal sites, it is inferred that favourable doping can be achieved through in situ experiments or post treatment as it creates vacancy defects or native Schottky defects.102 For example, in the doping of metal-sulfides with halogens (F, Cl, Br) as well as group V elements (N, P, As), sulphur vacancies determine the thermodynamically favourable position that are always preferential at anion sites.97 Compared with substitutional doping that occurs at cation sites, maximum doping efficiency is achieved by anion substitutional doping.
Suh et al.64 have discussed the reconfiguring of electronic and crystal structures of MoS2 using the substitutional doping method. They reported the unusual effects of degenerate doping carried out with Nb on the structural, optical and electronic characteristics of MoS2 crystals. Synthesis of Nb-free and Nb-doped MoS2 single crystals, NbxMo1−xS2 (x = 0–0.01), was carried out via chemical vapor transport methods. Optical reflectance spectra were measured for the MoS2 and MoS2:Nb bulk crystals at 4.5 K, which revealed the rearrangement of the stacking order through the substitutional Nb doping. The exciton transitions at the K point of the Brillouin zone were also discussed in detail. Further, discussions were on the structural transformation of MoS2 due to doping, which resulted in naturally occurring 2H stacking to 3R stacking with valence band structure renormalization. An important point was inferred from the studies in that a strong interaction of the Nb impurity states modifies the electronic band structure of MoS2.64
Charge transfer doping
The sources of charge transfer doping are through gaseous molecules, metals and their compounds. In charge transfer doping, contact is established through either physical or chemical interactions between the host and dopant materials.97 The dopant activity (donor or acceptor) with respect to the charge transfer direction is determined by the difference created at the Fermi level between the dopant and the host materials. In this case, charge transfer interaction usually occurs in between the host material and any adjacent media, molecules, also surface atoms, particles ions, and supporting substrates.120–126 For surface charge transfer doping, the changes in the charge transfer direction mainly depend on the relative energy alignment of the DOS of the dopants with the Fermi level of the TMDs.127 Notably, the enhancement in the electronic behaviour of semiconductors through charge transfer doping has attracted much attention, as lattice distortion is avoided due to doping, which further ensures high mobility transport in low dimensional materials. The exact molecular orientations and the different substrate phases are responsible factors which determine the amount of charge transfer per molecule.128 For example, for the organic/2D-TMD systems of interest, DFT calculations provide an excellent way to analyze charge transfer effects with the input of charge density obtained. It was further reported that besides charge transfer, charge rearrangement can also take place significantly at the organic/2D-TMD interface. It is also possible to estimate the amount of charge transferred per molecule, which would be useful to compare the doping efficiencies of different molecular donors and acceptors.127
Peng et al.129 have thoroughly studied the charge density distributions, electronic structures induced due to stacking configurations, band edge alignments, and optical properties of BlueP/TMD vdW heterostructures using DFT. It was discussed that the thermodynamic stability of the BlueP/TMD vdW heterostructures was protected by negative formation energies and good lattice match. Indirect gap characteristics were exhibited by the BlueP/TMD vdW heterostructures. Localization of the valence-band maximum (VBM) and conduction-band maximum (CBM) were in different places in the BlueP/MoSe2, BlueP/WS2 and BlueP/WSe2 heterostructures. MoSe2, WSe2 or WS2 layers were used as the electron donors. Then the BlueP layer was used as the electron acceptor in the corresponding heterostructures. It was found that the unusually stronger optical absorbance and energy conversion efficiency were exhibited for the BlueP/TMD vdW heterostructures in the visible range. The highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs) of the BlueP/TMDs vdW heterostructures, which correspond to the band-decomposed charge density, are shown in Fig. 5. The study revealed that the VBM and CBM were localized in different monolayers of the BlueP/MoSe2, BlueP/WS2 and BlueP/WSe2 heterostructures, which proved the different spatial distribution of the lowest energy electron–hole pairs. It was concluded that the MoSe2, WS2 or WSe2 layers have the potential to be used as electron donors and the BlueP layer as the electron acceptor in the corresponding heterostructures.
 Fig. 5  Band-decomposed charge density of the HOMOs and LUMOs of the (a) BlueP/MoS2 and (b) BlueP/MoSe2, (c) BlueP/WS2 and (d) BlueP/WSe2 heterostructures with an isosurface value of 0.02e au−3. The red, violet, green, cyan and blue balls represent Mo, W, S, Se and P atoms, respectively.129 Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. 
Also, significant improvement in the optical properties of the BlueP/TMD vdW heterostructures under visible-light irradiation was observed. The predicted upper limit energy conversion efficiencies estimated for the BlueP/MoS2 and BlueP/MoSe2 heterostructures were found to be 1.16 and 0.98%, respectively, which reveals their superior performances in the applications of thin-film solar cells and optoelectronic devices.129
In the gas phase doping method, foreign molecules are adsorbed on the surfaces of 2D TMDs, which tunes the optical and electronic behaviour of the materials.122,130 The adsorption nature of the gas phase doping was usually by weak vdW interactions. The created vacancies help to promote molecular adsorption.97,130 On the other hand, in metals and metal oxides involved in charge transfer doping with 2D TMDs, usually the decoration of ion complexes and oxides at the surfaces occurs via evaporation and solution cast methods.97,131–134 The third category of charge transfer doping, i.e. introducing organic small and super-molecules on the surface or interfaces of the 2D TMDs, routinely happens by vdW coupling, chemical bonding or through dipole interactions, which help to achieve products with greater functionality.97,135–138 More research is required to focus on exploring ideal dopants, which would offer efficient charge transfer doping with outstanding functional performances.
Intercalation doping
The two main sources of intercalation doping of 2D TMDs are H or alkali metal intercalation and zerovalent intercalation occurs with heavy metal elements. Unlike substitutional doping, the presence of a vdW interlayer facilitates 2D materials coupling for foreign ion intercalation,139,140 atoms,141–143 and also molecules into the large interlayer space.144 The exfoliation of 2D TMDs is carried out in solution using the intercalation method, which is beneficial for producing novel batteries and electrochemical cells. A recent study has shown that intercalation modulates the electronic structure and crystal lattice of host materials, resulting in physical or chemical phenomena that manifest in a series of peculiar ways, which include semiconductor–metal transition145 and charge density waves and superconductivity.66,146 It is easy to intercalate H and alkali metal ions into layer structured materials due to their small radii. It also basically induces electronic structure changes and lattice distortion because of their reductive nature by donating electrons to the lattice.143,147 In the case of zerovalent intercalation of heavy metal elements that are very less reactive, intercalation occurs with transition metals such as Co, Cu, etc.142,148 This also prevents lattice disruption, as intercalation happens with no charge interaction occurring between the intercalant and host lattice.143 It is concluded that exploring different kinds of organic molecules with various functional groups as intercalants would facilitate the generation of new intercalation systems with engineered enhanced functions.97
Electrostatic doping
Floating gate modulation and ferroelectric gate-based sources are involved in the electrostatic doping engineering of 2D TMDs. During electrostatic doping, 2D TMDs are susceptible to external field effects due to their ultrathin nature, which facilitates the tailoring of carrier doping concentration and also the polarity in semiconductor materials.149 Electrostatic doping strategies mainly rely on coupling of the capacitance between the 2D channels and external gate that exhibit predominant advantages in non-destructive, steady, reversible and industrial availability.150 Reports show that many gate modulation configurations have been mainly explored using high-k dielectrics (HfO2, ZrO2, etc.),151 ionic liquids or gels,65,152–154 and ferroelectrics.155
Luo et al.97 summarized the strategies that are mainly used for the functionalization of 2D TMDs and the related available doping sources, as shown in Table 1. They concluded from their in-depth review that with its own limitations, 2D MX doping engineering has resulted in the enabling of materials with new properties and functions. They concluded from their in-depth review that with its own limitations, the 2D MX doping engineering has resulted in enabling of materials with new properties and functions, which would further help in achieving enormous functional devices. Hence, it is possible to enhance the performance of 2D TMDs and elevate their respective functions according to the application needs with dedicated efforts.
Table 1 A summary of the doping strategies, their common doping sources available and potential functions.97 Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright© 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry




Doping strategy
Doping sources
Functions




Substitution
Cation: Re, Nb, Zn, W, Mo, Fe, Cr, Mn, Fe, V, Ni
PN diode, phase transition, ferromagnetism, photodetector, transistor


Anion: Se, S, Te, O, P, N, H, Cl


Charge transfer
Gaseous: O2, H2O, NO2
PN diode, chemical & biosensor, transistor, photodetector, logic devices


Metals based: Ti4+, B3+, Al3+, Sn4+, Au3+ (Au), K+ (K), Ag, Pd, Pt, Sc, Y, Zn, Ca2N, MoO3, WO3 (WOx), ATO, Cs2CO3


Organic: OTS, APTMS, FOTS, BV, Pc, F4TCNQ, R6G, Co6Se8(PEt3)6, PPh3


Intercalation
Ions: H+, Li+, Na+, K+, NH4+
Exfoliation, HER, capacitor, phase transition, transistor, PN diodes


Atoms: Cu, Co, Ag, Au, Fe, In, Ni, Pd, Sn, P


Electrostatic
Floating gate by Gr, BP, MoS2, Au, Ag, Co, Al, HfO2, TiO2, ferroelectric gate: the remnant polarization electric field in PZT, P(VDF-TrFE)
Memories, PN diodes, photodetectors, transistors, logic devices




So far, we have discussed the structure, properties and doping strategies for altering the various basic properties of TMD 2D nanomaterials. These are reflected through doping engineering, by which the structural and electrical properties of 2D TMD nanomaterials can be enhanced, which is very promising for further technological applications as well as fundamental studies. As mentioned above, these 2D TMDs are potentially applicable in several fields of current interest. In the next section, we will discuss the applications of doped 2D TMD nanomaterials in addressing the environment related major issues.
Environmental applications of doped 2D TMD nanomaterials
In this section, we particularly focus on the enhanced properties of 2D TMD nanomaterials and their applications, as shown in Fig. 6, in various environment related issues.
 Fig. 6  Various environmental applications of doped TMDs. 
CO2 reduction
The presence of carbon dioxide (CO2) in a high quantity in the atmosphere is one of the environmental problems that needs to be reduced for the betterment of society. It has been recorded that global average CO2 concentration has reached 400 ppm from 280 due to climate change.156 Currently, artificial photosynthesis is a fascinating research area in the conversion of CO2 into value-added chemicals and fuels, which has gained great attention in areas such as solar-driven water splitting and environmental remediation.157–159 CO2 is a thermodynamically stable molecule.160 As is widely known, the stability of the CO2 molecule is mainly due to its strong CO double bond that has a bond energy of 750 kJ mol−1. This energy is usually larger than that of C–O, C–C, or C–H bonds. Hence, significant energy input is required for breaking the CO bond for CO2 reduction, which mainly occurs through electrocatalytic or photocatalytic approaches.156 Several complicated steps and different reaction pathways are involved in the CO2 reduction process with the transfer of 2, 4, 6, 8, 12 or more electrons and the production of its reduction products carbon monoxide (CO), formic acid (HCOOH), methane (CH4), ethylene (C2H4), etc. Further, the nature of the electrocatalysts or photocatalysts and the experimental conditions decide several other possible products.161 The five main sequential steps in photocatalytic CO2 reduction are (i) light absorption, (ii) charge separation, (iii) CO2 adsorption, (iv) surface redox reaction, and (v) product desorption. A brief description of each step is discussed below.156
• The first step is the generation of electron and hole pairs through absorption of photons.
• The second step involves the spatial separation of photogenerated electrons and holes – occurrence of direct competition with charge recombination.
• The third step is CO2 adsorption, which is essential and determines the electron transfer from the photocatalyst to the CO2 molecule.
• The fourth step is the surface redox reaction – it is purely electrochemical in nature, which determines the conversion efficiency – photogenerated electrons and holes proceed via different half reactions.
• The final step is the product desorption – the important thing to be noted here is termination of the reaction if the product is not timely released from the catalyst surface and thus the catalyst becomes “poisoned”.
Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 is a promising strategy that involves multiple proton-coupled electron transfer for the generation of various products. However, this process involves complex product separation. Hence, photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with high efficiency and selectivity remains a difficult task to achieve.162–166
Recently, 2D TMDs have attracted tremendous attention due to their unusual interaction with CO2 and its reduction intermediates, which exhibit promising CO2 catalytic activity.36,37,167 As discussed in previous sections, TMDs have a variety of characteristics such as being inexpensive and having more active state densities and tuneable bandgaps that make them ideal, cost effective and alternative candidates as precious catalysts for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2.168 Kim and co-workers applied first-principles-based screening to predict 2D metallic TMDs in CO2 conversion and found that they could completely break the strong correlation between the adsorption energies of *COOH and *CO, which throws out potential opportunities for new catalyst design for CO conversion from CO2.39
Experimental demonstration by Salehi-Khojin et al.37 proved the selective electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO, which shows a maximum current density of 65 mA cm−2 at −0.764 V vs. a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) in the presence of MoS2 with Mo-terminated edges, in an ionic liquid solution. Thickness reduction of 2D TMDs to an atomic scale makes them remarkable and robust catalysts for CO2 reduction. A similar study by Asadi et al.36 showed that at the same overpotential, WSe2 nanoflakes reached a current density of 330 mA cm−2, which is very unique. To optimize the catalytic performances of 2D TMDs, Xu et al.169 applied an alloying strategy, which induced the rate-limiting CO desorption step due to the partially delocalized charge in the monolayer MoSeS alloy. This also facilitates the stabilization of the *COOH intermediate. They reported that MoSeS alloy monolayers exhibited a current density of 43 mA cm−2 at −1.15 V vs. RHE, which is approximately 2.7 and 1.3 times larger than that of MoS2 monolayers and MoSe2 monolayers, respectively.169
Zhou et al.170 demonstrated the CO2 reduction efficiency of ternary metal chalcogenides as photocatalysts and claimed that with the exploration of solar energy in addition to this, it is possible to transform the CO2 into value-added chemicals, so that it can become an efficient and low-cost catalytic system. It was reported that (Mo–Bi)Sx, a ternary metal chalcogenide, supported on mesoporous CdS, ((Mo–Bi)Sx/meso CdS), was highly active and facilitated the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to HCOOH in a mixed solvent of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([Bmim]BF4)–acetonitrile (MeCN) under visible light illumination (Fig. 7). It was found during the experiment that the only carbonaceous product and by product found were HCOOH and H2, respectively. The reported rate of HCOOH formation was 208 μmol g−1 h−1 with 72% faradaic efficiency. It was also stated that the synergistic effect of the components showed outstanding performance in the role of catalyst. The study summarized the extended performance of an inexpensive Mo–Bi–Cd system for the conversion of CO2 into HCOOH in the presence of visible light. Further, the efficiency of the reaction was found to completely depend on the chalcogenide composition, CO2 pressure, solvents used, and light intensity.
 Fig. 7  Possible mechanism for visible-light-driven selective production of HCOOH from CO2 reduction over (Mo–Bi)Sx/meso CdS in the presence of [Bmim]BF4.170 Reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Sensing of toxic gases/metal ions
The presence of toxic gases and heavy metal ions in the environment has serious ill effects on human health when they are present even in very low concentrations.171–173 2D TMD nanomaterials have received great attention as fluorescent probes due to their strong fluorescence, stability, and low toxicity.174–176 For this purpose, MoS2 has been found to be an efficient material in the detection of several environmental analytes. The presence of nitro explosives in the environment is considered as a toxic pollutant that can significantly affect human health and surroundings.177 Recently, MoS2 showed significant potential for detection of these nitro explosives because of its tunable photoluminescence (PL) properties. Saha et al.178 observed that MoS2 quantum dots (QDs) synthesized via a bottom-up approach using ammonium molybdate tetrahydrate as the molybdenum source and sodium sulfide as the sulfur source, respectively, using 1,4-diaminobutane as a capping agent, exhibited excellent sensitivity for the detection of 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP) (Fig. 8). The MoS2 QD particle size observed was 5 nm with a lattice spacing of 2.7 Å, confirmed as the (101) plane of a crystalline MoS2 phase. They observed that the 1,4-diaminobutane functionalized quantum dots showed bright blue color photoluminescence (emission maxima 423 nm) upon excitation at 340 nm, as shown in Fig. 8a. Decreased fluorescence intensity of the MoS2 QDs after adding different amounts of TNP was observed and the results showed remarkable selectivity for TNP detection (Fig. 8b and c). The developed sensor showed a superior detection limit for TNP up to 2.04 ppm in aqueous medium with 90% selectivity, which was very high compared to other aromatic nitro compounds. The high selectivity of the MoS2 QDs towards TNP was due to the favorable FRET (Förster resonance energy transfer) and ET (electron transfer) mechanisms. The ET mechanism arises because of strong electrostatic interactions between functional groups of the MoS2 QDs and TNP, whereas significant overlap between the photoluminescence emission spectrum of MoS2 QDs and the absorbance spectrum of that particular quencher (TNP) is responsible for FRET mechanism, as shown in Fig. 8d. TNP detection by MoS2 QDs was also reported by Ni et al.,177 with a wide range from 0.099 to 36.5 μM and a high detection limit of 95 nM. Recently, amine functionalized MoSe2 QDs have also been used for the sensitive detection of TNP, with a detection limit of 4.6 nM.179
 Fig. 8  (a) Photoluminescence emission spectrum of functionalized MoS2 QDs at 340 nm excitation. (b) Fluorescence quenching of functionalized MoS2 QDs after gradual addition of different amounts of 1 mM TNP solution at buffer 7. (c) Quenching efficiency of MoS2 QDs towards different nitro aromatic compounds after the addition of 200 μL of 1 mM TNP solution at buffer 7. (d) Spectral overlap between the emission spectrum of functionalized MoS2 QDs and the absorption spectra of different nitro compounds.178 Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright© 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Selective sensing of Hg2+ ions has been reported by Feng et al.180 using boron- and nitrogen-doped MoS2 (B, N–MoS2) nanosheets (Fig. 9). The as-synthesized B, N–MoS2 nanosheets show an absorption peak at 250 nm, while they exhibit a strong fluorescence at 343 nm when excited at 280 nm, as shown in Fig. 9a. Improved fluorescence due to doping makes the nanosheets highly sensitive and selective towards Hg2+ (Fig. 9b). A good correlation was observed by nanosheets within the concentration range of 0.01 to 3.0 μM (R = 0.9904) along with a detection limit of 1 nM for Hg2+, as represented in Fig. 9c and d. The photoinduced electron transfer (PET) from the CB of the (B, N–MoS2) nanosheets to the complex Hg2+ is responsible for fluorescence quenching of the nanosheets and therefore, the system acts as a selective sensor for Hg2+. Dinakaran et al.181 have developed a MoS2 nanosheet/DNA/carbon dot nanoassembly for the detection of mercury(II) with a detection limit of 1.02 nM. Here, efficient sensing towards Hg2+ was observed because of improved fluorescence of the nanoassembly as Hg2+ intercalates within the MoS2 nanosheet and therefore prevents energy transfer between the DNA functionalized carbon dots and MoS2 nanosheets. Recently, the development of a MoS2-based device was also reported by Duan et al.182 for the rapid detection of Hg2+ ions with a detection limit of 30 pM. In addition, fluorescent MoS2 nanosheets were also used for the selective detection of Pb2+ (Fig. 10).183 Improved fluorescence intensity of the MoS2 nanosheets was observed upon the addition of a lead salt via a “turn on” mechanism as Pb2+ was incorporated within the MoS2 nanosheets, as shown in Fig. 10a. The detection limit of Pb2+ was found to be 0.22 μM (Fig. 10b). A good selectivity for Pb2+ ions in terms of “turn on” fluorescence was reported, as shown in Fig. 10c and d. Recently, functionalized two dimensional MoS2 was also used for the detection of toxic metals. Two dimensional MoS2 nanosheets functionalized with 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(1-methyl-4-pyridinio)porphyrintetra(p-toluenesulfonate) (TMPyP), represented as MoS2@TMPyP, exhibited excellent sensitivity towards the detection of cadmium (Cd2+) ions in water, as reported by Zhao et al.184 The excellent detection limit (7.2 × 10−8 mol L−1) for Cd2+ was due to the formation of a complex between Cd2+ and TMPyP, since electrostatic interaction between MoS2 and TMPyP favored enrichment of the concentration of TMPyP on the MoS2 surface. Carboxylic acid functionalized MoSe2 QDs were also reported for the selective detection of Cu2+ ions. The improved fluorescence of the COOH@MOSe2 QDs was due to a “turn on” mechanism, where formation of a complex between Cu2+ and –COOH restored the original intensity of the MoSe2 QDs.
 Fig. 9  (a) UV and PL spectra of B, N–MoS2. (b) Selective PL response of an aqueous B, N–MoS2 solution towards different metal ions (λex = 280 nm, F0 and F are the fluorescence intensities of B, N–MoS2 at 343 nm in the absence and presence of metal ions, respectively). (c) PL spectra of B, N–MoS2 at different Hg2+ concentrations. (d) Linear relationship of fluorescent probes for Hg2+.180 Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright© 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 10  (a) FL spectra of the fluorescent MoS2 nanosheets with different Pb2+ concentrations (0, 0.5, 1.0, …, 15.0 μM). (b) Calibration curve for Pb2+ sensing. (c) FL spectra of the fluorescent MoS2 nanosheets with each individual metal ion. (d) Selectivity of a fluorescent MoS2 nano-sheet-based sensor for Pb2+. F and F0 denote the fluorescence intensity of the fluorescent MoS2 nanosheets with or without each metal ion at the maximum emission wavelength of 406 nm, respectively.183 Reprinted with permission from ref. 183. Copyright© 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants and hydrogen evolution
Different dichalcogenides have been developed over the years for the degradation of water pollutants.185,186 Doping in transition metal dichalcogenides increases the photocatalytic activity of the materials.187,188 Anion–cation (N and Co) co-doped MoS2 were investigated for the visible light photocatalytic activity through various experimental and theoretical methods using DFT. The energy band gaps for the pristine MoS2 and N-doped MoS2 were found to be in the visible region, while the band gap of N–Co doped MoS2 shifted to the infrared region. So, the MoS2 and N-doped MoS2 materials were found to be suitable photocatalysts in the visible light region.187 The co-doping of nonmetals is also effective for the enhancement of photocatalysis. Wang et al.188 investigated anion–anion co-doping (N–N, N–P, and P–P) in monolayer MoS2via density functional theory (DFT). N–P and P–P co-doping in MoS2 are more favorable than mono-doped MoS2. The photocatalytic activity of N-doped monolayered MoS2 is limited by the unfilled vacancy created above the Fermi level, while P doping leads to the creation of an S vacancy, both conditions decrease the photocatalytic activity due to an enhancement in photo-generated electron–hole pair recombination. N–P co-doping prevents the formation of a bilayer, forming suitable CB and VB positions with respect to water redox labelling and thus, is suitable for photocatalytic water splitting.188 Lin et al.189 developed S-depleted monolayer MoS2 to enhance its photocatalytic properties via increasing the catalytic sites and suitable band structure. The S-depleted monolayer MoS2 (20 mg) degraded methylene blue (20 ppm, 100 mL) in 7 min under solar light irradiation, while MoS2 degraded it in 180 min under the same conditions. Additionally, it showed high repeatability over 8 cycles without any loss. The as-prepared material also showed high photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. The defect states and metallic sites of the S depleted monolayer MoS2 enhanced the photocatalytic degradation of dyes and water splitting via boosting of the electron transportation and decreasing of electron–hole recombination.189 The defect states in the MoS2 nanoplates can be tuned using a hydrothermal method, which were further incorporated by the CdS nanocrystals. MoS2/CdS showed remarkable enhancement for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution.190 In another study, defect-rich O incorporated 1T-MoS2 was synthesized via a hydrothermal method and further used as a cocatalyst with CdS nanorods. The defect-rich O-incorporated 1T-MoS2/CdS nanorods showed better photocatalytic evolution (132.4 mmol h−1 g−1) than defect-free O incorporated 1T-MoS2/CdS nanorods (102.1 mmol h−1 g−1) for 20 wt% of MoS2 in the composites. The photocatalytic properties for hydrogen evolution were better in this case due to improved charge carrier generation and suppression of charge carrier recombination.191
H-, B-, C-, N-, O-, and F-absorbed MoS2 monolayers were analyzed using DFT and all these dopants were found to be chemically absorbed over the 2-D MoS2 sheets.192 Kumar et al.193 prepared MoS2via a simple hydrothermal method and B doping was incorporated using the same method. B-Doped MoS2 was further distributed over the CdS nanorods (synthesized via hydrothermal method) and the B–MoS2/CdS showed better photocatalytic hydrogen production than MoS2/CdS. The performance was improved due to an increase in the number of active sites in the materials.193 Liu et al.194 synthesized nanoflowers of N-doped MoS2via a sol–gel method and MoS2 nanosheets prepared using a hydrothermal method. N-Doped MoS2 nanoflowers showed a higher photocatalytic activity (K = 0.06928 min−1) than bare MoS2 sheets and P25 towards Rhodamine B (RhB) degradation under visible light irradiation (Fig. 11).194 The N-doped MoS2 also showed appreciable stability over 4 cycles.
 Fig. 11  (a) Photocatalytic degradation of RhB by different photocatalysts under visible light irradiation. (b) UV-vis spectroscopic changes of the RhB aqueous solution in the presence of N-doped MoS2 nanoflowers. (c) Plot of ln(C0/C) with irradiation time for N-doped MoS2 nanoflowers and MoS2 nanosheets. (d) Reusability experiment for the degradation of RhB by N-doped MoS2 nanoflowers under visible light irradiation.194 Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. 
The photocatalytic performance of N-doped MoS2 nanoflowers was enhanced due to a higher surface area (increase in the active sites for surface adsorption) owing to its morphology, narrow band gap induced by N doping (improved visible light response of the material), and extension of the absorption edge in the visible light region (Fig. 12).194 N-Doped MoS2 generates excitons upon irradiation of light. The electrons further react with oxygen and produce superoxide ions, while the holes produce hydroxyl radicals and hydrogen ions upon reaction with water. The reactive oxygen species (hydroxyl radicals, superoxide ions, etc.) react with water pollutants to degrade them.194
 Fig. 12  Illustration of RhB degradation by N-doped MoS2 nanoflowers.194 Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. 
Several metal (Cu, Fe and Co)-doped 2D TMDs have been prepared using hydrothermal methods. The metal-doped MoS2 materials were found to be in nanosheet form and were further deposited on the CdS nanorods by liquid exfoliation.67 The metal-doped MoS2/CdS nanorods showed better photocatalytic hydrogen evolution than bulk MoS2. The loading of 6% Cu-doped MoS2 on CdS was found to be optimal for a higher H2 production rate (194.18 μmol h−1), 52 times higher than bare CdS nanorods. The increase in the photocatalytic response was attributed to the enhanced charge transfer and increase in the active sites owing to Cu doping.
In another report, Ni- or Co-doped MoS2 nanosheets were directly grown on CdS nanorods using an autoclave. 15% MoS2 loading on the CdS nanorods showed the best photocatalytic H2 evolution over other loadings. MoS2 were further doped with Ni or Co at different concentrations. CdS nanorods doped with Ni (1% doping)/MoS2 and CdS nanorods doped with Co (5% doping)/MoS2 showed 2.2 and 2.4 times higher photocatalytic H2 evolution, respectively than CdS/MoS2 under solar light irradiation. The doping led to the formation of active sites and decreased exciton recombination.195
Similarly, Cu-doped MoS2/ Bi2S3 hybrid composites prepared using a hydrothermal method by varying the Cu concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20, 30 and 40 mol%) showed a flower-like structure and improved visible light response with Cu doping. The Cu-doped (20%) hybrid composites showed a 40% increase in H2 production compared to bare MoS2 (Fig. 13a and b) and also showed 85% retainability after 4 continuous cycle of reuse (Fig. 13c and d).196
 Fig. 13  (a) Photocatalytic rate of H2 production and (b) time course H2 evolution of all of the studied samples in a 0.5 M Na2S/Na2SO3 mixture irradiated under simulated solar light over a duration of 6 h. (c) Total H2 yield for each cycle and (d) time course of the photocatalytic H2 production of 20Cu–MoS2/Bi2S3 under simulated solar light.196 Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright© 2018 Elsevier Inc. 
The high photocatalytic hydrogen evolution for Cu–MoS2/Bi2S3 was attributed to the impurity states created upon Cu doping (easier to create excitons upon light exposure), and fast electron transportation from MoS2 to Bi2S3. In addition, electrons excited to CB of MoS2 can transfer to the trap sites and more active sites were developed through Cu doping. The overall H2 evolution was increased due to the synergic effect of Cu, MoS2, and Bi2S3 (Fig. 14).196
 Fig. 14  Band alignment diagram with proposed electron–hole transfer mechanism.196 Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright© 2018 Elsevier Inc. 
A Co-doped FeS2 photocatalyst was prepared using a microwave hydrothermal method and X was varied from the 0.111 to 0.4 in the preparation of CoxFe1−xS2. The absorption peaks and edges were extended into the visible light region upon increasing the Co concentration (e.g. Co0.4Fe0.6S2 showed an absorption peak and absorption edge at 500 and 800 nm, while pristine FeS2 showed them at 380 and 590 nm, respectively). FeS2, Co0.111Fe0.889S2, Co0.2Fe0.8S2, Co0.333Fe0.666S2 and Co0.4Fe0.6S2 showed 13.2, 24.3, 31.5, 48.9, 38.4% methylene blue (MB) degradation under visible light irradiation (>420 nm) in 210 min, respectively. The enhanced photocatalytic activity was owing to the defects created in the FeS2 lattice due to Co2+ doping, resulting in increased electron–hole pair generation. Additionally, Co2+ doping decreased the particle size (increase in the surface area).197
Water splitting
Generation of pollution by the burning of fossil fuels has led to extensive research on alternative renewable energy sources.198–201 The electrochemical splitting of water to generate hydrogen as a popular alternative energy source due to the high energy density of hydrogen compared to fossil fuels.201–205 Moreover, energy from hydrogen is pollution free and does not result in the release of any poisonous gases into the environment. In overall water splitting, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) takes place at the cathode, whereas the oxygen evolution reaction (HER) takes place at the anode.206 HER 2H+ + 2e− → H2; Eo = 0 vs. normal hydrogen electrode(1) OER 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−; Eo = 1.23 V vs. normal hydrogen electrode(2)
However, splitting of water (2H2O → 2H2 + O2) requires an energy of 237 kJ mol−1, which can be lowered using a suitable catalyst and hence can increase the yield of hydrogen. Recently, Co doping in MoS2 has proven to be useful for overall water splitting. Xiong et al.207 prepared Co-doped MoS2 nanosheets using a hydrothermal technique that showed good hydrogen and oxygen evolution in acidic and basic electrolytes. For the HER, the onset potentials were found to be 0.04/0.03 V (vs. RHE) with low overpotentials of 60/90 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1 M KOH, respectively. Whereas, for the OER, the onset potentials were 1.68/1.33 V (vs. RHE) with overpotentials of 540/190 mV at the same current density in acidic and alkaline electrolytes.207 Further, the same group reported on Co doping in MoS2 with the help of bacterial cellulose and found good OER in alkaline media, which was not possible for the layered MoS2 structure alone.208 Dai et al.209 proposed a scalable deposition–precipitation technique followed by calcination under inert atmosphere for Fe, Co, Ni doping in MoS2 over few layer carbon black. They found that Co-doped MoS2 exhibited good activity for the HER compared to Ni/Fe-doped MoS2 and undoped MoS2, which also matched with the DFT calculations. They reported a low onset potential of 90 mV with a Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1 at a current density of 0.03 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4. Apart from the information on the current–potential curve, the Tafel slope also helps in determining the coefficient of the charge transfer occurring during the reaction. Hence, if the reaction is more complex, involving several steps and electron transfers, the Tafel slope helps in understanding whether the rate-determining step involves electron transfer or not. They also showed the cycling stability up to 10000 cycles.209 Chen et al.210 doped Co into MoSe2 at high temperatures (up to 900 °C) for the synthesis of 2D terrace MoSe2/CoMoSe lateral heterostructures (LH), vertical heterostructure (VH) nanolayers and bilayers and multilayer MoSe2/CoMoSe LH (Fig. 15). They found that after Co doping, more active sites were created due to atomic rearrangement and distortion in the CoMoSe alloy thin layers. The 2D MoSe2/CoMoSe LH and VH nanolayers showed a Tafel slope of 95.2 mV dec−1 with a low overpotential of 305 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for the HER in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte.210
 Fig. 15  Optical, SEM, and Raman mapping of defective 2D terrace MoSe2/CoMoSe LH and LH and VH nanolayers. (a and b) Optical images of the 2D MoSe2/CoMoSe LH nanolayers. (c) Optical image of 2D MoSe2/CoMoSe LH and VH nanolayers. (d and e) SEM images of the 2D MoSe2/CoMoSe LH nanolayers. (f–h) SEM images of the 2D MoSe2/CoMoSe LH and VH nanolayers. (i) Raman mapping of the 2D MoSe2/CoMoSe LH nanolayers.210 Reprinted with permission from ref. 210. 
Similarly, Ming et al.211 doped Co into NiSe2 to synthesize a metal–organic framework supported over Ni foam for overall water splitting in 1 M KOH electrolyte. They found that the overpotential was 275 mV for the OER at a current density of 30 mA cm−2, whereas for the HER, the overpotential was found to be 90 mV at a current density of −10 mA cm−2.211 Shi et al.212 synthesized Zn-doped MoS2 using a one-step solvothermal technique. They suggested that the modulation of the energy level by Zn doping improved the catalytic activity of MoS2 for the HER. They also studied the thermodynamics and kinetics of the HER for a Zn-doped MoS2 system. They measured an onset potential of −0.13 V vs. RHE, a Tafel slope of 51 mV dec−1 and overpotential of 300 mV. These results were far better than the catalytic activity of MoS2. This improved performance of Zn-doped MoS2 was due to the energy level matching and greater number of active sites present in the material.212
Liu et al.213 also doped Zn into MoS2 nanosheets via a hydrothermal method and found that the onset potential and overpotential were 40 and 140 mV, respectively, at a current density of 100 mA cm−2 for the HER in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte, whereas, the Tafel slope was found to be 35 mV dec−1. FeS2-Doped MoS2 and Sn-doped MoS2 were also studied for the HER to improve the catalytic activity of MoS2.214,215 Similarly, W-doped MoS2 hollow nanospheres on Ni3S2 nanorods were used for overall water splitting, which showed improved conductivity of MoS2@Ni3S2 that improved the charge transfer ability of MoS2@Ni3S2. They recorded a 98 mV overpotential for the HER and 285 mV overpotential for the OER at a current density of 10 mA cm−2.216
Transition metal doping in dichalcogenides other than MoS2 has also proven to be very useful. Ni-Doped CoS2 nanowires supported on carbon cloth were synthesized through a hydrothermal method and delivered overpotentials of 231 mV for the HER and 370 mV for the OER at a current density of 100 mA cm−2.217 Wu et al.191 prepared Fe ion etched ZIF-67 (metal–organic framework) to synthesize Fe-doped CoSe2 incorporated in N-doped carbon. DFT calculations showed that Fe doping improved the HER kinetics. The favorable adsorption–desorption behavior of Fe-doped CoSe2 also improved the activity of the material towards the HER in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. They reported an overpotential of −143 mV with a small Tafel slope of 40 mV dec−1 at a current density of 10 mA cm−2.191 Jiang et al.218 synthesized V-doped WS2 nanosheets on carbon cloth for the HER in both acidic and basic electrolytes. V doping improved the electrochemical surface area of WS2 from 9.6 to 2.6 times compare to pure WS2 in acidic and basic electrolytes, respectively. A Tafel slope of 71 mV dec−1 and overpotential of 148 mV were reported at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 for the HER, whereas the corresponding Tafel slope and overpotential were found to be 85 mV dec−1 and 134 mV in 1 M KOH electrolyte.218 V, Nb and Ta doping in WSe2 increased the number of active sites and morphological changes in WSe2, which led to better performance of WSe2 for the HER and OER.219 Ni-Doped NiS2 showed 37 mV dec−1 with an overpotential of 121 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in the Tafel slope region.220 Ni-Doped CoS2 nanoneedle arrays supported on stainless steel showed an overpotential of 286 mV and Tafel slope of 55 mV dec−1 at a current density of 50 mA cm−2 for the OER. It also showed a 350 mV overpotential at a 30 mA cm−2 current density with a Tafel slope of 76 mV dec−1 for the HER in 1 M KOH.221
Non-metal doping in dichalcogenide materials was also utilized for improving the performance of dichalcogenide activity in overall water splitting. N-Doped WS2 nanosheets were synthesized via a sol–gel method in a single step for high electrochemical activity towards the HER. N-Doping improved the conductivity of WS2 and showed an onset potential of 86 mV with an overpotential of 197 mV at a current density of 100 mA cm−2.222 Maiti et al.223 co-doped N and P in WS2, which showed improved HER because of a greater number of active sites present in single layered porous 1T-WS2 and the combined effect of N, P doping. A low overpotential of 59 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 was observed and the Tafel slope region exhibited 35 mV dec−1.223 Xia et al.224 synthesized S-doped ReSe2 nanosheets vertically grown on carbon cloth and reported a Tafel slope of 84 mV dec−1 followed by an overpotential of 123 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which showed stable catalytic activity up to 30 h. Najafi et al.225 doped Cl to synthesize a MoSe2/3d metal-oxide-hydr(oxy)oxide hybrid material for the HER. They reported overpotentials of 81 and 64 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in electrolyte media of 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1 M KOH, respectively.225
Summary and future aspects
This review article mainly addresses the several possible doping strategies for engineering 2D TMD nanomaterials to enhance their application potential. This review includes a broad overview of the environmental applications of doped 2D TMDs with special emphasis on the doping mechanisms. It has been demonstrated that 2D TMD materials are emerging materials and are very promising for many important applications including energy, environment, biomedicine, etc. For example, due to their inexpensive nature, high active state densities and tuneable bandgaps, these 2D TMD materials show potential catalytic properties mainly for photocatalytic reduction of CO2, which is one of the hot topics in the field of catalysis. Doped TMDs have also received great attention as fluorescent probes due to their strong fluorescence, stability and low toxicity. However, these materials need much more attention in view of their synthesis, stability and modification of their optoelectronic properties, which are challenging issues. One of the main challenging issues remains the usage of 2D TMDs for semiconductor device applications with a finite bandgap. An attempt to overcome this issue will be a driving force for the development of 2D TMDs for enhanced electronic as well as environmental-based device applications. Many dedicated attempts and efforts have already been made to achieve the controlled large-scale synthesis of different 2D TMDs with uniform atomic layers. In particular, top-down and bottom-up approaches, namely chemical and mechanical exfoliations, and CVD were extensively employed for the synthesis of various 2D TMDs. However, only the CVD technique has shown a little success in producing atomically thin 2D TMDs with a large growth area for successful device applications. Further, while linking the “physics and devices of 2D TMDs”, the preferential method for preparing the high quality 2D TMDs is mechanical exfoliation method. However, this method has flake size and film uniformity limitations, which hinders the usage of the materials for device applications. MoS2 is one of the 2D TMDs which has been found as to be an efficient material and is being used in all fields of research, including in the detection of several environmental analytes. Recently, doped MoS2 nanomaterials were shown to be potential probes for the detection of nitro explosives as they possess tunable photoluminescence properties. The possibility of metal and non-metal doping in 2D TMDs have shown enhanced HER as well as OER properties. Further, this review has brought about fascinating computational insight for the analysis of possible different types of doping in 2D TMDs. Also, many authors have discussed the importance of functionalization through doping of 2D TMDs for various emerging applications. Hence, it is believed that enhancing the novel functionalities of 2D TMDs via doping will ensure the promising applications of 2D TMDs in many emerging fields, particularly in environmental related applications. Further, the challenges and future perspectives on achieving the full potential of 2D TMDs are as follows:
• Proper selection of a doping methodology for enhancing the functional properties of 2D TMDs and achieving their full potential on the basis of particular applications. As far as substitutional doping in 2D TMDs is concerned, it is comparatively at an early stage, and requires more research in this direction towards optimizing the experimental parameters.
• Opting for an efficient synthesis methodology towards producing uniform, pure and homogeneous 2D TMDs via doping is a challenging task, which needs greater attention. Also, a scalable synthesis methodology is one of the “need of the hour” for many emerging applications such as sensors, photovoltaic systems, etc.
• The crystal and electronic structure properties of the doped 2D TMDs are only theoretically proven in many cases; hence experimental findings are important to correlate with the theoretical findings towards functional understanding of the respective molecules.
• Advanced characterization techniques are required to understand the atomic and microstructural relationships of doped 2D TMDs.
• For any device applications, we need high quality 2D TMDs. However, despite considerable progress being achieved in the large-scale synthesis of 2D TMDs with uniform atomic layers, we are still yet to achieve that. There is a need for more attention on exploring the practical applications of 2D TMDs with advanced synthesis methods so that single-layer controllability can be achieved, which would result in uniform and continuous film growth through proper doping of 2D TMDs.
Hence, it is concluded that when advanced synthetic methods at the laboratory level meet the practical applications, the revolution of the 2D TMD materials community would be realized in the field of electronics, opto-electronics, environmental and energy technologies. In summary, we have reviewed the doping strategies of 2D TMDs and their potential environmental applications. We have also highlighted the challenges and future research needs towards 2D TMDs as far as environmental and device-based applications are concerned. It will be of immense worth to realize the complete application potential of 2D TMDs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
RKG acknowledges financial assistance from the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India, through the INSPIRE Faculty Award (Project No. IFA-13 ENG-57) and Grant No. DST/TM/WTI/2K16/23(G). BB acknowledges the Department of Science and Technology (DST) support for providing the women scientist project (Grant No: SR/WOS-A/CS-17/2017). PK acknowledges financial assistance from the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India, for an Institute Postdoctoral Fellowship Award. JP acknowledges financial support from DST, India, through the INSPIRE Faculty Award/research grant (IFA-15/MS-57).
References
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2165–2216 RSC .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Han, S. Lee and J. Cheon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2581–2591 RSC .
C. N. R. Rao, H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte and U. Maitra, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13162–13185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1102–1120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Zhang and Y. Xie, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2018, 130, 1–39 CrossRef .
W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande and Y. H. Lee, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 116–130 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, M. Tosun, G. Seol, T. C. Chang, K. Takei, J. Guo and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1991–1995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhong, R. C. Bruno, K. Ethan, L. Ruitao, R. Rahul, T. Humberto, A. P. Marcos and T. Mauricio, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 022002 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, H.-M. Cheng and P. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6009–6012 RSC .
A. Di Bartolomeo, F. Urban, M. Passacantando, N. McEvoy, L. Peters, L. Iemmo, G. Luongo, F. Romeo and F. Giubileo, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 1538–1548 RSC .
A. Di Bartolomeo, L. Genovese, F. Giubileo, L. Iemmo, G. Luongo, T. Foller and M. Schleberger, 2D Mater., 2017, 5, 015014 CrossRef .
S. Behura, P. Nguyen, S. Che, R. Debbarma and V. Berry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13060–13065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Bessonov, M. N. Kirikova, D. I. Petukhov, M. Allen, T. Ryhänen and M. J. A. Bailey, Nat. Mater., 2014, 14, 199 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Feng and J. Li, Small, 2014, 10, 2165–2181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. Wang, X. Sun, M. Zhou, J. Zhou, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5807–5813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10274–10277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, J. Zhang, S. Li, F. Grote, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, R. Wang, Y. Lei, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17881–17888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. Li, R. Silva, D. C. B. Alves, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
G. Ye, Y. Gong, J. Lin, B. Li, Y. He, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1097–1103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Lin, N. Yu, L. Wang, L. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 19298–19301 RSC .
F. Gong, X. Xu, Z. Li, G. Zhou and Z.-S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1437–1439 RSC .
C.-J. Liu, S.-Y. Tai, S.-W. Chou, Y.-C. Yu, K.-D. Chang, S. Wang, F. S.-S. Chien, J.-Y. Lin and T.-W. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21057–21064 RSC .
M. Shanmugam, C. A. Durcan and B. Yu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7399–7405 RSC .
J. Feng, X. Sun, C. Wu, L. Peng, C. Lin, S. Hu, J. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17832–17838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shanmugam, T. Bansal, C. A. Durcan and B. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 153901 CrossRef .
H. Li, Z. Yin, Q. He, H. Li, X. Huang, G. Lu, D. W. H. Fam, A. I. Y. Tok, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 63–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chan, C. Tsai, H. A. Hansen and J. K. Nørskov, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1899–1905 CrossRef CAS .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato, R. Haasch, P. Zapol, B. Kumar, R. F. Klie, J. Abiade, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Science, 2016, 353, 467–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Asadi, B. Kumar, A. Behranginia, B. A. Rosen, A. Baskin, N. Repnin, D. Pisasale, P. Phillips, W. Zhu, R. Haasch, R. F. Klie, P. Král, J. Abiade and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, K. Chan, C. Tsai and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4428–4437 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shin, Y. Ha and H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4124–4129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vogt, P. De Padova, C. Quaresima, J. Avila, E. Frantzeskakis, M. C. Asensio, A. Resta, B. Ealet and G. Le Lay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 155501 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Pakdel, C. Zhi, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 256–265 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ni, Q. Liu, K. Tang, J. Zheng, J. Zhou, R. Qin, Z. Gao, D. Yu and J. Lu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 113–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Song, L. Balicas, D. J. Mowbray, R. B. Capaz, K. Storr, L. Ci, D. Jariwala, S. Kurth, S. G. Louie, A. Rubio and P. M. Ajayan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 075429 CrossRef .
G. Z. Magda, J. Pető, G. Dobrik, C. Hwang, L. P. Biró and L. Tapasztó, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, J. Kim, S.-F. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. Jin, Y. Sun, S. Tongay, J. Wu, Y. Zhang and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, H. Li and L.-J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2744–2756 RSC .
Y.-H. Lee, X.-Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M.-T. Chang, C.-T. Lin, K.-D. Chang, Y.-C. Yu, J. T.-W. Wang, C.-S. Chang, L.-J. Li and T.-W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, W. Zhou, X. Zou, G. Shi, S. Lei, B. I. Yakobson, J.-C. Idrobo, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Rong, Y. Fan, M. Pacios, H. Bhaskaran, K. He and J. H. Warner, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6371–6379 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, C. Li, Y. Liu, L. Su, Y. Zhang and L. Cao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1866 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Park, N. Choudhary, J. Smith, G. Lee, M. Kim and W. Choi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 012104 CrossRef .
Y. Zhan, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Small, 2012, 8, 966–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Han, N. J. Kybert, C. H. Naylor, B. S. Lee, J. Ping, J. H. Park, J. Kang, S. Y. Lee, Y. H. Lee, R. Agarwal and A. T. C. Johnson, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kang, S. Xie, L. Huang, Y. Han, P. Y. Huang, K. F. Mak, C.-J. Kim, D. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2015, 520, 656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Eichfeld, L. Hossain, Y.-C. Lin, A. F. Piasecki, B. Kupp, A. G. Birdwell, R. A. Burke, N. Lu, X. Peng, J. Li, A. Azcatl, S. McDonnell, R. M. Wallace, M. J. Kim, T. S. Mayer, J. M. Redwing and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2080–2087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, R. K. Ghosh, R. Addou, N. Lu, S. M. Eichfeld, H. Zhu, M.-Y. Li, X. Peng, M. J. Kim, L.-J. Li, R. M. Wallace, S. Datta and J. A. Robinson, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7311 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Tan, B. Liu, J. H. Teng, S. Guo, H. Y. Low and K. P. Loh, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10584–10588 RSC .
J.-G. Song, J. Park, W. Lee, T. Choi, H. Jung, C. W. Lee, S.-H. Hwang, J. M. Myoung, J.-H. Jung, S.-H. Kim, C. Lansalot-Matras and H. Kim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11333–11340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jin, S. Shin, D. H. Kwon, S.-J. Han and Y.-S. Min, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14453–14458 RSC .
J. J. Pyeon, S. H. Kim, D. S. Jeong, S.-H. Baek, C.-Y. Kang, J.-S. Kim and S. K. Kim, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10792–10798 RSC .
A. A. Tedstone, D. J. Lewis and P. O'Brien, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1965–1974 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Lai, Q. Ma and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3301–3338 RSC .
W. Zhou, D. Hou, Y. Sang, S. Yao, J. Zhou, G. Li, L. Li, H. Liu and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11358–11364 RSC .
J. Suh, T. L. Tan, W. Zhao, J. Park, D.-Y. Lin, T.-E. Park, J. Kim, C. Jin, N. Saigal, S. Ghosh, Z. M. Wong, Y. Chen, F. Wang, W. Walukiewicz, G. Eda and J. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 199 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Xiao, H. Zhu, Y. Li, Y. Alsaid, K. Y. Fong, Y. Zhou, S. Wang, W. Shi, Y. Wang, A. Zettl, E. J. Reed and X. Zhang, Nature, 2017, 550, 487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, F. Yang, X. F. Lu, Y. J. Yan, Y.-H. Cho, L. Ma, X. Niu, S. Kim, Y.-W. Son, D. Feng, S. Li, S.-W. Cheong, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hong, D. P. Kumar, E. H. Kim, H. Park, M. Gopannagari, D. A. Reddy and T. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20851–20859 RSC .
K. Eshun, H. D. Xiong, S. Yu and Q. Li, Solid-State Electron., 2015, 106, 44–49 CrossRef .
S. Ahmed and J. Yi, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 9, 50 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Cunningham, M. Lotya, C. S. Cucinotta, S. Sanvito, S. D. Bergin, R. Menzel, M. S. P. Shaffer and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3468–3480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yun, S. W. Han, S. C. Hong, I. G. Kim and J. D. Lee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 033305 CrossRef .
Y. Ding, N. Zhou, L. Gan, X. Yan, R. Wu, I. H. Abidi, A. Waleed, J. Pan, X. Ou, Q. Zhang, M. Zhuang, P. Wang, X. Pan, Z. Fan, T. Zhai and Z. Luo, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 200–208 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, X. Hu, S. Zhou, H. Song, Q. Zhang, L. Pi, L. Li, H. Li, J. Lü and T. Zhai, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703286 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yuan, H. Wang and Y. Cui, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 81–90 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wu, Q. Zhang, X. Zhou, L. Li, J. Su, F. Wang and T. Zhai, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, K. Xu, F. Pan, C. Zhou, F. Zhou and Y. Chai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603484 CrossRef .
V. Kochat, A. Apte, J. A. Hachtel, H. Kumazoe, A. Krishnamoorthy, S. Susarla, J. C. Idrobo, F. Shimojo, P. Vashishta, R. Kalia, A. Nakano, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703754 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan and Y.-W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7280–7290 RSC .
A. T. Neal, H. Liu, J. Gu and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7077–7082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Tan, A. Ambrosi, Z. Sofer, Š. Huber, D. Sedmidubský and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 7170–7178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Frey, S. Elani, M. Homyonfer, Y. Feldman and R. Tenne, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 6666–6671 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Islam, N. Kang, U. Bhanu, H. P. Paudel, M. Erementchouk, L. Tetard, M. N. Leuenberger and S. I. Khondaker, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10033–10039 RSC .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Nitin, R. I. Muhammad, K. Narae, T. Laurene, J. Yeonwoong and I. K. Saiful, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2016, 28, 364002 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Sarkar, W. Liu, X. Xie, A. C. Anselmo, S. Mitragotri and K. Banerjee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3992–4003 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Late, B. Liu, H. S. S. R. Matte, V. P. Dravid and C. N. R. Rao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5635–5641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rumyantsev, G. Liu, M. S. Shur, R. A. Potyrailo and A. A. Balandin, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2294–2298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. K. Perkins, A. L. Friedman, E. Cobas, P. M. Campbell, G. G. Jernigan and B. T. Jonker, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 668–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-L. Zhang, H.-H. Choi, H.-Y. Yue and W.-C. Yang, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2014, 14, 264–268 CrossRef .
R. Dong and I. Kuljanishvili, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2017, 35, 030803 Search PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutiérrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Bhimanapati, Z. Lin, V. Meunier, Y. Jung, J. Cha, S. Das, D. Xiao, Y. Son, M. S. Strano, V. R. Cooper, L. Liang, S. G. Louie, E. Ringe, W. Zhou, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, B. G. Sumpter, H. Terrones, F. Xia, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, D. Akinwande, N. Alem, J. A. Schuller, R. E. Schaak, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509–11539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, A. Pan, R. Yu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8859–8876 RSC .
P. Luo, F. Zhuge, Q. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Lv, Y. Huang, H. Li and T. Zhai, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 26–51 RSC .
J. Suh, T.-E. Park, D.-Y. Lin, D. Fu, J. Park, H. J. Jung, Y. Chen, C. Ko, C. Jang, Y. Sun, R. Sinclair, J. Chang, S. Tongay and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6976–6982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tosun, L. Chan, M. Amani, T. Roy, G. H. Ahn, P. Taheri, C. Carraro, J. W. Ager, R. Maboudian and A. Javey, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6853–6860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Z. Xu, H. M. Liu, K. Park, Z. Li, Y. Losovyj, M. Starr, M. Werbianskyj, H. A. Fertig and S. X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3576–3584 RSC .
K. Zhang, S. Feng, J. Wang, A. Azcatl, N. Lu, R. Addou, N. Wang, C. Zhou, J. Lerach, V. Bojan, M. J. Kim, L.-Q. Chen, R. M. Wallace, M. Terrones, J. Zhu and J. A. Robinson, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6586–6591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dolui, I. Rungger, C. Das Pemmaraju and S. Sanvito, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 075420 CrossRef .
M. R. Laskar, D. N. Nath, L. Ma, E. W. L. II, C. H. Lee, T. Kent, Z. Yang, R. Mishra, M. A. Roldan, J.-C. Idrobo, S. T. Pantelides, S. J. Pennycook, R. C. Myers, Y. Wu and S. Rajan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 092104 CrossRef .
S. Das, M. Demarteau and A. Roelofs, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 173506 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Z. Shao, X. Zhang, Y. He and J. Jie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10409–10442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, H. Fang, X. Wang, X. Chen, W. Lu and W. Hu, Small, 2017, 13, 1700894 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chen, H. Nam, S. Wi, L. Ji, X. Ren, L. Bian, S. Lu and X. Liang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 142110 CrossRef .
S. Lee, Y. T. Lee, S. G. Park, K. H. Lee, S. W. Kim, D. K. Hwang and K. Lee, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700563 CrossRef .
K. Suhhyun, C. Min Sup, Q. Deshun, R. Chang Ho, L. Xiaochi, K. Minwoo, S. Young Jae and Y. Won Jong, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 035002 CrossRef .
S. I. Kim, S. Hwang, S. Y. Kim, W.-J. Lee, D. W. Jung, K.-S. Moon, H. J. Park, Y.-J. Cho, Y.-H. Cho, J.-H. Kim, D.-J. Yun, K. H. Lee, I.-t. Han, K. Lee and Y. Sohn, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Azcatl, X. Qin, A. Prakash, C. Zhang, L. Cheng, Q. Wang, N. Lu, M. J. Kim, J. Kim, K. Cho, R. Addou, C. L. Hinkle, J. Appenzeller and R. M. Wallace, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5437–5443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, D. Zhou, X. Chen, H. Liu, C. Wang and S. Wang, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 375–379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Cheng, Z. Y. Zhu, W. B. Mi, Z. B. Guo and U. Schwingenschlögl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 100401 CrossRef .
A. Ramasubramaniam and D. Naveh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 195201 CrossRef .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Nørskov and X. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2015, 15, 48 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich and H. Krieg, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 154104 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Perdew and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1981, 23, 5048–5079 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bai, Z. Yang, H. Lin, W. Jie and J. Hao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9261–9267 RSC .
D. Xu, W. Chen, M. Zeng, H. Xue, Y. Chen, X. Sang, Y. Xiao, T. Zhang, R. R. Unocic, K. Xiao and L. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 755–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ataca and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13303–13311 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kiriya, M. Tosun, P. Zhao, J. S. Kang and A. Javey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7853–7856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-M. Chang, S.-H. Yang, C.-Y. Lin, C.-H. Chen, C.-H. Lien, W.-B. Jian, K. Ueno, Y.-W. Suen, K. Tsukagoshi and Y.-F. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706995 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fang, S. Chuang, T. C. Chang, K. Takei, T. Takahashi and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3788–3792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Choi, D. Qu, D. Lee, X. Liu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and W. J. Yoo, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9332–9340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Huo and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 572 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, D. Qu, J. Ryu, F. Ahmed, Z. Yang, D. Lee and W. J. Yoo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2345–2351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Huang, Y. J. Zheng, Z. Song, D. Chi, A. T. S. Wee and S. Y. Quek, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3241–3264 RSC .
N. Shen and G. Tao, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1601083 CrossRef .
Q. Peng, Z. Wang, B. Sa, B. Wu and Z. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tongay, J. Zhou, C. Ataca, J. Liu, J. S. Kang, T. S. Matthews, L. You, J. Li, J. C. Grossman and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2831–2836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yamamoto, S. Nakaharai, K. Ueno and K. Tsukagoshi, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2720–2727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Sreeprasad, P. Nguyen, N. Kim and V. Berry, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4434–4441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sarkar, X. Xie, J. Kang, H. Zhang, W. Liu, J. Navarrete, M. Moskovits and K. Banerjee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2852–2862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cai, C. J. McClellan, A. L. Koh, H. Li, E. Yalon, E. Pop and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3854–3861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mouri, Y. Miyauchi and K. Matsuda, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5944–5948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Jo, D.-H. Kang, J. Shim, J. Jeon, M. H. Jeon, G. Yoo, J. Kim, J. Lee, G. Y. Yeom, S. Lee, H.-Y. Yu, C. Choi and J.-H. Park, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4824–4831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Yu, Y. Lee, S. K. Jang, J. Kang, J. Jeon, C. Lee, J. Y. Lee, H. Kim, E. Hwang, S. Lee and J. H. Cho, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8285–8291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, C.-H. Lee, D. Bouilly, M. Han, P. Kim, M. L. Steigerwald, X. Roy and C. Nuckolls, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3385–3389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wan, S. D. Lacey, J. Dai, W. Bao, M. S. Fuhrer and L. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6742–6765 RSC .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall'Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Q. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Addou, J. Kim, M. J. Kim and R. M. Wallace, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11005–11014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, H. Yuan, C.-L. Wu, P. Tang, S.-Z. Yang, A. Yang, G. Li, B. Liu, J. van de Groep, M. L. Brongersma, M. F. Chisholm, S.-C. Zhang, W. Zhou and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 294–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Koski, C. D. Wessells, B. W. Reed, J. J. Cha, D. Kong and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13773–13779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Gan, Y. He, H. Li and T. Zhai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14893–14897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, A. Goswami, R. Kappera, C. d. C. C. e. Silva, D. Kaplan, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Chem., 2014, 7, 45 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, H. Lian, J. He, J. Liu, S. Wang, H. Xing, Z. Mao and Y. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 023502 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, Y. Wei, H. Li and T. Zhai, Small, 2017, 13, 1701649 CrossRef PubMed .
K. P. Chen, F. R. Chung, M. Wang and K. J. Koski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5431–5437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jung, Y. Zhou and J. J. Cha, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 452–463 RSC .
M. Chhowalla, D. Jena and H. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16052 CrossRef CAS .
B. Radisavljevic and A. Kis, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Allain and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7180–7185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ciarrocchi, A. Avsar, D. Ovchinnikov and A. Kis, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 919 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, C.-H. Kim, Y. Yoo, J. E. Johns and C. D. Frisbie, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7586–7592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lipatov, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and A. Sinitskii, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8089–8098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Huang, W. Ye and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700194 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jiang, H. Wu, Z. Li, D. Ji, W. Li, Y. Liu, D. Yuan, B. Wang and Z. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 82–87 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rockström, O. Gaffney, J. Rogelj, M. Meinshausen, N. Nakicenovic and H. J. Schellnhuber, Science, 2017, 355, 1269–1271 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Siahrostami, K. Jiang, M. Karamad, K. Chan, H. Wang and J. Nørskov, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 11080–11085 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, C. Guild and S. L. Suib, J. CO2 Util., 2013, 1, 18–27 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Lim, M. Xie, M. A. Sk, J.-M. Lee, A. Fisher, X. Wang and K. H. Lim, Catal. Today, 2014, 233, 169–180 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, C. Lai, P. Xu, G. Zeng, D. Huang, C. Zhang, M. Cheng, L. Hu, J. Wan, Y. Liu, W. Xiong, Y. Deng and M. Wen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 4174–4184 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zeng, J. Wan, D. Huang, L. Hu, C. Huang, M. Cheng, W. Xue, X. Gong, R. Wang and D. Jiang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 339, 354–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 185–200 RSC .
L. Yuan and Y.-J. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 342, 154–167 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, Z. Pan and X. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Sun, N. Li and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2239–2262 RSC .
B. Luo, G. Liu and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6904–6920 RSC .
J. Xu, X. Li, W. Liu, Y. Sun, Z. Ju, T. Yao, C. Wang, H. Ju, J. Zhu, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9121–9125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou, J. Song, C. Xie, C. Chen, Q. Qian and B. Han, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5754–5759 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. DeCoste and G. W. Peterson, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5695–5727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kumar, K.-H. Kim, E. E. Kwon and J. E. Szulejko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 345–361 RSC .
H. Wang, W. P. Lustig and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4729–4756 RSC .
Y. Hu, Y. Huang, C. Tan, X. Zhang, Q. Lu, M. Sindoro, X. Huang, W. Huang, L. Wang and H. Zhang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 24–36 RSC .
V. Yadav, S. Roy, P. Singh, Z. Khan and A. Jaiswal, Small, 2019, 15, 1803706 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, L. Yan, X. Li and H. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 2931 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang and Y. Ni, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 7463–7470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Haldar, D. Dinda and S. K. Saha, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6321–6326 RSC .
N. Dhenadhayalan, T.-W. Lin, H.-L. Lee and K.-C. Lin, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 3453–3463 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, L. Li, Y. Wei, Y. Zheng, Q. Xiao and B. Feng, Analyst, 2015, 140, 4654–4661 RSC .
K. Srinivasan, K. Subramanian, K. Murugan and K. Dinakaran, Analyst, 2016, 141, 6344–6352 RSC .
S. Jiang, R. Cheng, R. Ng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 257–262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Hu, Q. Zhuang and Y. Ni, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2535–2541 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yin, X. Dong, J. Yu, J. Pan, Z. Yao, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 21362–21370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, Q. Zhou, L. Shi, Q. Chen and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4291–4312 RSC .
S. Ahn, G. Kim, P. K. Nayak, S. I. Yoon, H. Lim, H.-J. Shin and H. S. Shin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8973–8979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cheriyan, D. Balamurgan and S. Sriram, Superlattices Microstruct., 2018, 116, 238–243 CrossRef CAS .
G.-Z. Wang, H.-K. Yuan, A.-L. Kuang and H. Chen, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2018, 255, 1700413 CrossRef .
L. Lin, N. Miao, J. Huang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhu, D. D. Horsell, P. Ghosez, Z. Sun and D. A. Allwood, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 544–552 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiong, Y. Liu, D. Wang, S. Liang, W. Wu and L. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12631–12635 RSC .
X.-H. Zhang, N. Li, J. Wu, Y.-Z. Zheng and X. Tao, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 229, 227–236 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, K. Wu, R. Sa, Q. Li and Y. Wei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 082504 CrossRef .
D. P. Kumar, M. I. Song, S. Hong, E. H. Kim, M. Gopannagari, D. A. Reddy and T. K. Kim, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7651–7658 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Ye, J. Ma and D. Gao, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 225403 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ma, J. Li, C. An, J. Feng, Y. Chi, J. Liu, J. Zhang and Y. Sun, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2284–2293 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. C. Lee, L.-L. Tan, S. Sumathi and S.-P. Chai, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 748–756 CrossRef CAS .
F. Long, J. He, M. Zhang, X. Wu, S. Mo, Z. Zou and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 1848–1854 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600087 CrossRef .
C. Wan, Y. N. Regmi and B. M. Leonard, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6407–6410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Gao, X. Wu, K.-J. Huang, L.-L. Xing, Y.-Y. Zhang and L. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 404–418 RSC .
C. Li, Q. Cao, F. Wang, Y. Xiao, Y. Li, J.-J. Delaunay and H. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4981–5037 RSC .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
B. Kumar, M. Llorente, J. Froehlich, T. Dang, A. Sathrum and C. P. Kubiak, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2012, 63, 541–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Gupta and C. N. R. Rao, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 49–65 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiong, X. Zhang, H. Wang, G. Liu, G. Wang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3859–3862 RSC .
Q. Xiong, Y. Wang, P.-F. Liu, L.-R. Zheng, G. Wang, H.-G. Yang, P.-K. Wong, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801450 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Dai, K. Du, Z. Li, M. Liu, Y. Ma, H. Sun, X. Zhang and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27242–27253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Qiu, G. Liu, W. Zheng, W. Feng, F. Gao, W. Cao, Y. Fu, W. Hu and P. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11357–11363 RSC .
F. Ming, H. Liang, H. Shi, X. Xu, G. Mei and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15148–15155 RSC .
Y. Shi, Y. Zhou, D.-R. Yang, W.-X. Xu, C. Wang, F.-B. Wang, J.-J. Xu, X.-H. Xia and H.-Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15479–15485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, J. Zhu, J. Zhang, K. Tao, D. Gao and P. Xi, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 260, 24–30 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, X. Ma, Q. Lu, Q. Li, C. Han, Z. Xing and X. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 249, 72–78 CrossRef CAS .
C. Du, H. Huang, J. Jian, Y. Wu, M. Shang and W. Song, Appl. Catal., A, 2017, 538, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, J. Du, B. Hou and C.-L. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26066–26076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fang, D. Liu, Q. Lu, X. Sun and A. M. Asiri, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 63, 60–64 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jiang, B. Zhang, Z. Li, G. Jin and J. Hao, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 1438–1446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chia, N. A. A. Sutrisnoh, Z. Sofer, J. Luxa and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 3199–3208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, H. Wu, P. li, H. Chen, R. Jiang and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10173–10181 RSC .
G. He, W. Zhang, Y. Deng, C. Zhong, W. Hu and X. Han, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 366 CrossRef .
C. Sun, J. Zhang, J. Ma, P. Liu, D. Gao, K. Tao and D. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11234–11238 RSC .
A. Maiti and S. K. Srivastava, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19712–19726 RSC .
Y. Xia, J. Huang, W. Wu, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Zhu, J. Yao, L. Xu, Y. Sun, L. Zhang, R. Lu, J. Xiong and G. Zou, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 4424–4430 CrossRef CAS .
L. Najafi, S. Bellani, R. Oropesa-Nuñez, A. Ansaldo, M. Prato, A. E. Del Rio Castillo and F. Bonaccorso, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801764 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Bhuvaneshwari Balasubramaniam	Dr. Bhuvaneshwari Balasubramaniam is a Woman Scientist at the Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India. She completed her Ph.D. in Chemistry (2013) in India. Her research interests include polymer synthesis, corrosion analysis, nanocomposites for energy applications, cryogenic treatment of metals, repair and retrofitting of structures, computational modelling and environmental applications. She is the recipient of a Quick Hire Scientist Fellowship and Ad hoc Scientist Position at the CSIR Structural Engineering Research Centre (SERC), Chennai, India. She received a certificate of merit for research conducted at CSIR-SERC, Chennai. Dr. Bhuvaneshwari has authored more than 10 research articles in SCI journals and 2 book chapters.
Narendra Singh	Dr. Narendra Singh pursued his Ph.D. degree in Chemical Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. He completed postdoctoral research at AIST Nagoya, Japan. Moreover, he received a B.Tech. in Biochemical Engineering (2010) from Harcourt Butler Technological Institute, Kanpur, India, and M.Tech. in Chemical Engineering (2012) from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India. He has authored 11 research articles in reputable international journals, and 2 book chapters. His research interests are the fabrication of nanostructures (metal nanoparticles, metal oxide nanofibers, quantum dots, etc.) and the surface treatment of polymer/metal surfaces for applications such as photocatalysis, sensors, energy devices, oil/water separation, omniphobic surfaces, etc.
Prasenjit Kar	Dr. Prasenjit Kar received his PhD degree from the S. N. national Centre For Basic Sciences (Calcutta University). He is currently working as an Institute Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of Chemical Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. His research interests focus on the design of novel functional nanomaterials, the understanding of charge carrier dynamics and their application towards wastewater treatment.
Ankit Tyagi	Ankit Tyagi received his Bachelor degree in 2010 from the Institute of Engineering and Technology Lucknow and Master's degree in 2012 from the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, both in Chemical Engineering. He is currently pursuing his doctoral degree at the Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. His current research interests focus on the development of metal oxide nanostructures for high energy density supercapacitor applications.
Jai Prakash	Dr. Jai Prakash is working as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology (NIT) Hamirpur, India. He worked as an ‘INSPIRE Faculty’ member at IIT Kanpur, India. He completed his PhD in Chemistry (India) and did postdoctoral research at AMU, Marseille (France), ULB (Belgium), UFS (South Africa) and INRS-EMT (Canada). He has received several scientific national/international awards including DAAD (Germany), Merit Scholarship Award (Canada), Promising Young Researcher Award (South Africa), Guest scientist (NIMS Japan), etc. He has published more than 50 research articles. His major research fields are functional nanomaterials for energy and environmental applications.
Raju Kumar Gupta	Dr. Raju Kumar Gupta is currently an Associate Professor at the Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. He received his Ph.D. degree in 2010 from the National University of Singapore. His current research interests are photocatalysis, perovskite solar cells, supercapacitors, and nanostructured materials for energy and environmental applications. He has been a recipient of several fellowships and awards for his outstanding career in the academic and research fields. Dr. Gupta is an editorial board member of several international journals, as well as a member of scientific bodies. Some of his significant appointments include Associate Editor for ‘Solar Energy’, Editorial board member for ‘IET Nanodielectrics’ and Advisory board member for ‘Molecular Systems Design & Engineering’.

Design, System, Application
The present article reviews the potential environmental applications of engineered 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). The emergent 2D TMDs and their enhanced performance through doping have been focused upon primarily in this review as doping alters the structural and electronic properties in the TMD systems. The photocatalytic efficiencies of doped TMDs ensure their high active state densities and tunable bandgaps. Also, the tunable photoluminescence properties of TMDs make them unique candidates for the detection of nitro explosives and toxic metals. The possibility of metal and non-metal doping in 2D TMDs has shown enhanced properties towards HER as well as OER applications.


 	Fig. 1  Electronic, opto-electronic and energy devices based on 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs).9 Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright© 2017 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Typical structures of layered transition metal dichalcogenides. Cleavable 2H, 1T and 1T0 structures in layered TMDs are shown. (b) Bandgap of 2D layered materials varying from the zero band gap of graphene (white color) to the wide bandgap of hBN. The color in the column represents the corresponding wavelength of the bandgap, for example, the bandgap for MoS2 (1.8 eV) is red in color and WS2 (2.0 eV) is orange in color. Indirect materials are represented on the left (SnS2, ZrS2, HfS3, ZrS3, ZrSe3, HfS2, HfSe3, HfSe2, ZrSe2 and ZrTe2) and direct bandgap materials are represented on the right hand side of the column (h-BN, WS2, MoS2, WSe2, MoSe2, 2H–MoTe2, TiS3 and TiSe3).9 Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright© 2017 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the recently emerged novel-structured TMD nanosheets.62 Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright© 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Doping strategies for 2D MXs and their potential applications.97 Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright© 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Band-decomposed charge density of the HOMOs and LUMOs of the (a) BlueP/MoS2 and (b) BlueP/MoSe2, (c) BlueP/WS2 and (d) BlueP/WSe2 heterostructures with an isosurface value of 0.02e au−3. The red, violet, green, cyan and blue balls represent Mo, W, S, Se and P atoms, respectively.129 Reprinted with permission from ref. 129.	 

Substitution	Cation: Re, Nb, Zn, W, Mo, Fe, Cr, Mn, Fe, V, Ni	PN diode, phase transition, ferromagnetism, photodetector, transistor
Anion: Se, S, Te, O, P, N, H, Cl
Charge transfer	Gaseous: O2, H2O, NO2	PN diode, chemical & biosensor, transistor, photodetector, logic devices
Metals based: Ti4+, B3+, Al3+, Sn4+, Au3+ (Au), K+ (K), Ag, Pd, Pt, Sc, Y, Zn, Ca2N, MoO3, WO3 (WOx), ATO, Cs2CO3
Organic: OTS, APTMS, FOTS, BV, Pc, F4TCNQ, R6G, Co6Se8(PEt3)6, PPh3
Intercalation	Ions: H+, Li+, Na+, K+, NH4+	Exfoliation, HER, capacitor, phase transition, transistor, PN diodes
Atoms: Cu, Co, Ag, Au, Fe, In, Ni, Pd, Sn, P
Electrostatic	Floating gate by Gr, BP, MoS2, Au, Ag, Co, Al, HfO2, TiO2, ferroelectric gate: the remnant polarization electric field in PZT, P(VDF-TrFE)	Memories, PN diodes, photodetectors, transistors, logic devices

 	Fig. 6  Various environmental applications of doped TMDs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Possible mechanism for visible-light-driven selective production of HCOOH from CO2 reduction over (Mo–Bi)Sx/meso CdS in the presence of [Bmim]BF4.170 Reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Photoluminescence emission spectrum of functionalized MoS2 QDs at 340 nm excitation. (b) Fluorescence quenching of functionalized MoS2 QDs after gradual addition of different amounts of 1 mM TNP solution at buffer 7. (c) Quenching efficiency of MoS2 QDs towards different nitro aromatic compounds after the addition of 200 μL of 1 mM TNP solution at buffer 7. (d) Spectral overlap between the emission spectrum of functionalized MoS2 QDs and the absorption spectra of different nitro compounds.178 Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright© 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) UV and PL spectra of B, N–MoS2. (b) Selective PL response of an aqueous B, N–MoS2 solution towards different metal ions (λex = 280 nm, F0 and F are the fluorescence intensities of B, N–MoS2 at 343 nm in the absence and presence of metal ions, respectively). (c) PL spectra of B, N–MoS2 at different Hg2+ concentrations. (d) Linear relationship of fluorescent probes for Hg2+.180 Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright© 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) FL spectra of the fluorescent MoS2 nanosheets with different Pb2+ concentrations (0, 0.5, 1.0, …, 15.0 μM). (b) Calibration curve for Pb2+ sensing. (c) FL spectra of the fluorescent MoS2 nanosheets with each individual metal ion. (d) Selectivity of a fluorescent MoS2 nano-sheet-based sensor for Pb2+. F and F0 denote the fluorescence intensity of the fluorescent MoS2 nanosheets with or without each metal ion at the maximum emission wavelength of 406 nm, respectively.183 Reprinted with permission from ref. 183. Copyright© 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Photocatalytic degradation of RhB by different photocatalysts under visible light irradiation. (b) UV-vis spectroscopic changes of the RhB aqueous solution in the presence of N-doped MoS2 nanoflowers. (c) Plot of ln(C0/C) with irradiation time for N-doped MoS2 nanoflowers and MoS2 nanosheets. (d) Reusability experiment for the degradation of RhB by N-doped MoS2 nanoflowers under visible light irradiation.194 Reprinted with permission from ref. 194.	 

 	Fig. 12  Illustration of RhB degradation by N-doped MoS2 nanoflowers.194 Reprinted with permission from ref. 194.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photocatalytic rate of H2 production and (b) time course H2 evolution of all of the studied samples in a 0.5 M Na2S/Na2SO3 mixture irradiated under simulated solar light over a duration of 6 h. (c) Total H2 yield for each cycle and (d) time course of the photocatalytic H2 production of 20Cu–MoS2/Bi2S3 under simulated solar light.196 Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright© 2018 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 14  Band alignment diagram with proposed electron–hole transfer mechanism.196 Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright© 2018 Elsevier Inc.	 
HER 2H+ + 2e− → H2; Eo = 0 vs. normal hydrogen electrode	(1)
OER 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−; Eo = 1.23 V vs. normal hydrogen electrode	(2)

 	Fig. 15  Optical, SEM, and Raman mapping of defective 2D terrace MoSe2/CoMoSe LH and LH and VH nanolayers. (a and b) Optical images of the 2D MoSe2/CoMoSe LH nanolayers. (c) Optical image of 2D MoSe2/CoMoSe LH and VH nanolayers. (d and e) SEM images of the 2D MoSe2/CoMoSe LH nanolayers. (f–h) SEM images of the 2D MoSe2/CoMoSe LH and VH nanolayers. (i) Raman mapping of the 2D MoSe2/CoMoSe LH nanolayers.210 Reprinted with permission from ref. 210.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
