Economically advantageous pathways for reducing greenhouse gas emissions from industrial hydrogen under common, current economic conditions   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE03768K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE03768K
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1517-1529Economically advantageous pathways for reducing greenhouse gas emissions from industrial hydrogen under common, current economic conditions†

        
          
            Cody E. 
            Finke‡
*abc, 
      
        
          
            Hugo F. 
            Leandri‡
bcd, 
      
        
          
            Evody Tshijik 
            Karumb
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            David 
            Zheng
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Michael R. 
            Hoffmann
          
        
      de and 

        
          
            Neil A. 
            Fromer
          
        
      e
aCyclotron Road, LBNL, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. E-mail: cody@brimstone.energy
bJoint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, LBNL, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
cBrimstone Energy Inc., Oakland, CA 94609, USA
dLinde Center for Global Environmental Science, Caltech, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
eThe Resnick Sustainability Institute, Caltech, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
Received 
      1st December 2020
    , Accepted 3rd February 2021First published on 15th February 2021AbstractHydrogen is a major industrial chemical whose manufacture is responsible for ∼3% of global carbon dioxide emissions. >95% of hydrogen is made via reforming fossil fuels which typically co-produces hydrogen and waste carbon dioxide. Nearly all other hydrogen is co-produced with other commodity chemicals. Unfortunately, many alternative, clean hydrogen production processes are small-scale because they require major reductions in capital cost or energy prices to be economical enough for industry. Because the climate problem is urgent, and the economics of future energy is uncertain, this paper seeks to expand the options for producing industrial-scale, clean hydrogen under common, present-day economic conditions. First, we build a model to understand the economic and carbon dioxide emissions constraints of sulfur electrolysis which is an emerging process that cogenerates hydrogen and co-salable sulfuric acid and has the potential to produce up to 36% of the world's current hydrogen demand under present-day, average US economic conditions. We also use our model to evaluate water electrolysis, which cogenerates hydrogen and waste oxygen, but is not economical under present-day average US economic conditions. We then propose criteria for identifying clean hydrogen production chemistries. Using these criteria, we find enough reactions to have the combined potential to make over 150% of the world's industrial hydrogen needs under present-day, average US economic conditions while reducing cost and reducing or eliminating CO2 emissions. Given the urgency of the climate problem, we believe that an economic analysis, such as this is crucial to near-term CO2 emissions reductions.

Broader context
Industrial processes are responsible for over 30% of global greenhouse gas emissions.1 The “big 4” industrial emissions sources are the production of cement, steel, hydrogen, and aluminum which, combined, account for almost 16% of global GHG emissions.1,2 Hydrogen production alone is responsible for over 2% of global greenhouse gas emissions, approximately the same as all of the world's airplanes.1,3 The problem with decarbonizing the hydrogen industry is a problem of cost. Despite decades of development in currently high-cost alternative hydrogen production pathways like water electrolysis, methane pyrolysis, and biomass gasification, the low-cost, CO2-intensive steam reforming fossil fuels still accounts for >95% of global hydrogen production. Meanwhile, ultra-low-cost technologies like plasma cracking methane have gone from lab to industrial scale in less than a decade.4 One of the key examples of slow adoption and high cost is water electrolysis which even after over 200 years of development has minimal market share and is well-known to be 4–10× more costly than steam-reforming fossil fuels under modern economic conditions.5–8 In this paper, we present novel chemistries that may be able to quickly replace the emissions-intensive steam reforming of fossil fuels and meet the world's hydrogen demand because they are both clean and low cost.

Introduction
Hydrogen is among the most consumed chemicals on the planet by mol (∼35 teramoles per year; 74 MMT per year).5,9–11 It is used primarily (∼49%) for the production of ammonia and the hydrodesulfurization of petrochemicals (∼37%).5 Currently, >95% of hydrogen is made from the thermochemical reformation of fossil fuels. Hydrogen production is responsible for ∼3% of global CO2 emissions annually, equal to the overall emissions of airplanes (∼2.25% of greenhouse gas emissions; ∼1200 MMT of CO2 per year).1,5 The most common hydrogen production process, Steam Methane Reforming (SMR), may co-produce hydrogen with CO2 for ∼$1.15 per kg hydrogen in the US.6,7 SMR CO2 is typically wasted but also may be used in the synthesis of urea fertilizer or for enhanced oil recovery.12 Some hydrocarbon reformation reactions may also cogenerate process-emissions-free, low-cost hydrogen. One such emerging technology is plasma cracking methane which since 2012 has demonstrated the potential to make industrial scale, market-rate, process-emissions-free hydrogen from natural gas as a cogeneration product to carbon black.4 The market for carbon black is ∼1.2 Tmol per year (14 MMT carbon black per year) meaning that, at full scale, plasma cracking could produce ∼7% of the world's hydrogen demand at a 2:1 H2:C molar ratio (7 MMT H2 per year).13 Another example of clean hydrogen from fossil carbon reformation is steam cracking propane to make propylene which produces ∼3 Tmol hydrogen per year (6 MMT H2 per year or ∼8% of global demand) without cogenerating CO2. This hydrogen is so cheap that it is often burned for heat, but in some modern refineries it is separated and utilized for hydrodesulfurization.14 The major technology, besides the reformation of hydrocarbons, that has produced hydrogen at the industrial scale is the Chlor-Alkali Process which currently produces ∼0.75 Tmols of hydrogen per year (1.5 MMT H2 per year, ∼2% of global demand).15 Older chlor-alkali plants oxidize this hydrogen for electricity, but modern plants sell it at market rate.10,16 The total combined theoretical, economical process-emissions-free hydrogen production capacity of plasma cracking methane, steam cracking propane, and the chlor-alkali process is therefore ∼5.25 Tmols per year (12.5 MMT H2 per year) or ∼17% of current hydrogen demand. Unfortunately, much of this process-emissions-free hydrogen is unutilized, likely due to the low economic benefit of retrofitting fully depreciated, outdated infrastructure.16
While these cogenerative technologies show great promise in the near term, there are many technologies that, as of 2020, are relatively unused and are also not estimated to produce hydrogen for $1.15 per kg under current economic conditions. These so-far relatively small scale hydrogen production technologies include water electrolysis (co-produces hydrogen and oxygen gas), various thermochemical water splitting cycles (co-produces hydrogen and oxygen gas),17,18 biomass gasification (co-produces hydrogen and CO2), and methane pyrolysis (co-produces hydrogen and solid carbon) which are estimated to produce hydrogen for ∼$5.50 (380% more than SMR),5–7 ∼$4 (250% more than SMR),19 ∼$2.41 (110% more than SMR),6 and ∼$1.58 (40% more than SMR)20 per kg hydrogen respectively. We also acknowledge that there are many individual locations where these prices are lower. Some notable examples for water electrolysis which may yield prices as low as $2.93 per kg H2 are Texas, USA and Germany which both have renewable electricity subsidies in excess of $0.023 per kW h,21 or Quebec, Canada which has near 100% capacity factor mixed hydro and wind electricity for $0.024 per kW h (compared to average US electricity at $0.07 per kW h),22,23 or places with high capacity factor, low cost solar energy, like Sourthern California, USA.24
In the present analysis, we seek to understand the economics governing the production of clean hydrogen. We begin by modeling the economics of Sulfur Electrolysis (SE), an emerging electrochemical process which cogenerates hydrogen and sulfuric acid at a 1:1 molar ratio and could cogenerate ∼3.25 Tmols per year of clean hydrogen (∼9% of global hydrogen demand) if it met the global demand for sulfuric acid.25 Additionally, cogeneration of these commodities may be especially valuable because sulfuric acid and hydrogen are commonly co-consumed in fertilizer production processes.26 Future SE technology may electrolyze H2S (a byproduct of oil and gas mining or, in a fossil-fuel-free future, a byproduct of mining sulfur and sulfide minerals like some copper ores) thus producing hydrogen and sulfuric acid at a 4:1 molar ratio which could provide 36% of the world's hydrogen demand and therefore may eliminate the need for SMR at ammonia plants.
We then use this model to compare the economics and emissions intensity of SE to the more well-studied water electrolysis (WE). One key economic assumption that we explore in this comparison is what it would take for hydrogen produced from ultra-low-cost, intermittent solar to be cheaper than hydrogen made on grid electricity. Finally, we define criteria for finding economically advantageous, process-emissions-free hydrogen production pathways. Given the projected urgency of reducing greenhouse gas emissions, we consider it imperative to create near-term models to find economically efficient pathways to reduce CO2 emissions from hydrogen production.13
Methods
Our model uses current component Capital Expenditure (CapEx) and Operating Expenditure (OpEx) values from the DOE H2A model and it takes a set of empirical data that represents allowed operational parameters (voltage, current, maximum capacity factor, etc) and then calculates the optimized cost of hydrogen given those inputs. Our model defines the CapEx for major plant components including, the electrolyzer, the AC/DC rectifier, the DC/DC converter, batteries, photovoltaic cells (PV), the hydrogen compressor, and in the case of SE the sulfuric acid concentrator and the SO2 generator. Other components are treated as the balance of systems (e.g. land, wiring, owner's fees, installation labor, and piping). The model also includes routine maintenance, major maintenance, labor, and raw materials (e.g. water, electricity, and for SE, sulfur). The model assumes that operational parameters (e.g. operating voltage, current density, and faradaic efficiency) and CapEx at various plant sizes are governed by a set of empirical scaling relationships (eqn (S1)–(S7), ESI†). As in the H2A model, electrochemical components scale stepwise in 500 kg H2 per day increments.6,7 Other active systems (e.g. the SO2 generator and the sulfuric acid concentrator for SE) scale non-linearly according to empirical data from these systems in the real world. The electrolyzer's operational parameters are governed by demonstrated experimental evidence (see sections below). Table 1 shows many CapEx and OpEx parameters for this model, and a full list may be found in Table S3 (ESI†). All model code can be found in the ESI.†
Table 1 Plant OpEx and CapEx data in 2020 USD





CapEx






a Reference case.





Electrolyzer size (in kg H2 per day)
500


Water electrolyzer ($103 per electrolyzer)a
532


Sulfur electrolyzer (at 1.2 A cm−2; $103 per electrolyzer)
632


Electrolyzer hard balance of systems ($103 per electrolyzer)
600


DCDC converter ($103 per electrolyzer)
471


Installation ($103 per electrolyzer)
136


Soft balance of systems ($103 per electrolyzer)
24







OpEx





PEM electrolyzer electricity consumption (kW h kg−1 H2)
49


Balance of systems energy consumption (kW h kg−1 H2)
5


Electricity from sulfur burning (kW h kg−1 H2)
12


Sulfur electrolyzer energy consumption (kW h kg−1 H2)
33


Routine maintenance (% of install CapEx per year)
3


Major maintenance (% of install CapEx/7 years)
15




Detailed model description for sulfur electrolysis
The primary steps of SE (eqn (1) and (2)) have been investigated extensively because eqn (1) is the first step in the Contact Process (the standard thermochemical process to produce sulfuric acid)27 and eqn (2) is the electrochemical step in the Hybrid Sulfur Cycle (a proposed combined electrochemical and thermochemical water splitting cycle).28 S8 + 8O2 → 8SO2, ΔG° = −300 kJ mol−1 SO2(1) SO2 + 2H2O → H2SO4 + H2, ΔG° = 85 kJ mol−1; E° = 0.16 V(2)In our SE model, sulfur is burned in air (eqn (1)) to produce SO2. The SO2 is then dissolved in a mixture of water and sulfuric acid and electrochemically converted into hydrogen and sulfuric acid (eqn (2)).27 A plant level box-diagram is shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  A simplified reactor scheme. Sulfur is burned in air and the resulting SO2 is mixed with water where it is used in the electrolyzer as a raw material to cogenerate hydrogen and sulfuric acid. The sulfuric acid may be concentrated before use. 
Major sulfur electrolysis plant components

SO2 generator. 
In the Contact Process, burning sulfur produces SO2 and pressurized steam which is used to heat the downstream SO3 generation reactor. Additional pressurized steam is produced when the SO3 is hydrated to produce oleum and eventually sulfuric acid. The heat from this process is used to export as much as 0.2 kW hs electricity per kg of sulfuric acid for state of the art contact process plants.26 In SE, the heat generated from burning sulfur (eqn (2)) is also turned into pressurized steam used to produce electricity for the electrochemistry. Our model assumes that 30% of the heat produced from sulfur burning could be used as electricity. In order to be consistent with a conservative estimate, we equated the CapEx of our sulfur furnace and turbine to the CapEx of an entire contact process plant which includes the CapEx required for electricity generation from burning sulfur (see Fig. S1 and eqn (S1) for details, ESI†).27 Under standard assumptions (see Table 1), as much as 12 kW h s kg−1 of H2 were provided by burning sulfur.


Sulfur depolarization electrolyzer. 
Our techno-economic analysis models a plant that utilizes industrial scale sulfur depolarization electrolyzers (SDEs). Because we are unaware of any industrial scale SDEs, we modified recent overnight CapEx numbers for Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) water electrolyzers from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory's (NREL) H2A model.6 Our model takes current OpEx and CapEx data and estimates the LCH. Some studies utilize a low-cost carbon-based electrolyzer (similar to a PEM fuel cell) as an electrolyzer with cell voltage of <1 V. While the use of carbon instead of gold or tantalum coated titanium is an obvious way to reduce CapEx, our analysis did not consider this option.29 The CapEx for electrolyzers in the H2A model assumes that each electrolyzer is capable of producing 500 kg H2 per day and that the catalyst can reach a current density of 1.5 A cm−2. It is likely that for a 500 kg H2 per day electrolyzer that operates at a lower current density than in the H2A model, the electrolyzer would need to be bigger and therefore more expensive. To estimate the cost of an SDE (CapExlyzer_SE) from a PEM electrolyzer, the PEM electrolyzer CapEx (CapExlyzer_WE) was multiplied by the ratio of the operating geometric current densities of the water electrolysis catalyst (jWE) to the SDE catalyst (jSE) (see eqn (3)). It is difficult for most SDEs to reach current densities higher than 1.2 A cm−2 without significant voltage losses due to mass transport limitations.17Eqn (3) results in higher CapEx for SDEs than PEM electrolyzers, especially at high sulfuric acid concentrations where the dissolution of SO2 is suppressed and the voltage increases due to concentration effects. CapExlyzer_SE = jWE/jSE·CapExlyzer_WE(3)Eqn (3) also allows our model to tune the operating current density of the reaction because the relationship between voltage and current is non-linear such that energy consumption per kg H2 decreases with decreasing voltage but the CapEx of the electrolyzer increases linearly with decreasing voltage. Our model uses this relationship to determine the cheapest operating current density for the plant. Fig. S2 (ESI†) shows the calculated price of hydrogen for a variety of electrolyzer costs and operating current densities where the lowest price of hydrogen for a given CapEx and current density represents the optimized operating condition.


Sulfuric acid concentrator. 
Our model assumes that sulfuric acid and hydrogen were cogenerated in a SDE with currently demonstrated voltage, current, and faradaic efficiency relationships.28,30 Most industrial applications use 62 to 98 mass percent (10 to 18 M) sulfuric acid. Studies have shown that modern SDE can generate 65% sulfuric acid and therefore, we assume that produced sulfuric acid must be concentrated for many applications (see key technical challenges below and Fig. S3–S5 and eqn (S2)–(S6), and Tables S1, S2 for details, ESI†).28,30
To account for acid concentration, we use real data from Sinopec Nanjing Chemical Industry Co. Ltd from a currently installed plant in Nanjing, China to add CapEx and OpEx values for sulfuric acid concentration via combined vacuum concentration and spent acid regeneration processes. Costs of raw materials, permitting, and labor are converted to US values to be consistent with the model (Table 2).
Table 2 CapEx and OpEx associated with energy




Photovoltaics (PVs)a







a Similar to other studies, it is assumed that PV could be placed on top of all structures and therefore no soft balance of systems would be associated with PV.7
b Levelized cost of energy.
c This value agrees with previous studies.34





CapEx (USD per kW)




Module
0.31


Hard balance of systems
0.22


Installation cost
0.12


Soft balance of systems
—


OpEx (USD per kW per year)
17


LCOEb for first PV panel (USD per kW)
0.043c






Batteries






CapEx (USD per kW)




Module
180


Hard balance of systems
60


Installation cost
27


Soft balance of systems
33


OpEx (% installed CapEx/12 years)
69


LCOE for first battery (USD per kW)
0.21c





General model considerations

Maintenance. 
As in the H2A model, we assume that maintenance requires replacement of 15% of installed CapEx every 7 years. Three percent of installed CapEx was added as annual OpEx to account for annual maintenance.2


Energy sources. 
There is a prevailing economic assumption that, with cheap enough solar electricity, any electrochemical process can make CO2-free products for lower cost than grid electricity simply by running intermittently on solar energy.31 We test this assumption by running the model in either grid-assisted with optional onsite solar mode or solar-only mode and compare the results. In grid-assisted mode, grid electricity is used to supplement onsite solar with optional battery storage in the cheapest possible configuration. Solar-only mode only allows the model to use solar-derived electricity. Our model uses a value of $0.07 per kW h for grid electricity (the 2020 US industrial average).23 The cost of solar, similar to previous models, is calculated using three years of hourly resolved insolation data which was spatially averaged across the entire contiguous United States (CONUS; see ESI† for details).32 While there was considerable seasonal variation, the CONUS average solar capacity factor was 20%.32 The solar panels in this analysis were assumed to have a peak power rating of 160 W m−2 with a 0.75% loss in efficiency per year of operation. In grid assisted with optional onsite solar mode, solar panels were added beyond where their electricity was 100% directly used until the marginal Levelized Cost Of Energy (LCOE) for solar was higher than that of grid electricity. Optional batteries were rated to a constant annual discharge over a 12-year lifetime after which they would need to be replaced.33 Costs associated with energy are presented in Table 3. All battery costs assume a 0.5 kW max power output per kW h energy storage.33 The time of day or year that energy was needed could also be changed by increasing the number of electrolyzers and running them for less time per day or year (capacity factor). The capacity factor of the plant was allowed to vary between 1% and 97% of a year. The model optimized capacity factor, size of the onsite solar installation, energy drawn from the grid, and energy stored in batteries. Under standard assumptions, despite a 20% capacity factor for solar, 29% of energy needed was provided by solar while 71% was provided by the grid, no battery storage was used and solar panels were left open circuit when they were overproducing. The plant capacity factor was 97%. For the solar-only case, similar to analyses done on water electrolysis, due to high overall plant CapEx, it was cheaper to have a capacity factor of 97% and operate on battery based electricity than to decrease the capacity factor.
Table 3 Summary of cost and emissions for various hydrogen production pathways. SMR is steam methane reforming, SE is sulfur electrolysis at a 1:1 molar ratio of H2:H2SO4, SE4 is sulfur electrolysis at a 4:1 molar ratio of H2:H2SO4. All H2SO4 was concentrated to 96% by mass. These data are calculated under standard assumptions (Table 1 and Table S3, ESI)




Production process
Grid-assisted solar energy
Only solar energy


Cost ($ per kg H2)
Emissions (kg CO2 per kg H2)
Cost ($ per kg H2)
Emissions (kg CO2 per kg H2)




SMR
1.15
9.28
5.05
5.50


SE
0.51
5.03
2.32
0.00


WE
5.72
15.79
9.91
0.00


SE4
1.30
9.76
6.87
0.00






Levelized cost calculation. 

Eqn (4) calculates levelized costs; variable definitions follow: LC is the levelized cost (e.g. of hydrogen); product is the annual amount of product made (in kW h s for batteries or solar panels and in kgs for hydrogen or sulfuric acid); lifetime is the time the plant lasts before replacement in years; OpEx is annual operational expenditure; CapEx is the total capital expenditure of building a plant; r is the rate of return; and t is time in years. We assume a one-year build time where no product was produced. We also assume that plant capacity reached the maximum capacity factor during the first year of operation. We also assume a rate of return of 12% as standard. This is higher, and therefore more conservative, than the H2A model which assumes an 8% rate of return. Our model assumes no taxes, subsidies, or deferred debt. (4)Consistent with our conservative assumptions, when we use SMR CapEx and OpEx numbers from the H2A model, our model estimates an LCH of $1.25 instead of $1.15 per kg H2. However, we use $1.15 per kg as our reference point for SMR which accounts for the relative riskiness of the new technology compared to the incumbent technology.


CO2 emissions analysis. 
The amount of produced CO2 varies for electrochemical processes based on how that electricity is generated (e.g. coal, natural gas, solar, biomass etc). Modern SMR emits around 9.28 kg CO2 per kg hydrogen and is heated with natural gas.6 This process is thermochemical with 59–83% of CO2 being chemical process CO2 emissions and the other 17–41% coming from heating.3 The full process requires 41–46 kW h s per kg hydrogen of thermal energy and is net endergonic at the thermodynamic limit.35 The net sulfur electrolysis process is exergonic; heat harvested from burning sulfur can be captured and converted into electricity to run the SDE. While it is theoretically possible to run the plant only on burning sulfur (without exogenous electricity) the assumed energy consumption of the plant is too large for the assumed conversion efficiency of heat to electricity from the sulfur burner (30%) even at low operating voltages.
For emissions, we use an average emissions factor for US natural gas electricity of 0.41 kg CO2 per kW h because we assume that natural gas electricity is available wherever industrial hydrogen is needed (this emissions intensity is slightly lower than the US average of 0.44 kg CO2 per kW h).36 Electricity harvested from sulfur burning, PV, or PV plus batteries was assumed to emit no CO2. If sulfuric acid concentrating was necessary, electricity and natural gas requirements were taken into account for the concentration step (see Tables S1, S2 and Fig. S4, S5 for details, ESI†).


Sensitivity analysis. 
We performed a sensitivity analysis to determine how the price of hydrogen would respond to several factors: electrolyzer current density, amount of produced hydrogen, CapEx of the components, catalyst stability, catalyst activity, process faradaic efficiency, catalyst cost, prices of sulfur and sulfuric acid, the rate of return, cost of electricity (from PV, grid, or batteries), and a CO2 tax. For each sensitivity analysis, the parameter of interest was varied while the current density and capacity factor of the plant changed to find the cheapest possible plant configuration. All other parameters were set to constant values. Parameter values as well as ranges for values are presented in Table S1 (ESI†). Real data from lab scale SDEs were used for current density and corresponding voltages.28 Current density was corrected based on an empirical relationship between voltage and faradaic efficiency (see Fig. S7–S9 and eqn S4–S6 for details, ESI†). A detailed discussion of the sensitivity parameter range selection may be found in Table S3 (ESI†).


Comparing cogeneration to SMR. 
It is difficult to make a direct comparison between SMR and cogenerative processes because SMR only makes a single hydrogen commodity while cogenerative processes make at least two commodities. For the purposes of this analysis, we make this comparison by subtracting out the revenue of selling the cogenerative commodity. In the case of SE, sulfuric acid may be sold at an US average of $100 per tonne in 2018.37 Another way of comparing these costs would be to subtract a levelized cost of sulfuric acid production via the contact process which would represent a maximum LCH ($6.83 per 49 kg H2SO4 according to our model). We find negligible differences between the methods. We present results from the former method because the selling price of sulfuric acid has been validated by the market whereas the levelized cost of sulfuric acid is an estimate (see Tables S4 and S5, ESI† for details on levelized cost of sulfuric acid and hydrogen via the contact process and SMR).


Model validation. 
We validated our model by comparing LCH values for both grid-assisted and solar-only WE hydrogen as well as the LCOE from solar. We found that all of these values agreed with previous studies as discussed in Table 3 and below.5,7,34 We also considered, non-average conditions and found that our model was in good agreement with previous studies that showed the LCH from WE as low as $2.93 per kg with favorable geographic constraints and subsidies see Table S6 (ESI†) for details.21,22,24

Results and discussion
Levelized cost of hydrogen under standard assumptions
Under standard assumptions, our techno-economic model estimates that the LCH from SE is $0.51 per kg H2 when 96% concentration by mass sulfuric acid is cogenerated. This price is considerably lower than the LCH from SMR (Table 3). Next, we investigated the production of hydrogen using only solar-derived electricity. We found that the optimized solar-only LCH is $2.32 per kg H2 when 96% concentration by mass sulfuric acid is cogenerated, more expensive than SMR (Table 3).
CO2 emissions analysis
Under standard assumptions, the calculated cheapest price for hydrogen for SE was found when the reaction required 18 kW h kg−1 H2 of exogenous electricity (30 kW h kg−1 H2 if no electricity is harvested from sulfur combustion, see Fig. S2, ESI†). This happened to occur around the point where the current density switched from the mass transfer limited regime to the charge transfer limited regime (Fig. S5, ESI†). With an economically optimal solar penetration, SE was found to have fewer greenhouse gas emissions than SMR by almost a factor of two even if sulfuric acid needed to be concentrated to 96% (Table 3). Even though we are utilizing electricity from burning sulfur for SE, it may be fair to claim that if a state-of-the-art contact process plant were replaced with SE, 0.2 kW h of clean electricity may be lost for every kg of H2SO4 that is made. In which case, natural gas electricity may need to replace this demand, and the relative emissions intensity of SE would increase by 4 kg CO2 per kg H2. This change would result in 9.03 kg CO2 per kg H2 for 96% H2SO4, still lower than SMR (Table 3).
These data indicate that if SE were to meet the global demand for sulfuric acid (∼3 Tmols in 2017)25 and the produced hydrogen were to replace around 9% of global hydrogen demand as a commodity chemical, then up to 60 MMT of CO2 emissions could be avoided by the use of grid assisted SE with onsite solar. Under a solar-only scenario, current technology for SE is not cheap enough to make hydrogen that is competitive with hydrogen from SMR. However, two ways to make clean SE cost competitive with SMR are to (1) levy a carbon tax of $115 per tonne of CO2 for the solar-only version or (2) use a standard hydroelectric, nuclear, or geothermal grid at its current price.38 Clean-energy-only SE could reduce CO2 emissions by up to 145 MMT at full scale.
Future sulfur electrolysis technology
Both H2S and Sx have been investigated in electrochemical cells with coproduction of H2 at the cathode (eqn (5)–(7)).39–43 xH2S(g) → xH2 + Sx(s), E° = 33 kJ mol−1 H2; E° = 0.14 V(5) Sx(s) + 2xH2O → xSO2 + 2xH2, ΔG° = 174 kJ mol−1 H2; E° = 0.5 V(6) SO2 + 2H2O → H2SO4 + H2, 85 kJ mol−1 H2; E° = 0.16 V(7)While eqn (5)–(7) have been performed at the lab scale, we are not aware of long-term stability testing or other attempts to commercialize this technology. One major problem is deposition of solid sulfur on the cathode during oxidation of H2S. To solve this problem, we used 50% sulfuric acid as an electrolyte and were able to maintain a cell temperature of 118 °C which, at such high sulfuric acid concentrations, allowed liquid sulfur and liquid water to be present in the electrolyzer while preventing solid sulfur build-up. Despite the likelihood that this electrolyzer could be graphite-based due to the low operating voltages, we assumed that this future H2S electrolyzer has the same CapEx as a present-day PEM electrolyzer which is more expensive than a graphite system.6,29 Using a lab-measured JV curve for the rate limiting electrochemical oxidation of solid sulfur (Fig. S10, ESI†) we can perform the same analysis as above. We assumed operation at <1.23 V to ensure that water splitting is not contributing to faradaic losses.
Under this scenario, we find that hydrogen and 96% sulfuric acid could be produced at a 4:1 molar ratio for $1.30 and $0.97 per kg H2 using $0.07 and $0.06 per kW h electricity prices respectively (Table 3). Unfortunately, with a natural gas grid assisting onsite solar, this process emits 9.8 kg CO2 per kg H2 and therefore is dirtier than SMR. However, with a 25% cleaner-than-natural-gas-grid (0.33 kg CO2 per kW h or less) this process would be cleaner than SMR. This grid could be achieved by using a mix of wind, hydro, nuclear, and geothermal which all have larger capacity factors than solar and may decrease the price of electricity.38 This indicates that 4:1 molar ratio sulfur electrolysis could be a feasible pathway to produce up to ∼36% (13 Tmol or 26 MMT) of the world's H2 with some technological development. Importantly, it is feasible to make 1:1 and 4:1 clean SE that is cheaper than SMR using current technology prices for hydro and geothermal (LCOE $0.05 and $0.06 per kW h respectively).38
Pathways to cheaper, clean hydrogen
We conducted a sensitivity analysis to understand what would be necessary, aside from a carbon tax, for solar-only SE to outcompete SMR. We found that for SE, many individual improvements were more than enough to reduce the LCH to below that of SMR. These individual improvements include reducing the voltage requirement, reducing the solar or battery module CapEx, and reducing the balance of systems or electrolyzer CapEx (Fig. 2). Consistent with prior research on noble metal catalysts, even a 10× increase in the CapEx of the catalyst did not increase the LCH by more than 10%. These data indicate that with reasonable R&D improvements, solar-only SE may be cost competitive with SMR. A sensitivity analysis for grid assisted SE with onsite solar may be found in Fig. S10 and S11 (ESI†).
 Fig. 2  Sensitivity analysis of solar-only sulfur electrolysis. The parenthetical numbers on the vertical axis indicate the low, standard, and high assumption for each case. 
To simplify the sensitivity analysis, we analyzed the optimal system configuration for various total CapEx and electricity prices. In this analysis all component CapExes were reduced evenly. CapEx reductions made the model find new optimal operating currents, voltages, and capacity factors. Importantly, we do not report $ per kW for CapEx because the optimum operating voltage and current (and therefore power) of a given system may change based on local prices of electricity and CapEx (Fig. S2, ESI†) which yields the metric inadequate for comparison especially across different chemistries. Fig. 3 below shows the various combinations of energy price and CapEx that could allow grid-assisted-with-onsite-solar and solar-only sulfur electrolysis to outcompete SMR without a carbon tax.
 Fig. 3  LCH of SE with various CapEx and electricity price assumptions. (Above; A) Shows cost of solar-only SE while (Below; B) shows SE with onsite solar assisted by a natural gas grid. All CapEx components were reduced evenly. For the grid assisted case, the solar LCOE was held at $0.043 per kW h meaning that below that price, no solar was used. 

Fig. 3A shows that even with free PV electricity, CapEx must be reduced by ∼10% to compete with SMR. CapEx reductions also reduce the price of grid-assisted SE with onsite solar. By comparing Fig. 3A and B we can see that it is difficult for solar-only SE to be cheaper than grid assisted SE with onsite solar. In the scenario where grid-based electricity prices remain at $0.07 per kW h, solar-only SE could be cheaper than grid-assisted SE with onsite solar if solar electricity prices were $0.05, $0.02, and $0.01 per kW h if CapEx were to be 14×, 5.3× and 5× cheaper than current model assumptions respectively (Table 4). Another strategy to make 100% clean hydrogen that is cheaper than SMR could be to use present-day prices for hydro, geothermal, and some nuclear power or blended grids with >30% capacity factor (Table 4).
Table 4 Required cost reduction factors of CapEx for solar-only electrolysis to be cheaper than SMR and natural-gas-grid-assisted electrolysis with onsite solar energy for various solar prices and solar energy capacity factors. This tables represents some of the economic conditions that would guarantee that electrolysis hydrogen is clean. Grid electricity was held at $0.07 per kW h for this analysis




Capacity factor
LCOE solar ($ per kW h)
$0.05
$0.02
$0.01




20%
SE
14×
5×
5×


WE
Impossible
60×
14×


30%
SE
3×
0×
0×


WE
Impossible
35×
8×


50%
SE
0×
0×
0×


WE
Impossible
27×
6×


80%
SE
0×
0×
0×


WE
Impossible
19×
4×


100%
SE
0×
0×
0×


WE
Impossible
15×
4×




Comparison to water electrolysis
We then analyzed how the economics of making hydrogen from WE compare with SE including co-selling oxygen from WE (see Fig. S8 and S9, ESI† for details on physical parameters of WE). We found that grid-assisted WE with onsite solar was $5.72 per kg H2 and solar-only WE was $9.91 per kg H2 (Table 3). These values are consistent with previous studies.5–7 Solar-only WE would require a CO2 tax of $933 per tonne to be cost competitive with SMR.
We conducted a sensitivity analyses on model parameters for solar-only WE, and we found that, unlike solar-only SE, no single improvement could reduce the LCH from solar-only WE to be competitive with SMR. Instead, at least three improvements needed to be combined to reduce the cost of WE to below $1.15 per kg H2 (Fig. 4). For example, if the peak power rating of PVs was increased from 160 W m−2 to 500 W m−2 (LCOE = $0.014 per kW h), and the CapEx of battery modules decreased by 10× (LCOE = $0.025 per kW h), along with at 10× CapEx decrease for electrolyzers and plant balance of systems, solar-only WE would be cheaper than SMR. Similar to previous findings, even reducing the CapEx of the catalyst by 10× would only reduce the LCH by 5%.7 In all combinations of only three component CapEx reductions, the balance of systems CapEx must be reduced which is likely the hardest CapEx component to be reduced because it is made up of already mass-produced components. Therefore, it is likely that >3 system components must see ≥10× CapEx reduction for solar-only WE to be cheaper than SMR and grid-assisted WE with onsite solar.
 Fig. 4  Sensitivity analysis of solar-only water electrolysis. The parenthetical numbers on the vertical axis indicate the low, standard, and high assumption for each case. 
Co-sale of oxygen is also a way to reduce cost for WE. Oxygen (the cogeneration product of WE) is an important industrial gas with an industrial demand of ∼12 Tmols per year worldwide and a value of $40 per T.44 This would mean that co-selling oxygen could result in an additional revenue of $0.64 per kg H2 which would yield a cost of $5.08 and $9.27 per kg H2 under grid-assisted and solar-only assumptions respectively.44 Therefore, co-sale of oxygen will not allow clean water electrolysis to be cost-competitive with current technology. These data indicate that many more improvements would need to be made to a WE system than to a SE system to make solar-only hydrogen production cost competitive with SMR.
Unlike SE which is cleaner than SMR even when onsite solar is assisted by a natural gas grid, grid-assisted WE with onsite solar is only cleaner than SMR when assisted by rare grids that are >65% cleaner than natural gas (0.18 kg CO2 per kW h) ignoring the contribution of solar to the grid (solar in the grid cannot be counted towards this number because it overlaps with the time that solar produces electricity onsite at the plant). In order for WE to be cheaper and cleaner than SMR, a >65% cleaner-than-natural-gas-without-solar-grid would need to be available 24 h per day and produce electricity that costs <$0.023 per kW h. $0.023 per kW h is 2× cheaper than current hydroelectricity and solar electricity and 3× cheaper than the average US industrial electricity price. However, even at $0.023 per kW h this grid would still require CapEx to be free for WE to be cheaper than SMR (Fig. 5A). Importantly, unlike SE, there is no grid known to these authors that is both cheap enough and clean enough to allow WE to be cleaner and cheaper than SMR even with a 10× reduction in CapEx (requires $0.015 per kW h, 100% capacity factor, clean grid). However, a 10× reduction in CapEx could open the possibility of some extremely low-cost natural gas electricity (e.g. Alberta, Canada) to make WE cheaper than SMR but >1.5X more emissions intensive. If grid electricity remained at $0.07 per kW h and solar electricity fell to $0.02 per kW h (2× cheaper than today)34 or $0.01 per kW h (4× cheaper than today)34 and WE CapEx was 60× and 14× cheaper than it is today respectively, solar-only WE could be cheaper and cleaner than SMR and grid-assisted WE with onsite solar yielding a certainty of clean hydrogen (Table 4).
 Fig. 5  LCH of WE with various CapEx and Electricity Price Assumptions. (Above; A) Shows cost of solar-only WE while (Below; B) shows WE with onsite solar assisted by a natural gas grid. All CapEx components were reduced evenly. For the grid assisted case, the solar LCOE was held at $0.043 per kW h meaning that below that price, no solar was used. 
Locations with highly abundant solar energy or other renewable energy would also allow for lower cost renewable-only installations than the standard assumptions in this model. To address this, we compared the price of SE and WE to SMR in five different renewable-only capacity factor scenarios including capacity factors which may only be obtained by blending multiple renewables and significantly upgrading grids to transport energy long distances to combat intermittency.45 We calculated the cost of hydrogen for many average grids 20% (average USA solar),32 30%: (Saudi Arabia or California, USA Solar),46 50% (high capacity factor wind or blended wind and solar), 80%: (theoretical blended renewables),32 and 100%: (theoretical all-renewables grid).47 We find that with standard CapEx, WE is more expensive than SMR and SE for all capacity factors at $0.05, $0.02, and $0.01 per kW h and SE is cheaper than SMR for all electricity prices in 30%, 50%, 80%, and 100% capacity factors except $0.05 per kW h at 30% capacity factor (Table 4).
Conclusions
There is a prevailing notion that intermittent solar-based electricity can outcompete 24 h grid electricity to make clean, cheap hydrogen using WE. Because lower cost solar and CapEx also make 24 h operation cheaper, for intermittent operation to outcompete 24 h operation major cost reductions in CapEx must be achieved for both WE and SE (Table 4). Additionally, for solar-only WE to be cheaper than SMR, major reductions in the price of solar electricity must occur.34 The relatively novel components of CapEx like electrolyzers and catalysts have a relatively large chance of being cheaper at scale because, unlike the balance of systems components, they are not already mass produced. These novel components are sufficiently impactful on price to make solar-only SE, but not solar-only WE the cheapest option even if these components were free (Fig. 2 and 4). In order to make WE solar-only, CapEx reductions would need to occur in components that are already mass produced and typically have traveled very far down their cost curve since their invention, in some cases over 100 years ago. These CapEx components primarily include balance of plant costs like cement, steel, piping, wiring, voltage converters, and pumps. Additionally, while the cost of solar electricity is still decreasing, the trend is flattening, and, with the current trend, it may take more than a decade before the unsubsidized price of solar is cheap enough to make it possible for WE to be cheaper than SMR.34 Therefore, we believe that the chances of solar-only WE competing with SMR and grid-assisted WE with onsite solar is relatively remote and significant attention should be paid to other hydrogen generation technologies like SE which appears to be more economically feasible in the near term.
In our opinion, a more likely scenario for WE and SE is that relatively modest CapEx reductions (0×–10×) will occur which rely on major cost reductions in relatively novel components (e.g. electrolyzers and batteries) paired with a reduction in solar prices to $0.01–0.02 per kW h. This will allow grid assisted or battery supported SE with onsite solar, but not WE, to make hydrogen that is cheaper than SMR when run on a near 100% capacity factor solar-based energy supply (Fig. 2–5).
In 2020, average CONUS industrial grid electricity prices vary from $0.16 per kW h in California to $0.05 per kW h in Oklahoma with an average of $0.07 per kW h, the number used in this study. The US Energy Information Agency (EIA) estimates the LCOE for behind-the-meter (i.e. onsite at the plant) generation for hydroelectric, geothermal, and combined cycle natural gas can be even cheaper at $0.05, $0.04, and $0.04 per kW h respectively. Of these technologies, combined cycle natural gas is the only one that is not geographically constrained. Advanced nuclear is also not geographically constrained and is CO2-free, however, it is estimated to be around $0.08 per kW h. Supercritical coal is $0.07 per kW h. According to Fig. 3B and 5B all of these technologies are currently cheap enough to make hydrogen via SE competitive with SMR but none are cheap enough to make WE hydrogen competitive with SMR. Furthermore, using any of the energy sources to make hydrogen with SE, except coal which is more expensive, would lead to a decrease in CO2 emissions. Unfortunately, using any fossil electricity source to make hydrogen with WE would lead to an increase in emissions. This suggests that SE but not WE may be a near term solution to producing abundant, clean hydrogen. We acknowledge that SE alone cannot produce the world's hydrogen, so below we define criteria to identify candidate reactions to produce the world's demand for hydrogen cogeneration while reducing cost and CO2 emissions.
Opportunities for co-production to make the world's hydrogen demand clean
Below are a criteria for identifying novel hydrogen cogeneration chemistries that may be both cleaner and cheaper than SMR in the near term.
(1) There should be an annual demand of at least 0.1 Tmol for the co-product. Small industrial plants produce ∼0.1 Tmols (0.2 MMT) H2 per year4 so we chose a 0.1 Tmol per year global demand minimum for the co-product. Some chemicals that surpass this threshold are lime (for cement, ∼47.5 Tmols per year),48 oxygen (∼12 Tmols per year),44 ammonia (∼10.5 Tmol per year),49 methanol (∼4.5 Tmols per year),50 sulfuric acid (∼3.25 Tmol per year),25 propylene (∼3 Tmols per year),51 formaldehyde (∼2.5 Tmols per year),52 ethylene (∼1 Tmol per year),53 benzene (∼1 Tmol per year),54 carbon black (∼1.2 Tmols per year),13 chlorine (∼0.75 Tmols per year),15 caustic soda (∼0.75 Tmols per year),15 and nitric acid (0.1 Tmols per year).55 With these products combined, even at a 1:1 molar ratio, there is more than enough cogeneration capacity to produce the world's current hydrogen demand.9
(2) At least one of the co-products must be oxidized from a readily available starting material. Hydrogen is a fully reduced product and therefore requires the oxidation of something else to produce it. Some of the products, like ammonia, are very difficult to co-produce with hydrogen, because they are also fully reduced and would need to be produced in a scheme that cogenerates both ammonia and hydrogen with at least one additional oxidized byproduct. Other potential coproducts could be produced oxidatively depending on the starting material. Benzene, for example, could be co-produced with hydrogen if synthesized solely from methane or other alkanes, but not solely from more oxidized reactants like alkynes. There may also be multiple ways to produce a given product to enhance hydrogen production. For example, propylene synthesis produces one mol hydrogen per mol propylene, however, in theory, propylene could also be synthesized from three mols of methane which would create three mols hydrogen per mol propylene. Finally, products like lime may not be produced as a sole co-product because there is no readily available source of reduced calcium metal. However, lime may be produced, for example, from limestone in a combined reaction scheme with water splitting that also produces CO2.56
(3) The thermodynamic minimum cost and emissions of the product should be at least parity with the market standard. Because 24 h operation is typically cheaper than intermittent operation with current, and likely future, technology, a good candidate that shows the potential to make low emissions, low cost hydrogen is: (1) lower emissions than SMR when using natural gas electricity or heat after the industry standard emissions for the co-product is subtracted (eqn (3)) and (2) is lower cost than the conventional production when the co-product value is subtracted (eqn (4)). If the actual energetics, OpEx, and CapEx of the process is not known, an easy way to screen processes is to use the minimum amount of energy (approximated as ΔG°) along with the relevant price of energy while assuming that all other OpEx and all CapEx is zero. U × ec + N − Q ≤ USMR × eSMR + NSMR + UP × eP(8)and U × dc + Oc + Cc − P ≤ USMR × s + OSMR + CSMR(9)U is energy, e is emissions intensity for the type of energy in a given location, and N is process CO2 emissions (NSMR = 5.5 kg CO2 per kg H2), Q is the emissions associated with the normal way of making the co-product, d is the cost of the energy, O is the OpEx of the system assuming the energy type, C is the CapEx of the system assuming the energy type (CapEx will change based on capacity factor of the energy type and other variables), and P is the co-product value. Subscripts c, b, p and SMR mean cleaner energy type, base case energy type, conventional production pathway of the co-product(s), and steam methane reforming, respectively.
Using the criteria above, Fig. 6 shows that at least 57 Tmol per year of hydrogen (160% of the world's demand for industrial hydrogen) may be cogenerated with another commodity chemical in an overall reaction scheme that yields hydrogen and may be cleaner and cheaper than hydrogen produced via SMR with 2020 US energy assumptions. Chemical reactions that do not meet the above criteria include electrochemical production of nitric acid and WE (but not thermochemical water splitting). Because the price of heat is cheap compared to electricity, and electricity is so easily turned into heat, thermochemical processes to make these chemicals may prove to be lower cost and emissions than electrochemical processes and may also be easily converted into electric processes when electricity becomes cheap enough via resistive heating. Furthermore, many of the chemicals in Fig. 6 are already produced where hydrogen is used at refineries (benzene, chlorine, and propylene) or fertilizer plants (sulfuric acid) and therefore would make logical cogeneration targets. Water splitting, however, is only cleaner than SMR if heat is used and therefore, WE does not pass the minimum bar in this analysis to be considered as a clean hydrogen production pathway. Given the urgency of the climate problem, we urge significant research efforts be devoted to these cogenerative pathways to realize near-term CO2 emissions reduction targets.
 Fig. 6  Minimum costs and emissions of various hydrogen cogeneration pathways. These costs are calculated using $3 per GJ ($0.01 per kW h) heat, $0.07 per kW h ($19.5 per GJ) electricity, no CapEx, no non-energy OpEx, and using ΔG° as the energy demand. Emissions were calculated using natural gas as the energy source. The value of the co-product was subtracted from the cost of the energy. Baseline energy and CO2 emissions were calculated for each coproduct based on the endnoted references: chlorine and caustic soda,16 carbon black,57 nitric acid,58 sulfuric acid,27 lime,59 oxygen,60 methanol,61 benzene,62 propylene.63 
Because the climate problem is urgent, hydrogen production is responsible for ∼3% of global CO2 emissions, and the above analysis suggests that making technologies that are cheapest when run intermittently will require considerable technological advances, we urge the community to research technologies, like SE, which can make hydrogen for lower cost and lower emissions than SMR on currently available energy resources like hydro, geothermal, and natural gas. We also encourage more research into technologies which could produce continuously available, low cost, clean energy like advanced nuclear or ultra-low cost solar plus pumped hydro or compressed air storage. A clean, low cost, continuous grid, may pave the way for cogeneration of hydrogen with commodity chemicals and possibly environmentally benign byproducts like oxygen or potentially carbon.
Conflicts of interest
H. F. L., D. Z., M. R. H., and N. A. F.'s institution (California Institute of Technology) has filed a U.S. patent application directly relating to the work described in the paper (patent application no. US20190376191A1, filed on May. 17, 2019). C. E. F., H. L., and E. T. K. are founders or employees of Brimstone Energy Inc., a company which has hydrogen cogeneration in its vision.
Acknowledgements
Supporting data referenced above may be found in the ESI.† This work was supported by the Department of Energy's Advanced Manufacturing Office Cyclotron Road Program. Funding was provided to C. E. F., H. F. L., and N. A. F., by the Resnick Sustainability Institute at Caltech. In part, this material is based upon work by C. E. F., E. T. K. and H. F. L. performed at the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, a DOE Energy Innovation Hub, supported through the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Award Number DE-SC0004993. C. E. F. was the primary concept generator and modeler for this work. H. F. L. performed the electrochemistry. D. Z. developed early versions of the model. N. A. F. aided in idea development. C. E. F., H. F. L., E. T. K., M. R. H., and N. A. F. prepared the manuscript and helped with its reviewing. All authors reviewed and contributed to the final manuscript. We are grateful to Fanfei Li for helping acquire techno-economic data and Prof. Jess Adkins at Caltech for being willing to relentlessly talk shop with us.
References
B. Bajželj, J. M. Allwood and J. M. Cullen, Designing Climate Change Mitigation Plans That Add Up, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 14, 8062–8069 CrossRef .
A. Henry, R. Prasher and A. Majumdar, Five thermal energy grand challenges for decarbonization, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 635–637 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Wismann, 
            et al., Electrified methane reforming: A compact approach to greener industrial hydrogen production, Science, 2019, 364, 756–759 CrossRef CAS .
Monolith Materials to Build Large Scale Carbon-Free Ammonia Plant, Off Grid Energy Independence, 2020. https://www.offgridenergyindependence.com/articles/21889/monolith-materials-to-build-large-scale-carbon-free-ammonia-plant.
B. Parkinson, P. Balcombe, J. F. Speirs, D. Hawkes, A. Hellgardt and K. Levelized, cost of CO 2 mitigation from hydrogen production routes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 19–40 RSC .
H2A: Hydrogen Analysis Production Models | Hydrogen and Fuel Cells, NREL. https://www.nrel.gov/hydrogen/h2a-production-models.html.
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, A comparative technoeconomic analysis of renewable hydrogen production using solar energy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .
C. E. Finke, 
            et al., Enhancing the activity of oxygen-evolution and chlorine-evolution electrocatalysts by atomic layer deposition of TiO2, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 358–365 RSC .
Markets, R. and. Global Hydrogen Market Insights, 2020-2024 by Production Process, End-user, Generation System and Region. GlobeNewswire News Room, 2020. http://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2020/03/05/1995602/0/en/Global-Hydrogen-Market-Insights-2020-2024-by-Production-Process-End-user-Generation-System-and-Region.html.
K. Christopher and R. Dimitrios, A review on exergy comparison of hydrogen production methods from renewable energy sources, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6640–6651 RSC .
IEA. The Future of Hydrogen, 2019. https://www.iea.org/reports/the-future-of-hydrogen.
Putting CO2 to Use – Analysis. IEA https://www.iea.org/reports/putting-co2-to-use.
Carbon Black Market to 2023, Market Reports & Analysis, Smithers. https://www.smithers.com/services/market-reports/materials/the-future-of-carbon-black-to-2023#:~:text=Global%20consumption%<?pdb_no 20of?>20of<?pdb END?>%20carbon%20black,14.8%20million%20tonnes%<?pdb_no 20in?>20in<?pdb END?>%202018.
Is Propylene Market Oversupplied? Refinery Operations. https://refineryoperations.com/is-propylene-market-oversupplied/.
Chlorine Market Size Worth $39.31 Billion By 2024. https://www.grandviewresearch.com/press-release/global-chlorine-market.

          D.-Y. Lee, A. A. Elgowainy and Q. Dai, Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions of By-product Hydrogen from Chlor-Alkali Plants. ANL/ESD--17/27, 1418333, 2017. http://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/1418333 DOI:10.2172/1418333.

          M. Roeb, C. Agrafiotis and C. Sattler, 11 - Hydrogen production via thermochemical water splitting, in Compendium of Hydrogen Energy, ed. V. Subramani, A. Basile and T. N. Veziroğlu, Woodhead Publishing,  2015, pp. 319–347 DOI:10.1016/B978-1-78242-361-4.00011-X .
F. Safari and I. Dincer, A review and comparative evaluation of thermochemical water splitting cycles for hydrogen production, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 205, 112182 CrossRef CAS .
D. Graf, N. Monnerie, M. Roeb, M. Schmitz and C. Sattler, Economic comparison of solar hydrogen generation by means of thermochemical cycles and electrolysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4511–4519 CrossRef CAS .
B. Parkinson, J. W. Matthews, T. B. McConnaughy, D. C. Upham and E. W. McFarland, Techno-Economic Analysis of Methane Pyrolysis in Molten Metals: Decarbonizing Natural Gas, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2017, 40, 1022–1030 CrossRef CAS .
G. Glenk and S. Reichelstein, Economics of converting renewable power to hydrogen, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 216–222 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nguyen, Z. Abdin, T. Holm and W. Mérida, Grid-connected hydrogen production via large-scale water electrolysis, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 200, 112108 CrossRef CAS .
Electric Power Monthly – U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA).
J. Yates, 
            et al., Techno-economic Analysis of Hydrogen Electrolysis from Off-Grid Stand-Alone Photovoltaics Incorporating Uncertainty Analysis, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100209 CrossRef .
Global Sulfuric Acid Market to Surpass 324.1 Million Tons by 2027 – Coherent Market Insights, 2019. https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20191122005229/en/Global-Sulfuric-Acid-Market-to-Surpass-324.1-Million-Tons-by-2027-%E2%80%93-Coherent-Market-Insights.

          N. C. Nguyen, Best Available Techniques for Pollution Prevention and Control in the European Fertilizer Industry Booklet No. 4 of 8: PRODUCTION OF PHOSPHORIC ACID 2000 EFMA European Fertilizer Manufacturers&#39; Association.

          S. Kumareswaran, et al., Design of a Plant to Manufacture Sulfuric Acid from Sulfur, 2013 DOI:10.13140/RG.2.1.1083.2724.
J. W. Weidner, Electrolyzer performance for producing hydrogen via a solar-driven hybrid-sulfur process, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2016, 46, 829–839 CrossRef CAS .
C. Corgnale and W. A. Summers, Solar hydrogen production by the Hybrid Sulfur process, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 11604–11619 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lulu, Z. Ping, C. Songzhe and W. Laijun, Quantitative analysis of the cell voltage of SO2-depolarized electrolysis in hybrid sulfur process, Nucl. Eng. Des., 2016, 306, 203–207 CrossRef .
To Cut Carbon Emissions, a Movement Grows to ‘Electrify Everything’. Yale E360. https://e360.yale.edu/features/to-cut-carbon-emissions-a-movement-grows-to-electrify-everything.
M. R. Shaner, S. J. Davis, N. S. Lewis and K. Caldeira, Geophysical constraints on the reliability of solar and wind power in the United States, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 914–925 RSC .

          K. Ardani, et al., Installed Cost Benchmarks and Deployment Barriers for Residential Solar Photovoltaics with Energy Storage: Q1 2016. NREL/TP--7A40-67474, 2016, 1338670 http://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/1338670 DOI:10.2172/1338670.
Levelized Cost of Energy and Levelized Cost of Storage 2019. Lazard.com http://www.lazard.com/perspective/levelized-cost-of-energy-and-levelized-cost-of-storage-2019/.

          J. Jechura, Hydrogen from Natural Gas via Steam Methane Reforming (SMR), 21.
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) – U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php.
Green Markets. Green Markets. https://fertilizerpricing.com/pricing-news/green-markets/.
Levelized Cost and Levelized Avoided Cost of New Generation Resources, 22.
F. Bandermann and K.-B. Harder, Production of H2 via thermal decomposition of H2S and separation of H2 and H2S by pressure swing adsorption, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1982, 7, 471–475 CrossRef CAS .
G. Toktar, A. B. Bayeshov, G. A. Mintaeva and A. A. Adaibekova, Investigation of Electrochemical Properties of Elemental Sulfur Dissolved in Alkaline Solution on Rhodium Electrode, Key Eng. Mater., 2017, 723, 640–644 Search PubMed .
D. W. Kalina and E. T. Maas, Indirect hydrogen sulfide conversion—I. An acidic electrochemical process, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1985, 10, 157–162 CrossRef CAS .
Electrochemical Production of Hydrogen and Sulfur by Low-Temperature Decomposition of Hydrogen Sulfide in an Aqueous Alkaline Solution, IOPscience. https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1149/1.2087021/meta?casa_token=mpFAD7MvB4QAAAAA:1eP2NBeTk8jwjsuCwVNMZ7T9as1y_0ixpbHr2ruGbJDadL0vXVlmauT7uS8xTMmDwId8PTI8iQ.
H. Huang, Y. Yu and K. H. Chung, Recovery of Hydrogen and Sulfur by Indirect Electrolysis of Hydrogen Sulfide, Energy Fuels, 2009, 9, 4420–4425 CrossRef .
Insights, F. M. Global Demand for Industrial Oxygen Likely to Rise at 6% CAGR through 2029 – Future Market Insights. GlobeNewswire News Room, 2019. http://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2019/08/22/1905632/0/en/Global-Demand-for-Industrial-Oxygen-Likely-to-Rise-at-6-CAGR-through-2029-Future-Market-Insights.html.
J. A. Dowling, 
            et al., Role of Long-Duration Energy Storage in Variable Renewable Electricity Systems, Joule, 2020, 4, 1907–1928 CrossRef .
Form EIA-860 detailed data with previous form data (EIA-860A/860B). https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia860/.
M. Z. Jacobson, M. A. Delucchi, M. A. Cameron and B. A. Frew, Low-cost solution to the grid reliability problem with 100% penetration of intermittent wind, water, and solar for all purposes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 15060–15065 CrossRef CAS .
Cement – Analysis. IEA, https://www.iea.org/reports/cement.
Ammonia | IHS Markit. https://agribusiness.ihsmarkit.com/sectors/fertilizers/ammonia.html#:~:text= The%20global%20ammonia%20market%20amounts,with%20utilisation%20rates%20below%2080%25.
Global Methanol Market to Reach 112 Million Tons by 2025. https://www.expertmarketresearch.com/pressrelease/global-methanol-market.
Decline of 2.1m tonnes in 2020 global polypropylene demand now seems best possible outcome – Asian Chemical Connections. https://www.icis.com/asian-chemical-connections/2020/03/decline-of-2-1m-tonnes-in-2020-global-polypropylene-demand-now-seems-best-possible-outcome/.
ReportLinker. Global Formaldehyde Industry. GlobeNewswire News Room, 2020. http://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2020/07/08/2059521/0/en/Global-Formaldehyde-Industry.html.
ReportLinker. Global Ethylene Industry. GlobeNewswire News Room, 2020. http://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2020/08/22/2082234/0/en/Global-Ethylene-Industry.html.
ReportLinker. Global Benzene Industry. GlobeNewswire News Room, 2020. http://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2020/08/22/2082250/0/en/Global-Benzene-Industry.html.
Global Nitric Acid Market Projected to Grow to 6,900 Kilotons by 2021: Technavio, 2017. https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20170317005292/en/Global-Nitric-Acid-Market-Projected-to-Grow-to-6900-Kilotons-by-2021-Technavio.
L. D. Ellis, A. F. Badel, M. L. Chiang, R. J.-Y. Park and Y. M. Chiang, Toward electrochemical synthesis of cement—An electrolyzer-based process for decarbonating CaCO3 while producing useful gas streams, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 23, 12584–12591 CrossRef .
US EPA, Carbon Black, 1995.
US EP, Nitric Acid, 1995.
H. Shahin, S. Hassanpour and A. Saboonchi, Thermal energy analysis of a lime production process: Rotary kiln, preheater and cooler, Energy Convers. Manage., 2016, 114, 110–121 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Rao and M. Muller, Industrial Oxygen: Its Generation and Use,  2007, vol. 12 Search PubMed .
T. Blumberg, T. Morosuk and G. Tsatsaronis, Exergy-based evaluation of methanol production from natural gas with CO2 utilization, Energy, 2017, 141, 2528–2539 CrossRef CAS .
US EPA, Locating and Estimating Air Emissions from Sources of Benzene, 1998.

          A. Agarwal, A Design Approach for On-Purpose Propylene Production with Safety and Sustainability Considerations, Texas A&M,  2018 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee03768k‡ These authors did equal work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Broader context
Industrial processes are responsible for over 30% of global greenhouse gas emissions.1 The “big 4” industrial emissions sources are the production of cement, steel, hydrogen, and aluminum which, combined, account for almost 16% of global GHG emissions.1,2 Hydrogen production alone is responsible for over 2% of global greenhouse gas emissions, approximately the same as all of the world's airplanes.1,3 The problem with decarbonizing the hydrogen industry is a problem of cost. Despite decades of development in currently high-cost alternative hydrogen production pathways like water electrolysis, methane pyrolysis, and biomass gasification, the low-cost, CO2-intensive steam reforming fossil fuels still accounts for >95% of global hydrogen production. Meanwhile, ultra-low-cost technologies like plasma cracking methane have gone from lab to industrial scale in less than a decade.4 One of the key examples of slow adoption and high cost is water electrolysis which even after over 200 years of development has minimal market share and is well-known to be 4–10× more costly than steam-reforming fossil fuels under modern economic conditions.5–8 In this paper, we present novel chemistries that may be able to quickly replace the emissions-intensive steam reforming of fossil fuels and meet the world's hydrogen demand because they are both clean and low cost.



Electrolyzer size (in kg H2 per day)	500
Water electrolyzer ($103 per electrolyzer)a	532
Sulfur electrolyzer (at 1.2 A cm−2; $103 per electrolyzer)	632
Electrolyzer hard balance of systems ($103 per electrolyzer)	600
DCDC converter ($103 per electrolyzer)	471
Installation ($103 per electrolyzer)	136
Soft balance of systems ($103 per electrolyzer)	24

PEM electrolyzer electricity consumption (kW h kg−1 H2)	49
Balance of systems energy consumption (kW h kg−1 H2)	5
Electricity from sulfur burning (kW h kg−1 H2)	12
Sulfur electrolyzer energy consumption (kW h kg−1 H2)	33
Routine maintenance (% of install CapEx per year)	3
Major maintenance (% of install CapEx/7 years)	15
S8 + 8O2 → 8SO2, ΔG° = −300 kJ mol−1 SO2	(1)
SO2 + 2H2O → H2SO4 + H2, ΔG° = 85 kJ mol−1; E° = 0.16 V	(2)

 	Fig. 1  A simplified reactor scheme. Sulfur is burned in air and the resulting SO2 is mixed with water where it is used in the electrolyzer as a raw material to cogenerate hydrogen and sulfuric acid. The sulfuric acid may be concentrated before use.	 
CapExlyzer_SE = jWE/jSE·CapExlyzer_WE	(3)


CapEx (USD per kW)	

Module	0.31
Hard balance of systems	0.22
Installation cost	0.12
Soft balance of systems	—
OpEx (USD per kW per year)	17
LCOEb for first PV panel (USD per kW)	0.043c

CapEx (USD per kW)	

Module	180
Hard balance of systems	60
Installation cost	27
Soft balance of systems	33
OpEx (% installed CapEx/12 years)	69
LCOE for first battery (USD per kW)	0.21c


SMR	1.15	9.28	5.05	5.50
SE	0.51	5.03	2.32	0.00
WE	5.72	15.79	9.91	0.00
SE4	1.30	9.76	6.87	0.00
	(4)
xH2S(g) → xH2 + Sx(s), E° = 33 kJ mol−1 H2; E° = 0.14 V	(5)
Sx(s) + 2xH2O → xSO2 + 2xH2, ΔG° = 174 kJ mol−1 H2; E° = 0.5 V	(6)
SO2 + 2H2O → H2SO4 + H2, 85 kJ mol−1 H2; E° = 0.16 V	(7)

 	Fig. 2  Sensitivity analysis of solar-only sulfur electrolysis. The parenthetical numbers on the vertical axis indicate the low, standard, and high assumption for each case.	 

 	Fig. 3  LCH of SE with various CapEx and electricity price assumptions. (Above; A) Shows cost of solar-only SE while (Below; B) shows SE with onsite solar assisted by a natural gas grid. All CapEx components were reduced evenly. For the grid assisted case, the solar LCOE was held at $0.043 per kW h meaning that below that price, no solar was used.	 

20%	SE	14×	5×	5×
WE	Impossible	60×	14×
30%	SE	3×	0×	0×
WE	Impossible	35×	8×
50%	SE	0×	0×	0×
WE	Impossible	27×	6×
80%	SE	0×	0×	0×
WE	Impossible	19×	4×
100%	SE	0×	0×	0×
WE	Impossible	15×	4×

 	Fig. 4  Sensitivity analysis of solar-only water electrolysis. The parenthetical numbers on the vertical axis indicate the low, standard, and high assumption for each case.	 

 	Fig. 5  LCH of WE with various CapEx and Electricity Price Assumptions. (Above; A) Shows cost of solar-only WE while (Below; B) shows WE with onsite solar assisted by a natural gas grid. All CapEx components were reduced evenly. For the grid assisted case, the solar LCOE was held at $0.043 per kW h meaning that below that price, no solar was used.	 
U × ec + N − Q ≤ USMR × eSMR + NSMR + UP × eP	(8)
U × dc + Oc + Cc − P ≤ USMR × s + OSMR + CSMR	(9)

 	Fig. 6  Minimum costs and emissions of various hydrogen cogeneration pathways. These costs are calculated using $3 per GJ ($0.01 per kW h) heat, $0.07 per kW h ($19.5 per GJ) electricity, no CapEx, no non-energy OpEx, and using ΔG° as the energy demand. Emissions were calculated using natural gas as the energy source. The value of the co-product was subtracted from the cost of the energy. Baseline energy and CO2 emissions were calculated for each coproduct based on the endnoted references: chlorine and caustic soda,16 carbon black,57 nitric acid,58 sulfuric acid,27 lime,59 oxygen,60 methanol,61 benzene,62 propylene.63	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee03768k
‡ These authors did equal work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
