Artificial photosynthetic systems. Using light and water to provide electrons and protons for the synthesis of a fuel  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00645A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00645A
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2353-2365Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsArtificial photosynthetic systems. Using light and water to provide electrons and protons for the synthesis of a fuel

        
          
            Christian 
            Herrero
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Annamaria 
            Quaranta
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Winfried 
            Leibl
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            A. William 
            Rutherford
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ally 
            Aukauloo
          
        
      *ab
aCEA, iBiTec-S, Service de Bioénergétique Biologie Structurale et Mécanismes (SB2SM), F-91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. E-mail: ally.aukauloo@u-psud.fr
bInstitut de Chimie Moléculaire et des Matériaux d'Orsay, UMR-CNRS 8182, Université de Paris-Sud XI, F-91405, Orsay, France
Received 
      9th November 2010
    , Accepted 13th January 2011First published on 16th February 2011AbstractThis review covers the progress achieved in the synthesis and characterization of different metal based catalysts designed for the photocatalytic oxidation of water with special focus on molecular designed systems. In those cases where the mechanism of the light-driven catalytic activity of these complexes is not known, we have looked to published mechanisms related to chemically activated catalysts. We also discuss the choice of the chromophores used to sensitize these reactions as well as the recovery of the reaction products and nature of the electron acceptors used.

Broader context
The production of fuels using sunlight, water and carbon dioxide is one of the most important challenges facing scientists today. Nature has been performing this reaction for more than 2 billion years using solar energy to remove protons and electrons from water, generate oxygen and store the energy in the chemical bonds of sugars. This process, photosynthesis, is the energy input for life. Over the last two decades important advances have been made in the field of artificial photosynthesis spanning the fields of light-induced charge separated states, water oxidation reactions, and reductive processes aimed at fuel production. Of these, water oxidation seems the most challenging. Here we describe advances in the design of photocatalysts for water oxidation. Understanding the unique water oxidizing enzyme is expected to advance further the field of catalyst design and solar fuel production.

Introduction
The demand and supply of energy will be a crucial question facing all societies in the coming years. Reasons behind this are the increasing world population and the legitimate aspiration of developing countries to reach higher life standards.1,2 This issue gets more complicated when we take into account the side effects caused on the environment arising from the extensive use of fossil fuels. A potential solution to this problem is to look at nature for inspiration. Nature runs on solar energy and the process known as photosynthesis is responsible for the input of energy into the biological world. Photosynthesis uses only a small fraction of the solar energy that reaches the Earth's surface.3,4 The amount of solar energy reaching the planet is so great that many scientists consider that its capture and usage provide the best long-term solution to the energy problem and the associated climate change crisis.
In photosynthesis, absorption of light initiates a series of energy transfer and then electron transfer processes that lead to the oxidation of water (eqn (1)) in order to produce reducing equivalents that can then drive the reduction of either CO2 into higher carbohydrates (eqn (2)) or protons into H2 (eqn (3)): 2H2O + 4hν → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−(1) nCO2 + 2ne− + 2nH+ → (CH2O)n + n/2O2(2) 2H+ + 2e− → H2(3)
In photosynthesis the electrons produced from water oxidation are insufficiently reducing to be used directly for CO2 (or H+) reduction. Another photochemical reaction taking place in an enzyme called photosystem I is required to boost the reducing power of electrons. Thus the process requires two photoreactions per electron available for CO2 reduction.
In the present review we shall focus on the water oxidation reaction and will address the chemical approaches that have been made towards the replication of this reaction.
Photosystem II is the enzyme responsible for the oxidation of water. It is often conceptualized as being made up of two parts: (1) a photochemical charge separating device which produces a reductant and a strong oxidant species on opposite sides of the membrane and (2) a catalytic center in which the oxidizing power is accumulated in a cluster of high valence manganese ions and a calcium ion. Several reviews deal with the structure and mechanism of the natural photocatalytic machinery at great length and thus these aspects will be presented in this article only briefly.5,6 A view of the main cofactors and the sequence of electron transfer processes after excitation with visible light are indicated in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Map of the main cofactors of photosystem II based on the coordinates of ref. 7. 
(1) Light induced charge separation: charge separation takes place between pigment molecules very rapidly after excitation of the chlorophylls in the enzyme (step 1 in Fig. 1). A radical pair is detected which appears to be made up of a chlorophyll (PD1 in Fig. 1) cation and a pheophytin (PhD1 in Fig. 1) anion.
(2) The pheophytin anion radical rapidly donates an electron to a quinone (QA) with a significant free energy drop (∼350 mV) thereby stabilizing the charge separated state.
(3) The highly oxidizing chlorophyll cation extracts an electron from a tyrosine residue (TyrZ). The tyrosine's phenolic carbonyl group loses a proton as the tyrosyl radical forms.
(4) The neutral tyrosyl radical then goes on to oxidize the Mn ions of the Mn complex (designated OEC, oxygen evolving complex, in Fig. 1).
(5) The semiquinone anion formed is further stabilized by a lateral electron transfer step to a second quinone, QB.
The final state formed after the excitation of the enzyme by one photon contains a semiquinone (QB−) and a high valence form of the Mn cluster. This state is formed with a quantum yield of around 90% and it is stable for tens of seconds to minutes depending on the temperature. This state contains more than half of the energy (∼1.15 eV) of the absorbed photon. In order to complete the reduction of plastoquinone, a second turnover must occur. In order to oxidize water, a total of 4 photochemical events must take place, with each one resulting in an increase in the manganese cluster's valence.
Construction of an artificial photoanode
A molecular system designed to mimic the reactions leading to water oxidation should be capable of efficient absorption of visible light and conversion of this energy into a chemical potential through charge accumulation processes. The energy accumulated should then be transferred via catalytic chemical reactions into a fuel where it is stored in the form of chemical bonds. Such a system (Fig. 2) should consist of a photoactive unit (PU) and a catalytic unit (CU), connected through an electron relay (ER) moiety in order to synchronize fast photochemical processes, such as electron and proton transfers, with slow processes such as bond making–breaking steps that happen during chemical reactions. To date, most of the work accomplished in this area has been done by using mono- or bi-molecular systems (PU–CU or PU + CU) in solution and in the presence of sacrificial electron acceptors. This approach, although interesting from a proof of concept standpoint, suffers the pitfalls of any system which is limited by diffusion controlled reaction rates, instability of charge accumulated states, and more importantly, the loss of the reaction products (e−, H+).
 Fig. 2  Representation of a chromophore–catalyst assembly attached to TiO2 nanoparticles on an Indium Tin Oxide electrode. 
One way to overcome these issues emerged with the development of semi-conductor nanoparticles of TiO2 on an Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) electrode. Grafting of designed PU–CU molecules onto these surfaces allows fast photoinduced electron transfer reactions and, most importantly, the recovery of the products of the water oxidation reaction, H+ and e−.
High valence metal states and water
Nature has devised a Mn4Ca cluster with oxo bridges (OEC) as the only biological catalytic site able to perform the four electron oxidation of water to molecular oxygen. Different proposals for the mechanistic pathways of the OEC prompted from X-ray crystallography,7,8 spectroscopy, and theoretical calculations9–11 assume a highly oxidized manganese–oxo motif as an intermediate in the water oxidation reaction.
These oxo functionalities can be either terminal, with the oxygen atom bound by a multiple bond to the metal ion, or singly bound to multiple metallic centers. Both models have been hypothesized as working mechanisms in the oxygen evolving complex (OEC) of photosystem II.
One model, an acid–base mechanism (AB in Scheme 1), assumes that all the oxidizing equivalents are taken in by the Mn ions [MnIV3MnV], with the oxo motif forming at the MnV center which is the lone Mn outside the Mn3Ca cube.9,12,13 The highly oxidized Mn ion polarizes the oxygen atom and renders it electrophilic. This moiety is then susceptible to nucleophilic attack by a water molecule as depicted in Scheme 1 (AB, Acid/Base mechanism).
 Scheme 1  Proposed mechanisms for O2 evolution. 
A second proposal involves radical character of two adjacent oxo groups of a [MnIIIMnIV3, O˙ O˙] system.14 In this case, coupling of the two radicals via peroxo and hydroperoxo-like intermediates yields formation of the O–O bond (RC, Radical Center mechanism).
A detailed analysis of the structure and electronic states of putative metal–oxo species intervening in the oxygen–oxygen bond formation has been thoroughly discussed in recent fora.15,16 These mechanisms hinge on the ability to form a metal–oxo complex through the activation of a water molecule by a high valence metal ion by successive electron and proton transfer reactions from one or two water molecules.
Higher oxidation states of transition metal–oxo functionalities are easily accessible only when electron loss is compensated with proton loss (Scheme 2).17,18 Proof of this process was first shown in the comproportionation reaction between [RuIVO]2+ and [RuII–OH2]2+ to give 2[RuIII–OH]2+.19 The concerted proton–electron transfer reaction is downhill by −2.5 kcal mol−1 while the “proton first” and the “electron first” processes are uphill by 13.6 and 12.6 kcal mol−1 respectively.
 Scheme 2  Activation of a water molecule by a high valence metal ion. 
Photoinduced activation of water
In the following sections we will review the work done up to date on the catalytic light induced activation of water through 1, 2, and 4e− processes focusing on the mechanisms involved in the oxidation of water from its simplest form to the final O–O bond forming step. The different reactions are depicted below: 1e− H2O → HO˙ + H˙(4) 2e− H2O → [O] + 2H+ + 2e−(5) 4e− 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−(6)

Eqn (4) represents a formal one electron and one proton abstraction from a water molecule to give hydroxyl radical. An example of such a process taking place under visible light irradiation using a molecular dye was achieved using 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8-octafluorophenazine (F-Phen)20,21 (Scheme 3). These molecules have strong absorption bands at 256 and 368 nm that tail into the visible region (450 nm). They show very weak fluorescence and strong phosphorescence due to fast intersystem crossing from the singlet excited state [1Phen*] to form the triplet excited state [3Phen*]. The redox potential for the F-Phen/F-Phen˙+ couple has been reported to be +2.2 V vs. SCE, which is sufficiently high to oxidize water. Photooxidation experiments using F-Phen in acetonitrile/water solutions and wavelengths >400 nm yielded reaction mixtures where the original F-Phen underwent stoichiometric transformation into a product that was identified as 1,3,4,5,6,7,8-heptafluoro-2-hydroxyphenazine (F-Phen-2-OH). Addition of benzene to the reaction mixture yielded formation of phenol and disappearance of F-Phen in comparable quantities. These results indicate that hydroxyl radical (HO˙) is formed by the oxidation of H2O during the photolysis when F-Phen was irradiated with visible light.
 Scheme 3  Reaction scheme for F-Phen upon visible light irradiation in AcN:H2O mixture. 
Such species are currently generated using semiconducting TiO2 nanoparticles and find applications in the realm of photooxidative degradation of organic wastes (self-cleaning surfaces and depollution).
Using water and light to oxidize organic substrates by a two-electron transfer process
Using a water molecule as both an oxygen atom and an electron donor (eqn (5)) is an interesting aspect in the light activation of water molecules. The majority of catalytic oxidation processes known use metal–oxo derivatives that are generated using oxygen-containing oxidants. An alternative method consists of photogenerating the corresponding metal–oxo active species using a metal bound water molecule through a two-electron, two-proton abstraction with the resulting photogenerated reactive metal–oxo species transferring an oxygen atom to an organic substrate.
Ruthenium complexes have been reported to perform the photooxidation of alkenes and alcohols to the corresponding epoxides, aldehydes or ketones. These molecules can be divided into two families:
(i) Chromophore/catalyst systems: monometallic ruthenium complexes that act as both the chromophore and the catalyst.
(ii) Chromophore–catalyst assemblies: di-nuclear ruthenium complexes where one ruthenium moiety works as a chromophore (Ruchrom) and the other one as the catalyst (Rucat).
Chromphore/catalyst systems
Inoue and coworkers were the first to report the photocatalytic epoxidation of alkenes using water as the oxygen atom donor using tetra(2,4,6-trimethyl)phenylporphyrinatoruthenium(II) [RuIITMP(CO)].22–24 The photocatalytic reaction was run under light excitation at 420 nm in the presence of a highly oxidized platinum salt (PtIVCl2)2− as an irreversible electron acceptor. Of the conditions tested, best results (quantum yield of 60% and product selectivity of ∼95%) were obtained in alkaline conditions (pH ≈ 11).
Excitation of the porphyrin system with visible light triggers an electron transfer reaction from the triplet excited state of the porphyrin to the sacrificial acceptor which decomposes generating HCl. The resulting radical cation on the porphyrin reacts with OH− to give RuIIIOH (intermediate I), which deprotonates to generate the RuIIIO anion (intermediate II) as shown in Scheme 4. These intermediates are capable of reacting with alkenes to yield epoxides with quantitative insertion of 18O when H218O was used. At neutral pH the epoxidation products were detected after 20 s but rapidly converted into the corresponding diols because of acidification of the medium due to the release of HCl from the reduced electron acceptor. Unfortunately the mechanism of epoxidation was not further investigated at neutral pH. In a more recent paper, the reactivity was studied as a function of OH− concentration.22 The increased basicity of the solution (pH ≈ 12.7) results in formation of alcohols rather than oxides. The change in reactivity was explained using DFT calculations as due to the two intermediates previously postulated: formation of epoxide proceeds via RuIIIOH (intermediate I) which attacks the CC double bond to give the oxide, while formation of the alcohol proceeds via the RuIIIO− (intermediate II) and involves H abstraction followed by hydroxyl donation.
 Scheme 4  Postulated reaction mechanism for RuIITMP(CO). 
Other examples of mononuclear complexes acting as both chromophore and catalyst include a series of (NO)RuIII(salen) derivatives synthesized by Katsuki and coworkers.25,26 These molecules are capable of oxidizing alcohols under irradiation with visible light in the presence of aerobic oxygen as an electron acceptor.
Sensitizer–catalyst assemblies
The second category of complexes is composed of systems where the chromophore and the catalytic unit are covalently linked to form a single complex. The advantage of this approach is that the individual properties of the linked chromophore–catalyst couple can be more easily tuned and optimized by modifications of the molecules. Original work by Treadway et al.27 as well as more recent work by Chen et al.28 shows how upon light absorption the ruthenium sensitizers are capable, in the presence of electron acceptors (TiO2, [Co(NH3)5(Cl)]Cl2), of sequential electron transfers and activation of their catalytic units. Rocha and coworkers synthesized a bis-terpyridine complex that acts as a chromophore covalently attached to a terpyridine-ruthenium-bipyridine moiety that acts as a catalyst (Rucat) (Scheme 5).
 Scheme 5  Homogeneous photocatalyst for the oxidation of alcohols. 
Illumination of this complex with light >390 nm in the presence of [Co(NH3)5(Cl)]Cl2 as an electron acceptor leads to the oxidation of benzylic alcohols into their corresponding benzylic aldehydes, as well as the oxidation of secondary alcohols into ketones with turnover numbers (TONs) ranging from 170 to 110 and turnover frequencies (TOFs) around 20 h−1. The mechanism postulated is derived from electrochemical experiments where Rucat undergoes a two electron oxidation, two proton loss process from the original RuII–OH2 to form a RuIVO complex which is responsible for the oxidation reaction. These two oxidation processes (RuII–OH2/RuIII–OH) and (RuIII–OH/RuIVO) are reported to occur at 0.54 and 0.59 V vs. SCE. These potentials are well below the 1.28 V vs. SCE which the RuIII bis-terpyridine chromophore develops after light-induced reduction of an electron acceptor. Chromophores of this type have been studied in the literature and, while having a high oxidation potential and offering the optimal geometry to place acceptor–donor substituents at 180° as it has been observed in model triads,29 they suffer from a shortened lifetime of their excited state (ns),30,31 which limits the electron transfer efficiency in solution. Nevertheless, this molecule shows photocatalytic activity and is a good example of a covalently bound, chromophore–catalyst dyad.
Earlier work by Meyer on the oxidation of alcohol hinged on the same (tpy)(bpy)RuII–OH2 catalyst unit covalently bound to a (bpy–COOH)(bpy–Me)RuII chromophore.27 The presence of carboxylic groups on the chromophore allowed for extended absorption as well as the binding to TiO2 surfaces (Scheme 6).
 Scheme 6  Heterogeneous photocatalyst for the oxidation of alcohols. 
The oxidation potential of the (RuII–OH2/RuIII–OH) and (RuIII–OH/RuIVO) couples in this system is superimposed at 0.69 V vs. SCE, while the oxidation potential for the oxidized chromophore is 1.6 V. The resulting (tpy)(bpy)RuIV(O)2+ oxidizes 2-propanol into acetone through a hydride transfer mechanism.32,33 Although no turnover numbers were reported, production of H2 at a Pt cathode was observed. The advantage of heterogeneous systems of this kind is two-fold. On the one hand, fast electron injection from the excited state of the covalently bound chromophore into the TiO2 semiconductor surface decreases the losses that might arise from having short excited state lifetimes as in the previous case. Additionally, the drawbacks of using solution based electron acceptors (i.e. solubility, absorption, change of pH, etc.) are eliminated. The second advantage is that the electrons injected in the anode become true reaction products that can be collected and transferred to a cathode where they could be used in reduction reactions.
Light driven photooxidation of water to dioxygen
The four-electron oxidation of water to give dioxygen using visible light is the most challenging reaction in the field of artificial photosynthesis. Since the first reports of chemically driven molecular water oxidation catalysts in 1985 (ref. 34) there have been few advances in the field of photoactivation of these reactions until very recently. The first example of catalytic oxidation of water was reported by the Meyer group using a dinuclear ruthenium catalyst. Meyer's “blue dimer” is a cis,cis-[(bpy)2(H2O)Ru(µ-O)Ru(H2O)–(bpy)2]4+ complex (see Fig. 3, left). This complex bears two Ru–aqua groups which are bound via a µ-oxo bond which places the oxygen atoms at 4.27 Å with a torsion angle for the O–Ru–O–Ru–O of 65.7 degrees. This complex is capable of chemically promoting the reaction H2O–RuIII–O–RuIII–OH2 to ORuV–O–RuVO + 4e− + 4H+. The resulting Ru–oxo complex undergoes nucleophilic attack from a water molecule to form the intermediate HO–RuIV–O–RuIV–OOH, which releases oxygen with TON = 11–13. Visible light-driven oxidation of this complex using a modified ruthenium trisbipyridine Ru(bpy)2+3 chromophore and SO42− as an electron acceptor generated oxygen at a rate of 330 µL h−1 during the first 15 minutes of the reaction. After this time the reaction slowed down due to degradation of the ruthenium chromophore.35
 Fig. 3  Dinuclear ruthenium based catalysts. Meyer's blue dimer (left) and Llobet's in,in-Ru–Hbpp complex (right). 
The Llobet and Thummel groups modified the blue dimer molecule in order to improve the geometry of the metal–oxo groups as well as to increase its stability by replacing the one oxygen atom bridging ligand with a two nitrogen donor ligand as the backbone for the ruthenium ions (Fig. 3, right). In the Llobet system, the in,in-{[RuII(tpy)–(H2O)]2(µ-bpp)}3+ (bpp = 3,5-bis-(2-pyridyl) pyrazolate) has both ruthenium atoms in close proximity resulting in a 2.48 Å distance between the oxygen atoms of their aqua ligands. The H2O–RuII–bpp–RuII–OH2 species can be chemically oxidized to ORuIV–O–RuIVO + 4e− + 4H+ using CeIV. This species evolves into an intramolecular µ-1,2-peroxo followed by a hydroperoxidic intermediate that evolves oxygen (TON = 19).36–38 These two molecules are very clear examples of how ligand design can dictate the mechanism of a catalytic reaction.
More recently,39 a dinuclear ruthenium complex with a cis structure bearing a ligand 1,4-bis(6′-COOH-pyrid-2′-yl)phthalazine has been reported (Fig. 4, left). In the solid state, this molecule presents one water molecule between every two molecules of catalyst, making an infinite chain of OH–O bonds along their axis. Compared to similar compounds with neutral ligands, insertion of carboxylato groups in the ligand structure lowers the oxidation potentials of the (E1/2(RuII,II2/RuII,III2)) and (E1/2(RuII,III2/RuIII,III2)) to 0.903 V and 1.396 V vs. NHE. Oxidation of this catalyst by CeIV yields sustained H2O oxidation for 20 hours with a TON of 10400 and TOF of 1.2 s−1. These results are to date the highest turnover numbers achieved by any artificial water splitting catalyst. Photoactivation of this catalyst using light of wavelengths >400 nm in the presence of Na2S2O8 and Ru[(bpy)3]2+ chromophores with different oxidation potentials (1.26, 1.40, and 1.54 V vs. NHE) as sensitizers yields oxygen with a maximum TON of 580 and TOF of 0.83 s−1 for the more oxidizing chromophore.
 Fig. 4  Di- (left) and mononuclear (right) Ru catalysts from Sun's lab. 
Mononuclear ruthenium complexes such as [RuII(H2O)(tpy)(bpz)]2+ and [RuII(H2O)(tpy)(bpm)]2+ (bpz = pipyrazine, bpm = bipyrimidine) have also been reported to chemically catalyze the oxidation of water with good TON and TOF.40–43 The mechanism for these mononuclear complexes is similar to that proposed by Meyer for the blue dimer. Loss of two electrons and two protons from the L1L2–RuII–OH2 leads to formation of L1L2–RuIVO, followed by a further one electron oxidation that yields L1L2–RuVO. This complex undergoes nucleophilic attack from a water molecule to form a L1L2–RuIII–OOH intermediate, followed by proton loss and one-electron oxidation to form L1L2–RuV–OO and the release of oxygen.
Recently, work by Sala et al.44 based on both theoretical calculations and isotopic analysis of the O2 produced during a water oxidation reaction by the complex cis-[RuII(bpy)2(H2O)2]2+ showed evidence for a water nucleophilic attack mechanism which is 32 kcal mol−1 more favourable than the intramolecular O–O bond formation. This mechanism can be explained by a molecular orbital mesomeric representation of the catalyst, which upon removal of 4 electrons and 4 protons can be described as cis-[RuIII(bpy)2(O−0.5)2]2+. The presence of unpaired spin density on the metal and the O atoms renders the latter electrophilic, thus favoring the nucleophilic attack mechanism. The conclusion from these examples is that formation of high-valent metal–oxos with low overpotentials is key to the water oxidation reaction. The small potential separation between redox states is a consequence of proton coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions, where protons and electrons are lost without charge build-up, while the higher oxidation states of ruthenium are stabilized by the metal–oxo bond formation. These thermodynamic limitations are more important when trying to drive reactions with light, as the oxidizing power of the excited chromophores is more limited than that provided by the chemical oxidants used in the previous examples.
Light-induced oxidation of water using single ruthenium catalysts based on work by the Thummel group45,46 has been reported by Sun's group. In initial work on chemical oxidation of a ruthenium monomer (Fig. 4, right), Sun and coworkers succeeded in isolating a high oxidation state of a heptavalent Ru complex bearing negatively charged carboxylato ligands.47 Modification of the metal-bearing molecules with these kinds of ligands proved to be important because they lower the oxidation potential of the ruthenium ion and stabilize high oxidation states of the metal. Isolation of one of these high oxidation intermediates showed the formation of a seven-coordinated Ru(IV) dimeric complex µ-(HOHOH)[RuIVL(pic)2(PF6)3·2H2O]. According to the authors, these observations support the idea of water coordination into a hexavalent RuIV center without the need for ligand exchange. The resulting RuIV species does not undergo any large structural changes and a slight opening of the O–Ru–O angle is sufficient to accept a water molecule as the seventh ligand. Lastly, the dimeric species formed contains a hydrogen bonding network consisting of a [HOHOH]− ligand which, according to the authors, could provide a proton transfer channel during the catalytic reaction. This system is capable of water oxidation in the presence of CeIV at pH 1 (TON = 120).
Activation of this catalyst by light48,49 was performed using [Ru(bpy)3]2+ analogues as sensitizers and [Co(NH3)5(Cl)]Cl2 and SO42− as irreversible electron acceptors. Depending on the electron acceptor used, formation of oxygen was observed with impressive TOFs of 550 [Co(NH3)5(Cl)]Cl2 and 1250 h−1 (SO42−) corresponding to reaction times of 50 seconds and 7 minutes respectively. The short duration of the reaction seems to be inherently linked to the electron acceptor used. Reduction of cobalt pentamine releases ammonia which increases the pH of the reaction medium and results in decomposition of both the chromophore and catalyst molecules after 7 minutes. Reduction of persulfate salts occurs via an oxidative quenching of [Ru(bpy)3]2+* to [Ru(bpy)3]3+ followed by a second thermal oxidation reaction, according to eqn (7) and (8): [Ru(bpy)3]2+* + S2O82−→ [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + SO4˙− + SO42−(7) [Ru(bpy)3]2+ + SO4˙− → [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + SO42−(8)
Catalyst deactivation is, in this case, due to the lowering of the pH in the solution, which during a 50 seconds run decreased from 7.1 to 2.9 rendering the catalyst inactive. The reaction was also studied by changing the oxidative potential of the chromophores used. As expected, [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (E1/2(RuII/RuIII) = 1.26 V vs. NHE) gave higher turnover frequencies (591 h−1) for the oxidation reaction than [Ru(dmbpy)3]2+ (E1/2(RuII/RuIII) =1.10 V vs. NHE) (dmbpy = dimethylbipyridine) (360 h−1). These results are explained by the decreased driving force available to carry out the reaction for the more electron rich chromophore.
Using a different approach, two groups50–52 have independently reported light-induced catalytic oxidation of water using Ru–polyoxometalate structures (POMs). These are interesting systems since they are capable of encapsulating transition metal clusters where redox-active substituents can be transformed into metal–oxo moieties. The electron withdrawing nature of the POM ligand stabilizes high valent intermediates and it assists deprotonation steps. The complex Cs10[Ru4(µ-O)4(µ-OH)2(H2O)4(γ-SiW10O36)2] (Ru4–POM; POM is the polyoxometalate ligand γ-SiW10O36) consists of four RuIV–OH2 where adjacent ruthenium centers within each γ-[SiW10Ru2] are bridged by hydroxo ligands, while the ruthenium centers of different monomeric units are bridged by oxo ligands. Bonchio et al.53,54 reported the oxidation of the four RuIV–OH2 units into (RuV–OH)4 at potentials of E1/2 = +1.12, +0.70, +0.53, and +0.29 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Upon oxidation by CeIV at pH 0.6, the (RuV–OH)4 intermediate was reported to undergo nucleophilic attack by a water molecule to produce a hydroperoxo intermediate that evolved oxygen with TON around 500 and initial TOF around 450 h−1. Isotope experiments using 18O-labelled water demonstrated that water was the origin of the O atom in dioxygen. Hill et al.50,51 reported oxygen evolution with TON of 18 at neutral pH using electrochemically generated [RuIII(bpy)3]3+ as the oxidant. Given the oxidation potentials for the RuIV–OH2/RuV–OH couple these oxidation reactions should be accessible by photoactivation with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ analogues. The use of SO42− salts as electron acceptors renders these multi-electron reactions easier since two photons are sufficient to oxidize four Ru[(bpy)3]2+ molecules into four Ru[(bpy)3]3+. Hill's group reported, under neutral conditions, the reaction of a mixture of Ru–POM, Ru[(bpy)3]2+, and SO42− yielding oxygen with a turnover number of 180, an initial turnover frequency of 0.08 s−1, and a photoreaction quantum yield, defined as the number of O2 molecules per two absorbed photons, of Φ = 0.09 (i.e.Φ = 0.045, according to the classical definition of quantum yield). According to the authors, the major limiting factors in the light-induced process are the quantum efficiency of generating [RuIII(bpy)3]3+ and the rate of the bimolecular reaction between the chromophore and the catalyst. In a different study, Orlandi et al.55 observed hole transfer with close to diffusion limited rate from the photoproduced oxidant to the catalyst which was further enhanced when the Ru–POM complex was adsorbed on nanocrystalline TiO2. Light activation of the catalyst was highly improved by the use of a tetranuclear RuII first generation dendrimer, [Ru{(µ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}3](PF6)8, (bpy = bipyridine; dpp = 2,3-bis(2′-pyridyl)pyrazine) as the sensitizer.53 Dendrimers, often used as antenna mimicks,56 have enhanced visible absorption throughout a large portion of the visible spectrum working at wavelengths that are inaccessible to Ru[(bpy)3]2+. Furthermore, the oxidation potential of the RuII/RuIII couple in these systems (1.55 vs. SCE) is 290 mV higher than that of [Ru(bpy)3]2+. In these conditions, excitation with 550 nm light gave a quantum yield of Φ = 0.30, which is 6.7 times higher than the previous example.
Besides these ligand based catalysts, extensive research has also been done on transition metal oxides such as RuO2, IrO2, and Co3O4. Out of these oxides, IrO2 is interesting in this context since it has been characterized in a hybrid colloid/molecular system containing a chromophore. The first experiments reported by Harriman et al.57–59 showed the catalytic oxidation of water using light, [Ru(bpy)3]2+, and iridium colloids in the presence of an electron acceptor. Using optimal conditions irradiation of these solutions with light >420 nm yielded TOF of 160 s−1 (corresponding to 40 O2 molecules per second). The mechanism postulated involves oxidative quenching of photogenerated Ru[(bpy)3]3+ by Ir centers. This transfer occurs in a stepwise fashion from IrIII to IrIV and a subsequent oxidation beyond the IrIV state leading to oxygen evolution.
This reaction showed no H/D kinetic isotope effect (KIE = 1.0).60 Large isotope effects had been observed for molecular µ-oxo-bridged ruthenium (H/D = 1.4)61 or manganese (H/D = 1.7)62 complexes where the formation of a metal bound hydroperoxo intermediates is the rate determining step. If similar IrV–OOH species are involved in the oxidation of water, the lack of isotope effect is taken as proof that the rate determining step is the electron transfer between Ru[(bpy)3]2+ and surface Ir centers in the colloid. In order to obtain a more efficient electron transfer between sensitizer/acceptor and sensitizer/catalyst the Mallouck group investigated a tris-heteroleptic ruthenium complex bearing phosphonate and malonate groups designed in order to both be grafted to TiO2 surfaces and covalently bind small (1–5 nm) diameter IrO2 iridium nanoparticles,63,64 thus enhancing the electronic coupling between the two molecules.
Irradiation with light >420 nm of a photoelectrochemical cell with the ruthenium–iridium complexes at the TiO2 anode and a Pt wire as the cathode for proton reduction gave an internal quantum yield of 0.9% for overall water splitting when an electrical bias of >330 mV was applied. Formation of oxygen and hydrogen products was observed with a TON for water splitting of 16 per dye molecule. The decrease in TON for this system is explained by the fact that electron transfer from iridium to the oxidized chromophore is very slow (2.2 ms) compared with the fast recombination reaction (0.37 ms) between the photoinjected electron and RuIII (Fig. 5). Even though the efficiency of this cell is far from ideal, it is a good example of a water-oxidizing, proton-reducing photoelectrochemical device. The authors foresee ways for improvement by enhancing the rate of electron transfer from IrO2·nH2O nanoparticles to the sensitizer, slowing down back electron transfer by increasing the distance between the complex and the metal oxide surface, and making systems where catalyst particles are bound to just one chromophore.
 Fig. 5  Ru–Ir nanoparticle and its energetics when grafted to TiO2. 
Water oxidation using light and manganese has been reported by the Dismukes and Spiccia groups.62,65–69 They use a tetranuclear Mn–oxo cluster [Mn4O4L6]+, where L is diarylphosphinate ligand (p-R–C6H4)2PO2− (RH, alkyl, OMe). The manganese core of the cube is reported to be a much stronger oxidant than any known dimanganese complex. It is capable of H-abstraction from various organic substrates by breaking O–H and N–H bonds. When imbedded in a Nafion membrane (aq, 0.1 M Na2SO4) and deposited on a glassy carbon electrode it exhibited sustained water oxidation upon illumination with light >275 nm, while poised at 1.00 V vs. Ag/AgCl. A photocurrent was observed during 65 hours of catalysis yielding 1000 turnovers per Mn4 unit.
The proposed mechanism is explained by the removal of electrons and protons from the system after excitation of the Mn ← O charge transfer band using 350 nm light (Scheme 7). The highly oxidized Mn2–µ-O core formed releases O2 from the corner –oxo groups as well as one phosphinate ligand, yielding the “butterfly” intermediate.66 Re-insertion of a ligand to form the “pinned butterfly” intermediate, followed by coordination of two water molecules, closes the Mn2–di-µ–OH2 core and regenerates the catalyst. The most probable mechanism for water oxidation by this catalyst seems to be the light-independent electrooxidation of the Mn–cubane core, followed by photodissociation of an oxygen molecule. The need for Nafion is explained by the ability of these membranes to immobilize hydrophobic cations while allowing for direct contact with aqueous electrolytes by forming hydrophobic domains separated by hydrated head groups (sulfonic acids). The biggest drawback of such systems is the large overpotential needed to drive the reaction. Whether the mechanism is separated as successive electrooxidation, photodissociation reactions, or photoelectrooxidation, the energy input necessary to drive the catalysis is very high. The use of 275 nm light and 1.2 V of applied potential does not allow for these systems to be considered as viable catalysts.
 Scheme 7  Proposed mechanism for the manganese–cubane catalyst. 
Further work by this group based on the study of the electrooxidation followed by photodissociation mechanism proved that the 1.2 V bias and the UV light irradiation could be replaced by employing a ruthenium photosensitizer and visible light in a photoelectrochemical device.65 In their work they use a [RuII(bpy)2–(bpy–(COO)2)]2+ sensitizer that is known to promote the injection of electrons in the conduction band of TiO2. The resulting [RuIII(bpy)2–(bpy–(COO)2)]3+ is a potent oxidant (E = 1.4 V vs. SHE) capable of oxidizing the Mn–cubane complex (E =1.12 V vs. SHE). In the described setup, the Ru dye was adsorbed onto TiO2 which had been deposited on conductive glass (FTO). The dye was coated with Nafion and doped with the cubane catalyst. Illumination with white light (>290 to 750 nm) using 0.1 M Na2SO4 as the electrolyte at pH 6.5 produced a large increase in H+ concentration (7 times that in control experiments), and production of 130–140 nmol of O2 over 5 minutes. The estimated TON for the system is 47 ± 10 O2 molecules per cluster and 41 ± 9 electrons per dye. It is noteworthy to add that when this system was connected to a platinum wire as the counter electrode formation of hydrogen was detected. Thus the photocurrent generated by this photoelectrochemical cell corresponds to production of O2 and H+ at the photoanode and production of H2 at the cathode.
From the description above, it can be seen that most water oxidizing catalysts are based on ruthenium. True biomimetic catalysts based on Mn are scarce and plagued by controversy. Mn chemistry has proven difficult because of the chemical lability of the intermediates formed as manganese increases in oxidation states, as well as the formation of stable µ-oxo Mn bonds that are unreactive towards water oxidation. The only examples in literature that show chemically driven catalytic water oxidation are based on di- or tetra-manganese complexes which could, in principle, store the four oxidative equivalents needed to oxidize two water molecules.
The most promising of these molecules has been published by the Brudvig group.70 The [H2O(terpy)Mn(O)2Mn(terpy)OH2]3+ complex (Fig. 6, left) was the first complex that oxidized water using oxidants such as sodium hypochlorite or oxone via a nucleophilic attack of OH− onto a MnO moiety to yield O2. These results have been questioned on the basis of the origin of the oxygen atoms71 in the resulting dioxygen molecule and the inability to form terminal oxo groups by electrochemical methods.72 More recent work by Yagi and Narita73 has nonetheless shown the ability of this complex to oxidize water catalytically using CeIV when absorbed on clay surfaces. It was hypothesized by the authors that the observed activity during these heterogeneous reactions was due to intermolecular coupling of MnVO units formed by oxidation of terminal water molecules bound to the catalyst.
 Fig. 6  Di-manganese complexes reported to oxidize water by the Brudvig (left) and McKenzie's (right) groups. 
Poulsen and coworkers74 published a similar complex [MnII2(mcbpen)2(H2O)2]2+ (mcbpen− = N-methyl-N′-carboxymethyl-N,N′-bis(2-pyridylmethyl)ethane-1,2-diamine) (Fig. 6, right) where upon oxidation with tert-butylhydrogenperoxide or CeIV, water oxidation was observed via a oxo to peroxo mechanism. Although 18O labeling studies were performed for this catalysts, further work on the origin of the second oxygen atom is required. Other complexes such as Naruta's face to face Mn porphyrins,75 and Dismukes' tetramanganese–cubane system76 have also been debated at length in the literature. The lack of follow up on these publications seems to indicate that an agnostic position seems justified.
In a recent study the Styring group undertook the systematic screening of eight Mn-based catalysts with different chemical oxidants including [RuII(bpy)3]2+ as a photooxidant.77 Their work showed that no O2 was formed by the Mn catalysts when the oxidant did not act as a O-transfer agent (CeIV, [RuII(bpy)3]3+). Although these oxidants provide the largest thermodynamic driving forces, it seems evident that energetics only cannot account for the lack of reactivity. The fact that oxygen containing oxidants are needed implies that O-atom transfer to the Mn is key to the oxidation reactions.
Perspectives
Artificial photosynthesis, when thought of as the process of absorption of solar energy and its storage in a chemical form, can be separated in two half reactions. A four electron photooxidation of water to form dioxygen on the anodic side and a (photo)reduction reaction to generate dihydrogen or reduced forms of CO2 at the cathodic side.
The current idea for a photoelectrochemical cell consists of the use of chromophore–catalyst molecules covalently attached to a metal oxide surface. Activation of this system by light would trigger a series of oxidative chemical reactions that would lead to the transfer of electrons from water molecules to the cathode for their incorporation into a fuel (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Photoelectrochemical cell for the oxidation of water and reduction of protons. 
In this section, we will discuss the different approaches that could be used in developing a molecular based photocatalytic system for the anodic reaction.
Photoactive unit
The area of molecular based sensitizers is under intensive investigation as it holds the promise to bring alternative solution to the expensive silicon based photovoltaics. The breakthrough in the field came with the association of large band gap materials like metal oxides covered with a redox-active light-absorbing material.78,79 The working principle behind these sensitized semiconductors resides in the separation of optical absorption from charge separation processes. Among the best candidates as sensitizer in this field are the ruthenium(II) based polypyridine complexes. [RuII(bpy)3]2+ is the archetypical complex used for this purpose because of its robustness and unique photophysical properties.80,81 From a synthetic point of view, differently substituted bipyridines can be incorporated in a stepwise manner in the coordination sphere of the ruthenium ion.80 This allows for the preparation of different heteroleptic complexes whose spectroscopic and electrochemical properties can be tailored for each individual molecule. However, the development of heteroleptic molecular assemblies based on the [RuII(bpy)3]2+ module leads to the formation of different isomers which may render kinetic analyses difficult.29,82 The use of the [RuII(tpy)2]2+ (tpy: terpyridine) leads to the linear disposition of the different modules when substituting in the 4 position. However, the pitfall with this chromophore is the very short lived excited states (0.25 ns). Abrahamsson et al. have recently prepared and characterized a novel bis-tridentate ruthenium(II) complex with an observed excited state lifetime of 3 µs while at the same time keeping the oxidizing power of the resulting RuIII close to [RuII(tpy)2]2+.29
Modifications in future generations of chromophores may include larger absorption cross-sections and extended spectral ranges in the visible region such as those shown by antenna, dendrimer, or heteroleptic complexes, as well as the ability to increase/decrease oxidation potentials in order to optimize electron transfer to the catalyst in terms of kinetics and energetics. Porphyrin-based chromophores have also been extensively studied and are good candidates,83 but the synthetic pathways are often tedious and discouraging. The development of suitable organic dyes could help to avoid the use of rare metals such as ruthenium.84
Surfaces
The fate of the electrons taken from water is an important factor to consider when performing photodriven oxidation reactions. The use of oxidants in chemically driven reactions is substituted by irreversible electron acceptors in homogenous systems. These molecules are non-innocent and might be responsible for the deactivation of any of the components of the reaction. The best alternative for the efficient removal and collection of the electrons obtained from photooxidation reactions in order to use them for fuel production is the transfer of these solution based reactions to the surface of an electrode in a photoelectrochemical cell. The use of n-type semiconductive, optically transparent layers of TiO2 (but also ZnO or SnO2) helps avoid many of the drawbacks present in solution systems.78 The most obvious advantage comes from the fact that the photosensitizer is covalently bound to the metal–oxide surface, enabling very efficient and fast electron transfer reactions between the excited state of the chromophore and the conduction band of the semiconductor. Secondly, immobilization of the photocatalysts suppresses potential intermolecular reactions between highly oxidized catalyst species which might lead to molecule degradation. These changes are likely to result in a much higher stability of the system during long-term operation. Lastly, low potential electrons resulting from these photocatalytic processes at a photoanode can be directed to a second half-cell where they can be used at a (photo)cathode for reduction reactions leading to the formation of fuels (H2, CO, CH4, etc.). Due to the high specific surface area of nanocrystalline, mesoporous TiO2 layers sufficient light absorption can be obtained even with layer thicknesses of less than 10 µm. Back electron transfer reactions from TiO2 to the oxidized sensitizer are a recurrent problem in these kind of system which can be avoided by enhancing the rate of electron transfer from the catalyst to the oxidized dye.
Electron relay systems
The incorporation of electron relay groups as intermediate redox active centers between the chromophore and the catalytic unit is an important feature for the design of efficient molecular photocatalysts. This approach is equivalent to that found in nature where a tyrosine/histidine couple is situated between P680 and the OEC (Fig. 1).85 The use of this kind of group allows for sufficient decoupling of the chromophore and catalyst, thus assuring fast rates of intramolecular electron transfer as well as decreasing the risk of charge recombination reactions arising from the proximity of the chromophore to the highly oxidized catalytic center. Several groups have reported synthetic equivalents of the photosystem II tyrosine/histidine couple composed of Ru-based chromophores covalently attached to imidazole–phenol couples.86–88 Flash photolysis studies in the presence of electron acceptors have shown the presence of intramolecular electron transfer reactions from the phenol moiety to the oxidized chromophore. More interestingly, the rate of electron transfer from the phenol group was found to be orders of magnitude faster when the phenol is hydrogen bonded to a base. The resulting phenoxy radical is sufficiently oxidizing to activate a synthetic dinuclear MnII–MnII center by up to three consecutive electron transfer processes89–91 through consecutive deprotonation of the metal-bound water molecules to form a bis-µ-oxo dinuclear Mn2III,IV which was detected by EPR. These sequential oxidation steps occur within a potential window of ca. 0.2 V due to charge compensating ligand exchange and proton-coupled electron transfer (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Example of light driven charge accumulation process. 
In a different study, light activation of a known catalytic unit in a chromophore–catalyst construct was shown on a molecule bearing a [RuII(bpy)3]2+ analogue covalently bound to a manganese(III) ion in a salen cavity. Photoactivation of the MnIII–salen into a high spin MnIV species via intramolecular electron transfer was shown by flash photolysis and EPR techniques (Fig. 9).92
 Fig. 9  MnIII to MnIV photooxidation process in a chromophore–salen complex. 
Unfortunately these examples of photoactivation reactions have not reported catalytic activity but they serve as good examples of how the study of photoactivated reactions by spectroscopic methods can give valuable information on the intermediates formed in a reaction as well as on the kinetics of sequential electron transfer/deprotonation steps involved in charge accumulation processes.

Catalyst design. 
As shown in the previous sections, the synthesis of catalysts capable of oxidizing water hinges on the use of metal complexes that are capable of coordinating water molecules and stabilizing the resulting deprotonated OH−/O2− species through their acceptor d-orbitals. Photosystem II uses a Mn cluster in the OEC that cycles through +3, +4, and probably +5 oxidation states in order to split water. Besides a great range of oxidation states, high oxidation states of Mn are capable of binding water to form hydroxo and oxo moieties with modest overpotentials in the ranges needed for water splitting. pK values for H2O molecules bound to MnII are around 10.5, 0 for MnIII, and the remaining proton is lost in MnIV species, which is stabilized by the resulting O2− ligands.93 Unfortunately, as shown in previous sections, Mn chemistry has proven very difficult for its use in artificial systems and only a handful of catalysts have been published, all with limited efficiencies. Based on our knowledge of the natural system and related artificial systems, a Mn-based catalyst would require a multi-metallic cluster cycling between the MnIII and MnV oxidation states, capable of undergoing water binding, deprotonation reactions, and O–O bond formation within a stable ligand structure capable of enduring the high oxidation states of the metal intermediates.
Most of the systems present in literature that are capable of water activation are based on ruthenium. This metal features III, IV, and V oxidation states and metal–aqua to metal–oxo water activation steps similar to those formed by manganese in nature. Unfortunately, ruthenium is rare and therefore expensive and, although invaluable at the level of basic research, cheaper alternatives should be studied based on abundant transition state metals.
Nature uses other transition elements such as Fe, Co, Ni and Cu in catalytically active sites. Iron, which is the closest element to manganese from a chemical point of view, has been extensively studied in the reductive activation of O2 to form Fe–oxo complexes, but has not proven useful for the oxidative activation of water. Low oxidation states of iron(II, III) have lower binding constants for O-donor ligands than manganese, while FeIV is too oxidizing and therefore unstable. Promising advances in the water splitting reaction have been achieved using Co and Ni catalysts deposited on electrode surfaces.94,95 The former systems are composed of Co–oxo/hydroxo clusters which show the presence of Co4+ moieties when studied at their working potentials (1.25 V vs. NHE).


Radical coupling. 
The design of water splitting catalysts that work through RC mechanism involves the coupling of two metal–oxo species having radical character. The structure of the ligand has to be such that two of these odd electron oxidants are placed in close proximity in order to form a peroxo intermediate that releases oxygen. An example of such a molecule could be described by the blue dimer molecule where two d3 RuV metal oxo groups are placed at close distances. In this case though, the ligand structure impedes the two oxo groups from being at the right angle and distance, and therefore the reaction proceeds via nucleophilic attack by a water molecule. Complexes have been designed to favour the RC mechanism by improving oxo–oxo distances and angles. This approach consists of the design of “pacman” molecules where two metal ions were placed at specific distance by specific design of their ligand sets.15,96,97 Oxidation of the aqua ligands into their oxo equivalents followed by O–O coupling yields formation of oxygen in bridged di-ruthenium polypyridyl complexes. Other complexes such as pacman Mn porphyrins have also shown formation of O2 by the reaction of two proximal HO–MnVO, although whether O2 formation is via oxo coupling or nucleophilic attack by OH− is not clear.75


Nucleophilic attack. 
In order to drive oxidation of water through the AB mechanism, the catalysts used must be capable of forming an active electrophilic oxo species that reacts via nucleophilic attack with an activated water molecule. Related examples of molecules working via this mechanism are found in the salen family where epoxidation of a nucleophile (alkene) is performed by the reaction of the double bond with a d2 MnV species.98 During water oxidation, the double bond of the alkene gets substituted by a lone pair from a water molecule. This reaction is more difficult because OH− is a weaker nucleophile and the reaction has to manage the release of two protons. “Hangman” complexes have been designed to facilitate this mechanism (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Hangman structure. 
These complexes include a metal-bearing ligand where a water molecule can coordinate. Pendant groups placed at discrete distances should be capable of binding and activating a second water molecule in order to provide a hydroxide group that is sufficiently nucleophilic to react with the oxo group formed at the metal center.15,99,100 The electrophilicity of the metal–oxo can be modulated by insertion of appropriate electron withdrawing groups in the periphery of the ligand in order to increase/decrease the electron density around the metal ion.
 Fig. 11  Formation of Mn–oxo by O2 activation in a corrole system. 
Other examples of nucleophilic attack of hydroxy groups on metal–oxo complexes include the Mn corroles where O2 evolution was detected after reaction of OH− with a MnV–oxo corrole system (Fig. 11).101 More recently, reversible O–O bond cleavage/formation has been observed in a Mn corrole system via an acid–base mechanism.102 This result is interesting because it highlights a potential relationship between the O–O bond formation reaction in photosystem II with the O2 bond cleavage in monooxygenases.103
Recent work on Fe(III) tetraamido macrocyclic ligands (TAMLs) has shown how this family of molecules can form oxo groups by reducing oxygen or oxidizing water depending on the conditions used.66,104 These results constitute a breakthrough since they introduce the use of iron as a catalyst while at the same time allowing for large synthetic modifications in the ligands in order to tune the electronic properties of the molecule (Fig. 12).105
 Fig. 12  Water oxidation catalyst based on Fe(TAML). 
Other issues such as the stability of the catalytic systems to be used should be addressed in the future. These molecules will work in very harsh conditions and have to be either resistant to strong oxidative processes106 or, more interestingly, capable of undergoing self-repair once damaged. Important advances in the development and understanding of oxidizing complexes have been made, and self-repair mechanisms have been introduced in heterogeneous catalysts but further work in this field with respect to molecular catalysts needs to be done.
Although not covered in this article, the use of solid state metal–oxo systems should be considered as an important facet of this field of research. Since the first article in 1972 (ref. 107) dealing with UV light oxidation of water, few reports on the visible light oxidation of water have been published.108,109 These systems are marred by the difficulty to address their structure, reactivity and reaction mechanisms, as well as large band-gaps that prohibit the use of visible light. They are nonetheless important because of the potential they have in terms of cost, robustness, and the possibility of forming structures where they can be coupled to co-catalysts or sensitizers.

Conclusions
The use of water as a source of protons and electrons and light in order to produce clean fuels is one of the most important chemical challenges lying ahead. This task will span all fields of the physical sciences as we strive to develop systems that are capable of promoting the catalytic oxidation of water with sunlight as the sole energy input. Additionally, the resulting protons and electrons from this reaction must be collected for further use in the formation of fuels.
In this review we have focused on water oxidation and presented a number of approaches used in the field of homogeneous catalysis. The catalysts here presented are just the starting point for the development of this field. Issues such as ligand design, nature of the metal ion, and reaction mechanisms are intimately related and must be mastered if we want to design complexes that can work at high turnover rates and frequencies for extended period of time.
The design of photocatalysts has benefited from the study of the natural enzyme to a limited extent. This is due to uncertainties concerning the structure and function of the active site. With new high resolution structures in the future and the consequent advances in understanding the mechanism, it is not unreasonable to expect insights that will be directly applicable to improved catalyst design.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the Region Ile-de-France in the framework of C’Nano IdF. C’Nano IdF is the nanoscience competence center of Paris Region, supported by CNRS, CEA, MESR and Region Ile-de-France. Further financial support was obtained from the EU/Energy project “SOLAR-H2” (FP7 contract 212508), ANR PhotobioH2 project (ANR-05-NT05-2_42699), ANR-HYPHO-05-BLAN-0174, and the Conseil Général d’Essonne (ASTRE).
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barber, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2007, 365, 1007 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Alstrum-Acevedo, M. K. Brennaman and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6802 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. McEvoy and G. W. Brudvig, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4455 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. McEvoy, J. A. Gascon, V. S. Batista and G. W. Brudvig, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2005, 4, 940 RSC .
K. N. Ferreira, T. M. Iverson, K. Maghlaoui, J. Barber and S. Iwata, Science, 2004, 303, 1831 CrossRef CAS .
B. Loll, J. Kern, W. Saenger, A. Zouni and J. Biesiadka, Nature, 2005, 438, 1040 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. M. Siegbahn, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1871 Search PubMed .
E. M. Sproviero, J. P. McEvoy, J. A. Gascon, G. W. Brudvig and V. S. Batista, Photosynth. Res., 2008, 97, 91 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Sproviero, J. A. Gascon, J. P. McEvoy, G. W. Brudvig and V. S. Batista, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6728 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Peloquin, K. A. Campbell, D. W. Randall, M. A. Evanchik, V. L. Pecoraro, W. H. Armstrong and R. D. Britt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 10926 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Cady, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 252, 444 Search PubMed .
W. Ruttinger and G. C. Dismukes, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Betley, Q. Wu, T. Van Voorhis and D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1849 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Betley, Y. Surendranath, M. V. Childress, G. E. Alliger, R. Fu, C. C. Cummins and D. G. Nocera, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2008, 363, 1293 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. V. Huynh and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 5004 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Meyer, M. H. V. Huynh and H. H. Thorp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5284 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Meyer and M. H. V. Huynh, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 8140 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kitamura, H. Fudemoto, Y. Wada, K. Murakoshi, M. Kusaba, N. Nakashima, T. Majima and S. Yanagida, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 221 RSC .
T. Kitamura, Y. Wada, K. Murakoshi, M. Kusaba, N. Nakashima, A. Ishida, T. Majima, S. Takamuku, T. Akano and S. Yanagida, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 3491 RSC .
S. Funyu, M. Kinai, D. Masui, S. Takagi, T. Shimada, H. Tachibana and H. Inoue, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 931 RSC .
S. Funyu, T. Isobe, S. Takagi, D. A. Tryk and H. Inoue, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5734 CrossRef .
H. Inoue, S. Funyu, Y. Shimada and S. Takagi, Pure Appl. Chem., 2005, 77, 1019 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shimizu, S. Onitsuka, H. Egami and T. Katsuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5396 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tanaka, H. Nishikawa, T. Uchida and T. Katsuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12034 Search PubMed .
J. A. Treadway, J. A. Moss and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1999, 38, 4386 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Chen, F. N. Rein and R. C. Rocha, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9672 Search PubMed .
M. Abrahamsson, M. Jager, R. J. Kumar, T. Osterman, P. Persson, H. C. Becker, O. Johansson and L. Hammarstrom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15533 CrossRef CAS .
M. Maestri, N. Armaroli, V. Balzani, E. C. Constable and A. Thompson, Inorg. Chem., 1995, 34, 2759 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Sauvage, J. P. Collin, J. C. Chambron, S. Guillerez, C. Coudret, V. Balzani, F. Barigelletti, L. Decola and L. Flamigni, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 993 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Thompson and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 4106 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Thompson and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 5070 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Gilbert, D. S. Eggleston, W. R. Murphy, D. A. Geselowitz, S. W. Gersten, D. J. Hodgson and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 3855 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Rotzinger, S. Munavalli, P. Comte, J. K. Hurst, M. Gratzel, F. J. Pern and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 6619 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bozoglian, S. Romain, M. Z. Ertem, T. K. Todorova, C. Sens, J. Mola, M. Rodriguez, I. Romero, J. Benet-Buchholz, X. Fontrodona, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi and A. Llobet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15176 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sala, I. Romero, M. Rodriguez, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2842 CrossRef CAS .
I. Romero, M. Rodriguez, C. Sens, J. Mola, M. R. Kollipara, L. Francas, E. Mas-Marza, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1824 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, A. Fischer, L. Duan, L. Tong, E. Gabrielsson, B. Åkermark and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8934 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16462 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. R. Norris, Z. F. Chen, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 1277 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, M. K. Tsai, J. T. Muckerman and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1545 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. M. Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sala, M. Z. Ertem, L. Vigara, T. K. Todorova, W. Z. Chen, R. C. Rocha, F. Aquilante, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7745 Search PubMed .
H. W. Tseng, R. Zong, J. T. Muckerman and R. Thummel, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 11763 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Deng, H. W. Tseng, R. F. Zong, D. Wang and R. Thummel, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1835 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nyhlen, L. L. Duan, B. Akermark, L. C. Sun and T. Privalov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1773 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Xu, G. Eilers, M. Borgstrom, J. X. Pan, M. Abrahamsson, A. Magnuson, R. Lomoth, J. Bergquist, T. Polivka, L. C. Sun, V. Sundstrom, S. Styring, L. Hammarstrom and B. Akermark, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 7305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Xu, L. L. Duan, L. P. Tong, B. Akermark and L. C. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6506 RSC .
Y. V. Geletii, B. Botar, P. Koegerler, D. A. Hillesheim, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3896 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, Z. Q. Huang, Y. Hou, D. G. Musaev, T. Q. Lian and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7522 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, R. De Zorzi, S. Geremia, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5006 CrossRef CAS .
F. Puntoriero, G. La Ganga, A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Bonchio and S. Campagna, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4725 RSC .
A. Sartorel, P. Miro, E. Salvadori, S. Romain, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Di Valentin, A. Llobet, C. Bo and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16051 CrossRef CAS .
M. Orlandi, R. Argazzi, A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Bonchio and F. Scandola, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3152 RSC .
V. Balzani and A. Juris, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2001, 211, 97 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman, J. M. Thomas and G. R. Millward, New J. Chem., 1987, 11, 757 CAS .
A. Harriman, M. C. Richoux, P. A. Christensen, S. Mosseri and P. Neta, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1987, 83, 3001 RSC .
A. Harriman, I. J. Pickering, J. M. Thomas and P. A. Christensen, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1988, 84, 2795 RSC .
N. D. Morris, M. Suzuki and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 9115 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Hurst, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 313 CrossRef CAS .
J. Limburg, J. S. Vrettos, H. Chen, J. C.d. Paula, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 423 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S. H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S. H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, A. Koo, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2892 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pushkar, X. Long, P. Glatzel, G. W. Brudvig, G. C. Dismukes, T. J. Collins, V. K. Yachandra, J. Yano and U. Bergmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 800 Search PubMed .
G. C. Dismukes, R. Brimblecombe, G. A. N. Felton, R. S. Pryadun, J. E. Sheats, L. Spiccia and G. F. Swiegers, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1935 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, D. R. J. Kolling, A. M. Bond, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 7269 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ruettinger, M. Yagi, K. Wolf, S. Bernasek and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 10353 CrossRef CAS .
J. Limburg, J. S. Vrettos, L. M. Liable-Sands, A. L. Rheingold, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Science, 1999, 283, 1524 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yagi and M. Kaneko, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 21 CrossRef CAS .
C. Baffert, S. Romain, A. Richardot, J.-C. Lepretre, B. Lefebvre, A. Deronzier and M.-N. Collomb, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13694 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yagi and K. Narita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8084 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Poulsen, A. Rompel and C. J. McKenzie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2 .
Y. Shimazaki, T. Nagano, H. Takesue, B. H. Ye, F. Tani and Y. Naruta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 98 CrossRef .
W. Ruettinger, M. Yagi, K. Wolf, S. Bernasek and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 10353 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kurz, G. Berggren, M. F. Anderlund and S. Styring, Dalton Trans., 2007, 4258 RSC .
G. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6852–6864 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Gratzel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 77, 347 CrossRef CAS .
L. Spiccia, G. B. Deacon and C. M. Kepert, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1329 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hang, V. Huynh, D. M. Dattelbaum and T. J. Meyer, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 457 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Keene, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1997, 166, 121 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Gould, G. Kodis, R. E. Palacios, L. D. L. Garza, A. Brune, D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, J. Phys. Chem.
B, 2004, 108, 10566 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jana, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2000, 132, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sjodin, S. Styring, B. Akermark, L. Sun and L. Hammarstrom, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2002, 357, 1471 CrossRef .
T. Lachaud, A. Quaranta, Y. Pellegrin, P. Dorlet, M. F. Charlot, S. Un, W. Leibl and A. Aukauloo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1536 CrossRef .
A. Quaranta, F. Lachaud, C. Herrero, R. Guillot, M. F. Charlot, W. Leibl and A. Aukauloo, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 8201 CrossRef CAS .
A. Magnuson, H. Berglund, P. Korall, L. Hammarstrom, B. Akermark, S. Styring and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 10720 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huang, A. Magnuson, R. Lomoth, M. Abrahamsson, M. Tamm, L. Sun, B.v. Rotterdam, J. Park, L. Hammarstrom, B. Akermark and S. Styring, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2002, 91, 159 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huang, J. Hogblom, M. F. Anderlund, L. Sun, A. Magnuson and S. Styring, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2004, 98, 733 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, M. K. Raymond, A. Magnuson, D. LeGourriérec, M. Tamm, M. Abrahamsson, P. H. Kenez, J. Mårtensson, G. Stenhagen, L. Hammarstrom, S. Styring and B. Akermark, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2000, 1, 15 Search PubMed .
C. Herrero, J. L. Hughes, A. Quaranta, N. Cox, A. W. Rutherford, W. Leibl and A. Aukauloo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7605 RSC .
F. A. Armstrong, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2008, 363, 1263 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan, J. Yano, Y. Surendranath, M. Dinca, V. K. Yachandra and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13692 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dinca, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 10337 CAS .
T. Wada, K. Tsuge and K. Tanaka, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 329 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wada, K. Tsuge and K. Tanaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 1479 CrossRef CAS .
M. Palucki, N. S. Finney, P. J. Pospisil, M. L. Güler, T. Ishida and E. N. Jacobsen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 948 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Chang, L. L. Chng and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1866 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Yeh, C. J. Chang and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1513 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, T. Akermark, J. H. Liu, L. C. Sun and B. Akermark, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8726 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, H. Park, M. S. Seo, M. Kubo, T. Ogura, J. Klajn, D. T. Gryko, J. S. Valentine and W. Nam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14030 Search PubMed .
C. W. Hoganson, M. A. Pressler, D. A. Proshlyakov and G. T. Babcock, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1998, 1365, 170 Search PubMed .
W. C. Ellis, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and T. J. Collins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10990 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Ellis, C. T. Tran, M. A. Denardo, A. Fischer, A. D. Ryabov and T. J. Collins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18052 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Collins, Acc. Chem. Res., 1994, 27, 279 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. L. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2008, 254, 198 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
The production of fuels using sunlight, water and carbon dioxide is one of the most important challenges facing scientists today. Nature has been performing this reaction for more than 2 billion years using solar energy to remove protons and electrons from water, generate oxygen and store the energy in the chemical bonds of sugars. This process, photosynthesis, is the energy input for life. Over the last two decades important advances have been made in the field of artificial photosynthesis spanning the fields of light-induced charge separated states, water oxidation reactions, and reductive processes aimed at fuel production. Of these, water oxidation seems the most challenging. Here we describe advances in the design of photocatalysts for water oxidation. Understanding the unique water oxidizing enzyme is expected to advance further the field of catalyst design and solar fuel production.

2H2O + 4hν → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−	(1)
nCO2 + 2ne− + 2nH+ → (CH2O)n + n/2O2	(2)
2H+ + 2e− → H2	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Map of the main cofactors of photosystem II based on the coordinates of ref. 7.	 

 	Fig. 2  Representation of a chromophore–catalyst assembly attached to TiO2 nanoparticles on an Indium Tin Oxide electrode.	 

 	Scheme 1  Proposed mechanisms for O2 evolution.	 

 	Scheme 2  Activation of a water molecule by a high valence metal ion.	 
1e− H2O → HO˙ + H˙	(4)
2e− H2O → [O] + 2H+ + 2e−	(5)
4e− 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−	(6)

 	Scheme 3  Reaction scheme for F-Phen upon visible light irradiation in AcN:H2O mixture.	 

 	Scheme 4  Postulated reaction mechanism for RuIITMP(CO).	 

 	Scheme 5  Homogeneous photocatalyst for the oxidation of alcohols.	 

 	Scheme 6  Heterogeneous photocatalyst for the oxidation of alcohols.	 

 	Fig. 3  Dinuclear ruthenium based catalysts. Meyer's blue dimer (left) and Llobet's in,in-Ru–Hbpp complex (right).	 

 	Fig. 4  Di- (left) and mononuclear (right) Ru catalysts from Sun's lab.	 
[Ru(bpy)3]2+* + S2O82−→ [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + SO4˙− + SO42−	(7)
[Ru(bpy)3]2+ + SO4˙− → [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + SO42−	(8)

 	Fig. 5  Ru–Ir nanoparticle and its energetics when grafted to TiO2.	 

 	Scheme 7  Proposed mechanism for the manganese–cubane catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 6  Di-manganese complexes reported to oxidize water by the Brudvig (left) and McKenzie's (right) groups.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photoelectrochemical cell for the oxidation of water and reduction of protons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Example of light driven charge accumulation process.	 

 	Fig. 9  MnIII to MnIV photooxidation process in a chromophore–salen complex.	 

 	Fig. 10  Hangman structure.	 

 	Fig. 11  Formation of Mn–oxo by O2 activation in a corrole system.	 

 	Fig. 12  Water oxidation catalyst based on Fe(TAML).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
