Using plasmonic heating of gold nanoparticles to generate local SER(R)S-active TiO 2 spots   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B900647H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B900647H
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2009, 2359-2361Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsUsing plasmonic heating of gold nanoparticles to generate local SER(R)S-active TiO2 spots†

        
          
            Ivano 
            Alessandri
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Laura E. 
            Depero
          
        
      *
      INSTM and Chemistry for Technologies Laboratory, University of Brescia, via Branze 38, 25123 Brescia, Italy. E-mail: ivano.alessandri@ing.unibs.it;  Fax: +39 030 3702448;   Tel: +39 030 3705667
Received 
       (in Cambridge, UK) 
      12th January 2009
    , Accepted 17th February 2009First published on 9th March 2009AbstractThe plasmonic heating generated by laser irradiation of gold nanoparticles was exploited for fabricating SER(R)S-active anatase spots.
Metal nanoparticles are currently attracting manifold interests in several fields of chemistry and nanotechnology. For instance, gold nanoparticles have been extensively investigated due their chemical and physical properties, which make them suitable for catalysis, optoelectronics and sensing.1 In particular, the successful development of ultra-sensitive diagnostic techniques, such as Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) and Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) was achieved thanks to gold (or silver) surface plasmons which are excited upon interaction with an electromagnetic field.2 On the other hand, the achievement of SERS active sites directly generated on functional materials, such as metal oxide nanoshells or photonic crystals, which play key roles in some important chemical and physical processes, remains a challenging task to be reached. Another exciting research topic is addressed to exploit the enhanced photon absorption properties exhibited by gold nanoparticles to generate heat upon optical irradiation.3 This aspect is investigated in the field of nanomedicine in view of the photodegradation of cancer cells,4 or for the targeted delivery of drugs encapsulated inside living cells.5 Further interesting issues concern the use of plasmon heating for the controlled self-assembly of colloids and nanolithography.6,7 Recently, we succeeded in exploiting metal nanoparticles as light harvesting centers to introduce extremely localized heating into colloidal particles and colloidal assemblies, obtaining a selective modification of their morphology.8
In the present work, we show how citrate-stabilized gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) can be used to promote the crystallization of TiO2 spots on colloidal crystals by taking advantage of plasmon heating generated upon interaction with a low power Continuous Wave (C.W.) He–Ne laser. These Au/TiO2 spots are characterized by a high spatial resolution and may serve as SERS active sites for studying surface processes. The Au/TiO2 spots were prepared as follows. Core/shell-type colloidal crystals (or 2D assemblies) formed by polystyrene nanospheres (PS) coated by a thin layer of amorphous TiO2 (commonly referred as “a-TiO2nanoshells”) were used as substrates (Fig. 1b). Details of the preparation are reported in the experimental section (see ESI).† The interest in using nanoshells as substrates is twofold. On one hand, colloidal assemblies are considered among the most promising SERS active substrates, as they are easy to be obtained and allow to control important parameters such as surface roughness and absorption/scattering of incident light.9 Moreover, they are paradigm-structures for metal oxide photonic crystals, which have been recently demonstrated to be interesting materials for dye-sensitized solar cells and optically amplified photochemistry.10,11 In our experiments, a few μL of citrate-stabilized Au solutions (with concentration ranging from 10−4 to 10−6 M) were dropped on these substrates and dried at room temperature. Upon drying, the Au NPs decorated the PS/TiO2 surface forming microscopic aggregates, which can be easily detected by optical inspection (see Fig. 1a and ESI).† The surface density of the Au NP aggregates depended on concentration of the nanoparticle solution. Aggregation resulted in blue-shift of the Au plasmon band, which passed from 530 nm of the initial solution to about 600 nm of the final aggregates, as a consequence of the electronic coupling of the individual plasmon resonances.8,12
 Fig. 1  (a) Optical microscope images of citrate-stabilized Au NPs on PS/a-TiO2 substrates. White arrows indicate some of the Au aggregates. The red circle highlights the aggregate that is going to be irradiated. Snapshots 1, 2 and 3 show the effects of laser irradiation for 3, 30 and 300 s, respectively. Scale bars: 2 μm. (b) SEM image of the PS/a-TiO2 core shell colloidal crystals used as substrates for deposition of Au NPs. Scale bar: 200 nm. (c) Micro-Raman spectrum of the Au/anatase spots obtained after laser irradiation. The anatase modes are labelled by “A”. The spectrum was acquired using an optical filter to attenuate the laser power to 0.5 mW, in order to prevent any possible structural modifications induced by plasmonic heating. 
The gold aggregates were irradiated by a C. W. He–Ne laser (λmax: 632.8 nm) focused through a 100× (numerical aperture, N. A.: 0.9) objective of a Raman microscope. The power of the laser on the sample was about 4.5 mW (6.5 × 105W cm−2). Upon irradiation, elliptical bright spots were generated in the region where the laser had been pointed. The size of the spots depended on the time of irradiation. As a selected example, a sequence of optical images showing the evolution of the spot size as a function of the exposure time was presented in Fig. 1a. The size of the initial spot, obtained after 3 seconds of exposure, was about 2 μm, which corresponded to the laser beamsize (snapshot 1). After prolonged irradiation (5 min) the bright spot extended to about 5 μm in width (snapshot 3). At the same time, the morphology of the gold aggregates was modified as well. In general, the size of the aggregates increased and new rough islands appeared on their surface. Micro-Raman analysis revealed that nanocrystalline anatase was produced after laser irradiation. Fig. 1c shows the presence of signals at about 149, 394, 512 and 636 cm−1, which correspond, respectively, to the Eg(1), B1g(1), A1g + B1g(2) and Eg(3) modes characteristic of TiO2 in the anatase phase. The spectrum was acquired using an optical filter in order to attenuate the laser power below 0.5 mW to avoid any possible heating-induced modification during the measurement. The broadening of the Raman modes, as well as their slight shift compared to bulk powder samples, suggested that the anatase was present in form of nanocrystals and might indicate diffusion of gold into the anatase layer.13
It is important to note that, under typical conditions, the Raman detection of such a thin (50 nm or less) anatase layer is prevented. On the contrary, in the present case, the gold aggregates gave rise to suitable conditions for a strong enhancement of the Raman signal, so allowing the detection of anatase. These results were analogous to those we obtained by irradiating PS/TiO2 core/shell systems containing a thin film made of gold nanoparticles between PS and titania.13 This confirmed that the electromagnetic field was locally increased by laser excitation of gold surface plasmons, and that a certain amount of gold nanoparticles remained tethered into the crystallizing anatase. The overall spectral background, as well as the broad bump at about 690 cm−1 supported this hypothesis. Further in-depth microstructural characterization is currently under way to analyze the Au–TiO2 inter-diffusion.
We have already demonstrated the activity of aggregated gold nanoparticles in modifying colloidal nanospheres.8 In that case the Au NPs were in direct contact with the surface of the colloid. However, in the present case, they were separated by a TiO2 thin layer. The perfect conformality of atomic layer deposition guaranteed that no regions of the polymeric core remained un-coated, as shown by SEM analysis (see Fig. 1b). In addition, we did not observe any effect of laser irradiation on the PS/TiO2 samples uniformly coated by aggregated gold nanoparticles deposited by sputtering at room temperature. As the latter were demonstrated to be active in triggering plasmon heating effects when directly deposited on polymeric substrates,8 we can conclude that the TiO2 layer improved the adhesion of gold nanoparticles and acted as an efficient thermal barrier in preventing heat propagation to the underlying PS. Thus, in the present case, the anatase spots were obtained thanks to the presence of the stabilizing citrates, that underwent thermal decomposition upon generation of plasmon heating by laser irradiation (citrates decomposes above 175 °C ). The overall process of anatase crystallization was monitored in situ by Raman microspectroscopy (see ESI).† The initial, intermediate and final stages are summarized in Fig. 2. As gold nanoparticles act as very efficient photon–thermal converters, a large amount of heat is generated and propagated through the surrounding medium upon laser irradiation. Both citrates and amorphous TiO2 are poor thermal conductors, thereby heat cannot be dissipated in a effective way and local temperature increases up to the thermal decomposition of citrates. In fact, the initial spectrum of Au-stabilized citrates (ESI†) turned in a spectrum exhibiting only two broad bands at 1310 and 1560 cm−1, which are characteristic of carbonaceous species (spectrum 1). The thermal decomposition of citrates is an exothermic process, so that further heat is supplied to the system. This behaviour is analogous to that we observed for polystyrene or poly(methyl methacrylate) coated by Au NPs.8,12 As the reaction proceeds, amorphous TiO2 arranges into anatase nanocrystals (spectra 2 and 3). The crystallization process stops once the organic substrate is almost completely removed and/or cannot give further contribution to the total heating.
 Fig. 2  
Micro-Raman spectra showing initial, intermediate and final stages of the anatase crystallization induced by plasmonic heating. See the text for further details. 
The use of gold nanoparticles to drive the crystallization process presents some important advantages compared to the approaches that have been proposed so far. Literature reported that the direct crystallization of anatase spots from a-TiO2 can be obtained only by means of high-power lasers and long exposure times.14 In other cases, this result was yielded by electron beam irradiation, which required to get at least 20 kV in a vacuum chamber.15 In addition, both these methods do not allow to operate on polymeric colloidal crystal with a spatial resolution as good as that reached in the present case.
Another key point is related to the enhanced Raman activity that gold nanoparticles conferred to these substrates. Thanks to this property anatase spots can be used, for example, to investigate photocatalytic or surface processes directly on the site where they take place. To demonstrate this point, we tested the photodegradation of methylene blue (MB) adsorbed onto one of the anatase spots prepared by laser irradiation for 3 min. MB is commonly used as a reference molecule for investigating the degradation of azo dyes. In the present case, as the main absorption band of MB falls within the frequency range of excitation, the surface enhanced Raman experiment is carried out under resonant conditions (SERRS). This enables one to gain extra-sensitivity compared to the surface-enhanced effect taken by itself, so allowing the adsorbed dye to be detected even at very low concentration. Fig. 3 shows the Raman spectra of less that 1pmol of MB adsorbed on a single gold/anatase spot before and after UV irradiation for 1 h (see experimental details), together with a reference spectrum of MB. The power of the exciting laser was decreased to 0.5 mW to avoid photobleaching or photo-desorption of the dye. The most important modes are located at 445, 497, and 1618 cm−1 (reference spectrum), which have been assigned to C–N–C skeletal bending and C–C ring stretching, respectively.16 The adsorption of MB on the anatase surface is indicated in spectrum 1 by the strong intensity exhibited by the C–N–C mode at about 483 cm−1, as well as the general shift of peak positions compared to the reference spectrum. Spectrum 2 shows that after UV irradiation the intensity of MB peaks was strongly reduced, indicating that photo-degradation process occurred successfully. The removal of MB is further witnessed by the increased intensity of the anatase modes. Details about the in situ monitoring of the reaction progress at different time are illustrated in supporting information. Similar investigations can be extended to a number of surface processes and represent an important diagnostic tool for the newborn field of plasmonic photocatalysis.17
 Fig. 3  
Micro-Raman spectra of MB (1 pmol) adsorbed onto Au/anatase spot before (spectrum 1) and after (spectrum 2) UV irradiation (1 h). The spectra were acquired with an incident power of 0.5 mW to avoid either photobleaching or photo-desorption of dye. The spectrum of about 1 μmol of MB dried on a microscope slide glass was shown as a reference. 
In conclusion, this work demonstrates that photo-induced plasmon heating of gold nanoparticles can be exploited to yield the local conversion of amorphous TiO2 into the anatase phase on the surface of core-shell colloidal crystals. The strong enhancement of the electromagnetic field due to the presence of gold nanoparticles allowed the in situSERS characterization of this process. Although the preparation of SERS-active substrates has been extensively investigated,18 so far plasmonic heating has never been directly harnessed for these purposes. In addition, we showed that these spots can be used as model sites to investigate some reactions occurring at the metal oxide surfaces. This is an important benefit in some research fields, such as photocatalysis in nano-scaled devices, as it allows some important parameters, like either the thickness of photocatalytic layer or the concentration of catalytic substrate, to be optimized. Moreover, these substrates could be conveniently employed as plasmonic photocatalysts, enabling a number of important reactions to occur with high efficiency and minimal light exposure.
This work was supported by Fondazione Cariplo. We thank Marcello Zucca for deposition of TiO2. Dr Matteo Ferroni is gratefully acknowledged for assistance in SEM measurements.
Notes and references
C. Burda, X. B. Chen, R. Narayan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS ; N. L. Rosi and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1547 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Aroca, Surface-Enhanced Vibrational Spectroscopy, Wiley,  2006 Search PubMed .
H. H. Richardson, Z. N. Hickman, A. O. Govorov, A. C. Thomas, W. Zhang and M. E. Kordesch, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 783 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Paciotti, L. Myer, D. Weinreich, D. Goia, N. Pavel, R. E. McLaughlin and L. Tamarkin, Drug Deliv., 2004, 11, 169 CrossRef CAS ; C. Loo, A. Lowery, N. Halas, J. West and R. Drezek, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 709 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Skirtach, A. Muñoz Javier, O. Kreft, K. Köhler, A. P. Alberola, H. Möhwald, W. J. Parak and G. B. Sukhorukov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4612 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Bjerneld, F. Svedberg and M. Käll, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 593 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Cortie, N. Harris and M. Ford, Physica B, 2007, 18, 188 CrossRef .
I. Alessandri and L. E. Depero, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 305301 CrossRef .
H. Ko, S. Singamaneni and V. V. Tsukruk, Small, 2008, 4, 1576 CrossRef CAS .
L. I. Halaoui, N. Abrams and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6334 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. L. Chen, G. von Freymann, S. Y. Choi, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1915 CrossRef CAS ; I. Alessandri, M. Zucca, M. Ferroni, E. Bontempi and L. E. Depero, Small, 2009, 5, 235 CrossRef ; I. Alessandri, M. Zucca, M. Ferroni, E. Bontempi and L. E. Depero, Cryst. Growth Des., 2000 DOI:10.1021/cg800985k .
K. E. Peceros, X. Xu, S. R. Bulcock and M. B. Cortie, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21516 CrossRef CAS ; 
          U. Kreibig and M. Vollmer, Optical Properties of Metal Clusters, Springer, Berlin,  1995 Search PubMed .
I. Alessandri, M. Ferroni and L. E. Depero, ChemPhysChem DOI:10.1002/cphc.200900080 .
M. A. Camacho-Lopez, S. Vargas, R. Arroyo, E. Haro-Poniatowski and R. Rodriguez, Opt. Mater., 2002, 20, 43 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kern, Y. Müller, J. Patscheider and J. Michler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23660 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hutchinson, R. E. Hester, W. J. Albery and A. R. Hillman, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1984, 80, 2053 RSC .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murukami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Q. Tian, B. Ren, J.-F. Li and Z.-L. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3514 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Optical microscopy of dense Au aggregates before and after laser irradiation, Raman spectrum of citrate-stabilized Au NPs, Raman monitoring of anatase crystallization and MB degradation. See DOI: 10.1039/b900647hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Optical microscope images of citrate-stabilized Au NPs on PS/a-TiO2 substrates. White arrows indicate some of the Au aggregates. The red circle highlights the aggregate that is going to be irradiated. Snapshots 1, 2 and 3 show the effects of laser irradiation for 3, 30 and 300 s, respectively. Scale bars: 2 μm. (b) SEM image of the PS/a-TiO2 core shell colloidal crystals used as substrates for deposition of Au NPs. Scale bar: 200 nm. (c) Micro-Raman spectrum of the Au/anatase spots obtained after laser irradiation. The anatase modes are labelled by “A”. The spectrum was acquired using an optical filter to attenuate the laser power to 0.5 mW, in order to prevent any possible structural modifications induced by plasmonic heating.	 

 	Fig. 2  
Micro-Raman spectra showing initial, intermediate and final stages of the anatase crystallization induced by plasmonic heating. See the text for further details.	 

 	Fig. 3  
Micro-Raman spectra of MB (1 pmol) adsorbed onto Au/anatase spot before (spectrum 1) and after (spectrum 2) UV irradiation (1 h). The spectra were acquired with an incident power of 0.5 mW to avoid either photobleaching or photo-desorption of dye. The spectrum of about 1 μmol of MB dried on a microscope slide glass was shown as a reference.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Optical microscopy of dense Au aggregates before and after laser irradiation, Raman spectrum of citrate-stabilized Au NPs, Raman monitoring of anatase crystallization and MB degradation. See DOI: 10.1039/b900647h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
