Development and challenges of smart actuators based on water-responsive materials  - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2SM00519K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2SM00519K
(Review Article)
Soft Matter, 2022, 18, 5725-5741Development and challenges of smart actuators based on water-responsive materials

        
          
            Yiwei 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Chuang 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *bc, 
      
        
          
            Ruiqian 
            Wang
          
        
      bcd, 
      
        
          
            Wenjun 
            Tan
          
        
      bcd, 
      
        
          
            Yanyu 
            Gu
          
        
      bce, 
      
        
          
            Xiaobin 
            Yu
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Lizhong 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Lianqing 
            Liu
          
          
        
      bc
aSchool of Automation and Electrical Engineering, Shenyang Ligong University, Shenyang 110159, Liaoning, China. E-mail: zlz2686312@sina.com
bState Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, 110016, China. E-mail: zhangchuang@sia.cn
cInstitutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang 110169, China
dUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
eSchool of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Northeastern University, Shenyang, 110819, China
Received 
      24th April 2022
    , Accepted 8th July 2022First published on 11th July 2022AbstractWater-responsive (WR) materials, due to their controllable mechanical response to humidity without energy actuation, have attracted lots of attention to the development of smart actuators. WR material-based smart actuators can transform natural humidity to a required mechanical motion and have been widely used in various fields, such as soft robots, micro-generators, smart building materials, and textiles. In this paper, the development of smart actuators based on different WR materials has been reviewed systematically. First, the properties of different biological WR materials and the corresponding actuators are summarized, including plant materials, animal materials, and microorganism materials. Additionally, various synthetic WR materials and their related applications in smart actuators have also been introduced in detail, including hydrophilic polymers, graphene oxide, carbon nanotubes, and other synthetic materials. Finally, the challenges of the WR actuator are analyzed from the three perspectives of actuator design, control methods, and compatibility, and the potential solutions are also discussed. This paper may be useful for the development of not only soft actuators that are based on WR materials, but also smart materials applied to renewable energy.
Yiwei Zhang
Yiwei Zhang began studying a master's degree in the School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, Shenyang Ligong University, in 2020. His current research interests include smart materials, soft actuators and bionic robots.
Chuang Zhang
Chuang Zhang received his BEng degree in Mechanical Design, Manufacturing and Automation from the Shenyang University of Technology, Shenyang, China, in 2012, and his PhD degree in Pattern Recognition and Intelligent Systems from the Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, China, in 2019. He is currently an associate professor at the Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include bio-syncretic robots, micro-robots and cell modeling.
Lizhong Zhu
Lizhong Zhu received his BS degree in Industrial Electrification and Automation from Shenyang Ligong University, Shenyang, China, in 1990, and his MSc degree in theoretical electrician from the College of Electrical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, China, in 1997. He is currently a professor at the School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, Shenyang Ligong University. His current research interests include intelligent control and image processing.
Lianqing Liu
Lianqing Liu received his BS degree in Industry Automation from Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China, in 2002, and his PhD degree in Pattern Recognition and Intelligent Systems from the Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, China, in 2009. He is currently a professor at the Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include nanorobotics, intelligent control, and biosensors.
1 Introduction
Stimuli-responsive materials can translate different external stimuli, such as humidity,1,2 light,3,4 temperature,5–7 pH,8,9 and magnetism,10,11 into specific displacement and force and hence have great potential in various emerging fields including artificial muscles, robotics, and other areas that benefit from smart actuators.12,13 In particular, WR materials are an important and promising class of stimuli-responsive materials. They are capable of responding to environmental humidity to expand or contract volumetrically by adsorbing or desorbing water molecules. Relying on their WR characteristics, WR materials can readily obtain energy in all sorts of spatial humidity gradients and evaporation phenomena to perform specific tasks. Since natural water evaporation produced by solar radiation is a ubiquitous and abundant resource at the Earth's surface,14,15 developing humidity energy is of great significance to solve global energy challenges and sustainable development problems, such as developing clean energy, protecting the natural environment, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Due to the in-depth research of recent years, an increasing amount of WR materials have been discovered or created, which are mainly divided into biological and synthetic materials. All living things in nature cannot survive without water. Through the survival of the fittest in the natural world, some organisms, to guarantee subsistence and reproduction, have evolved WR tissues or produced WR materials, such as pine cone scales,16,17 seed awns,18–20 spider silk,21–23 silkworm silk,24–26 and bacillus.27–30 For example, due to the functionally graded pericarp architecture, sesame capsule actuating tissues can be shrunk to force fruits to open to disperse seeds while drying.31 Some bacillus spores can shrink in volume for dormancy to sustain life under dry conditions and absorb water to recover activity when exposed to moisture.29 Additionally, with the development of materials science and technology, by studying and imitating biological materials, synthetic WR materials are constantly being enriched. The composition of these materials is based on carbon, they are also known as carbon-based materials. As a carbon atom has four coordination bonds, the carbon chain could contain abundant hydrophilic functional groups that can combine with water molecules in the air, thus producing a response to humidity gradients, such as hydrophilic polymers,32,33 graphene oxide (GO),34–39 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),40–42 and other synthetic materials. Taking advantage of hydration characteristics, actuators based on WR materials have great prospects for many applications. For example, regarding natural materials, there have been various imaginative applications in recent years, such as film actuators and smart response walls based on cellulose,43,44 torsion actuators and wound healing devices based on spider silk,21 and smart textiles and miniature engines based on spores.45,46 In addition, WR actuators based on synthetic materials have also achieved many excellent works, including polymer-based generators and ratchet robots,51,52 CNT-based smart curtains,41 GO-based biomimetic insects and leaves,36 and a crawling robot made of calcium carbonate oligomers.53
In this paper, we mainly review the development and challenges of smart actuators based on WR materials. First, we introduce the properties of different WR materials, including biological and synthetic materials, and also summarize the development of smart actuator applications, which is shown systematically in Fig. 1. The challenges of the WR actuator are then analyzed from the three perspectives of actuator design, external control methods, and compatibility, and the potential solutions are also discussed. With the further development of WR materials, the related actuators may be applied in various significant fields, such as smart sensors, soft robots, energy conversion devices, environmental monitoring, and bionic muscles.
 Fig. 1  Response actuators based on the humidity stimulation: Umbrella. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. Mechanical arm. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. Silk-based microactuator. Reproduced under the terms of the CC-BY license.48 Copyright 2015, The Authors, John Wiley and Sons. Rotary engine. Reproduced under the terms of the CC-BY license.46 Copyright 2015, The Authors, Springer Nature. 3D responsive actuators. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. Dancing film. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. Crawling robot. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Bionic centipede. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. Bionic scorpion. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Generator. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. Humidity switch. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2 WR material-based actuators
2.1 Biological material-based actuators
Over countless years of evolution, nature has produced many unique biological materials that respond to changes in moisture. For example, plants are able to take advantage of changes in the diurnal humidity to release and bury seeds for reproduction; the silk produced by animals such as spiders and silkworms can also expand or contract in response to changes in the humidity, and some microorganisms also have similar properties. The advent of these biological WR materials offers broad prospects for the development of actuators. Next, we will introduce biological material-based actuators from three aspects: plants, animals, and microorganisms.

2.1.1 Plant material-based actuators. 
Plant materials were the first WR materials to be utilized in human history. As early as 4000 years ago in ancient Egypt, people learned to use the water swelling properties of wood to mine stones in the mountains. Taking advantage of humidity cycles is a common way for plants to propagate and reproduce their seeds in the natural world. Pine cones,17,55 wheat awns,19 sesame fruits,31 chiral seed pods,56 and ice plant seed capsules57 can spread their seeds and expand the species group by the response to changes in the environmental humidity. For example, pine cone scales open to release seeds when dry and close when wet (Fig. 2a).17 Wheat awns push seeds into the soil under cyclic changes in daily humidity (Fig. 2b).19,58 These WR properties are produced by the contraction or expansion of plant fibers in a predetermined direction, resulting in the bending motion of the plant tissue. Moreover, different cellulose arrangements may lead to different movements. The cellulose arrangements of pelargonium seed awns and stork's bill seed awns have an inclined spiral, which can produce rotational movements on a macroscopic level under cyclic changes in the moisture (Fig. 2c and d).20,32,54 These seeds rely on the tightening and relaxation of the spiral awns to push themselves across the soil surface into a safe germination position.
 Fig. 2  The WR properties of various plants. (a) Pine cones release their seeds in a dry state. Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2009, Royal Society. (b) Wheat awns drop seeds into the soil under the moisture cycle. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2007, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Twining movement of Pelargonium seed awns with changes in the humidity. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (d) The morphology of stork's bill fruits. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2012, Royal Society. 
Through the structural imitation and processing of plant materials, researchers have developed various potential applications of smart actuators. First, due to the soft matrix and moisture sensitivity of plant materials, soft actuators based on plant materials have been developing at a rapid rate. For example, Jiang et al. exhibited a cellulose membrane synthesized from balsa wood; its humidity response originated from the diffusion of water molecules on the film surface causing the asymmetric expansion of the structure (Fig. 3a).43 By adjusting the location of the cellulose membrane, the actuator can provide a variety of predetermined deformations under changes in the ambient humidity, such as curves, S-shaped deformations, and curls (Fig. 3b). To show the potential applications of the cellulose film, they fabricated a humidity-driven three-finger gripper that can grasp, hold, and release objects up to 40 times its own weight (Fig. 3c). Wang et al. used an aqueous native birch pulp as the raw material to produce a nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) film by evaporation of the solution.59 The obtained films were sensitively responsive to humidity and could realize the tilting motion in hand (Fig. 3d). In the fatigue test of the NFC film, no obvious fatigue was observed for more than 20 cycles of the adsorption–desorption process (Fig. 3e). Furthermore, natural pollen, corn xerogel, and agar have similar humidity-driven effects and are used to produce soft actuators.60–63
 Fig. 3  Smart actuators based on plant materials. (a) A schematic of moisture-based actuation in cellulose membranes. (b) Different predetermined deformations of cellulose membranes. (c) The soft body gripper based on cellulose membranes for gripping experiments. Reproduced under the terms of the CC-BY license.43 Copyright 2020, The Authors, published by Taylor & Francis Group. (d) Reversible and bidirectional humidity-driven bending of the NFC film in the hand. (e) Fatigue test of the NFC film. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (f) Smart response houses and walls can be opened or closed with weather changes. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Additionally, due to the advantages of material breathability and good heat dissipation properties, WR plant materials also performed well in the field of smart textiles. For example, Hu et al. reported a self-balanced torsional actuator based on WR twisted bamboo yarns.64 The twisted actuator could achieve a torsional actuation of 64.4° mm−1 in 4.2 s and achieve a maximum elongation of 133% or contraction of 50%. As a demonstration of the concept, they used this twisted actuator to design a smart shirt, which could respond to changes in humidity around the human body and improve the level of comfort of the users.
Moreover, because of their low cost, biodegradability, and renewability, plant WR materials are also widely used for smart building materials. For example, Steffen Reichert et al. used the moisture absorption properties of wood materials to make double-layer actuators.65 The two sides of the actuator are cellulose materials and inert materials. When the environmental humidity increases, the cellulose absorbs moisture and expands, forcing the actuator to bend. They used this actuator to build a smart house and a smart wall that can dynamically respond to weather changes, which can open the actuators to exchange air with the environment when humidity increases, and close them when humidity decreases (Fig. 3f).
Although plant materials are excellent in biocompatibility, reproducibility, and biodegradability, some smart actuators made of plant materials may have a relatively slow response speed. To improve the performance of plant materials, natural plant cellulose may be pretreated, directly modified, and compound modified to introduce hydrophilic groups or materials to enhance its WR actuation characteristics.


2.1.2 Animal material-based actuators. 
Animal materials play an important part in WR materials, and the representative materials include spider silk and silkworm silk. Spider silk has an amazingly high modulus and tensile strength with a maximum work density of 500 kJ m−3, which is 50 times higher than most biological muscles (Fig. 4a).66–68 Furthermore, spider silk is capable of a longitudinal shrinkage of up to 60% at high humidity.69,70 This shrinkage phenomenon is caused by the supercontraction properties of spider silk. Research studies have shown that the supercontraction of spider silk may be produced by the hydration-induced transition between glass and rubber phases, which is due to the disruption of hydrogen bonding and reorientation of molecular chains.71,72 Moreover, the range of shrinkage stress in spider silk depends on the rate of hydration, which increases rapidly under ambient humidity to the critical point of supercontraction, with a stress distribution from 10 to 140 MPa (Fig. 4b).73 Spider farming and mass production of spider silk are impractical,74,75 hence the silkworm fiber has become a possible alternative. However, the deformation of the silkworm silk fibers under environmental humidity may be smaller than that of spider silk.68 These disadvantages can be overcome by making use of long silk fibers, amplifying the stress deformation (bistable structure) or through silk reprocessing. Twisting and plying are commonly used technologies for processing silk fibers. This approach, which was derived from the textile industry, can provide a fast response speed, large-angle torsion, and high energy density to enhance the performance of actuators.76,77
 Fig. 4  The supercontraction of spider silk. (a) Spiders rely on the pull of spider silk to create webs in the air. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2009, The Company of Biologists Ltd. (b) The relationship between the rate of increase in humidity and hydration stress. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2009, Elsevier. 
Based on the research for animal WR materials, researchers have created a number of high-performance actuators. For example, Liu et al. found that spider silk exhibited a torsional deformation of 300° mm−1 under humidity, and the torsional actuation of spider silk can be precisely controlled by adjusting the relative humidity, which can inspire novel designs of torsional actuators or artificial muscles.78 Recently, Dong et al. produced spider dragline silk yarns with WR properties using moderate twist technology.21 The silk yarns can generate up to 60% longitudinal shrinkage, and an isometric stress of 11 MPa when exposed to water. They also demonstrated programmable humidity alarm switches, smart doors, and wound healing devices based on spider silk yarns (Fig. 5a). Their demonstration provided multiple application prospects for the supercontraction properties of spider silk. Moreover, the high sensitivity of spider silk to humidity makes it possible to develop smart sensors. Spider silk can form an interferometric cavity structure with a single-mode or multi-mode optical fiber to develop a smart humidity sensor that can utilize changes in the interferometric spectrum for measuring humidity.78–80 Zhang et al. utilized the supercontraction properties of spider dragline silk to fabricate a Fabry-Perot (FP) humidity sensor which can achieve an ultra-high sensitivity of up to 23.14 nm RH−1 (Fig. 5b).81 As the spider dragline silk-based artificial muscle could change the length of the FP cavity under high humidity, the humidity data could be acquired precisely by measuring the change in length. In their application test, the humidity sensor was able to accurately identify every breath by monitoring the amount of air the experimenter exhale, demonstrating its potential in the medical field.
 Fig. 5  Smart actuators based on animal materials. (a) Applications for spider silk, including humidity responsive switches, smart doors, and medical devices that promote the speed of wound healing. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) A schematic diagram of the experimental system and the spider dragline silk-based FP humidity sensing probe. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (c) Smart sleeves are made from silkworm silk fibers that respond to changes in humidity. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition, silkworm silk materials can also be processed by twisting and plying technology to fabricate excellent actuators. Jia et al. produced WR yarns based on silk fibers using twisted technology.24 The smart yarn showed 70% shrinkage when the relative humidity was changed from 20% to 80%. When exposed to water spray, the twisted silk fibers provided a fully reversible twist deformation of 547° mm−1. To develop the potential application of natural silk for smart textiles, they fabricated silk-based smart sleeves that could shrink when exposed to moisture and recover their original state when dry (Fig. 5c). Lin et al. developed a fiber micro-actuator composed of silk by integrating force-reeling and yarn-spinning techniques.48 The micro-actuator was able to achieve a maximum speed of 6179.3° s−1 in 4.8 s, which is comparable to state-of-the-art actuators. Furthermore, the power of the micro-actuator can be adjusted precisely by controlling the number of silk fibers.
Under the WR properties of animal materials and appropriate processing methods, most WR actuators based on animal materials may show excellent response characteristics. However, most of the current actuators that are based on animal materials can only demonstrate a single actuation mode, which may reduce the application range of animal material-based actuators.


2.1.3 Microorganism material-based actuators. 
Microorganism materials occupy an important position among WR materials. Microorganisms are natural WR materials and are extremely sensitive to changes in the environmental humidity. The representative microbial materials include E. coli,45Bacillus subtilis,27,82 and Bacillus thuringiensis.29,46 For example, Bacillus subtilis spores swell within 0.4 s of exposure to humidity and shrink volumetrically within 0.5 s of changing from wet to dry environments,28 and Bacillus thuringiensis spores expand and shrink under changes in the humidity with a margin of expansion of approximately 30%.29 Due to the fast response speed, large expansion displacement, and high energy density of microorganism materials, they are suitable for fabricating smart actuators. For example, Chen et al. applied Bacillus thuringiensis solution alternately on both sides of a micron-sized tape, which was used to prepare a WR actuator.46 Next, they used this actuator to successfully realize the oscillatory motion and rotary motion of the engines by combining other control structures to create humidity gradients (Fig. 6a). As a proof-of-concept, the oscillatory engine was connected with an electromagnetic generator to supply energy for LEDs (Fig. 6b), and a miniature car integrated with the rotary engine, driven by humidity, was able to move automatically (Fig. 6c). Wang et al. fabricated a humidity-driven bilayer biohybrid film by microprinting Escherichia coli cells in parallel lines on a latex surface.45 By using the biohybrid films, they designed a breathable tracksuit with ventilating flaps. Based on the biohybrid film, these flaps were able to act as sensors and actuators to open and close in response to an athlete's body heat and sweat, which could effectively remove sweat from the body, reduce air temperature, and improve physical comfort.
 Fig. 6  Smart actuators based on microorganism materials. (a) Schematic diagrams and object pictures of oscillating and rotating engines based on Bacillus thuringiensis spores. (b) The oscillatory engine drives an electromagnetic generator to output power. (c) Snapshots showing the position of a miniature car driven by a rotary engine. Reproduced under the terms of the CC-BY license.46 Copyright 2015, The Authors, published by Springer Nature. 
It is widely known that the effect of hydrophilic groups is one of the essential factors affecting hygroscopicity. Plant WR materials are mainly composed of cellulose. Although cellulose is hydrophilic in nature, a small amount of single bond hydroxyl groups (-OH) are exposed or accessible as cellulose is semicrystalline, which will reduce its moisture absorption.83 In contrast, animal materials are mainly made up of proteins, such as spider silk and silkworm silk. Protein chains contain a large number of hydrophilic groups, such as the amide group, amino group (-NH2), carboxyl group (-COOH), and hydroxyl group (-OH), and the hydrophilia of the carboxyl group is relatively high.84 In addition, animal materials are filamentous structures that have a higher specific surface area and are more likely to bind to water molecules. Therefore, most animal materials have better water response characteristics than most plant materials, and the response time of WR actuators based on animal materials is relatively fast to some extent.

2.2 Synthetic material-based actuators
Although biological materials have excellent WR properties, there are still some problems that are difficult to solve, such as having less variety, uncertain safety, and difficulty in obtaining raw materials. Therefore, synthetic WR materials have become a popular alternative. With the development of materials science, numerous materials with WR properties have been discovered and synthesized. Many smart actuators based on WR materials have been able to carry out the related work by imitating biological tissue structures. In this section, we will introduce synthetic WR materials separately by dividing them into polymer materials, GO and CNT materials, and other synthetic materials.

2.2.1 Polymer material-based actuators. 
Hydrophilic groups in WR polymers have strong polarities, such as carboxylic groups,85,86 amides,87 esters,88 and ether bonds composed of oxygen-containing groups.89,90 They can be easily combined with water to form hydrogen bonds, resulting in the volume expansion of the polymer. To some extent, these hydrophilic polymers respond quickly to changes in the humidity and translate the potential energy of humidity gradients into mechanical energy. In particular, hydrogels play an important role among hydrophilic polymers. A hydrogel is a highly hydrophilic 3D crosslinked polymer network that can absorb up to 99 wt% water.91,92 This may be due to the fact that the hydrogel contains abundant hydrophilic groups which can release or absorb water molecules under dry or wet conditions. Based on this property, the hydrogel is capable of obvious expansion and shrinking when the environmental humidity changes. In recent years, a variety of hydrogels have been developed for actuation studies, including the poly(ε-caprolactone)-agarose hydrogel,88 alginate hydrogel,94,95 hydroxypropyl methylcellulose hydrogel,96 polyacrylamide hydrogel,87,97 poly(acrylic acid) hydrogel,33,98 poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) hydrogel,99 poly(N-alkylacrylamide) hydrogels,100 and poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEG-DA) hydrogel.93,101,102
Taking advantage of the hygroscopic properties of polymer hydrogels, a variety of actuation applications can be realized. For example, inspired by the hygroscopic movement of plant awns and waterfowl beak structures, Ma et al. integrated poly(acrylic acid) hydrogel, cellulose membrane, and superhydrophilic copper wire to fabricate a smart WR switch to control the directional transport of a droplet.33 When the switch was opened in a dry environment, the droplet moved to the bottom of the switch channel; when wet, the switch would close and the droplet could be locked in place (Fig. 7a and b). Sun et al. designed a biomimetic asymmetric humidity-driven micro-worm based on the PEG-DA hydrogel by the method of laser processing.93 Under dry conditions, the asymmetric biped of the micro-worm resulted in different shrinkage rates, which could affect differences in foot-to-substrate adhesion, and the movement of the micro-worm was also achieved (Fig. 7c). To exhibit the potential application of humidity-powered micro-worms in the biomedical field, the authors assembled silica microspheres with micro-worms for transport, demonstrating the efficient load capability of the worms (Fig. 7d). Although the hydrogel materials can respond to humidity changes, it has a slower response speed and less mechanical deformation,2 and further improvements are needed.
 Fig. 7  Smart actuators based on polymer WR materials. (a) Snapshots and schematics of the humidity response switch when open and closed. (b) The plot of the opening angle of copper wires versus the time evolution, corresponding to the bending and extending behaviors of the hydrogel-actuated system. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The movement schematic of micro-worms. (d) The micro-worm could carry silica microspheres to complete transportation and obstacle avoidance work. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) The ratchet robot relies on a spatial humidity gradient to move. (f) Different motion modes of the ratchet robot. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Additionally, other polymers containing hydrophilic groups can also respond to humidity changes, such as polyvinyl alcohol (PVA),51,103 polyethylene oxide (PEO),32,52,104 chitosan (CS),105 polyol-borate,106 polyethylene-co-acrylic acids (EAAs),107 biaxially oriented polypropylene (BOPP),108 and some liquid crystal polymers,109–111 which are widely used in various actuation studies. For example, Wang et al. demonstrated the continuous response of the actuator to humidity gradients by using PVA films as actuators.51 The PVA film exhibited strong mechanical properties under both dry and wet conditions and achieved flipped frequencies up to 65 r min−1. In 2018, Shin et al. reported a ratchet robot with an asymmetric friction coefficient composed of polyethylene glycol nanofibers.52 The ratchet robot can expand and contract rapidly in the longitudinal direction in a humidity gradient (Fig. 7e). Furthermore, many mechanical actuation modes, including rotation and tumbling, can be realized by adjusting the angle of the fiber actuator spindle. Different designs of moisture absorption systems result in different movement gaits of the robot under changes in the environmental humidity (Fig. 7f).
Polymer materials with carbon as the backbone, accompanied by different hydrophilic functional groups, have different speeds of humidity responses. The more hydrophilic groups there are, the more rapid the response is. Due to the extensibility of carbon chains, a variety of functional groups can be combined and matched. Therefore, polymer materials have high scalability. With the development of material technology, the WR polymer can connect different types of functional groups to achieve different characteristics and meet the needs of human beings.


2.2.2 GO and CNT material-based actuators. 
Due to their excellent electrical conductivity and good mechanical properties, graphene and CNTs have a wide range of applications in electronic devices, power transmission devices, etc.114 For WR materials, they also perform well. GO is one of the most important graphene derivatives and contains abundant oxidation groups, such as hydroxyl, epoxy, carboxyl, and carbonyl groups, enabling it to change its volume rapidly and reversibly by adsorption or desorption of water molecules.115–117 Therefore, WR actuators based on GO are widely applied. These actuators generally consist of a bilayer structure, in which GO acts as the active layer and plays a driving role. Due to the active chemistry of GO, a bilayer structure can be prepared by unilateral redox methods. The GO/reduced GO (rGO) bilayer can be obtained by reducing the surface layer of GO by unilateral sunlight irradiation,39,118 UV irradiation,38,112 laser irradiation,119 or double-beam laser interference.120 Moreover, the GO/rGO film can also be prepared by hydroiodic acid reduction and vacuum filtration.121 For example, Han et al. fabricated graphene actuators by vacuum filtration of GO solution and rGO solution; the degree of reduction of the rGO layer can be accurately adjusted by controlling the irradiation time of UV light.112 Different irradiation times will affect the number of oxygen-containing groups in the rGO layer, which will result in different responsive deformation under humidity cycles. By controlling the light reduction time, they made four WR actuators that were capable of varying degrees of deformation under moist conditions (Fig. 8a). As an application was able to show, bionic mimosa based on the GO/rGO-3 film can open and close automatically by using a hose to control the environmental humidity (Fig. 8b).
 Fig. 8  Smart actuators based on GO. (a) Graphene films with different reduction degrees. (b) Mimosa based on the GO/rGO film was capable of blooming under the influence of the environmental humidity. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic diagram for the fabrication of a programmable GO/wax actuator. (d) The structure, grasping process, and releasing process of smart shape-adaption grippers. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
GO can also be combined with polymers or other materials, such as polyethyleneimine,89 polypropylene,122 poly(vinylidene) fluoride,123 cellulose fiber (CF),124 and silicon,125 to make WR actuators using differences in the expansion coefficients of different materials. For example, Dong et al. designed programmable GO/wax actuators by printing designable wax patterns composed of oriented wax fibrils onto the GO paper (Fig. 8c).113 Due to different arrangements of wax fibrils, the obtained actuators were able to realize predirected deformations and different functions. As a demonstration of the potential application, various shape-adaption grippers fabricated by GO/wax actuators were capable of grasping and releasing heavy weights under humidity cycles (Fig. 8d). In addition, the GO/wax actuators can also realize multiple responses, such as light response and temperature response, which can inspire more attractive and practical designs of smart actuators or robots in the future.
Moreover, without introducing other materials, GO can still generate a strong actuation capacity by exploiting the inhomogeneous distribution of moisture-excited stresses resulting from the asymmetric structure.12,126,127 For example, inspired by a quantum confined superfluid (QSF), Zhang et al. designed and fabricated a single-sided structured GO paper by soft lithography.36 By introducing a folded nanostructure on one side of the GO paper, the adsorption, transport, and desorption of water molecules and the consequent deformation can be well-controlled without coupling any other materials. The prepared GO paper can realize the maximum curvature of 8.7 cm−1 at high humidity and can be restored to a flat state within 4 s. To demonstrate the concept of bionic robotics, they made bionic insects that were driven by humidity, which could crawl by using moisture, along with bionic leaves that could catch insects quickly (Fig. 9a and b).
 Fig. 9  Smart actuators based on GO and CNTs. (a) Biomimetic insects made of single-layer GO moving under a humidity cycle. (b) Moisture-driven bionic leaves catching insects. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. (c) The manufacturing process and the twisting process of the GO/SA fiber. (d) Video screenshot of the bridge floor being driven by the moisture stimulation. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) CNT yarns are treated with oxygen plasma. (f) Hydrophilic CNT yarns can be assembled into smart windows for humidity actuation. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
Expect for fabricating the film actuators, GO can also be made into torsional actuators. With spinning and twisting methods, GO hydrogel fibers processed by GO materials can show the rotational motion when stimulated by humidity.128–130 For example, Wang et al. prepared a new kind of torsional fiber-based actuator including GO and sodium alginate (SA) by applying traditional wet spinning and twisting methods (Fig. 9c).131 When exposed to moisture, the twisted GO/SA fiber was able to generate a rapid and reversible rotational motion, and the most untwisting speed and recovery speed could achieve approximately 4000 rpm m−1 and 14067 rpm m−1. Furthermore, the revolutions of the twisted GO/SA fiber were basically unchanged after 100 fatigue tests, which showed the stability of not only the fiber's twisted structure but also the rotational movement of the actuator. Inspired by the WR properties of the twisted actuators, they fabricated a moisture-driven elevating bridge, and hence, the controllable rise and fall process of the bridge floor could be easily achieved by the changes in the external moisture (Fig. 9d).
In recent years, researchers have also used CNTs to develop WR materials. CNTs can provide channels for the movement of water molecules, which are rapidly transported through micron-sized channels, and effectively infiltrate into interconnected capillary nanoscale channels.40 Therefore, CNTs exhibit a high degree of reversibility and actuating ability. For example, He et al. used oxygen plasma technology to process CNTs to obtain hydrophilic layered helical CNT fibers (Fig. 9e).41 Due to their helically arranged structure, a large number of nanoscale interconnected channels are formed between the aligned CNTs. Through these channels, water molecules can be transported rapidly, and the macroscopic motion is manifested as rapid contraction and rotation. Smart windows and blinds are used as demonstrations to show the excellent performance of CNT fibers (Fig. 9f).
GO and CNTs are excellent WR materials that are sensitive not only to water molecules but also to the presence of temperature and light. Therefore, GO and CNT materials have great potential for developing multi-response actuators. However, GO and CNTs are expensive, which limits their applications.


2.2.3 Other synthetic material-based actuators. 
In addition to polymeric materials, GO, and CNTs, many other synthetic materials with nanoscale porous structures, such as silicon dioxide,50 Ti3C2Tx (MXene),49,132,133 carbon nitride,134,135 gold,136 titanium oxide,137,138 and some metal-organic frameworks,139,140 are sensitive to humidity. Fluid adsorption and condensation in nanoscale pores can deform the pore walls. At low pressure, the pore wall is widened due to the repulsion caused by the collision between fluid molecules and the pore wall. The pore wall shrinks due to the interaction between the fluid and the pore wall in the process of capillary condensation.141 For example, the double-layer actuator made of Au/np Au can be bent reversibly under alternating wet and dry conditions, and the tip of the actuator can be displaced by up to 20 mm (Fig. 10a).136
 Fig. 10  Smart actuators based on other synthetic materials. (a) The reversible bending deformation of the Au/np Au double-layer actuator. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2021, IOP Publishing, Ltd. (b) MXene films could be used to lift objects or transport cargo under humidity gradients. (c) Photographs of a motor based on the MXene films carrying cylindrical cargo by rolling caused by moisture and the schematic diagram are illustrated below. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. (d) The actuator crawling on a rough substrate by periodically applying moisture on and off. (e) The calcium carbonate film dancing on the ice. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. 
Utilizing the hygroscopic deformation characteristics of the nanoporous structure, some inorganic substances also have a place in the field of WR actuation. For example, MXene has good hydrophilic properties and is promising for fabricating wet-sensitive actuators. Yang et al. combined MXene with poly(dopamine) (PDA) and bacterial cellulose nanofibers (CNF) to prepare WR films, which can improve the stability and mechanical properties of the films.49 The films are not only excellent in tensile strength (406 MPa) and toughness (15.3 MJ m−3), but also highly sensitive to humidity with the advantages of a fast response (1.6 s), a large deformation (176°), and a high drive output (6.5 N m−2). To demonstrate the excellent properties of the composite film, they also fabricated a robotic arm and motor-driven by using the film as an actuator (Fig. 10b and c). Additionally, some hydrophilic compounds also have actuation ability. For example, Yan et al. combined hydrophilic calcium carbonate ionic oligomers into hydrophobic poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) to prepare a humidity-responsive film with an ultra-sensitive, reversible, and bidirectional response.53 The film is driven very rapidly under humidity changes, with both adsorption and desorption completed within 0.6 seconds. By changing the environmental humidity, it can crawl on rough substrates (Fig. 10d). Moreover, compared to current bi-directional humidity actuators, the film actuator is very sensitive to humidity. Hence, it can take advantage of the weak humidity gradient on an ice surface to convert the chemical potential energy of the humidity gradient into the mechanical energy of the film deformation (Fig. 10e).
With various and abundant hydrophilic groups, synthetic material-based actuators can also have excellent WR response characteristics. Compared to natural materials, people are interested in synthetic materials not only in response times, but also in other aspects, such as multiple responses (light, pH, and temperature), good scalability, and abundant polymer styles. In addition, synthetic materials are cheap and easy to produce in large quantities, which is convenient for commercial applications.
In summary, taking advantage of WR properties, the WR actuators respond to the humidity gradient in space and transform the humidity stimulation into controlled movements. Among many kinds of stimulus-responsive actuators, due to their environmentally friendly response mode, fast response speed, extraordinary mechanical characteristics, and good human-machine interaction, WR actuators have great potential for the actuation development. For a brief overview of this field, the recent development of WR actuators based on WR materials is summarized below (Table 1).
Table 1 Development of WR actuators based on different WR materials in recent years




Category
Active materials
Structure
Response time (s)
Maximum deformation
Other features
Applications
Ref.




Plant
Linen
Twisted fibers
8–10
22.5% (contraction)
110 J kg−1 work capacity
Artificial muscle

142



Lotus fiber
Twisted fiber
6–8
38% (elongation)
200° mm−1 torsional actuation; 450 J kg−1 work capacity; 200 rpm rotation speed
Weight-lifting artificial limb; smart textiles

143



Cotton yarns
Twisted fiber
3
<1%
42.55° mm−1 torsional actuation; 720 rpm rotation speed
Smart WR window; smart textiles

144



Bamboo yarns
Twisted fiber
4.2
50% (contraction) 133% (elongation)
64.4° mm−1 torsional actuation; 158 rpm rotation speed
Smart textiles

64



NFC
Bilayer
∼7
0.65 mm−1 (bending)
∼1000 times lifting weight ratio,
Mechanical arm; soft robot

44



NFC
Monolayer
∼75
0.07 mm−1 (bending)
High sensitivity
Bionic flowers

59



TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibrils (TCNF-Na +)
Bilayer
23.5
1.57 mm−1 (bending)
Good stability and durability; reversible
Humidity switch

145



Balsa wood
Bilayer
∼90
0.13 mm−1 (bending)
40 times grabbing weight ratio
The three-finger gripper;

43



Paper made with natural pollen
Monolayer
80
0.19 mm−1 (bending)
Simple fabrication process; high sensitivity
Bionic flowers; crawling robot

60



Animal
Spider dragline silk
Twisted fiber
3–4
60% (contraction)
11 MPa stress; 682 J kg−1 work capacity;
Humidity alarm switches; smart doors; wound healing devices

21



Spider dragline silk
Twisted fiber
2–3
70% (contraction)
500 kJ m−3 work density; 30–190 W kg−1 power density
High performance biomimetic muscle

68



Spider dragline silk
Twisted fiber
—
—
300° mm−1 torsional actuation
Artificial muscle

22



Silkworm silk
Twisted fiber
4.9
81.69% (contraction)
1030 rpm rotation speed; 2.1 W kg−1 power density
Smart textiles; wound healing devices

48



Silkworm silk
Twisted fiber
10
70% (contraction)
547° mm−1 torsional actuation; 1125 rpm rotation speed
Smart sleeves; bionic caterpillar

24



Spider silk fibroin
Monolayer
0.3
0.62 mm−1 (bending)
Good repeatability
Intelligent textile layer; crawling robot

26



Silkworm silk fibroin
Bilayer
4
0.175 mm−1 (bending)
High stability; excellent repeatability; multidirectional bending
Cargoing carriage

146



Microorganism

Bacillus subtilis spores
Bilayer
—
300% (elongation)
Large deformation; fast response time; excellent repeatability
Oscillatory engine; rotary engine

46




Escherichia coli

Bilayer; directional fiber
—
140° (bending)
Genetic engineering
Smart sportswear; smart shoe

45




Bacillus subtilis peptidoglycan
Bilayer
3
0.22 mm−1 (bending)
High energy/power densities and efficiency; high durability and availability
Pull actuator; bionic fingers

147




Bacillus subtilis spores
Bilayer
∼20
0.5 mm−1 (bending)
682 J kg−1 work capacity:
Bionic flower;

27



Polymer
SA
Twisted fiber
5.44
13.8% (elongation)
13000 rpm rotation speed; good repeatability
Hydro-generator; smart rainy curtain; smart crane; breathable fabric

95



CS/CNTs
Twisted fiber
5
17% (contraction)
11400 rpm rotation speed; 1105.9 J kg−1 work capacity;
Smart textiles

148



PDDA/CNT
Twisted fiber
4
78% (contraction)
2.17 kJ kg−1 work capacity
Automatic ventilation the system

42



CS
Bilayer
25–30
0.391 mm−1 (bending)
Multiple response
Two-finger grip

105



PEO
Bilayer; directional fiber
2–3
0.11 mm−1 (bending)
High sensitivity
Self-locomotive ratcheted actuator; disinfection robot

52



PEO
Bilayer
20
0.46 mm−1 (bending)
4 V peak voltage
Steam generator

104



PVA
Bilayer
10
1.12 mm−1 (bending)
Good repeatability; fast response time
Artificial clover; biomimicked flower; self-driven hygrometer

103



PEDOT:PSS
Bilayer
10
0.24 mm−1 (bending)
Bidirectional bending
Biomimetic dragonflies; generator

149



PEG-DA
Asymmetry
2–3
—
Actuation by the difference of adhesion
Micro-worm

93



GO and CNTs
GO/CNTs
Twisted fiber
10
50% (contraction)
200 rpm rotation speed
Sensor; smart textiles

150



CNTs
Twisted fiber
1–2
55% (contraction)
750 rpm rotation speed
Smart windows

41



GO
Monolayer
7
0.9 mm−1 (bending)
QSF channels; ultrafast bending velocity
Bionic centipede robot; bionic leaves

36



GO
Monolayer
3–4
0.314 mm−1 (bending)
Directional bending; 1100° maximum bending angle
Bionic crawling robot

12



GO
Bilayer
7
1.00 mm−1 (bending)
Multiple response
Selective air valve; smart grip

151



GO
Bilayer
1.2
2.2 mm−1 (bending)
Multiple response; high sensitivity
Robotic finger; nanogenerator

152



GO
Bilayer
12
0.41 mm−1 (bending)
Adjustable reduction gradient; multiple response
Bionic mimosa; bionic insert

112



GO/CNF/CNT
Monolayer
0.8
0.126 mm−1 (bending)
Short response/recovery time; excellent repeatability; large actuation amplitude
Load-bearing smart robot; mechanical gripper; circuit switch

153



GO/CF
Bilayer
10
0.148 mm−1 (bending)
696.86 MPa tensile strength; self-healing property
Bionic butterfly

124



Other synthetic materials
MXene/CNF
Monolayer
3.5
0.105 mm−1 (bending)
Multiple response; excellent mechanical strength; antibacterial properties
Smart garment

154



MXene/CNF/PDA
Monolayer
1.6
0.154 mm−1 (bending)
6.5 N m−2 force; high conductivity; excellent mechanical strength
Electrical switch; robotic arm; motor

49



Calcium carbonate
Monolayer
0.3
0.26 mm−1 (bending)
Highly sensitive; reversible, and bidirectional deformation
Crawling robot

53



Carbon nitride
Monolayer
∼10
1.05 mm−1 (bending)
Rapid response; distinct deformation; low triggering threshold
Humidity-powered robot

135



Titanium oxide with nanocapillaries
Monolayer
∼10
0.029 mm−1 (bending)
high energy density of ∼1250kJm−3; repeatable deformation
Energy collecting; robotics applications

138






3 Challenges of WR material-based actuators
Compared with traditional actuators, WR actuators have clear advantages, such as the ability to work without an external power supply and a soft structure. However, these actuators face severe challenges when it comes to further development and applications, such as actuator design, external humidity control, and actuator compatibility.
3.1 Challenges of the actuator design
Compared with traditional actuators, such as engines and electromotors, WR material-based smart actuators are more adaptable and safer. However, the actuators also have certain disadvantages that limit their practicality, including slow response speed, low energy density, limited movement pattern, and poor repeatability. Therefore, to overcome these weaknesses, researchers carried out a series of optimizations from the material selection, size design, structure design, and movement mode.
First, in terms of the material selection, different WR materials should be selected according to the application scenarios and design requirements. For some special requirements, such as the need for multiple and/or fast responses, GO, MXene or animal materials may meet the design requirements. Furthermore, a single WR material cannot meet the demands of the public for higher performance, so we can take advantage of composite WR materials to fabricate WR actuators, which can not only strengthen the mechanical properties of materials but also improve the actuation performance of actuators.
Moreover, the size design is an important factor to consider when it comes to improving the performance of WR actuators. For example, different thicknesses of the film actuators will affect the response speed and drive capability. The turning frequency of PVA films decreases with an increase in thickness, reaching 65 times at 10 microns and decreasing to about 10 times at 30 microns.51 However, the lesser thickness of the film actuators will affect the shrinkage stress of the actuators and lead to insufficient driving capability.
For the structure design and movement mode, different structures can cause the actuators to have different movement modes. The common actuator structures include double-layer structures, multi-layer structures, unilateral structures, helical structures, fiber structures, etc. Furthermore, different movement modes may influence the response properties of the actuators. For example, double or multi-layer structures of the actuator can achieve a large bending deformation, which is commonly used to fabricate robots and other devices that need large deformation to crawl or move. However, their response speed and energy density are relatively low. In contrast, the rotary actuator, consisting of the multi-strand wet sensitive fiber, can provide a fast response speed and high energy density, which can achieve a rotation speed of over 10000 rpm. Yet, their usage scenarios are limited due to the rotational movement mode.
In short, although researchers have made great efforts to optimize material properties and enhance the actuation ability, there is still an inevitable problem: the actuation ability and material properties of WR materials are contradictory. Most WR materials exist with soft characteristics. The softer the material, the faster the actuator responds, but the less it can be loaded. If the stiffness of the WR material is increased, the response time will decrease, and the flexibility and safety of soft actuators will be influenced. Therefore, finding out how to balance mechanical properties and actuation capabilities is a grand challenge for developing WR materials.
3.2 Challenges of humidity control
In general, WR actuators rely on an ambient humidity gradient to carry out work. Humidity gradients fall into two main categories: an artificial humidity gradient and a natural humidity gradient. For WR actuators, the benefits and weaknesses of these two control methods coexist.
First, an artificial humidity gradient is the most effective way to control the WR actuator. This is because an artificial humidity gradient can be precisely controlled and maintained. Researchers often use it to remove interference from other variables and test the response characteristics of WR actuators. For example, Yan et al. set up artificial humidity gradients to test the flexural curvature, response speed, and recovery speed of composite films.53 Beomjune Shin et al. alternately passed dry nitrogen and humidified air to the experimental box to realize the rapid movement of a moisture-driven robot.52 The top speed of this robot was 0.24 BL s−1 or 6 mm s−1. Therefore, an artificial humidity gradient is generally used to calibrate the response characteristics of WR materials and optimize the design of the WR actuator for optimal performance. However, artificial humidity gradients reduce the range of applications for hygroscopic actuators. Furthermore, the energy consumed to maintain an artificial humidity gradient is much greater than the energy output of a WR actuator, which does not conform to the requirements of new energy utilization.
Additionally, the movement and control of humidity-sensitive actuators can be achieved by using a natural humidity gradient. Natural humidity gradients are widely present in various areas where water evaporates, such as lake surfaces, and the surfaces of wet objects. Therefore, WR actuators can take advantage of the energy in natural evaporation to complete tasks without an additional energy input. For example, using a bistable structure and shutters to periodically change humidity levels, a micro-generator based on WR materials was placed on the water surface to generate power.46 Shin et al. fabricated a soft robot which was able to automatically carry out the sterilization task by absorbing energy in the natural humidity gradient generated by a Petri dish.52 Although an actuator controlled by a natural humidity gradient could meet the requirements of new energy utilization, there are still some problems to solve. Affected by the natural environment, an external humidity gradient is complex and variable. Hence, it is difficult to control WR actuators precisely, including the movement distance and direction.
In summary, neither of the two methods of controlling the motion of actuators is perfect. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a new method to control the humidity gradient stably without consuming extra energy.
3.3 Challenges for the compatibility of actuators
Smart actuators based on WR materials can only be an actuator or a detector, which must be integrated with sensors, controls, and other mechanisms to carry out tasks. Therefore, WR actuators must have good compatibility to be integrated with other functionalities. However, due to the influence of material properties, energy supply, and work environment, it is difficult to be compatible with other devices. First, the actuator cannot carry heavy loads due to its soft material and small size. In consequence, in a special application scenario, a WR actuator is often used as a sensor, such as an intelligent WR switch and smart drawstring, which only require a simple deformation to complete tasks. Additionally, for energy supply, WR actuators utilize humidity gradients to move without a power supply. However, when wet-sensitive actuators are integrated with other devices, the energy supply of the whole system needs to be solved. Moreover, WR actuators work in humid environments; thus, the integrated devices must be treated with anticorrosion, water tightness, and insulation, to ensure the stability of the work when they are assembled together.
To summarize, the properties of WR materials and the work environment of actuators may result in low compatibility. Therefore, to expand the application range of WR actuators, there is a critical challenge in the integration of WR actuators and other devices.
4 Conclusion
This paper has discussed the characteristics of different types of WR materials, reviewed the latest research progress on WR actuators, and highlighted various challenges faced by WR actuators. Smart actuators based on WR materials can be used in a wide range of applications such as intelligent wearable devices, sensors, robots, soft actuators, new building materials, and clean energy devices. However, some challenges remain, such as the large-scale preparation of WR materials, response speed, control method, and interface compatibility. Exploring the opportunities and overcoming the development challenges of WR actuators require the combined efforts of various research fields, such as robotics, mechanics, materials science, and chemistry. In the future, WR material-based actuators may be dynamically adaptable, intrinsically safe, highly sensitive, and very efficient, which will likely serve people in a variety of fields.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China [62003338, 61927805 and 61925307], the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation [252311], the Nature Foundation of Liaoning Province of China [2021-BS-021], the State Key Laboratory of Robotics [2020-Z16], and the Open Project of Hebei Key Laboratory of Micro-Nano Precision Optical Sensing and Measurement Technology [NEUQ202102].
References
H. Kim and S. Kwon, Science, 2013, 339, 150–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Park and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15227–15244 RSC .
A. S. Kuenstler and R. C. Hayward, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 40, 70–86 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. M. Scheiger and P. A. Levkin, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 171807333 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Kim and Y. T. Matsunaga, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 4307–4321 RSC .
H. X. Liu, T. Prachyathipsakul, T. M. Koyasseril-Yehiya, S. P. Le and S. Thayumanavan, Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 164–193 RSC .
R. Suntornnond, J. An and C. K. Chua, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2017, 302, 1600266 CrossRef .
G. Kocak, C. Tuncer and V. Butun, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 144–176 RSC .
F. Ofridam, M. Tarhini, N. Lebaz, E. Gagniere, D. Mangin and A. Elaissari, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2021, 32, 1455–1484 CrossRef CAS .
V. Q. Nguyen, A. S. Ahmed and R. V. Ramanujan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4041–4054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Yu, Y. L. Xu, Z. H. Liu, H. M. Qiu, Z. Y. Zhu, X. P. Huang and L. Q. Pan, Rare Met., 2015, 34, 527–539 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Q. Li, J. Shi, X. Cao, L. Min, X. Li, L. Zhu, Y. Lv, Z. Qin, X. Chen and K. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33104–33112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zou, S. T. Li, X. Y. Hu, X. Q. Leng, R. Wang, X. Zhou and Z. F. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007437 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yang, H. Yuan, S. Wang, X. Gao, H. Zhao, P. Niu, B. Liu, B. Li and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19269–19277 RSC .
A. H. Cavusoglu, X. Chen, P. Gentine and O. Sahin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 617 CrossRef .
H. Bae and J. Kim, Plants, 2020, 9, 1343 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Reyssat and L. Mahadevan, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2009, 6, 951–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yanez, I. Desta, P. Commins, M. Magzoub and P. Naumov, Adv. Biosyst., 2018, 2, 1800007 CrossRef .
R. Elbaum, L. Zaltzman, I. Burgert and P. Fratzl, Science, 2007, 316, 884–886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jung, W. Kim and H. Y. Kim, Integr. Comp. Biol., 2014, 54, E105–E105 Search PubMed .
L. Z. Dong, J. Qiao, Y. L. Wu, M. Ren, Y. L. Wang, X. F. Shen, X. W. Wei, X. N. Wang, J. T. Di and Q. W. Li, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2021, 7, 482–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, A. Tarakanova, C. C. Hsu, M. Yu, S. Zheng, L. Yu, J. Liu, Y. He, D. J. Dunstan and M. J. Buehler, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau9183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lin, J. Zhu, X. M. Li, Y. Guo, Y. P. Fang, H. Y. Cheng and H. W. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 053103 CrossRef .
T. Jia, Y. Wang, Y. Dou, Y. Li, M. J. de Andrade, R. Wang, S. Fang, J. Li, Z. Yu, R. Qiao, Z. Liu, Y. Cheng, Y. Su, M. Minary-Jolandan, R. H. Baughman, D. Qian and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808241 CrossRef .
Y. Park, Y. Jung, T. D. Li, J. P. Lao, R. S. Tu and X. Chen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2020, 41, 1900612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Manikandan, A. Murali, R. Kumar and D. K. Satapathy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 8880–8888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Cakmak, H. O. El Tinay, X. Chen and O. Sahin, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800596 CrossRef .
X. Chen, L. Mahadevan, A. Driks and O. Sahin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 137–141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Westphal, P. B. Price, T. J. Leighton and K. E. Wheeler, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 3461–3466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Z. Wang, Z. L. Liu, J. P. Lao, S. Zhang, R. Abzalimov, T. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2022, 2104697,  DOI:10.1002/advs.202104697 .
I. Shtein, R. Elbaum and B. Bar-On, Front. Plant Sci., 2016, 7, 1501 Search PubMed .
J. Ha, S. M. Choi, B. Shin, M. Lee, W. Jung and H.-Y. Kim, Ext. Mech. Lett., 2020, 38, 100746 CrossRef .
X. Ma, M. Cao, C. Teng, H. Li, J. Xiao, K. Liu and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15540–15545 RSC .
Y. Y. Gao, Y. L. Zhang, B. Han, L. Zhu, B. Dong and H. B. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37130–37138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Liu, J. N. Ma, Y. Liu, D. D. Han, H. B. Jiang, J. W. Mao, C. H. Han, Z. Z. Jiao and Y. L. Zhang, Opt. Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 2617–2625 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhang, Y. Q. Liu, D. D. Han, J. N. Ma, D. Wang, X. B. Li and H. B. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901585 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Q. Liu, Z. D. Chen, D. D. Han, J. W. Mao, J. N. Ma, Y. L. Zhang and H. B. Sun, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 102002464 Search PubMed .
G. Xu, J. Chen, M. Zhang and G. Shi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 242, 418–422 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Han, Y. L. Zhang, J. N. Ma, Y. Liu, J. W. Mao, C. H. Han, K. Jiang, H. R. Zhao, T. Zhang, H. L. Xu and H. B. Sun, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 91700045 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, Y. H. Ge, S. J. Ye, Z. F. Zhu, Y. F. Tu, D. T. Ge, Z. Xu, W. Chen and X. M. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6104–6110 RSC .
S. He, P. Chen, L. Qiu, B. Wang, X. Sun, Y. Xu and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14880–14884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kim, C. H. Kwon, K. Park, T. J. Mun, X. Lepro, R. H. Baughman, G. M. Spinks and S. J. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Jiang, B. K. Tian, X. Y. Xuan, W. Q. Zhou, J. X. Zhou, Y. Q. Chen, Y. Lu and Z. H. Zhang, Int. J. Smart Nano Mater., 2021, 12, 146–156 CrossRef .
Y. Kuang, C. Chen, J. Cheng, G. Pastel, T. Li, J. Song, F. Jiang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, S.-H. Jang, G. Chen, T. Li and L. Hu, Ext. Mech. Lett., 2019, 29, 100463 CrossRef .
W. Wang, L. N. Yao, C. Y. Cheng, T. Zhang, H. Atsumi, L. D. Wang, G. Y. Wang, O. Anilionyte, H. Steiner, J. F. Ou, K. Zhou, C. Wawrousek, K. Petrecca, A. M. Belcher, R. Karnik, X. H. Zhao, D. I. C. Wang and H. Ishii, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601984 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, D. Goodnight, Z. Gao, A. H. Cavusoglu, N. Sabharwal, M. DeLay, A. Driks and O. Sahin, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Holstov, B. Bridgens and G. Farmer, Constr. Build. Mater., 2015, 98, 570–582 CrossRef .
S. H. Lin, Z. Wang, X. Y. Chen, J. Ren and S. J. Ling, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902743 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Yang, J. Cui, L. Zhang, X. R. Xu, X. Chen and D. P. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101378 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boudot, H. Elettro and D. Grosso, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10031–10040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, S. Yan, L. Zhang, H. Zhao, T. Yang, F. Li and H. Li, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2020, 305, 2000145 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shin, J. Ha, M. Lee, K. Park, G. H. Park, T. H. Choi, K.-J. Cho and H.-Y. Kim, Sci. Robot., 2018, 3, eaar2629 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. He, K. R. Kong, Z. X. Guo, W. F. Fang, Z. Q. Ma, H. H. Pan, R. K. Tang and Z. M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101291 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Abraham, C. Tamburu, E. Klein, J. W. C. Dunlop, P. Fratzl, U. Raviv and R. Elbaum, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2012, 9, 640–647 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Dawson, J. F. V. Vincent and A. M. Rocca, Nature, 1997, 390, 668 CrossRef .
S. Armon, E. Efrati, R. Kupferman and E. Sharon, Science, 2011, 333, 1726–1730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Harrington, K. Razghandi, F. Ditsch, L. Guiducci, M. Rueggeberg, J. W. C. Dunlop, P. Fratzl, C. Neinhuis and I. Burgert, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 337 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Elbaum, S. Gorb and P. Fratzl, J. Struct. Biol., 2008, 164, 101–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, X. Tian, R. H. A. Ras and O. Ikkala, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500080 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, Y. K. Hwang, Y. Yang, T. F. Fan, J. H. Song, S. Suresh and N. J. Cho, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 8711–8718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, M. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Sun and B. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6416–6422 RSC .
Y. Zhang, S. F. Zhou, L. D. Zhang, Q. W. Yan, L. N. Mao, Y. Q. Wu and W. Huang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2020, 221, 1900518 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jaspin, R. Anbarasan, M. Dharini and R. Mahendran, J. Food Eng., 2022, 330, 111107 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, X. Leng, T. Jia and Z. Liu, Chin. Phys. B, 2020, 29, 118103 CrossRef CAS .
S. Reichert, A. Menges and D. Correa, Comput.-Aided Des., 2015, 60, 50–69 CrossRef .
J. D. W. Madden, N. A. Vandesteeg, P. A. Anquetil, P. G. A. Madden, A. Takshi, R. Z. Pytel, S. R. Lafontaine, P. A. Wieringa and I. W. Hunter, IEEE J. Oceanic Eng., 2004, 29, 706–728 CrossRef .
O. Hakimi, D. P. Knight, F. Vollrath and P. Vadgama, Composites, Part B, 2007, 38, 324–337 CrossRef .
I. Agnarsson, A. Dhinojwala, V. Sahni and T. A. Blackledge, J. Exp. Biol., 2009, 212, 1989–1993 CrossRef PubMed .
T. A. Blackledge, C. Boutry, S. C. Wong, A. Baji, A. Dhinojwala, V. Sahni and I. Agnarsson, J. Exp. Biol., 2009, 212, 1980–1988 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Cohen, M. Levin and C. D. Eisenbach, Biomacromolecules, 2021, 22, 993–1000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Plaza, G. V. Guinea, J. Perez-Rigueiro and M. Elices, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2006, 44, 994–999 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Li, L. Zong, X. C. Wu, J. You, M. J. Li and C. X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 3212–3219 RSC .
I. Agnarsson, C. Boutry, S. C. Wong, A. Baji, A. Dhinojwala, A. T. Sensenig and T. A. Blackledge, Zoology, 2009, 112, 325–331 CrossRef PubMed .
F. G. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, Science, 2010, 329, 528–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Bowen, B. Dai, C. J. Sargent, W. Q. Bai, P. Ladiwala, H. B. Feng, W. W. Huang, D. L. Kaplan, J. M. Galazka and F. Z. Zhang, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 3853–3860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Lima, N. Li, M. J. de Andrade, S. L. Fang, J. Oh, G. M. Spinks, M. E. Kozlov, C. S. Haines, D. Suh, J. Foroughi, S. J. Kim, Y. S. Chen, T. Ware, M. K. Shin, L. D. Machado, A. F. Fonseca, J. D. W. Madden, W. E. Voit, D. S. Galvao and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2012, 338, 928–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Fu, Z. G. Xia, C. Hurren, A. Nilghaz and X. G. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2022, 196, 113690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Liu, M. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. X. Zhang, K. Q. Liu, J. Z. Zhang, J. Yang and L. B. Yuan, Opt. Lett., 2019, 44, 2907–2910 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, M. Zhang, J. P. Li, Y. X. Zhang, Z. H. Liu, X. H. Yang, J. Z. Zhang, J. Yang and L. B. Yuan, IEEE Sens. J., 2020, 20, 7069–7073 Search PubMed .
Z. H. Liu, M. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Xu, Y. X. Zhang, X. H. Yang, J. Z. Zhang, J. Yang and L. B. Yuan, Sens. Actuators, A, 2020, 313, 112179 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Z. H. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. X. Zhang, X. H. Yang, J. Z. Zhang, J. Yang and L. B. Yuan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2022, 350, 130895 CrossRef CAS .
E. Birch, B. Bridgens, M. Zhang and M. Dade-Robertson, Sustainability, 2021, 13, 4030 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Mokhothu and M. J. John, Carbohydr. Polym., 2015, 131, 337–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Zhang, X. X. Jing, K. G. Jing, L. P. Chang and W. R. Bao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 324, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhao, W. Dou, Z. Hu, W. Hou, Y. Sun and J.-A. Lv, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2020, 41, 2000313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Salvekar, W. M. Huang, R. Xiao, Y. S. Wong, S. S. Venkatrarnan, K. H. Tay and Z. X. Shen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 141–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Yu, Y. T. Guo, C. Yao, D. F. Perepichka and H. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11055–11058 RSC .
F. Aaron, M. Clare, B. Bastian, K. Fredrick, D. Tim and F. Aurelien, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 117, 159–164 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Z. Li, G. S. Wu, Y. D. Wang, T. Wang, Y. Ma and B. Fei, Composites, Part A, 2018, 115, 341–347 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fei, H. R. Zhao, K. Jiang, X. Zhou and T. Zhang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 130, 2056–2061 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ionov, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 494–503 CrossRef .
Y. S. Zhang and A. Khademhosseini, Science, 2017, 356, eaaf3627 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-C. Sun, H. Xia, X.-L. Xu, C. Lv and Y. Zhao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 322, 128620 CrossRef CAS .
H. Luo, L. Liang, X. C. Ma, N. Liu, S. P. Huang and H. Sun, IEEE Sens. J., 2018, 18, 8022–8027 CAS .
W. Wang, C. X. Xiang, Q. Z. Liu, M. F. Li, W. B. Zhong, K. L. Yan and D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22599–22608 RSC .
J. Z. Li, J. Q. Zhang, H. Sun, D. Hong, L. T. Li, Y. X. Yang, X. Yong, C. Zhang and J. T. Cui, Optik, 2019, 195, 7163172 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, C. Wu, D. Wu, Q. Wang and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11610–11613 RSC .
S. Liu, E. Boatti, K. Bertoldi and R. Kramer-Bottiglio, Ext. Mech. Lett., 2018, 21, 35–43 CrossRef .
M. R. Islam and M. J. Serpe, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 31937–31940 RSC .
C. K. Pandiyarajan, O. Prucker and J. Ruhe, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 8254–8264 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lv, X.-C. Sun, H. Xia, Y.-H. Yu, G. Wang, X.-W. Cao, S.-X. Li, Y.-S. Wang, Q.-D. Chen, Y.-D. Yu and H.-B. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 259, 736–744 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lv, X. C. Sun, Y. S. Xu, W. Y. Zhang, P. Li, Q. Shi, L. Wang, G. Wang, X. W. Cao, S. X. Li, Y. Z. Dai, H. Xia and H. B. Sun, IEEE Sens. J., 2018, 18, 8796–8802 CAS .
Y. R. Wang, P. P. Feng, R. Liu and B. T. Song, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 330, 129236 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gong, H. Li, J. G. Huang, Y. H. Jing, Z. G. Hu, D. W. Xia, Q. Zhou and R. Xiao, Nano Energy, 2022, 91, 106677 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, X. Z. Xu, J. W. Xu, S. P. Dai, X. Dong, F. Han, N. Y. Yuan and J. N. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 7558–7565 RSC .
M. M. Ma, L. Guo, D. G. Anderson and R. Langer, Science, 2013, 339, 186–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ge, H. X. Wang, J. Y. Xue, J. Q. Jiang, Z. T. Liu, Z. W. Liu, G. Li and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 38773–38782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhou, L. Chen, L. Yao, M. Weng and W. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8422–8427 RSC .
L. T. de Haan, J. M. N. Verjans, D. J. Broer, C. W. M. Bastiaansen and A. P. H. J. Schenning, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10585–10588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Wani, R. Verpaalen, H. Zeng, A. Priimagi and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805985 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kim, Y. H. Guo, J. Bae, S. Choi, H. Y. Song, S. Park, K. Hyun and S. K. Ahn, Small, 2021, 17, 2100910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-D. Han, Y.-Q. Liu, J.-N. Ma, J.-W. Mao, Z.-D. Chen, Y.-L. Zhang and H.-B. Sun, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800258 CrossRef .
Y. Dong, L. Wang, N. Xia, Y. Wang, S. J. Wang, Z. X. Yang, D. D. Jin, X. Z. Du, E. W. Yu, C. F. Pan, B. F. Liu and L. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2021, 88, 106254 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, W. W. Cai, X. S. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Buchsteiner, A. Lerf and J. Pieper, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22328–22338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, C. M. Andres, J. D. Xu, A. Ramamoorthy, T. Tsotsis and N. A. Kotov, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8357–8365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
D. D. Han, Y. L. Zhang, H. B. Jiang, H. Xia, J. Feng, Q. D. Chen, H. L. Xu and H. B. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 332–338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Shi, K. Sun, Y. H. Lv, R. H. Li, J. P. Deng, C. Z. Wang and K. Pan, Smart Mater. Struct., 2019, 28, 8105024 Search PubMed .
H. B. Jiang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Y. Li, Y. Y. Song, D. D. Han and L. Q. Ran, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 8464 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, L. Wang, K. Sun, T. Luo, Z. Yu and K. Pan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 268, 421–429 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, M. Weng, P. Zhou, L. Zhang, Z. Huang and W. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9825–9833 RSC .
G. Xu, M. Zhang, Q. Zhou, H. Chen, T. Gao, C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17465–17470 RSC .
J.-W. Mao, Z.-D. Chen, D.-D. Han, J.-N. Ma, Y.-L. Zhang and H.-B. Sun, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 20614–20619 RSC .
Y. Yao, X. D. Chen, H. H. Guo, Z. Q. Wu and X. Y. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 161, 1053–1058 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Cheng, F. Zhao, J. L. Xue, G. Q. Shi, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9529–9535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, M. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. V. Li and K. Pan, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14060–14066 RSC .
H. Cheng, Y. Hu, F. Zhao, Z. Dong, Y. Wang, N. Chen, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2909–2913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Foroughi and G. Spinks, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 4592–4614 RSC .
Y. An, L. Gao and T. Wang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 5079–5087 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, C. X. Xiang, D. M. Sun, M. F. Li, K. L. Yan and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21926–21934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Xu, D. F. Pei, S. Y. Yu, X. F. Zhang, M. G. Yi and C. X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 31978–31985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Li, N. Su, Z. Y. Wang and J. S. Qiu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 16811–16818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Arazoe, D. Miyajima, K. Akaike, F. Araoka, E. Sato, T. Hikima, M. Kawamoto and T. Aida, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1084–1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Wang, F. H. Zhang, L. W. Liu, J. S. Leng, Y. J. Liu, X. F. Zhao and H. J. Zhang, Smart Mater. Struct., 2019, 28, 105007 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Ye, L. Z. Liu and H. J. Jin, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 10325501 Search PubMed .
M. Lee, G. Han and J. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 115, 5091601 Search PubMed .
H. Kang, M. Lee, H. Lim, H. A. Stone and J. Lee, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e417 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Solovyeva, A. I. Shkatulov, L. G. Gordeeva, E. A. Fedorova, T. A. Krieger and Y. I. Aristov, Langmuir, 2021, 37, 693–702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Yang, S. Q. Wang, Z. Y. Liu, Y. Chen, M. J. Zaworotko, P. Cheng, J. G. Ma and Z. J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 7732–7739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Guenther, J. Prass, O. Paris and M. Schoen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 4086104 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang and M. H. Miao, Smart Mater. Struct., 2021, 30, 075031 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. Y. Lu, M. J. de Andrade, S. L. Fang, Z. Q. Zhang, J. P. Wu and R. H. Baughman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 6642–6649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Li, X. Q. Leng, J. K. Sun, X. Zhou, W. Wu, H. Chen and Z. F. Liu, Chin. Phys. B, 2020, 29, 048103 CrossRef CAS .
F. Heraly, M. Zhang, A. Ahl, W. Cao, L. Bergstrom and J. Y. Yuan, Advanced Intelligent Systems, 2022, 4, 2100084 CrossRef .
R. H. Wu, J. Bae, H. Jeon and T. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 444, 136556 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Wang, Z. L. Liu, J. P. Lao, S. Zhang, R. Abzalimov, T. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2104697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, S. J. Ye, Q. Y. Tao, Z. Chen, Y. F. Tu and X. M. Yang, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2021, 306, 2000822 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, H. Xia, X. C. Sun, C. Lv, S. X. Li, B. Han, Q. Guo, Q. Shi, Y. S. Wang and H. B. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 1415–1421 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Sun, Y. Wang, C. F. Hua, Y. L. Ge, S. Y. Hou, Y. Y. Shang and A. Y. Cao, Carbon, 2018, 132, 394–400 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. L. Zhang, B. Han, J. N. Ma, J. N. Wang, D. D. Han, Z. C. Ma and H. B. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 290, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Xu, M. Zhang, Q. Q. Zhou, H. W. Chen, T. T. Gao, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17465–17470 RSC .
J. Wei, S. Jia, J. Guan, C. Ma and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 54417–54427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, S. Jia, J. Wei, C. Ma and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 38700–38711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Yiwei Zhang
	Yiwei Zhang began studying a master's degree in the School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, Shenyang Ligong University, in 2020. His current research interests include smart materials, soft actuators and bionic robots.

Chuang Zhang
	Chuang Zhang received his BEng degree in Mechanical Design, Manufacturing and Automation from the Shenyang University of Technology, Shenyang, China, in 2012, and his PhD degree in Pattern Recognition and Intelligent Systems from the Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, China, in 2019. He is currently an associate professor at the Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include bio-syncretic robots, micro-robots and cell modeling.

Lizhong Zhu
	Lizhong Zhu received his BS degree in Industrial Electrification and Automation from Shenyang Ligong University, Shenyang, China, in 1990, and his MSc degree in theoretical electrician from the College of Electrical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, China, in 1997. He is currently a professor at the School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, Shenyang Ligong University. His current research interests include intelligent control and image processing.

Lianqing Liu
	Lianqing Liu received his BS degree in Industry Automation from Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China, in 2002, and his PhD degree in Pattern Recognition and Intelligent Systems from the Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, China, in 2009. He is currently a professor at the Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include nanorobotics, intelligent control, and biosensors.

 	Fig. 1  Response actuators based on the humidity stimulation: Umbrella. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. Mechanical arm. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. Silk-based microactuator. Reproduced under the terms of the CC-BY license.48 Copyright 2015, The Authors, John Wiley and Sons. Rotary engine. Reproduced under the terms of the CC-BY license.46 Copyright 2015, The Authors, Springer Nature. 3D responsive actuators. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. Dancing film. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. Crawling robot. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Bionic centipede. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. Bionic scorpion. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Generator. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. Humidity switch. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  The WR properties of various plants. (a) Pine cones release their seeds in a dry state. Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2009, Royal Society. (b) Wheat awns drop seeds into the soil under the moisture cycle. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2007, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Twining movement of Pelargonium seed awns with changes in the humidity. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (d) The morphology of stork's bill fruits. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2012, Royal Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Smart actuators based on plant materials. (a) A schematic of moisture-based actuation in cellulose membranes. (b) Different predetermined deformations of cellulose membranes. (c) The soft body gripper based on cellulose membranes for gripping experiments. Reproduced under the terms of the CC-BY license.43 Copyright 2020, The Authors, published by Taylor & Francis Group. (d) Reversible and bidirectional humidity-driven bending of the NFC film in the hand. (e) Fatigue test of the NFC film. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (f) Smart response houses and walls can be opened or closed with weather changes. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  The supercontraction of spider silk. (a) Spiders rely on the pull of spider silk to create webs in the air. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2009, The Company of Biologists Ltd. (b) The relationship between the rate of increase in humidity and hydration stress. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2009, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  Smart actuators based on animal materials. (a) Applications for spider silk, including humidity responsive switches, smart doors, and medical devices that promote the speed of wound healing. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) A schematic diagram of the experimental system and the spider dragline silk-based FP humidity sensing probe. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (c) Smart sleeves are made from silkworm silk fibers that respond to changes in humidity. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  Smart actuators based on microorganism materials. (a) Schematic diagrams and object pictures of oscillating and rotating engines based on Bacillus thuringiensis spores. (b) The oscillatory engine drives an electromagnetic generator to output power. (c) Snapshots showing the position of a miniature car driven by a rotary engine. Reproduced under the terms of the CC-BY license.46 Copyright 2015, The Authors, published by Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  Smart actuators based on polymer WR materials. (a) Snapshots and schematics of the humidity response switch when open and closed. (b) The plot of the opening angle of copper wires versus the time evolution, corresponding to the bending and extending behaviors of the hydrogel-actuated system. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The movement schematic of micro-worms. (d) The micro-worm could carry silica microspheres to complete transportation and obstacle avoidance work. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) The ratchet robot relies on a spatial humidity gradient to move. (f) Different motion modes of the ratchet robot. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 8  Smart actuators based on GO. (a) Graphene films with different reduction degrees. (b) Mimosa based on the GO/rGO film was capable of blooming under the influence of the environmental humidity. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic diagram for the fabrication of a programmable GO/wax actuator. (d) The structure, grasping process, and releasing process of smart shape-adaption grippers. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Smart actuators based on GO and CNTs. (a) Biomimetic insects made of single-layer GO moving under a humidity cycle. (b) Moisture-driven bionic leaves catching insects. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. (c) The manufacturing process and the twisting process of the GO/SA fiber. (d) Video screenshot of the bridge floor being driven by the moisture stimulation. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) CNT yarns are treated with oxygen plasma. (f) Hydrophilic CNT yarns can be assembled into smart windows for humidity actuation. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  Smart actuators based on other synthetic materials. (a) The reversible bending deformation of the Au/np Au double-layer actuator. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2021, IOP Publishing, Ltd. (b) MXene films could be used to lift objects or transport cargo under humidity gradients. (c) Photographs of a motor based on the MXene films carrying cylindrical cargo by rolling caused by moisture and the schematic diagram are illustrated below. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. (d) The actuator crawling on a rough substrate by periodically applying moisture on and off. (e) The calcium carbonate film dancing on the ice. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons.	 

Plant	Linen	Twisted fibers	8–10	22.5% (contraction)	110 J kg−1 work capacity	Artificial muscle	
142

Lotus fiber	Twisted fiber	6–8	38% (elongation)	200° mm−1 torsional actuation; 450 J kg−1 work capacity; 200 rpm rotation speed	Weight-lifting artificial limb; smart textiles	
143

Cotton yarns	Twisted fiber	3	<1%	42.55° mm−1 torsional actuation; 720 rpm rotation speed	Smart WR window; smart textiles	
144

Bamboo yarns	Twisted fiber	4.2	50% (contraction) 133% (elongation)	64.4° mm−1 torsional actuation; 158 rpm rotation speed	Smart textiles	
64

NFC	Bilayer	∼7	0.65 mm−1 (bending)	∼1000 times lifting weight ratio,	Mechanical arm; soft robot	
44

NFC	Monolayer	∼75	0.07 mm−1 (bending)	High sensitivity	Bionic flowers	
59

TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibrils (TCNF-Na +)	Bilayer	23.5	1.57 mm−1 (bending)	Good stability and durability; reversible	Humidity switch	
145

Balsa wood	Bilayer	∼90	0.13 mm−1 (bending)	40 times grabbing weight ratio	The three-finger gripper;	
43

Paper made with natural pollen	Monolayer	80	0.19 mm−1 (bending)	Simple fabrication process; high sensitivity	Bionic flowers; crawling robot	
60

Animal	Spider dragline silk	Twisted fiber	3–4	60% (contraction)	11 MPa stress; 682 J kg−1 work capacity;	Humidity alarm switches; smart doors; wound healing devices	
21

Spider dragline silk	Twisted fiber	2–3	70% (contraction)	500 kJ m−3 work density; 30–190 W kg−1 power density	High performance biomimetic muscle	
68

Spider dragline silk	Twisted fiber	—	—	300° mm−1 torsional actuation	Artificial muscle	
22

Silkworm silk	Twisted fiber	4.9	81.69% (contraction)	1030 rpm rotation speed; 2.1 W kg−1 power density	Smart textiles; wound healing devices	
48

Silkworm silk	Twisted fiber	10	70% (contraction)	547° mm−1 torsional actuation; 1125 rpm rotation speed	Smart sleeves; bionic caterpillar	
24

Spider silk fibroin	Monolayer	0.3	0.62 mm−1 (bending)	Good repeatability	Intelligent textile layer; crawling robot	
26

Silkworm silk fibroin	Bilayer	4	0.175 mm−1 (bending)	High stability; excellent repeatability; multidirectional bending	Cargoing carriage	
146

Microorganism	
Bacillus subtilis spores	Bilayer	—	300% (elongation)	Large deformation; fast response time; excellent repeatability	Oscillatory engine; rotary engine	
46


Escherichia coli
	Bilayer; directional fiber	—	140° (bending)	Genetic engineering	Smart sportswear; smart shoe	
45


Bacillus subtilis peptidoglycan	Bilayer	3	0.22 mm−1 (bending)	High energy/power densities and efficiency; high durability and availability	Pull actuator; bionic fingers	
147


Bacillus subtilis spores	Bilayer	∼20	0.5 mm−1 (bending)	682 J kg−1 work capacity:	Bionic flower;	
27

Polymer	SA	Twisted fiber	5.44	13.8% (elongation)	13000 rpm rotation speed; good repeatability	Hydro-generator; smart rainy curtain; smart crane; breathable fabric	
95

CS/CNTs	Twisted fiber	5	17% (contraction)	11400 rpm rotation speed; 1105.9 J kg−1 work capacity;	Smart textiles	
148

PDDA/CNT	Twisted fiber	4	78% (contraction)	2.17 kJ kg−1 work capacity	Automatic ventilation the system	
42

CS	Bilayer	25–30	0.391 mm−1 (bending)	Multiple response	Two-finger grip	
105

PEO	Bilayer; directional fiber	2–3	0.11 mm−1 (bending)	High sensitivity	Self-locomotive ratcheted actuator; disinfection robot	
52

PEO	Bilayer	20	0.46 mm−1 (bending)	4 V peak voltage	Steam generator	
104

PVA	Bilayer	10	1.12 mm−1 (bending)	Good repeatability; fast response time	Artificial clover; biomimicked flower; self-driven hygrometer	
103

PEDOT:PSS	Bilayer	10	0.24 mm−1 (bending)	Bidirectional bending	Biomimetic dragonflies; generator	
149

PEG-DA	Asymmetry	2–3	—	Actuation by the difference of adhesion	Micro-worm	
93

GO and CNTs	GO/CNTs	Twisted fiber	10	50% (contraction)	200 rpm rotation speed	Sensor; smart textiles	
150

CNTs	Twisted fiber	1–2	55% (contraction)	750 rpm rotation speed	Smart windows	
41

GO	Monolayer	7	0.9 mm−1 (bending)	QSF channels; ultrafast bending velocity	Bionic centipede robot; bionic leaves	
36

GO	Monolayer	3–4	0.314 mm−1 (bending)	Directional bending; 1100° maximum bending angle	Bionic crawling robot	
12

GO	Bilayer	7	1.00 mm−1 (bending)	Multiple response	Selective air valve; smart grip	
151

GO	Bilayer	1.2	2.2 mm−1 (bending)	Multiple response; high sensitivity	Robotic finger; nanogenerator	
152

GO	Bilayer	12	0.41 mm−1 (bending)	Adjustable reduction gradient; multiple response	Bionic mimosa; bionic insert	
112

GO/CNF/CNT	Monolayer	0.8	0.126 mm−1 (bending)	Short response/recovery time; excellent repeatability; large actuation amplitude	Load-bearing smart robot; mechanical gripper; circuit switch	
153

GO/CF	Bilayer	10	0.148 mm−1 (bending)	696.86 MPa tensile strength; self-healing property	Bionic butterfly	
124

Other synthetic materials	MXene/CNF	Monolayer	3.5	0.105 mm−1 (bending)	Multiple response; excellent mechanical strength; antibacterial properties	Smart garment	
154

MXene/CNF/PDA	Monolayer	1.6	0.154 mm−1 (bending)	6.5 N m−2 force; high conductivity; excellent mechanical strength	Electrical switch; robotic arm; motor	
49

Calcium carbonate	Monolayer	0.3	0.26 mm−1 (bending)	Highly sensitive; reversible, and bidirectional deformation	Crawling robot	
53

Carbon nitride	Monolayer	∼10	1.05 mm−1 (bending)	Rapid response; distinct deformation; low triggering threshold	Humidity-powered robot	
135

Titanium oxide with nanocapillaries	Monolayer	∼10	0.029 mm−1 (bending)	high energy density of ∼1250kJm−3; repeatable deformation	Energy collecting; robotics applications	
138


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
