Correlating triplet yield, singlet oxygen generation and photochemical stability in polymer / fullerene blend films   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CC38243A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CC38243A
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1291-1293Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsCorrelating triplet yield, singlet oxygen generation and photochemical stability in polymer/fullerene blend films†

        
          
            Ying W. 
            Soon
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hoduk 
            Cho
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jonathan 
            Low
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hugo 
            Bronstein
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Iain 
            McCulloch
          
        
       and 

        
          
            James R. 
            Durrant
          
        
      *
      Centre for Plastic Electronics and Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London, UK SW7 2AZ. E-mail: j.durrant@imperial.ac.uk;   Tel: +44 (0)20 7594 5321
Received 
      15th November 2012
    , Accepted 24th December 2012First published on 2nd January 2013AbstractThe photostability of two donor polymers, DPP-TT-T and PTB7, is compared in neat films and blend films with PC71BM. In both neat and blend films, PTB7 is shown to be relatively unstable. This observation is shown to correlate with transient optical studies of long lived polymer triplets and with molecular probe studies of singlet oxygen yields.
Organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices based on semiconducting polymer/fullerene blend films are showing promising potential, with power conversion efficiencies approaching 10%, often perceived as a benchmark for commercial viability. However, semiconducting polymers are known to be susceptible to photo-oxidation under ambient conditions. As such, photochemical stability is a significant concern for the commercial development of OPV, potentially requiring the use of expensive encapsulation procedures to prevent oxygen or water exposure. However, whilst there are extensive studies reporting the ability of new donor polymers to deliver enhanced device efficiencies, there are relatively few studies quantitatively comparing the relative photochemical stabilities of these polymers.1 Photochemical stability studies on semiconducting polymers to date have focused on two possible oxygen dependent photodegradation pathways involving the generation of either singlet oxygen or superoxide radical anions.2 Such studies to date have typically employed P3HT and poly(p-phenylenevinylenes) (PPVs),3,4 and have primarily concluded that the dominant degradation pathway involves superoxide radical anions generated by polymer or fullerene anions.4,5 The alternative singlet oxygen pathway, based on oxygen quenching of molecular triplet states, has received less attention, with most studies to date indicating this pathway is less significant.6
In this study, we compare the photochemical stability of two donor polymers in neat and blend films. We employ transient absorption measurements and a molecular singlet oxygen indicator to demonstrate that the polymer with the higher yield of long lived triplets exhibits higher yields of photochemical singlet oxygen generation in both neat films and blend films with PC71BM, and that this higher singlet oxygen generation correlates with lower photochemical stability of both neat and blend films.
The two polymers used in this study are DPP-TT-T and PTB7, as shown in Chart 1. Both of these donor polymers are attracting extensive current interest for OPV applications. DPP-TT-T is a recently developed low band gap polymer (∼1.4 eV) which has already demonstrated impressive charge-carrier mobilities and efficiencies of ∼5.4% in OPV devices with PC71BM.7 PTB7, on the other hand, is a more widely studied, larger band gap polymer, where the optimisation of blend morphology and device architectures has led to device efficiencies of over 9%.8
 Chart 1  Chemical structures of the repeat units of the donor polymers and the fullerene acceptor used in this study: (a) PTB7, (b) DPP-TT-T, (c) PC71BM. 
We start with transient absorption studies on neat, spin coated films of DPP-TT-T and PTB7. These neat films showed very different photophysical behaviour. Data were collected on nanosecond to microsecond time scale at room temperature.9 PTB7 neat films exhibit a broad photoinduced absorption maximum with a peak at 1130 nm (Fig. 1). This photoinduced absorption exhibits monoexponential decay kinetics function, with a lifetime of 1.2 μs, accelerating to 0.7 μs under an oxygen environment. These dynamics and absorption maximum are characteristic of polymer triplet states, as we have discussed previously9 (also see ESI†). The acceleration in decay time in the presence of oxygen is assigned to the widely reported quenching of molecular triplet states by molecular oxygen. On the other hand, no transient absorption signals could be observed with DPP-TT-T neat films over the same timescale (see ESI†). This may be due to a very low triplet yield or the triplet lifetime being less than our time resolution of ∼100 ns (and therefore too short to enable significant quenching by molecular oxygen). No signals characteristic of polarons were observed for neat films of either polymer, suggesting that charge generation yields (and therefore the potential for superoxide generation) were very low for both polymers. We also note that consideration of the exciton energies of PTB7 and DPP-TT-T indicate that the PTB7 triplet state is sufficiently energetic to generate singlet oxygen (0.98 eV), whilst any DPP-TT-T triplets, if formed, may be too low in energy. These data therefore suggest that PTB7 films are likely to be efficient singlet oxygen generators, whilst DPP-TT-T films are not.
 Fig. 1  The transient absorption decay kinetics of a PTB7 neat film under N2 and O2 environments, measured using 43 μJ cm−2 excitation at 630 nm and a probe wavelength of 1200 nm. Decay kinetics under nitrogen is repeated after measurement under oxygen (grey line). The inset shows the transient absorption spectrum at 1 μs after laser excitation under N2. 
Transient absorption studies of films of either donor polymers blended with PC71BM exhibited power law decay kinetics which were not sensitive to the presence of oxygen (see ESI†). Such power law decays are characteristics of non-geminate recombination of dissociated charge species.10 Therefore, both DPP-TT-T and PTB7 blend films showed high yields of charge separation. For PTB7, this charge separation competes effectively with the triplet formation by intersystem crossing from the PTB7 singlet states observed for the neat PTB7 films. We note however that the non-geminate recombination observed for both blend films has the potential to yield polymer and/or fullerene triplets,9,11 as has also been widely discussed in the context of organic electroluminescent devices.12 This polaron mediated triplet formation can proceed through the formation of triplet interfacial ‘charge transfer’ states.9,11,13 Such triplet formation would not be observed directly in the transient optical data due to the triplet lifetime being shorter than the non-geminate recombination kinetics. The potential importance of this polaron mediated triplet generation will be discussed further below.
We now turn to the photochemical stability of DPP-TT-T and PTB7 in neat and blend films. Photodegradation was monitored from the change in ground state absorbance spectra of films in a pure oxygen environment as a function of white light irradiation time (∼80 mW cm−2, λ > 410 nm). Typical spectra are shown in ESI.†Fig. 2 illustrates the rate of photodegradation of neat and blend films under these accelerated ageing conditions, monitoring the amplitude of the polymer absorption maximum. Comparing the rate of photodegradation for both polymers, it is apparent that both neat and blend PTB7 films degraded significantly (∼200 times) faster than neat and blend DPP-TT-T films. The difference in neat film degradation kinetics is consistent with the difference in neat film photophysics discussed above. Control data in the absence of oxygen showed no degradation. It is striking that this difference in degradation behaviour is also observed for the blend films, as we discuss further below.
 Fig. 2  Decrease in the peak ground state absorbance of neat PTB7 and DPP-TT-T films and films blended with PC71BM during accelerated photochemical ageing under pure oxygen and 80 mW cm−2 illumination. 
In order to investigate further whether singlet oxygen generation plays a role on the photochemical stability of DPP-TT-T and PTB7, we employ a molecular fluorescent probe (SOSG, see ESI†) which has been shown to give a characteristic increase in emission yield following exposure to singlet oxygen, but no change in the presence of superoxide. Polymer neat and blend films were immersed in an aqueous solution of this selective singlet oxygen probe, the photodegradation studies repeated as for Fig. 2 (except using illumination at >550 nm to avoid self-excitation of the probe solution) and the resultant change in fluorescence emission of the probe solution was monitored over time. Immersion of polymers films in the absence of light gave no detectable change in fluorescence emission. The rate of singlet oxygen generation in different films, as assayed by the increase in fluorescence intensity of the probe solution, are shown in Fig. 3 (see ESI† for typical emission spectra). It is apparent that these rates of singlet oxygen generation correlate with the trends in the rates of photochemical degradation observed in Fig. 2. The PTB7 neat and blend films both generate significantly more singlet oxygen than the solution only control data, whilst DPP-TT-T neat and blend films do not. This observation confirms that both neat and blend PTB7 films are efficient singlet oxygen generators, thereby strongly indicating that the more rapid photochemical degradation observed for PTB7 films in the presence of oxygen derives from triplet mediated singlet oxygen generation.
 Fig. 3  Normalised fluorescence intensity at 525 nm of the singlet oxygen sensor green (SOSG) solution with illumination (λ > 550 nm) time on films. 
The triplet mediated photodegradation pathways discussed herein are illustrated in Fig. 4. Our observation of efficient singlet oxygen generation from PTB7:PC71BM blend films is particularly striking. It can be assigned to oxygen quenching of triplets generated by the non-geminate recombination of dissociated polarons, as discussed above. It clearly indicates that efficient charge separation, whilst competing with direct triplet generation by intersystem crossing from polymer (or PCBM) singlet excitons, does not necessarily prevent triplet generation, as has also recently been discussed by Janssen et al.,11 and indeed that recombination mediated triplet generation may have a higher quantum yield than direct intersystem crossing. In OPV devices, the efficiency of this polaron mediated triplet generation is likely to be dependent upon device operating condition, being most significant as the device voltage approaches open circuit (where non-geminate recombination is the dominate loss pathway).
 Fig. 4  The model used to describe triplet formation mechanism in neat film (blue solid arrow) via direct intersystem crossing (ISC) from polymer singlet to triplet state, and in blend film (blue dashed arrow) via charge recombination from dissociated charges. Depending upon polymer triplet lifetime and energy, oxygen quenching of the polymer triplet states can result in singlet oxygen formation and polymer degradation. 
In practice, the stability of most OPV devices reported to date is limited by the stability of the device electrodes. Significant progress is being made to address these instabilities,1 such that the stability of future devices is likely to be limited by the underlying stability of the photoactive layer. Here we have shown that two donor polymers, both promising in terms of device efficiency, exhibit very different susceptibilities to photochemical degradation in both neat and blend films. This difference in photochemical stability is likely to impact upon the long term stability of OPV devices employing these polymers, and in particular upon their requirements for oxygen barrier layers.
The results reported here suggest some simple materials guidelines to avoid triplet mediated singlet oxygen photodegradation. One strategy would be to ensure that polymer triplets are too short-lived for bimolecular quenching by oxygen molecules. Oxygen quenching studies of air-exposed films suggest this requires a triplet lifetime < approx. 500 ns. Alternatively the energy of the polymer triplet states needs to be above that of the polaron pairs and/or charge transfer states, such that charge recombination cannot result in triplet formation, or lower in energy than the singlet state of oxygen (0.98 eV). Further considerations, not addressed in this study, include the potential generation of fullerene triplets and the inherent susceptibility of the polymer to irreversible oxidation in the presence of singlet oxygen.14
In summary, we have compared the photochemical stability of two promising polymers, DPP-TT-T and PTB7 and found that PTB7 neat and blend films are significantly less stable than DPP-TT-T neat and blend films. Transient optical and singlet oxygen generation data suggest that the relative instability of PTB7 films is associated with singlet oxygen generation from triplet excitons. The efficient singlet oxygen production in PTB7 blend films is assigned to PTB7 triplet generated by non-geminate charge recombination. These conclusions have significant implications on the design of donor polymers for stable, low cost OPV applications.
We are very grateful for Solvay SA, the EPSRC and the Brunei Government scholarship for financial support.
Notes and references
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 CrossRef .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686 CrossRef .
H. D. Burrows, O. Narwark, R. Peetz, E. Thorn-Csanyi, A. P. Monkman, I. Hamblett and S. Navaratnam, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 942–948 RSC ; L. Ma, X. Wang, B. Wang, J. Chen, J. Wang, K. Huang, B. Zhang, Y. Cao, Z. Han, S. Qian and S. Yao, Chem. Phys., 2002, 285, 85–94 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chambon, A. Rivaton, J.-L. Gardette and M. Firon, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 6044–6052 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Hoke, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, M. T. Lloyd, I. Kauvar, W. R. Mateker, A. M. Nardes, C. H. Peters, N. Kopidakis and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1351–1357 Search PubMed .
M. Manceau, A. Rivaton and J.-L. Gardette, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 1823–1827 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bronstein, Z. Chen, R. S. Ashraf, W. Zhang, J. Du, J. R. Durrant, P. Shakya Tuladhar, K. Song, S. E. Watkins, Y. Geerts, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen, T. Anthopoulos, H. Sirringhaus, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3272–3275 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 593–597 Search PubMed .
H. Ohkita, S. Cook, Y. Astuti, W. Duffy, M. Heeney, S. Tierney, I. McCulloch, D. D. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2006, 3939–3941 RSC .
I. Montanari, A. F. Nogueira, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, C. Winder, M. A. Loi, N. S. Sariciftci and C. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3001–3003 CrossRef CAS .
A. Distler, P. Kutka, T. Sauermann, H.-J. Egelhaaf, D. M. Guldi, D. Di Nuzzo, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4397–4405 Search PubMed .
R. H. Friend, R. W. Gymer, A. B. Holmes, J. H. Burroughes, R. N. Marks, C. Taliani, D. D. C. Bradley, D. A. D. Santos, J. L. Bredas, M. Logdlund and W. R. Salaneck, Nature, 1999, 397, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganas and J. V. Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904–909 CrossRef CAS .
M. Manceau, E. Bundgaard, J. E. Carle, O. Hagemann, M. Helgesen, R. Sondergaard, M. Jorgensen and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4132–4141 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, additional transient absorption data, absorption and fluroscence spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cc38243aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Chart 1  Chemical structures of the repeat units of the donor polymers and the fullerene acceptor used in this study: (a) PTB7, (b) DPP-TT-T, (c) PC71BM.	 

 	Fig. 1  The transient absorption decay kinetics of a PTB7 neat film under N2 and O2 environments, measured using 43 μJ cm−2 excitation at 630 nm and a probe wavelength of 1200 nm. Decay kinetics under nitrogen is repeated after measurement under oxygen (grey line). The inset shows the transient absorption spectrum at 1 μs after laser excitation under N2.	 

 	Fig. 2  Decrease in the peak ground state absorbance of neat PTB7 and DPP-TT-T films and films blended with PC71BM during accelerated photochemical ageing under pure oxygen and 80 mW cm−2 illumination.	 

 	Fig. 3  Normalised fluorescence intensity at 525 nm of the singlet oxygen sensor green (SOSG) solution with illumination (λ > 550 nm) time on films.	 

 	Fig. 4  The model used to describe triplet formation mechanism in neat film (blue solid arrow) via direct intersystem crossing (ISC) from polymer singlet to triplet state, and in blend film (blue dashed arrow) via charge recombination from dissociated charges. Depending upon polymer triplet lifetime and energy, oxygen quenching of the polymer triplet states can result in singlet oxygen formation and polymer degradation.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, additional transient absorption data, absorption and fluroscence spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cc38243a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
