Polymers for electronics and spintronics  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60257E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60257E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8895-8999Polymers for electronics and spintronics

        
          
            Piotr 
            Bujak
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Irena 
            Kulszewicz-Bajer
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Malgorzata 
            Zagorska
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Vincent 
            Maurel
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ireneusz 
            Wielgus
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Adam 
            Pron
          
          
        
      *a
aFaculty of Chemistry, Warsaw University of Technology, Noakowskiego 3, 00-664 Warsaw, Poland. E-mail: piotrbujakchem@poczta.onet.pl; apron@ch.pw.edu.pl
bCEA-Grenoble, SCIB, UMRE-E 3 CEA/UJF-Grenoble 1, INAC, Grenoble, F-38054, France
Received 
      15th July 2013
    First published on 13th September 2013AbstractThis critical review is devoted to semiconducting and high spin polymers which are of great scientific interest in view of further development of the organic electronics and the emerging organic spintronic fields. Diversified synthetic strategies are discussed in detail leading to high molecular mass compounds showing appropriate redox (ionization potential (IP), electron affinity (EA)), electronic (charge carrier mobility, conductivity), optoelectronic (electroluminescence, photoconductivity) and magnetic (magnetization, ferromagnetic spin interactions) properties and used as active components of devices such as n- and p-channel field effect transistors, ambipolar light emitting transistors, light emitting diodes, photovoltaic cells, photodiodes, magnetic photoswitches, etc. Solution processing procedures developed with the goal of depositing highly ordered and oriented films of these polymers are also described. This is completed by the description of principal methods that are used for characterizing these macromolecular compounds both in solution and in the solid state. These involve various spectroscopic methods (UV-vis-NIR, UPS, pulse EPR), electrochemistry and spectroelectrochemistry, magnetic measurements (SQUID), and structural and morphological investigations (X-ray diffraction, STM, AFM). Finally, four classes of polymers are discussed in detail with special emphasis on the results obtained in the past three years: (i) high IP, (ii) high |EA|, (iii) low band gap and (iv) high spin ones.
Piotr Bujak
Piotr Bujak got his MSc in chemistry from Silesian University of Technology in 2004. In 2008, at the University of Silesia he defended his PhD thesis devoted to the NMR investigation of copolymers. Then he started working at the Department of Inorganic and Coordination Chemistry (University of Silesia), where he developed an effective method for the synthesis of new isoxazolines. In 2012 he accepted the position of a research associate at Warsaw University of Technology, joining the group of Professor Adam Pron, where he presently works on the preparation of electroactive hybrids consisting of inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals functionalized with organic semiconductors.
Irena Kulszewicz-Bajer
Irena Kulszewicz-Bajer obtained her PhD in chemistry from Warsaw University of Technology in 1984. She spent one year in the Laboratory of Inorganic Chemistry at the University of Nancy I in France at the position of “maitre de conference” in 1985. Then she returned to Warsaw University of Technology, at which she has been working till now. In 1991 she worked in Uniax Corporation in Santa Barbara (USA), collaborating with Alan J. Heeger and Paul Smith. She became full professor in 2009. Her research interests involve the synthesis and spectroscopic characterization of π-conjugated materials and high-spin organic compounds.
Malgorzata Zagorska
Malgorzata Zagorska, a University of Warsaw graduate, obtained her PhD in chemistry from Warsaw University of Technology in 1987. Then she moved to Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm (Sweden) where she worked as postdoctoral fellow under the supervision of Goran Ahlgren and Bernd Krische. In 1992–1994 she worked in UNIAX Corporation in Santa Barbara (USA), closely collaborating with Alan J. Heeger. In 1994 she returned to Warsaw University of Technology where she became full professor in 2005. Her research interests involve the synthesis, electrochemistry and spectroelectrochemistry of organic semiconductors as well as their application in organic electronics.
Vincent Maurel
Vincent Maurel obtained his PhD in 2004 from Joseph Fourier University in Grenoble (France) working under the supervision of Serge Gambarelli and Jacques Gaillard. Then he moved to Canada working as a postdoctoral fellow in the team of Professor Tito Scaiano at the University of Ottawa. In 2006 he joined the University of Strasbourg where worked under the supervision of Philippe Turek. Since 2007, he has been working as a researcher at Atomic Energy Commission (CEA) in Grenoble. His research interests involve advanced EPR spectroscopy, molecular magnetism and photocatalysis.
Ireneusz Wielgus
Ireneusz Wielgus was born in 1969 in Warsaw (Poland). In 1993 he obtained his MSc degree in chemistry and chemical engineering from Warsaw University of Technology. In 2000 he defended his PhD thesis at the same university, devoted to conducting polymers and carried out under the supervision of Professor Malgorzata Zagorska. In 2003 he obtained the position of an assistant professor. His research interests involve the synthesis and characterization of specialty polymers.
Adam Pron
Adam Pron was born (1951) and educated in Poland. After obtaining his MSc in chemistry he moved to the USA where in 1980 he completed his PhD at the University of Pennsylvania (under the supervision of Alan G. MacDiarmid). Then he joined the Warsaw University of Technology where he became full professor in 1993. In 1998 he moved to Atomic Energy Commission (CEA) in Grenoble (France). In 2012 he retired from CEA and accepted full-time professorship at Warsaw University of Technology. His research interests involve preparation and characterization of organic electroactive materials and hybrid organic–inorganic nanomaterials.
1 Introduction
Semiconducting and conducting properties of low and high molecular mass organic compounds have been attracting some interest from various scientific communities for more than six decades, although up to the early 70s of the past century a large majority of papers devoted to this domain of research passed essentially unnoticed. Intensive interest in the chemistry, physics and materials science of organic semiconductors and metals started in 1973 after the publication of an important report on high and metallic-type conductivity of tetrathiafulvalene–tetracyanoquinodimethane (TTF–TCNQ).1 A few years later, the discovery of the highly conductive form of polyacetylene – the simplest polyene – stimulated the research directed towards the synthesis of conjugated polymers and elucidation of their electrical properties.2 Up to the early 90s of the past century the majority of published studies dealt with doped polymers, exhibiting a very high conductivity approaching that of metals. Among the plethora of these compounds, two must be mentioned: poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) abbreviated as PEDOT and polyaniline abbreviated as PANI. They are used in their oxidized (polycationic) state and by appropriate choice of the anions compensating the positive charge they can be rendered solution and thermally processable. This facilitates their blending with conventional polymers. Thus, doped PEDOT or PANI can be used as components of transparent electrodes, replacing indium tin oxide (ITO) in organic electronic devices such as light emitting diodes or photovoltaic cells,3,4 as hole transporting materials and in other applications where high conductivity and good compatibility with conventional polymers are needed.5
In this review we will not discuss doped (polycationic) conjugated polymers, frequently showing metallic behaviour,6,7 but rather focus our attention on neutral (undoped) ones which are semiconductors. The interest in polymeric semiconductors aroused in the early 90s after the publication of reports announcing successful fabrication of field effect transistors from polythiophenes,8,9 and oligothiophenes,10 light emitting diodes from poly(p-phenylene vinylene)11 and its dialkoxy-substituted derivative3 and after the introduction of the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) concept to the design of organic photovoltaic cells.12 Since that time several thousands of papers have been published on various aspects of chemistry, physics and engineering of polymers used in organic electronics.
In parallel interest in high spin (magnetic) polymers started to rise.13 They are somehow similar to electronic polymers since they contain ferromagnetic coupling (FC) units of conjugated nature which connect the spin containing (SC) units.14 Moreover magnetic polymers in which spins are present in the form of radical cations very closely resemble doped conjugated polymers, although the macromolecular topology may be different.15,16
As a consequence of this increasing interest, in the past decade several reviews have been published on electronic and magnetic π-conjugated polymers including special issues of Advanced Materials,17Chemical Society Reviews,18 and Chemical Reviews19 entirely devoted to this subject. One should be, however, aware of the fact that in the recent three years the number of reported polymeric semiconductors nearly doubled. Although some papers discussing this progress have been published20,21 a large majority of the recent review publications focus on the description of devices,22,23 their architecture,24 their functioning,25 their stability26 and their application in sensing,27etc. It therefore seems that a review paper discussing in detail the strategies for the synthesis of semiconducting and magnetic polymers, the methods of their characterization as well as the relationship between the applied preparation method and their macromolecular structure is strongly needed in view of the fast growing library of these compounds.
The organization of this review is as follows. In the first part we discuss typical synthetic pathways leading to semiconducting polymers with tunable band gap (Eg), controlled ionization potential (IP) and electron affinity (EA). The effect of the applied synthesis method on the chain microstructure and macromolecular parameters (molecular mass and its distribution) of the resulting polymers is discussed in the next part of the paper. This is followed by the description of the redox and spectroelectrochemical properties of high molecular mass semiconductors which frequently play a diagnostic role in predicting the suitability of a given polymer for electronic or spintronic applications. A short description of the processing techniques and their effect on the supramolecular organization of the polymers in thin layers is then discussed in the subsequent section. This general part is completed by the description of typical electrical transport features of electroactive polymers. In the three subsequent sections different classes of semiconducting polymers are discussed. In the last part of the paper a detailed description of the high spin polymers showing different macromolecular (molecular) topologies and different spin configurations (free radicals or radical ions) is given.
2 Preparation strategies for conjugated polymers and their basic characterization
2.1 Synthetic pathways leading to semiconducting polymers
In the early days of the research focused on electroactive polymers classical polymerization methods were used for their preparation. This involved polymerization of acetylene using either Ziegler–Natta or Luttinger catalysts to yield semiconducting polyacetylene.28 The morphology of this unprocessable polymer could be controlled by the use of liquid crystalline solvent providing a chiral nematic reaction field.29 Polyacetylene was also prepared via ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) of 1,3,5,7-cyclooctatraene (COT)30 or its derivatives.31 This method was also used for the synthesis of poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV) from a bicyclooctadiene derivative.32
Simple unsubstituted or β-substituted heterocyclic monomers of the thiophene, pyrrole or furan family as well as macromonomers containing terminal rings of this type can be oxidatively polymerized (chemically or electrochemically) to yield the corresponding conjugated polymers.33 Electrochemical polymerization of these monomers is limited by the surface area of the working electrode, and for this reason difficult to apply in large scale preparation. In contrast, this obstacle does not exist in the polymerization of pyrroles or thiophenes with iron(III) chloride. Oxidative polymerization of thiophene derivatives with this reagent yields polymers of a higher molecular mass, as compared to electrochemically prepared ones. In the case of asymmetric monomers like 3-alkylthiophenes, for example, the oxidative polymerization route is not regiospecific and yields irregular polymers.34 Their regioregularity degree can be improved by lowering the polymerization temperatures and the concentration of the monomer as demonstrated by Amou et al.35
Much better results were obtained in the case of alkylphenyl-substituted thiophene. Andersson et al.36 reported excellent regioselective synthesis of poly[3-(4-alkylphenyl)thiophene] through oxidative coupling polymerization of 3-(4-octylphenyl)thiophene by slow addition of FeCl3, although the regiocontrol mechanism was not clear. Haba et al.37 also reported that such regioselective oxidative coupling polymerization could be achieved by adding a catalytic amount of vanadium(IV)-oxy acetylacetonate (VO(acac)2) to the reaction mixture. These polymerization reactions, which succeeded in the case of 3-alkylphenylthiophene, failed however for 3-alkylthiophene, as mentioned above. Evidently, the bulky alkylphenyl substituent better prevents head-to-head (HH) coupling, which perturbs the regioregularity of the polymer chain.
The nickel-catalyzed Kumada catalyst transfer polycondensation (KCTP), also known as Grignard metathesis (GRIM) polymerization, turned out to be one of the most convenient ways for the preparation of almost purely head-to-tail (HT) coupled poly(3-alkylthiophenes).
Treatment of 2,5-dibromo-3-hexylthiophene with an alkyl Grignard reagent results in two metalated regioisomers via a magnesium exchange reaction. Introduction of a catalytic amount of Ni(dppp)Cl2 (dppp = 1,3-bis(diphenylphosphino)propane) into this isomeric mixture affords P3HT with regioregularity >99% (Scheme 1). The chain-growth mechanism of the NidpppCl2-initiated polymerization of 3-hexylthiophene (3HT) to yield regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) shows essential features of a quasi-living process as demonstrated by the following findings.38–42 First, the molecular mass of the resulting polymers turned out to be dependent on the monomer to catalyst ratio. In particular their number average molecular mass (Mn) increased linearly with increasing monomer/catalyst feed ratio up to the degrees of polymerization (DP) of ∼120. Second, the measured polydispersity indices (PDIs) were low, usually from 1.2 to 1.4.39,41 Third, this quasi-living polymerization could also be used for the preparation of block copolymers by sequential addition of different 3-alkylthiophene monomers.39 A detailed end-group analysis via1H NMR and MALDI-TOF (Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption and Ionization-Time of Flight mass spectrometry) showed that all P3HT chains uniformly had one hydrogen atom and one bromine atom at the end.41 The GRIM polymerization has been developing very fast and a plethora of conjugated polymers of different chain architectures have recently been prepared by this method.43–46
 Scheme 1  Synthesis of poly(3-hexylthiophene) via the Grignard metathesis (GRIM) method. 
Mechanistic studies are becoming increasingly important since the elucidation of the reaction mechanism can enrich possible applications of KCTP. The extent of the chain regularity control is certainly very high for thiophene-based monomers. Further improvements in this respect are still needed if more complex initiators or monomers are to be used. This involves problems of chain termination, transfer, and reinitiation. The most significant impact could be generated by applying KCTP to the synthesis of n-type, ambipolar, and low band-gap conjugated polymers.45
The nickel-mediated Yamamoto dehalogenation coupling reactions provide an alternative pathway for the polymerization of single monomers or macromonomers47 but they are essentially ineffective in the preparation of regioregular alternating copolymers. The Heck and Sonogashira coupling methods, while effective in this context, are limited in the selection of monomers (macromonomers).48–52
Alternating copolymers consisting of segments of different electron donating/accepting properties have become increasingly important in view of the search for new low band gap semiconductors for ambipolar transistors, photovoltaic cells and near infra-red (NIR) active photodiodes.20,33
The design of these types of polymers is based on the efficient carbon–carbon single bond formation between unsaturated carbons in two different aromatic units. In general, this process involves a transition-metal-catalyzed oxidative addition reaction across the C–X bond of an electrophile and then transmetalation with a main group organometallic nucleophile, followed by a reductive elimination step leading to the desired intermolecular carbon–carbon bond formation. The most commonly employed transition-metal catalysts are nickel- or palladium-based complexes, although other metals have been used. The organometallic nucleophiles can be, already discussed, Grignard reagents (Kumada–Corriu),53 stannyl reagents,54 boron reagents (Suzuki–Miyaura),55 or copper reagents (Sonogashira).56 Thus, the growing conjugated chain can be extended through consecutive transformations in the catalytic cycle. Another advantage is that the applied reaction conditions are generally mild and many functional groups are tolerated.
Stille and Suzuki coupling reactions, using two distinct monomers, are the most efficient and the most widely used methods for preparing alternating copolymers of donor (D)–acceptor (A) type: –(DA)–, –(DAD)– and –(ADA)–. It is noteworthy that stannyl groups-functionalized benzene exhibits low reactivity towards aryl halides under Stille coupling conditions.57 Therefore, Stille coupling is more suitable for thiophene-capped macromonomers substituted with stannyl groups, whereas Suzuki coupling is more widely used for polycondensation of benzene-capped macromonomers functionalized with boronic groups.58 In the past two decades impressive progress has been observed in Stille-type polycondensation.59 There exist however some disadvantages of the Stille-type processes. The synthesis of distannane monomers requires the use of reactive organometallic compounds, such as organolithium or Grignard reagents, which impose problems in the monomer functional group compatibility. Moreover, these difunctionalized monomers are usually difficult to purify when they are not crystallizable. Palladium catalysts are relatively expensive and palladium black formed during the polymerization, which is sometimes difficult to remove, can worsen the semiconducting properties of the resulting polymers. The heteropolycondensation may also be perturbed by homocoupling of the distannane compounds, which changes the stoichiometric balance of the monomers.59 Finally, both Stille and Suzuki couplings yield polymers of relatively low molecular mass, frequently only oligomeric fractions are obtained.
Classical reactions such as the Wittig–Horner reaction or Knoevenagel condensation are also of use in the synthesis of conjugated polymers via the carbon–carbon double bond formation between the respective monomers.60,61
In the very recent years the direct arylation polymerization (DARP) has become increasingly popular. This synthetic procedure represents an economically attractive and ecologically acceptable alternative to the traditional cross-coupling methodologies.62–65 In this method nonfunctionalized (hetero)arenes are employed directly and coupled through C–H bond cleavage. However, since different C–H bonds exhibit comparable dissociation energies, the major challenge is enabling highly regioselective direct arylations for synthetically useful transformations. The regioselectivity of direct arylation can be controlled by the electronic structure of a given arene substrate, which determines its reactivity. Several (hetero)arenes exhibit preferential reactive positions, and this feature is exploited in the highly regioselective metal-catalyzed direct functionalization of both electron-rich and electron-poor arenes. However, reactions of electronically unbiased arenes are often nonselective, yielding undesired mixtures of regioisomers, which are often difficult to separate. This is particularly critical for polycondensations where regioselectivity is of primary importance. Incorporation of an undesired segment into the conjugated backbone may significantly worsen the electronic and optoelectronic properties of the resulting product.
Wang et al.66 successfully polymerized 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene to P3HT in quantitative yields (99%), using Herrmann's Pd-catalyst and tris(2-dimethylaminophenyl)phosphine as catalyst precursors. The obtained polymer showed a relatively high Mn value (30600 Da using polystyrene (PS) standards) and high regioregularity (98%). The same group67 reported the synthesis of aryl group-capped regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene)s by palladium-catalyzed DARP of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene. A variety of aryl groups were installed at the initiated end using aryl bromides and iodides as capping agents. The polymerization proceeds via a two-stage process. In the first stage 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene is consumed, the competitive formation of end capped Ar-P3HT and non-capped P3HT occurs. At this stage Mn increases linearly with the monomer is totally consumed. In the second stage the monomer is consumed, the resulting Ar-P3HT and P3HT are coupled with each other to afford Ar-P3HT with a higher molecular mass.
DARP is also a convenient way of preparing alternating conjugated copolymers. Lu et al.68 prepared a high molecular mass poly(tetrafluorophenylene-alt-dioctylfluorene) by this method.
Leclerc and his coworkers focused on the application of the direct heteroarylation polycondensation method for the synthesis of thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione-based polymers.69 The imide group may act as an orienting and activating group for the hydrogen atoms at 2- and 2′-positions,70 and on this basis, this monomer could be a good candidate for DARP. To prove the concept, the authors69 synthesized an alternating copolymer of this monomer with 4,4′-dialkyl-2,2′-bithiophene by both Stille coupling and DARP (see Scheme 2). The copolymer obtained by Stille coupling showed inferior macromolecular parameters as compared to that synthesized by DARP, Mn being 9000 g mol−1, PDI (polydispersity index) = 1.8 and 56000 g mol−1, PDI = 2.6, respectively.69 This relatively low molecular mass might be related to the loss of some functional groups during the Stille polymerization. Lower molecular mass of the Stille polymer was also manifested by a hypsochromic shift of its π–π*transition band by 10 nm with respect to the position of this band in the spectrum of the DARP polymer (from 474 nm to 464 nm). Finally, the DARP polymer showed a higher melting point, probably also associated with its significantly higher molecular mass. This instructive example clearly demonstrates the potential of the DARP method.
 Scheme 2  Comparison of the Stille versus the direct heteroarylation polymerization (DARP) approach.69 
To recapitulate, the progress in heterocyclic chemistry enabled the synthesis of a large variety of homo- and copolymers with tunable redox, electronic and spectroscopic properties. The most popular preparation methods are collected in Scheme 3.
 Scheme 3  The most popular synthetic routes to prepare semiconducting polymers. 
2.2 Macromolecular parameters
Marcomolecular chain microstructure is of crucial importance for the electrical transport properties of semiconducting polymers. In general regioregular and, where it applies, stereoregular polymers show better electrical parameters than their counterparts with less regular chain structure. HT-coupled P3HT is here an instructive example. Lowering its regioregularity from 96% to 70% results in a decrease of its charge carrier mobility by over three orders of magnitude.71 This is caused not only by a more difficult flow of charge carriers along the polymer chain but also by less ordered supramolecular organization which makes the transport in three dimensions more difficult. Among a large number of methods used for the synthesis of semiconducting polymers only few are regiospecific, therefore nominally the same polymers may differ in their regioregularity and may show different properties.
Other parameters that should be strictly controlled for semiconducting polymers are their molecular mass and its distribution. For polymers showing the same regioregularity degree, spectroscopic, redox and electrical transport properties are strongly dependent on the molecular mass.72 Moreover, this dependence persists at surprisingly high molecular masses.73
Molecular mass of conjugated polymers and its distribution are usually measured by size exclusion chromatography (SEC), using sharp fractions of PS as standards. One should however be aware of the fact that these standards tend to overestimate the molecular mass and this overestimation strongly increases with increasing Mn. This was elegantly demonstrated by comparing Mn determined by SEC and by MALDI-TOF for fractionated regioregular P3HT.74
The majority of synthetic methods used for the preparation of macromolecular semiconductors yield polymers of high PDI. In fact crude polymers are frequently mixtures of oligomers and true high molecular fractions.75 The presence of oligomeric fractions in a given polymeric sample can have a negative impact on the quality of the solution processed thin semiconducting layers. Such studies have been carried out for oligo(dialkylterthiophenes). It has been demonstrated by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) that strictly monodispersed oligomers, deposited on highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) or gold monocrystals, form highly ordered monolayers via self-assembly involving π-stacking and interdigitation of alkyl chains. However, with increasing oligomer length this supramolecular organization undergoes profound changes, being transformed from two-dimensional to one-dimensional.76 Moreover, admixtures of monodispersed oligomers to true high molecular mass fractions result in a quick phase separation. It must therefore be stated that the supramolecular organization of short oligomers is not compatible with that of true polymeric fractions. As a result, for crude non-fractionated polymers, which contain oligomeric fractions, poorly ordered, amorphous layers are obtained upon casting.76 Lack of the PDI control is the main reason for large discrepancies in charge carrier mobilities measured for regioregular polymers of nominally the same Mn.73 Thus, polymers showing large values of PDI should be fractionated before any type of their use in organic electronics or optoelectronics.
2.3 Redox properties
Suitability of the use of semiconducting polymers in a given application is determined by their redox properties and more precisely by their electron affinity (EA) and ionization potential (IP). For example, polymers used as active layers in air operating n-channel field effect transistors (FETs) should be characterized by |EA| > 3.9 eV, whereas for those applied in air operating p-channel FETs IP should be higher than 5.1 eV. For ambipolar transistors both mentioned conditions must be fulfilled. Semiconductors for organic photovoltaic cells must show a narrow band gap so the IP − |EA| term should be low. Therefore polymers that are suitable for ambipolar transistors may under some circumstances be applied in bulk heterojunction solar cells. This, however does not only depend on the IP − |EA| difference but also on the absolute values of IP and EA.33
IP and EA can be determined by photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) and inverse photoelectron spectroscopy (IPES), respectively.77 However, in everyday practice electrochemical methods are frequently used for this purpose.
The determination of IP from cyclic voltammetry investigations is based on the assumption that the formal potential E0ox [E0ox = (Eox(peak) + Ered(peak))/2] of the redox couple corresponding to the oxidation of the neutral macromolecule to a radical polycation and its consecutive reduction to the neutral state is related to the molecule ionization potential. By symmetry, EA can be determined from the formal potential of the redox couple corresponding to the transformation of the neutral macromolecule into a polyradical anion and its subsequent oxidation to the neutral state: E0red [E0red = (Ered(peak) + Eox(peak))/2].
Cyclic voltammogram of low molecular mass semiconductors frequently yields reversible or quasi-reversible redox couples, for which the determination of E0 is unequivocal.78 However for thin layers of polymeric semiconductors, deposited on a platinum electrode, the cyclic voltammograms may be more complex, sometimes yielding peaks of irreversible oxidation (reduction) with no reduction (oxidation) counterpart. Fig. 1 shows a typical cyclic voltammogram of an ambipolar DA copolymer.79 Although it yields a rather clear E0red value, the determination of E0ox is more ambiguous.
 Fig. 1  Cyclic voltammogram of a thin film of poly[(5,5′′′-dioctyl-[2,2′;5′,2′′;5′′,2′′′]quaterthiophene)-alt-(2,7-fluoren-9-one)] deposited on an ITO electrode. Electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 solution in acetonitrile; Ag/Ag+ reference electrode; scan rate 20 mV s−1 [reproduced by permission from R. Demadrille, N. Delbosc, Y. Kervella, M. Firon, R. De Bettignies, M. Billon, P. Rannou and A. Pron, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4661]. 
Very frequently peaks of the oxidation to radical cations and the reduction to radical anions become irreversible and the E0 values cannot be determined. In this case for the calculation of IP the potential of the first oxidation peak onset is taken whereas for the EA calculation – the onset of the first reduction peak.
When determining the EA and IP values one must express these potentials in the absolute potential scale i.e. with respect to the vacuum level. Assuming a value of −5.1 V for the half-wave potential of the Fc/Fc+ couple in non-aqueous electrolytes, IP and EA can be calculated using eqn (1) and (2): IP(eV) = |e|(Eox(onset) + 5.1)(1) EA(eV) = − |e|(Ered(onset) + 5.1)(2)
The value of −5.1 V is taken from the paper of Trasatti.80 One should be however aware of the fact that in the majority of publications devoted to low and high molecular mass organic semiconductors a value of −4.8 V is attributed to the Fc/Fc+ couple. This value is not recommended. Detailed justification for the preferable use of −5.1 V can be found in ref. 81. EA and IP determined electrochemically are frequently termed HOMO and LUMO levels, respectively. This is not rigorously correct since the molecular orbital energies are not observables but originate from quantum chemical approximations. The difference IP – |EA| is, in turn, called “the electrochemical band gap”. In the case of polymers with pronounced electron accepting character it is sometimes difficult to determine electrochemically their IP. Similarly, for strongly electron donating polymers electrochemical determination of EA may constitute a real problem. In these cases EA is sometimes calculated by adding the optical gap energy to IP whereas IP – by subtracting the optical gap energy from EA and changing the sign. Such approach is allowed only under the condition that the HOMO–LUMO transition has a sufficient oscillator strength to be optically detected. Sometimes this is not the case, especially for molecules (macromolecules) for which the HOMO and LUMO orbitals are separated in space.82,83
Differences between the experimental conditions of the UPS and CV measurements of IP and EA should be pointed out. In the former, a thin solid layer of the semiconducting polymer deposited on a metallic substrate like gold in ultra high vacuum is measured in situ. In electrochemical measurements the studied polymeric layer, covering the working electrode is in contact with the electrolyte solution. Low molecular mass semiconductors are frequently studied in the dissolved state, being an additional component of the electrolytic medium.
The final verification of the adequacy of the electrochemical determination of IP and EA is furnished by a very good correlation between the “electrochemically” determined values and those obtained from the photoelectron spectroscopy.84,85
Some polymers give a rather unclear response in a cyclic voltammetry study. In this case spectroelectrochemistry can be of help in determining EA and IP. The spectroelectrochemical method is based on the experimental finding that the onset of the oxidation to a radical polycation or the reduction to a radical polyanion induces profound changes in the UV-vis-NIR and Raman spectra, the latter due to changing resonant conditions. By raising (lowering) the working electrode potential in very small increments with simultaneous registration of the spectrum, it is possible to precisely determine the potential of the oxidation (reduction) onset.86,87
2.4 Structural organization and processing techniques
Appropriate redox properties of a given organic semiconductor constitute only a “conditio sine qua non” of its potential applications in organic electronic devices. In the majority of semiconducting polymers, their electrical transport properties are strongly dependent not only on their chain regularity and molecular mass, as discussed in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, but also on the type of the supramolecular organization which they adopt upon processing. This organization may frequently be considered as the decisive factor in determining the charge carrier mobility. Although, for some high molecular mass semiconductors like poly(triarylamine)s, reasonable charge carrier mobilities are measured for thin amorphous layers,88 in the case of macromolecules consisting of a stiff conjugated backbone and flexible, solubilizing side groups of alkyl- or alkoxy-type, the electrical transport properties depend on the crystallinity index and the degree of macromolecules orientation.33 These polymers have a tendency to form ordered supramolecular aggregates through π-stacking and interdigitation of the flexible side substituents, as schematically depicted in Fig. 2. Such a structure gives rise to three characteristic Bragg reflections in the diffractograms of thin layers: an intensive reflection at low angles which corresponds to a distance between the π-stacks of conjugated polymer chains separated by lateral groups. This distance is determined by the length of the solubilizing groups and the degree of their interdigitation. For the polymers described in this review it varies between 1.5 nm and 2.8 nm. In the case of lateral groups of different lengths, coexisting in the same repeating unit, it is imposed by the longest substituent.87 The second less intensive reflection is attributed to the distance between π-stacked parallel conjugated chains which, for the polymers described here, varies from 0.36 nm to 0.42 nm. Usually, the charge carrier mobilities are higher for structured polymers in which the π-stacking distance is inferior to 0.38 nm. The third feature is a broader halo whose maximum corresponds to 0.44 nm – the alkyl interchain correlation distance. The described structural arrangement is remarkably robust. It can be found not only in homopolymers like P3HT but also in the majority of conjugated polymers containing a long lateral solubilizing group which are isomorphic with this structure.33
 Fig. 2  Possible structural arrangement of a semiconducting polymer, consisting of a stiff conjugated backbone and flexible lateral solubilizing groups, with respect to the substrate. 
Based on the available crystallographic data no precise information can be gained concerning the exact ordering along the polymer chain as well as the exact chain stacking pattern. It can, however, be postulated that these two factors may influence the charge carrier mobility.
In real devices semiconducting polymers are used in the form of thin layers, usually deposited from solution. Taking into account strong anisotropy of these compounds, the orientation of the macromolecules in the layer becomes of crucial importance. This problem can be illustrated using a typical top gate-bottom contact field effect transistor or a bottom gate-bottom contact one, schematically shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Thin film field effect transistors (FETs) of different configurations. 
In the first case (top gate-bottom contact), the source and drain gold electrodes are usually patterned on a polyester substrate and then the semiconductor layer is deposited on them by one of the usually used solution processing technique. The orientation of the macromolecules on the substrate/semiconductor interface determines the direction of π-stacking with respect to the substrate surface. If macromolecules lie flat on the surface of the substrate, the π-stacking direction is perpendicular to the substrate (see Fig. 2a). If they adopt the edge-on position (Fig. 2b), the π-stacking direction is parallel to the substrate/semiconductor interface. Evidently, different electrical transport properties are expected for these two orientations.
Frequently, in FETs an inorganic dielectric is used, for example a SiO2 layer grown on the surface of the gate in the bottom gate-bottom contact configuration. In this case, again, the flat (face-on) and edge-on positions can be adopted. Macromolecules of semiconducting polymers usually adopt the latter position on SiO2 and polyester substrates being either perpendicular or slightly tilted with respect to the plane of the interface. The flat position (Fig. 2a) is rare and is usually found on layers deposited on the HOPG surface, where π interactions between the macromolecule and the substrate are very strong.
In devices where oriented crystalline aggregation is needed like in bulk heterojunction-type solar cells, the formation of highly crystalline polymer nanofibers, through special processing, greatly improves the measured device parameters.89
All these examples discussed above underline the importance of the supramolecular organization control through the selection of an appropriate processing method. There are several processing techniques used for the deposition of thin polymeric layers from solution: dip coating, spin coating, dip casting, zone casting, directional solidification, etc. The last two are especially suitable for the fabrication of oriented layers.
The zone casting method was developed more than 30 years ago for the preparation of thin layers of oriented polymers on large surfaces.90 Upon development of organic electronics it has been used for depositing both low and high molecular mass semiconductors.91–93 In the zone casting procedure a solution of a given polymer is dispensed on a moving substrate through a nozzle. By controlling the substrate speed and its temperature as well as the solution concentration, temperature and dispensing rate, it is possible to induce the orientation of the macromolecules near the drying zone.
Oriented films of semiconducting polymers can also be obtained by directional solidification.94 In this case a crystallizable solvent is used, for example 1,3,5-trichlorobenzene (TCB) for P3HT. Cooling of a solution of this polymer in TBC on a special hot bar induces first directional crystallization of the solvent along the temperature gradient with the formation of large TBC crystals of crystallographically well defined surfaces. These crystals coexist with the remaining P3HT solution whose concentration increases with ongoing crystallization of TBC crystals. Above a given concentration of the polymer, its deposition on the surface of TBC crystals occurs with the formation of an oriented polymer layer, showing improved crystallinity. Crystalline TBC is then removed by sublimation.
A modification of this method involves the deposition of P3HT on the crystallographically well defined surface of potassium 4-bromobenzoate (K-BrBz), followed by the polymer melting and its subsequent cooling to the temperature of isothermal, epitaxial crystallization of P3HT on the K-BrBz surface. This is followed by rapid cooling of the system to RT. The K-BrBz substrate is then removed by dissolution.95
Another widely used epitaxial processing technique, leading to oriented polymer films, is the epitaxy on the friction transferred poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) substrate. This method consists of fabrication of an oriented PTFE substrate by sliding a PTFE rod against a glass slide. A thin polymer film is then deposited on this substrate, usually by doctor-blading. It subsequently undergoes thermal cycling involving quick melting and slow constant rate cooling. The described procedure was proven to be extremely efficient in preparing oriented films of semiconducting polymers.96,97
Epitaxial solidification methods are interesting processing techniques, however difficult to apply on large surfaces. The orientation of macromolecules in thin films of semiconducting polymers deposited by classical casting or spin coating can greatly be improved by mechanical rubbing.98
Uniaxial alignment of macromolecules in the solid state is greatly facilitated for polymers showing lyotropic liquid crystallinity. In these cases the alignment can be induced by an applied flow field. By optimizing this method thin polymeric layers, showing high orientation in grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction investigations as well as a high dichroic ratio, were obtained.99
2.5 Electrical transport properties
Metals, semiconductors and insulators are characterized by different values of conductivity. The conductivity, σ, is defined as the ratio of the current density J to the magnitude of the electric field and usually expressed in [S cm−1] or [S m−1] (eqn (3)): J = σE(3)
Room temperature conductivity varies from 106 S cm−1 for the best conductors like silver or copper to 10−21 S cm−1 for the most insulating materials such as PTFE. Doped conjugated polymers such as polycationic form of PEDOT or PANI reach conductivities of the order of 102–103 S cm−1. Conductivity of these highly conductive materials has to be measured by the 4-probe method which eliminates the contact resistance.
When discussing neutral conjugated polymers which are semiconductors, in the context of their application in organic electronic devices, it is better to use mobility as a parameter describing their electrical properties. The relationship between the conductivity and the charge carrier mobility is given by eqn (4): σ = neeμe + nheμh [cm2 V−1 s−1](4)where μe and μh are the mobilities of electrons and holes, ne and nh – their number densities and e is the elementary charge.
In conjugated polymers usually one type of charge carriers is present or the two different charge carriers significantly differ in their mobilities. In such cases one of the two terms of eqn (4) can be neglected. Conjugated polymers reach the mobilities of a few cm2 V−1 s−1, much less than inorganic semiconductors. Mobility is one of the key parameters that determine the efficacy of electronic and optoelectronic devices and its highest values are desirable which can be reached only by the synthesis of highly regular polymers with good macromolecular parameters and optimized supramolecular organization.
There exist several techniques of measuring charge carriers transport in organic semiconductors such as space-charge-limited current (SCLC), time of flight (TOF), carrier extraction by linearly increasing voltage (CELIV), photogenerated charges in CELIV (photo-CELIV), double injection (DoI) and impedance spectroscopy (IS). We will not discuss them here since they are excellently reviewed in recent review papers.100,101 Here, we will limit ourselves to a brief description of the determination of charge carrier mobility from the characteristics of a field effect transistor (FET). This practical approach has recently become very popular.
The two popular FET configurations are schematically depicted in Fig. 3. In this three-electrode device the source and the drain electrodes form an ohmic contact with the conducting channel. The source electrode is grounded and all other voltages are given in relation to this electrode. Charge carriers are injected from the source electrode and collected at the drain one. The semiconducting polymer layer is separated from the gate electrode by a thin dielectric layer (either polymeric or inorganic). The gate electrode controls the current in the active layer of the organic semiconductor by capacitive coupling of the dielectric layer.
There are two principal characteristics describing functioning of a given transistor: the output and the transfer characteristics (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Typical output (a) and transfer (b) characteristics of a polymeric field effect transistor. 
The output characteristics are a set of plots of the drain–source current (IDS) versus the drain voltage (VDS) for varying gate voltages (VGS). For output characteristics two regions can be distinguished: the linear one and the saturated one (see Fig. 4a). For the transfer characteristics IDS is plotted as a function of VGS for a constant value of VDS. In the saturation region (VDS > VGS − VT, where VT is the threshold voltage defined in Fig. 4b) of the output curve the IDS can be expressed as follows (eqn (5)): (5)where W and L are the width and length of the conduction channel, respectively; μ is the charge carrier mobility, CS is the capacitance per unit area of the dielectric layer and VT is the threshold voltage. For the calculation of μ in the saturation regime, the slope of the transfer characteristics IDS1/2vs. VGS (VDS = constant) can be used.
One should be careful in comparing the mobility values obtained by different methods (for example from TOF and FET measurements) since the charge generation methods are different (field effect and photogeneration, respectively) as well as the configurations of the measurement. However, they play an important predictive role in selecting new semiconductors suitable for fabrication of devices. In the description of the electrical properties of semiconducting polymers, discussed in the subsequent sections, we always indicate by which method the charge carrier mobility was obtained.
3 Polymeric semiconductors with n-type conductivity
From the point of view of their electrical transport properties, semiconducting polymers can be classified as electron (n-type semiconductors) or hole transporting (p-type semiconductors) or ambipolar materials according to the type of orderly transferring charge carriers, under a given set of conditions.102
Charge transport in conjugated polymers is a series of successive charge transfers between their neutral and charged repeat units. In n-type semiconductors this process involves the transfer of an electron from the half occupied LUMO level of the radical anion segment to the empty LUMO level of the adjacent neutral segment. As clearly stated in Section 2.3, these polymers should exhibit a low lying LUMO level and as a consequence a high value of |EA|. These are rather harsh requirements for synthetic and polymer chemists and for this reason n-type polymeric semiconductors are scarcer than the p-channel ones.33 However, over the past two decades, and especially in the last few years, some progress has been made in developing solution processable n-type polymers, largely due to the improvement in the synthetic techniques yielding high molecular mass semiconductors, in which a delicate balance between their redox properties, adequate solubility and appropriate supramolecular organization in the solid state has been established.103–106
Two general methods of solubilizing stiff backbone polymers are usually applied. The non-covalent route involves complexation of the macromolecules with an appropriate Lewis acid or protonation with a functionalized Brønsted acid, provided that appropriate complexation or protonation sites are present in their repeat units. In the covalent route flexible, alkyl- or alkoxy-type type side groups are grafted to the polymer backbone. The introduced lateral substituents should not, however, perturb the π-stacking of the stiff polymer backbones in the solid state. This π-stacking is of crucial importance for the transport properties since strong electronic coupling between the π-systems on adjacent macromolecules promotes high electron mobility. Air stability under operating conditions is another key parameter for the application of n-type organic semiconductors. They are usually stable in air in the neutral state but upon injection of electrons from the electrode some of their parts are temporarily transformed into radical polyanions, which are prone to irreversibly react with H2O or O2 in air. It is experimentally established that the semiconductor showing |EA| > 3.9 eV does not degrade under air operating conditions.107
A large majority of n-type polymeric semiconductors have been prepared through functionalization of rylene constituents such as naphthalene-1,8:4,5-tetracarboxylic bisimide and perylene-3,4:11,12-tetracarboxylic bisimide.108 Interest in rylene bisimides and other aromatic bisimides has its origin in long dated observations that for this family of compounds redox, electrical transport and processing properties can be precisely tuned by the size of the conjugated core and by variation of the substituents on the imide nitrogen atoms or on the rylene skeleton. Rylene bisimides can exhibit relatively high electron affinities, high electron mobilities, and excellent chemical, thermal, and photochemical stabilities.108
Poly(benzobisimidazobenzophenanthroline) (n3.1) (Fig. 5) was first synthesized via condensation of naphthalene tetracarboxylic acid and tetraminobenzene.109 This ladder-type polymer can be solubilized by complexation or protonation. It was used for the fabrication of active layers in the first n-channel polymer FET showing high electron mobility.110 Due to the very strong intermolecular π–π stacking of the rigid ladder polymer main chain, n3.1 exhibits high glass transition temperature Tg (>500 °C). It undergoes a reversible reduction to a radical polyanion state (n-type doping), and its |EA| = 4.0 eV. Organic field effect transistors (OFETs) based on thin layers of n3.1, spin-coated from methanesulfonic acid, showed an electron mobility (μe) of 0.03–0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 and the Ion/Ioff ratio of 5 × 105, after annealing at 105 °C (Table 1). Electron diffraction data indicated that thin films of n3.1 cast from methanesulfonic acid were semicrystalline. Briseno et al.111 obtained highly oriented nanobelts of n3.1 by injecting a solution of this polymer in methanesulfonic acid into a mixture of methanol and water which resulted in nanophase separation. In these nanobelts, the polymer chains are oriented parallel to the nanobelt axis (i.e., face-to-face, perpendicular to the nanobelt axis) with an unusually short stacking distance of 0.336 nm. This unique packing differs from that observed in other conjugated polymers, for example in P3HT nanowires, where the polymer backbone packs face-to-face along the nanowire direction.73 The unique packing in n3.1 nanobelts arises from the extraordinary strength of intermolecular contacts, which is a result of the rigid and planar molecular backbone of this polymer. N-channel FETs fabricated from the nanobelts showed electron mobilities of (3–7) × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and current on/off ratios of ∼1 × 104 (Table 1).111 Ambipolar transistors were also fabricated from blends of n3.1 and p-type semiconductor polymers, namely poly[(thiophene-2,5-diyl)-alt-(2,3-diheptylquinoxaline-5,8-diyl)] and poly[(10-hexylphenoxazine-3,7-diyl)-alt-(3-hexyl-2,5-thiophene)]112 or from mixtures of n3.1 with copper phthalocyanine.113
 Fig. 5  Polymers used in n-channel transistors. 
Table 1 Polymeric semiconductors for n-channel FETs; Mn, PDI, |EA| and IP, transistor parameters and OFET device structure




 

M
n (Da)/PDI
IP/|EA|/eV

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)

I
on/Ioff

V
T (V)
Device structure (deposition technique)
Ref.




BGBC – bottom-gate/bottom-contact, BGTC – bottom-gate/top-contact, TGBC – top-gate/bottom-contact, [a.o] – air operating, [i.o] – inert atmosphere operating, [v.o.] – vacuum operating.





n3.1

—/—
—/4.0–4.5
3 × 10−2
5 × 105
—
BGBC (solution deposition); annealing at 105 °C [ a.o.]

110





60000/—
–/4.2
3–7 × 10−3
1 × 104
11–12
BGBC (solution deposition) [a.o.]

111




n3.2A

—/—
—/—
1.9 × 10−3
1 × 104
6
BGTC (solution deposition) [a.o.]

115




n3.2B

—/—
—/—
5.5 × 10−3
3.3 × 104
6
BGTC (solution deposition) [a.o.]

115




n3.3

47800/5.5
5.36/3.91
6 × 10−2
—
—
BGTC (solution deposition)

118





51000/5.5
5.36/3.91
0.1–0.85
106–107
5–10
TGBC with ActivInk D2200 dielectric (solution deposition) [a.o.]

119





Polyera, ActivInkTM N2200
0.1–0.3
∼106
∼10
TGBC with PMMA dielectric (solution deposition) [a.o.]

120





46900/2.1
5.30/3.79
3.9 × 10−2
105
10
BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 150 °C [v.o.]

128




n3.4

11000/2.9
5.61/3.96
2 × 10−3
—
—
BGTC (solution deposition)

118




n3.5A

14500/2.5
5.62/3.85
3.1 × 10−3
103
20
BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 150 °C [v.o.]

128




n3.5B

153000/2.2
5.13/3.76
7.6 × 10−2
105
7
BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 150 °C [v.o.]

128




n3.6

42400/2.6
5.95/3.94
7 × 10−2
105
15
BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

129




n3.7

15000/1.5
5.9/3.9
1.3 × 10−2
104
4.4
BGTC (solution deposition) [i.o.]

130





—/—
5.9/3.9
6 × 10−2
104
7
TGBC with PAN/PS dielectric (solution deposition) [a.o.]

132




n3.8

5700/1.4
5.5/3.9
1.2 × 10−3
103
8.6
BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 100 °C [v.o.]

131




n3.9

3500/2.2
6.3/3.5
1.1 × 10−2
2 × 107
∼75
BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 240 °C [v.o.]

133





3600/2.2
6.3/3.5
1.1 × 10−2
2 × 104
93
BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 300 °C [v.o.]

135





7200/2.0
6.3/3.5
3.8 × 10−2
2 × 106
68
BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 300 °C [v.o.]

135





7200/2.0
6.3/3.5
0.19
105
76
TGBC with ActivInk D2200 dielectric (solution deposition) annealing at 110 °C [v.o.]

135




n3.10

57000/3.5
5.0/3.7
1.3 × 10−3
—
—
BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 80 °C [i.o]

137




n3.11

6700/3.5
5.8/4.3
0.16
107
5
TGBC (solution deposition) annealing at 110 °C [a.o.]

148




n3.12

14000/3.6
5.0/4.4
5.8 × 10−4
—
—
BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 150 °C [i.o]

149




n3.13

—/—
—/—
1.2 × 10−3
3.3 × 104
6.8
BGBC (solution deposition) annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

150





More recently, n3.1 was functionalized by grafting poly(ethylene oxide) chains to render it water dispersible. Cyclic voltammograms recorded for a drop cast layer of this functionalized polymer showed that it retained its reversible reduction (n-doping) properties.114
Poly(1,10-phenanthroline-3,8-diyl) and poly(3-nonyl-1,10-phenanthroline-3,8-diyl) show no semiconducting properties when uncomplexed. Upon complexation (1:1) with RuII(bpy)2 (n3.2A and n3.2B) (Fig. 5) they can be applied as semiconductors in n-channel FETs115 showing electron mobilities of 1.9 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 5.5 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for n3.2A and n3.2B, respectively (Table 1).115
Alternating copolymers of arylene bisimide and bithiophene i.e. poly{[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-1,4,5,8-naphthalenedicarboximide-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene)}, n3.3 and poly{[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-3,4,9,10-perylenedicarboximide-1,7-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene)}, n3.4 (Fig. 5), were synthesized via a Pd-catalyzed Stille polymerization.116,117 For n3.3 Chen et al.118 reported an electron mobility of 0.06 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 1) and reasonable operating stability. Four weeks after fabrication μe dropped to 0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1. Surprisingly, this value was 30 times higher than the carrier mobility measured for its perylene bisimide analogue (n3.4), processed and measured under identical conditions. This difference can be rationalized by better regioregularity of n3.3. During the synthesis of perylenebisimide dibromide, which is one of the reagents for the preparation of n3.4, two regioisomers are formed, namely 1,6- and 1,7-dibromo, which are difficult to separate. Even a small amount of the undesired regioisomer in the reaction mixture lowers the regioregularity of the resulting polymer.
An improvement in μe (values of 0.1–0.85 cm2 V−1 s−1 with on/off ratios > 106) measured for n3.3 in the FET configuration was later reported by Yan et al.119 for transistors operating under ambient conditions. n3.3 seems to be much more promising for technological applications than its perylene analogue n3.4.118 It is available as a commercial product of Polyera (ActiveInk™ N2200). The characteristics of OFETs with active layers of n3.3 are strongly dependent on the processing conditions. In particular strictly orthogonal dielectric solvents must be used at each deposition step, with special emphasis on the deposition of the dielectric layer. Both spin-coated and inkjet-printed n3.3-based FETs exhibited reasonably high values of field-effect mobility of 0.1–0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 1) with poly(methyl methacrylate) as the gate dielectric when carefully selected orthogonal solvents were used for processing.120 The value of μe decreased by one order of magnitude if a solvent showing worse orthogonality (e.g. 1,2-dichloroethane) was used. The value of μe decreased dramatically, to 0.005 cm2 V−1 s−1, with poly(4-vinyl phenol) (PVP) as the dielectric material, despite the fact that the processing was carried out with a perfectly orthogonal solvent (1-butanol). This drop was rationalized by electron trapping by the hydroxyl groups in PVP. X-ray scattering experiments reveal that n3.3 exhibits an exceptional degree of in-plane ordering and adopts a largely face-on packing.121 These excellent in-plane transport properties can be obtained with a face-on packing texture, which is not a common crystallographic feature for n-type high field effect mobility semiconducting polymers. However, it is similar to the case of p-type semiconductors, where the best transport properties are attained for a high degree of in-plane π-stacking of the conjugated chains of soluble polythiophene derivatives, facilitating two-dimensional (2D) transport in the plane of the substrate.122–124 The implications of the high performance face-on packing in the layers of n3.3 are important for further development of related n-type and ambipolar materials. In plane π-stacking is important for FET applications in configurations depicted in Fig. 2 where the electron transport is limited to a very thin layer at the substrate/semiconductor or semiconductor/dielectric interface and the in-plane stacking plays a dominant role. For other applications like in light emitting diodes (LEDs) or photovoltaic cells (PC) bulk electron mobility is equally important. Steyrleuthner et al.125 used the TOF technique to determine this parameter, demonstrating that layers of n3.3 exhibit also one of the highest TOF mobility values reported for polymeric semiconductors.
Rivnay and coworkers126 demonstrated that the supramolecular organization in thin films of n3.3 can be modified by post-deposition processing. When spin-coated films are heated to melting and then controllably cooled down, the orientation of lamellae changes from predominantly face-on orientation to almost 100% edge-on one. At the same time a 2 fold increase in the crystallinity index is observed. Evidently, this post-deposition processing moves the polymer phase closer to the thermodynamic equilibrium. The observed drastic change of the texture does not influence the FET configuration mobility. This means that the structural modifications either do not occur at the semiconductor/dielectric interface or they are not the limiting factor for the in-plane electrical transport. In contrast in the electron-only diode a six-fold decrease in the current density was observed, showing the importance of the texture effects in the bulk electrical transport.
Brinkmann et al.97 used two different processing techniques to fabricate highly oriented films, namely on a crystallizable solvent (1,3,5-trichlorobenzene in this case) and epitaxy on friction transferred PTFE substrates (see Section 2.4). Both methods lead to highly ordered, oriented supramolecular organization, however with different π-stacking patterns. Directional epitaxial crystallization results in the formation of a polymorphic structure in which segregated stacking of naphthalene bisimide and bithiophene is observed. Both segments form separate stacking columns. Epitaxial growth on friction transferred PTFE yields a different type polymorph, in which a shift between successive π-stacked chains occurs leading to mixed stacking in which bithiothene segments π-overlap with bisimide ones.
Solutions of n3.3 in different solvents were studied by Steyrleuthner et al.127 in view of optimizing the process of thin films casting. Six different solvents were tested: chloronaphthalene, toluene, chloroform and three different chloroderivatives of benzene. It turned out that only the first one, whose solubility parameter is closest to that of the polymer, yields the true solutions. In the remaining solvents aggregates are formed even at low concentrations. The aggregation process occurs via an intermediate state in which initial aggregates (type 1) are replaced by thermodynamically more stable ones (type 2). Since both types of aggregates exhibit distinctly different spectroscopic features (both in absorption and in emission spectra), it is possible to quantitatively differentiate them. In solid films type 2 aggregates dominate. It is possible to obtain films containing type 1 aggregates by using a mixed solvent consisting of chloronaphthalene (good solvent with high boiling point) and chlorobenzene (poor solvent with low boiling point). However, upon annealing of the film type 1 agglomerates are gradually transformed into more stable type 2 ones.
Durban et al. synthesized a series of three alternating copolymers of naphthalene bisimide and either thiophene or bithiophene or terthiophene (n3.5A, n3.3 and n3.5B) (Fig. 5).128 The effect of the length of the thiophene segment on the redox, structural and electronic properties is clearly observed. The IP and |EA| values decrease with the number of thiophene units, which means that both HOMO and LUMO levels are being raised. Taking into account only the redox properties, n3.5A should be the best candidate for the application in n-channel FETs. In reality, the opposite is observed, since in identically fabricated transistors, the lowest μe and the highest threshold voltage are measured for the n3.5A-based one (Table 1). This can be rationalized by differences in the structural organization of the polymer thin layers. The lamellar ordering improves with increasing length of the thiophene segment, facilitating in this manner the transport of charge carriers. One should also comment on a lower μe reported for n3.3 in this paper and the values given in ref. 119 and 120. This is caused by the fact that Durban et al. chose the bottom gate-top contact configuration for their transistors whereas in the above quoted papers top gate-bottom contact transistors are described. The value of μe reported by Durban128 is only slightly lower than that given in ref. 118 whose authors tested transistors of the same configuration (BGTC).
Recently Hwang and coworkers129 synthesized the biselenophene analogue of n3.3i.e. poly{[N,N′-bis(2-decyltetradecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-biselenophene)}, n3.6, (Fig. 5) by Stille coupling polymerization of N,N-bis(2-decyltetradecyl)-2,6-dibromo naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide) and 5,5′-bis(trimethylstannyl)-2,2′-biselenophene in the presence of Pd2(dba)3 and P(o-tolyl)3 in chlorobenzene. This new n-type semiconductor showed a highly ordered structural organization of lamellar type in thin layers. As a consequence its μe measured for transistors in the BGTC configuration (0.07 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 1) was comparable to that reported for n3.3 for the same configuration.118
Stille coupling was also used for the synthesis of an alternating copolymer containing perylene bisimide and a fused thiophene unit, namely dithienothiophene n3.7 (Fig. 5). In this synthesis N-dialkyl-1,7-dibromo-3,4,9,10-perylene bisimide was reacted with distannylated dithienothiophene.130,131 The resulting, solution processable polymer n3.7 showed μe as high as 1.3 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 a low threshold voltage of ca. 4.4 V in the bottom-gate OFET configuration (Table 1).130 Air operating, top-gate OFETs, with a polyacrylonitrile (PAN)/PS dielectric layer, exhibited a μe value of 6 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, Ion/Ioff 104 and a threshold voltage of 7 V in air (Table 1).132n3.7 differs from n3.4 in its thiophene unit (Fig. 5). Replacing bithiophene by fused dithienothiophene stiffens the polymer chain and promotes π-stacking and as a consequence better supramolecular organization can be achieved. Not surprisingly, in a similar device geometry, n3.7 shows better electrical transport properties than n3.4.118

n3.8 (Fig. 5) i.e. an alternating copolymer of perylenebisimide and N-n-dodecyldithienopyrrole differs from n3.7 by the presence of an N-alkylpyrrole ring in the fused heterocyclic unit. It was synthesized by palladium-catalyzed coupling of dibromo-derivatives of perylene bisimide with N-n-dodecyldithienopyrrole.131 Incorporation of the pyrrole moiety into the polymer backbone raises the polymer HOMO level which is manifested by a decrease of its IP by 0.4 eV as compared to n3.7 (Table 1). This can be considered as a clear manifestation of stronger electron-donating properties of the pyrrole ring as compared to the thiophene one. The EA value remains unaffected by this change. Significantly lower electron mobilities, μe, were measured for n3.8 than for n3.7 in FETs of the same configuration. This can be tentatively attributed to lower Mn of n3.7 (Table 1). The strong effect of molecular mass on FET mobility was reported for several semiconducting polymers.72a–c,73,127
Letizia et al.133 reported the synthesis of an interesting polymer in which the electron withdrawing imide group was integrated directly into the conjugated poly(bithiophene) main chain. This poly(N-alkyl-2,2′-bithiophene-3,3′-dicarboximide) n3.9 depicted in Fig. 5 was obtained by Yamamoto polycondensation of the corresponding dibromo-functionalized monomer.134 Films of n3.9 deposited on a SiO2 surface, which was rendered hydrophobic through the treatment with hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS), after annealing are highly oriented and show a high degree of structural ordering. In their diffractograms a set of Bragg reflections, originating from the same family (up to 5th order) and corresponding to a d-spacing of 2.51 nm, can be observed. If no interdigitation of alkyl groups is assumed, this spacing imposes a tilt angle of the macromolecule with respect to the substrate of 70°. Partial interdigitation would increase the value of this angle. In earlier studies, mobilities of ca. 0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1 were measured for n3.9 in the FET configuration which was remarkably independent of the film-deposition conditions (Table 1). More recent studies concentrated on the effect of Mn on the morphology and electrical transport properties of n3.9.135 It was found that both the crystallinity of the polymer thin layers and μe increased with the molecular mass. Through device optimization using top-gate/bottom-contact OFET architecture, it was possible to fabricate n3.9-based FETs exhibiting a high electron mobility of ∼0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1.135
Alternating copolymers of n3.9 and monothiophene, bithiophene and quaterthiophene were also reported.135 Their electrochemically determined |EA| and IP decrease with increasing number of the thiophene rings. This means that both HOMO and LUMO are being raised as a consequence of increasing electron donating effect of the thiophene unit. As a consequence their ambipolar electrical properties become increasingly pronounced and they exhibit field effect in both n-channel and p-channel configurations. Copolymers of N-alkyl-2,2′-bithiophene-3,3′-dicarboximide and oligodialkylbithiophenes in thin layers showed ordered supramolecular organization similar to that of poly(alkylthiophene) where π-stacked conjugated chains are separated by interdigitating alkyl substituents.
Diaryl derivatives of diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) constitute convenient building blocks for the preparation of semiconducting alternating copolymers with tunable n-type and p-type conducting properties. Over 70 semiconducting polymers of this family have been synthesized to date. We will not discuss them in detail since an excellent review on this subject has recently appeared.136 We will rather describe the strategy used in the design of such polymers using a few instructive examples.
The repeat unit of an alternating conjugated copolymer containing the dithienyl DPP unit can be depicted as shown in Scheme 4.
 Scheme 4  General formula of alternating conjugated polymers containing dithienyl diketopyrrolopyrrole (DT DPP) building blocks. 
The redox properties of the resulting copolymer and as a consequence its capability of conducting holes or electrons in a given configuration are determined by a delicate balance of electron donating/accepting properties of DT DPP and the π building blocks. If in the macromolecule DT DPP alternates with a strongly accepting unit like for example bis-benzothiadiazole (BisBT) (n3.10 in Fig. 5), the resulting polymer has predominantly n-type character with μe significantly higher than μh.137 Replacing BisBT with dialkylbithiophene i.e. lowering of the electron accepting ability of the π-segment leads to an almost purely ambipolar transistor with well balanced μe and μh of 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1.138 If the π-segment is strongly electron donating, like N-alkyl-2,7-carbazole, the semiconducting polymer is purely p-channel in behaviour showing a μh of 0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1.139
Ambipolarity is a technologically interesting feature and ambipolar organic semiconductors have gained much attention because of their potential use in complementary circuits and light-emitting field-effect transistors (LFETs),140,141 including those emitting in the infrared.138 In particular, there is significant interest in the application of ambipolar polymers in FETs, because of their capability of hole and electron transport within the same material, which can simplify the circuit design and offers processing simplicity and flexibility to fabricate low cost, flexible, and portable devices.142–144 Moreover, some ambipolar semiconductors can also be used as components of bulk heterojunction solar cells because of their low band gap. This embraces, among others, polymers such as poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-dithieno[3,2-b]thiophene) or its copolymer with thiophene,145 poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-alt-terthiophene)146 or a terpolymer consisting of diketopyrrolopyrrole, 1,4-phenylene and bithiophene units.147
Polymers containing oligothiophene and indenofluorenebis(dicyanovinylene) segments also exhibit ambipolar behavior with comparable hole and electron mobilities. This proves that electron withdrawing properties of the cyano units are sufficiently strong to assure n-type semiconductor behavior, despite the fact that they are separated by quaterthiophene segments. Usta et al.148 discussed the synthetic strategy used for the preparation of such polymers and reported several derivatives of indenofluorenebis(dicyanovinylene) prepared either by Stille or by Yamamoto coupling whose electrical and structural properties could be tuned. For semiconductors with low-lying LUMO level (high |EA|) (n3.11, Fig. 5), these authors148 observed air-stable n-type behavior with electron mobilities of up to 0.16 cm2 V−1 s−1 and exceptionally high on/off ratios 107–108 (Table 1).148
Stecker et al. reported a new soluble, spray-processable, donor–acceptor polymer n3.12 (Fig. 5), which was synthesized by C–C coupling polymerization of the strong donor, N-(3,4,5-tris(dodecyloxy)phenyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole, with a strong acceptor 4,8-di(2-thienyl)benzo[1,2-c;4,5-c′]bis[1,2,5]thiadiazole via Stille methodology.57,149n3.12 shows a very low optical band gap of 0.5–0.6 eV. These values suggest the possibility of facile injection of both holes and electrons from commonly used electrodes, and therefore of ambipolar charge transport. Ambipolar OFETs based on n3.12 exhibit hole and electron mobilities of 1.2 × 10−3 and 5.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively.149
An interesting, and distinctly different than those presented above, approach to the preparation of n-type semiconductors was proposed by Hüttner et al.150 who obtained a saturated main chain polymer with perylene bisimide pendant groups, namely poly(perylene bisimide acrylate) (n3.13, Mn = 30900 g mol−1, PDI = 1.86) (Fig. 5). Since the pendant groups were connected together by a flexible main chain, their strong π-interactions were not impeded. As a result side groups crystallization occurred,151 which was manifested by a clear polymer melting point at 190 °C. As spun films yielded rather poor electron mobilities in the bottom gate FET configuration. They could be, however, greatly improved by over 2 orders of magnitude by annealing at 210 °C, i.e. above the melting temperature of the side groups (Table 1). These results suggest that after annealing the perylene bisimide side groups become highly structured at the dielectric/active layer interface forming an efficient n-channel.
Interestingly, very similar results were obtained for a diblock copolymer of poly(perylene bisimide acrylate) and PS (70:30%; Mn = 37900 g mol−1; PDI = 1.52). The main reason for the improvement in the charge carrier transport after annealing lies in the microphase separation, observed only in the annealed layers. Cylindrical domains of poly(perylene bisimide acrylate) blocks are formed within the polystyrene phase and they are preferentially located at the interface with the dielectric. This phenomenon is widely known and originates from the strong surface interaction with one of the blocks.152
These two types of semiconducting polymers, described here, are more similar to low molecular mass arylene bisimides rather than to their high molecular mass analogues. They differ from the low molecular compounds only by restricted mobility due to their grafting to a saturated polymer chain.
Only a fraction of polymers which are capable of transporting electrons show field effect in the n-channel FET configuration. Other applications of these polymeric materials involve organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), where they can serve as electron transporting layers.
The role of electron transporting polymers in OLEDs can be briefly outlined as follows. In these devices electrical energy is transformed into light in the so called “electroluminescence effect” involving injection of electrons and holes from the respective electrodes, formation of excitons and their annihilation with simultaneous emission of light. Balanced charge injection and transport is one of the key factors determining appropriate functioning of these optoelectronic devices. The majority of electroluminescent materials, used for the fabrication of active layers in OLEDs, are hole conductors (p-type conductors). This facilitates the injection of holes and their transport within the layer. However, the injection barrier for electrons is in this case very high and the electron mobility within the layer is low. As a consequence of this charge injection and charge transport imbalance, the processes of exciton formation and annihilation occur in close vicinity of the cathode and are very inefficient because of the excitons quenching on the surface of the metallic electrode. To avoid these problems it is advisable to separate the emissive layer from the electrode by an additional layer which facilitates the injection and transport of electrons and at the same time blocks the transport of holes to the cathode, shifting the formation and annihilation of excitons far from the cathode. Some n-type semiconductors are very well suited for this purpose. In this review we will discuss them only briefly, since an excellent detailed paper on this subject has recently appeared.105
Polymers containing electron-deficient 1,3,4-oxadiazole groups either in the main conjugated chain or in side chains being in conjugation with the main chain are promising candidates for application in electronic devices.153–156 However, they do not show field effect or their electron mobilities measured in the FET configuration are very low.157 Moreover, initially prepared polymers of this type were not soluble in typical organic solvents and their solution processing required the use of strong acids (sulfuric acid or methanesulfuric acid), which is technologically inconvenient.158 To induce the solubility of polyoxadiazole derivatives in organic solvents, flexible tetraphenylsilane or hexafluoroisopropylidene units were introduced into the main chain.159 Another strategy for the improvement of their processability followed the classical approach of attaching solubilizing side chains such as long alkyl or alkoxy groups to the polymer main chain.160
Electron transporting polymers containing oxadiazole units are usually amorphous and show high Tg. These good thermal parameters prompt their use as additional layers which do not only improve electron injection and transport and, as a consequence the external quantum efficiency (EQE), but also extend operating lifetime of the fabricated OLEDs.156,159–163
Other thermally stable organic semiconductors which show high |EA| and for these reasons are suitable for use as electron transporting layers in OLEDs (and sometimes emissive layers) embrace polymers containing such electron deficient units like pyridine,164 quinoline,165 1,3,5-triazine,166 benzobisthiazole,167 benzobisoxazole167a,c and benzothiadiazole.168
To summarize, conjugated polymers of high |EA| find application in organic electronic devices as active layers in n-channel FETs, electron transporting layers or emissive layers in LEDs, the latter in combination with an appropriate hole transporting layer. Finally, in bulk heterojunction-type organic photovoltaic cells (OPC) some of these electron transporting polymers can be used as acceptors which facilitate exciton dissociation at the interface with an appropriate donor polymer.
4 Polymeric semiconductors with p-type conductivity
Polymers which can be used as semiconductors transporting holes find a variety of applications in organic electronics: as active layers in p-channel FETs,33 components of bulk heterojunctions in PCs,20 as emissive layers in LEDs,169 and as components of photodiodes (PDs),170 to name the most important. Given the plethora of such polymers we have selected the most representative examples. Their chemical structures are presented in Fig. 6–8 and 10–23.
 Fig. 6  Chemical structures of copolymers containing thiophene units. 
 Fig. 7  Chemical structures of copolymers containing thienothiophene units. 
 Fig. 8  Chemical structures of the copolymers p4.20–p4.28. 
 Fig. 9  Possible interdigitation patterns in conjugated polymers containing side alkyl groups. 
 Fig. 10  Chemical structures of copolymers containing bithiazole units. 
 Fig. 11  Chemical structures of copolymers containing thiazolo-thiazole or benzobisthiazole units. 
 Fig. 12  Chemical structures of copolymers containing dithienopyrrole or silylene-2,2′-bithiophene units. 
 Fig. 13  Chemical structures of the copolymers p4.50 and p4.51. 
 Fig. 14  Chemical structures of copolymers containing fluorenone units. 
 Fig. 15  Chemical structures of copolymers containing thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione units. 
 Fig. 16  Chemical structures of copolymers containing 2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione. 
 Fig. 17  Chemical structures of the copolymers p4.66–p4.68. 
 Fig. 18  Chemical structures of copolymers containing isoindigo units. 
 Fig. 19  Chemical structures of copolymers containing benzothiadiazole or naphthobisthiadiazole units. 
 Fig. 20  Two types of carbazole unit coupling. 
 Fig. 21  Chemical structures of homopolymers or copolymers containing N-substituted, 2,7-coupled carbazole units. 
 Fig. 22  Chemical structures of the copolymers p4.81–p4.84. 
 Fig. 23  Chemical structures of copolymers containing triarylamine units. 
Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) is one of the most common hole conductors investigated for bulk heterojunction solar cells171 and p-channel FETs.172 The first environmentally stable and soluble poly(3-alkylthiophenes) (P3ATs) were synthesized by Elsenbaumer173 in 1985, using a method similar to that used to prepare 2,5-polythiophene. Polymerization reactions of asymmetric 3-hexylthiophene (3HT) may result in three different coupling sites along the polymer chain, i.e. 2,5′-(head-to-tail, HT), 2,2′-(head-to-head, HH) and 5,5′-(tail-to-tail, TT) (Scheme 5). Therefore, synthetic methodologies have been developed to control P3HT regiochemistry, which greatly affects several structural, electronic and optical properties of this polymer family.171,174
 Scheme 5  Poly(3-hexylthiophene) regioisomers. 
Particularly, a structural regioregular head-to-tail (HT) arrangement is greatly desirable, since polymers of this type of regioregularity exhibit very interesting physicochemical properties, which facilitate their application in organic electronics. Regioregular HT-P3HT macromolecules can preorganize via a three-dimensional self assembly, resulting in efficient two-dimensional hole transport71 with high mobilities and current density.172b,175–177 Self-organization in P3HT results in a lamellar structure with two-dimensional conjugated sheets formed by interchain stacking. Sirringhaus et al.71 suggested that the π–π stacked crystalline planes can adopt two different orientations (i.e. parallel and normal to the film) depending on the P3HT regioregularity, processing conditions and the type of the substrate.
In essentially all applications of P3HT in organic electronics, regioregularity turned out to be one of the key parameters. Its decrease from 96% to 70% results in a drop in the hole mobility by three orders of magnitude. Regioregularity affects the charge transport not only in the semiconducting, undoped form of P3HT but also in the electrochemically doped polymer, as demonstrated by Jiang et al.176 who reported worsening of the electrical transport parameters in thin films of doped P3HT with decreasing degree of regioregularity. These findings were ascribed to the better supramolecular organization and higher extent of π-stacking in regioregular P3HT, as concluded from electrochemical, EPR, UV-vis-NIR, and X-ray diffraction measurements.
The aspect of regioregularity in P3HT also plays an important role in its band gap control. The random polymerization of 3-hexylthiophene leads to a large degree of HH coupling that decreases the effective conjugation in the chain and blue-shifts the absorption maxima, due to a large twist-distortion.174,178
Besides the HT regioregularity, molecular mass and its polydispersity are also important parameters to control electronic, spectroscopic and electrochemical properties of P3HT. The first study of the effect of Mn on spectroscopic and electrochemical properties of regioregular P3HT was undertaken by Trznadel et al.179 who investigated five fractions of this polymers of reduced PDI. They found that the conjugation length in P3HT increases with Mn whereas the IP value decreases.
Sirringhaus et al.71 reported that the molecular mass has a considerable impact on the crystalline connectivity and ordering of pristine P3HT spin-cast films, thus influencing the charge carrier mobility of the polymer. Kline et al.72a,b,180 observed that varying the molecular mass of P3HT by one order of magnitude results in a four order of magnitude change in the hole mobility. The low mobility, low molecular-mass films revealed a highly ordered structure consisting of nanorods, whereas the high-molecular mass films, showing an increased μh had an isotropic nodule structure. The best mobilities were obtained for relatively high molecular mass P3HT (Mn > 25 kDa by Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC), using PS standards) under slow evaporating conditions on hydrophopic substrates.181 Verilhac et al.73 found that this increase of μh persists at Mn = 120 kDa (SEC), PS standards. Zen et al.172a,182 reported on the optical, structural and electrical characterization of thin films prepared from different molecular mass fractions of regioregular P3HT. They demonstrated that lowering the molecular mass of P3HTs dramatically decreases the field-effect mobility and this was mainly ascribed to the ability of high-molecular mass fractions to adopt a planar backbone conformation which allows a close interchain contact. To support this hypothesis the authors correlated the well known thermochromic effect of regioregular P3HT183 with the charge carrier mobility. The thermochromic effect is manifested by a hypsochromic shift of the π–π* transition band in the UV-vis spectrum of a solid P3HT layer with increasing temperature. This shift is associated with a temperature-induced increase of the torsion angle between the adjacent thiophene rings in the polymer chain. The authors correlated the increasing spectral hypsochromic shift with decreasing charge carrier mobility, demonstrating in this manner that a more twisted conformation hindered the transport of charge carriers.
P3HT can be obtained via nickel-catalyzed coupling polymerization, palladium-catalyzed coupling polymerization (Stille coupling and Suzuki–Miyaura coupling), direct arylation polymerization and oxidative (chemical or electrochemical) coupling polymerization (Table 2).
Table 2 Different methods of P3HT synthesis – a comparison of reaction yields, regioregularity degree and molecular mass




 
Substrate/reaction conditions
Yield (%)
HT (%)

M
n (Da)
PDI
Ref.




Nickel-catalyzed coupling polymerization


1
2-Bromo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) LDA (2) MgBr2·Et2O (3) Ni(dppp)Cl2
36
98
12200
1.9

74, 184



2
2,5-Dibromo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) Rieke zinc (2) Ni(dppe)Cl2
82
99
25500
1.5

185



3


Grignard metathesis

2,5-Dibromo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) C12H25MgX/THF (2) Ni(dppp)Cl2/THF

71
99
21000
1.4

186d



4
2,5-Dibromo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) iPrMgCl/THF (2) Ni(dppp)Cl2 [monomer]:[Ni(dppp)Cl2] = 20000:1
40
—
≈280000
<1.1

187







Palladium-catalyzed coupling polymerizations


5


Stille coupling

3-hexylthiophene, (1) I2/HgO (2) LDA, (3) Bu3SnCl, (4) Pd(PPh3)4

10–50
96
10000–16000
1.2–1.4

188



6


Suzuki–Miyaura coupling

2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) (pin)B–B(pin), [Ir2(μ-Cl)2(η4-COD)2], 4,4′-(tBu)2-2,2′-bipyridine, (2) Pd(tBu3P)2

50
97
3400
3.3

189



7


Suzuki–Miyaura coupling

2-iodo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) (pin)B–B(pin), [Ir2(μ-Cl)2(η4-COD)2], 4,4′-(tBu)2-2,2′-bipyridine, (2) Pd(PPh3)4

22
97
13900
1.6

193



8


Suzuki–Miyaura coupling

2-iodo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) (pin)B–B(pin), [Ir2(μ-Cl)2(η4-COD)2], 4,4′-(tBu)2-2,2′-bipyridine, (2) Pd(PTh3)3

72
97
26000
2.3

193







Direct Arylation


9
2-Bromo-3-hexylthiophene, Herrmanns's catalyst/tris(o-Me2N)phosphine Cs2CO3
99
98
30600
1.6

66



10
2-Bromo-3-hexylthiophene, Pd[(o-tolyl)3]2, Me2NC6H4Br Cs2CO3, KOAc/THF
98
99
11800
1.7

67







Oxidative coupling polymerizations


11
3-Hexylthiophene FeCl3
62
89
38000
1.9

35



12
3-Hexylthiophene VO(acac)3, FeCl3, O2
18
81
16000
2.3

194





The first synthesis of regioregular HT-P3HT was reported by McCullough's group in 1992.74,184 The regioregular polymerization of 3-hexylthiophene can be controlled by selective lithiation of 2-bromo-3-alkylthiophene with lithium diisopropylamine followed by transmetalation using magnesium bromide to yield the organomagnesium intermediate. The use of a Ni(dppp)Cl2 catalyst for the polymerization of this intermediate gives the corresponding P3HT with 98% head-to-tail regioselectivity (Table 2, entry 1). The second method to obtain highly regioselective P3HT (Table 2, entry 2) was subsequently developed by Chen and Rieke.185 Highly reactive zinc (known as “Rieke zinc”) undergoes a selective oxidative addition to 2,5-bromo-3-hexylthiophene to yield the 2-(bromozinco)-3-hexyl-5-bromothiophene intermediate in quantitative yields. This intermediate undergoes then regiospecific polycondensation to yield HT P3HT.
Later, McCullough's group186a,d reported another method for the synthesis of regioregular P3HT by Grignard metathesis (GRIM)186 (Table 2, entry 3). Treatment of 2,5-dibromo-3-hexylthiophene with a variety of alkyl Grignard reagents resulted in two metalated regioisomers via a magnesium exchange reaction. Introduction of a catalytic amount of Ni(dppp)Cl2 into this isomeric mixture afforded P3HT of regioregularity >99%. McCullough186d and Yokozawa40,41 independently demonstrated that the Grignard metathesis polymerization of 3-hexylthiophene proceeds by the living chain growth mechanism instead of the traditionally accepted step growth polycondensation. The molecular mass of the resulting polymer can be controlled by the monomer to the Ni catalyst feed ratio and the polydispersity of the resulting polymer is low (PDI from 1.2 to 1.4)40,186d,187 (Table 2, entry 4). Taking into account that the described reaction can be carried out at RT on a relatively large scale, the Grignard metathesis (GRIM)–Kumada catalyst transfer polycondensation (KCTP) has become the most widely used method for producing P3HT with predetermined high molecular mass.
Another group of methods employed for the synthesis of regioregular P3HT include palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions. Iraqi and Barker188 have investigated the synthesis of regioregular P3HT through the Stille reaction, using 3-hexyl-2-iodo-5-(tributylstannyl)thiophene (Scheme 6). The polymerization reactions were carried out in different solvents at reflux temperature, and in the presence of Pd(PPh3)4 (3 mol%) as a catalyst. Molecular masses of regioregular P3HT prepared by this method were Mn = 10–16 kDa (SEC, PS standards) with PDI = 1.2–1.4 (Table 2, entry 5).
 Scheme 6  Synthesis of regioregular P3HT by Stille coupling reactions. 
Liversedge et al.189 investigated a range of Pd catalysts with bulky, electron-rich phosphane ligands for the synthesis of regioregular P3HT by the Suzuki reaction (Table 2, entry 6). Such complexes were previously found190 to be too active for a range of cross-coupling reactions, including Suzuki couplings. Indeed, although Suzuki coupling was used to prepare oligothiophenes191 polymerizations were found to be more difficult to be carried out successfully. In the use of thiophene boronates, deboronation turned out to be a problem, representing the termination of polymerization by aryl group transfer from the PPh3 ligand employed.192 Li et al.193 reported a novel efficient zero valent catalyst precursor, tris[tri(2-thienyl)phosphine]palladium (Pd(PTh3)3), and demonstrated that this catalyst was superior to Pd(PPh3)4 typically used in Suzuki–Miyaura coupling polymerization of thiophene-based substrates. 3-Hexyl-5-iodothiophene-2-boronic pinacol ester was used as a monomer in this polymerization (Scheme 7). The HT regioregularity of this P3HT was over 97%. The authors also found that the use of this new catalyst leads to a higher reaction yield and a higher molecular mass (compare entries 7 and 8 in Table 2).
 Scheme 7  Synthesis of regioregular P3HT by Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reactions. 
The palladium-catalyzed C–H activation was used for efficient coupling of numerous aromatic molecules via direct arylation. Wang et al.66 applied this strategy to the synthesis of regioregular P3HT (Table 2, entry 9), successfully polymerizing 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene using Herrmann's catalyst and tris(2-dimethylaminophenyl)phosphine as catalyst precursors. P3HT was obtained with high molecular mass (Mn = 30600) and high regioregularity (98%) in quantitative yields (99%).
More recently Wang et al.67 have described the synthesis of regioregular P3HT end-capped with p-substituted phenyl groups via direct arylation (Table 2, entry 10).
In the past century Amou et al.35 performed a detailed study with the goal to establish optimum conditions for oxidative polymerization of 3HT with FeCl3 as an oxidant in chloroform. The best head-to-tail content of 89% was obtained for polymerizations carried out at −45 °C for 72 h with the initial monomer concentration of 0.02 mol L−1 (Table 2 entry 11). Yu et al.194 reported the oxidative coupling polymerization of 3-hexylthiophene with O2/VO(acac)2/FeCl3 as a catalyst. By lowering the polymerization temperature to −20 °C an increased head-to-tail content of 81% was observed, but correspondingly the yield decreased to 18% (Table 2, entry 12).
Regioregular poly(alkylthiophenes) of HH–TT regioregularity were obtained either from 4,4′-dialkyl-2,2′-bithiophenes195 or from 3,3′-dialkyl-2,2′-bithiophenes196 by chemical or electrochemical oxidative polymerization. HH–TT poly(alkylthiophenes) show higher optical band gap than the corresponding HT poly(alkylthiophenes) which can be ascribed to higher chain torsion angle, induced by the HH couplings. HH–TT poly(alkylthiophenes) do not show the field effect in the p-channel FET configuration. Contrary to HT poly(alkylthiophenes) they show strong photo- and electroluminescence.197
Poly(3,3′′-dialkyl-2,2′:5′,2′′-terthiophene)s (p4.1) were first reported by Gallazzi et al.198 The monomer was synthesized by coupling 3-alkyl-2-iodothiophene in the form of a Grignard reagent with 2,5-diiodothiophene in the presence of the Ni(dppp)Cl2 catalyst. However, presently this monomer is usually synthesized from 2-bromo-3-alkyl thiophene and the diboroderivative of thiophene through Suzuki coupling because in this case the purification process is simpler. It can then be oxidatively polymerized to give the corresponding polymer.199 Alternatively, poly(3,3′′-dioctyl-2,2′:5′,2′′-terthiophene)s (p4.1) can also be obtained by Stille-type polycondensation of 5,5′-dibromo-4,4′-dioctyl-2,2′:5′,2′′-bithiophene with distannylated thiophene.200p4.1 can be used for the fabrication of p-channel FETs. Similarly as in the case of regioregular P3HT, the FET mobility of its charge carriers is strongly Mn dependent.72c
Poly(3,3′′-dialkylquaterthiophene)s i.e. solution processable poly(thiophene) derivatives containing one alkyl group per two thiophene rings were prepared by oxidative polymerization of the corresponding monomer and tested as components of OFETs.201 OFET active layers were fabricated from structurally ordered nanoparticles of poly(3′,3′′-didodecylquaterthiophene)s, p4.2, yielding transistors of very high performance (Table 3).
Table 3 Polymeric semiconductors for p-channel FETs; Mn, PDI, |EA| and IP, transistor parameters and OFET device structure




 

M
n (Da)/PD
IP/|EA|(eV)

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

I
on/Ioff

V
T (V)
Device structure (deposition technique)
Ref.




BGBC – bottom-gate/bottom-contact, BGTC – bottom-gate/top-contact, TGBC – top-gate/bottom-contact, HMDS – hexamethyldisilazane, OTS – octyltrichlorosilane, OTMS – octadecyltrimethoxysilane, ODTS – octadecyltrichlorosilane, FDTS – 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltriethoxysilane, PS – polystyrene, CYTOP – poly(perfluorobutenylvinylehter), [a.o] – air operating, [i.o] – inert atmosphere operating, [v.o.] – vacuum operating.





p4.1

13000/2.23
5.00/—
0.030
2 × 102
—
HMDS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

200




p4.2

17300/1.32
—/—
0.140
>107
—
OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120–140 °C [a.o.]

201




p4.3

22100/1.47
5.04/—
0.020
103
−2.1
TC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

202




p4.4

12800/1.63
5.31/—
1.4 × 10−5
102
−2.4
TC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

202




p4.5

6000/1.25
5.84/3.49
0.060
105
—
TC, SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

204




p4.6

33000/1.80


0.630
>107
—
OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120–160 °C [i.o.]

205





28000/2.00
—
1.000
—
—
BC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 185 °C [i.o.]

210




p4.7

29600/1.82
5.10/—
0.300
106
—
OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120–160 °C [i.o.]

205




p4.8

28500/1.80


0.300
106
—
OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120–140 °C [i.o.]

205




p4.9

12400/1.58
5.23/—
0.250
107
−8.0
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

212




p4.10

13300/1.89
5.00/3.06
0.030
106
−7.0
TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [i.o.]

214




p4.11

15200/1.83
5.10/3.26
0.040
106
−9.0
TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [i.o.]

214




p4.12

12100/1.84
5.50/2.76
8.1 × 10−7
101
−39.0
TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [i.o.]

214




p4.13

14700/1.93
5.60/2.98
6.4 × 10−6
102
−15.0
TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [i.o.]

214




p4.14

26285/1.94
5.15/3.25
1.1 × 10−4
102
−13.0
TC, SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

220





26285/1.94
5.15/3.25
5.0 × 10−4
103
−11.0
TC, HMDS/SiO2/S annealing at 150 °C i [a.o.]

220




p4.15A

9287/1.15
—/—
0.330
105
−10.0
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

219




p4.15B

13142/1.23
5.20/3.40
0.010
103
−10.0
TC, SiO2/Si, annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

220





13142/1.23
5.20/3.40
0.072
106
−4.0
TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

220




p4.16

22922/2.28
5.21/3.31
1.5 × 10−4
102–103
−12.0
TC, SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

220





22922/2.28
5.21/3.31
1.5 × 10−3
103–104
−9.0
TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

220




p4.17

7900/1.90
5.14/—
0.300
107
−14.2
BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 160 °C [a.o.]

221




p4.18A

38000/1.15
5.06/2.62
9.0 × 10−5
103
—
TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]

222




p4.18B

40000/1.26
5.04/2.63
4.7 × 10−5
103
—
TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]

222




p4.18C

62000/1.40
5.11/2.59
0.028
2 × 104
−18.9
TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]

222




p4.18D

59000/1.47
5.08/2.60
0.015
104
—
TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]

222




p4.19A

29000/2.00
5.30/—
0.150
105
—
BGBC, OTS(HMDS)/SiO2/Si annealing at 100–125 °C [a.o.]

226




p4.19B

26000/1.90
5.30/—
0.120
105
—
BGBC, OTS(HMDS)/SiO2/Si annealing at 100–125 °C [a.o.]

226




p4.20

15000/1.70
5.20/3.35
0.15
3.67 × 104
−8.5
BGTG, SiO2/Si annealing at 110 °C [a.o.]

231




p4.21

16300/3.90
—/—
0.15–0.25
105–106
−5.9
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

235




p4.22

18000/—
—/—
1.3 × 10−4
2.4 × 102
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]

236




p4.23A

22000/—
—/—
2.1 × 10−3
7.1 × 103
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]

236




p4.23B

21000/—
—/—
0.027
1.5 × 105
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Siannealing at 100 °C [i.o.]

236




p4.23C

21000/—
—/—
0.134
1.9 × 105
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]

236




p4.24

18000/2.33
—/—
1.3 × 10−3
3.8 × 103
—
BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]

239




p4.25A

7100/1.82
5.00/—
0.050
106
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

240




p4.25B

24100/1.43
5.00/—
0.370
107
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

240




p4.25C

28900/1.58
5.00/—
0.540
107
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

240





28900/1.58
5.00/—
0.540
107
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242





28900/1.58
5.00/—
0.260
107
—
BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242




p4.25D

28100/1.55
5.00/—
0.200
108
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

240




p4.25E

33400/2.17
5.00/—
0.320
107
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

240





33400/2.17
—/—
0.320
107
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242





33400/2.17
—/—
0.770
107
—
BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242




p4.26A

29500/1.58
5.10/—
0.086
107
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242





29500/1.58
5.10/—
0.030
107
—
BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242




p4.26B

52100/2.01
—/—
0.150
107
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242





52100/2.01
—/—
0.190
107
—
BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242




p4.27A

21300/1.99
5.10/—
0.029
106
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242





21300/1.99
5.10/—
0.024
106
—
BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242




p4.27B

44100/1.76
—/—
0.037
104
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242





44100/1.76
—/—
0.055
104
—
BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242




p4.28A

27900/1.76
5.20/—
5.9 × 10−3
105
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242





27900/1.76
5.20/—
3.3 × 10−3
105
—
BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242




p4.28B

21700/1.95
—/—
6.6 × 10−3
103
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242





21700/1.95
—/—
0.026
103
—
BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

242




p4.29A

45000/2.40
5.15/—
0.0015
103
—
BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

248




p4.29B

20000/2.40
5.20/—
0.1 × 10−5
102
—
BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

248




p4.30

41000/1.70
5.19/—
0.330
—
−2.6
BTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]

249




p4.31

13000/1.70
5.39/3.47
1.1 × 10−3
4.7 × 104
−21.6
BC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]

250




p4.32

13200/2.38
5.22/—
5.4 × 10−3
105
−5.0
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C

251




p4.33

13800/2.33
5.15/—
0.050
106
−2.0
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C

251




p4.34

8800/5.20
4.80/3.40
0.150
102
—
TGBC, annealing at 110 °C [a.o.]

254




p4.35

11700/2.00
4.94/3.31
0.250
102
—
TGBC, annealing at 110 °C [a.o.]

254




p4.36A

4100/1.50
5.00/3.20
0.050
107
−27.0
BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

255b




p4.36B

7200/2/40
5.10/3.30
0.140
2 × 106
−33.0
BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

255a





7200/2.40
5.10/3.30
0.230
107
−31.0
BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

255b




p4.36C

8700/1.80
5.10/3.30
0.300
107
−30.0
BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

255b




p4.37

13700/1.80
5.30/3.50
2.7 × 10−4
104
—
BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

256




p4.38

10000/1.60
5.20/3.40
0.130
106
—
BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

256




p4.39A

7700/1.40
5.20/3.30
0.120
107
—
BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

256




p4.39B

7600/1.50
5.20/3.30
0.100
106
—
BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

256




p4.40

10659/3.66
5.60/2.75
0.020
104
−1.1
BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [a.o.]

257




p4.41

14816/5.02
5.30/2.79
0.020
104
−10.0
BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [a.o.]

257




p4.42A

8060/1.91
5.2/3.3
0.002
105
−19.0
BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

258




p4.42B

366500/1.97
—/—
0.010
106
−5.2
BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

258




p4.43

20500/1.82
5.3/—
0.120
107
−12.0
TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

261





20500/1.82
5.3/—
0.180
107
−12.0
TC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

261




p4.44

23000/1.56
5.2/—
0.120
107
<−10
TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

261





23000/1.56
5.2/—
0.260
107
<−10
TC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

261




p4.45D

50000/1.70
4.68/2.94
0.026
4
60.0
BGBC OTS/SiO2/Si [i.o.]

265




p4.47A

32000/1.70
4.88/3.02
0.210
120
−21.0
BGBC OTS/SiO2/Si [i.o.]

265




p4.47B

16000/1.90
4.96/2.96
0.0035
140
−23.0
BGBC OTS/SiO2/Si [i.o.]

265




p4.49A

10344/2.90
5.30/3.50
0.050
105
—
TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 250 °C [a.o.]

269




p4.49B

13666/3.00
5.20/3.30
0.080
5 × 104
—
TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 250 °C [a.o.]

269




p4.50A

36129/3.10
5.80/3.30
6 × 10−5
3 × 104
—
TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 250 °C [a.o.]

269




p4.50B

34324/3.70
5.60/3.30
0.006
4 × 106
—
TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 250 °C [a.o.]

269




p4.51A

6538/2.60
5.70/3.20
9 × 10−5
2 × 105
—
TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 250 °C [a.o.]

269




p4.51B

24242/3.30
5.40/3.00
0.006
2 × 105
—
TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 250 °C [a.o.]

269




p4.56

4800/2.17
5.73/3.27
2.5 × 10−4
6
−16.0
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

277




p4.57A

14000/1.67
5.54/3.75
0.189
8 × 106
−12.0
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 210 °C [a.o.]

277




p4.57B

8300/1.75
5.11/3.45
5.1 × 10−3
6 × 102
−14.0
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 90 °C [a.o.]

277




p4.58

7600/1.73
5.50/3.71
0.585
5 × 105
−22.0
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 210 °C [a.o.]

277




p4.59A

9400/1.77
5.52/3.70
0.216
105
−18.0
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]

277




p4.59B

9800/1.86
5.47/3.71
3.8 × 10−3
103
−10.0
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

277




p4.59C

14100/1.91
5.41/3.58
0.101
2 × 104
−11.0
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]

277




p4.59D

15700/1.72
5.42/3.60
0.141
2 × 105
−17.0
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 210 °C [a.o.]

277




p4.59E

18000/1.96
5.40/3.58
0.108
5 × 104
−24.0
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

277




p4.60

28000/2.90
5.50/4.00
0.110
1.5 × 105
−5.2
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [i.o.]

138




p4.61

54000/3.15
5.17/3.61
0.040
—
—
BC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 110 °C [v.o.]

146





10000/2.40
5.17/3.61
0.050
—
—
BC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 110 °C [v.o.]

146




p4.62

10000/—
5.35/3.53
0.04
—
—
BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [v.o.]

147




p4.63

58787/3.36
—/—
1.04
106
−7.0
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

284a





106000/3.44
5.20/4.00
0.970
106
−2.7
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]

284b





45200/2.15
5.20/4.00
0.350–0.390
—
—
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]

284b




p4.64

19271/3.25
—/—
1.50
106
−12.0
BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]

284a




p4.65A

122300/3.58
5.07/3.82
2.53
>105
—
BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si solution-sheared annealing at 220 °C [i.o.]

285




p4.65B

269400/4.38
4.91/3.65
3.97
>104
—
BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si solution-sheared annealing at 220 °C [i.o.]

285




p4.66A

4700/1.39
5.02/—
7.8 × 10−3
105
—
TC SiO2/Si [i.o.]

287b




p4.66B

6200/1.71
5.04/—
0.0226
106
—
TC SiO2/Si [i.o.]

287b




p4.67A

10042/1.80
5.02/3.49
5.1 × 10−3
4.9 × 103
−15.5
TC OTMS/SiO2/Si [i.o.]

292




p4.67B

34732/1.93
5.16/3.52
6.6 × 10−3
1.3 × 106
−69.7
TC OTMS/SiO2/Si [i.o.]

292




p4.68

8995/1.87
4.64/3.47
2.8 × 10−3
2.8 × 104
7.4
TC OTMS/SiO2/Si [i.o.]

292




p4.69

19800/2.00
5.80/3.80
0.019
106
—
BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

296




p4.70A

87900/2.10
5.70/3.70
0.790
107
—
BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

296





135000/5.50
5.38/3.77
0.57
>105
−2.0
BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 170 °C [a.o.]

298





20400/2.00
5.54/3.70
1.060
>106
−18.0
BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

299




p4.70B

18400/2.00
5.57/3.70
0.400
>105
−10.0
BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

299




p4.70C

39200/3.20
5.33/3.74
3.620
>106
−2.0
BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 175 °C [a.o.]

299




p4.70D

37300/2.30
5.26/3.74
1.760
>106
−5.0
BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 175 °C [a.o.]

299




p4.70E

138000/3.3
5.20/3.58
2.48
>106
3.0
BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 170 °C [a.o.]

298




p4.71

74190/2.91
5.66/3.61
4 × 10−3
5.0 × 104
−25.0
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [a.o.]

300




p4.72

55276/2.40
5.53/3.70
0.013
9.8 × 106
−17.3
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

300




p4.73

35000/1.63
5.18/3.59
0.13–0.20
106–107
—
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

302




p4.74

36100/3.20
5.07/3.53
0.074
105
−8.0
BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

304




p4.75

52600/2.40
5.16/3.77
0.560
107
−10.0
BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

304




p4.76

15000/1.60
5.99/—
6.2 × 10−6
102
−39.0
BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [a.o.]

307a




p4.77

27000/2.00
5.94/—
2.0 × 10−5
5 × 103
−35.0
BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [a.o.]

307a




p4.78

10000/3.50
5.66/2.76
2.2 × 10−3
5 × 104
−40.0
BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [a.o.]

307a




p4.79

17000/2.60
5.64/2.75
1.4 × 10−4
5 × 103
−52.0
BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [a.o.]

307a




p4.80

3160/1.58
5.21/2.05
1 × 10−5
103
−47.1
BGTC ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C

322




p4.82A

3300/1.44
(5.1–5.2)/—
1.5 × 10−5
102
−12.0
BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

224




p4.82B

5700/1.16
(5.1–5.2)/—
8.0 × 10−4
103
−10.0
BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

224




p4.82C

11200/2.63
(5.1–5.2)/—
9.6 × 10−3
105
−8.0
BGTC PS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

224




p4.82D

7000/2.08
(5.1–5.2)/—
1.8 × 10−3
103
−10.0
BGTC PS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

224




p4.82E

4930/3.34
(5.1–5.2)/—
0.02
105
−4.0
BGTC PS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

224




p4.83A

19500/2.37
4.96/2.51
6.4 × 10−3
103
−6.7
BGTC HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]

325




p4.83B

18600/2.14
4.95/2.48
0.022
104
−2.7
BGTC HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]

325




p4.83C

21700/1.91
4.99/2.49
0.035
104
−4.5
BGTC HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

325




p4.84A

13000/2.28
5.01/2.60
0.200
1.4 × 106
−1.0
BGTC ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

326




p4.84B

12000/1.98
5.07/2.65
0.390
4.5 × 106
−6.0
BGTC ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

326




p4.85A

14100/1.40
4.50/1.6
2.4 × 10−3
1.0 × 104
−7.0
ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C [a.o.]

335




p4.85B

8500/2.30
4.50/1.7
9.2 × 10−4
1.3 × 103
−2.0
ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C [a.o.]

335




p4.86A

4200/1.92
4.40/1.8
1.1 × 10−5
1.2 × 103
−5.0
ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C [a.o.]

335




p4.86B

8200/1.44
4.50/1.8
7.6 × 10−5
1.3 × 102
−6.0
ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C [a.o.]

335




p4.87A

13800/1.40
4.80/1.8
5.1 × 10−4
4.3 × 105
−8.0
ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C [a.o.]

335




p4.87B

13100/1.76
4.80/1.8
2.2 × 10−3
5.7 × 104
−10.0
ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C [a.o.]

335




p4.88

45500/2.11
5.20/—
4.0 × 10−3
—
−4.2
BCTG CYTOP/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

338




p4.89

27900/1.89
5.40/—
0.020
—
−6.4
BCTG CYTOP/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

338




p4.90

15000/1.69
5.50/—
0.040
—
−5.5
BCTG CYTOP/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

338





A series of selenophene-based copolymers, poly(5,5′-bis(3-dodecylthiophene-2-yl)-2,2′-biselenophene), p4.3, and poly(5,5′-bis(4,4′-didodecyl-2,2′-bithiophen-5-yl)-2,2′-biselenophene), p4.4, were synthesized by Stille and oxidative coupling reactions.202 The FET characteristics of these polymers were strongly dependent on the intermolecular ordering of the polymer chains. p4.3 exhibited a reasonable hole transporting mobility of 0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1 due to its excellent intermolecular ordering, whereas p4.4 exhibited a very poor mobility of 1.4 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3) due to its amorphous nature, which resulted from the polymer chain torsion induced by the head to head coupled decylthiophenes. The thin film of a blend of p4.3 and PCBM (phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester) was used as a bulk heterojunction layer in photovoltaic cells. The PCE (power conversion efficiency) of a cell composed of a blend of p4.3 and PCBM (1:4, w/w) reached 1.4% under A.M. 1.5 G illumination, 100 mW cm−2. This PCE was higher than those achievable using p4.2:PCBM system.203
A regioregular copolymer of 2,2′-bithiophene and didodecyl 2,2′-bithiophene-4,4′-dicarboxylate was prepared by Stille coupling (p4.5). This macromolecular compound containing withdrawing ester groups can be considered as a donor–acceptor polymer with unsubstituted bithiophene groups as the donating units.204
Polythiophene derivatives containing fused thiophene rings constitute an interesting class of organic semiconductors. Poly(2,5-bis(3-alkylthiophene-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophenes) containing no substituents on the thieno[3,2-b]thiophene unit but two long tetradecyl chains (R = C14H29, p4.6) (and R = C12H25, p4.7, R = C10H21, p4.8) on the bithiophene unit were reported by McCulloch et al.205 Those polymers were prepared by a Stille condensation of 2,5-bis(trimethylstannyl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene and the appropriate 5,5′-dibromo-4,4′-dialkyl-[2,2′]bithiophene in analogy to a previously reported procedure (Scheme 8).206 The Michael addition of ethylmercaptoacetate to the 3-position of 3-bromothiophene-2-carboxaldehyde followed by elimination of bromide and an aldol condensation yielded ethyl thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate. This intermediate product was then hydrolyzed to the corresponding carboxylic acid. Decarboxylation by copper and quinoline led to the formation of thieno[3,2-b]thiophene. Lithiation of thieno[3,2-b]thiophene and quenching with trimethyltin chloride afforded 2,5-bis-trimethylstannylthieno[3,2-b]thiophene (Scheme 8).207 The TT arrangement of the alkyl chains on the bithiophene units also minimizes the steric interactions between neighboring units, leading to coplanarity of the backbone and hence promoting self-organization. It was found that the hairy rigid-rods p4.6 (p4.7 and p4.8) exhibit a liquid-crystalline behaviour and self-assemble into a highly crystalline domain with lamellar and π-stacked polymer chains.208 The side chain attachment density in p4.6 (p4.7 and p4.8) is sufficiently low to allow interdigitation, which provides a three-dimensional ordering.209 Due to this enhanced structural order, a remarkably high field-effect hole mobility of 0.3–1.0 cm2 V−1 s−1 was obtained (Table 3).205,210 This value is even higher than that reported for regioregular P3HT (0.1–0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1).205 Films of p4.6 deposited by simple spin-casting showed remarkably ordered in-plane microstructure originating from the liquid-crystallinity of this polymer which facilitated the transport of carriers between the electrodes.211
 Scheme 8  Synthetic route to pepare p4.6, p4.7 and p4.8. 
The synthesis of poly(2,5-bis(2-thienyl)-3,6-dipentadecylthieno[3,2-b]thiophene) (p4.9) containing substituents on the thieno[3,2-b]thiophene unit is depicted in Scheme 9.212 Stille coupling of 2,5-dibromo-3,6-dipentadecylthieno[3,2-b]thiophene with 2-tributylstannylthiophene, followed by bromination, gave 2,5-bis(2-bromothienyl)-3,6-dipentadecylthieno[3,2-b]thiophene.213 Subsequent Yamamoto dehalogenative coupling polymerization was carried out in the presence of a slight excess of Ni(COD)2 (COD: 1,5-cyclooctadiene) and catalytic amounts of 2,2′-dipyridyl in refluxing toluene.212 The FETs properties of p4.9 were tested using a bottom-gate, top-contact TFT device configuration built on an n-doped silicon wafer. Before annealing, the device showed a saturated FET mobility of ca. 0.08 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a current on/off ratio of 106. This mobility increased to about 0.25 cm2 V−1 s−1 after annealing of the active layer at ca. 150 °C (Table 3).212
 Scheme 9  Synthetic route to prepare p4.9. 
Poly(2,5-bis(3′-dodecyl-2,2′-bithiophen-5-yl)-3,6-dimethylthieno[3,2-b]thiophene) (p4.10) and poly(5′,5′′-(3,6-dimethylselenopheno[3,2-b]selenophene-2,5-diyl)bis(3-dodecyl-2,2′-bithiophene)) (p4.11) containing two fused aromatic rings either 3,6-dimethylthieno[3,2-b]thiophene or 3,6-dimethylselenopheno[3,2-b]selenophene as central units were synthesized via oxidative coupling reactions.214 An important advantage of this synthetic pathway is the possibility to obtain the fused bithiophene segment in a one step reaction (Scheme 10).215 Both polymers were prepared by oxidative polymerization with FeCl3 in chlorobenzene. FETs prepared from p4.10 and p4.11 by solution processing exhibited a charge carrier mobility of 0.03–0.04 cm2 V−1 s−1, with a high on/off ratio of 106 (Table 3).214
 Scheme 10  Synthetic pathway leading to p4.10 and p4.11. 

p4.10 and p4.11 contain an unsubstituted thiophene spacer between the alkyl substituted thiophene ring and the alkyl substituted thieno[3,2-b]thiophene unit (or its selenophene analogue). The presence of this spacer turned out to be crucial for the highly ordered supramolecular organization and electronic properties of these polymers since it diminishes the distortion of the core units caused by the repulsion of the methyl chains attached to the fused aromatic ring and enables interdigitation of the dodecyl substituents in neighbouring macromolecules. Lack of this spacer leads to polymers of higher chain torsion, less ordered structural organization and poor FET mobility as measured for poly(2,5-bis(3-dodecylthiophen-2-yl)-3,6-dimethylthieno[3,2-b]thiophene), p4.12, and poly(2,2′-(3,6-dimethylselenopheno[3,2-b]selenophene-2,5-diyl)bis(3-dodecylthiophene)), p4.13.214
A series of copolymers consisting of alternating β-alkylsubstituted fused thiophene and bithiophene segments (p4.14, p4.15 and p4.16) were successfully synthesized by He and Zhang.216 For these copolymers the π–π* transition band in the UV-vis spectra is blue shifted as compared to the corresponding band in the copolymers with unsubstituted fused thiophene units. This indicates that their IP is higher and they should be more stable with regard to oxidation.217 Recently, Youn et al. have reported218 a convenient “one-pot” [1 + 1 + 2] and [2 + 1 + 1] synthesis of tetrathienoacene – a building block used for the preparation of these polymers. Compared to the previous synthetic routes, this one-pot synthesis offers a more efficient way to obtain the condensed quaterthiophene-based reagent at low cost.
The hole mobility in thin layers of poly(2,5-bis(thiophene-2-yl)-(3,7-ditri-decanyltetrathienoacene), p4.15A, derived from the FET transfer characteristics, is 0.33 cm2 V−1 s−1, with an on/off ratio exceeding 105, and a threshold voltage of −10 V (Table 3).219
Three polymers, poly(2,5-bis(thiophene-2-yl)-(3,5-didecanyltrithienoacene)) (p4.14) poly(2,5-bis(thiophene-2-yl)-(3,7-didecanyltetrathienoacene)) (p4.15B), and poly(2,5-bis(thiophene-2-yl)-(3,6-didecanylpentathienoacene)) (p4.16) were synthesized by Stille polymerization.220 Polymers having the same alkyl substituent were chosen for a more accurate and meaningful comparison. OFET properties of these polymers were evaluated from the characteristics of specially fabricated test transistors (top contact, bottom gate, SiO2 dielectric). The measured mobilities strongly depended on the substrate surface treatment. The devices fabricated by spin-casting on the surface of SiO2 treated with octyltrichlorosilane (C8OTS) or hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) exhibited one order magnitude higher mobility, two or three orders of magnitude higher on/off ratio, and much lower threshold voltage than the devices on bare substrates (Table 3). This indicates that alkylsilane self-assembled monolayers on the oxide surface can be used to decrease the oxygen contamination of the polymer film, decrease the trap sites, and improve the molecular chain packing order of the semiconductor layer on the dielectric/semiconductor interface, at least in the case of this family of polymers. No liquid crystallinity is observed for p4.14, p4.15 and p4.16 as judged from the DSC scans. A GIWAXS study confirmed that p4.15B can form tighter lamellae packing structures due to the proper arrangement of the substituents. On the other hand p4.14 and p4.16 macromolecules are packed much more loosely. AFM images are consistent with X-ray scattering results. The p4.15B polymer demonstrated the largest terrace structure among all three polymers, not surprisingly yielding the best device performance.220

p4.17 containing no substituents in the trithienoacene units but with two dodecyl chains on the bithiophene unit was prepared by Stille coupling polymerization of 2,6-bis-trimethyl-stannanyl-dithieno[3,2-b;2′,3′-d]thiophene with 5,5′-dibromo-4,4′-didocyl-[2,2′]bithiophene.221 It shows a FET mobility as high as 0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 with a very high current on/off ratio of over 107 (Table 3). Moreover, p4.17 can also be processed in environmentally friendly hydrocarbon solvents such as hexane and heptane, and devices fabricated using these solvents still retain high FET performance characteristics.221
A series of semiconducting copolymers consisting of thiophene-dialkyl-trithienoacene and alkyl-bithiophene units (p4.18A–D) were synthesized by Lu et al.222 The energy gaps of these four copolymers are 2.4–2.5 eV, about 0.4 higher than that of regioregular of poly(3-hexylthiophene),223 which helps to decrease their sensitivity to ambient light and inhibits photoinduced excitation.224 The hole mobility, measured in the FET configuration, for films annealed at 180 °C was ca. 0.03 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3). It should be noted that all fabricated devices exhibited high environmental stability against oxygen contamination and against high ambient humidity (30%).
Thieno[2,3-b]thiophene, which is used as a building block in the synthesis of p4.19, is a stable aromatic heterocycle readily synthesized.225 Otsubo et al.225b reported its synthesis by the lithiation of 1-trimethylsilylpentadiyne with n-BuLi/t-BuOK, followed by trapping of the resultant anion with carbon disulfide. Subsequent ring closure afforded 2-trimethylsilylthieno[2,3-b]thiophene, which could readily be desilylated by treatment with tetrabutylammonium fluoride to yield thieno[2,3-b]thiophene.225c
Its copolymers with 4,4′-dialkyl 2,2′-bithiophenes, p4.19A and p4.19B, were prepared by Stille coupling.226 The thieno[2,3-b]thiophene unit prevents a fully conjugated pathway between the substituents at the 2 and 5 positions.227 As a result these polymers exhibit a somewhat higher IP (5.3 eV) than fully conjugated, planar thiophene polymers.
As already stated in Section 2.4 in conjugated polymers long alkyl substituents promote self-organization in the solid state. Moreover, in the case of p4.19A and p4.19B decyl and longer substituents are necessary to ensure their good solubility for printing using environmentally friendly solvents. Spin-coated p4.19A showed a lamellar structure with an interlayer spacing of 1.7 nm and a π-stacking distance of 0.37 nm, as evidenced by X-ray diffraction.226 FETs with p4.19A and p4.19B as active layers exhibited a good μh of 0.15 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.12 cm2 V−1 s−1 for p4.19A and p4.19B, respectively, under ambient conditions.226
Among polymers containing condensed thiophene rings, poly(thieno[3,4-b]thiophene) derivatives constitute an interesting case.228 The monomers thieno[3,4-b]thiophene derivatives can be readily electropolymerized through oxidative coupling at 2 and 5 positions. The resulting polymers show a very low band gap <1 eV – one of the lowest ever reported.
Thienylenevinylene derivatives consisting of a central vinylene group to which two alkylbithiophenes are attached are known to have an extended conjugated system.229 It is caused by the fact that the incorporation of a vinylene unit in an linear aromatic system reduces steric hindrance on successive aromatic rings.230 These monomers are very good building blocks for the corresponding polymers. Poly(1,2-(E)-bis[3-dodecylthiophene-2,2′-bithiophene-5-yl]ethene), p4.20, was prepared from the dibrominated monomer using Yamamoto coupling.231 Layers of this polymer, after annealing, showed an ordered supramolecular organization of lamellar-type with the dominant X-ray reflection corresponding to d = 1.44 nm. A rather low value of this distance, ascribed to the separation of π-stacked columns of conjugated macromolecules by side alkyl groups, seems to indicate a high degree of interdigitation of the dodecyl groups. IP of p4.20 (5.2 eV) is slightly higher than that of regioregular P3HT, suggesting its better air operating stability. FETs based on p4.20 showed a high charge carrier mobility of 0.15 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3).231 Exhibiting a high hole mobility and a low band-gap (1.85 eV) as well as an appropriate IP value, p4.20 can be considered as a donor in polymer bulk heterojunction (BHJ) photovoltaic cells. Such cells comprising p4.20 and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC[71]BM) as an electron acceptor were fabricated. In preliminary tests, under nonoptimized conditions they showed a power-conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.2%.231
Several polymeric semiconductors, containing other than thienoacene-type fused aromatic rings, have been synthesized and tested in recent years. Benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) constitutes an interesting building block for the design of such polymers. In discussing the synthesis of polymers containing the BDT unit it is instructive to present the concepts of benzannulation and thienannulation as two distinctly different synthetic approaches to this molecule or its derivatives (Scheme 11).232 In the benzannulation approach, the central benzene ring of BDT is constructed from two differently substituted thiophene derivatives via a set of thermodynamically driven condensation/aromatization reactions leading to the benzene ring formation.233 There are several drawbacks of these reactions, described in detail in ref. 232. In contrast, the synthesis of BDT through thienannulation starts from a readily available benzene derivative, and yields the desired product in a one pot procedure.234
 Scheme 11  Two approaches – benzannulation and thienannulation – to benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) derivatives. 

p4.21, an alternating copolymer of BDT and dialkylbithiophene, was obtained by oxidative polymerization of 4,8-dihexyl-2,6-bis(3-hexylthiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene. The monomer was prepared, in turn, by Suzuki coupling of 2,6-dibromo-4,8-dihexylbenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene and 3-hexylthiophene-2-boronic acid pinacol ester.235 Thin films of p4.21 showed a highly ordered supramolecular organization with a π-stacking distance of 0.39 nm and a distance between the π-stacked columns of 1.61 nm, as revealed by grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) investigations. Its IP is by 0.22 eV higher than that of regioregular P3HT, making this polymer more resistant towards irreversible oxidation under air operating conditions. μh values extracted from the FET characteristics reached 0.15–0.25 cm2 V−1 s−1 with a current on/off ratio of 105–106 (Table 3). Only a slight decrease of the mobility was observed over a period of 30 days.235

p4.22 containing benzo[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene units, having two dodecyl chains attached to the central benzene ring, was prepared by oxidative polymerization with FeCl3.236 The presence of these alkyl substituents was necessary to induce the polymer solubility. Consisting of a sequence of fused aromatic rings the macromolecules of p4.22 lack sufficient flexibility for the formation of a highly ordered supramolecular organization in thin solid films. Moreover the distance between the macromolecules in a π-stacked column is unusually large (0.43 nm), significantly larger than in semiconductors showing high charge carrier mobilities.237 Indeed, p4.22 showed a rather low value of μh measured in the FET configuration (10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 3). For this reason, following a general concept known in the literature,238 additional thiophene units bearing alkyl chains were incorporated into the backbone yielding p4.23A – an alternating copolymer of benzodithiophene and dialkylbithiophene with better solution processability. This polymer showed a π-stacking distance significantly shorter than that measured for p4.22. Its charge carrier mobility, calculated from the FET characteristics, improved by over one order of magnitude as compared to the case of p4.22, being still relatively low236 (2.1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 3). According to the authors236 these rather moderate electrical parameters of thin films of p4.23A have their origin in an excessive number of solubilising groups per repeating unit which makes the formation of an organized supramolecular organization more difficult. A delicate compromise between the solubility and the capability of the supramolecularly ordered structure formation is needed. This was achieved by cutting the number of solubilising substituents by a factor of 2 (per repeating unit). Two polymers with reduced number of alkyl groups were prepared, namely p4.23B and p4.23C, in the former the two alkyl groups were attached to the benzene ring in the benzodithiophene moiety, whereas in the latter – to the bithiophene unit.236p4.23B is more soluble than p4.23C since its alkyl side groups can more freely rotate. This makes the deposition of thin layers of controlled supramolecular organization on appropriate substrates easier. p4.23C shows better charge carrier mobility in the FET measurements than p4.23B (0.134 cm2 V−1 s−1vs. 0.027 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 3). Interestingly, the presence of benzo[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene units introduces local curvature of the polymer, not perturbing its global linearity and the capability of forming ordered supramolecular structures through self-assembly. The shortest π-stacking distance of 0.37 nm is measured for p4.23C.236
Poly(2,8-bis-(3-tetradecylthiophene-2-yl)-5,12-bis(tetradecyl)dithienobenzothieno[3,2-b]thiophene) (p4.24) differs from the p4.21 by the extent of its fused aromatic segment. It was synthesized by Stille coupling polymerization with 2,8-bistrimethylstannyl-5,12-bis(tetradecyl)dithienobenzothieno[3,2-b]thiophene and 5,5′-dibromo-4,4′-bistetradecyl-2,2′-dithiophene using Pd(PPh3)4 as a catalyst in toluene.239 The authors demonstrated that a polymer consisting of a large unit of six fused rings with only two alkyl substituents which alternates with a dialkyl-bithiophene unit can still be soluble. Despite the fact that in the solid state p4.24 exhibits features characteristic of polymers of high μh, (a highly ordered, lamellar supramolecular structure with a short π-stacking distance, 0.37 nm), its hole mobility is disappointingly low (1.3 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 3), which indicates that optimizing redox and structural properties of a given conjugated polymer may not necessarily lead to the desired semiconducting properties in real devices.
Copolymers of benzothieno[3,2-b]benzothiophene (four unsubstituted fused rings segment) with dialkylbithiophenes are not well suited for FET or photovoltaic applications because of their twisted main chain (λmax for the π–π* transition <400 nm) and show no field effect in the p-channel configuration.240 Meanwhile, copolymers of their naphtho[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene analogues (p4.25A–E) which are isoelectronic with benzothieno[3,2-b]benzothiophene241 are very promising semiconductors for FETs,240 exhibiting FET hole mobilities in the range of 0.2 to 0.54 cm2 V−1 s−1 for p4.25B to p4.25Ei.e. polymers with a comparable molecular mass. One order of magnitude lower hole mobility was measured for p4.25A which showed 5 fold smaller molecular mass, consistent with the observation of a strong effect of Mn on the charge carrier mobility in conjugated polymeric semiconductors.72c
Osaka et al. in their detailed study investigated the effect of isomerism of the naphthodithiophene unit on the spectroscopic, structural and electrical transport properties of poly(2,7-bis(3-alkylthiophen-2-yl)-alt-naphtho[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene)s.242 Copolymers containing four different isomers of naphthodithiophene were compared: naphtho[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (p4.25C and p4.25E), naphtho[2,1-b:6,5-b′]dithiophene (p4.26A and p4.26B), naphtho[2,3-b:6,7-b′]dithiophene (p4.27A and p4.27B), naphtho[2,3-b:7,6-b′]dithiophene (p4.28A and p4.28B). Alkyl groups of two different lengths (R = C16H33 or R = C20H41) were attached to the bithiophene unit to induce solubility. All copolymers were prepared by Stille coupling polymerization and showed comparable molecular mass and close values of IP, determined by photoelectron spectroscopy (from 5.2 eV for p4.28 to 5.0 eV p4.25). Judging from these values, polymers of all isomeric forms studied are suitable candidates for use as semiconductors in p-channel FETs. One should however be aware of the fact that the type of isomerism strongly influences the polymer chain geometry: in p4.25 it is pseudo-straight, in p4.26 it is sine-like, in p4.27 it adopts a zig-zag geometry whereas in p4.28 the chain geometry is square wave-like. These are local geometrical changes, the global chain linearity remains preserved in all cases. These local differences in the macromolecule geometry have a strong impact on the structural organization of thin polymer films. The grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) patterns show the best structural organization in p4.25, then in p4.26, p4.27 and p4.28 being less ordered, both in plane and out of plane. This trend in supramolecular organization is reflected in the FET hole mobilities measured for all isomeric forms. They decrease in the following sequence: p4.25 > p4.26 > p4.27 > p4.28 (Table 3). The discussed paper constitutes an instructive example of a careful chain polymer chain engineering in view of the optimization of the charge carrier mobility.
One of the drawbacks of thiophene- of benzothiophene-based semiconducting polymers is their IP values, which frequently are not sufficiently high to assure air operating stability or are close to its limiting value. To increase IP, electron accepting units are sometimes incorporated into the polymer main chain. Thiazole is one of the most popular electron-deficient groups used for this purpose. Several moieties of thiazole, such as bithiazole, thiazolothiazole and benzobisthiazole have been used in organic synthesis for a long time. Now, researchers have been continuing to explore some novel structures for enriching the library of thiazole-based molecules.243 Meanwhile, new preparation methods have been elaborated, which enabled the synthesis of thiazole containing compounds under milder conditions.244 Small molecules containing thiadiazole were used as n or p-type semiconductors in OFETs or as building blocks for the preparation of polymeric semiconductors.245
In the early years of the present century low molecular compounds consisting of thiophene and thiadiazole units have been tested as active layers in FETs, however yielding rather low hole mobilities.246 Yamamoto et al.247 synthesized an alternating copolymer of thiophene and alkylthiadiazole with an enhanced IP value (5.3 eV), improving air-operating stability. In thin layers the copolymer showed highly ordered lamellar-type supramolecular organization, similar to that of P3HT with an interchain distance of 2.65 nm and a π-stacking distance of 0.365 nm. Despite these promising features of the semiconducting polymer hole mobilities, measured in the FET configuration, were still low.

p4.29A and p4.29B, which can be considered as alternating copolymers of HH coupled dialkylbithiazole and TT coupled dialkylbithiophene, were obtained by Yamamoto dehalogenation polycondensation of the corresponding dibromotetramer (Scheme 12) using a zerovalent nickel complex.248 Both polymers showed increased IP values (5.15 eV and 5.20 eV) as compared to the case of P3HT. UV-vis spectra of thin layers showed a characteristic π–π* transition band of a distinct vibrational structure characteristic of polythiophene-based polymers of high conjugation length.179 The maxima of the vibrational peaks were however hypsochromically shifted as compared to the case of P3HT. Thin layers of p4.29A showed ordered supramolecular organization of lamellar type, similar to that found in thin layers of P3HT whereas layers of p4.29B were amorphous,248μh measured for p4.29A in the FET configuration gave a value of 0.015 cm2 V−1 s−1 whereas in p4.29B the field effect was hardly detectable because of the amorphous nature of its thin layers which impeded effective charge carrier transport.
 Scheme 12  Synthetic route to prepare p4.29. 
Poly(didodecylquaterthiophene-alt-didodecylbithiazole), p4.30, was prepared from the distannyl derivative of bithiophene and the dibromoderivative of 2,2′-bis(3-dodecylthiophene-2-yl)-4,4′didodecylthiophene-5,5′-bi-1,3-thiazole by Stille coupling polymerization.249 The presence of electron withdrawing thiazole rings in the polymer main chain increases its IP value to 5.19 eV, improving its stability against oxidation under air operating conditions. The polymer has liquid crystalline properties which facilitate the formation of highly ordered structure in thin films deposited on appropriate substrates. This supramolecular organization can be further improved by annealing. As evidenced by X-ray diffraction studies the macromolecules adopt the edge-on position with the π-stacking direction parallel to the substrate. The stacks are highly oriented as evidenced by ω-scans in the X-ray rocking mode. The π-stacking distance is 0.37 nm and the distance between the stacks separated by lateral alkyl substituents is 2.1 nm. This ordered supramoleular organization leads to the FET hole mobility value of 0.33 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3) for annealed films.
Paek et al.250 studied the effect of the presence of bithiazole groups on the spectroscopic, electrochemical, structural and electrical transport properties of an alternating polymer composed of tetraalkylated quaterthiophene and 2,2′-bithiazole units (p4.31) by a comparison with its “all thiophene” analogue. p4.31 was prepared by Stille coupling of 3,3′-didodecyl-5,5′-bis(trimethylstannyl)-2,2′-bithiophene and 5,5′-bis(5-bromo-4-dodecylthiophene-2-yl)-2,2′-bithiazole. The presence of electron withdrawing groups leads to a small increase of the IP value from 5.33 eV in the “all thiophene” polymer to 5.39 eV in p4.31. In the UV-vis spectrum of a thin solid film of p4.31 a bathochromic shift by 60 nm of the band ascribed to the π–π* transition can be noticed, indicating optical band gap lowering. Moreover, the “all thiophene” polymer was amorphous whereas the out-of-plane X-ray scattering pattern of p4.31 shows a set of four distinct reflections of the (h00) family yielding a d-spacing of 2.07 nm, which corresponds to the distance between π-conjugated main-chains separated by interdigitated alkyl substituents. Thus, thin films of p4.31 exhibit an ordered supramolecular organization typical of polymers with a stiff conjugated backbone containing flexible side chains. p4.31 is also a better semiconductor for the fabrication of FETs (and possibly PCs) showing the FET hole mobility of 1.1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3) i.e. nearly two orders of magnitude higher than its “all thiophene” analogue.
A similar comparative study of polymers containing thiazole units with their “all thiophene” analogues was carried out by Kong et al.251 Before describing their results in detail, it is instructive to outline the possible interdigitation patterns characteristic of supramolecular organization in heterocyclic conjugated polymers containing alkyl side chains. Depending on the type of the side group distribution in a regiochemically well defined polymer chain, two types of interdigitations are possible: A-shaped and H-shaped (see Fig. 9). In general, ordered supramolecular organization is easier to achieve for H-shaped packed polymers such as poly(3,3′′′′-didodecylquaterthiophene) and poly(2,5-bis(3-alkylthiophene-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene)201a,205,210,252 than for A-shaped packed ones which include, among others poly(3,3′′-didodecyl-2,2′:5′,2′′-terthiophene) and poly(2,5-bis(3-dodecylthiophen-2-yl)thieno[2,3-b]thiophene).200,226,253
Two polymers were designed:251 poly(5,5′-bis(3′,4-didodecyl-2,2′-bithiophen-5-yl)-2,2′-bithiazole) (p4.32) and poly(5,5′-bis(2,5′-(thiophene-2,5-diyl)bis(3-dodecylthiophene)-5-yl)-2,2′-bithiazole) (p4.33), which are A- and H-shaped packed, respectively. They were prepared by Stille coupling polymerization in the presence of Pd2(dba)3 and P(o-tol)3. For comparison their “all thiophene” analogues were also prepared. The obtained results were in line with the general trends observed for heterocyclic conjugated polymers. First, the incorporation of the thiazole unit resulted in a small increase of the IP value – higher for p4.32 (0.11 eV) than for p4.33 (0.06 eV), which was consistent with a higher ratio of thiazole to thiophene ring in the former. Second, a large bathochromic shift of the π–π* transition band was observed for both polymers containing thiazole units, indicating lowering of the optical band gap. Thiazole containing polymers exhibited better thermal stability and more ordered supramolecular organization as evidenced by out-of-plane and in-plane X-ray diffraction patterns. In line with its most ordered supramolecular structure p4.33 showed the highest FET hole mobility (0.05 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 3) and the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.39%, when used as a component of bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells.
Recently, Guo et al.254 have proposed HH coupled dialkoxy-bithiazoles as building blocks for semiconducting conjugated polymers. In poly(alkylthiophenes) the presence of HH coupled dyads usually induced the chain torsion which led to an increase of IP to values unexploitable for p-channel FETs. Moreover, the resulting polymers usually showed a poor supramolecular organization.195 This is not the case for HH coupling of alkoxythiazoles since small oxygen van der Waals radius together with intramolecular S(thiazolyl)⋯O(alkoxy) attraction improve the planarity of the HH coupled dyad. The synthetic pathways leading to 4,4′-bis(dodecoxy)-5,5′-bithiazole and p4.34, its homopolymer, as well as p4.35, its copolymer with TT coupled dialkylbithiophene, are depicted in Scheme 13. Thin films of both polymers show good structural organization and high hole mobility in the FET configuration (0.15 and 0.25 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively) (Table 3). Their IP values are 4.94 eV and 4.80 eV i.e. lower than that of P3HT. This is caused by the fact that the electron withdrawing effect of the thiazole ring is overbalanced by the electron donating effect of the alkoxy substituent.
 Scheme 13  Synthetic routes to prepare p4.34 and p4.35. 
To summarize, bithiazole derivatives seem to be promising building blocks for the preparation of semiconducting polymers with a variety of comonomers, not necessarily from the oligothiophene family.
Osaka et al.255 reported a series of alternating copolymers of tetra-alkylated quaterthiophene with fused bithiazole which differed in the length of the alkyl lateral groups (p4.36A–C). Similarly to other polymers containing thiophene and thiazole units, they can be considered as donor–acceptor copolymers. The thiazolo-thiazole containing comonomers were prepared by the reaction of the corresponding aldehyde and dithiooxamide (Scheme 14), poly(2,5-bis(3-alkyl-5-(3-alkylthiophen-2-yl)thiophen-2-yl)thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole)s (p4.36A–C) were synthesized by Stille coupling polymerization (Scheme 14). A drawback of these polymers is their relatively low Mn value.
 Scheme 14  Synthetic route to prepare p4.36C. 
The presence of the thiazolo-thiazole unit in p4.36A–C increases their IP and lowers their optical band gap as compared to P3HT. Taking into account their polymer chain structure, they cannot form T-shaped interdigitation patterns but rather a kind of A-shaped ones. Despite this fact, they self-assemble in thin films, forming an ordered supramolecular organization of lamellar type which improves with increasing length of the lateral, alkyl substituent. For p4.36Cμh in the FET configuration reaches 0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3).
A series of copolymers (p4.37, p4.38, p4.39) containing the same thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole units as in the p4.36 but with higher ratios of electron accepting to electron donating units were synthesized by Stille coupling polymerization.256 Consistent with their chemical structure, IP values of p4.37, p4.38 and p4.39 (5.2–5.3 eV) were found to be 0.1–0.2 eV higher than that of p4.36. In thin films these polymers showed less ordered supramolecular organization than p4.36C, typical of distorted lamellae. This is probably caused by the branched nature of the substituents. With an exception of p4.37 they showed FET mobilities reaching 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3). Excellent FET air-operating stability of this polymer series should be pointed out, consistent with their deepened HOMO level (increased IP).

p4.40 and p4.41 being alternating copolymers of thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole and tetraalkylated quaterthiophene are chemically similar to p4.36 but differ from it by the distribution pattern of the alkyl substituent along the polymer chain. Both polymers were synthesized by Stille coupling polymerization.257 The authors studied the effect of their regiochemical environment on the spectroscopic, redox and electrical transport properties. The only difference between the chemical structure of both polymers lies in one sequence of coupling (HH in p4.40 and HT in p4.41, see the substituent labeled in red). The HH coupling induces a significant torsion angle in the polymer chain of p4.40 which leads to an increased value of its IP value (5.6 eV) as compared to the case of p4.41 whose IP is equal to 5.3 eV. A hypsochromic shift in the π–π* transition band, from 560 nm for p4.41 to 520 nm for p4.40, is also observed for thin solid films. Layers of both polymers on an SiO2 covered Si substrate are amorphous. This probably accounts for rather low μh values measured in the FET configuration (0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 3). Both polymers were also tested in organic PC as components of bulk heterojunctions in combination with methanofullerene[6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM). A power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.70% was reached for p4.40.
Poly(benzobisthiazole-alt-3-octylquarterthiophene) (p4.42) reported by Ahmed et al.258 is somehow similar to p4.36 having a benzobisthiazole electron accepting group instead of a thiazolo-thiazole one. 2,6-Bis(3-octylthiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-d;4,5-d′]bisthiazole, the comonomer containing benzobisthiazole, was prepared by acid-catalyzed condensation of 3-octylthiophene-2-carboxylaldehyde and 2,5-diamino-1,4-benzenedithiol dihydrochloride259 and then reacted with the distannyl derivative of dialkylbithiophene to yield p4.42 through Stille coupling (Scheme 15).260 Similarly like in the case of poly(alkylthiophene)-type homopolymers72c,179 its spectroscopic, redox and electrical transport properties are molecular mass dependent. IP of the polymer fraction showing Mn = 8000 g mol−1 is 5.2 eV, a value comparable to that measured for p4.36 of similar molecular mass. X-ray diffraction studies of thin films reveal the presence of the (h00) family of reflections corresponding to an interlayer lamellar d100-spacing of 1.56 nm, much shorter than the corresponding distance in poly(3-alkylthiophene) with the same (octyl) lateral substituent. This seems to indicate a higher degree of alkyl chains interdigitation in p4.42. The FET hole mobility measured for the fraction of Mn = 8000 g mol−1 is rather low (0.002 cm2 V−1 s−1) and increases only 5 fold for 40 times higher Mn. A low molecular mass fraction of p4.42 (8000 g mol−1) in combination with PC71BM was also tested as a component of BHJ in organic photovoltaic cells, yielding a PCE value of 2.1%.258
 Scheme 15  Synthetic route to prepare p4.42. 

p4.43 and p4.44 which also contain a benzobisthiazole group in their repeating unit were synthesized through the conventional Stille coupling polymerization.261 Their similarity to p4.39 should be pointed out. p4.43 is easier to solution process. It is soluble in chloroform and chlorinated benzenes even at room temperature, p4.44 is soluble in warm chlorinated benzenes. Their IP is high and comparable to that of p4.39 (5.3 eV and 5.2 eV for p4.43 and p4.44, respectively). Solution-cast thin films of both polymers show ordered supramolecular organization with a short π-stacking distance of 0.36 nm. A comparison of the in-plane and out of plane diffraction patterns indicates that the lamellae are edge-on oriented on the substrate surface. The measured hole mobilities in the FET configuration reach 0.18 and 0.26 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3), for p4.43 and p4.44, respectively. High air operating stability of both polymeric semiconductors should be pointed out.
First reports on the use of N-alkyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrroles as fused aromatic building blocks were published by Ogawa et al.262 These monomers show a completely flat crystal structure, which is a clear manifestation of good π conjugation across the condensed rings. N-alkyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrroles can be chemically (FeCl3) or electrochemically polymerized to yield poly(N-alkyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrroles), exhibiting excellent stability in their oxidized (polycarbocation or doped) state. This stability in the conducting form arises from its low IP value, much lower than that of P3HT and comparable to that of poly(ethylenedioxythiophene). In addition to their low IP poly(N-alkyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrroles) have low band gaps.263 Low IP constitutes a serious drawback of all N-alkyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole-containing conjugated polymers because it excludes their use as semiconductors under air operating conditions. However, even when working in an inert atmosphere they show low on/off ratios due to the difficulty in the complete removal of all permanent charge carriers, originating from the oxidative doping. These permanent charges interfere with the ones created by the field effect in FETs or in PCs with the charges originating from excitons dissociation.264
Liu et al.265 synthesized a series of soluble alternating copolymers of N-alkyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole and thiophene or bithiophene (p4.45, p4.46 and p4.47) by Stille coupling copolymerization. Different thiophene comonomers were used: 3-alkylthiophenes (p4.45), 3,4-didodecylthiophene (p4.46) and 4,4′-didodecyl-2,2′-bithiophene (p4.47A), 3,3′-dihexyl-2,2′-bithiophene (p4.47B) (Scheme 16). p4.45(A–D), p4.46 and p4.47A have band gaps between 1.74 and 1.84 eV, which are smaller than that of regioregular P3HT. The lowering of the bands gaps originates from a more coplanar structure of the polymer and the donor–acceptor effect of dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole and thiophene. For the regioirregular polymers, p4.45(A–D), which have a 1:1 ratio of thiophene/dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole units in the polymer backbone, the band gaps are the lowest (between 1.74 and 1.79 eV). As expected, the IP values of all synthesized copolymers are also low, as determined by cyclic voltammetry.265 The highest IP is determined for p4.47B in which dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole units alternate with HH linked dialkyl-substituted thiophene rings. Among all as-cast samples, p4.47A exhibited the best field effect performance with the highest FET hole mobility of 0.21 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3), the value which is higher than the highest FET hole mobility reported for regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene).266 Interestingly, after thermal annealing at 120 °C for 30 min, the mobilities of all the samples decreased, in some cases by as much as one order of magnitude. All transistor testing had to be carried out in argon, but even under these conditions the obtained on/off ratios were low.
 Scheme 16  Synthetic route to prepare p4.45. 
Conjugated building blocks containing silicon substituents constitute an interesting option for the preparation of semiconducting polymers. Such substituents are known to stabilize adjacent carbanionic centers due to the effective hyperconjugation between negatively charged carbon centers and the adjacent silyl groups.267 Among the various systems being considered, silole (sila-2,4-cyclopentadiene) containing polymers have attracted significant attention as systems in which the exocyclic Si–C σ*-orbital effectively mixes with the π*-orbital of the butadiene fragment to afford a low-lying lowest-unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and a relatively small band gap.268 Additionally, the silole bridge better stabilizes the diene HOMO level compared to the carbon analogues.268b This effect should enhance the stability of FETs fabricated from silole-containing polymers under ambient operating conditions.
Lu et al.269 reported the synthesis of 3,3′-dihexylsilylene-2,2′-bithiophene-based homopolymer, p4.48 and, and its copolymers with thiophene or bithiophene (p4.49A and p4.49B). The synthetic pathway leading to p4.48 is presented in Scheme 17. All polymers have excellent thermal and environmental stability. p4.48 showed no field effect, probably due to two reasons: amorphous structure in thin layers and too high (5.6 eV) IP value which constituted a substantial hole injection barrier. p4.49A and p4.49B exhibited lower IP values (5.2 eV and 5.3 eV) and an ordered supramolecular organization in thin layers. Both were found to be promising p-channel semiconductors, yielding a FET hole mobility of 0.05 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.08 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively (Table 3).
 Scheme 17  Synthetic route to prepare p4.48. 
The dibromo derivative of dibenzosilole is another building block used for the synthesis of silole-containing conjugated polymers. Its synthetic pathway is depicted in Scheme 18. p4.50A and p4.50B were prepared269 through Suzuki polycondensation between 2,7-dibromo-9,9-dioctyldibenzosilole (Scheme 18)270 and 2,5-bis(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)thiophene (p4.50A) and 2,5′-bis(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)bithiophene (p4.50B). These polymers are only soluble in chlorinated aromatic solvents such as warm chlorobenzene, dichlorobenzene and trichlorobenzene, which is probably a consequence of their higher molecular masses (Table 3). As evidenced by X-ray diffraction studies they adopt similar supramolecular structure to p4.49A and p4.49B, however less ordered as judged from more pronounced broadening of the Bragg reflections. As a consequence the FET hole mobilities 6 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 6 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for p4.50A and p4.50B, respectively, are lower than those measured for p4.49A and p4.49B (Table 3).269
 Scheme 18  Synthetic route to prepare 2,7-dibromo-9,9-dialkylsilafluorene. 

p4.51A and p4.51Bi.e. fluorene analogues of p4.50A and p4.50B were studied more than a decade ago by Sirringhaus et al.271p4.51B synthesized by Suzuki coupling272 showed liquid crystallinity and better FET charge carrier mobilities (0.01–0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1) than that reported for p4.50B as well as good operating stability. A slightly lower μh for p4.51B (0.006 cm2 V−1 s−1) was reported in ref. 269.
Alternating copolymers of fluorenone and oligothiophenes were also studied.79,273 Replacement of the fluorene moiety (p4.51) by the fluorenone one (p4.52) improves the thermal stability of the polymer, increases its IP and lowers the band gap since the polymer becomes donor–acceptor (–DA–) in nature. p4.54 contains three types of chromophores, being in conjugation: fluorenone, thiophene and vinylene. The π–π* band in the UV-vis-NIR spectra of p4.53 and p4.54 is shifted towards the NIR (absorption edge above 700 nm), which is a clear consequence of their low band gap. Both polymers exhibiting p-type conductivity were tested as components of bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells together with PC61BM, yielding power conversion efficiencies of 1.5% and 1.1% for p4.53 and p4.54, respectively.
Thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione is another electron accepting building block which has been widely used for the preparation of p-type organic semiconductors for FETs and PCs.274 The presence of this moiety in copolymers with more electron rich comonomers like thiophene oligomers, for example, lowers both the HOMO and the LUMO levels of the resulting macromolecular compounds, the former being however much more affected. Using these copolymers high open circuit voltages (0.8–1.0 V) and good power conversion efficiencies (3–7%) can be obtained for bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells.274 In FETs low-lying HOMO levels (high IPs) improve air operating stability of the devices.258,269,275 However, the IP values cannot be too high because in this case hole injection may become difficult as observed for semiconductors with IP > 5.5 eV. A delicate balance is needed here.276
Guo et al.277 reported the synthesis of a homopolymer of thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione), p4.55, and a series of its copolymers with thiophene or its oligomers (p4.56–p4.59). The main building block for these copolymers i.e. 1,3-dibromo-5-N-alkylthieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (Scheme 19) was first synthesized by Zhang et al.278 This original procedure was then modified by Nielsen and Bjørnholm.279 In recent years the preparation of this building block has been significantly facilitated by the commercial availability of thiophene-3,4-dicarboxylic acid.274a Thus, this reagent is first converted into the anhydride and then into the imide. The imidization reaction cannot be in this case achieved under conditions typically employed in the preparation of phthalimides280 or naphthalene diimides.117 but a two-step procedure has to be used. After reaction with the appropriate amines in toluene, the anhydride is converted to the corresponding 4-alkylcarbamoylthiophene-3-carboxylic acid, which then undergoes the SOCl2 assisted imidization without further purification.277 Dibromination with NBS is the final step of the precursor preparation. Its Yamamoto coupling leads to the homopolymer (p4.55) (Scheme 19). The copolymers (p4.56–p4.59) were synthesized by Stille coupling.135
 Scheme 19  Synthetic route to prepare p4.55. 
The alkyl substituent in the thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione unit assures very good solubilities of p4.59D and p4.59E up to 40 mg mL−1 in solvents such as chloroform, hexane, toluene. p4.55 shows limited π-conjugation as evidenced by its π–π* band in the UV-vis spectrum which is hypsochromically shifted with respect to the same bands of polymers of the same family. No field effect in neither n- nor in p-configuration was measured for p4.55. This can, at least in part, be associated with the amorphous character of its thin films. p4.56–p4.59 are better conjugated since repulsive imide–imide interactions, causing the polymer chain torsion, are weakened by the presence of thiophene spacers. p4.56 which has the highest ratio of the thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione unit to the thiophene ring exhibits ambipolar behavior under vacuum with electron and hole mobilities of ∼10−4–10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. All other copolymers of this family (p4.57, p4.58 and p4.59) show field effect only in the p-channel configuration with hole mobilities approaching or surpassing 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 – the highest being measured for p4.58 (0.6 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 3). In p4.57B the lowest band gap is determined which is associated with the electron-donating properties of the alkoxy substituent. However, the presence of these substituents has a negative impact on the air-operating stability of p4.57B since its IP becomes lower than the IP of P3HT.277 As evidenced by X-ray diffraction studies, the supramolecular organization of copolymers containing oligoalkylthiophene units is similar to that of poly(alkylthiophenes) and governed by π-stacking and interdigitation of side alkyl chains.
Compounds containing diketopyrrolopyrrole chromophores have been often used as components of organic pigments,281 and their solubility can be improved by appropriate modification of their chemical constitution.282 Diketopyrrolopyrrole can also be used as a building block of organic semiconducting polymers with tunable electronic properties.136 Three copolymers containing diketopyrrolopyrrole units have already been discussed in Section 3 as instructive examples of the design of tailor-made polymers exhibiting tunable spectroscopic and electronic properties. The diketopyrrolopyrrole unit exhibits a planar conjugated bicyclic structure, which favors conjugation. Its copolymers with more electron rich comonomers show low band gaps and are very well suited for the fabrication of bulk heterojunction PCs with thiophene or its oligomers. Typical comonomers used for the preparation of alternating copolymers with diketopyrrolopyrrole are dibenzosilole, benzodithiophene, dithienosilole or substituted bithiophenes.139,147,282b,283
Using 3,6-bis(5-bromothiophene-2-yl)-2,5-bis(2-hexyldecyl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione, whose synthetic pathway is presented in Scheme 20, Burgi et al. synthesized poly[3,6-bis-(4′-dodecyl-[2,2′]bithiophenyl-5-yl)-2,5-bis-(2-hexyldecyl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione] (p4.60), through Yamamoto coupling.138 The π–π* absorption band of p4.60 is located in the NIR part of the spectrum, being indicative of a low band gap. The high value of IP for this polymer, in combination with a low band gap leads to a rather high |EA| value of 4.0 eV. This polymer is therefore almost ideally suited for the fabrication of one-component ambipolar FETs. Indeed, in the FET configuration p4.60 shows well balanced hole and electron mobilities of 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.09 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively (Table 3). Light emitting FETs can be fabricated from p4.60 which under appropriate bias emit near-infrared light. This property is inherently associated with ambipolar character of this polymer.138
 Scheme 20  Synthetic pathway leading to the dibromo-derivative of 3,6-bis(thiophen-2-yl)-2,5-bis(2-hexyldecyl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione. 

p4.61 is an alternating copolymer of diketopyrrolopyrrole and unsubstituted terthiophene.283c It can be synthesized from the 3,6-bis(5-bromo-2-thienyl)-2,5-dihydro-2,5-di(2-hexyldecyl)-pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrolo-1,4-dione and bis(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3-dioxaborolane)-2,5-thiophene by Suzuki polymerization. Its molecular mass depends on the type of the used catalyst. The application of Pd2(dba)3/PPh3 as a catalyst yielded p4.61 of Mn = 54000 g mol−1 whereas a much lower Mn of 10000 g mol−1 was obtained using a Pd(PPh3)4 catalyst.146 The optical band gap of p4.61 is small (1.36 eV measured for thin solid films). The high molecular mass polymer (Mn = 54000 g mol−1) was ambipolar in the FET configuration and exhibited hole and electron mobilities of 0.04 and 0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively (Table 3). Surprisingly, these mobilities were found to be almost independent of the molecular mass.146 In combination with phenyl-C70-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM), high molecular mass p4.61 was tested as a component of a bulk heterojunction PC reaching external power conversion efficiency η = 4.7%. In contrast to Mn independent FET mobility, a dramatic reduction in organic photovoltaic cell performance was observed when the high molecular polymer was replaced by the low Mn one, processed under identical conditions.146

p4.62 differs from p4.61 by the presence of a phenyl ring in its aromatic segment. The immediate effect of this change on the redox properties of the copolymer is an increase of IP from 5.17 eV in p4.61 to 5.35 eV in p4.62 and of the optical band gap from 1.36 eV to 1.53 eV. Similarly to p4.61, p4.62 is ambipolar, showing electron and hole FET mobilities of 0.02 and 0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively (Table 3). In combination with phenyl-C70-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) it can also serve as a component of efficient PCs, showing power conversion efficiencies of 5.5%.147
Poly[2,5-bis(2-octyldodecyl)pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4(2H,5H)dione-alt-2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′′-quaterthiophene] (p4.63) and poly[2,5-bis(2-octyldodecyl)pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4(2H,5H)dione-alt-5,5′-di(thiophenyl-2-yl)-2,2′-biselenophene] (p4.64) were synthesized in high yields using Stille coupling polymerization.284 Excellent solubility (up to 12 mg mL−1) of both polymers in organic solvents such as chloroform, dichloromethane, toluene, THF, and chlorobenzene should be pointed out. A small optical band gap of 1.32–1.29 eV was measured for both polymers. They did not exhibit ambipolarity and in test FETs always behaved as p-conductors showing, after annealing, very high hole mobilities of 1.04 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.50 cm2 V−1 s−1 for p4.63 and p4.64, respectively (Table 3).284a It was found by X-ray diffraction that p4.64 exhibited a slightly denser packing than p4.63. The latter exhibited an interesting morphology of its thin films characterized by uniform, densely packed intertwined polymer fibers. As in the case of polythiophene homopolymers its FET mobility was found to be molecular mass dependent.284b
Lee et al.285 reported the synthesis of p4.65B – a copolymer of 3,6-bis(thiophen-2-yl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione with two siloxane substituents at the nitrogen atoms alternating with selenophene. Its preparation started from a standard N-alkylation of dithienyl-diketopyrrolopyrrole with 6-bromo-1-hexane under basic conditions. Subsequent hydrosilylation reaction of the olefinic compound 3,6-di(thien-2-yl)-2,5-di(hexy-5-en-1-yl)-pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione using 1,1,1,3,5,5,5-heptamethyltrisiloxane gave the siloxane-substituted precursor in the presence of a Karstedt catalyst.286 This precursor was then converted to the dibrominated dithienyl-diketopyrrolopyrrole. A Stille copolymerization of the dibrominated dithienyl-diketopyrrolopyrrole and distannylated selenophene yielded p4.65B. The main goal of the introduction of the siloxane substituent was to enhance the copolymer compatibility with the OTS modified SiO2/Si substrate. Therefore a dithienyl-diketopyrrolopyrrole selenophene copolymer with 2-octyldodecyl substituents (p4.65A) was also prepared for comparative reasons. Both polymers turned out to be ambipolar. The effect of the siloxane groups was very pronounced since p4.65B showed, after annealing, very high hole and electron mobilities of 3.97 and 2.20 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, measured in the FET configuration. Identically processed layers of p4.65A showed lower hole and electron mobilities: 2.53 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.43 cm2 V−1 s−1.285
Naphthylene cyclopentadienone has also been proposed as an electron accepting group in the design of alternating copolymers with oligothiophenes. A series of polymeric semiconductors containing this moiety was reported.287p4.66, a copolymer of dialkylquaterthiophene and naphthylene cyclopentadienone was prepared following the reactions sequence depicted in Scheme 21. 1,3-Dithienyl-2-propanone was prepared by self-condensation of thiopheneacetic acid using DCC (dicyclohexylcarbodiimide) and DMA (4-dimethylaminopyridine).288 The dithienylcyclopentadienone derivative was then synthesized via a double Knoevenagel condensation with acenenaphthenequinone.289 2,5-Di(5-bromothienyl)-3,4-(1,8-napthylene)cyclopentadienone was obtained after treatment with bromine in acetic acid/dichloromethane. The Stille cross-coupling polymerization of 2,5-di(5-bromothienyl)-3,4-(1,8-naphthylene)cyclopentadienone with 4,4′-dihexyl[2,2′]bithiophene or 4,4′-didodecyl[2,2′]bithiophene yielded p4.66A and p4.66B.287b Both polymers show interesting UV-vis-NIR spectra consisting of two overlapping bands. The higher energetic band with a clear maximum at wavelengths below 500 nm is located at approximately the same position as the corresponding band in dithienylcyclopentadienone which can be ascribed to the π–π* transition in naphthylene cyclopentadienone. The second band exhibits its λmax in the NIR (at 767 and 806 nm for p4.66A and p4.66B, respectively). Organic semiconducting NIR-absorbing materials are rare and are of significant technological interest.5p4.66A and p4.66B exhibit field effects in the p-channel configuration with the FET hole mobilities of 7.8 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for p4.66A and 2.26 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for p4.66B (Table 3).
 Scheme 21  Synthetic route to prepare 2,5-di(5-bromothienyl)-3,4-(1,8-naphthylene)cyclopentadienone. 
Several alternating copolymers of pyrazine and oligothiophenes showing tunable band gap were synthesized290 and tested as components of bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells.291 Mondal et al.292 reported the synthesis of a series of copolymers consisting of alternating fused aromatic thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine (or [3,4-b]quinoxaline) and tetraalkylquaterthiophene units. The synthetic route to prepare these polymers is presented in Scheme 22. Condensation between the 3,4-diaminothiophene dihydrochloric acid salt and 1,2-acenaphthoquinone (or 9,10-phenanthenequinone) yields fused aromatic thienopyrazines acenaphtho[1,2-b]thieno[3,4-e]pyrazine and dibenzo[f,h]thieno[3,4-b]quinoxaline, respectively.293 Stille coupling between 8,10-bis(5-bromo-3-dodecylthiophen-2-yl)acenaphtho[1,2-e]thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine, 8,10-bis[5-bromo-3-(2-ethylhexyl)-thiophen-2-yl]acenaphtho[1,2-e]thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine or 10,12-bis[5-bromo-3-(2-ethylhexyl)-thiophen-2-yl]dibenzo[f,h]thieno[3,4-b]quinoxaline with (3,3′-didodecyl-2,2′-bithiophene-5,5′-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane) leads to p67A, p67B or p68 respectively. It should be noted that the band gap of these polymers, being in the range of 1.15 eV to 1.64 eV, better matches the solar spectrum than the gaps of heterocyclic homopolymers which do not contain electron accepting moieties. In the FET configuration all polymers of this family behave like p-type conductors, exhibiting moderate hole mobility approaching 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, in the best case (Table 3).
 Scheme 22  Synthetic route to prepare 8,10-bis(5-bromo-3-alkylthiophen-2-yl)acenaphtho[1,2-e]thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine. 
Strongly electron deficient isoindigo ((E)-1H,1H′-[3,3′]bindolylidene-2,2′-dione) is a fused planar aromatic conjugated molecule consisting of two indole heterocycles which are joined together in E-configuration via a central carbon–carbon double bond. Isoindigo based oligomers were first investigated by Mei et al.294 and showed promising absorption spectra and favorable electrochemical and photovoltaic properties. This finding stimulated growing research interest and in the past three years the dibromoderivative of isoindigo was used as a building block in the preparation of its alternating copolymers with thiophene and its oligomers, thienothiophenes, benzodithiophenes, acenes, fluorenes and carbazoles, to name only the most important.295 These copolymers were mainly used as donor (p-type conducting) components of bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells, with PC71BM as an accepting phase, yielding sometimes very promising results like, for example, an efficiency of 6.3% for a copolymer consisting of alternating terthiophene and isoindigo units.295h
Lei et al.296 synthesized two alternating copolymers of isoindigo and thiophene (p4.69) and bithiophene (p4.70A). Direct condensation of two commercially available compounds, namely 6-bromoisatin and 6-bromooxindole, in acetic acid afforded 6,6′-dibromisoindigo in 86% yield (Scheme 23). Subsequently, 6,6′-dibromoisoindigo was alkylated with 1-iodo-2-octyldodecane to give 6,6′-dibromo-N,N′-(2-octyldodecanyl)isoindigo in 74% yield (Scheme 23). This bromoderivative of alkylated isoindigo constituted a convenient building block for the preparation of the targeted copolymers. Its Stille coupling polymerization with bis(trimethylstannyl)thiophene or 5,5′-bis(trimethylstannyl)-2,2′-bithiophene gave p4.69 and p4.70A, respectively. Both polymers showed similar redox properties, although the IP value of p4.70A (5.7 eV) was slightly lower than that of p4.69 (5.8 eV), consistent with a higher ratio of electron donating (thiophene) units to the electron-accepting (isoindigo) ones. Both polymers show a relatively high |EA| of 3.8 (p4.69) and 3.7 eV (p4.70A, Table 3), in line with their chemical constitution. As spun p4.69 did not exhibit observable field effect. However, after annealing at 150 °C, a hole mobility of 0.019 cm2 V−1 s−1 was measured in the FET configuration (Table 3). As evidenced by grazing incidence X-ray diffraction studies, thin layers of annealed p4.70A, showed a highly ordered supramolecular organization with edge-on lamellar packing of the molecules. As a result of this ordered structure, good hole mobilities were observed in the FET configuration, up to 0.79 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3). This better performance of p4.70A as compared to p4.69 was not only attributed to its better structural organization but also to its higher molecular mass.296 As already indicated, in conjugated polymers μh is strongly dependent on Mn.72c,297 It should also be noted that devices fabricated from p4.70A were stable at high humidity for 1 month, evidently due to the high value of IP.
 Scheme 23  Synthetic route to prepare 6,6′-dibromo-N,N′-(alkyl)isoindigo. 
It is instructive to comment on the high value of IP for p4.69 (5.8 eV) and p4.70A (5.7 eV) which should make injection of holes difficult. However no such problems are encountered since the FET performance of both polymers was very good. Mei et al.298 also synthesized p4.70A and measured its IP by a direct method, namely photoelectron spectroscopy, providing a much lower value of 5.38 eV, whereas in ref. 299 a value of 5.54 eV was obtained by photoelectron spectroscopy. The lower IP fully explains the observed facility of hole injection. In view of these findings “electrochemical” values of IP in p4.70A should be treated with caution because usually differences between the “electrochemical” and “photoelectron” IP values are lower.84,85 This discrepancy may originate from inappropriate determination of the redox couple potential with respect to the reference electrode.
Copolymers with branched substituents longer than 2-octyldodecyl were also synthesized by Stille coupling polymerization, namely with 3-decyltridecyl (p4.70B), 4-decyltetradecyl (p4.70C) and 5-decylpentadecyl (p4.70D) groups.299 A fair correlation between the “electrochemical” and “photoelectron” values of IP was found. Thin layers of all three polymers exhibited long-range ordered edge-on lamellar packing with a short π-stacking distance of 0.361 nm for p4.70B and 0.357 nm for p4.70C and p4.70D. Thin films of p4.70C and p4.70D showed higher hole mobilities in the FET configuration than films of p4.70B (3.62 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.76 cm2 V−1 s−1vs. 0.40 cm2 V−1 s−1) but this was probably associated with more than twice higher Mn of the former, especially in view of the fact that the structural organization in all these cases is similar.
Mei et al.298 synthesized p4.70E which contained siloxane groups in its N-substituent. Similar siloxane-containing side groups were also introduced into p4.65B to improve its compatibility with the SiO2 substrate (vide supra). The synthesis of this polymer started from 2,6-dibromoisoindigo which was N-alkylated with an alkene-terminated linear alkyl chain.294 Hydrosilylation of the terminal alkene with 1,1,1,3,5,5,5-heptamethyltrisiloxane was then carried out in the presence of a commercially available Karstedt catalyst, yielding a highly soluble isoindigo monomer with siloxane-terminated solubilizing side chains.286p4.70E was synthesized from this monomer by microwave assisted Stille coupling with 5,5′-bis(trimethylstannyl)-2,2′-bithiophene.296 By photoelectron spectroscopy p4.70E showed a lower IP value (5.20 eV) than p4.70A (5.38 eV).145 This polymer turned out to be very well suited for the fabrication of FETs with SiO2 dielectric. Hole mobility approaching 2.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 was measured for annealed films (Table 3). Two key factors contribute to these excellent electrical transport properties of p70E: a very short π–π stacking distance of 0.358 nm and its better compatibility with the SiO2 substrate.298
Alternating copolymers of isoindigo and acenes, namely poly[N,N′-(2-octyldodecyl)isoindigo-alt-naphthalene] (p4.71) and poly[N,N′-(2-octyldodecyl)isoindigo-alt-anthracene] (p4.72), were synthesized by Sonar et al.300 The polymerization reaction involved Suzuki coupling of 6,6′-dibromo-N,N′-(2-octyldodecyl)isoindigo and 2,6-bis(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)naphthalene (or 2,6-bis(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)anthracene) respectively. The resulting polymers showed a high value of Mn (74000 g mol−1 and 52000 g mol−1 for p4.71 and p4.72, respectively). An excellent agreement was found for the “electrochemical” and “photoelectron” IP values which were close to 5.50 eV, high enough to assure air operating stability and low enough to assure efficient injection of holes. Both copolymers exhibited p-channel charge transport characteristics with the hole mobility measured in the FET configuration of 1.3 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for p4.72 and 4.0 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for p4.71 (Table 3). Owing to rather low optical band gaps (1.80 eV for p4.71 and 1.75 eV for p4.72) these polymers could be used as donors with a PC71BM acceptor in a bulk heterojunction PC, yielding a power conversion efficiency of 1.13% for p4.72 and 0.34% for p4.71.300
Benzothiadiazole has also been studied as an electron accepting unit in copolymers with thiophene or its oligomers. Semiconducting polymers of this type were mainly tested as components of bulk heterojunction PCs.301p4.73 – a copolymer of benzothiadiazole and dialkylquaterthiophene – was synthesized via Stille copolymerization from 4,7-bis(2-trimethylstannylthien-5-yl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole and 5,5′-dibromo-4,4′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-2,2′-bithiophene (Scheme 24).302 The effect of the presence of electron deficient benzothiadiazole units in the polymer chain is manifested by an increase of the IP value to 5.18 eV i.e. by nearly 0.2 eV as compared to the case of P3HT studied under the same conditions. Hole carrier mobility measured for thin layers of p4.73 in the FET configuration reached 0.20 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3) with no signs of deterioration after the device storage in air (56% relative humidity) for 5 months. p4.73 was also tested as a component of BHJ PC with PC71BM, yielding devices with a power conversion efficiency of 6.26%.302
 Scheme 24  Synthetic route to prepare p4.73. 
Naphtho[1,2-c:5,6-c′]bis[1,2,5]thiadiazole consisting of two fused benzothiadiazole units was first reported by Mataka et al.303 Recently, Osaka et al.304 have published a detailed paper in which they compared p4.74 and p4.75 – the former being a copolymer of benzothiadiazole with dialkylquaterthiophene whereas the latter naphthobisthiadiazole with dialkylquaterthiophene. The synthesis of p4.75 is depicted in Scheme 25. In their principal hypothesis the authors assumed that the replacement of a smaller rigid electron accepting unit by its double extended analogue would not only increase its IP value but also would improve the π-stacking, facilitating in this manner the formation of ordered supramolecular organization in thin layers. Indeed, extension of the electron accepting unit led to a slight increase of the IP value by 0.05 eV (to 5.20 eV) in p4.75. An excellent agreement between the “photoelectron” and “electrochemical” IPs, reported in this paper should be pointed out. As expected the optical and electrochemical band gaps of p4.75 were also lower. In line with the predictions of the authors, thin layers of p4.75 exhibited much better structural order of lamellar type than p4.74 with a short π-stacking distance of 0.35 nm. In the difractograms of p4.74 the reflection ascribed to π-stacking was hardly detectable. Superior redox and structural properties of p4.75 were clearly manifested in its performance in FETs and BHT PCs. Hole carrier mobilities measured for thin layers of p4.75 in FET configuration reached 0.56 cm2 V−1 s−1 whereas for p4.74 they were 8 times lower. Similarly, maximum PCE values obtained for BHJ PCs made of p4.75 reached 6.3%, in p4.74 they never exceeded 2.6%.304
 Scheme 25  Synthetic route to prepare p4.75. 
Polymers containing carbazole units have been studied for decades as photoconductors or organic semiconductors.305 There are several advantages of using carbazole derivatives as building blocks in semiconducting polymers: (i) 9H-carbazole is a fully aromatic unit providing good chemical stability; (ii) bridging its phenyl group prevents it from rotation, therefore carbazole containing polymers show better conjugation and lower band gaps than their p-phenylene analogues; (iii) N-functionalization of carbazoles, which is relatively easy, allows us to tune the solution processability as well as electronic and optoelectronic properties of the resulting polymers.305,306
In the polymer chain the carbazole unit can be either 3,6-coupled or 2,7-coupled (see Fig. 20).
Polymers and copolymers of 3,6-coupled carbazole derivatives have been tested for many years, however much more promising polymers containing 2,7-coupled carbazole units started to be synthesized much later.305,307 More difficult synthesis of polymers with 2,7-carbazole units is caused by the fact that in the carbazole moiety 3,6- and 1,8-positions are highly activated because the electron-rich nature of carbazole inhibits direct and specific aromatic substitution at the 2,7-position. Indirect approaches have to be used in this case. They usually use a 4,4′-functionalized biphenyl unit bearing an activated group at the 2(2′) positions which undergoes ring-closing reaction, yielding 2,7-functionalized carbazoles, but other approaches are also possible (see Scheme 26).
 Scheme 26  Possible synthesis of 2,7-substituted carbazole. 
Quick progress in the preparation of semiconducting polymers with 2,7-carbazole units was made possible by exploiting advances in metal-catalyzed polycondensation.308 The synthesis of various 2,7-carbazole containing building blocks was optimized: (2,7-dichloro,308 2,7-ditriflate,309 and 2,7-dibromo).310 Yamamoto,47,311 Stille,57,312 or Suzuki313 coupling polymerization was used in the preparation of alternating copolymers consisting of 2,7-carbazoles and other conjugated units.314 Restriction imply to Yamamoto copolymerization which can be applied to the preparation of random copolymers only. In Stille copolymerization significant difficulties in the synthesis of pure organotin derivatives can be encountered. Suzuki polycondensation seems to be so far the most versatile method for the preparation of polymers of this family.313 Based on methodologies reported for the preparation of poly(2,7-fluorene)s,315 efficient syntheses of 2,7-diboronic ester derivatives of carbazole were developed from halogen–lithium exchange and palladium catalyzed borylation.309,316
In the early stages of research on poly(2,7-carbazole)s photo- and electroluminescence properties were of primary interest, especially in view of the fact that many of these compounds were blue emitters.308,317 Several solution processable poly(2,7-carbazoles) with tunable optoelectronic properties were prepared by N-substitution with alkyl307a,308,317,318 or aryl307,319 groups. Copolymers with specifically designed comonomers were also prepared to be tested as components of light emitting diodes and other optoelectronic devices.307b,319c,320

p4.76 and p4.77 are N-substituted poly(2,7-carbazole) homopolymers307a whereas p4.78 and p4.79 are their alternating copolymers with bithiophene. They were prepared either via Yamamoto coupling of the appropriate dibromoderivative (p4.76 and p4.77) or by Stille coupling of the same derivative with distannylated bithiophene (p4.78 and p4.79) (Scheme 27).
 Scheme 27  Syntheses of p4.76–p4.79. 
These solution processable polymers showed IP values in the range of 5.2 to 5.3 eV, indicating their resistance against oxidation under air operating conditions.321 They differed, however, in their electrochemical properties: p4.78 and p4.79 could be quasi-reversibly oxidized and reduced whereas for p4.76 and p4.77 a non-reversible oxidation was observed, as in other homopolymers of poly(2,7-carbazole).309p4.76 and p4.77 exhibited rather poor performance as components of active layers in p-channel FETs (Table 3), probably as a result of limited conjugation and not sufficiently ordered supramolecular organization. Hole carrier mobility in thin layers of p4.78, measured in the FET configuration after annealing reached a moderate value of 2.0 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3). Consistent with the increased IP values, hole mobilities of p4.78 and p4.79 remained essentially unchanged after one month of their exposure to an ambient atmosphere.

p4.80 – a hyperbranched homopolymer of carbazole, obtained in one pot Suzuki coupling – was reported by Li et al.322 Its FET hole mobility was rather low 1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 3), however its optoelectronic properties were more interesting. p4.80-based LEDs exhibited better efficiency (3.05 cd A−1) than those fabricated from standard poly(N-vinylcarbazole) (2.19 cd A−1). This improvement was attributed to lower energy barrier for charge carrier injection and higher hole-transporting ability of p4.80 layers.322
Low molecular mass indolo[3,2-b]carbazoles are known semiconductors exhibiting good hole carrier mobilities in the FET configuration.323 In the corresponding polymers the indolo[3,2-b]carbazole units can be coupled either at C3/C9 or C2/C8 positions to give poly(indolo[3,2-b]carbazole-3,9-diyl) (p4.81) or poly(indolo[3,2-b]carbazole-2,8-diyl) (p4.82), respectively. p4.81 has an extended π-conjugation along its chain, resembling that of poly(p-arylene)s, while in p4.82 the conjugation is restricted as in polyarylamines.

p4.81A–B and p82A–B were synthesized via a dehalogenative coupling of dihaloindolo[3,2-b]carbazole monomers (Scheme 28).224 The monomers i.e. 3,9-dichloroindole[3,2-b]carbazole and 2,8-dichloroindolo[3,2-b]carbazole were prepared respectively by condensation of 3- and 4-chlorophenylhydrazine with 1,4-cyclohexanedione, followed by double Fischer indolization (Scheme 28). p82C–E were synthesized using an alternative method, namely by regioselective oxidative (FeCl3) coupling of indolo[3,2-b]carbazole. Regioselectivity of this reaction is enhanced because of a strong activation of C2/C8 positions which are para located with respect to the amino functions (Scheme 29).224 Both preparation methods led to rather low molecular masses.
 Scheme 28  Synthesis of monomers and their polymerization to p4.81 and p4.82via dehalogenative coupling. 
 Scheme 29  Synthesis of p4.82 through oxidative coupling. 
Exhibiting sufficiently high IP values in the range of 5.1 to 5.2 eV p4.81A and p4.82 seem to be good candidates for the fabrication of active layers in p-channel FETs. Unfortunately, p4.81A and p4.81B showed rather poor film forming properties and the hole mobilities in the resulting FETs were low (Table 3). Better results were obtained for the p4.82, especially for those polymers which were obtained by oxidative coupling. For p4.82E hole carrier mobilities of 0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1 were measured (Table 3). It was postulated that better performance of p4.82 as compared to p4.81 is not only caused by morphological differences but also by better resonance stabilization of the ammonium radical cations formed in the charge carrier transport process.323b
Further modification of the properties of semiconducting polymers containing the carbazole moiety can be achieved by designing appropriate heteroacene units. In designing such polymers it should be remembered that unsubstituted poly(heteroacene)s are insoluble or very hard to solubilize. Long alkyl chains have to be attached to the conjugated chain so as to overbalance strong intermolecular interactions. The second role of the alkyl substituents is to promote appropriately ordered supramolecular organization, usually by the interdigitation. Thus, both the chemical constitution of the polymer and the geometry of its chain have to be carefully designed so as to achieve the desired goal.242,304,324
Chen et al.325 synthesized dithieno[2,3-b;7,6-b]carbazole, with a central N-substituted carbazole unit and two thiophene rings fused at the ends. This unit was then used in the copolymerization with dialkylbithiophenes via Stille coupling, to yield p4.83. The synthetic pathway is depicted in Scheme 30. Polymers of the p4.83 series are on the borderline of air operating stability since their IP values (IP < 5.0 eV) are lower than those of poly(carbazoles), poly(indolocarbazoles) and their copolymers with oligothiophenes (vide supra). As cast polymers show poor supramolecular structure which can be improved by annealing to give a lamellar-type organization. Hole mobility in thin layers of the p4.83 series increases with an increase of the alkyl substituent length reaching 0.035 cm2 V−1 s−1 for p4.83C (Table 3) owing it to slightly improved supramolecular structure caused by more efficient interdigitation.325
 Scheme 30  Synthetic pathway leading to p4.83. 
Very similar polymers, namely poly(dithieno[3,2-b;6,7-b]carbazole-alt-dialkylbithiophene)s (p4.84), have more recently been reported.326 The synthesis of the heteroacene monomers as well as their Stille coupling with the dibromoderivative of bithiophene to yield p4.84 are presented in Scheme 31.326 After annealing, both p4.84A and p4.84B showed improved lamellar-type supramolecular organization with the π-stacking distance of 0.37 nm. Annealed layers showed hole mobilities of 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.39 cm2 V−1 s−1, for p4.84A and p4.84B, respectively.326
 Scheme 31  Synthetic pathway leading to p4.84. 
Low molecular mass arylamines and the corresponding polymers and copolymers have been extensively studied as promising materials for active layers in FETs, hole transporting layers in LEDs, photoconducting layers, etc.327 They are characterised by a low ionisation potential (close or inferior to 5.0 eV) and can be reversibly oxidised to generate stable radical cations.328 The latter property is exploited not only in organic electronics but also in the design of polymeric high spin magnetic materials (see Section 6 of this review). With few exceptions poly(arylamine) derivatives do not crystallize, forming so called “molecular glasses”.33 This is associated with nonplanarity of the macromolecules which makes the crystallization difficult. Due to their amorphous structure, less problems are encountered in the reproducibility of films morphologies, so simple solution processing techniques can be used for the film deposition. Moreover, these materials combine amorphous structure with reasonably high hole carrier mobility of the order 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1.329
In the past decade a great improvement has been observed in the preparation of arylamine building blocks and the resulting polymers. Classically, triarylamines are obtained by amination of aryl halides.330 Progress in the design of the amination catalysts, based on palladium, copper or nickel complexes, led to significant lowering of the reaction temperatures and improvement in the yield of the desired product.331 Still, the applied procedures remain very demanding. The preparation of well-defined, high molecular mass polytriarylamines by the condensation of aniline with a dihalobenzene is an instructive example here. Since this is a step-growth reaction it requires exact stoichiometry and very high conversion of the reacting functional groups to obtain a high molecular mass product with good yields. Conversions >0.95 are necessary to prepare polymers suitable for use in organic electronics.329a
Microwave-assisted methods were successfully applied to accelerate the rate of transition metal catalysed C–C and C–N coupling reactions, in some cases also improving the conversion and the selectivity of the reaction.332 Microwave irradiation was exploited not only in the preparation of the arylamine building blocks but also in the condensation polymerizations, where its action significantly accelerated the reaction rate and minimized the occurrence of side reactions.333 Synthesis of polytriarylamine from 2,4-dimethylaniline and 4,4′-dibromobiphenyl using microwave-assisted, palladium-catalysed amination is an instructive example of this effect. The reaction times could be reduced to five minutes at 100 °C. The depolymerization of the resulting polymer could be avoided in this manner which occurred at longer reaction times.334
Alternating copolymers of aryl amine and 2,9-fluorene (p4.85), 3,6-carbazole (p4.86) and 4,4′-biphenyl (p4.87) were prepared by a microwave-assisted palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction between a primary arylamine and an aryldibromide (Scheme 32).335 The IP values of all three polymers were 4.5 eV for p4.85 and p4.86 and 4.8 eV for p4.87i.e. much lower than those reported for polyflourene, polycarbazole and poly(p-phenylene) homopolymers336 and carbazole (IP = 5.3 eV) units.337 This is a clear consequence of the presence of electron donating, easily oxidizable amine group in the polymer main chain. All three polymers were tested as active layers in FETs. The best performance was observed in the case of p4.85A, for which the FET hole mobility of 2.4 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 was measured under ambient conditions (Table 3).335
 Scheme 32  Synthetic route to prepare p4.85, p4.86 and p4.87. 
Electrical transport properties of the poly(triarylamine) homopolymer (p4.88) and alternating copolymers of triarylamine with fluorene (p4.89) as well as indenofluorene (p4.90) were compared by Zhang et al.338 All three polymers were synthesized by Suzuki coupling polycondensation. p4.88 was prepared by homocondensation of N-(4-bromophenyl)-4-(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)-N-(2,4-dimethylphenyl)benzenamine, whereas both copolymers (p4.89 and p4.90) were obtained by heterocondensation of dibromotriarylamine and pinacol ester boromates of fluorene or indenofluorene. It was found that the FET mobility of hole carriers increases in the following order p4.88 < p4.89 < p4.90, reaching 0.04 cm2 V−1 s−1 for p4.90 (Table 3).338 It seems that the introduction of bridged aromatic units improves the planarity and the persistence length in the copolymers, resulting in better intramolecular π-orbital overlap and improving the local structural organization.
An interesting paper correlating the chemical structure of a given arylamine copolymer with its hole transport properties has recently been published.339 The investigation was carried out for copolymers depicted in Scheme 33 which were synthesized using Suzuki-coupling340 and showed high molecular masses in the range 200–600 kDa with PDI in the range 2.8–4.0. IP values of the polymers of the investigated series were strongly dependent on the number of amine nitrogens in the repeating unit (see p4.91, p4.92, p4.93 and p4.94 in Scheme 33) and could be varied from 4.86 eV to 5.40 eV.
 Scheme 33  Chemical structures of copolymers used in a comparative study of electrical transport properties. 
Time of flight (TOF) mobilities were measured under identical conditions for each polymer. Surprisingly, an inverse exponential relationship was found between μh and IP. Since the mobility value depends not only on the redox properties of a given conjugated polymer but also on such factors as structural and energetic disorder, polaronic effects, and wave function localization, the authors determined the contribution of all these factors to the measured mobility using complementary methods such as absorption and emission spectroscopy and DFT calculations. In conclusion it was postulated that disorder effects and hole localization, which are more pronounced in polymers with lower IP, were the principal factors that determined the mobility values.
To summarize this part of the review, the number of solution processable polymers which show good hole mobilities and for this reason can be used as active layers in FETs, hole transporting layers in LEDs or donor components of BHJ PCs by far exceeds the number of polymers exhibiting high electron mobilities. Polymer chain engineering, which involves appropriate geometrical arrangement of main chain conjugated segments as well as the positions of the solubilizing substituents, is the most important factor determining the redox and electrical properties of the resulting polymers. These properties can be tuned in a relatively large range by the synthesis of copolymers containing units with balanced donor–acceptor interactions. Finally, in these polymers an efficient p-type transport can be achieved not only in highly structured thin films of lamellar-type organization but also, in some cases, in amorphous layers.
5 Low band gap semiconductors
Low band gap semiconducting polymers of D–A type have been recently very intensively studied as components of bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells, photodiodes or field effect transistors, including ambipolar ones.341 The active layer in a typical BHJ PC consists of a donor i.e. a conjugated polymer capable of absorbing light in the visible and NIR parts of the spectrum and an appropriate acceptor which can be fullerene derivatives, inorganic nanocrystals or a strongly electron deficient conjugated polymer.276,342 All components should be solution processable and form two co-continuous networks of large interface so as to facilitate the formation of charge carriers through the dissociation of excitons at this interface.171b,341a,e,342a,343
Conjugated homopolymers such as regioregular P3HT can be used as donor components of BHJ providing power efficiencies of 3–5%,344 under the condition, however, that the morphology of the polymer network in the BHJ favors charge transport.89 Further progress in PCs containing P3HT is intrinsically limited by poor matching of its absorption spectrum and the solar spectrum. In addition its IP is too low. The same applies to solution processable poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV) derivatives, namely poly[3-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MEH-PPV) and poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MDMO-PPV) where even lower energy conversion efficiencies were obtained.344,345
Even quick literature search clearly shows several advantages of donor–acceptor alternating copolymers in this respect. First, due to narrower gaps, as compared to the corresponding homopolymers, their absorption spectrum is shifted towards NIR, which is favorable for the solar radiation harvesting. Moreover, in the spectra of DA polymers an additional intramolecular charge transfer absorption band frequently appears at longer wavelengths, which additionally broadens the spectrum and makes the conversion of photons to charge carriers more efficient. Second, the positions of the HOMO and LUMO levels in these polymers and as a consequence their IP and |EA| can be precisely tuned in a wide range and optimally adapted to a given acceptor so as to achieve satisfactory open circuit voltage Voc.
Although the design and synthesis of DA polymers is presently the most popular direction of constructing new high molecular mass semiconductors for photovoltaics,346 other approaches are also worth mentioning: (i) extension of the π system,171h,223,347 polythiophene containing conjugated bi(thienylenevinylene) side groups shows a narrower band gap than P3HT and better power conversion efficiency in devices processed under the same conditions; (ii) stabilization of the quinoidal structures, this approach was initiated by Wudl et al.348 nearly 30 years ago who prepared poly(isothianaphthene) – the first low band gap conjugated polymer. Many other low band polymers were prepared using this approach. A mixed approach was also applied, in which the stabilization of the quinoid structure was combined with DA copolymerization to yield poly(thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-benzodithiophene) exhibiting a narrow band gap (1.6 eV).349 Photovoltaic cells with this polymer as a donor component of the BHJ and PC71BM as an acceptor exhibited a power conversion efficiency of up to 7.4%.349b
Two methods discussed above are efficient in tuning the band gaps but they inevitably lead to raising the HOMO level (decreasing the IP value). This may have a negative effect on the open circuit voltage (Voc). In the approach involving DA copolymerization this problem is easier to avoid.
In DA-type conjugated polymers the electron rich, donor units are most frequently constructed from bridged dibenzene or dithiophene moieties. Another class of donors involves heteroacenes, for example fused benzene and thiophene units. The effect of bridging is very pronounced in terms of conjugation since the presence of the bridge impedes the torsion of the adjacent rings and fixes in this manner the planarity of these building blocks. Fluorene, dibenzosilole and carbazole are representative examples of dibenzene-based donor units. Because of the electron deficient nature of benzene which weakens the electron donating effect of the bridging group these building blocks are classified as weak donors (Scheme 34). Their presence in the corresponding DA copolymers leads to moderate gap narrowing, which limits their performance in photovoltaic cells, although it can have a beneficial effect on Voc.
 Scheme 34  Typical electron donating units used in the design of donor–acceptor conjugated polymers. 
In the bridged dithiophene series the following donors can be distinguished: cyclopentadithiophene (CPDT), dithienosilole (DTS), dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]germole (DTG) and dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole (DTP). Compared to the bridged dibenzene donors, in the corresponding DA copolymers orbitals of this type of donors better mix with those of the acceptor which results in a better planarity of the polymer chain. Taking into account their pronounced effect on the optical band lowering and diminishing of the oxidation potential in the DA polymers they can be classified as strong donors (Scheme 34).
Fused dithienobenzene units, frequently containing two solubilizing alkyl groups can be considered as medium donors where strong electron donating properties of alkylthiophene rings are weakened by the presence of the electron deficient benzene group (Scheme 34).
In general, the band widths of DA copolymers, containing the same A unit, can be correlated with the strength of the donor. This is illustrated in Scheme 35 where – IP and EA values are compared for a series of dithienopyrrolopyrrole copolymers with different donors. It is clear that the change in the donor has a more pronounced effect on IP (or HOMO) than on EA (or LUMO).
 Scheme 35  Effect of the electron donating strength on IP and EA of diketopyrrolopyrrole copolymers containing different donors. Data taken from ref. 283d and 283f. 
Electron-deficient acceptor units used for designing DA conjugated polymers usually contain imine nitrogen (benzothiadiazole (BT), quinoxaline (QA), thienopyrazine (TP), bithiazole (BTz), thiazolothiazole (TTz), benzobisthiazole (BBTz), benzotriazole (BTA), s-tetrazine (STTz), naphtho[1,2-c:5,6-c]bis[1,2,5]thiadiazole (NT)) or a carbonyl group (CO): diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP), [2,3-c]thiophene-4,9-dione (NTDO), isoindigo (II) and thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (TPD), fluorenone (Scheme 36). Similarly to donors, acceptors can be classified as weak, medium and strong. In DA copolymers the electron accepting strength affects mainly EA (or LUMO) although in the series of copolymers of a strong donor dithienosilole (DTS) with acceptors of varying strength, both changes in IP (or HOMO) and in EA (or LUMO) contribute to band gap narrowing as clearly seen in Scheme 37.
 Scheme 36  Typical electron accepting units used in the design of donor–acceptor conjugated polymers. 
 Scheme 37  Effect of the electron accepting strength on EA and IP of dithienosilole (DTS) copolymers containing different acceptors. Data taken from ref. 269, 283d and 350. 
In general, the following combinations weak donor–weak acceptor, medium donor–weak acceptor, and weak donor–medium acceptor yield alternating copolymers band gaps of which are too wide for efficient photovoltaic applications. Such applications require the combination of strong donor–strong acceptor or strong donor–medium acceptor or medium donor–strong acceptor. Similar rules apply to ambipolar FET applications, however ambipolarity in DA copolymers is more rare than it should be expected based on the IP and EA values.
Copolymers containing donors such as thienothiophene and cyclopentadithiophene and acceptors such as isoindigo, diketopyrrolopyrrole, thiazolothiazole, and benzothiazole were found to yield p-channel transistors with high hole mobilities. In these polymers strong intermolecular interactions are induced by the large dipole moment between the donor and the acceptor units. Among the most promising polymers, high molecular mass poly(cyclopentadithiophene-co-benzothiadiazole) should be cited, exhibiting the FET mobility of hole carriers of up to 5.5 cm2 V−1 s−1.351 Already mentioned diketopyrrololopyrrole-copolymers with various donors reached an FET mobility of up to 2.2 cm2 V−1 s−1.145,352 Recently, an even higher hole mobility of 8 cm2 V−1 s−1 was reported for a copolymer of dithienyldiketopyrrolopyrrole and dithienylvinylene.353 Most recently studied DA copolymers of isoindigo can also be considered as a promising group of semiconductors for p-channel FETs, for example Lei et al.324b reported a hole mobility of 1.06 cm2 V−1 s−1 for a copolymer of isoindigo and bithiophene.
Recent progress in heterocyclic chemistry makes possible to design and synthesize copolymers with sequences more complicated than DA sequences, for example: (D–A1–D–A2–D) or (A–D1–A–D2–A). This approach, extremely useful for fine tuning the redox, electronic and optoelectronic properties of the resulting polymers, was applied for the construction of periodic copolymers exhibiting ambipolar behavior, which consisted of diketopyrrolopyrrole and benzothiadiazole as acceptors and thiophene or selenophene as a donor. Well balanced hole and electron FET mobilities were measured for these polymers.354
In order to demonstrate the peculiar properties of DA conjugated copolymers we will discuss four series of copolymers. In each series the acceptor unit is common and combined with different donor units of varying electron donating strength. The selected A units are: benzobisthiazole (weak acceptor), thiazolothiazole (medium acceptor), thienopyrroledione (medium acceptor) and benzothiadiazole (strong acceptor).
The first series of copolymers can be obtained either by Stille or Suzuki couplings. In the Stille condensation two routes are possible: (i) the reaction of the dibromo derivative of dithienylbenzobisthiazole with the distannyl derivative of the donor or inversely (ii) the reaction of the distannyl derivative of dithienylbenzobisthiazole with the dibromo derivative of the donor. The application of Suzuki coupling is also possible.260,350b All copolymers of this series (l5.1–l5.6) (see Fig. 24) show in solution one broad absorption band in the 330–650 nm range, assigned to the intramolecular charge transfer band. A significant red-shift in the absorption maximum is observed as the donor comonomer is varied from dithienobenzene (l5.2) to dithienopyrrole (l5.6), which can be interpreted as originating from increasing intramolecular charge transfer strength with increasing donor strength.355 The electron donating unit affects mainly the IP value (or in other words the energy of the HOMO level which is related to IP) which decreases from 5.71 eV (l5.1) to 4.79 (l5.6). In contrast |EA| (∼3.3 eV) remains essentially independent of the nature of the donor unit (Table 4). Since Voc in BHJ PCs is inversely related to IP of the polymer used in combination with PC71BM, test cells have been fabricated to verify whether the expected trend is reflected by the changes in the open circuit voltage Voc. This is indeed the case, Voc decreases from 0.81 V to 0.31 V when going from l5.1 to l5.6. Changes in power conversion efficiencies are more complex, but this parameter is strongly morphology dependent and should be treated with caution.350b
 Fig. 24  Chemical structures of copolymers containing benzobisthiazole acceptor units. 
Table 4 
M
n, PDI, |EA|, IP, Eg (electrochemical band gap) and photovoltaic properties of the donor–acceptor copolymers




 

M
n (Da)/PDI
IP/|EA|/Eg (eV)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Device structure
Ref.




ITO – indium tin oxide, PEDOT-PSS – poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate), PCBM – methanofullerene[6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester, BCP – bathocuproine, PFN – poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)], CPE – conjugated polyelectrolyte: PF2/6-b-P3TMAHT (poly[9,9-bis(2-ethylhexylfluorene)]-b-poly[3-(6-trimethylammoniumhexyl)thiophene]).a Eg – optical band gap.b ODCB(1,2-dichlorobenzene)/DIO (1,8-diiodooctane).c ODCB/ODT(1,8-octanedithiol).d Chlorobenzene/DIO.e ODCB/1-chloronaphthalene.f ODCB/1,2,4-trichlorobenzene.g Device prepared by thermal annealing, slow drying and solvent vapor annealing.





l5.1

19940/2.84
5.71/3.33/2.37
0.81
3.42
0.63
1.79
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

350b





19940/2.84
5.71/3.33/2.37
0.63
7.22
0.64
3.00
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alb

350b




l5.2

6800/1.68
5.55/3.30/2.25
0.65
0.29
0.32
0.06
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

350b





6800/1.68
5.55/3.30/2.25
0.61
1.17
0.54
0.39
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alb

350b




l5.3

8060/1.91
5.20/3.30/1.90
0.66
7.08
0.45
2.10
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

350b





8060/1.91
5.20/3.30/1.90
0.61
6.55
0.41
1.70
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alc

350b




l5.4

7820/2.46
5.09/3.29/1.80
0.73
3.01
0.55
1.24
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

350b





7820/2.46
5.09/3.29/1.80
0.62
5.98
0.55
2.03
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alc

350b




l5.5

9870/1.41
5.13/3.36/1.77
0.65
6.58
0.51
2.20
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

350b





9870/1.41
5.13/3.36/1.77
0.55
7.96
0.38
1.68
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alc

350b




l5.6

52400/2.82
4.79/3.30/1.49
0.31
3.06
0.32
0.31
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

350b




l5.7A

8700/1.59
5.06/2.81/2.26
0.76
10.5
0.58
4.68
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Al

357




l5.7B

24300/2.00
5.00/3.00/2.00
0.56
7.50
0.49
2.10
ITO/PEDOT/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

350a




l5.7C

15500/2.30
5.10/2.90/2.20
0.62
10.20
0.65
4.10
ITO/PEDOT/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

350a




l5.7D

33900/3.90
5.10/3.30/1.80
0.65
12.60
0.61
5.00
ITO/PEDOT/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

350a




l5.7E

6300/1.47
5.04/3.41/1.63
0.73
11.25
0.71
5.88
ITO/PEDOT/L:PC70BM/Ca/Al

356




l5.8

58000/2.90
5.31/3.24/2.07
0.86
9.15
0.62
4.88
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

358




l5.9A

10700/1.80
5.30/2.80/2.50
0.76
6.32
0.56
2.72
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/Al

359




l5.9B

11020/1.30
5.05/3.11/1.94
0.77
6.68
0.51
2.60
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al

360




l5.10

14000/2.40
5.31/3.51/1.80
0.67
11.13
0.53
4.03
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Ag

361




l5.11

12000/2.33
5.10/3.40/1.70
0.58
4.04
0.47
1.10
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al

363




l5.12A

13200/2.60
5.56/3.75/1.81
0.85
9.81
0.66
5.50
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

274a





35000/2.70
5.40/—/1.73a
0.85
11.50
0.68
6.80
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/Ca/Ald

274b




l5.12B

39000/3.00
5.57/—/1.70a
0.81
9.70
0.67
5.70
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/Ca/Ald

274b




l5.12C

42000/2.50
5.48/—/1.70a
0.87
8.10
0.56
4.00
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/Ca/Ald

274b




l5.13A

6600/1.20
5.11/3.63/1.48
0.66
4.98
0.50
1.63
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Al

364





4100/1.30
5.09/3.42/1.67
0.70
6.97
0.39
1.90
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/Al

365




l5.13B

10600/1.29
5.16/3.08/2.08/1.59a
0.76
4.69
0.53
1.69
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Ale

274h




l5.14A

26700/2.49
5.08/3.43/1.65
0.70
9.22
0.35
2.30
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alf

367




l5.14B

39800/2.58
5.12/3.47/1.65
0.75
13.20
0.57
5.70
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alb

367




l5.14C

46100/2.29
5.29/3.63/1.66
0.79
13.00
0.59
6.09
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alb

367




l5.14D

37700/1.48
5.24/3.55/1.69
0.84
12.70
0.53
5.71
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alb

367




l5.14E

64000/4.70
5.26/3.59/1.67a
0.76
8.12
0.50
3.15
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Al

274g




l5.15A

28000/1.60
5.57/3.88/1.69
0.88
12.20
0.68
7.30
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/BCP/Ald

274l





10000/—
—
0.89
6.53
0.53
3.10
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/BCP/Alb

72d





18000/—
—
0.88
9.91
0.62
5.40
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/BCP/Alb

72d





31000/1.58
—
0.91
12.13
0.70
7.70
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/BCP/Alb

72d




l5.15B

26000/1.62
—
0.90
10.91
0.62
6.40
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/BCP/Alb

72d




l5.15C

25000/1.62
—
0.90
9.65
0.61
5.30
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/BCP/Alb

72d




l5.15D

20000/2.58
5.33/3.63/1.70a
0.89
9.40
0.52
4.40
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Age

274i




l5.15E

27000/2.56
5.37/3.67/1.70a
0.83
8.40
0.50
3.40
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Ag

274i




l5.16

16300/1.90
5.66/3.93/1.73
0.80
9.7
0.53
4.10
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/LiF/Ald

369





48000/1.70
5.60/3.50/2.10
0.85
12.6
0.68
7.30
ITO/ZnO/L:PC70BM/MoO3/Agb

370




l5.17A

10800/1.44
5.59/3.49/2.10
0.82
3.05
0.43
1.06
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Al

373




l5.17B

13600/1.92
5.66/3.66/2.00
1.01
0.62
0.35
0.22
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

374




l5.18A

34900/1.38
5.52/3.50/2.02
0.86
7.29
0.54
3.41
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Alb

373




l5.18B

11700/1.83
5.60/3.59/2.01
0.99
1.15
0.43
0.74
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

374




l5.19

9200/1.40
5.15/3.48/1.67
0.58
7.03
0.52
2.11
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Alb

373




l5.20

39200/2.95
5.44/3.61/1.83
0.90
6.11
0.56
3.11
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

374




l5.21A

14900/1.37
4.89/3.08/1.81
0.43
6.19
0.46
1.23
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/LiF/Al

375




l5.21B

15600/1.36
4.86/3.07/1.79
0.43
11.1
0.43
2.06
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/LiF/Al

375




l5.21C

17900/1.63
4.81/3.08/1.73
0.54
11.9
0.44
2.80
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/LiF/Al

375




l5.22A

35000/1.30
5.30/3.57/1.73
0.70
11.0
0.60
3.20
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al

376




l5.23

18000/1.20
5.05/3.27/1.78
0.68
12.7
0.55
5.10
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Al

346a




l5.24

7000/1.71
4.90/3.50/1.40
0.36
4.20
0.53
0.80
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al

363




l5.25

38500/2.09
5.32/3.25/2.07
0.81
8.86
0.48
3.47
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al

377




l5.26A

38000/2.80
5.40/3.70/1.70
0.75
2.02
0.44
0.66
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al

378a




l5.26B

24200/2.51
5.36/3.52/1.84
0.86
10.7
0.60
5.40
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al

379





24200/2.51
5.36/3.52/1.84
0.85
11.2
0.67
6.10
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Alg

379




l5.26C

33000/7.4
5.30/3.70/1.60
0.74
10.05
0.46
3.39
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al

378a




l5.26D

40000/2.2
5.30/3.60/1.70
0.79
11.45
0.49
4.46
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al

378a




l5.26E

9000/1.40
5.30/3.60/1.70
0.78
9.75
0.49
3.79
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al

378a




l5.27

37000/1.97
5.50/3.60/1.90
0.89
6.92
0.63
3.60
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/Al

314a





—/—
—
0.89
10.60
0.67
6.50
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/CPE/Al

381




l5.28

79000/4.20
5.39/—/—
0.90
9.50
0.50
5.40
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC60BM/Al

383b




l5.29A

21000/1.50
5.50/—/—
0.95
8.40
0.44
3.50
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al

384b




l5.29B

20000/1.30
5.50/—/—
0.97
9.10
0.51
4.50
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al

384b




l5.30

—/—
5.01/3.24/1.77
0.62
13.20
0.63
5.15
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Ald

346b




l5.31

—/—
5.12/3.35/1.77
0.70
14.70
0.64
6.58
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Ald

346b




l5.32

—/—
5.22/3.45/1.77
0.76
15.20
0.66
7.73
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Ald

346b




l5.33

—/—
5.15/3.31/1.84
0.76
15.40
0.70
8.24
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/PFN/Ca/Ald

346c




l5.33

—/—
5.15/3.31/1.84
0.74
17.20
0.74
9.15
ITO/PFN/L:PC71BM/PFN/MoO3/Al or Agd

346c





From the point of view of their application in p-channel FETs, l5.1 suffers from ineffective hole injection caused by too high IP whereas in the case of l5.6 low on/off ratios are expected because of its low IP value which leads to weak resistance against oxidative doping (see Section 4). Indeed copolymers with high IP values (l5.1 and l5.6) show inferior FET parameters, the best ones being measured for l5.2 (Table 5).
Table 5 Donor–acceptor polymeric semiconductors for p-channel FETs; Mn, PDI, |EA|, IP, Eg (electrochemical band gap) transistors parameters and OFET device structure




 

M
n (Da)/PDI
IP/|EA|/Eg (eV)

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

I
on/Ioff

V
T (V)
π-Stacking [Å]
Device structure (deposition technique)
Ref.




BGBC – bottom-gate/bottom-contact, BGTC – bottom-gate/top-contact, TGBC – top-gate/bottom-contact, HMDS – hexamethyldisilazane, OTS – octyltrichlorosilane, ODTS – octadecyltrichlorosilane, PFBT – poly(fluorene-alt-benzothiadiazole), [a.o] – air operating, [i.o] – inert atmosphere operating, [v.o.] – vacuum operating,a Eg – optical band gap.





l5.1

19940/2.84
5.71/3.33/2.37
9.3 × 10−3
104
−20.9
3.53
BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

350b




l5.2

6800/1.68
5.55/3.30/2.25
0.011
105
−15.3
3.70
BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

350b




l5.3

8060/1.91
5.20/3.30/1.90
2 × 10−3
105
−19.0
—
BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

350b





366500/1.97
5.20/3.30/1.90
0.010
106
−5.2
—
BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

350b




l5.4

7820/2.46
5.09/3.29/1.80
7.2 × 10−4
104
−22.8
3.78
BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

350b




l5.5

9870/1.41
5.13/3.36/1.77
8.5 × 10−4
105
−22.1
3.78
BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

350b




l5.6

10300/3.12
4.79/3.30/1.49
2.2 × 10−4
104
−28.6
3.64
BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

350b





52400/2.82
4.79/3.30/1.49
5.5 × 10−4
103
−3.7
3.64
BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

350b




l5.7B

24300/2.00
5.00/3.00/2.00
0.12
105–106
—
—
BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

350a




l5.7C

15500/2.30
5.10/2.90/2.20
0.01
105–106
—
—
BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

350a




l5.7D

33900/3.90
5.10/3.30/1.80
0.03
105–106
—
—
BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

350a




l5.8

58000/2.90
5.31/3.24/2.07
3.8 × 10−3
105
—
—
BC, OTS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

358




l5.9A

10700/1.80
5.30/2.80/2.50
2.8 × 10−3
1180
−19
—
BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]

359




l5.10

14000/2.40
5.31/3.51/1.80
1.3 × 10−3
—
−14
—
BG, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [v.o.]

361




l5.11

12000/2.33
5.10/3.4/1.70
0.01
103
—
—
BGTC,OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

363




l5.13B

10600/1.29
5.16/3.08/2.08/1.59a
3.9 × 10−4
104–105
—
—
TC, —/SiO2/Si

274h




l5.14E

64000/4.70
5.26/3.59/1.67a
8.9 × 10−3
105
−0.3
—
BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]

274g




l5.15A

28000/1.60
5.57/3.88/1.69
1 × 10−4
—
—
—
BC, SiO2/Si [i.o.]

274l





10000/—
—
7 × 10−6
—
—
—
BC, SiO2/Si [i.o.]

72d





18000/—
—
1 × 10−4
—
—
—
BC, SiO2/Si [i.o.]

72d





31000/1.58
—
3.7 × 10−4
—
—
—
BC, SiO2/Si [i.o.]

72d




l5.15D

20000/2.58
5.33/3.63/1.70a
8.2 × 10−4
105
−1.91
—
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

274i




l5.15E

27000/2.56
5.37/3.67/1.70a
2.4 × 10−3
105
−1.69
—
BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]

274i




l5.22B

10200/2.60
—
0.17
105
—
3.70
BC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

351a






13000/—
(11000)/—

—
0.28
103–104
—
3.7–3.8
BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

351c






30000/—
(16000)/—

—
0.59
103–104
—
—
BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

351c






51000/—
(25000)/—

—
1.20
102–104
—
3.7–3.8
BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

351c





(35000)/—
—
3.30
105–106
—
3.7–3.8
BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

351c




l5.22C

1800/—
—
0.016
104
—
—
BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

351c





6500/—
—
0.20
103–105
—
—
BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

351c





16000/—
—
0.40
102–103
—
3.7
BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

351c




l5.24

7000/1.71
4.90/3.5/1.40
0.02
104
—
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]

363




l5.25

38500/2.09
5.32/3.25/2.07
2.5 × 10−3
104–105
−15
—
BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]

377




l5.26A

38000/2.84
5.40/—/—
0.80–1.20
103–104
−25
—
BCTG OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [a.o.]

378b





38000/2.80
5.40/3.70/1.70
1.20
104
—
—
BCTG, PFBT/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C

378a




l5.26C

33000/7.40
5.30/3.70/1.60
0.15
104
—
—
BCTG, PFBT/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C

378a




l5.26D

40000/2.20
5.30/3.60/1.70
0.57
105
—
—
BCTG, PFBT/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C

378a




l5.26E

9000/1.40
5.30/3.60/1.70
3 × 10−3
102
—
—
BCTG, PFBT/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C

378a




l5.20

79000/4.20
5.39/—/—
1 × 10−3
—
—
—
BG, SiO2/[a.o.]

383b





As already stated thiazolothiazole can be considered as a medium strength electron acceptor. Stille coupling of the distannyl derivative of dialkylthienylthiazolothiazole with a precursor introducing a strong donor unit (dibromo derivative of dithienosilole)356 yields the copolymers of the l5.7–l5.10 series (Fig. 25).350a,357 Alternatively they can also be prepared by Suzuki coupling.357 The available literature data allow for the elucidation of the effect of topology and chemical nature of the solubilizing substituent in the thiophene ring on the redox and optical properties of the resulting polymer. First, a reduction of the optical band gap is observed as a result of the electron-donating properties of dithienosilole.356 A comparison of l5.7A, l5.7C and l5.7D which contain the hexyl, octyl and 2-ethylhexyl substituent, respectively, shows that this band gap narrowing is essentially independent of the topology of the alkyl substituent since optical gaps of all polymers are similar (1.81 eV, 1.79 eV and 1.82 eV). The same is observed for the IP values which are smaller than those of the homopolymer and very close to each other (5.06 eV, 5.10 eV and 5.10 eV). Surprisingly, shifting of the substituent from the position 3 to 4 slightly decreases the optical band gap to 1.76 eV and IP to 5.04 eV, however these changes are minimal and on the borderline of the measurement error. Replacing alkyl substituents by more electron-donating alkoxy ones changes the DA balance which is manifested by further lowering of the optical band gap and the IP values to 1.73 eV and 5.0 eV, respectively.
 Fig. 25  Chemical structures of copolymers containing thiazolothiazole acceptor units. 

l5.7B and l5.7E show reasonable hole carrier mobilities measured in the FET configuration of 0.17 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.078 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. For other polymers of this group lower hole mobilities are measured. The described copolymers are promising materials for BHJ PCs yielding devices with a PCE of 5.88% in the case of l5.7E. Interestingly, the l5.7B-based devices exhibited the lowest PCE (2.10%), despite the narrowest gap of this copolymer. However, PCE is a delicate parameter, depending on many factors which are not easy to control.

l5.8
i.e. poly[N-9′′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-2,5-bis(3-hexylthiophene-2-yl)thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole] (Fig. 25) is a DA copolymer containing the same acceptor as those of the l5.7 group but a weaker donor, namely N-alkyl carbazole. It was synthesized through a Suzuki coupling of diboronato-derivative of carbazole and the dibromo-derivative of dialkylthienylthiazolothiazole.358 As expected both the optical band gap (2.05 eV) and IP (5.31 eV) were higher than in the case of the polymers of the l5.7 group and reflected weaker DA interactions. The copolymer showed field effect in the p-channel configuration, the measured FET hole carrier mobility being 3.8 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. More promising results were obtained in photovoltaic applications. Test cells fabricated from l5.8 showed PCE values of up to 4.88%. Consistent with its lower lying HOMO (higher IP) the Voc values measured for l5.8-based cells (0.86 V) were higher than those determined for the l5.7 group of polymers.

l5.9A and l5.9B (Fig. 25) contain dialkoxy-substituted benzodithiophene as the D unit. Alkoxy groups are introduced to enhance the electron-donating properties of this segment and to facilitate solubilization of the copolymers. The copolymers were synthesized by Stille coupling copolymerization between 2,5-bis(5-bromo-3-dodecylthiophene-2-yl)thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole and 2,6-bis(trimethyltin)-4,8-didodecyloxybenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene359 or 2,6-bis(trimethyltin)-4,8-bis(2-ethylhexyloxy)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene,360 respectively. IP and optical gap values of l5.9A (5.30 eV and 1.99 eV) are very close to those reported for l5.8 suggesting a similar extent of DA interactions. l5.9A showed a moderate hole carrier mobility of 2.8 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 5), determined in the FET configuration. Both copolymers were used as components of BHJ PCs showing moderate PCE values of 2.72% and 2.6% for l5.9A and l5.9B, respectively.

l5.10
i.e. poly([4-(2′-ethylhexyl)-4-octyl-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl]-alt-[2,5-di(3′-hexylthiophen-2′-yl)thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole-5′,5′′-diyl]) (Fig. 25) contains the same acceptor unit as l5.7–l5.9 and asymmetrically alkyl-substituted cyclopentadithiophene as the donor unit. It was synthesized by Suzuki polycondensation.361 Although IP determined electrochemically (5.31 eV) was very close to those measured for l5.8 and l5.9A, both electrochemical and optical band gaps were narrower (1.80 eV). l5.10 showed moderate FET mobility of hole carriers (1.0 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 5). Taking into account its low lying HOMO level (high IP) and narrow band gap, higher Voc and PCE values were expected for this polymer as compared to l5.7–l5.9. This was not reflected in the parameters of the best cells which gave Voc = 0.67 V and PCE = 4.08%.
Thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione emerged as a very promising electron-deficient unit in the design of conjugated low band gap polymers (see Fig. 26). Alternating copolymers containing this unit combine rigidity and good solubility with favorable structural organization in this solid film.274f,362
 Fig. 26  Chemical structures of copolymers containing thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione acceptor units. 
In l5.11 thienopyrroledione segments alternate with pyrroloindacenodithiophene – a moderate electron donor. The copolymer was synthesized by microwave-assisted Stille coupling of distannylated pyrroloindacenodithiophene and dibrominated thienopyrrolodione.363 The electron-donating effect of pyrroloindacenodithiophene results in a decrease of IP to 5.10 eV and in a significant band gap narrowing whose value was determined as 1.70 eV. Films of l5.11 can be used as active layers in p-channel FETs, however the obtained hole mobilities are moderate (0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 5). BHJ PCs fabricated from l5.11/PC71BM show moderate PCE values (up to 1.10%) (Table 4) and low Voc. It seems that its low IP (or high lying HOMO level) limits the performance of devices based on l5.11.
More promising results were obtained for copolymers containing dialkoxy substituted benzodithiophene as a donor unit (the same as in l5.9).274a–d Copolymers of the l5.12 series were prepared by Stille coupling between 2,6-bis(trimethyltin)-4,8-di(alkyl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene and 1,3-dibromo-5-octylthieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione.274a Three different alkyl side chains were used as solubilizing groups in the acceptor unit: linear octyl in l5.12A, dimethyloctyl in l5.12B and 2-ethylhexyl in l5.12C.274b The measured IP values (∼5.50 eV) were little dependent on the alkyl substituent topology and significantly lower than in the case of l5.9 which combined the same donor with a weaker acceptor. The DA interactions were reflected by the band gap narrowing to ca. 1.7 eV (see Table 4). The linear substituent favored however ordered supramolecular structure through more effective side groups interdigitation which led to a closer π-stacking: d = 0.36 nm in l5.12A as compared to d = 0.38 nm in l5.12C. Consistent with their higher IP (lower lying HOMO level) polymers of the l5.12 series showed higher Voc as compared to l5.11. The highest value of PCE (6.80%) was measured for l5.12A but two other polymers of the series also gave promising results (Table 4).

l5.13A was synthesized by Stille coupling of 2,6-di(trimethyltin)-N-(2-ethylhexyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole and 1,3-dibromo-5-(2-ethylhexyl)thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione.364 Having the same acceptor unit as l5.12 it contains a stronger donor. l5.13B differs from l5.13A by its alkyl substituent (octyl instead of 2-ethylhexyl). A strong electron-donating effect is manifested in these copolymers by their low IP values (∼5.10 eV) and narrow band gaps (1.48 eV and 1.59 eV for l5.13B and l5.13A, respectively). This low IP (or high lying HOMO level) limits the performance of PCs in which l5.13B and l5.13A are used as components of BHJ. For this reason low Voc and PCE values are measured (see Table 4).365l5.13B exhibits a moderate FET hole mobility (3.9 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 5).274h
Also, in the case of l5.13B a large discrepancy between the electrochemically and optically determined band gap is observed.274h The former (2.08 eV) is significantly larger than the latter (1.59 eV). Similar discrepancies are sometimes observed in conjugated polymers of various nature.283h,346a,366 It should be therefore underlined that all electrochemical measurements must be treated with caution and the recorded redox processes must be identified as originating from the abstraction of an electron from the HOMO level or the addition of an electron to the LUMO level. For the identification of these processes the knowledge of the frontier orbitals distribution is helpful.83 The same applies to the determination of the optical band gap – the observed transition must be identified as the HOMO to LUMO one. For this reason a popular method of the calculation of the LUMO level by adding the optical gap to the energy of the HOMO level may sometimes be very misleading.
The l5.14 series comprises DA copolymers of thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione with a cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene as a donor unit. They were synthesized by Stille coupling reaction.367 The following alkyl side groups were introduced into the conjugated chain: butyl (l5.14A), hexyl (l5.14B), octyl (l5.14C), and 2-ethylhexyl (l5.14D) with the goal to improve solution processability and to adjust the packing of the polymer chains in the solid state.
With this moderate donor the IP values are intermediate between those of the l5.13 and l5.12 series, slightly increasing with an increase of the substituent size to the values ∼5.25 eV (Table 4). All copolymers show narrow band gaps close to 1.70 eV. As revealed by X-ray diffraction investigation, l5.14C shows the shortest π-stacking distance of 0.367 nm.367l5.14B, l5.14C and l5.14D are promising materials for the fabrication of BHJ PCs showing PCEs either exceeding 6% or close to this value (Table 4).367

l5.14E has different alkyl substituents both in the acceptor and donor units (dodecyl and octyl, respectively) It shows redox and optical properties similar to those reported for l5.14C and l5.14D, however its photovoltaic properties are inferior.274g The copolymer shows the field effect in the p-channel configuration and its hole carrier mobility approaches 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 5).
In the l5.15 series thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione acceptor units alternate with dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole donors. The copolymers can be prepared by Stille coupling between 4,4-bis(alkyl)-2,6-bis(trimethyltin)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole and 1,3-dibromo-5-alkylthieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione.274i,l The presence of the dithienosilole donor narrows the band gap to ∼1.7 eV but, surprisingly, does not significantly lower the IP value, which remains in the range 5.37 eV to 5.57 eV, contrary to the case of the l5.7 series (vide supra).274i,l Appropriately high IPs (low HOMO levels) combined with narrow gaps of these copolymers are very advantageous in view of their use in photovoltaics. Moreover, they show improved nanoscale morphology as compared to other DA copolymers.72d,274l,368 Their hole carrier FET mobilities are in the range of 10−4–10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for high molecular mass samples274i and are strongly molecular mass dependent increasing over two orders of magnitude with a three fold increase of Mn. Although the Voc values are high and constant for all polymers studied(∼0.9 V) their PCE is Mn dependent reaching 7.40% for the highest molecular mass fraction of l5.15A (see Table 4).72d
High IP (or low lying HOMO level) is also advantageous from the point of view of the air operating stability. Chu et al.368 reported an air stable inverted organic solar cell consisting of ZnO nanocrystals film as an electron transporting layer and a bulk heterojunction film composed of l5.15A and PC71BM. A power conversion efficiency of 6.7% was measured for the inverted devices which, in addition, turned out to be highly stable and retained 85% of their original efficiency after being stored in air for 32 days without encapsulation.

l5.16 differs from the l5.15 series by the use of the dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]germole donor instead of its silole analogue. Like l5.15 it was synthesized by Stille coupling using either Pd(PPh3)4369 or Pd2(dba)3/P(o-Tol)3 as catalysts.370 Since the C–Ge bond (0.327 nm) is longer by 0.017 nm compared with the C–Si bond the bulky substituents should be better separated from the polymer backbone which should result in better π–π interactions. l5.16 shows a slightly narrower optical band gap than l5.15A (1.69 eV vs. 1.73 eV),370 a slightly higher IP of 5.66 and slightly higher |EA| with the electrochemical band gap (1.73 eV) close to the optical one.369 Amb et al. have reported a similar IP of 5.60 eV, but a lower |EA| of 3.50 eV.370 Thus redox and optical properties of l5.16 are similar to those of l5.15A. As a result efficient BHP PCs could be fabricated from this polymer reaching PCE values of 4.1% (Table 4)369 or even 7.3% in inverted device architecture ITO/ZnO/l5.16:PC70BM/MoO3/Ag, (Table 4).370
In the synthesis of DA copolymers specific building blocks are designed in which the electron accepting unit is attached to two β-substituted or unsubstituted thiophene rings. As a result, in the formed copolymer A units are separated from D units by an additional thiophene spacer. The use of this approach has some advantages since it allows for additional tuning of the solution processing properties as well as the DA interactions.371 Moreover, in some cases (tetrazine, diketopyrrolopyrrole and others) it is synthetically more convenient to prepare a dithiophene containing building block as an intermediate product in which the electron accepting center is formed in the last step of the reaction.136,372 This approach was also used in the case of the synthesis of DA copolymers containing thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione acceptors where 1,3-di(thien-2-yl)thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione derivatives were used as building blocks.
A series of alternating copolymers of 1,3-di(thien-2-yl)thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (Fig. 27) in combination with fluorene l5.17, carbazole l5.18, dithienopyrrole l5.19 and benzo[1,2-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene l5.20 have recently been synthesized. Stille coupling (Pd(PPh3)4 catalyst) was used for the preparation of l5.17A, l5.18A and l5.19.373l5.17B and l5.18B were synthesized by Suzuki coupling whereas l5.20 – by both methods (Suzuki and Stille).374 For all these copolymers a clear correlation between their redox and optical properties and the electron donating capability of the D unit can be established. The IPs and band gap widths decrease in the order l5.17 > l5.18 > l5.19 > l5.20. l5.19 suffers from too high lying HOMO levels (or too low IP) which in BHJ PC applications results in low Voc and a moderate value of PCE. For l5.17 and l5.18 the Voc values are very high, due to their deep HOMO level (or high IP) but the band gap is less adapted for the solar spectrum. Nevertheless l5.18A shows a promising PCE value of 3.41%. For the studied series of copolymers, in view of their applications in photovoltaics, l5.20 seems to be the best compromise combining reasonably high Voc (0.90 V) and PCE (3.11%) (see Table 4).
 Fig. 27  Chemical structures of copolymers containing 1,3-di(thien-2-yl)thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione acceptor units. 
Strong electron withdrawing properties of benzothiadiazole are also of interest when DA copolymers are being designed (Fig. 28). The four substitution positions on the phenyl ring make the chemistry of this unit diversified and facilitate tuning of the redox, electronic and optical properties of the resulting copolymers. For these reasons a large number of papers on benzothiadiazole-based DA conjugated copolymers were published.341b,e,362a Here we limit ourselves to a few instructive examples.
 Fig. 28  Chemical structures of copolymers containing benzothiadiazole acceptor units. 

l5.21A–l5.21C were synthesized by Stille coupling of 2,6-di(trimethyltin)-N-(1-alkyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole containing different alkyl chains (octylnonyl for l5.21A, hexylheptyl for l5.21B, pentylhexyl for l5.21C) and 4,7-dibromo-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole using Pd2(dba)3 as a catalyst.375 Since these are “strong donor–strong acceptor” polymers they show very narrow band gaps only slightly exceeding 1.4 eV which makes them good absorbers in the NIR part of the spectrum. A 0.30–0.35 eV discrepancy is found between the “electrochemical” and optical band gap, the former being larger. The IP values are very low <5.0 eV clearly showing that the DA interaction raises the HOMO level. Although their optical properties should be beneficial for photovoltaic applications, their redox properties are far from being optimal. Due to high lying HOMO levels the test cells based on these polymers show low Voc values (<0.5 V) and moderate PCEs (see Table 4).
Dialkyl cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene is a weaker donor and its copolymerization with benzothiadiazole yields polymers of higher IP. Poly[2,6-(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (l5.22A) exhibits a higher IP value (5.30 eV) than the polymers of the l5.21 series and a comparable electrochemical band gap (1.73 eV) (Table 4).376 Judging from these parameters l5.22A seems to be more suitable for use in BHJ and indeed in test cells it yields higher Voc and better PCE than l5.21 polymers (Table 4).

l5.22B and l5.22C differ from l5.22A by the alkyl substituents. Both polymers were tested as active components of p-channel FETs.351a,c Their thin films exhibited ordered supramolecular organization with the π-stacking distance of 0.36–0.37 nm. In both polymers the mobility was found to be molecular mass dependent, reaching an exceptionally high value of 3.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 5) for the highest molecular mass fraction of l5.22B. Such strong dependence of charge carrier mobility on Mn is known for a variety of conjugated polymers.72a–c,274i,297
Poly[(4,4′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole)-2-diyl-alt-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)-4,7-diyl] (l5.23) was prepared by Stille coupling.346a Dialkyldithienosilole is a strong donor, thus its presence in the polymer backbone lowers the IP to a value of 5.05 eV which is intermediate between the values measured for l5.21 and l5.22 (Table 4). Again a discrepancy between the electrochemical band gap (1.78 eV) and the optical one (1.45 eV) is observed as in l5.21. l5.23 shows the field effect in the p-channel configuration, however the hole carrier mobility, measured in the FET configuration, is rather low 3 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1.346a Much better results are reported for its application in photovoltaics. Despite its low IP (or high lying HOMO level) and, as a consequence, a rather low Voc, cells in which l5.23 was a component of the BHJ showed PCE values of up to 5.1%.346a

l5.24 was synthesized via microwave assisted Stille condensation of benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b]bis(2-trimethylstannyl)-4-(2-octyl-1-dodecyl)-4H-amino[3,2-b]thiophene and 4,7-dibromobenzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole.363 Due to a rather pronounced effect of its donor unit, l5.24 shows a low value of IP (4.90 eV) and a low band gap (1.40 eV), the former is unfavorable for photovoltaic applications, the latter is favorable. However, its photovoltaic performance is not impressive (PCE = 0.80%). This is, at least in part, caused by low Voc. The copolymer was also tested as a semiconductor in p-channel FETs yielding a moderate hole carrier mobility of 0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1. This could be in part caused by its low Mn (7000 Da, Table 5).363
The addition of benzene to the thienosilole moiety in silaindacenodithiophene weakens the electron-donating properties, therefore l5.25 an alternating copolymer of silaindacenodithiophene and benzothiadiazole shows higher IP (5.32 eV) and wider optical (1.70 eV) and electrochemical (2.07 eV) gaps than l5.23. l5.25 was obtained by Stille coupling using Pd(PPh3)4 as a catalyst.377 It was used as a p-type semiconductor in the FET configuration yielding a hole mobility of 2.5 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 5). Although in the case of l5.25 matching of the solar spectrum by its absorption spectrum is worse than for l5.23, promising results were obtained in test BHJ PCs. Voc exceeded 0.81 V due to relatively high IP (or low lying HOMO) and the measured PCE approached 3.50% for the best cells.
Polymers of the l5.26 series contain indacenodithiophene as a donor unit. l5.26A, l5.26C, l5.26D and l5.26E were synthesized by Suzuki condensation,378 whereas l5.26B by Stille coupling.379 They show high IP values in the range of 5.30 eV to 5.40 eV and the electrochemical band gaps from 1.70 eV to 1.84 eV (Table 4). The IP values are high enough to achieve air operating stability in FETs but at the same time low enough to assure effective hole injection. Therefore these copolymers were tested as active layers in p-channel test transistors. l5.26A, l5.26C and l5.26D showed the FET hole mobility in the range of 0.14 to 1.2 cm2 V−1 s−1, the highest value being reached for l5.26A (Table 5). l5.26E exhibited much lower hole mobility, which could be attributed to its lower molecular mass because hole mobility in the polymers of this series was found to be strongly Mn dependent, as in other DA copolymers and in homopolymers.72a–c,297,274i,351c
Taking into account their IP values and the reduced band gaps polymers of the l5.26 series are promising candidates for photovoltaic applications. With the exception of l5.26A, all polymers showed good performance when tested as components of BHJ in PCs. The best results were obtained for l5.26B.379 The initially obtained PCE value of 5.4% was further improved to 6.10% by the application of previously investigated special annealing techniques which involved slow drying and solvent vapor annealing of the BHJ layer.380
Poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (l5.27) (Fig. 29) was prepared by Suzuki coupling using Pd2(dba)3, (o-tol)3P catalyst.314a Introduction of thienylene spacers between the acceptor unit (benzothiadiazole) and the donor unit (2,7-carbazole) significantly changes the redox and optical properties of the resulting copolymer. This can be evidenced by comparing l5.21 (which has no spacers) with l5.27. First, the IP value measured for l5.27 is much higher, indicating weaker DA interactions. This is of course advantageous for air operating stability and for high Voc values in PCs. Second, both electrochemical (1.90 eV) and optical (1.88 eV) band gaps are larger than in l5.21, meaning less adequate matching of the absorption spectrum with the solar spectrum. This is of course disadvantageous. Evidently, the high IP value (implying a low lying HOMO level) is a more dominant factor in this case since the performance of l5.27-based PCs is much better than those based on l5.21. Initially obtained PCE values (up to 3.6%314a) were later improved to 6.1% by adding an optical spacer (TiOx)381 and then to 6.5% by incorporating a conjugated polyelectrolyte interlayer as recommended in ref. 382.
 Fig. 29  Chemical structures of copolymers containing 4,7-di(thien-2-yl) benzothiadiazole-acceptor units. 

l5.28 (Fig. 29) was obtained by a modified Suzuki coupling reaction of 2,7-bis(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)-9,9-dioctylsilafluorene with 4,7-bis(5-bromo-2-thienyl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole.383 Its IP value (5.39 eV) was lower than that of l5.27 indicating a slightly more pronounced electron-donating effect of dioctylsilafluorene on the position of the HOMO level. l5.28 acted as a p-type semiconductor in p-channel FETs showing, however a rather low hole mobility of 1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table 5).383b However its performance in BHJ PCs was much more promising. A PCE of up to 5.4% was obtained (Table 4) with a high Voc value. This was not surprising, taking into account that its redox and optical properties constituted a good compromise for the applications in photovoltaics.
Poly{[2,7-(9,9-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)fluorene)]-alt-[5,5-(4,7-di-2′-thienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)]} (l5.29A) and poly{[2,7-(9,9-bis-(3,7-dimethyl-octyl)-fluorene)]-alt-[5,5-(4,7-di-2′-thienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)]} (l5.29B) (Fig. 29), which have the same polymer backbone but different side substituents were synthesized by Stille coupling using Pd(PPh3)4 as a catalyst.384 They are copolymers of a weak donor and a strong acceptor. For this reason they show a high value of IP (5.5 eV) and a relatively large optical band gap. In photovoltaic applications they give promising results – l5.29B shows a high value of Voc (0.97 V) and good PCE (4.5%) (Table 4).384b
Ester, keto and fluoro derivatives of thieno[3,4-b]thiophene constitute promising acceptor units in DA copolymers for photovoltaic applications.346b,c Especially good results are obtained if they are combined with dialkoxy benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene donors. These copolymers are depicted in Fig. 30. The l5.30–l5.32 series is an instructive example of successful chain engineering. Replacement of the ester group by a keto one increased the IP value by ∼0.1 eV. Addition of the fluorine substituent further increased IP which reached 5.22 eV for l5.32. Consistent with lowering the HOMO level (or increasing IP) Voc increased as well as PCE (7.4% for l5.32). Even better PCE values were obtained for l5.33 which showed slightly lower IP and Voc but PCE as high as 9.2% (Table 4). Some of these polymers are commercial products offered by 1-Material Chemscitech Inc.
 Fig. 30  Chemical structures of copolymers containing substituted thieno[3,4-b]thiophene acceptor units. 
The trends discussed in the text above require a short discussion. Band gap narrowing, which is beneficial for photons harvesting, results in raising of the HOMO level (decreasing IP) and lowering of the LUMO level (increasing of |EA|). However Voc and short circuit current (Isc) are sacrificed due to a smaller energetic difference between the HOMO level of the copolymer and the acceptor constituent of BHJ and more difficult charge separation at the interface of the polymer/acceptor interface. A compromise between these contradictory phenomena is needed. Evidently l5.32 and l5.33 represent a good compromise reaching high PCE despite a rather moderate Voc.
To summarize this part of the paper, the concept of designing alternate or even more complex periodic copolymers from donor and acceptor building blocks turned out to be very successful. A plethora of new semiconductors were prepared showing interesting photovoltaic properties and/or high hole carrier mobilities in p-channel FETs. However, the number of polymers, which would combine sufficiently high IP values (or sufficiently low lying HOMO level) with the band gap appropriately matching the solar spectrum, is still rather scarce. The same applies to semiconductors exhibiting ambipolarity in their electrical transport properties, prepared using this approach. Their number is also low, for the simple reason that it is easier to adjust the appropriate value of IP than |EA|, the latter determining the n-type conductivity conditions.
6 High-spin molecules and macromolecules
6.1 Generalities
In the past decade many research attempts have been directed to spintronics, which exploits the intrinsic spin of the electron and its associated magnetic moment. The advantages of spintronics materials applications are related to lower power use and faster information transfer than in classical electrical devices. To date, only diluted magnetic semiconductors, for example Cd1−xMnxTe or Ga1−xMnxAs, can fulfill these requirements.385 However, the successful use of purely organic materials in organic and molecular electronics can stimulate the search for new organic compounds also for spintronics. So far, organic semiconductors have been used only in few spintronic devices.386 There exists, therefore, a strong need for the design and preparation of new functional organic materials exhibiting spin alignment.
The most general strategy for building high-spin organic molecules is based on alternation of spin containing units (SC) and ferromagnetic coupling units (FC)387 (see Section 6.1.1.5). SC are chemical structures which have an unpaired electron in the form of a radical (Scheme 38, structure 6.1–6.6) or a radical ion (Scheme 38, structures 6.7–6.9). Carbenes 6.1,388 triphenylmethyl radicals 6.2,389 aminyl radicals 6.3,390,391 phenoxyl radicals 6.4,392 nitroxide radicals 6.5,393 nitronyl nitroxides 6.6394 are typical SC units. Radical cations can be created after partial oxidation† of conjugated segments as in octatetraene 6.7 or oligothiophene.15,16 However, the most studied and most stable are aryl ammonium radical cations 6.8.395
 Scheme 38  Organic chemical moieties bearing spins (spin containing units, SC). 
Very recently radical anions 6.9 fulfilling these requirements have also been reported.396
The early studies of organic high-spin materials were devoted to oligo- and polycarbenes. Iwamura and co-workers improved the synthesis of these compounds and obtained S = 5 for pentacarbene.388c However, oligo- and polycarbenes are very unstable, thus precluding potential applications. Triphenylmethyl radicals 6.2 were later developed as alternatives to carbenes. The stability of these radicals can be increased by introducing substituents inducing steric hindrance for example perchlorosubstituents, which can impede the spin dimerization by blocking the rotation of the phenylene rings.389b Significant progress in the design and the synthesis of this type of radical was made by Rajca and co-workers.389c,397 The highest spin state (up to S ≈ 5000) was obtained for polyradicals derived from macrocyclic polyarylmethyls.397d Aminyl radicals 6.3 are also interesting as building segments of high-spin molecules. Rajca reported that a diradical similar to 6.3 has a high-spin ground state and postulated from EPR data that they have a more stable high-spin state than the corresponding nitroxide diradicals.390
Polymers containing conjugated segments alternating with 1,3-benzenediyl were synthesized by Dougherty and co-workers.15,16 Radical cations (polarons) have been generated in conjugated segments after p-type doping.15 However, the most chemically stable and most promising compounds studied to date are compounds containing triarylamine radical cations.395

6.1.1 Strategies of electron spin coupling in the design of high spin polymers. 
Several strategies were developed for the preparation of high-spin organic and organometallic compounds with the goal to design organic or organometallic magnets (for a comprehensive review see ref. 398). Some of them rely on the design of such compounds in which mutual intermolecular interactions between organic free radicals or between paramagnetic ions in well-defined crystal structures are possible (for recent reviews in the field of molecular magnetism see ref. 399 and 400). This section focuses on the strategies that are best suited for obtaining high-spin polymers. In the designed macromolecules, through-bond interactions between the electronic spins of organic free radical moieties in the same macromolecule have to be induced (for reviews see ref. 389c and 401–403). They are presented in this section for simple examples of diradicals that were successfully designed in order to obtain high-spin S = 1 ground states and a few examples of oligo- and polyradicals leading to high-spin S > 1 ground states.
6.1.1.1 Ferromagnetic (or antiferromagnetic) coupling of electron spins in biradicals – exchange coupling constant (J). 
Let us consider a biradical with two identical free radical moieties, which are covalently bound to a common molecular backbone. The magnetic properties of such a system can be qualitatively described by the active-electron approximation.404 In this approximation only the two single electrons (noted 1 and 2) corresponding to the two free radical moieties (noted A and B) are considered as active and all other electrons are considered as passive. The molecular orbitals φA and φB corresponding to the singly occupied molecular orbitals of the monoradicals are used as the so-called “natural orbitals” basis set and have an energy level noted E0.
If φA and φB spread over different and disjoint parts of the molecule, the interaction between the two electrons is null or very weak and the biradical behaves as two independent S = 1/2 free radicals.
If φA and φB spread over common parts of the molecule, then they are called coextensive402 and the interaction between the two electrons must be taken into account to derive the molecular orbitals and energy levels that account for the magnetic properties of the biradical405 (see Fig. 31).
 Fig. 31  Energy levels due to interactions between single electrons in a biradical in the active-electron approximation. E0 corresponds to the energy of a single electron with no interaction with the second single electron. K corresponds to the electrostatic interaction between the two single electrons and J to the exchange interaction (see text). 
These molecular orbitals are: (i) the product of a symmetric combination of φA and φB (noted ΦS) with an anti-symmetric singlet spin function χ (S = 0) of energy ES and (ii) the product of an anti-symmetric combination of φA and φB (noted ΦA) with a symmetric triplet spin function χ (S = 1) of energy ET. The interaction between the two electrons changes the energy level E0 by adding a purely electrostatic term (K) and a second term (J) called exchange interaction, whose origin is purely quantic and that lifts the degeneracy between the states of different spins S with ΔEST = ES − ET = J (ref. 404).

J can be positive or negative. When J is positive, the system has an S = 1 ground state, so the two electrons are ferromagnetically coupled. When J is negative, the system has an S = 0 ground state, so the two electrons are antiferromagnetically coupled. Using the same level of approximation, one can demonstrate that J is the sum of an antiferromagnetic term (noted J1) and a ferromagnetic term (noted J2) as shown by eqn (6), ref. 404: (6)From these expressions the conditions for observing a strong ferromagnetic coupling (S = 1 ground state) between the spins of two electrons belonging to the same (macro)-molecule can be deduced:
(i) the two singly occupied orbitals associated to these electrons φA and φB should be orthogonal, then the overlap integral ∫φA(r)·φB(r)·d3r and the antiferromagnetic term J1 vanish,
(ii) φA and φB should be coextensive, in order to make the so-called exchange integral in the ferromagnetic term J2 as high as possible. The term “coextensive” means that these orbitals share some common space in the molecule and that the two electrons can interact quite strongly.402,403
6.1.1.2 Molecular structures inducing ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic coupling of electron spins – concept of a ferromagnetic coupling unit. 
The trimethylenemethane biradical is the simplest organic biradical with an S = 1 ground state that was predicted by Longuet-Higgins406 in 1950 and observed by Dowd407 sixteen years later. It can be considered as two methyl radicals connected to the same carbon atom of ethylene or as the molecule C(CH2)3 with four electrons in its π system. The electronic structure of this biradical obtained by simple Hückel calculations is shown in Fig. 32 (right). The two electrons at the highest energy level are localized in two degenerate and orthogonal orbitals. Moreover, these two orbitals are coextensive, since two carbon atoms have non-zero coefficients in both orbitals. So all conditions for observing an S = 1 ground state are satisfied.
 Fig. 32  Electronic structures of biradicals bonded to 1,2-ethene (left) and 1,1-ethene (right). The schematic view depicts the energy levels and the electronic structures of the π-system of biradicals and the two singly occupied orbitals that are obtained by using Hückel's approximation. 
On the opposite, two methyl radicals connected at both extremities of ethylene have the same electronic structure as butadiene as shown in Fig. 32 (left). All molecular orbitals are occupied by two electrons of opposite spins (due to the Pauli principle), so this molecule has an S = 0 spin state. Thus a simple difference in topology of the molecular structure of this molecule compared to the trimethylenemethane biradical induces an antiferromagnetic coupling instead of a ferromagnetic coupling between the spins of the two methyl radical moieties.
The same observations can be made for the family of benzoquinodimethane diradicals. The meta-benzoquinodimethane diradical has an S = 1 ground state.408–410 This is consistent with its electronic structure showing two singly occupied degenerate, orthogonal and coextensive orbitals (orbitals 4 and 5 in Fig. 33). On the opposite, para-benzoquinodimethane diradicals (shown in Fig. 33) and ortho-benzoquinodimethane diradicals (not shown) have an S = 0 spin state due to their closed shell electronic structures. Again the ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic coupling of the two electron spins is determined by the topology of the molecule.
 Fig. 33  Electronic structures of meta-benzoquinodimethane (left) and para-benzoquinodimethane (right) biradicals. This schematic view depicts the energy levels and the two singly occupied orbitals that are obtained by using Hückel's approximation. 
Remarkably, if one replaces the methyl free radicals by another type of free radical moiety to build structures with a topology similar to trimethylenemethane biradical or to meta-benzoquinodimethane diradical, an S = 1 ground state is also obtained. In biradicals 6.10411 and 6.11412 (Scheme 39) nitroxide free radicals or ammonium free radicals are connected by a meta-phenylene moiety, leading to an S = 1 ground state as in the meta-benzoquinodimethane diradical. In the biradical 6.12413,414 nitroxide free radicals are connected by a 1,1-ethylene moiety as in the trimethylenemethane biradical. All these diradicals have an S = 1 ground state.
 Scheme 39  Biradicals 10–12 exhibiting triplet ground state, S = 1 and biradical 13 exhibiting S = 0. 
The observation of the same effects in several other diradicals389c,398 led to the conclusion that meta-phenylene and 1,1-ethylene act as “ferromagnetic coupling units” and produce an S = 1 ground spin state when they connect two free radicals. However, the ferromagnetic coupling is obtained only when the free radicals and the coupling unit are (enough) coplanar in order to obtain a significant conjugation between these constituents of the molecule. For instance, in the biradical 6.13,415 the two nitroxide moieties are strongly twisted out of the plane of the phenyl ring due to the steric hindrance of the methoxy groups, which results in an S = 0 ground state.
6.1.1.3 Topological model as a tool for the design of spin coupling units. 
The trimethylenemethane biradical and the meta-benzoquinodimethane diradical are two examples of alternant conjugated hydrocarbons. A conjugated hydrocarbon is alternant if all its carbon atoms can be divided into two classes (usually referred to as “starred” and “unstarred”) in such a way that each carbon of the molecule is linked only to carbon atoms belonging to the other class. Ovchinnikov13 using the Lieb's theorem416 demonstrated that, when the number of starred atoms is not equal to the number of unstarred atoms (see Scheme 40), the ground spin state is expected to be non-zero with the following relationship (eqn (7)): S = ½|N* − N°|(7)
In such cases, N* − N° also corresponds to the number of non-bonding singly-occupied π orbitals in the considered alternant hydrocarbon. This topological model enabled Ovchinnikov to propose several high spin structures for polymers (see Sections 6.2.1 and 6.4).
 Scheme 40  Examples of simple alternant conjugated hydrocarbons with their expected ground spin state. 
In addition, the topological model paved the way for finding new ferromagnetic coupling units. For instance, this model predicts that 1,3,5-phenylene acts as a ferromagnetic coupling unit between three methyl free radicals (see Scheme 40). Consistently, Ovchinnikov proposed the star-branched hydrocarbon 6.14 as the S = 3/2 ground state triradical, in agreement with the earlier experimental observation417 of the S = 3/2 ground state of 6.15 (despite a rapid dimerization reaction of such hydrocarbon-based triradicals). At last, the observation of the S = 3/2 ground state of 6.16 with ammonium cation radicals as spin carrying moieties418,419 demonstrated that the 1,3,5-phenylene unit, 6.17, acts also as an efficient ferromagnetic spin coupler between three ammonium free radical moieties (Scheme 41).
 Scheme 41  Star-branched structures with ferromagnetic coupling by the 1,3,5-phenylene unit. 
Based on the topological model, one can predict that the 3,4′-biphenylene and 4,4′′-meta-terphenylene groups, represented below, should behave as ferromagnetic coupling units, as confirmed experimentally by the S = 1 ground state of the corresponding free radical 6.19, 6.20 studied by Rajca420 and 6.21 by Bushby421 (Scheme 42). The meta-phenylene, 1,3,5-phenylene and 3,4′-biphenylene groups are the most commonly used ferromagnetic coupling units for the design of high-spin polymers as will be illustrated in Sections 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4.
 Scheme 42  3,4′-Biphenyl and 4,4′′-meta-terphenyl groups as ferromagnetic coupling units. 
Among many other conjugated hydrocarbon structures which can be considered as candidates for FC, let us mention those based on fused polycyclic aromatic compounds such as 2,7-naphthalene 6.22, whose efficiency was confirmed by the S = 1 ground state of 6.24422 and 2,4,5,7 anthracene, which is able to couple up to four free radical moieties in an S = 2 state as observed for the radical 6.23 (Scheme 43).423–425
 Scheme 43  2,7-Naphthalene and 2,4,5,7-anthracene as ferromagnetic coupling units. 
6.1.1.4 Strength of the spin coupling (J) for different ferromagnetic coupling units. 
The topological model is very helpful in the design of high-spin polymers since it predicts whether a given group connecting two (or more) free radical moieties can act as a ferromagnetic coupling unit. However, this model does not give information about the strength (J) of this coupling, which has to be investigated experimentally (see Section 6.1.2) or by quantum chemistry calculations. Li et al.426,427 used an effective valence-bond model to calculate the singlet-triplet energy gaps for hydrocarbon biradicals corresponding to the structures commonly used or envisioned as ferromagnetic spin coupling units.
According to these calculations, 1,1-ethylene and meta-phenylene units produce very strong spin coupling (see Scheme 44 and Table 6). Sets 6.25 and 6.26 include ferromagnetic spin coupling units derived from 1,1-ethylene. For these sets, it is clear that making the system larger results in much less efficient coupling. In set 6.27, which includes ferromagnetic spin coupling units derived from meta-phenylene, the loss of coupling is less pronounced, upon addition of consecutive rings, and the 3,4-biphenyl unit still exhibits a rather high exchange coupling constant J of 0.248 eV (J/k = 2880 K, in temperature units). For set 6.28, which includes 2,7-naphthalene and other ferromagnetic spin coupling units expanded by adding fused phenyl rings, the loss of coupling is moderate so for 2,7-naphthalene and 2,7-anthracene units the calculated J values are more than half of the value computed for meta-phenylene (1.146 eV).426
 Scheme 44  Different ferromagnetic coupling units. 
Table 6 The effectiveness of ferromagnetic coupling calculated for different ferromagnetic coupling units linking two methyl free radicals (data extracted from ref. Li et al.426)




 

J [eV]




Set 6.25
1.555
0.146
0.029
0.006


Set 6.26
1.492
0.248
—
—


Set 6.27
1.146
0.380
0.147
—


Set 6.28
0.842
0.634
0.487
—




6.1.1.5 Alternation of spin containing units and spin coupling units as a strategy for building high-spin molecules. 
To date, the most developed strategy of building high-spin polymers consists in alternating spin containing units with ferromagnetic spin coupling units in one molecule (macromolecule) ⋯–SC–FC–SC–FC–⋯ as proposed for the first time by Fukutome (Fig. 34).14 The first macromolecules of this type were designed using doped conjugated oligomeric fragments as SC units. Each oligomeric fragment contains one electron or one hole and can be considered as a radical ion capable of forming polarons, hence the name “polaronic model” for this strategy.
 Fig. 34  Polaronic model of the ferromagnetic polymer. 
The first polymer, synthesized according to this model, was reported by Dougherty and coworkers15 in the early 1990's. It consisted of meta-phenylene as an FC unit and tetraene which were oxidized to produce radical cations in the form of positive polarons as SC units (Scheme 45). Oxidative doping of 6.29 with AsF5 yielded a rather low concentration of radical cations, but high enough to obtain an S = 2 ground spin state. Since then, many other examples of molecules (macromolecules) consisting of other FC and SC (not only polaronic structures but also free radicals) were reported. They will be discussed in greater detail in Sections 6.2–6.4.
 Scheme 45  The structure of poly(meta-phenyleneoctatetraene). 
6.1.1.6 Functionalization with pendant radicals on a conjugated polymer backbone as a strategy for building high-spin molecules. 
The design of oligomers and polymers consisting of conjugated main chain and pendant groups of free radical nature was first proposed by Ovchinnikov (Fig. 35).428
 Fig. 35  Model of high-spin polymers designed by grafting SC units as pendant chains on a conjugated polymer backbone. 
Polymers and oligomers with pendant phenoxyl free radicals linked to a poly(phenylenevinylene) backbone are instructive examples of these compounds (see Scheme 46).429 The free radical moieties are grafted on positions that are expected to favour the ferromagnetic coupling between electron spins according to the topological model, as can be checked from the chemical formulae of 6.30–6.32. Experimentally, S = 1 ground states were observed for these dimers and an average spin state up to S = 3/2 was observed for the polymer 6.31 (S = 1 for the polymer 6.30), despite a limited oxidative doping efficiency which yielded 0.59 spin per unit.
 Scheme 46  Conjugated polymers and dimers containing pendant phenoxyl radicals. 
The expected advantage of this strategy is that the resulting molecule or macromolecule should be less sensitive to incomplete formation of spins than the molecules in which radicals or radical cations are being formed in the main chain (polaronic model). In the latter case incomplete oxidation disrupts the magnetic interactions between successive electronic spins (see Section 6.2). On the opposite, incomplete oxidation of pendant groups should not totally vanish the interaction between the spins immediately preceding and following the defect, as exemplified by 6.32 (for m = 0 or 1), both of which exhibit an S = 1 ground state, even if the exchange coupling constant J/k decreases from 24 K for m = 0 to only 6 K in the case of m = 1. More examples illustrating this strategy will be discussed in Sections 6.2.2. and 6.4.


6.1.2 Experimental measurements of spin multiplicity (S) and spin coupling constants (J). 
Two main quantities characterize the magnetic properties of a given polymer: the spin multiplicity S of the ground state and the spin coupling constants J.
The spin multiplicity S = n/2 of the ground state corresponds to the number (n) of individual S = 1/2 electronic spins that are actually ferromagnetically coupled. This number reflects how far the ferromagnetic interaction between the electronic spin propagates along the polymer backbone. In most cases reported to date organic high-spin polymers exhibit spin multiplicity between S = 1 (electron spins coupled by two) and S = 5 (electron spins coupled by groups of ten).430 Ideally S should be made as high as possible in order to obtain a ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic material.397d
Following the definition given in Section 6.1.1.1, the spin coupling constant between two spins (J) measures the stability of the ferromagnetically coupled high-spin ground state compared with the antiferromagnetically coupled low-spin excited state. The measurements of the J coupling constants between coupled spins in a given high-spin polymer is of outmost importance since they allow us to estimate the maximum temperature to which the polymer can exhibit the desired magnetic properties of the high-spin ground state.
Different techniques can be used for measuring J and S values in high-spin polymers. The Evan's method based on NMR measurements and the Faraday's scale can be used (see dedicated sections in the ref. 389c) but we will focus on SQUID magnetometry and EPR spectroscopy only, which are currently the most frequently used techniques. Moreover, we describe the pulsed-EPR nutation technique, which is of particular interest in the case of samples containing several spin states with different multiplicities.
6.1.2.1 SQUID magnetometry. 
Superconducting Quantum Interference Device magnetometry (for the principle of this magnetometry see ref. 431) is the most popular technique to study the magnetic properties of high-spin polymers. This technique enables the measurement of the magnetization of a given sample in a wide range of temperatures (typically 2–300 K) and a wide range of magnetic field (typically up to 7 T) with a high sensitivity. Typically high-spin polymers or low molecular mass compounds containing as few as 3 × 10−7 mol of electronic spins can be studied by this technique.432,433
When measuring the magnetization, M, of a high-spin polymer sample, the magnetometer measures the sum of two types of contributions: (i) the paramagnetic contribution due to electronic spins in the high-spin polymer (noted Mpara), (ii) the diamagnetic contribution (noted Mdia) associated with all diamagnetic components of the sample (the sample holder, the polymer itself, solvent molecules…). J and S values are related to Mpara only, so Mdia must be determined as precisely as possible, in order to extract Mpara (Mpara = M − Mdia) from the experimental data with a good precision. The determination of Mdia can be a hard task in the case of dilute samples. An efficient experimental procedure to measure and subtract Mdia with a high precision in the case of high-spin organic molecules was described in detail by Bushby et al.421
The spin multiplicity S of the magnetic ground state can be determined by measuring the magnetization as a function of the magnetic field, M = f(H), at low temperature in such a manner that only the magnetic ground state is populated (generally this study is performed at T ≤ 2 K). If the sample contains a high-spin polymer with only one spin state of a given multiplicity S, the performed measurement can be directly related to S by comparing the experimental curve Mpara = f(H) with the theoretical curves expected for the various S values (namely Brillouin's functions) (eqn (8)): (8)where β stands for Bohr's Magneton, g for Landé's factor, k for Boltzmann's constant and N for the number of spins S in the sample. An example of such magnetometry measurement and analysis applied to a doped polyarylamine (see ref. 432) is shown in Fig. 36. By comparing the experimental normalized magnetization (noted M/Msat, where Msat denotes the maximum value of magnetization in the applied external magnetic field) with the Brillouin's functions, one can notice that the experimental data are very close to S = 2 at low magnetic field and to S = 3/2 at high magnetic field which is diagnostic of a high-spin polymer sample bearing a mix of spin state,16 in this particular case a mix of S = 3/2 spin states and S = 2 spin states432 (the properties of this particular system will be discussed in Section 6.2.1).
 Fig. 36  Example of the analysis of spin multiplicity S in a doped high-spin polyarylamine. M = f(H) is measured and normalized and then compared with Brillouin functions (Bs) corresponding to different values of S. The polymer PN was doped at two equivalents of oxidant per mer. Solid lines represent unpublished calculations (J. M. Mouesca, V. Maurel and I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, 2013) which are compared with the experimental data taken from ref. 432. 
If the spin coupling constant(s) J are small or at least lower than kT, they can be extracted from measurements of the magnetization as a function of the temperature M = f(T) at a given weak magnetic field (typically H ≤ 500 Oe). Then, the χT = f(T) plot, where χ is the magnetic susceptibility of the sample (M = χH) can be compared to the analytical expressions of χT = f(T) derived from Van Vleck's approximation (see for instance ref. 404). These expressions depend on the spin multiplicity S and they include one or several J value(s) as parameter(s), depending on the considered spin coupling pathway. For the simplest case of an S = 1 high-spin ground state corresponding to electrons coupled by two with one coupling constant J, χT = f(T) is modelized by the Bleaney–Bowers434expression (9) (for more complicated cases of coupling of three up to nine S = 1/2 spins see ref. 435 and 436): (9)where β stands for Bohr's Magneton, g for Landé's factor and k for Boltzmann's constant and N for the number of S = 1 spins in the sample.
An example of the J coupling constant measurement in the arylamine dimer421 is shown in Fig. 37: the J/k = 42 K value is obtained by fitting the experimental χT = f(T) plot with the Bleaney–Bowers expression and was the first experimental J value recorded for a diradical designed using a 4-4′′-meta-terphenyl group as a spin coupling unit.
 Fig. 37  Determination of J in oxidatively doped S = 1 arylamine dimer from the plot of χT = f(T). The solid line represents the calculated values with the best fit parameters using the Bleaney–Bowers equation. The obtained J coupling constant is J/k = 42 K with the definition of J adopted here. [reproduced by permission from R. J. Bushby, N. Taylor and R. A. Williams, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 955–964]. 
6.1.2.2 Continuous-wave Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (CW-EPR). 
Continuous-wave Electron Paramagnetic Resonance is well adapted for the study of organic free radicals and polyradicals437,438 since it selectively detects paramagnetic components of the sample with a good sensitivity. Typically 1010S = 1/2 spins can be detected by this technique. The presence of electron spins with multiplicity S > 1/2 induces two typical features in the CW-EPR spectra: (i) a fine structure originating from the electron–electron interaction, named zero-field splitting interaction which dominates the EPR spectrum, (ii) a much weaker additional signal which appears at half-field due to forbidden ΔMs = ±2 EPR transition(s), nonexistent for S = 1/2 systems.
Thus, by recording the EPR spectrum of a polymer containing unpaired spins, one can easily find if an S > 1/2 high-spin state is present in the sample. However, the determination of the spin multiplicity is more delicate: in most cases quantum chemistry calculations of the zero-field splitting interaction have to be performed to verify whether the observed fine structure is due to S = 1, S = 3/2 or a higher spin state. In some cases, the spectral features due to the zero-field splitting interaction are typical of a given spin multiplicity. For instance, in the case of the star-shape triradical 17, the main EPR signal corresponding to ΔMs = ±1 EPR transition is composed of five equidistant features, consistent with the fine structure of an S = 3/2 system with a quasi-axial symmetry and a small zero-field compared to the electron Zeeman interaction.439
On the other hand, the intensity of the EPR spectra is proportional to the paramagnetic contribution to the sample magnetization, so it is possible to measure J coupling constants by performing a temperature study χT = f(T) of the same kind as described previously for the SQUID magnetometry (see 6.1.3.1) (see for instance ref. 440 and 441). The EPR measurement of J coupling constants has a great advantage over SQUID magnetometry. In this measurement the diamagnetic contribution to the magnetization originating from the sample holder, the solvent and the high-spin molecule/polymer itself is not observed and does not need to be subtracted. However, EPR measurements of J coupling constants can be difficult to perform for samples containing S = 1/2 impurities: the EPR spectrum of the high-spin state under study and the spectrum of the S = 1/2 impurities almost always overlap and the subtraction of the S = 1/2 signal for spectra recorded in a wide temperature range can be difficult due to the very different spin relaxation properties of S = 1/2 and S > 1/2 spin states.
6.1.2.3 Pulsed-EPR nutation spectroscopy. 
Pulsed-EPR nutation spectroscopy442–444 is a powerful tool for the study of high-spin polymers because using this technique it is possible to measure the spin multiplicities S present in a complex system where spins of different multiplicities coexist.
In a pulsed-EPR nutation443,445 experiment, a long and powerful microwave pulse (whose magnetic field is noted as B1) is applied to the sample, which induces a rotation of the electronic spins around B1 called “nutation”. The frequency of this motion of “nutation” depends on several parameters and in particular on the spin multiplicity S with the following relationship for an electron spin S involved in a given (S, mS) ↔ (S, mS + 1) EPR transition (10): (10)
Note: this relationship is not always valid depending on the intensity of B1 and on the fine structure of the considered high-spin state.439,443
In the majority of pulsed-EPR nutation experiments, the nutation frequency is measured as a function of the static magnetic field for a range covering the full CW-EPR spectrum of the sample, providing 2D maps signal = f(B0,νnut) such as the one presented in Fig. 38. This 2D-map was measured for a sample of branched polyarylamine oxidatively doped at the stoichiometry providing the highest proportion of high spin states (as confirmed by the results of SQUID magnetometry presented in ref. 446). From this spectrum it can be seen that four different spin states (S = 1/2, S = 1, S = 3/2 and S = 2) can be detected in the sample. Their identification would be very difficult by SQUID magnetometry, because the corresponding Brillouin functions are not orthogonal and the fitting process of the Mpara = f(H) curve could not be reliable when using a high number of adjustable parameters.
 Fig. 38  Example of 2D field-swept pulsed-EPR nutation spectrum for a sample containing a mix of four different spin states. The pulsed-EPR experiment was performed at T = 7 K with a sample of the polymer PAB1 oxidized to the radical cation state at the oxidant:polymer ratio 3:1 [V. Maurel and I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, 2013, unpublished data]. 
Unfortunately, the relative intensities of the pulsed-EPR nutation signals of the different spins states cannot be used to find the proportions of the different spins states S in the sample, mainly because these signals are affected by the electronic relaxation times of the various spin states. For instance the relaxation times of S = 1/2 spin states are generally longer than those of higher spin states and the relative intensity of S = 1/2 spin states in pulsed-EPR nutation spectra is generally too high compared with the actual proportion of the S = 1/2 spin state in the sample.
Pulsed-EPR nutation spectroscopy is also a very useful tool to optimize the oxidative doping process of a high-spin polymer and find the optimal stoichiometry between the oxidizing agent and the polymer. An example of such a study for a linear polyarylamine grafted with small pending units is shown in Fig. 39, similar results were reported in ref. 432. According to the 2D EPR-nutation maps, the optimal oxidant:polymer ratio is 2:1. At this particular ratio, the signals corresponding to the high spin state S = 2 are dominant compared with other signals originating form the lower spin states. On the opposite, at a 1:1 oxidant:polymer ratio, the dominant signal corresponds to an S = 1/2 state and signals due to higher spin states are very weak.
 Fig. 39  Monitoring of the chemical doping of the polymer PN by 2D pulsed-EPR nutation. The polymer PN was oxidized to the radical cation state with the following molar ratios: Ox/PN = 1 (lower frame), 2 (middle frame), and 3 (upper frame) [V. Maurel and I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, 2013, unpublished data]. 

6.2 High-spin linear oligomers and polymers
Many fundamental studies of ferromagnetic spins interaction in organic molecules have been focused on oligomers which can be considered as model compounds for linear polymers.389c,390,393a,395a,421–425,447,448 This approach allows us to determine several factors characterizing spin interactions for example the planarity of the system,390,423–425 the sign of the exchange interaction,421 the effect of conformational changes.395b,412 These findings can then be extended to linear polymers. Taking into account the location of spin carrying units, SC, one can distinguish two types of linear polymers:
• polymers containing SC units in the main chain,
• polymers containing SC units in the pendant groups.
The polymers of the first class show one main weakness. If in some SC units spins are not created, the ferromagnetic interaction is interrupted and the molecule is divided into several clusters showing lower multiplicity than theoretically predicted. The polymers of the second type are more spin-deficit resistant because they interact magnetically via the conjugated π-system (Fig. 40).
 Fig. 40  Effect of the lack of a spin due to incomplete doping on the coupling between electronic spins in high-spin polymers designed following the polaronic model or by grafting pendant radical on a conjugated backbone. 
However, it should be noticed that polymers of both types show relatively high flexibility, thus local conformation of the polymer chain can be easily changed. The chain conformation can, in turn, modify the character of magnetic spins interactions from ferromagnetic to antiferromagnetic ones. Despite these disadvantages linear polymers still attract significant research attention because they also represent certain advantages. From the practical point of view, they are relatively easily processed and some of them exhibit sufficient chemical stability at room temperature, thus they could be interesting for potential applications.

6.2.1 Polymers containing spin carrying units in the main chain. 
Important attempts to design one-dimensional organic ferromagnets have been undertaken by Iwamura and co-workers.388c,447,448 They prepared linear oligocarbenes (Scheme 47, structure 6.33), which exhibited intramolecular ferromagnetic coupling. The EPR spectrum of tetracarbene showed the features characteristic of a nonet state.447 The temperature dependence of the total signal intensity indicated that S = 4 is the ground-spin state. However, irreversible changes of the spectrum were detected at 64 K, related to twisting of the phenyl rings. The semiempirical calculations demonstrated that tetracarbene can form four conformational isomers, however all of them have nonet as a ground-spin state. Thus, the magnetic properties of this molecule are not sensitive to conformational changes. Similarly, the EPR spectrum of pentacarbene showed the features of fine structure expected for S = 5.388c The magnetic susceptibility measurements performed for tetracarbene confirmed the conclusion derived from the EPR spectra. However, the 1/χ vs. temperature of tetracarbene in a glass matrix of Me-THF indicated that an antiferromagnetic interaction took place at temperatures below 65 K.448 This suggests that tetracarbene molecules are close enough to induce antiferromagnetic interaction between them.
 Scheme 47  Oligocarbenes. 
The lack of chemical stability of carbene compounds directed the research efforts towards more resistant materials like for example organic nitroxides. Trinitroxide 6.34 (Scheme 48) can be considered as a model compound for constructing polymeric organic magnets containing NO˙ groups.393a
 Scheme 48  Polymers containing nitroxide groups. 
To avoid the isomerization to aminoquinone, tert-butyl groups were attached to the phenylene rings for steric protection. The EPR spectrum of 6.34 in glassy toluene showed a fine structure signal, characteristic of randomly oriented molecules in a quartet spin state. Magnetic measurements, using Faraday magnetic balance, confirmed that the intramolecular exchange coupling was strongly ferromagnetic with J/k = 240 ± 20 K.393a Oka and co-workers have synthesized polymers containing nitroxide groups (Scheme 48, structures 6.35, 6.36, 6.37).449,450 It should be pointed out that in these compounds the NO˙ moiety is π-conjugated with adjacent phenylene rings and the spin density is spread over the whole segment. Thus, one can consider the structures of these polymers as nitroxides containing two phenylene rings coupled through m-benzene or as nitroxides NO˙ moieties linked through a meta-terphenyl coupler. 6.35 and 6.37 were very stable in their radical form in solution and in the solid state under ambient conditions, whereas radical forms of 6.36 were stable only in solution. The EPR studies corroborated the formation of high-spin states for all three polymers. The spectra in dichloromethane showed a signal at g = 2.0055 (in the case of 6.37) as well as an additional signal at half-field for ΔMs = ±2 transition. The magnetization data were in accordance with S = 1 for 6.35 and S = 3/2 for 6.36 and 6.37.449,450 The magnetic exchange coupling constant for 6.37 was J/k = 8.6 K.450 It has been demonstrated that effective through-bond spin interaction occurs in the polymers containing nitroxide groups, however, it is difficult to avoid the formation of spin defects.
Rajca and co-workers have postulated from EPR experiments that m-phenylene aminyl radicals should exhibit S = 1 ground state with 4 times greater energy gap between the singlet and the triplet states as compared to the case of polymers containing the nitroxide diradical.390 Thus, they directed their attention toward compounds with aminyl radicals, although these radicals are only short-lived.
The EPR spectrum of the diaminyl radical 6.38 showed six symmetrical signals. The analysis of the 14N hyperfine tensor led to the conclusion that aminyl radicals and the m-phenylene ring are co-planar.390 SQUID measurements revealed the presence of the S = 1 state. Higher homologues of the aminyl diradical have also been synthesized by Rajca et al.391 (see Scheme 49, structure 6.39). These compounds can be considered as oligo(m-anilines) or the derivatives of conjugated azaacenes. Ladder oligomers with up to 13 fused six-membered rings and six aza bridges were obtained.391 The DFT optimized geometries and the crystallographic structures determined by X-ray investigations suggest that these compounds show in-plane bending of the ladder, thus the oligomers can be presented in the form of an arc. High-spin properties of these new compounds have not yet been determined.
 Scheme 49  Model compound with aminyl radicals (6.38) and oligo(meta-aniline) (6.39). 
As previously mentioned, spin containing units (SC) can be composed not only of radicals but also of radical-ions (Section 6.1). Fukutome proposed a design of organic ferromagnets based on the polaronic model.14 In this case the SC unit is constituted of a conjugated segment which forms a radical cation after its partial oxidation (p-type doping). Using this concept Dougherty and co-workers synthesized a series of polymers containing different conjugated segments as SC units and m-benzene as a ferromagnetic coupler (Scheme 50: structures 6.40, 6.41, 6.42).15,16
 Scheme 50  Polymers containing different conjugated segments as SC units. 
Several criteria must be taken into consideration when designing this type of polymer. The conjugated segment should have a minimal length. In this respect a short conjugated segment is favored for ferromagnetic interaction which dramatically decreases with increasing spins separation. Moreover, in short conjugated segments polarons are preferentially formed after partial oxidation whereas in a long conjugated segment spinless bipolarons can dominate. On the other hand, an increase of the polaron delocalization in a long conjugated segment stabilizes radical cations. Additionally, long conjugated segments can be oxidatively doped under milder conditions which helps to avoid the polymer degradation. Thus, the design of this type polymer is a real challenge and “a compromise” between all mentioned above factors have to be found. The magnetization measurements performed for 6.40–6.42 showed that the experimental data can be well fitted using the Brillouin function with S = 2.2 for 6.40, S = 2.1 for 6.41 for samples lightly oxidized with AsF5. However, for some samples of 6.40 and 6.41S ≥ 4 was also detected. In the case of 6.42 the S = 1 state was achieved. A weak antiferromagnetic interaction was observed at low temperatures in all cases, probably due to an interchain interaction. It should be, however, noted that polarons created in these polymers are very stable at room temperature under an inert atmosphere and after 7 days the spin concentration drops down to 70% of its original value. The main inconvenience in the use of macromolecules of this type is related to the doping procedure which causes the samples of the same polymer to exhibit different properties caused by slight changes in their oxidation conditions.
Electronically conducting polymers can constitute an interesting inspiration in the design of organic ferromagnets. Among them polyaniline and its derivatives deserve special attention since upon multi-step oxidation they can form radical cations which are very stable at room temperature. For these reasons several attempts to design ferromagnetic organic material were directed towards arylamine compounds. The simplest approach is to synthesize poly(m-aniline) in which radical cations can be generated after the amine groups oxidation. Tanaka et al. have prepared such polymers, either unsubstituted or substituted with alkyl chains with the goal to increase the solubility of the product (Scheme 51, structure 6.43).451,452
 Scheme 51  Poly(m-aniline)s oxidized to radical cations. 
It has been shown that after oxidation with I2 or NOBF4 the polymers contained 10 times as many spins as the pristine materials corresponding to a spin concentration inferior to 0.1 spin per unit. The EPR spectra consisted of the signals at ΔMs = ±1 as well as at ΔMs = ±2 of a forbidden transition. The magnetization measurements data showed that the S = 1 spin state could be obtained and that small clusters of two electronic spins were obtained despite the modest spin concentration. Yamabe and co-workers have performed ab initio MO calculations for a dimer model compound analogue to poly(m-aniline) and suggested that 1,3,5-triazinediyl is a more effective ferromagnetic coupler for poly(m-aniline) than m-benzenediyl.453 The singlet–triplet energy gap in the case of 1,3,5-triazinediyl was estimated to be 12.5 kcal mol−1 (J/k = 6300 K) whereas for 1,3-benzenediyl it was determined to be only 0.7 kcal mol−1 (J/k = 350 K). However, no stable macromolecules containing 1,3,5-triazinediyl as a magnetic coupler have been synthesized to date.
When the SC unit does not contain radicals but radical cations an additional problem should be taken into account, namely the electrostatic repulsion between the adjacent positive charges (holes). Bushby et al. pointed out that the oxidation of poly(m-aniline) is mainly governed by electrostatics.454 The oxidation of every second amine group to a radical cation in the polymer chain is relatively easy. However, in this oxidation state the spin densities do not overlap, thus there is no ferromagnetic interaction. To obtain overlapped spin densities almost all nitrogen atoms should be oxidized to radical cations. This is, in reality, very difficult because of coulombic repulsion between the charges of the same sign. To decrease the electrostatic repulsion one can use 3,4′-biphenyl or 4,4′′-meta-terphenyl as a ferromagnetic coupler instead of 1,3-phenyl. The use of ferromagnetic couplers longer than m-benzene decreases the coulombic repulsion but, at the same time, also decreases the ferromagnetic exchange interaction.454 Bushby and co-workers have synthesized model compounds containing the above-mentioned couplers (Scheme 52, structures 6.44, 6.45).421,455
 Scheme 52  Oligoarylamines containing 3,4′-biphenyl and meta-terphenyl ferromagnetic couplers. 
The oxidation of these compounds was not coulombically limited, but the strength of ferromagnetic interaction decreased sharply and in the case of 6.45 the measured singlet–triplet was only J/k = 42 K.421
An alternative strategy to decrease the electrostatic repulsion and to increase the chemical stability of the formed radical cations is the use the p-phenylenediamine moiety, PD, as a SC unit. It is well known that tetramethyl-p-phenylenediamine (Würster blue) forms one of the most chemically and thermally stable radical cations. Its stability is caused by the electron delocalization in the semiquinone structure. Ito et al. have synthesized and studied a model compound containing two PD units linked by a central m-benzene ring (Scheme 53, structure 6.47).395a
 Scheme 53  Oligoarylamines containing the m-benzene ferromagnetic coupler. 
The EPR spectrum of 6.46 oxidized to the diradical cationic state showed the signals at ΔMs = ±1 and at ΔMs = ±2. The intensity of the signal at half-field demonstrated a linear relationship to the reciprocal temperature indicating the presence of a triplet ground state.395a Similar results were obtained by Janssen et al. for model compounds containing phenyl substituents instead of methyl ones.395b,412 Thus, the ferromagnetic interaction in these model compounds were well established and stimulated subsequent synthesis of macromolecules with alternating meta–para-aniline moieties. Several poly(m–p-anilines) were synthesized using palladium catalyzed amination reactions (Scheme 53, structure 6.47).456–458 The electrochemical oxidation of 6.47 showed reversible waves attributed to the formation of radical cations in the PD units. The CW-EPR spectrum exhibited the signals at ΔMs = ±1 and at ΔMs = ±2 regions.458,459 However, the pulsed-EPR nutation spectrum demonstrated that most of the spins were uncoupled (S = 1/2) and only a small fraction of them formed the triplet state.459 Ito and co-workers have studied a linear oligomer composed of three PD units linked by two m-phenylene rings (Scheme 53, structure 6.48).460 The pulsed-EPR nutation spectrum of 6.48 oxidized to the triradical cationic state revealed only a small signal attributable to the quartet multiplicity (S = 3/2). The difficulties in achieving a high-spin state in linear compounds of this type can be related to conformational changes around the m-benzene couplers impeding the ferromagnetic ordering.
Polyarylamines containing longer than the PD unit conjugated segments have also been prepared (Scheme 54, structures 6.49, 6.50).432,433 The main chains of these polymers are composed of m–p–p-aniline sequences.
 Scheme 54  Polyamines containing m–p–p-aniline segments in the main chain. 
Radical cations formed in aminophenyl-1,4-phenylenediamine units are very stable at room temperature. The pulsed-EPR spectrum of 6.49 oxidized with 1 equivalent of oxidant per polymer repeat unit showed a pure triplet state. Further oxidation led to the creation of spinless dications in the conjugated amine segments and the destruction of the S = 1 state. The exchange coupling constant was J/k = 18 K. Similarly, the highest multiplicity in 6.50 was observed for its oxidation to two diradicals cations per polymer repeat unit. For this oxidation level a quintet spin state S = 2 was unequivocally identified in the EPR measurements, performed at various microwave power values.432 The most interesting feature of poly(m–p–p-aniline) (6.49) was established by magnetization measurements. The magnetization data of diluted solutions of 6.49 can be approximated with S = 1 whereas the experimental data obtained for concentrated solutions can be well fitted using the Brillouin function with S higher than 1. The χT vs. T plot increases strongly between 10 K and 2 K indicating weak intermolecular ferromagnetic interactions. The Curie–Weiss temperature was determined to be Θ = 0.51 K.433
Summarizing the results obtained for 6.49 and 6.50, the principal question should be asked why the majority of the electronic spins are coupled only to S = 1 or S = 2, respectively, with very few, if any, uncoupled spins, as evidenced by pulsed EPR. The first possible reason can be related to incomplete oxidation of the polymer chain. The number of radical cations measured by SQUID magnetometry corresponds to 65% for 6.49 and 74% for 6.50 which imply that some polymer units remain unoxidized, which results in breaking the spin coupling along the chain. The second reason could originate from unfavorable local conformation in some units which, in turn, would lead to a change in the character of the spin interactions from ferromagnetic to antiferromagnetic ones. Finally, the third possible reason is the actual delocalization of the spin density, especially in conjugated oligoaniline segments. If the electronic spins were delocalized on a part of the conjugated segment only, the spin densities of two neighboring units would not effectively overlap, breaking the ferromagnetic interaction. The above mentioned hypotheses should be further investigated with the goal to design macromolecules with increased ferromagnetic ordering along the polymer chain.
Some of the problems outlined above have been solved by the synthesis of polymers containing the phenothiazine moiety linked through 1,3-phenylene, as for example 6.51 and 6.52 (see Scheme 55).461,462
 Scheme 55  Polymers containing the phenothiazine moiety. 
Phenothiazine forms almost planar three fused six-membered rings, thus the rotation in the radical cationic part of the molecule is impeded but the conformation of two adjacent phenothiazine moieties attached to the m-benzene coupler can differ. It should also be mentioned that phenothiazine forms well-known stable radical cations. The spin density calculations performed for model compounds indicate that spins are delocalized and the spin density in the m-phenylene coupler is sufficient to establish ferromagnetic interaction. In view of its rigid structure 6.51 was not soluble in any organic solvents. The introduction of a long alkyl/alkoxy chain into the 1,3-phenylene ring induced, however, the solubility of 6.52 in dichloromethane and THF. The magnetization data obtained by SQUID could be approximated using Brillouin function with S = 1 − 3/2. Although these results do not give simple answer to the question posed above, it seems that the planar and rigid structure promote the ferromagnetic interaction.


6.2.2 Polymers containing spin carrying units in the pendant groups. 
As already pointed out, the second main strategy to obtain high-spin polymers is to graft spin containing units on a conjugated polymer backbone at well-defined positions in order to favor the ferromagnetic coupling of spins according to the topological model (as explained in Section 6.1.1.6). This approach was first proposed by Ovchinnikov in 1977.13,428 This author suggested that grafting of phenoxy radicals on the polyacetylene backbone (structure 6.53) could yield a polymer showing a spin multiplicity S proportional to the degree of polymerization (Scheme 56).
 Scheme 56  The structure of polyacetylene with grafting phenoxy radicals. 
In 1987 he reported the synthesis of an insoluble polymer obtained by thermal and photochemical treatment of diacetylene derivatives bearing nitroxide radical groups463 and exhibiting some ferromagnetism at room temperature whose magnetization was equivalent to a 0.1% fraction in mass of the polymer sample. The exact chemical formula of this polymer could not be firmly established and two structures were proposed (see structures 6.54 and 6.55, Scheme 57).
 Scheme 57  Conjugated polymer containing pendant nitroxide radicals. 
Following this report, several groups tried to reproduce this result and to prepare similar polymers using either pyrolysis or oxidation of conjugated polymers. All these attempts were reviewed in detail by Miller464,465 in 1992. In the main conclusions he stated that in these materials the magnetic properties corresponded to a small fraction of the samples, the chemical structures of the polymers were not clearly established, the reproducibility of the magnetic properties was poor and extrinsic sources of magnetism such as iron oxide could not be discarded, so he concluded that the ferromagnetism of these polymers was not firmly established.
In the 1990's, thanks to the progress in the synthesis of conjugated polymers, several groups started to synthesize polymers with linear conjugated polymer backbones and pendant radical groups using mild conditions of polymerization such as Heck reaction,466 metathesis467,468 or Gilch reaction.469 Such a strategy was reviewed by Nishide in 1995.466 This section will be devoted to the polymers obtained by such mild synthetic processes, starting with selected systems reported in the 1995 Nishide's review and focusing on the most recent reports of high-spin polymers. The four main classes of high spin polymers containing conjugated polymer backbones will be discussed: polyacetylene, poly(phenylenevinylene), polythiophene and poly(aryleneethynylene).
6.2.2.1 Polyacetylene-based high spin polymers. 
In the early studies some representative examples of well characterized polymers containing spin containing units in pendant chains grafted on the polyacetylene backbone were reported by Nishide and coworkers (polymers 6.56a–d on Scheme 58)466,470–473 as well as by other groups (polymers 6.56e and 6.56f).474–476 The non-radical precursor polymers of these polymers (containing X–H precursors of the radical X° moieties) were obtained by polymerization or by head-to-tail condensation of appropriately functionalized phenylacetylenic compounds. The resulting polymers usually exhibited molecular masses above 104 g mol−1 and good solubility. The non-radical precursors could be converted to the corresponding high-spin polymers by oxidation with oxidants such as PbO2 and Ag2O or by electrochemical oxidation. The radical concentration in the polymers, referred to as “spin-concentration” in many reports, in some cases exceeded 0.5 spin per unit (0.8 in the case of the polymer 6.56b).
 Scheme 58  Polyacetylenes containing different pendant radical moieties. 
In all these polymers (but polynitroxide 6.56f), the free radicals are conjugated with the polyacetylene backbone and 6.56a is very close to 6.53 which was predicted by Ovchinnikov as a high-spin polymer with S proportional to the degree of polymerization (vide supra). However, no high-spin magnetic ground state could be observed in these polymers: the electronic spins behaved as isolated spins and even some antiferromagnetic interactions were observed in polymers 6.56d–f. This effect was attributed to the through-space antiferromagnetic coupling of neighboring free radicals.
The absence of ferromagnetic coupling between pendant free radicals was mainly attributed to a non-planar cis–transoid conformation of the polyacetylene backbone, which would be in conflict with the hypothesis of planarity of the conjugated backbone assumed in original theoretical studies by Ovchinnikov. This non-planarity was confirmed by force-field computational studies of poly(phenylacetylene), which revealed that the polyacetylene chain was twisted (with a 75° dihedral angle) and that the phenyl groups are not coplanar with the backbone (with a 35° dihedral angle), which considerably reduces the delocalization of the spin density over the polyacetylene backbone.477 Let us mention here that several other similar polymers exhibiting S = 1/2 or antiferromagnetic behavior were synthesized. In some studies a particular effort was paid to induce chirality by obtaining a helical conformation of the polyacetylene backbone. These reports have been reviewed in ref. 401 and will not be discussed here.
To the best of our knowledge, only four examples of high-spin polymers based on the polyacetylene backbone were reported to date. In 2005 and 2006, Nishide et al. synthesized three polymers with polyacetylene backbones grafted with arylamine radical precursors.467,468 The synthesis was performed by metathesis polymerization catalyzed by rhodium or tungsten catalysts and the precursor polymers were oxidized with NOPF6 or SbCl5 to obtain the desired high spin polymers 6.57 and 6.58 (Scheme 59). Compound 6.58 showed a rather modest degree of polymerization (DP = 7 and 11, respectively). The spin concentration after the oxidation was only 0.25 spin per unit for 6.58 (H) and 0.52 spin per unit for 6.58 (CH3). Nevertheless, SQUID magnetization studies indicated that 6.58 (H) has the properties of an S = 3/2 spin state and 6.58 (CH3) the properties of an S = 2 spin state between 20 and 100 K. At lower temperatures antiferromagnetic interactions were observed, ascribed to through space radical–radical interactions.467
 Scheme 59  Polyacetylenes containing arylamine pendant groups. 
Polyacetylene grafted with dianisylphenyl ammonium radical cations 6.57 could adopt a helical conformation and be obtained as an achiral or as a chiral magnetic polymer depending on the use of achiral or chiral amine as a solvent during the polymerization.468 Remarkably, the spin concentration of the achiral polymer could be as high as 0.98 spin per unit, with a stability of one month in the powder state. Moreover, as revealed by the temperature-dependent SQUID magnetometry and room temperature Evans NMR shift measurements, up to RT the achiral polymer 6.57 exhibited the behavior of an S = 2 spin state while the chiral polymer 6.57 exhibited the behavior of an S = 1 spin state. From these results it was concluded that the through-bond ferromagnetic spin coupling constant J between ammonium radical cations is very high (J/k > 300 K). The lower spin state of the chiral polymer 6.57 was attributed to the fact that a well-ordered helical conformation apparently favors the through space antiferromagnetic interactions between radical cations.
Another remarkable example of a magnetic polymer was reported by Itoh et al.,478 who described polyacetylene grafted with triplet carbene moieties. These authors succeeded in designing the diazo compound 6.59 that was stable enough to perform the polymerization and obtain the precursor polyacetylene-based polymer 6.60 with a high degree of polymerization (DP = 190) (Scheme 60).
 Scheme 60  Polyacetylene grafted with diazo and carbene moieties. 
The photolysis of 6.60 was performed directly at low temperature (T = 2–5 K) inside a SQUID magnetometer due to the limited chemical stability expected for the carbene moieties. The resulting polycarbene exhibited high spin states, whose M = f(H) behavior was between S = 3 and S = 4 Brillouin functions at T = 5 K.
6.2.2.2 Poly(phenylenevinylene)-based high spin polymers. 
Poly(phenylenevinylene)-based high-spin polymers appeared to be good candidates to solve the problem of non-planarity observed with the polyacetylene backbone because of their extended conjugation and rigid coplanarity.466 The first reports on high-spin poly(phenylenevinylene) grafted with nitroxide (6.61, 6.62) and phenoxyl (6.63, 6.64) pendant radicals were published in 1994–1996 (Scheme 61).429,479–481
 Scheme 61  Poly(phenylenevinylene) grafted with nitroxide and phenoxyl groups. 
These polymers were obtained by palladium catalyzed Heck reaction of bromostyrene precursors bearing the phenoxyl moiety protected by an acetoxy group. Then the free radical moieties were generated by oxidation with PbO2, which resulted in spin concentration of up to 0.68 radical per unit in the case of 6.64. 6.61 was unstable due to reactivity of the nitroxide radical with the vinylene proton, but the polymers 6.62–6.64 were stable enough to be studied by SQUID magnetometry. 6.63 and 6.64 had a half-life time of 3–5 hours in solution and 1.5 days as powders at room temperature. 6.62 and 6.63 exhibited similar magnetic properties with the S = 1 high-spin ground state and J/k = 28 K for 6.62 and J/k in the range 28–46 K for 6.63, while 6.64 exhibited an S = 5/2 spin state with an estimated average J/k coupling constant of 69 K.429,481
In an attempt to further improve the magnetic properties of such polymers, the polymer 6.65 containing two phenoxyl radicals grafted on each phenylenevinylene moieties was synthesized (Scheme 62).482 The strategy was to generate an S = 1 ground state diradical on each polymer unit, so that S = 1 diradicals of different polymer units would interact more strongly than S = 1/2 free radicals in the case of polymers 6.63 and 6.64. The synthetic strategy was similar to that used for 6.63 and 6.64. It resulted in a modest polymerization degree of 4, a spin concentration of 0.5 spin per unit and the magnetic behavior of an S = 1 ground state at low temperature. The J/k coupling constant was estimated at 230 K consistent with the coupling of two phenoxyl radicals grafted on the same phenyl ring.
 Scheme 62  Poly(phenylenevinylene) grafted with two phenoxy radicals. 
In 1999–2000 several papers reported on poly(phenylenevinylene) grafted with arylamine radical cations. In addition to their chemical stabilities, ammonium radical cations were known for the large delocalization of the spin density on aryl groups, which was expected to favor the interaction of spins in the polymer backbone.483 The studies of the dimers 6.66 (n = 0 or 1)484 and 6.67485 (Scheme 63) confirmed the validity of this hypothesis, since 6.66 diradical cations up to 100 K exhibited a pure S = 1 ground state as evidenced by EPR spectroscopy. 6.67 had a pure S = 1 ground state with a very strong coupling constant (J/k >300 K) evidenced by SQUID magnetometry.
 Scheme 63  Phenylenevinylene grafted with aryl amine radical cations. 
The poly(phenylenevinylene) backbones grafted with arylamine radical cations 6.68 with t-Bu and OMe substituents corresponding to dimers 6.67 (with t-Bu or OMe) were prepared by Nishide's group. 6.68-t-Bu described in the first report483 showed a spin concentration of 0.41 spin per unit and the spin multiplicity reached 3/2 ≤ S ≤ 2 up to 150 K. In the following paper4866.68-OMe was described which exhibited similar properties with 0.37 spin per unit S ∼ 2 up to room temperature. However, by dispersing 6.68-OMe in a poly(styrenesulfonate tetrabutylammonium) matrix the magnetic properties could be enhanced to 0.63 spin/unit and S = 5/2 persisting at room temperature. The synthesis of poly(phenylenevinylene) grafted with both arylamine radical cations and long aliphatic chains was also reported (Scheme 64, structure 6.69),469 with the aim to improve the solubility and film forming properties. A S = 3/2 spin multiplicity was measured for samples dispersed in poly(styrenesulfonate tetrabutylammonium).
 Scheme 64  Poly(phenylenevinylene) grafted with aryl amine radical cations. 
As in the case of poly(phenylenevinylene) grafted with phenoxyl radicals, the polymer 6.70 was synthesized with the aim of further enhancing the magnetic properties by grafting two arylamine radical cations per unit (Scheme 65).487 This polymer exhibited a very good spin concentration estimated to be 0.8 spin per unit and an S = 5/2 spin state at temperatures up to 100 K. Remarkably 6.70 in its radical cation state was chemically stable at room temperature with a half-life longer than 10 days.
 Scheme 65  Poly(phenylenevinylene) grafted with two aryl amine groups per the polymer unit. 
6.2.2.3 Polythiophene-based high-spin polymers. 
Regioregular, solution processable polythiophene derivatives have been extensively studied since early 1990's as components of field effect transistors and photovoltaic cells since they showed better structural organization and better electrical transport properties as compared to their non-regioregular counterparts (see Section 4). They were also identified as promising candidates for functionalization with spin containing substituents (see ref. 488 and references therein). High-spin regioregular 3-substituted polythiophenes containing phenoxyl and galvinoxyl free radicals were reported by Nishide and coworkers in the 2000–2001 years (Scheme 66).488–490
The polymer 6.71, bearing phenoxyl radicals488 was prepared by oxidative polymerization of the thiophene monomer functionalized with a protected phenolic group followed by its deprotection and subsequent oxidation. It exhibited an S = 1 spin state at low temperatures with a J/k = 104 K spin coupling constant, which is larger than that measured for the corresponding polymer with the poly(phenylenevinylene) backbone. This limited spin multiplicity was attributed to the low efficiency of the oxidation of phenolic moieties to phenoxyl radicals, since the spin concentration was only 0.3 spin per unit. In their second report489 the same group described the preparation of the copolymer 6.72 synthesized by feeding the polymerization reaction with an equimolar ratio of 3-hexyl-thiophene and 3-substituted thiophene with a phenoxyl radical precursor. It also exhibited an S = 1 spin multiplicity at low temperatures with a limited spin concentration of 0.25 spin per unit. Remarkably, the spin coupling constant dropped to J = 18 cm−1. This lower coupling constant was attributed to the longer distance between neighboring phenoxyl radicals in 6.72 compared with 6.71.
 Scheme 66  Polythiophenes grafted with phenoxyl radicals. 
Following these studies, the galvinoxyl radical moiety was chosen as a spin carrying unit with the aim of improving the spin concentration in the polymer.490 In 6.73 the spin concentration of 0.93 spin per unit was obtained. However, no high spin state could be detected: this polymer exhibited the properties of a pure S = 1/2 state as evidenced by EPR and SQUID magnetometer studies with only a weak ferromagnetic interaction at low temperatures. The absence of any high-spin state despite the quantitative generation of free radicals on the pendant chains was attributed to their possible complete localization on the pendant groups without extending it to the polythiophene backbone.
Very recently an elegant strategy for grafting radical anions on regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) was reported.396 This polymer was modified in the post-polymerization functionalization process involving the following steps: (i) bromination of poly(3-hexylthiophene) in position 4; (ii) coupling between brominated poly(3-hexylthiophene) and an electron rich alkyne; (iii) cycloaddition of the strong acceptor TCNE (tetracyanoethylene) to the alkyne functions followed by a cycloreversion to obtain 6.77, a polymer containing n-dopable TCBD (1,1,4,4-tetracyanobuta-1,3-diene) moieties (Scheme 67). In the next step 6.77 was either chemically or electrochemically reduced (n-doped) to generate radical anions. The spin concentration in the radical anion of 6.77 was estimated to be 0.17 spin per unit only. Its half-life time was about 26 h and the SQUID magnetometry measurements corresponded to an S = 1 spin multiplicity at low temperature up to T = 50 K.
 Scheme 67  Preparation of polythiophene grafted with 1,1,4,4-tetracyanobuta-1,3-diene. 
6.2.2.4 Poly(aryleneethynylene)-based high spin polymers. 
The expected rigidity and well-defined geometries of poly(phenylene–ethynylene) made oligomers and polymers, based on the phenylene–ethynylene backbone grafted with free radical moieties, good candidates for obtaining high-spin polymers. However, in the majority of cases these polymers and oligomers, when grafted with nitroxides and nitronylnitroxides did not show a high-spin state, but rather antiferromagnetic coupling of the spins (see ref. 401 and 440 and references therein).
Some ferromagnetic coupling was observed in these few examples, for which free radicals were grafted on the 2-positions of the oligo- or poly(1,4-phenyleneethynylene) main chain with the head to tail coupling as for the dimers 6.78491 and 6.79 (n = 0 or 1)484 and the polymer 6.80 (Scheme 68).491 In the case of 6.79 an S = 1 ground spin state at T = 4 K was found by EPR spectroscopy. The dimer 6.78, which was obtained with a 0.69 spin per unit concentration, has also an S = 1 ground state at low temperature with a J/k = 26 K measured by SQUID magnetometry. The polymer 6.80 had only a limited spin concentration of 0.37 spin per unit, which resulted in an S = 3/2 spin multiplicity and J/k = 17 K, compatible with the coupling constant of J/k = 26 K observed for the dimer.
 Scheme 68  1,4-Phenyleneethynylene main chain grafted with phenoxyl radicals and aryl amine radical cations. 
In an elegant improvement of this strategy the poly(1,4-phenyleneethynylene) backbone was replaced by the poly(8,9-anthryleneethynylene) one,392,401,492 for which grafting of two free radicals per unit was possible (Scheme 69). As a result the electronic spins could couple by several pathways. A comprehensive description of these systems is provided in the review by Aoki et al.401 The polymer 6.81 which had the same backbone with one phenoxyl free radical per anthryleneethynylene unit was reported first in ref. 492 showing an S = 1 high-spin ground state, 0.36 spin per unit and J1/k = 56 K. The measured coupling constant was much higher than the J/k = 26 K coupling constant determined for the analogous polymer with the poly(1,4-phenyleneethynylene) backbone. This seems to indicate that the use of the poly(8,9-anthryleneethynylene) backbone probably reduces the steric hindrance between the grafted radicals and the main chain. The best magnetic properties were obtained for the polymer 6.82 which has two phenoxyl radicals per anthryleneethynylene unit, grafted at β-positions. SQUID magnetometry revealed an S = 5/2 ground spin state at low temperatures with a spin concentration of 0.37 spin per phenoxyl unit.392 In the same report the dimer 6.83 was described, showing the coupling constant of two phenoxyl radicals grafted at β-positions on the same anthranyl moieties J2/k = 149 K. So both spin coupling constants J1 and J2 involved in the polymer 6.82 were measured experimentally.
 Scheme 69  Poly(8,9-anthryleneethynylene) and anthranyl grafted with phenoxyl radicals. 

6.3 High-spin macrocyclic compounds
Difficulties encountered in the design and preparation of high-spin linear polymers have been at least partially overcome by employing cyclic structures. There are several advantages of cyclic molecules compared to the linear ones:
(i) a significant reduction of the spin defects influence on the total multiplicity of the system,
(ii) the existence of numerous spin coupling paths which can increase the ferromagnetic interactions,
(iii) the rigid structure of macrocyclic molecules decreasing the number of possible conformations
The creation of unpaired electrons in each spin containing unit, SC, can be difficult and in several cases it is less effective than theoretically predicted. The SC site which does not contain spin can be defined as “a spin defect”. The appearance of this spin defect can interrupt magnetic coupling. Scheme 70 shows the spin defects in branched/linear structure 6.84 and cyclic structures (6.85 and 6.86). The appearance of a spin defect in the branched/linear structure causes a break in the spin–spin connectivity, thus the molecule is divided into several segments bearing lower S values than that theoretical one, predicted for the whole molecule. However, spin defects generated in cyclic molecules have lower influence on the S value than in the previous case. The appearance of a spin defect on peripheral sites (structure 6.85) has a minor effect. Moreover, the existence of a spin defect in one of the spin-coupling paths of the cycle (6.86) does not prevent spin interactions on the remaining coupling paths. High multiplicity of the system is therefore preserved. Thus, the presence of numerous spin-coupling paths in the molecules is very important and enhances the ferromagnetic coupling in cyclic molecules compared to their linear analogues as evidenced by theoretical calculations.426,427,493
 Scheme 70  Spin defects in linear/branched and cyclic structures. 
Iwamura et al. have studied cyclic hexacarbene (6.87, Scheme 71),494 which was obtained from the hexadiazo derivative photolyzed at cryogenic temperature to yield the desired product. The CW-EPR spectrum of 6.87 showed a strong signal centered at g = 2, exhibiting fine structural characteristics of a high-spin state. The magnetization data were well fitted using the Brillouin function with S = 6. Cyclocarbene 6.87 has a rigid structure in which the carbene centers were fixed in non-reactive positions.
 Scheme 71  Hexacarbene. 
Rajca and co-workers have studied macrocyclic polyradicals of triarylmethyl calixarenes (Scheme 72). They prepared the corresponding cyclic polyether precursors which were treated with an excess of Na/K alloy to give carboanion solutions. Carboanions were then oxidized with I2 at 180 K to the corresponding triradical (6.88),495 tetraradical (6.89)495 and its analogues containing a calix[4]arene-type cycle with branched substituents like octaradical (6.90),495 hexadecaradical,496 tetracosaradical497 and 2-strand tetradecaradical (6.91).498 It has been shown that calix[3]arene based triradicals undergo the dimerization, which can be related to an insufficient steric hindrance in its planar system. In the EPR spectrum of 6.88 a signal of relatively low intensity was observed, indicating only a minor amount of a quartet state. The EPR data were qualitatively consistent with a mixture of triplet diradicals. However, in the case of the tetraradical 6.89 and the octaradical 6.90 the EPR spectra showed very intensive signals in both ΔMs = ±1 and ΔMs = ±2 regions, although the EPR spectrum of the octaradical was poorly resolved. Rajca postulated that the main reason for this observation can be attributed to higher defects content and/or many more transitions in the octaradical than in the tetraradical.495 The magnetization data obtained for the tetraradical 6.89 can be well fitted with the Brillouin function with S in the range 1.86–1.93. The experimental data presented as MT vs. T indicated that small intermolecular antiferromagnetic interactions took place at low temperature. However, the S = 2 ground-state was unequivocally established. Similarly, the magnetization data obtained for the octaradical 6.90 can be fitted using the Brillouin function with S = 3.8, which corresponds to 95% yield in the radical formation. Intermolecular antiferromagnetic interactions were negligible for dilute solution of 6.90. Similar results have been obtained for other compounds based on the calix[4]arene cycle. The increase of the number of spin sites by the substitution of branched oligoarylmethyl arms led to an augmentation of the multiplicity of the system. The impressive S = 10 value was detected for tetracosaradical.497
 Scheme 72  Macrocyclic polyradicals of triarylmethyl calixarenes. 
As proved, calix[4]arene based oligoradicals have distorted structure with steric protection which preserves their kinetic stability. Therefore they are interesting as building blocks for high-spin polyradicals, relatively insusceptible to spin defects. Following this strategy Rajca and co-workers have prepared 2-strand tetradecaradical 6.91 (Scheme 72). The arylmethyl bridges help to maintain the ferromagnetic coupling between the spin sites, even in the presence of spin defects in this structure. The magnetization measurements data can be approximated using the Brillouin function with S = 6.2, lower than the theoretically predicted S = 7. This can be explained by the presence of spin defects. The MT vs. T plot showed a drop down at high temperature which suggests the presence of low-lying low-spin excited states. Rajca postulated that the strain in the center calix[4]arene ring may increase basicity which in turn facilitates the formation of defects. Moreover, twisting of arylmethyl bonds in the center calix[4]arene ring could weaken the spin coupling. The magnetic properties were then tentatively rationalized by considering three coupled spins, namely S = 3 (left calix[4]arene ring), S = 1/2 (central part with only one single electron due to a defect) and S = 3 (right calix[4]arene ring). Thus, the formation of a symmetric trimer of S = 3–S = 1/2–S = 3 can be postulated. Cyclic structures of triarylmethyl polyradicals are undoubtedly very interesting and can give a high-spin state, however, using the described preparation procedure it is rather difficult to avoid the creation of spin defects in the process of the oxidation of the formed polyanions to the corresponding polyradicals. In addition they are not chemically stable. The exposure of polyradicals solution to room temperature causes a dramatic destruction of the radical sites.497,498
The defined, rigid structure of calix[4]arene is promising as a building block for other spin containing units like, for example nitroxides. It should be stressed that nitroxides are chemically stable and that the best (and almost unique) example of organic material showing ferromagnetic ordering (at T < 1.48 K in the crystalline phase) is the N,N′-dioxy-l,3,5,7-tetramethyl-2,6-diazaadamantane diradical designed by Rassat.499 There were several attempts to combine calix[4]arene structure with nitroxides. Scheme 73 shows some of them like biradical 6.92,500 tetraradicals 6.93, 6.94501 and 6.95.502
 Scheme 73  Calix[4]arene structure with nitroxides. 
In biradical 6.92 nitroxide groups are attached to the upper calix[4]arene rim. The EPR spectrum of this compound at room temperature shows two sets of overlapping signals at g = 2.0067.500 The character of the spectrum indicates strong spin–spin exchange interaction, supported by the transition for ΔMs = ±2 at half-field. Based on these findings, it was concluded that calix[4]arene maintain partial cone conformation with two N–O˙ groups pointing into the cavity. The two SC units are located in close vicinity, thus resulting in strong spin–spin exchange interaction. In this case spin exchange interaction takes place through space. However, an exchange coupling can also be mediated through bonds and this type of interaction is generally more effective, especially when realized through a cross-conjugated π-system. Rajca et al. have synthesized two kinds of tetraradicals (6.93, 6.94) with nitroxide groups located on the upper rim.501 The EPR spectrum of 6.93 at room temperature shows a well-resolved nonet, whereas the EPR spectrum at 135 K comprises a single peak at ΔMs = ±1 and only a slightly visible peak at the ΔMs = ±2 region. This can be explained by the specific conformation of the cycle in which two nitroxide groups are arranged in parallel on both sides of the molecule. The magnetization measurements showed that the χT vs. T remained constant in the 40–150 K temperature range and fell down at lower temperatures. Rajca concluded that through-bond exchange interaction between adjacent nitroxides was controlled by the conformation of the nitroxide–m-Ph–CH2–m-Ph–nitroxide coupling path. The exchange interaction was antiferromagnetic with J/k ≈ −1 K.501 However, in the case of tetraradical 6.94 with nitroxide groups located on the same side of the calix[4]arene rim, the exchange interaction was ferromagnetic with J/k ≈ +1 K and mostly intramolecular in nature.
The multiplicity of the tetraradical 6.95 has been studied using pulsed-EPR spectroscopy.502 The 2D nutation spectrum demonstrated signals at 2.νS=1/2 and √6.νS=1/2 corresponding to a quintet high-spin state (see Section 6.1.2.3). Additionally, more than three open-shell species contributed to the experimentally measured spectrum, which could be related to a small amount of nitroxide deficient radicals. However, the quintet state was reported as the ground-state or a nearly degenerate state with the singlet-ground state.
Molecules composed of two (or more) aromatic rings linked by aliphatic bridges are called cyclophanes. The replacement of methylene bridges in the structure 6.95 by aza-bridges leads to the formation of tetraazacyclophane, 6.96 (Scheme 74); which shows interesting high-spin properties.
 Scheme 74  Azacyclophanes. 
Spectacular progress in the chemistry of new aza compounds through palladium-catalyzed amination reaction503 has led to the preparation of aza-cyclophanes with reasonable yields. Ito et al. have synthesized tetraazacyclophane 6.96 with the isolated yield of 12.4%.504 By improving the preparation procedure they have synthesized a series of azacyclophanes containing from 3 to 8 aza-bridges.505 Similarly, Rajca and co-workers have obtained N-benzyl substituted aza-meta-cyclophanes composed of 4, 6, 8 and 10 aza-bridges.506 However, the electrochemical studies showed that all these compounds underwent an irreversible oxidation. Radical cations were not stable and participated in an immediate benzidine formation reaction before the polycationic state was established. This irreversible oxidation did not allow for the observation of any high-spin states in all aza-meta-cyclophanes, although they were classified as co-extensive non-Kekulé molecules. Ito et al. suggested that the introduction of suitable substituents into the ortho-position to the amino groups can facilitate the creation of the high-spin state.505 Indeed, the new cyclophane 6.97 (Scheme 74) containing phenylenediamine units, PD, with anisyl substituents exhibited sufficient chemical stability in the oxidized state.507 The radical cation created in phenylenediamine unit was delocalized within N–Ph–N conjugated segments, thus electrostatic repulsion was not so strong as in the case of meta-cyclophanes. Additionally, radical cations were stabilized by the presence of electro-donating anisyl groups. In effect, all oxidation processes of the azacyclophane 6.97 were chemically reversible. The pulsed-EPR studies showed that 6.97 oxidized to tetraradical cations showed the quintet state (S = 2) and was stable under anaerobic conditions at room temperature for several days.507
The usefulness of the PD unit as a spin containing unit was pointed out previously and proved in the case of the structure 6.97. However, there were several attempts to incorporate the phenylenediamine moiety in the main cycle of cyclophanes. Following this idea tetraazacyclophanes 6.98 (Scheme 75) containing two p-phenylenediamine units have been synthesized.508–510
 Scheme 75  Tetraazacyclophanes (6.98a and 6.99), hexaazacyclophane (6.100a) and octaazacyclophanes (6.98b and 6.100b). 
Hartwig and co-workers have improved the reaction conditions and in a two-step procedure have obtained several tetraazacyclophanes with remarkable yields exceeding 70%.508 The voltammograms of the compounds 6.98a exhibited four reversible waves corresponding to the oxidation of four nitrogens present in the molecules.508,509 The CW-EPR spectra of tetraazacyclophanes oxidized to the diradical cationic state showed the signals at g = 1.98 and g = 4.02 for ΔMs = ±1 and ΔMs = ±2, respectively.508 The intensity of the line for ΔMs = ±2 demonstrated a linear dependence with 1/T indicating a triplet-ground state.509a The presence of a triplet state was also confirmed by pulsed-EPR studies which unequivocally proved the existence of S = 1.510 Diradical cations of tetraazacyclophanes were stable for several weeks in solution at −78 °C, but underwent degradation at higher temperature.509a Recently, Sakamaki et al. have prepared a larger macrocycle than tetraazacyclophane, namely octaazacyclophane 6.98b, containing four PD units linked by four 1,3-benzenediyl couplers. Molecules of 6.98b can be reversibly oxidized up to their octacations. However, the pulsed-EPR spectrum of 6.98b oxidized to tetraradical cationic form showed the signals which could be attributed to four different spin states (S = 1/2, 1, 3/2 and 2).509b The different multiplicity observed for this compound can be related to the conformational changes. An increase of the macrocyle size makes it more flexible and facilitates these changes.
Hartwig and co-workers have also prepared polycyclic arylamines such as ladders consisting of two or three cyclophane units.511 Unfortunately, the EPR spectra of oxidized ladder cyclophanes did not exhibit a forbidden transition at half-field, suggesting that the compounds of this type have a singlet-ground state.
Nelsen et al. have synthesized cyclophanes containing two PD units linked by trimethylene bridges512 (6.99, Scheme 75). Surprisingly, the EPR spectrum of the compound containing iso-propyl substituents showed the signals at g = 2 as well as at the half-field transition for ΔMs = ±2 characteristic of the triplet state. Temperature dependent NMR studies revealed that these diradicals have a singlet ground state with a thermally accessible triplet. The authors postulated that the oxidation of two PD units to radical cations caused changes in the molecule conformation and the PD units took up a nearly parallel position. Thus, it could be concluded that in this case the ferromagnetic interaction was realized through-space, similarly to the interaction observed for calix[4]arene with nitroxide groups, as mentioned previously.
To increase the stability of ammonium radical cations, hexaazacyclophane containing prolonged conjugated segment, i.e. two N–Ph–N–Ph–N units, was synthesized (6.100a, Scheme 75).510 Indeed, this compound when oxidized to diradical cations turned out to be very stable even at room temperature. The pulsed-EPR nutation measurements performed for hexaazacyclophane oxidized to its diradical cationic state indicated that spins interacted ferromagnetically and created a pure triplet state.510 The magnetization measurements allow us to determine the exchange coupling constant of 6.100a equal to J/k = 57 K, i.e. 1.7 times bigger than in the case of the corresponding linear dimer (J/k = 33 K).433 Taking into account the chemical stability of these radical cations this entity seems to be very promising as a building block for magnetic materials. Sakamaki and co-workers synthesized octaazacyclophane 6.100b with conjugated amine parts elongated to four nitrogen atoms linked with three phenylene rings.509b This compound can also be reversibly oxidized. The pulsed-EPR studies showed that almost pure triplet state was obtained for 6.100b oxidized to diradical cations, however, further oxidation led to the formation of a spinless, diamagnetic state.
Tetraazacyclophanes have also been used to design more complex structures. Ito and co-workers have prepared compound 6.101 containing three cyclophane moieties bonded by the 1,3,5-benzenetriyl center513 as well as compound 6.102 composed of two cyclophane moieties linked by the p–m–p-oligoaniline bridge (Scheme 76).395e
 Scheme 76  Multicyclophane structures. 
The pulsed-EPR nutation studies of compound 6.101 oxidized to the triradical cationic state clearly indicated the dominance of the spin quartet. However, further oxidation to the tetraradical cationic state caused antiferromagnetic coupling of the newly generated spin to the already existing three spins.513 In the case of compound 6.102 the pulsed-EPR spectra allowed us to detect the septet spin state (S = 3) for the oxidation to hexaradical cations. Furthermore, triplet and quintet states were also present, which suggested that the high-spin state is nearly degenerate with thermally accessible intermediate spin states.395e
Azacyclophanes have also been exploited to construct sophisticated molecular structures. Very recently Ito et al. have synthesized double- and triple-decker molecules which can be regarded as a 1,3,5-benzenetriamine multiple-decker linked by three meta-phenylenes or two locked tetraaza-meta-cyclophanes514 or two locked hexaazacyclophanes containing m–p–p-bonds alternation.441 However, tetraazacyclophanes used as building blocks for a belt-shaped polymacrocyclic oligoarylamine showed the most interesting properties.515 The latter compound is composed of six p-phenylenediamine units forming two cyclophane rings locked by two PD units (6.103, Scheme 77). Electrochemically it could be reversibly oxidized up to dodecacations. By chemical oxidation, using Magic Blue as an oxidant, only the tetraradical cationic state could be reached. The pulsed-EPR spectrum demonstrated the presence of a spin quintet state. Moreover, the excited triplet state was available as well. The study by EPR spectroscopy in liquid solution at different temperatures revealed that the compound containing one radical cation could undergo thermal interconversion between two side slipped structures.
 Scheme 77  Belt-shaped polymacrocyclic oligoarylamine (tetraazacyclophane moiety – in red, PD bridge – in blue). 
In summary, it should be stressed that cyclic structures with different spin bearing units are very promising as building blocks for high-spin or magnetic polymers. One should however be aware of the fact that the properties of these new compounds cannot be simply predicted and sometimes unusual behavior may appear, as recently demonstrated by Ito.441,514,515
6.4 High-spin branched and two-dimensional polymers
In 1968 Mataga proposed a two dimensional (2D) model of polyradicals in which spins can be ferromagnetically aligned (6.104, Scheme 78).516 In this polymeric network each spin of triarylmethyl radicals is ferromagnetically coupled with all spins of six neighboring radicals through 1,3,5-benzenetriyl units.
 Scheme 78  The model of two dimensional polyradicals. 
This two dimensional network allows us to overcome the main difficulties caused by the presence of spin defects. As mentioned before (Section 6.2) in linear polymers spin defects have a severe influence on the multiplicity of the system, breaking magnetic spin–spin interaction (see also Fig. 41). In the case of cyclic structures the spin defects do not affect significantly the multiplicity because spins can interact on two coupling paths (Section 6.3). The Mataga's network contains multiple ferromagnetic coupling paths, thus this model is the most insusceptible to the spin defects (Fig. 41). Moreover, the two-dimensional rigid structure does not allow changing the local conformations and would help to maintain ferromagnetic ordering. However, considering the presence of multiple coupling paths it should be underlined that the spin concentration in the polymer network has to exceed a certain limit value to preserve the ferromagnetic ordering, i.e. the spin concentration should exceed the percolation threshold (ca. 70%). Although the Mataga's polymer has not yet been synthesized to date, there were several attempts directed to design this type of network.
 Fig. 41  Spin defects in linear and 2-D structures. 
Iwamura and co-workers have prepared partially dendritic hexacarbenes (Scheme 79, structures 6.105, 6.106) as well as cyclic structure 6.87 described previously (Chapter 6.3, Scheme 71).494
 Scheme 79  Dendritic hexacarbenes (6.105 and 6.106) and 2D network (6.107). 
These building blocks can be used to construct the polymer network 6.107, similar to the polyradical structure proposed by Mataga.516 The photolysis of hexadiazo precursors led to the creation of the corresponding hexacarbenes. The EPR spectra of both dendritic compounds were similar in the line shape. The signals centered at g = 2 contained characteristic fine structures. The temperature dependence of the spectra followed the Curie–Weiss law in 10–50 K temperature range. The magnetization data could be well fitted using the Brillouin function with S = 6. Thus, the photolysis of precursor compounds proceeded without the generation of low spin impurities. Moreover, it can be concluded that these types of compounds can retain their molecular shape and symmetry.
Rajca and co-workers have studied dendritic triarylmethyl oligoradicals. “Star-branched” topology allows the design and synthesis of hepta- and decaradicals (Scheme 80, structures 6.108, 6.109).517 The EPR spectra showed the presence of S = 7/2 for heptaradicals and S = 5 for decaradicals. The absence of other paramagnetic species indicated that both oligoradicals have high-spin ground states. Following this route different dendritic oligoradicals up to 31-radicals were also prepared.518,519
 Scheme 80  Star-branched dendritic triarylmethyl oligoradicals. 
The EPR spectra of these oligoradicals exhibited a broad single line. The magnetization measurements data indicated the presence of a mixture of spins with different multiplicity and weak antiferromagnetic interaction at low temperatures. The experimental data cannot be approximated using one Brillouin function which is related to the formation of spin defects breaking the whole molecule into several segments possessing different S values.
However, the most impressive results have been obtained for pseudo-2D polymers with triarylmethyl radicals (Scheme 81, structure 6.110).397a,d
 Scheme 81  Triarylmethyl polymers exhibiting S ≈ 5000. 
In this case the polymer chain consists of macrocyclic modulus of S = 2 cross-linked with two bridges of S = 1/2 each. The structure is relatively rigid and “a priori” spins of the bridges should be ferromagnetically coupled to spins of macrocycles, but the twisting of phenyl rings in biphenyl moieties can change the nature of magnetic interaction from ferromagnetic to antiferromagnetic ones. Rajca demonstrated that magnetic properties depend strongly on the molecular mass of the polymer. The magnetization measurements data indicated that for the polymer with Mn = 4 × 104 Da the average S ≥ 17 was obtained, for the polymer with Mn ≥ 105 Da S ≥ 40 was achieved.397a Rajca optimized the preparation procedure and obtained polymers in which the average S values varied from 600 (for a short polymerization time) to 7000.397d The dependence of magnetization showed unusually abrupt increase at low magnetic field at 1.8 K, but the complete saturation was not achieved even at 50 kOe.397d The average S value of ca. 5000 was estimated. The detailed studies revealed that zero field-cooled and the field-cooled magnetizations diverged below 10 K, indicating the slow relaxation (blocking) of the magnetization. The χT vs. T dependence exhibited rapid increase below 10 K. Using these data an effective magnetic moment μeff ≈ 8000 μB was determined. It should be underlined that these magnetic parameters obtained for 6.110 were not exceeded to date.
Considering the stability of the spin sources much attention was paid to polymers containing arylamine groups. Bushby et al. have prepared a series of three dimensional network polymers containing arylamines linked through 3,4′-biphenyl (Scheme 82, structure 6.111) or meta-terphenyl (6.112 and 6.113) couplers.520
 Scheme 82  Polyarylamines containing 3,4′-biphenyl and meta-terphenyl ferromagnetic couplers. 
The electrochemical studies indicated that the polymers can be oxidized to radical cations without the formation of spinless dications. The magnetization measurements showed that the experimental data can be approximated using the Brillouin functions with S = 3/2 for 6.113 and S = 5/2 for 6.112. However, in the case of 6.111 only S = 1/2 was detected. The main problem for all of these polymers was very low oxidation level, insufficient to exceed the percolation threshold. Bushby pointed out two main reasons causing the low radical cation concentration. The first one is the electrostatic repulsion between adjacent positive charges of radical cations, as pointed out in Section 6.2.1. However, in the case of rather large couplers like 3,4′-biphenyl or meta-terphenyl the repulsion cannot limit very much the oxidation process. The second reason is the steric effect of the rigid polymer matrix which is not able to incorporate large counter-ions and this effect seems to limit the efficiency of the doping reaction.
To build up a two-dimensional polymer network it is profitable to use multifunctional ferromagnetic couplers, like for example 1,3,5-benzenetriyl. In this view several attempts have been performed. Star-shaped oligoarylamines containing the 1,3,5-benzenetriyl coupler in the center of a molecule and different aromatic substituents like anisyl,439 4-N,N-dimethylaminophenyl,395c 4-N,N-diphenylaminophenyl,395b 4-N,N-dianisylaminophenyl395d,521 have been synthesized by several groups (typical structure represents 6.114, Scheme 83).
 Scheme 83  Model compounds containing trifunctional ferromagnetic couplers. 
These oligoanilines can be considered as model compounds for suitable two-dimensional polymers. It has been proved that these star-shaped oligomers can be reversibly oxidized to the triradical cationic state. The stability of polycationic species increased with the increase of conjugation in aromatic amine parts. Thus, the oligomer containing 4-N,N-dianisylaminophenyl substituents showed enhanced stability after the oxidation in comparison with the oligomer with 4-N,N-dimethylaminophenyl substituents.395d Moreover, the pulsed-EPR spectra indicated the features characteristic of the quartet spin state. The magnetization measurements revealed that χT values increased gradually with decreasing temperature and reached its maximum at 40 K, then decreased, indicating the intermolecular antiferromagnetic interaction.395d The other trifunctional couplers like s-triazine (structure 6.115)522 or 2,6,10-substituted triphenylene (structure 6.116)523 have also been studied. The AM1-CI calculation performed for s-triazine by Zhang and Baumgarten524 suggested that the singlet–triplet splitting is ca. 23 kcal mol−1 indicating its preference to form a quartet spin state. The EPR spectrum of 6.115 at 100 K showed the features typical of S = 3/2. However, the variable temperature EPR analysis and NMR shift susceptibility measurements showed that 6.115 forms a mixture of quartet and doublet states at room temperature.
Triphenylene was also studied as a ferromagnetic coupler (structure 6.116).523 It forms planar π-conjugated structure. The size of such a coupler reduces the steric hindrance between substituted arylamine groups and, on the other hand, diminishes the electrostatic repulsion between adjacent radical cations. This compound can be reversibly oxidized to triradical cations. The half-life of oxidized 6.116 was 1.2 months at room temperature. The EPR spectrum exhibited the formation of the quartet spin state. The magnetization data could well be fitted using the Brillouin function with S = 3/2 and the spin concentration per amine group 0.9. This molecule is very promising as a building block for 2D polymers.
Taking into account the effectiveness of 1,3,5-benzenetriyl in coupling spins in a ferromagnetic fashion several 2D/3D polyarylamines containing this FC unit have been synthesized. Kulszewicz-Bajer et al. have prepared branched 2D polymers with different lengths of conjugated amine segments, namely the p-phenylenediamine unit (Scheme 84, structure 6.117) and the N,N-diaminophenylamine unit (structure 6.118).458
 Scheme 84  2D/3D polyarylamines with conjugated segments of different length. 
The pulsed-EPR spectra of both polymers oxidized to triradical cations showed the features characteristic of high-spin states.446 The detailed analysis of the spectra revealed the presence of S = 1/2, S = 1, S = 3/2 and S = 2. However, spins with different multiplicity have different relaxation times, so it was not possible to determine the relative concentration of various spins using this method. The magnetization measurements data should also be composed of Brillouin functions with S = 1/2, S = 1 and S = 3/2 weighted by the concentration of particular magnetic centers, nevertheless the majority of them have S = 3/2 multiplicity. The χT vs. T exhibited upward deviation with decreasing temperature indicating ferromagnetic coupling with some antiferromagnetic interaction at T ≤ 20 K. Magnetization measurements confirmed the ferromagnetic ordering of spins with an exchange constant J = 0.75 meV estimated for 6.117.446 One can ask a question why in the case of the discussed polymers different high-spins were observed while for star-shaped oligomers (like for example 6.114) no other than quartet spin state was detected. It seems that the presence of spins with different multiplicity in 6.117 and 6.118 can be explained by the influence of local conformation of the chains which change the nature of magnetic interaction.
Michinobu et al. have synthesized networked aromatic polyamines containing 1,3,5-benzenetriyl as well as 1,3-benzenediyl couplers.525,526 The 2D polymer 6.119 (Scheme 85) was prepared by a palladium-catalysed amination reaction of bi- and trifunctionalized monomers.
 Scheme 85  3D polyarylamines containing 1,3-benzenediyl and 1,3,5-benzenetriyl couplers. 
The soluble part of 6.119a had the molecular mass Mw = 76.8 kDa, Mn = 16 kDa whereas 6.119b exhibited the molecular mass Mw = 10 kDa and Mn = 6.5 kDa. The electrochemical studies showed reversible oxidation to polyradical cations without any side reactions. 6.119 can also be oxidized chemically to the polyradical cationic state using NOPF6. The half-life of the polyradical of 6.119a reached 1 week at 20 °C in CH2Cl2/CF3COOH (95/5 vol%) and under a nitrogen atmosphere.525,526 The EPR spectra of 6.119 at room temperature exhibited a broad single line at g = 2.003, but at low temperature the signal at g = 4 at half-field was clearly visible. This last signal showed a fine structure indicating multiple states at least higher than S = 1. The plot of the intensity of the signal vs. temperature showed the upward deviation from a linear Curie dependence indicating the intramolecular ferromagnetic interaction between adjacent radical cations. The magnetization measurements data could be approximated using the Brillouin function with S = 10/2 at low magnetic fields and S = 7/2 at high fields. The spin concentration was estimated to be 0.66 spins per unit for 6.119a and 0.75 spins per unit for 6.119b. The χT values were higher than the theoretical value of 0.375 for S = 1/2 below 180 K. The χT values increased significantly below 50 K for 6.119a and below 100 K for 6.119b, respectively, indicating ferromagnetic coupling between eight or nine spins. Thus, polyradical cations can be generated effectively in 6.119 which assemble spins to form local clusters. The observed multiplicity was the highest, measured to date in networked polytriarylamines.
High-spin hyperbranched polymers containing the poly(1,2-phenylenevinylene) skeleton and the triarylamine (structure 6.120) or tert-butylphenoxyl moiety (structure 6.121) as spin sources have been synthesized by Nishide et al.430,527 (Scheme 86).
 Scheme 86  Poly(1,2-phenylenevinylene) containing arylamine groups or phenoxyl moieties. 
In the case of 6.120 the determined molecular mass of 5.2 kDa corresponds to the degree of polymerization DP = 12.527 The molecular mass of 6.121 was estimated to be 32 kDa.430 The electrochemical studies of 6.120 revealed that the oxidation of amine moieties inside the hyperbranched polymer was kinetically shielded by the outer layer, but the oxidation potential of these amine groups was lower than that of terminal ones. The EPR spectrum of 6.120 oxidized to radical cations showed a strong unimodal signal at g = 2.0028. The half-life of the polyradicals was estimated to be ca. 3 weeks at room temperature. The spin concentration determined by iodometric titration was 0.65 spin per unit. The magnetization measurements indicated a χT value of ca. 0.8 suggesting a high-spin state or a strong spin-exchange interaction. Magnetization was also measured by the NMR shift method using the Evans equation. The multiplicity determined by this method corresponded to S = 7/2, even at 70 °C.527
In the case of 6.121, the precursor polymer was converted to polyphenoxyl radicals and isolated as a brownish green powder. The high-spin state was persistent at room temperature even in air with the half-life equal to ca. 1.2 days.430 The normalized magnetization of 6.121 can be approximated using the Brillouin function with S = 10/2 and the spin concentration 0.42 spin per phenol residue. The latter studies show unequivocally that the extended network can act as an effective π-conjugated coupler for different spin sources.
7 Conclusions
Extremely quick progress has been observed in the synthesis of semiconducting and high spin polymers in the past decade. Through the design of new monomers, elaboration of new polymerization methods, modification of already known ones as well as development of post-polymerization functionalization, it was possible to prepare a large number of solution processable electronic and high spin macromolecular compounds, showing highly regular chain microstructure and high molecular mass of reduced polydispersity. In parallel, significantly more attention has been paid to the elaboration of solution processing techniques, which resulted in the fabrication of supramolecularly ordered, oriented thin films. Better elucidation of the peculiar properties of semiconducting and high-spin polymers has been made possible through application of complementary and, in some cases, hyphenated characterization methods. Taking into account a large number of semiconducting polymers, it must be however stated that only a small fraction of them attained technological maturity, combining operating stability with good parameters of the fabricated devices. High spin polymers are much less developed and are still in the emerging state, comparable to that of semiconducting polymers twenty years ago. Further synthetic efforts are required to obtain stable radical or radical ion forms of these polymers which would exhibit strong spin interactions. Finally, further standardization of the principal characterization techniques is needed. Electrochemical determination of IP and EA is an instructive example of the problem where different calculation assumptions may lead to different values of these parameters for identical electrochemical data. Thus, without appropriate standardization, in all comparative studies the original, “raw” data have to be consulted.
Abbreviations

2DTwo-dimensional
3DThree-dimensional
3HT3-Hexylthiophene
AAcceptor
acacAcetylacetone
AFMAtomic force microscopy
BBTzBenzobisthiazole
BDTBenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene
BGBCBottom-gate/bottom-contact transistor
BGTCBottom-gate/top-contact transistor
BHJBulk heterojunction
BisBTBis-benzothiadiazole
bpy2,2′-Bipyridine
BTBenzothiadiazole
BTABenzotriazole
BTzBithiazole
C8OTSOctyltrichlorosilane
CELIVCarrier extraction by linearly increasing voltage
COD1,5-Cyclooctadiene
COT1,3,5,7-Cyclooctatraene
CPDTCyclopentadithiophene
CPEConjugated polyelectrolyte
CVCyclic voltammetry
CW-EPRContinuous-wave electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy
CYTOPCommercial perfluorinated polymer, produced by Asahi Glass Co.
DDonor
DADonor–acceptor
DARPDirect arylation polymerization
dbaDibenzylideneacetone
DCCDicyclohexylcarbodiimide
DECDirectional epitaxial crystallization
DFTDensity functional theory calculations
DIO1,8-Diiodooctane
DMA4-Dimethylaminopyridine
DoIDouble injection
DPDegree of polymerization
DPPDiketopyrrolopyrrole
dppp1,3-Bis(diphenylphosphino)propane
DT DPPDithienyl diketopyrrolopyrrole
DTGDithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]germole
DTPDithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole
DTSDithienosilole
EAElectron affinity

E
g
Band gap
EPCExternal power efficiency
EPRElectron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy
EQEExternal quantum efficiency
FC unitFerromagnetic coupling unit
FDTS1H,1H,2H,2H-Perfluorodecyltriethoxysilane
FETField effect transistor
GIWAXSGrazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering
GIXRDGrazing incidence X-ray diffraction
GRIMGrignard metathesis polymerization
HHHead-to-head
HMDSHexamethyldisilazane
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
HOPGHighly oriented pyrolytic graphite
HTHead-to-tail
IPIonization potential
IPESInverse photoelectron spectroscopy
ISImpedance spectroscopy
ITOIndium tin oxide
K-BrBzPotassium 4-bromobenzoate
KCTPKumada catalyst transfer polycondensation
LEDLight emitting diode
LFETLight-emitting field-effect transistor
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MALDI-TOFMatrix assisted laser desorption and ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry
MDMO-PPVPoly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene]
MEH-PPVPoly[3-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene]

M
n
Number average molecular mass
NIRNear infra-red
NMRNuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
NTNaphtho[1,2-c:5,6-c]-bis-[1,2,5]thiadiazole
NTDO[2,3-c]Thiophene-4,9-dione
ODCB1,2-Dichlorobenzene, o-dichlorobenzene
ODT1,8-Octanedithiol
ODTSOctadecyltrichlorosilane
OFETOrganic field effect transistor
OLEDOrganic light emitting diode
OPCOrganic photovoltaic cell
OTFTOrganic field-effect transistor
OTMSOctadecyltrimethoxysilane
OTSOctyltrichlorosilane
P3HTPoly(3-hexylthiophene)
P3TMAHTPoly[3-(6-trimethylammoniumhexyl)thiophene]
PANPolyacrylonitrile
PANIPolyaniline
PCPhotovoltaic cell
PCEPower conversion efficiency
PCnBMPhenyl Cn butyric acid methyl ester, n = 60, 70, 71
PD
p-Phenylenediamine unit
PDIPolydispersity index
PEDOTPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PESPhotoelectron spectroscopy
PF2Poly[9,9-bis(2-ethylhexylfluorene)]
photo-CELIVPhotogenerated charges in CELIV
PPVPoly(p-phenylene vinylene)
PSPolystyrene
PSSPoly(styrenesulfonate)
PTFEPoly(tetrafluoroethylene)
pulsed-EPRElectron paramagnetic resonance nutation spectroscopy
PVPPoly(4-vinyl phenol)
QAQuinoxaline
ROMPRing opening metathesis polymerization
SC unitSpin containing/carrying unit
SCLCSpace-charge-limited current
SECSize exclusion chromatography
SQUIDSuperconducting quantum interference device magnetometry
STMScanning tunneling microscopy
STTz
s-Tetrazine
TCB1,3,5-Trichlorobenzene
TCBD1,1,4,4-Tetracyanobuta-1,3-diene

T
g
Glass transition temperature
TGBCTop-gate/bottom-contact transistor
TOFTime of flight
TPThienopyrazine
TPDThieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione
TTTail-to-tail
TTF–TCNQTetrathiafulvalene–tetracyanoquinonodimethane
TTzThiazolothiazole
UPSUltraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy
UV-vis-NIRUltraviolet-visible-near infrared spectroscopy
VO(acac)2Vanadium(IV)-oxy acetylacetonate

Acknowledgements
The authors are profoundly thankful for the financial support of their research within the framework of the project entitled “New solution processable organic and hybrid (organic/inorganic) functional materials for electronics, optoelectronics and spintronics” (Contract No. TEAM/2011-8/6), which is operated within the Foundation for the Polish Science Team Programme confinanced by the EU European Regional Development Fund.
References
J. Ferraris, V. Walatka, J. H. Perlstein and D. O. Cowan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1973, 95, 948 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shirakawa, E. Louis, A. G. MacDiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578 RSC .
G. Gustafsson, Y. Cao, F. Klavetter, N. Colaneri and A. J. Heeger, Nature, 1992, 357, 477 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Na, S. S. Kim, J. Jo and D. Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4061 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pron and P. Rannou, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2002, 27, 135 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Kaiser, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 927 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, S. Cho, S. H. Park, A. J. Heeger, C. W. Lee and S. H. Lee, Nature, 2006, 441, 65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tsumura, H. Koezuka and T. Ando, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 49, 1210 CrossRef CAS .
J. Paloheimo, P. Kuivalainen, H. Stubb, E. Vuorimaa and P. Yl-Lahti, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 65, 1157 CrossRef .
G. Horowitz, D. Fichou, X. Peng, Z. Xu and F. Garnier, Solid State Commun., 1989, 72, 381 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. I. Burn and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474 CAS .
A. A. Ovchinnikov, Theor. Chim. Acta, 1978, 47, 297–304 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fukutome, A. Takahashi and M. Ozaki, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1987, 133, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Kaisaki, W. Chang and D. A. Dougherty, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 2764–2766 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Murray, P. Kaszyński, D. A. Kaisaki, W. Chang and D. A. Dougherty, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 8152–8161 CrossRef CAS .
See for a review: Adv. Mater.,  2009, 21(14–15).
See for a review: Chem. Soc. Rev.,  2010, 39(7).
See for a review: Chem. Rev.,  2007, 107(4).
A. W. Hains, Z. Q. Liang, M. A. Woodhouse and B. A. Gregg, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Wang, H. L. Dong, W. P. Hu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kim, K. Hong, W. Xie, K. H. Lee, S. P. Zhang, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Gather, A. Kohnen and K. Meerholz, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Maggini and D. Bonifazi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 211–241 RSC .
S. R. Cowan, N. Baneji, W. L. Leong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1116 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jorgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andersen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Lin and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Handbook of conducting polymers, ed. T. A. Skotheim and R. L. Elesnebaumer, Marcel Dekker, New York, 2nd edn,  1998, pp. 197–208 Search PubMed .
K. Akagi, G. Piao, S. Kaneko and K. Sakamaki, Science, 1998, 282, 1683 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Klavetter and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 7807 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Edwards and W. J. Feast, Polym. Commun., 1980, 21, 595 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Conticello, D. L. Gin and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 9708 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pron, P. Gawrys, M. Zagorska, D. Djurado and R. Demadrille, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2577 RSC .
M. Leclerc. F. M. Diaz and G. Wegner, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1989, 190, 3105 CrossRef .
S. Amou, O. Haba, K. Shirato, T. Hayakawa, M. Ueda, K. Takeuchi and M. Asai, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1999, 37, 1943 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Andersson, D. Selse, M. Berggren, H. Järvinen, T. Hjertberg, O. Inganäs, O. Wennerström and J.-E. Österholm, Macromolecules, 1994, 27, 6503 CrossRef CAS .
O. Haba, T. Hayakawa, M. Ueda, H. Kawaguchi and T. Kawazoe, React. Funct. Polym., 1998, 37, 163 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Sheina, J. Liu, M. C. Iovu, D. W. Laird and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 3526 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Iovu, E. E. Sheina, R. R. Gil and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 8649 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yokoyama, R. Miyakoshi and T. Yokozawa, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 1169 CrossRef CAS .
R. Miyakoshi, A. Yokoyama and T. Yokozawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Osaka and R. D. McCullough, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Beryozkina, V. Senkovskyy, E. Kaul and A. Kiriy, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7817 CrossRef CAS .
V. Senkovskyy, M. Sommer, R. Tkachov, H. Komber, W. T. S. Huck and A. Kiriy, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 10157 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kiriy, V. Senkovskyy and M. Sommer, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 1503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Lu, T. Mizobe, M. Ueda, W.-C. Chen and T. Higashihara, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 1783 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto, A. Morita, Y. Miyazaki, T. Maruyama, H. Wakayama, Z.-H. Zhou, Y. Nakamura and T. Kanbara, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 1214 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huo, C. He, M. Han, E. Zhou and Y. Li, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 3861 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Ashraf, M. Shahid, E. Klemm, M. Al-Ibrahim and S. Sensfuss, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 1454 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, Y. Chen, Q. Liu, M. Yang, X. Wan, S. Yin and A. Yu, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3114 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, C. Zhu, S. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Guo, X. Zhan, Y. Liu and Z. Bo, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6895 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Ramos, M. T. Rispens, J. K. J. van Duren, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6714 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tamao, K. Sumitani and M. Kumada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1972, 94, 4374 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Stille, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1986, 25, 508 CrossRef .
N. Miyaura and A. Suzuki, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 2457 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sonogashira, J. Organomet. Chem., 2002, 653, 46 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, W. K. Chan and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 12426 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sakamoto, M. Rehahn, G. Wegner and A. D. Schlüter, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Carsten, F. He, H. J. Son, T. Xu and L. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 1493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Shen, G. Sang, J. Lu, B. Zhao, M. Wan, Y. Zou, Y. Li and S. Tan, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 5716 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Moratti, R. Cervini, A. B. Holmes, D. R. Baigent, R. H. Friend, N. C. Greenham, J. Grüner and P. J. Hamer, Synth. Met., 1995, 71, 2117 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. McGlacken and L. M. Bateman, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2447 RSC .
A. Facchetti, L. Vaccaro and A. Marrocchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Mercier and M. Leclerc, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang and M. Wang, Curr. Org. Chem., 2013, 17, 999 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, R. Takita, Y. Kikuzaki and F. Ozawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, M. Wakioka and F. Ozawa, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 1203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, J. Kuwabara and T. Kanbara, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 1252 CrossRef CAS .
P. Berrouard, A. Najari, A. Pron, D. Gendron, P.-O. Morin, J.-R. Pouliot, J. Veilleux and M. Leclerc, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) G. Dyker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1698 CrossRef ; 
  (b) V. S. Thirunavukkarasu, K. Parthasarathy and C. H. Cheng, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) F. Kakiuchi and S. Murai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova, J. Liu and J. M. J. Fréchet, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1519 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova, J. Liu, J. M. J. Fréchet and M. F. Toney, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 3312 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J.-M. Verilhac, R. Pokrop, G. LeBlevennec, I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, K. Buga, M. Zagorska, S. Sadki and A. Pron, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13305 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) T.-Y. Chu, J. Lu, S. Beaupre, J.-R. Pouliot, J. Zhou, A. Najari, M. Leclerc and Y. Tao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2345 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Verilhac, G. LeBlevennec, D. Djurado, F. Rieutord, M. Chouiki, J.-P. Travers and A. Pron, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Liu, R. S. Loewe and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 5777 CrossRef CAS .
R. Demadrille, P. Rannou, J. Bleuse, J.-L. Oddou, A. Pron and M. Zagorska, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 7045 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jaroch, M. Knor, R. Nowakowski, M. Zagorska and A. Pron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 6182 RSC .
S. Braun, W. R. Salaneck and M. Fahlman, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1450 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rybakiewicz, J. Zapala, D. Djurado, R. Nowakowski, P. Toman, J. Pfleger, J.-M. Verilhac, M. Zagorska and A. Pron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1578 RSC .
R. Demadrille, N. Delbosc, Y. Kervella, M. Firon, R. De Bettignies, M. Billon, P. Rannou and A. Pron, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4661 RSC .
S. Trasatti, Pure Appl. Chem., 1986, 58, 955 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Cardona, W. Li, A. E. Kaifer, D. Stockdale and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gawrys, A. Pron, D. Djurado, J. Rimarcik, A. Kornet, D. Boudinet, J.-M. Verilhac, V. Lukes, I. Wielgus and M. Zagorska, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 1803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pron, R. R. Reghu, R. Rybakiewicz, H. Cybulski, D. Djurado, J. V. Grazulevicius, M. Zagorska, I. Kulszewicz-Bajer and J.-M. Verilhac, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15008 CAS .
C. Arantes, M. Scholz, R. Schimdt, V. Dehm, M. L. M. Rocco, A. Scholl, F. Reinert and F. Wurthner, Appl. Phys. A, 2012, 108, 629 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rybakiewicz, P. Gawrys, D. Tsikritzis, K. Emmanouil, S. Kennou, M. Zagorska and A. Pron, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 96, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Buga, R. Pokrop, A. Majkowska, M. Zagorska, J. Planes, F. Genoud and A. Pron, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 2150 RSC .
C. Ottone, P. Berrouard, G. Louarn, S. Beaupre, D. Gendronm, M. Zagorska, P. Rannou, A. Najari, S. Sadki, M. Leclerc and A. Pron, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 2355 RSC .
J. Veres, S. Ogier, G. Lloyd and D. de Leeuw, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4543 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berson, R. de Bettignies, S. Bailly and S. Guillerez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1377 CrossRef CAS .
L. Burda, A. Tracz, T. Pakula, J. Ulanski and M. Kryszewski, J. Appl. Phys., 1983, 16, 1737 CAS .
D. W. Breiby, O. Bunk, W. Pisula, T. I. Slling, A. Tracz, T. Pakula, K. Mullen and M. M. Nielsen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Tszydel, M. Kucinska, T. Marszalek, R. Rybakiewicz, A. Nosal, J. Jung, M. Gazicki-Lipman, C. Pitsalidis, C. Gravalidis, S. Logothetidis, M. Zagorska and J. Ulanski, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3840 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lee, D. Gupta, N. Zhao, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 932 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brinkmann and J.-C. Wittmann, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 860 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brinkmann, C. Contal, N. Kayunkid, T. Djuric and R. Resel, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 7604 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brinkmann, N. Charoenthai, R. Traiphol, P. Piyakulawat, J. Wlosnewski and U. Asawapirom, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 8298 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brinkmann, E. Gonthier, S. Bogen, K. Tremel, S. Ludwigs, M. Hufnagel and M. Sommer, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hartmann, K. Tremel, S. Uttiya, E. Crossland, S. Ludwigs, N. Kayunkid, C. Vergnat and M. Brinkmann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4047 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Kim, E. J. Jeong, J. W. Chung, S. Seo, B. Koo and J. Kim, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pivrikas, N. S. Sariciftci, G. Juska and R. Osterbacka, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 677 CAS .
A. Kokil, K. Yang and J. Kumar, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 1130 CrossRef CAS .
A. Faccchetti, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 28 CrossRef .
J. E. Anthony, A. Facchetti, M. Heeney, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Usta, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3728 RSC .
S. Kola, J. Sinha and H. E. Katz, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 1090 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Jones, A. Facchetti, M. R. Wasielewski and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhan, A. Facchetti, S. Barlow, T. J. Marks, M. A. Ratner, M. R. Wasilewski and S. R. Marder, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Arnold and R. L. Van Deusen, Macromolecules, 1969, 2, 497 CrossRef CAS .
A. Babel and S. A. Jenekhe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfels, P. J. Shamberger, F. S. Ohuchi, Z. Bao, S. A. Jenekhe and Y. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4712 CrossRef CAS .
A. Babel, Y. Zhu, K.-F. Cheng, W.-C. Chen and S. A. Jenekhe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2542 CrossRef CAS .
A. Babel, J. D. Wind and S. A. Jenekhe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 891 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wagner, A. Österholm, S.-P. Hirvonen, H. Tenhu, A. Ivaska and C. Kvarnström, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 1567 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto, Y. Sakai and S. Aramaki, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2006, 79, 959 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, S. Zhang, T. L. Chen and Y. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6034 RSC .
X. Guo and M. D. Watson, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 5333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Zheng, H. Yan and A. Facchetti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, Z. Chen, Y. Zheng, C. Newman, J. R. Quinn, F. Dötz, M. Kastler and A. Facchetti, Nature, 2009, 457, 679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-J. Baeg, A. Facchetti and Y.-Y. Noh, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21138 RSC .
J. Rivnay, M. F. Toney, Y. Zheng, I. V. Kauvar, Z. Chen, V. Wagner, A. Facchetti and A. Salleo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Street, J. E. Northrup and A. Salleo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 165202 CrossRef .
R. J. Kline, D. M. Delongchamp, D. A. Fischer, E. K. Lin, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and M. F. Toney, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 062117 CrossRef .
A. Salleo, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 38 CrossRef CAS .
R. Steyrleuthner, M. Schubert, F. Jaiser, J. C. Blakesley, Z. Chen, A. Facchetti and D. Neher, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rivnay, R. Steyrleuthner, L. H. Jimison, A. Casadei, Z. Chen, M. F. Toney, A. Facchetti, D. Neher and A. Salleo, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5246 CrossRef CAS .
R. Steyrleuthner, M. Schubert, I. Howard, B. Klaumünzer, K. Schilling, Z. Chen, P. Saalfrank, F. Laquai, A. Facchetti and D. Neher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.
M. Durban, P. D. Kazarinoff and C. K. Luscombe, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6348 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Hwang, G. Ren, N. M. Murari and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 9056 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhan, Z. Tan, B. Domercq, Z. An, X. Zhang, S. Barlow, Y. Li, D. Zhu, B. Kippelen and S. R. Marder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhan, Z. Tan, E. Zhou, Y. Li, R. Misra, A. Grant, B. Domercq, X.-H. Zhang, Z. An, X. Zhang, S. Barlow, B. Kippelen and S. R. Marder, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5794 RSC .
L. Zhang, C. A. Di, Y. Zhao, Y. L. Guo, X. N. Sun, Y. G. Wen, W. Y. Zhou, X. W. Zhan, G. Yu and Y. Q. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Letizia, M. R. Salata, C. M. Tribout, A. Facchetti, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamamoto and N. Saito, Chem. Lett., 1996, 127 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, R. P. Ortiz, Y. Zheng, Y. Hu, Y.-Y. Noh, K.-J. Baeg, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 131, 1405 CrossRef PubMed .
C. B. Nielsen, M. Turbiez and I. McCulloch, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Cho, J. H. Seo, P. Anant, J. Jacob and C. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1504 RSC .
L. Bürgi, M. Turbiez, R. Pfeiffer, F. Bienewaldm, H.-J. Kirner and C. Winnewisser, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2217 CrossRef .
Y. Zou, D. Gendron, R. Badrou-Aich, A. Najari, Y. Tao and M. Leclerc, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2891 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, H. Lemke, S. Albert-Seifried, M. Caironi, M. M. Nielsen, M. Heeney, W. Zhang, I. McCulloch and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Anthopoulos, S. Setayesh, E. Smits, M. Colle, E. Cantatore, B. de Boer, P. W. M. Blom and D. M. de Leeuw, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1900 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Yuen, R. Kumar, D. Zakhidov, J. Seifter, B. Lim, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3780 CAS .
J. Cornil, J. L. Brédas, J. Zaumseil and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1791 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Yuen, R. Kumar, D. Zakhidov, J. Seifter, B. Lim, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3780 CAS .
H. Bronstein, Z. Y. Chen, R. S. Ashraf, W. M. Zhang, J. P. Du, J. R. Durrant, P. S. Tuladhar, K. Song, S. E. Watkins, Y. Geerts, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen, T. Anthopoulos, H. Sirrimhaus, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Bijleveld, A. P. Zoombelt, S. G. J. Mathijssen, M. M. Wienk, M. Turbiez, D. M. de Leeuw and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Bijleved, V. S. Gevaerts, D. D. Nuzzo, M. Turbiez, S. G. J. Mathijssen, D. M. de Leeuw, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E242 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Usta, C. Risko, Z. Wang, H. Huang, M. K. Deliomeroglu, A. Zhukhovitskiy, A. Facchetti and T. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Stecker, X. Zhang, J. Hwang, R. Honeyager, S. Ohira, X.-H. Zhang, A. Grant, S. Ellinger, S. A. Odom, D. Sweat, D. B. Tanner, A. G. Rinzler, S. Barlow, J.-L. Brédas, B. Kippelen, S. R. Marder and J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2824 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hüttner, M. Sommer and M. Thelakkat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 093302 CrossRef .
S. M. Lindner, N. Kaufmann and M. Thelakkat, Org. Electron., 2007, 8, 69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Harrison, P. M. Chaikin, D. A. Huse, R. A. Register, D. H. Adamson, A. Daniel, E. Huang, P. Mansky, T. P. Russel, C. J. Hawker, D. A. Egolf, I. V. Melinkov and E. Bodenschatz, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 857 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schultz, G. Knochenhauer, L. Brehmer and S. Janietz, Synth. Met., 1995, 69, 603 CrossRef .
S. Janietz and B. Schulz, Eur. Polym. J., 1996, 32, 465 CrossRef CAS .
S. Janietz, S. Anlauf and A. Wedel, Synth. Met., 2001, 122, 11 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, H. Jin, Y. Xu, P. Wang, X. Liang, Z. Shen, X. Chen, D. Zou, X. Fan and Q. Zhou, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 1037 CrossRef CAS .
S. Janietz, J. Barche, A. Wedel and D. Sainova, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2004, 205, 187 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schulz, M. Bruma and L. Brehmer, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 601 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kaminorz, B. Schulz, S. Schrader and L. Brehmer, Synth. Met., 2001, 122, 115 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Wang, M. Kilitziraki, L. O. Palsson, M. R. Bryce, A. P. Monkman and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 47 CrossRef CAS .
E. Buchwald, M. Meier, S. Karg, P. Posch, H. W. Smidt, P. Strohriegl, W. Reiss and M. Schwoerer, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 839 CrossRef CAS .
F.-I. Wu, P.-I. Shih, C.-F. Shu, Y.-L. Tung and Y. Chi, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 9028 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pei and Y. Yang, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1568 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Wang and A. J. Epstein, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 217 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. K. Stille, Macromolecules, 1981, 14, 870 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. W. Zhan, Y. Q. Liu, X. Wu, S. Wang and D. B. Zhu, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 2529 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. J. Tonzola, M. M. Alam and S. A. Jenekhe, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1086 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. L. Kim, J. K. Kim, H. N. Cho, D. Y. Kim, C. Y. Kim and S. I. Hong, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 5880 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) J. L. Kim, J. Kim, H. N. Cho, D. Y. Kim and S. I. Hong, Synth. Met., 2000, 114, 97 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) S. Wang, Y. Q. Liu, X. W. Zhan, G. Yu and D. B. Zhu, Synth. Met., 2003, 137, 1153 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) Y. Zhu, M. M. Alam and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 8958 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) T. Yamamoto, K. Sugiyama, T. Kushida, T. Inoue and T. Kanbara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 3930 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) T. Fukuda, T. Kanbara, T. Yamamoto, K. Ishikawa, H. Talezoe and A. Fukuda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 2346 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) D. O'Brien, M. S. Weaver, D. G. Lidzey and D. D. C. Bradley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 881 CrossRef ; 
  (k) Y. T. Cui, X. J. Zhang and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 3824 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fink, C. Frenz, M. Thelakkat and H. W. Schmidt, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 8177 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. D. Hu, S. E. Jenkins, B. G. Min, M. B. Polk and S. Kumar, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2003, 288, 823 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. A. Osaheni and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 672 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. M. Alam and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4775 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Kanbara and T. Yamamoto, Chem. Lett., 1993, 419 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. J. Campbell, D. D. C. Bradley and H. Antoniadis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2133 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. He, S. Gong, R. Hattori and J. Kanicki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 2265 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. I. Wilkinson, D. G. Lidzey, L. C. Palilis, R. B. Fletcher, S. J. Martin, X. H. Wang and D. D. C. Bradley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 171 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay and A. Salleo, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rauch, M. Böbel, S. F. Tedde, J. Fürst, M. V. Kovalenko, G. Hesser, U. Lemmer, W. Heiss and O. Hayden, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 332 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CAS ; 
  (b) C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) V. Shotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, C.-W. Chu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073508 CrossRef ; 
  (e) V. D. Mihailetchi, H. Xie, B. de Boer, L. J. A. Koster and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 699 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, N. E. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) S. Gunes, H. S. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (h) Y. Li and Y. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2952 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) A. Salleo, R. J. Kline, D. M. DeLongchamp and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3812 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (j) M. T. Dang, L. Hirsch and G. Wantz, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3597 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (k) K. Vakhshouri, D. R. Kozub, C. Wang, A. Salleo and E. D. Gomez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 026601 CrossRef ; 
  (l) A. Marrocchi, D. Lanari, A. Facchetti and L. Vaccaro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8457 RSC .

  (a) A. Zen, J. Pflaum, S. Hirschmann, W. Zhuang, F. Jaiser, U. Asawapirom, J. P. Rabe, U. Scherf and D. Neher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 757 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Yang, T. J. Shin, L. Yang, K. Cho, C. Y. Ryu and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 671 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Jen, R. Obodi and R. L. Elsenbaumer, Polym. Mater. Sci. Eng., 1985, 53, 79 CAS .

  (a) R. D. McCullough, Adv. Mater., 1988, 10, 93 CrossRef ; 
  (b) 
Handbook of Oligo, Polythiophenes, ed. D. Fichou, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1998 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) 
Handbook of Thiophene-Based Materials, ed. I. F. Perepichka, D. F. Perepichka and J. Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  2009 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) I. Osaka and R. D. McCullough, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bao, A. Dodabalapur and A. J. Lovinger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 4108 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, R. Patil, Y. Harima, J. Ohshita and A. Kunai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. G. Naber, M. Muldder, B. De Boer, P. W. M. Blom and D. M. De. Leew, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Luzny and A. Pron, Synth. Met., 1997, 84, 573 CrossRef CAS .
M. Trznadel, A. Pron, M. Zagorska, R. Chrzaszcz and J. Pielichowski, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 5051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kline and M. McGehee, J. Macromol. Sci., Polym. Rev., 2006, 46, 27 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Chang, J. Clark, N. Zhao, H. Sirringhaus, D. W. Breiby, J. W. Andreasen, M. M. Nielsen, M. Giles, M. Heeney and I. McCullooch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 115318 CrossRef .
A. Zen, M. Saphiannikova, D. Neher and G. Wegner, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 2162 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Salaneck, O. Inganäs, B. Thémans, J. O. Nilsson, B. Sjögren, J.-E. Österholm, J. Brédas and S. Svensson, J. Chem. Phys., 1988, 89, 4613 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. D. McCullough and R. D. Lowe, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1992, 70 RSC ; 
  (b) R. D. McCullough, R. D. Lowe, M. Jayaraman and D. L. Anderson, J. Org. Chem., 1993, 58, 904 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. A. Chen and R. D. Rieke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 10087 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Chen, X. Wu and R. D. Rieke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 233 CrossRef .

  (a) R. S. Loewe, S. M. Kheronsky and R. D. McCullough, Adv. Mater., 1999, 3, 250 CrossRef ; 
  (b) F. Wang, M. S. Wilson, R. D. Rauh, P. Schottland, B. C. Thompson and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 2083 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. M. Hong, J. C. Tyson and D. M. Collard, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 3502 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) R. S. Loewe, P. C. Ewbank, J. Liu, L. Zhai and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 4324 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Hiorns, R. De Bettignies, J. Leroy, S. Bailly, M. Firon, C. Sentein, A. Khoukh, H. Preud'homme and C. Dagron-Lartigau, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2263 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iraqi and G. W. Barker, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 25 RSC .
A. Liversedge, S. J. Higgins, M. Giles, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 5143 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) J. Hassan, M. Sevignon, C. Gozzi, E. Schulz and M. Lemaire, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 1359 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. F. Littke and G. C. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4176 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Miyaura, Top. Curr. Chem., 2002, 219, 11 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Melucci, G. Barbarella and G. Sotgiu, J. Org. Chem., 2002, 67, 8877 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. C. Spivey, D. J. Turner, M. L. Turner and S. Yeates, Org. Lett., 2002, 4, 1899 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) A. Brihen and P. Bäuerle, J. Comb. Chem., 2002, 4, 457 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) M. Jayaakannan, J. L. J. van Dongen and R. A. J. Janssen, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 5386 CrossRef ; 
  (b) M. Jayaakannan, X. Lou, J. L. J. van Dongen and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 1454 CrossRef .
W. Li, Y. Han, B. Li and Z. Bo, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 4556 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, T. Hayakawa and M. Ueda, Chem. Lett., 1999, 559 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zagorska and B. Krische, Polymer, 1990, 31, 1379 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. S. Maior, K. Hinkelmann, H. Eckert and F. Wudl, Macromolecules, 1990, 23, 1268 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barta, J. Birgerson, S. Guo, H. Arwin, W. R. Salaneck and M. Zagorska, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 135 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. C. Gallazzi, L. Castellani, R. A. Marin and G. Zerbi, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1993, 31, 3339 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. C. Gallazzi, L. Castellani, G. Zerbi and P. Sozzani, Synth. Met., 1991, 41, 495 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Pokrop, J. M. Verilhac, A. Gasior, I. Wielgus, M. Zagorska, J. P. Travers and A. Pron, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3099 RSC .
I. McCulloch, C. Bailey and S. Tierney, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1381 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) B. S. Ong, Y. L. Wu, P. Liu and S. Gardner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3378 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) B. S. Ong, Y. L. Wu, P. Liu and S. Gardner, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1141 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kong, D. S. Chung, I. N. Kang, J. H. Park, M. J. Park, I. H. Jung, C. E. Park and H. K. Shim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3490 RSC .
D. S. Chung, H. Kong, W. M. Yun, H. Cha, H.-K. Shim, Y.-H. Kim and C. E. Park, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Murphy, J. S. Liu, C. Luscombe, D. Kavulak, J. M. J. Frechet, R. J. Kline and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4892 CrossRef CAS .
I. McCulloch, M. Heeney, C. Bailey, K. Genevicius, I. MacDonald, M. Shkunov, D. Sparrowe, S. Tierney, R. Wagner, W. Zhang, M. L. Chabinyc, R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee and M. F. Toney, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tierney, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, Synth. Met., 2005, 148, 195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Fuller, B. Iddon and K. A. Smith, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1997, 3465 RSC .

  (a) D. M. DeLongchamp, R. J. Kline, E. K. Lin, D. A. Fischer, L. J. Richter, L. A. Lucas, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. E. Northrup, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 833 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. L. Chabinyc, M. F. Toney, R. J. Kline, I. McCulloch and M. Heeney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Kline, D. M. DeLongchamp, D. A. Fischer, E. K. Lin, L. J. Richter, M. L. Chabinyc, M. F. Toney, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 7960 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Hamadani, D. J. Gundlach, I. McCulloch and M. Heeney, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 243512 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, S. D. Hudson, D. M. DeLongchamp, D. J. Gundlach, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4098 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Wu, P. Liu, M. Birau, H. Pan and B. S. Ong, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3029 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Köhler and A. J. Matzger, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 6306 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kong, Y. K. Jung, N. S. Cho, I.-N. Kang, J.-H. Park, S. Cho and H.-K. Shim, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2650 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Choi, K. Saeada, H. Dong, M. Hoshino and J. Nakayama, Heterocycles, 1994, 38, 143 CrossRef CAS .
M. He and F. Zhang, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. Zhang, A. P. Cote and A. Matzger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10502 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Mazaki and K. Kobayashi, Tetrahedron Lett., 1989, 25, 3315 CrossRef .
J. Youn, P.-Y. Huang, Y.-W. Huang, M.-C. Chen, Y.-J. Lin, H. Huang, R. P. Ortiz, C. Stern, M.-C. Chung, C.-Y. Feng, L.-H. Chen, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 48 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Fong, V. A. Pozdin, A. Amassian, G. G. Malliaras, D.-M. Smilgies, M. He, S. Gasper, F. Zhang and M. Sorensen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, J. Lim, M. L. Sorensen, F. Zhang, R. R. Hancock, H. H. Fong, V. A. Pozdin, D.-M. Smilgies and G. G. Malliaras, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, F. Qin, C. M. Li, Q. Bao, M. B. Chan-Park, W. Zhang, J. Qin and B. S. Ong, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2057 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lu, C. A. Di, H. X. Xi, Y. Q. Liu, G. Yu, W. F. Qiu, H. J. Zhang, X. Gao, Y. Liu, T. Qi, C. Y. Du and D. B. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3426 RSC .
J. Hou, Z. Tan, Y. Yan, Y. He, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Wu and B. S. Ong, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 6521 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W. J. Archer and R. Taylor, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1982, 295 RSC ; 
  (b) T. Otsubo, Y. Kono, N. Hozo, H. Miyamoto, Y. Aso, F. Ogura, T. Tanaka and M. Sawada, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1993, 66, 2033 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Yasuike, J. Kurita and T. Tsuchiya, Heterocycles, 1997, 45, 1891 CrossRef CAS .
M. Heeney, C. Bailey, K. Genevicius, M. Shkunov, D. Sparrowe, S. Tierney and I. McCulloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Medina, A. Van Vooren, P. Brocorens, J. Gierschner, M. Shkunov, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, R. Lazzaroni and J. Cornil, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4949 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, Y. G. Seo, D. H. Yoon, Y.-S. Lee, S.-H. Lee, M. Pyo and K. Zong, Eur. Polym. J., 2010, 46, 1790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nakayama and T. Fujimiri, Heterocycles, 1991, 32, 991 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, H. Cheng and R. L. Elsenbaumer, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1720 CrossRef CAS ; H. Elandaloussi, P. Frére, P. Richomme, J. Orduna, J. Garin and J. Roncali, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 10774 CrossRef .
B. Lim, K.-J. Baeg, H.-G. Jeong, J. Jo, H. Kim, J.-W. Park, Y.-Y. Noh, D. Vak, J.-H. Park, J.-W. Park and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2808 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takimiya, M. Nakano, M. J. Kang, E. Miyazaki and I. Osaka, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2013, 217 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Laquindanum, H. E. Katz, A. J. Lovinger and A. Dodabalapur, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 36 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Takimiya, Y. Kunugi, Y. Konda, N. Niihara and T. Otsubo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5084 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. Takimiya, Y. Konda, H. Ebata, N. Niihara and T. Otsubo, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 10569 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) T. Kashiki, S. Shinamura, M. Kohara, E. Miyazaki, K. Takimiya, M. Ikeda and H. Kuwabara, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 2473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, Y. Li, Y. Wu, P. Liu, B. S. Ong, S. Zhu and G. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rieger, D. Beckmann, W. Pisula, W. Steffen, M. Kastler and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Jaiswal and R. Menon, Polym. Int., 2006, 55, 1371 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. N. Tsao, D. Cho, J. W. Andreasen, A. Rouhanipour, D. W. Breiby, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 209 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Ong, Y. L. Wu, Y. N. Li, P. Liu and H. L. Pan, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rieger, D. Beckmann, W. Pisula, M. Kastler and K. Müllen, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6264 CrossRef CAS .
I. Osaka, T. Abe, S. Shinamura, E. Miyazaki and K. Takimiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shinamura, E. Miyazaki and K. Takimiya, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 1228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Osaka, T. Abe, S. Shinamura and K. Takimiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. A. Getmanenko, P. Tongwa, T. V. Timofeeva and S. R. Marder, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 2136 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Zahradnik, P. Magdolan and P. Zahradnik, Tetrahedron Lett., 2010, 51, 5819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. F. Mike, J. J. Inteman, A. Ellern and M. Jeffries-El, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 75, 495 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) J. F. Mike, J. J. Intermann, M. Cai, T. Xiao, R. Shinar, J. Shinar and M. Jeffries-El, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2299 RSC .
Y. Lin, H. Fan, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Hong, H. E. Katz, A. J. Lovinger, B.-C. Wang and K. Raghavachari, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4686 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto, H. Kokubo, M. Kobashi and Y. Sakai, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4616 CrossRef CAS .
B.-L. Lee, K.-M. Han, E.-K. Lee, I.-N. Kang, D. H. Kim and S. Lee, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, B.-L. Lee, H. Moon, H. M. Kang, E. J. Jeong, J.-I. Park, K.-M. Han, S. Lee, B. W. Yoo, B. W. Koo, J. Y. Kim, W. H. Lee, K. Cho, H. A. Becerril and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Paek, J. Lee, H. S. Lim, J. Lim, J. Y. Lee and C. Lee, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 2273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kong, S. Cho, D. H. Lee, N. S. Cho, M.-J. Park, I. H. Jung, J.-H. Park, C. E. Park and H.-K. Shim, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 2886 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Y. Wu, Y. Li, B. S. Ong and S. J. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Gallazzi, C. Bertarelli and E. Montoneri, Synth. Met., 2002, 128, 91 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, J. Quinn, Z. Chen, H. Usta, Y. Zheng, Y. Xia, J. W. Hennek, R. P. Ortiz, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) I. Osaka, G. Sauvè, R. Zhang, T. Kowalewski and R. D. McCullough, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4160 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Osaka, R. Zhang, G. Sauvé, D.-M. Smilgies, T. Kowalewski and R. D. McCullough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Osaka, R. Zhang, J. Liu, D.-M. Smilgies, T. Kowalewski and R. D. McCullough, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4191 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, H. Fan, Y. Liu, J. Chen, Z. Shuai, W. Hu, Y. Li and X. Zhan, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 4875 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ahmed, F. S. Kim, H. Xin and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 8615 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Wudl, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3169 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, R. D. Champion and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 8712 CrossRef CAS .
I. Osaka, K. Takimiya and R. D. McCullough, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Ogawa and S. C. Rasmussen, J. Org. Chem., 2003, 68, 2921 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. Ogawa, J. A. Stafford, S. D. Rothstein, D. E. Tallman and S. C. Rasmussen, Synth. Met., 2005, 152, 137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Ogawa and S. C. Rasmussen, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 1771 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Koeckelberghs and C. Samyn, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 4545 CrossRef CAS .
B.-H. Huisman, J. J. P. Valeton, W. Nijssen, J. Lub and W. Hoeve, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2002 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, R. Zhang, G. Sauvè, T. Kowalewski and R. D. McCullough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-F. Chang, B. Sun, D. W. Breiby, M. M. Nielsen, T. I. Sölling, M. Giles, I. McCulloch and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4772 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Wetzel and J. I. Brauman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 8333 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Risko, G. P. Kushto, Z. H. Kafati and J. L. Brédas, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 9031 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Yamaguchi and K. Tamao, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1996, 69, 2327 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Zhan, C. Risko, F. Amy, C. Chan, W. Zhao, S. Barlow, A. Kahn and J.-L. Brédas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lu, H. Usta, C. Risko, L. Wang, A. Facchetti, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Chen, M. J. McKiernan, C. R. Towns and A. B. Holmes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7662 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sirringhaus, R. J. Wilson, R. H. Friend, M. Inbasekaren and W. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 406 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Inbasekaran, W. Wu and E. P. Woo, US Pat., 5,777,070,  1998 Search PubMed .
R. Demadrille, M. Firon, J. Leroy, P. Rannou and A. Pron, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1547 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Zou, A. Najari, P. Berrouard, S. Beaupré, B. Réda Aïch, Y. Tao and M. Leclerc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5330 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Piliego, T. W. Holcombe, J. D. Douglas, C. H. Woo, P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7595 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Zhang, S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, Y. Sun, O. Action and A. K. Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2696 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) G. Zhang, Y. Fu, Q. Zhang and Z. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4997 RSC ; 
  (e) M.-C. Yuan, M.-Y. Chiu, S.-P. Liu, C.-M. Chen and K.-H. Wei, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6936 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) A. Najari, S. Beaupré, P. Berrouard, Y. Zou, J.-R. Pouliot, C. Lepage-Pérusse and M. Leclerc, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 718 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) X. Guo, H. Xin, F. S. Kim, A. D. T. Liyanage, S. A. Jenekhe and M. D. Watson, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 269 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) Y. Zhang, J. Zou, H.-L. Yip, Y. Sun, J. A. Davies, K.-S. Chen, O. Action and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3895 RSC ; 
  (i) Y.-R. Hong, H.-K. Wong, L. C. H. Moh, H.-S. Tan and Z.-K. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4920 RSC ; 
  (j) G.-Y. Chen, Y.-H. Cheng, Y.-J. Chou, M.-S. Su, C.-M. Chen and K.-H. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5064 RSC ; 
  (k) G. Griffini, J. D. Douglas, C. Piliego, T. W. Holcombe, S. Turri, J. M. Fréchet and J. L. Mynar, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1660 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (l) T.-Y. Chu, J. Lu, S. Beaupré, Y. Zhang, J.-R. Pouliot, S. Wakim, J. Zhou, M. Leclerc, Z. Li, J. Ding and Y. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Usta, G. Lu, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Facchetti, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 733 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, R. P. Ortiz, Y. Zheng, M.-G. Kim, S. Zhang, Y. Hu, G. Lu, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 5065 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Nielsen and T. Bjørnholm, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 3381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, F. S. Kim, S. A. Jenekhe and M. D. Watson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fukuda, K. Kodoma, H. Yamamoto and K. Mito, Dyes Pigm., 2004, 63, 115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. H. Choi, O. T. Kwon, N. R. Kim, C. Yoon, J. P. Kim and J. H. Choi, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2010, 4, 1073 CrossRef ; 
  (b) P. Sonar, G. M. Ng, T. T. Lin, A. Dodabalapur and Z.-K. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3626 RSC ; 
  (c) F. Guo, S. Qu, W. Wu, J. Li, W. Ying and J. Hua, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. Beyerlein and B. Tieke, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2000, 21, 182 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. M. Wienk, M. Turbiez, J. Gilot and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2556 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Zou, D. Gendron, R. Neagu-Plesu and M. Leclerc, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6361 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) L. Huo, J. Hou, H.-Y. Chen, S. Zhang, Y. Jiang, T. L. Chen and Y. Yang, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6564 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C.-Y. Yu, C.-P. Chen, S.-H. Chan, G.-W. Hwang and C. Ting, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3262 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) E. Zhou, S. Yamakawa, K. Tajima, C. Yang and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4055 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) A. P. Zoombelt, S. G. J. Mathijssen, M. G. R. Turbiez, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Jansen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2240 RSC ; 
  (h) E. Zhou, Q. Wei, S. Yamakawa, Y. Zhang, K. Tajima, C. Yang and K. Hashimoto, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 821 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) J. C. Bijleveld, R. A. M. Verstrijden, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9224 RSC ; 
  (j) T. W. Holcombe, J.-H. Yum, J. Yoon, P. Gao, M. Marszalek, D. Di Censo, K. Rakstys, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10724 RSC ; 
  (k) N. Allard, A. Najari, J.-R. Pouliot, A. Pron, F. Grenier and M. Leclerc, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 2875 RSC .

  (a) J. S. Ha, K. H. Kim and D. H. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10364 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Li, P. Sonar, S. P. Singh, M. S. Soh, M. van Meurs and J. Tan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, A.-R. Han, J. Kim, Y. Kim, J. H. Oh and C. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dantlgraber, A. Eremin, S. Diele, A. Hauser, H. Kresse, G. Pelzl and C. Tschierske, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2408 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W. Walker, B. Veldman, R. Chiechi, S. Patil, M. Bendikov and F. Wudl, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7278 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Yang, S. Cho, R. C. Chiechi, W. Walker, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhandari and S. Ray, Synth. Commun., 1998, 28, 765 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawase, T. Ohsawa, T. Enomoto and M. Oda, Chem. Lett., 1994, 1333 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Wen, J. N. Neitfeld, C. M. Amb and S. C. Rasmussen, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 8529 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) E. Bundgaard and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 954 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) A. Ajayaghosh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 181 RSC ; 
  (d) J. Roncali, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. M. Wienk, M. G. R. Turbiez, M. P. Struijik, M. Fonrodona and R. A. Janssen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 153511 CrossRef ; 
  (b) F. Zhang, E. Perzon, X. Wang, W. Mammo, M. R. Andersson and O. Inganäs, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 745 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) L. M. Campos, A. Tontcheva, S. Gunes, G. Sonmez, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci and F. Wudl, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4031 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. Kitamura, S. Tanaka and Y. Yamashita, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 570 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. Kitamura, S. Tanaka and Y. Yamashita, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 1585 RSC ; 
  (f) A. P. Zoombelt, J. Gilot, M. M. Wienk and R. A. Janssen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1663 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mondal, N. Miyaki, H. A. Beceriil, J. E. Norton, J. Parmer, A. C. Mayer, M. L. Tang, J.-L. Brédas, M. D. McGehee and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3618 CrossRef CAS .
M. Younus, A. D. Kohler, S. Cron, N. Chawdhury, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. S. Khan, J. Lewis. N. J. Long, R. H. Friend and P. R. Raithby, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 3036 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mei, K. R. Graham, R. Stalder and J. R. Reynolds, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. Stadler, J. Mei and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 8348 CrossRef ; 
  (b) B. Liu, Y. P. Zou, B. Peng, B. Zhao, K. L. Huang, Y. H. He and C. Y. Pan, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 1156 RSC ; 
  (c) E. G. Wang, Z. F. Ma, Z. Zhang, P. Henriksson, O. Inganas, F. L. Zhang and M. R. Andersson, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4908 RSC ; 
  (d) G. B. Zhang, Y. Y. Fu, Z. Y. Xie and Q. Zhang, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 1414 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) R. Stalder, J. Mei, J. Subbiah, C. Grand, L. A. Estrada, F. So and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6303 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) R. Stalder, C. Grand, J. Subbiah, F. So and J. R. Reynolds, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 89 RSC ; 
  (g) Z. F. Ma, E. G. Wang, M. E. Jarvid, E. Markus, P. Henriksson, O. Inganas, F. L. Zhang and M. R. Andersson, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2306 RSC ; 
  (h) E. Wang, Z. Ma, Z. Zhang, K. Vandewal, P. Henriksson, O. Inganas, F. Zhang and M. R. Andersson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lei, Y. Cao, Y. Fan, C.-J. Liu, S.-C. Yuan and J. Pei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Goh, R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova and J. M. Fréchet, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 122110 CrossRef .
J. Mei, D. H. Kim, A. L. Ayzner, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lei, J.-H. Dou and J. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sonar, H.-S. Tan, S. Sun, Y. M. Lam and A. Dodabalapur, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 1983 RSC .

  (a) Y. Xia, X. Deng, L. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhu and Y. Cao, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 1260 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. Bundgaard, S. E. Shaheen, F. C. Krebs and D. S. Ginley, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1631 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) F. Liang, J. Lu, J. Ding, R. Movileanu and Y. Tao, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6107 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) W. Yue, Y. Zhao, H. Tian, D. Song, Z. Xie, D. Yan, Y. Geng and F. Wang, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6510 CrossRef CAS .
K.-H. Ong, S.-L. Lim, H.-S. Tan, H.-K. Wong, J. Li, Z. Ma, L. C. H. Moh, S.-H. Lim, J. C. de Mello and Z.-K. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mataka, K. Takahashi, Y. Ikezaki, T. Hatta, A. Tori-I and M. Tashiro, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1991, 64, 68 CrossRef CAS .
I. Osaka, M. Shimawaki, H. Mori, I. Doi, E. Miyazaki, T. Koganezawa and K. Takimiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Blouin and M. Leclerc, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. V. Grazulevicius, P. Strohriegl, J. Pielichowski and K. Pielichowski, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2003, 28, 1297 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. F. Morin, M. Leclerc, D. Adès and A. Siove, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 761 CrossRef .

  (a) S. Wakim, N. Blouin, E. Gingras, Y. Tao and M. Leclerc, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1798 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. Koguchi, N. Kobayashi, T. Shinnai, K. Oikawa, K. Tsuchiya and M. Kijima, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 439 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Morin and M. Leclerc, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 4680 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zotti, G. Schiavon, S. Zecchin, J. F. Morin and M. Leclerc, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 2122 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dierschke, A. C. Grimsdale and K. Müllen, Synthesis, 2003, 2470 CAS .
T. Yamamoto, Synlett, 2003, 425 CrossRef CAS .
F. Babudri, S. R. Cicco, G. M. Farinola, F. Naso, A. Bolognesi and W. Porzio, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1996, 17, 905 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Rehahn, A.-D. Schluter, G. Wegner and W. J. Feast, Polymer, 1989, 30, 1060 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. D. Schlüter, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2001, 39, 1533 CrossRef .

  (a) N. Blouin, A. Michaud and M. Leclerc, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2295 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. Peng, A. Najari, B. Liu, P. Berrouard, D. Gendron, Y. He, K. Zhou, M. Leclerc and Y. Zou, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2010, 211, 2026 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Ranger, D. Rondeau and M. Leclerc, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 7686 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            E. P. Woo, M. Inbasekaran, W. R. Shiang and G. R. Roof, US Pat., 5,708,130,  1997 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) M. T. Bernius, M. Inbasekaran, J. O'Brien and W. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1737 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Leclerc, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2001, 39, 2867 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Bouchard, S. Wakim and M. Leclerc, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 5705 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Dierschke, A. C. Grimsdale and K. Müllen, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2004, 205, 1147 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iraqi and I. Wataru, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 442 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. F. Morin and M. Leclerc, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 8413 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Li, F. Dierschke, J. Wu, A. C. Grimsdale and K. Müllen, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 96 RSC .

  (a) A. Iraqi, T. G. Simmance, H. Yi, M. Stevenson and D. G. Lidzey, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5789 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Yi, A. Iraqi, M. Stevenson, C. J. Elliot and D. G. Lidzey, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1155 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Kobayashi, R. Koguchi and M. Kijima, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 9102 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J.-F. Morin, P.-L. Boudreault and M. Leclerc, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2002, 23, 1032 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Fu and Z. Bo, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 1704 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. F. Morin, S. Beaupre, M. Leclerc, I. Levesque and M. D'lorio, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 341 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) N. Kobayashi and M. Kijima, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 081113 CrossRef .
D. M. de Leeuw, M. J. Simenon, A. R. Brown and R. E. F. Einhard, Synth. Met., 1997, 87, 53 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Liu, G. Yu, Y. Wen, Y. Guo, L. Ji, J. Qin and Z. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2677 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Wu, Y. Li, S. Gardner and B. S. Ong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 614 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Li, Y. Wu, S. Gardner and B. S. Ong, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 849 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Rieger, D. Beckmann, A. Mavrinskiy, M. Kastler and K. Müllen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5314 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Lei, Y. Cao, X. Zhou, Y. Peng, J. Bian and J. Pei, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1762 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, H. Tian, D. Yan, Y. Geng and F. Wang, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5178 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, C. Liu, H. Tian, C. Bao, X. Zhang, D. Yan, Y. Geng and F. Wang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 1759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Shirota, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 75 RSC ; 
  (b) Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. D'Andrade, S. Datta, S. R. Forrest, P. Djurovich, E. Polikarpov and M. E. Thompson, Org. Electron., 2005, 6, 11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Veres, S. D. Ogier, S. W. Leeming, D. C. Cupertino and S. M. Khaffaf, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 199 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. G. J. Mathijssen, M. Cölle, H. Gomes, E. C. P. Smits, B. de Boer, I. McCulloch, P. A. Bobbert and D. M. de Leeuw, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2785 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lindley, Tetrahedron, 1984, 40, 1433 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. V. Ley and A. W. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 5400 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. F. Hartwig, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 2046 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. B. Goodbrand and N.-X. Hu, J. Org. Chem., 1999, 64, 670 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) A. A. Kelkar, N. M. Patil and R. V. Chaudhari, Tetrahedron Lett., 2002, 43, 7143 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) K. W. Anderson, R. E. Tundel, T. Ikawa, R. A. Altman and S. L. Buchwald, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6523 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) O. Navarro, N. Marion, J. Mei and S. P. Nolan, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 5142 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) M. C. Harris and S. L. Buchwald, J. Org. Chem., 2000, 65, 5327 CrossRef ; 
  (h) C. Jacquelin, N. Saettel, C. Hounsou and M.-P. Teulade-Fichou, Tetrahedron Lett., 2005, 46, 2589 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) H.-J. Cristau, P. P. Cellier, J.-F. Spindler and M. Taillefer, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 5607 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (j) C. Chen and L.-M. Yang, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 2209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. O. Kappe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6250 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) B. U. W. Maes, K. T. J. Loones, S. Hostyn, G. Diels and G. Rombouts, Tetrahedron, 2004, 60, 11559 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) B. U. W. Maes, K. T. J. Loones, G. L. F. Lemière and R. A. Dommisse, Synlett, 2003, 2599 Search PubMed .

  (a) F. Wiesbrock, R. Hoogenboom and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2004, 25, 1739 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. S. Nehls, U. Asawapirom, S. Füldner, E. Preis, T. Farrell and U. Scherf, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 352 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Larhed, C. Moberg and A. Hallberg, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-W. Shen, M. C. McCairn, J. J. Morrison and M. L. Turner, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 449 CrossRef CAS .
M. Horie, Y. Luo, J. J. Morrison, L. A. Majewski, A. Song, B. R. Saunders and M. L. Turner, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5230 RSC .
B. Liu, W.-L. Yu, Y.-H. Lai and W. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 1984 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Dijken, J. J. A. M. Bastiaansen, N. M. M. Kiggen, B. M. W. Langevels, C. Rothe, A. Monkman, I. Bach, P. Stossel and K. Brunner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7718 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. Smith, R. Hamilton, M. Heeney, J. Kirkpatrick, K. Song, S. E. Watkins, T. Anthopoulos and I. McCulloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Hoffmann, F. Jaiser, A. Hayer, H. Bässler, T. Unger, S. Athanasopoulos, D. Neher and A. Köhler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Treacher, P. Stoessel, H. Spreitzer, H. Becker and A. Falcou, U. S. Pat. Application WO, 03/048225, A2,  2003 Search PubMed .

  (a) J. Chen and Y. Cao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1709 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 723 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) P.-L. T. Boudreault, A. Najari and M. Leclerc, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 456 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20009 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) Z.-G. Zhang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4178 RSC ; 
  (f) H. J. Son, F. He, B. Carsten and L. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18934 RSC .

  (a) B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Helgesen, R. Søndergaard and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 36 RSC ; 
  (c) M.-S. Su, C.-Y. Kuo, M.-C. Yuan, U.-S. Jeng, C.-J. Su and K.-H. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4542 CrossRef .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45 RSC .

  (a) S. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Zheng, Q. Zhou, X. Deng, M. Yuan, G. Yu and Y. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 11921 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) L. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Jiang, D. Qin and Y. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9538 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Hou, H.-Y. Chen, S. Zhang and G. Lim Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16144 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591 Search PubMed .

  (a) J. Hou, C. Yang, C. He and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2006, 871 RSC ; 
  (b) E. Zhou, Z. a Tan, L. Huo, Y. He, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 26062 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Hou, L. Hou, C. He, C. Yang and Y. Li, Macromolecules, 2005, 39, 594 CrossRef .
F. Wudl, M. Kobayashi and A. J. Heeger, J. Org. Chem., 1984, 49, 3382 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Huo, S. Zhang, X. Guo, F. Xu, Y. Li and J. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9697 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Liang, D. Feng, Y. Wu, S. T. Tsai, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Subramaniyan, H. Xin, F. S. Kim, S. Shoaee, J. R. Durrant and S. A. Jenekhe, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 854 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. Ahmed, S. Subramaniyan, F. S. Kim, H. Xin and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7207 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Zhang, H. N. Tsao, W. Pisula, C. Yang, A. K. Mishra and A. K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3472 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. H. Wang, M. Kappl, I. Liebewirth, M. Müller, K. Kirchhoff, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 417 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) H. N. Tsao, D. M. Cho, I. Park, M. R. Hansen, A. Mavrinskiy, D. Y. Yoon, R. Graf, W. Pisula, H. W. Spiess and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. R. Zhang, L. J. Richter, D. M. DeLongchamp, R. J. Kline, M. R. Hammond, I. McCulloch, M. Heeney, R. S. Ashraf, J. N. Smith, T. D. Anthopoulos, B. Schroeder, Y. H. Geerts, D. A. Fischer and M. F. Toney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15073 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. N. Li, S. P. Singh and P. Sonar, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. W. Jung, F. Liu, T. P. Russell and W. H. Jo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6857 RSC ; 
  (d) P.-T. Wu, F. S. Kim and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4618 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) P. Sonar, S. P. Singh, Y. N. Li, Z.-E. Ooi, T.-J. Ha, I. Wong, M. S. Soh and A. Dodabalapur, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2288 RSC ; 
  (f) R. S. Ashraf, Z. Y. Chen, D. S. Leem, H. Bronstein, W. M. Zhang, B. Schroeder, Y. Geerts, J. Smith, S. Watkins, T. D. Anthopoulos, H. Sirringhaus, J. C. de Mello, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 768 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) M. Shahid, T. McCarthy-Ward, J. Labram, S. Rossbauer, E. B. Domingo, S. E. Watkins, N. Stingelin, T. D. Anthopoulos and M. Heeney, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 181 RSC ; 
  (h) Y. N. Li, P. Sonar, S. P. Singh, W. J. Zeng and M. S. Soh, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10829 RSC ; 
  (i) J. S. Lee, S. K. Son, S. Song, H. Kim, D. R. Lee, K. Kim, M. J. Ko, D. H. Choi, B. Kim and J. H. Cho, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1316 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Chen, Y. L. Cuo, G. Yu, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, D. Gao, H. T. Liu and Y. Q. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. J. Kronemeijer, E. Gili, M. Shahid, J. Rivnay, A. Salleo, M. Heeney and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1558 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Sonar, S. P. Sinngh, Y. Li, M. S. Soh and A. Dodabalapur, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Jenekhe, L. Lu and M. M. Alam, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 7315 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-G. Zhang, J. Min, S. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhang and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9474 RSC .
M. Zhang, X. Guo and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 557 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Lee, J. M. Cho, Y. Goo, W. S. Shin, J.-C. Lee, W.-H. Lee, I.-N. Kang, H.-K. Shim and S.-J. Moon, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1791 RSC .
Q. Shi, H. Fan, Y. Liu, W. Hu, Y. Li and X. Zhan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16843 CAS .
M. Yang, B. Peng, B. Liu, Y. Zou, K. Zhou, Y. He, C. Pan and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17989 CAS .
S. Van Mierloo, A. Hadipour, M.-J. Spijkman, N. van den Brande, B. Ruttens, J. Kesters, J. D'Haen, G. van Assche, D. M. de Leeuw, T. Aernouts, J. Manca, L. Lutsen, D. J. Vanderzande and W. Maes, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 587 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) I. McCulloch, R. S. Ashraf, L. Biniek, H. Bronstein, C. Combe, J. E. Donaghey, D. I. Jamse, C. B. Nielsen, B. C. Schroeder and W. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 714 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Pron, P. Berrouard and M. Leclerc, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2013, 214, 7 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Donaghey, R. S. Ashraf, Y. Kim, Z. G. Huang, C. B. Nielsen, W. Zhang, B. Schroeder, C. R. G. Grenier, C. T. Brown, P. D'Angelo, J. Smith, S. Watkins, K. Song, T. D. Anthopoulos, J. R. Durrant, C. K. Williams and I. McCulloch, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18744 RSC .
E. Zhou, J. Cong, K. Tajima, C. Yang and K. Hashimoto, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 305 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, M. Shi, L. Zuo, Y. Nan, Y. Liu, L. Fu and H. Chen, Polymer, 2011, 52, 2559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. J. Moule, A. Tsami, T. W. Bünnagel, M. Forster, N. M. Kronenberg, M. Scharber, M. Koppe, M. Morana, C. J. Brabec, K. Meerholz and U. Scherf, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4045 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. H. Jung, H. Kim, M. J. Park, B. Kim, J. H. Park, E. Jeong, H. J. Woo, S. Yoo and H. K. Shim, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 1423 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. C. Scharber, M. Koppe, J. Gao, F. Cordella, M. A. Loi, P. Denk, M. Morana, H. J. Egelhaaf, K. Forberich, G. Dennler, R. Gaudiana, D. Waller, Z. G. Zhu, X. B. Shi and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 367 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) E. J. Zhou, M. Nakamura, T. Nishizawa, Y. Zhang, Q. S. Wei, K. Tajima, C. H. Yang and K. Hashimoto, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8302 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, S.-W. Tsang, X. Du, L. Scoles, G. Robertson, Y. Zhang, F. Toll, Y. Tao, J. Lu and J. Ding, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3331 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Y. Chu, S.-W. Tsang, J. Zhou, P. G. Verly, J. Lu, S. Beaupré, M. Leclerc and Y. Tao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 96, 155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gendron, P. O. Morin, P. Berrouard, N. Allard, B. R. Aïch, C. N. Garon, Y. Tao and M. Leclerc, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7188 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Amb, S. Chen, K. R. Graham, J. Subbiah, C. E. Small, F. So and J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Zhou, L. Q. Yang, S. Q. Xiao, S. B. Liu and W. You, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 811 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. Li, J. Ding, N. Song, J. Lu and Y. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13160 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) G. Clavier and P. Audebert, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zhou, J. Cong, K. Tajima, C. Yang and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 116, 2608 Search PubMed .
S. Wen, W. Cheng, P. Li, S. Yao, B. Xu, H. Li, Y. Gao, Z. Wang and W. Tian, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 3758 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yue, Y. Zhao, S. Shao, H. Tian, Z. Xie, Y. Geng and F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2199 RSC .
D. Mühlbacher, M. Scharber, M. Morana, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana and C. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2884 CrossRef .
J.-Y. Wang, S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, J. A. Davies, K.-S. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun and A. K.-Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 765 CrossRef .

  (a) H. Bronstein, D. S. Leem, R. Hamilton, P. Woebkenberg, S. King, W. Zhang, R. S. Ashraf, M. Heeney, T. D. Anthopoulos, J. de Mello and I. McCulloch, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6649 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Zhang, J. Smith, S. E. Watkins, R. Gysel, M. McGehee, A. Salleo, J. Kirkpatrick, S. Ashraf, T. Anthopoulos, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Chen, C.-Y. Yu, Y.-L. Fan, L.-I. Hung, C.-P. Chen and C. Ting, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6503 RSC .

  (a) G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. L. Ma, C. Y. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. K. Lee, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Seo, A. Gutacker, Y. Sun, H. Wu, F. Huang, Y. Cao, U. Scherf, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. Wang, C. Li, W. Zhuang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 797 RSC ; 
  (b) E. Wang, L. Wang, L. Lan, C. Luo, W. Zhuang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 033307 CrossRef .

  (a) M. Svensson, F. Zhang, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, J. C. Hummelen, J. M. Kroon, O. Inganäs and M. R. Anderson, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 988 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M.-H. Chen, J. Hou, Z. Hong, G. Yang, S. Sista, L.-M. Chen and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4238 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. Jonker, Y. D. Park, R. B. Bennett, H. D. Cheong, G. Kioseoglu and A. Petru, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 8180 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pulizzi, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Jacobs, D. A. Shultz, R. Jain, J. Novak and D. A. Dougherty, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 1744–1753 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. W. Murray, A. M. Trozollo, E. Wasserman, W. A. Yager and G. Smolinsky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1967, 89, 5079 CrossRef ; 
  (b) T. Sugawara, S. Murrata, K. Kimura, Y. Sugawara, H. Iwasaki and H. Iwamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 5293 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) I. Fujita, Y. Teki, T. Takui, T. Kinoshita, K. Itoh, F. Miko, Y. Sawaki, H. Iwamura, A. Izuoka and T. Sugawara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 4074 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. Kothe, E. Ohmem, J. Brickman and H. Zimmerman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1971, 10, 938 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Veciana, C. Rovira, M. I. Crespo, O. Armet, V. M. Domingo and F. Palacio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 2552 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Rajca, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 871–893 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajca, K. Shiraishi, M. Pink and S. Rajca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7232–7233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rajca, P. Boratyński, A. Olankitwanit, K. Shiraishi, M. Pikn and S. Rajca, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 2107–2120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kaneko, T. Makino, H. Myaji, M. Teraguchi, T. Aoki, M. Miyasaka and H. Nishide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3554–3557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. Ishida and H. Iwamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 4238–4241 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Kanno, K. Inoue, N. Koga and H. Iwamura, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 13267 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Tamura, Y. Nakazawa, D. Shiomi, K. Nozawa, Y. Hosokoshi, M. Ishikawa, M. Takahashi and M. Kinoshita, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1991, 186, 401 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Sugawara, M. M. Matsushita, A. Izuoka, N. Wade, N. Takeda and M. Ishikawa, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 1723 RSC .

  (a) A. Ito, A. Taniguchi and K. Tanaka, Org. Lett., 1999, 1, 741–743 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 4492–4501 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Ito, H. Ino, Y. Matsui, Y. Hirao, K. Tanaka, K. Kanemoto and T. Kato, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 5715–5720 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Y. Hirao, H. Ino, A. Ito, K. Tanaka and T. Kato, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 4866–4872 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) D. Sakamaki, A. Ito, K. Furukawa, T. Kato and K. Tanaka, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4524–4526 RSC .
Y. Yuan, W. Choi, H. Nishide and T. Michinobu, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 345–350 RSC .

  (a) A. Rajca, S. Rajca and J. Wongsriratanakul, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 6308–6309 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Rajca, J. Wongsriratanakul and S. Rajca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6608–6626 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Rajca, A. Rajca, J. Wongsriratanakul, P. Butler and S. M. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6972–6986 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) A. Rajca, J. Wongsriratanakul and S. Rajca, Science, 2001, 294, 1503–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) A. Rajca, Chem.–Eur. J., 2002, 8, 4834–4841 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Crayston, J. N. Devine and J. C. Walton, Tetrahedron, 2000, 56, 7829–7857 CrossRef CAS .
C. Train, L. Norel and M. Baumgarten, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 2342–2351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Miller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3266–3296 RSC .
T. Aoki, T. Kaneko and M. Teraguchi, Polymer, 2006, 47, 4867–4892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Dougherty, Acc. Chem. Res., 1991, 24, 88–94 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Bushby, D. Gooding and M. E. Vale, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1999, 357, 2939–2957 CrossRef CAS .

          O. Kahn, Molecular Magnetism, VCH Publishers,  1993 Search PubMed .

          P. Bertrand, La Spectroscopie de Résonance Paramagnétique Electronique, EDP sciences,  2010 Search PubMed .
H. C. Longuet-Higgins, J. Chem. Phys., 1950, 18, 265–274 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dowd, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1966, 88, 2587 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rule, A. R. Matlin, D. E. Seeger, E. F. Hilinski, D. A. Dougherty and J. A. Berson, Tetrahedron, 1982, 38, 787–798 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Wright and M. S. Platz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 628–630 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Goodman and J. A. Berson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 5409–5424 CrossRef CAS .
A. Calder, A. R. Forrester, P. G. James and G. R. Luckhurs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1969, 91, 3724 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 10626–10628 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsumoto, N. Koga and H. Iwamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 5448–5449 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsumoto, T. Ishida, N. Koga and H. Iwamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 9952–9959 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kanno, K. Inoue, N. Koga and H. Iwamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 847–850 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lieb and D. Mattis, J. Math. Phys., 1962, 3, 749–752 CrossRef .
G. Kothe, E. Ohmes, J. Brickman and H. Zimmerma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1971, 10, 938–940 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoshizawa, A. Chano, A. Ito, K. Tanaka, T. Yamabe, H. Fujita and J. Yamauchi, Chem. Lett., 1992, 369–372 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoshizawa, A. Chano, A. Ito, K. Tanaka, T. Yamabe, H. Fujita, J. Yamauchi and M. Shiro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 5994–5998 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajca and S. Rajca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 8121–8126 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Bushby, N. Taylor and R. A. Williams, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 955–964 RSC .
T. D. Selby and S. C. Blackstock, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 7152–7153 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Seeger, P. M. Lahti, A. R. Rossi and J. A. Berson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 1251–1265 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Seeger and J. A. Berson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 5146–5147 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Seeger and J. A. Berson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 5144–5146 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Li, J. Ma and Y. S. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 5567–5573 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Li, J. Ma and Y. S. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 5587–5592 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Misurkin and A. A. Ovchinnikov, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1977, 46, 967–987 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Nishide, T. Kaneko, T. Nii, K. Katoh, E. Tsuchida and K. Yamaguchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 548–549 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide, T. Ozawa, M. Miyasaka and E. Tsuchida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 5942–5946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. G. Jenks, S. S. H. Sadeghi and J. P. Wikswo, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1997, 30, 293–323 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dobrzyńska, M. Jouni, P. Gawryś, S. Gambarelli, J. M. Mouesca, D. Djurado, L. Dubois, I. Wielgus, V. Maurel and I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 14968–14978 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Maurel, M. Jouni, P. Baran, N. Onofrio, S. Gambarelli, J. M. Mouesca, D. Djurado, L. Dubois, J. F. Jacquot, G. Desfonds and I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1399–1407 RSC .
B. Bleaney and K. D. Bowers, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1952, 214, 451–465 CrossRef CAS .
R. Veit, J. J. Girerd, O. Kahn, F. Robert and Y. Jeannin, Inorg. Chem., 1986, 25, 4175–4180 CrossRef CAS .
E. Belorizky and P. H. Fries, J. Chim. Phys. Phys.-Chim. Biol., 1993, 90, 1077–1100 CAS .

          F. Gerson and W. Huber, Electron Spin Resonance Spectroscopy of Organic Free Radicals, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .

          J. A. Weil and J. R. Bolton, Electron Paramagnetic Resonance: Elementary Theory and Practical Applications, Wiley, 2nd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
K. Sato, M. Yano, M. Furuichi, D. Shiomi, T. Takui, K. Abe, K. Itoh, A. Higuchi, K. Katduma and Y. Shirota, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 6607–6613 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wautelet, J. Le Moigne, V. Videva and P. Turek, J. Org. Chem., 2003, 68, 8025–8036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yokoyama, D. Sakamaki, A. Ito, K. Tanaka and M. Shiro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9403–9406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schweiger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1991, 30, 265–292 CrossRef .

          A. Schweiger and G. Jeschke, Principles of Pulsed Electron Paramagnetic Resonance, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  2001 Search PubMed .
N. J. Turro, M. H. Kleinman and E. Karatekin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 4436–4461 CrossRef .
S. Stoll, G. Jeschke, M. Willer and A. Schweiger, J. Magn. Reson., 1998, 130, 86–96 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gosk, V. Maurel, S. Gambarelli, D. Djurado, R. Szymczak, A. Twardowski and I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 074911 CrossRef .
Y. Teki, T. Takui, K. Itoh, H. Iwamura and K. Kobayashi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 2147–2156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sugawara, S. Bandow, K. Kiura, H. Iwamura and K. Itoh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 368–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Oka, Y. Kiyohara, H. Kouno and H. Tanaka, Polyhedron, 2007, 26, 2059–2064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Oka, H. Kouno and H. Tanaka, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1209–1215 RSC .
K. Yoshizawa, K. Tanaka, T. Yamabe and J. Yamauchi, J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 96, 5516–5522 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ito, K. Ota, K. Tanaka, T. Yamabe and K. Yoshizawa, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 5618–5625 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ito, H. Miyajima, K. Yoshizawa, K. Tanaka and T. Yamabe, J. Org. Chem., 1997, 62, 38–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Bushby, C. A. Kilner, N. Taylor and M. E. Vale, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 11458–11466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Bushby, D. R. McGill, K. M. Ng and N. Taylor, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1997, 1405–1414 RSC .
F. E. Goodson, S. I. Hauck and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 7527–7539 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, M. Zagórska, I. Wielgus, M. Pawłowski, J. Gosk and A. Twardowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 34–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gałecka, I. Wielgus, M. Zagórska, M. Pawłowski and I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 4924–4932 CrossRef .
I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, J. Gosk, M. Pawłowski, S. Gambarelli, D. Djurado and A. Twardowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 9421–9423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ito, D. Sakamaki, H. Ino, A. Taniguchi, Y. Hirao, K. Tanaka, K. Kanemoto and T. Kato, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2009, 4441–4450 CrossRef CAS .
H. Oka, M. Terane, Y. Kiyohara and H. Tanaka, Polyhedron, 2007, 26, 1895–1900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Oka, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1927–1934 RSC .
Y. V. Korshak, T. V. Medvedeva, A. A. Ovchinnikov and V. N. Spector, Nature, 1987, 326, 370–372 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Miller, Adv. Mater., 1992, 4, 298–300 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Miller, Adv. Mater., 1992, 4, 435–438 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 937–941 CrossRef CAS .
H. Murata, D. Miyajima, R. Takada and H. Nishide, Polym. J., 2005, 37, 818–825 CrossRef CAS .
H. Murata, D. Miyajima and H. Nishide, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 6331–6335 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kurata, Y. J. Pu and H. Nishide, Polym. J., 2007, 39, 675–683 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide, N. Yoshioka, K. Inagaki and E. Tsuchida, Macromolecules, 1988, 21, 3119–3120 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide, N. Yoshioka, T. Kaneko and E. Tsuchida, Macromolecules, 1990, 23, 4487–4488 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide, T. Kaneko, N. Yoshioka, H. Akiyama, M. Igarashi and E. Tsuchida, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 4567–4571 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide, N. Yoshioka, Y. Saitoh, R. Gotoh, T. Miyakawa and E. Tsuchida, J. Macromol. Sci., Pure Appl. Chem., 1992, 29, 775–786 CrossRef .
A. Fujii, T. Ishida, N. Koga and H. Iwamura, Macromolecules, 1991, 24, 1077–1082 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miura, M. Matsumoto and Y. Ushitani, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 2628–2630 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saf, K. Hummel, K. Gatterer and H. P. Fritzer, Polym. Bull., 1992, 28, 395–402 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide, T. Kaneko, M. Igarashi, E. Tsuchida, N. Yoshioka and P. M. Lahti, Macromolecules, 1994, 27, 3082–3086 CrossRef CAS .
T. Itoh, Y. Jinbo, K. Hirai and H. Tomioka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1650–1651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kaneko, S. Toriu, Y. Kuzumaki, H. Nishide and E. Tsuchida, Chem. Lett., 1994, 2135–2138 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kaneko, S. Toriu, E. Tsuchida, H. Nishide, D. Yamaki, G. Maruta and K. Yamaguchi, Chem. Lett., 1995, 421–422 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide, T. Kaneko, T. Nii, K. Katoh, E. Tsuchida and P. M. Lahti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 9695–9704 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide, M. Miyasaka, R. Doi and T. Araki, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 690–698 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takahashi, T. Nakazawa, E. Tsuchida and H. Nishide, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 6383–6385 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. van Meurs and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Org. Chem., 2000, 65, 5712–5719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Michinobu, M. Takahashi, E. Tsuchida and H. Nishide, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 1969–1971 CrossRef CAS .
H. Murata, M. Takahashi, K. Namba, N. Takahashi and H. Nishide, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 631–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Murata, R. Takada and H. Nishide, Polyhedron, 2005, 24, 2309–2314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Miyasaka, T. Yamazaki, E. Tsuchida and H. Nishide, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 8211–8217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyasaka, T. Yamazaki, E. Tsuchida and H. Nishide, Polyhedron, 2001, 20, 1157–1162 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyasaka, T. Yamazaki and H. Nishide, Polym. J., 2001, 33, 849–856 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide, T. Maeda, K. Oyaizu and E. Tsuchida, J. Org. Chem., 1999, 64, 7129–7134 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kaneko, T. Matsubara and T. Aoki, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3898–3906 CrossRef CAS .

          J. M. Mouesca, unpublished results.
K. Matsuda, N. Nakamura, K. Takahashi, K. Inoue, N. Koga and H. Iwamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 5550–5560 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajca, S. Rajca and S. Desai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 806–816 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajca, J. Wongsriratanakul and S. Rajca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 11674 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajca, J. Won, J. Wongsriratanakul, S. Rajca and R. Cerny, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajca, K. Lu and S. Rajca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 10335–10345 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chiarelli, M. A. Novak, A. Rassat and J. L. Tholence, Nature, 1993, 363, 147–149 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Li and G. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1268–1269 RSC .
A. Rajca, S. Mukherjee, M. Pink and S. Rajca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13497–13507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sawai, K. Sato, T. Ise, D. Shiomi, K. Toyota, Y. Morita and T. Takui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3988–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) D. S. Surry and S. L. Buchwald, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6338–6361 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. F. Hartwig, Nature, 2008, 455, 314–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ito, Y. Ono and K. Tanaka, New J. Chem., 1998, 22, 779–781 RSC .
A. Ito, Y. Ono and K. Tanaka, J. Org. Chem., 1999, 64, 8236–8241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vale, M. Pink, S. Rajca and A. Rajca, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 27–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ito, S. Inoue, Y. Hirao, K. Furukawa, T. Kato and K. Tanaka, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3242–3244 RSC .
S. I. Hauck, K. V. Lakshmi and J. F. Hartwig, Org. Lett., 1999, 1, 2057–2060 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Ito, Y. Ono and K. Tanaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Sakamaki, A. Ito, K. Furukawa, T. Kato and K. Tanaka, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 2947–2956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, V. Maurel, S. Gambarelli, I. Wielgus and D. Djurado, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 1362–1368 RSC .
X. Z. Yan, J. Pawlas, T. Goodson III and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9105–9116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Nelsen, G. Li, K. P. Schultz, H. Q. Tran and I. A. Guzei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11620–11622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ito, Y. Yamagishi, K. Fukus, S. Inoue, Y. Hirao, K. Furukawa, T. Kato and K. Tanaka, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6573–6575 RSC .
D. Sakamaki, A. Ito, K. Tanaka, K. Furukawa, T. Kato and M. Shiro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8281–8285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sakamaki, A. Ito, K. Furukawa, T. Kato, M. Shiro and K. Tanaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12776–12781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mataga, Theor. Chim. Acta, 1968, 10, 372 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajca, S. Utamapanya and S. Thayumanavan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 1053 CrossRef .
A. Rajca and S. Utamapanya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 10688 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajca and S. Utamapanya, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 1993, 232, 305 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Bushby, D. R. McGill, K. Ng and N. Taylor, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 2343–2354 RSC .
Y. Hirao, A. Ito and K. Tanaka, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 2951–2956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Selby, K. R. Stickley and S. C. Blackstock, Org. Lett., 2000, 2, 171–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fukuzaki and H. Nishide, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 1835–1838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang and M. Baumgarten, Chem. Phys., 1997, 214, 291 CrossRef CAS .
T. Michinobu, J. Inui and H. Nishide, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 2165–2168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Michinobu, J. Inui and H. Nishide, Polym. J., 2010, 42, 575–582 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fukuzaki and H. Nishide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 996–1001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† This partial oxidation reaction is frequently termed “doping” by the community of solid state physicists since it induces profound changes in the physical properties of electronic or magnetic organic compounds, phenomenologically similar to the effect of doping in inorganic semiconductors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Piotr Bujak
	Piotr Bujak got his MSc in chemistry from Silesian University of Technology in 2004. In 2008, at the University of Silesia he defended his PhD thesis devoted to the NMR investigation of copolymers. Then he started working at the Department of Inorganic and Coordination Chemistry (University of Silesia), where he developed an effective method for the synthesis of new isoxazolines. In 2012 he accepted the position of a research associate at Warsaw University of Technology, joining the group of Professor Adam Pron, where he presently works on the preparation of electroactive hybrids consisting of inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals functionalized with organic semiconductors.

Irena Kulszewicz-Bajer
	Irena Kulszewicz-Bajer obtained her PhD in chemistry from Warsaw University of Technology in 1984. She spent one year in the Laboratory of Inorganic Chemistry at the University of Nancy I in France at the position of “maitre de conference” in 1985. Then she returned to Warsaw University of Technology, at which she has been working till now. In 1991 she worked in Uniax Corporation in Santa Barbara (USA), collaborating with Alan J. Heeger and Paul Smith. She became full professor in 2009. Her research interests involve the synthesis and spectroscopic characterization of π-conjugated materials and high-spin organic compounds.

Malgorzata Zagorska
	Malgorzata Zagorska, a University of Warsaw graduate, obtained her PhD in chemistry from Warsaw University of Technology in 1987. Then she moved to Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm (Sweden) where she worked as postdoctoral fellow under the supervision of Goran Ahlgren and Bernd Krische. In 1992–1994 she worked in UNIAX Corporation in Santa Barbara (USA), closely collaborating with Alan J. Heeger. In 1994 she returned to Warsaw University of Technology where she became full professor in 2005. Her research interests involve the synthesis, electrochemistry and spectroelectrochemistry of organic semiconductors as well as their application in organic electronics.

Vincent Maurel
	Vincent Maurel obtained his PhD in 2004 from Joseph Fourier University in Grenoble (France) working under the supervision of Serge Gambarelli and Jacques Gaillard. Then he moved to Canada working as a postdoctoral fellow in the team of Professor Tito Scaiano at the University of Ottawa. In 2006 he joined the University of Strasbourg where worked under the supervision of Philippe Turek. Since 2007, he has been working as a researcher at Atomic Energy Commission (CEA) in Grenoble. His research interests involve advanced EPR spectroscopy, molecular magnetism and photocatalysis.

Ireneusz Wielgus
	Ireneusz Wielgus was born in 1969 in Warsaw (Poland). In 1993 he obtained his MSc degree in chemistry and chemical engineering from Warsaw University of Technology. In 2000 he defended his PhD thesis at the same university, devoted to conducting polymers and carried out under the supervision of Professor Malgorzata Zagorska. In 2003 he obtained the position of an assistant professor. His research interests involve the synthesis and characterization of specialty polymers.

Adam Pron
	Adam Pron was born (1951) and educated in Poland. After obtaining his MSc in chemistry he moved to the USA where in 1980 he completed his PhD at the University of Pennsylvania (under the supervision of Alan G. MacDiarmid). Then he joined the Warsaw University of Technology where he became full professor in 1993. In 1998 he moved to Atomic Energy Commission (CEA) in Grenoble (France). In 2012 he retired from CEA and accepted full-time professorship at Warsaw University of Technology. His research interests involve preparation and characterization of organic electroactive materials and hybrid organic–inorganic nanomaterials.

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis of poly(3-hexylthiophene) via the Grignard metathesis (GRIM) method.	 

 	Scheme 2  Comparison of the Stille versus the direct heteroarylation polymerization (DARP) approach.69	 

 	Scheme 3  The most popular synthetic routes to prepare semiconducting polymers.	 

 	Fig. 1  Cyclic voltammogram of a thin film of poly[(5,5′′′-dioctyl-[2,2′;5′,2′′;5′′,2′′′]quaterthiophene)-alt-(2,7-fluoren-9-one)] deposited on an ITO electrode. Electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 solution in acetonitrile; Ag/Ag+ reference electrode; scan rate 20 mV s−1 [reproduced by permission from R. Demadrille, N. Delbosc, Y. Kervella, M. Firon, R. De Bettignies, M. Billon, P. Rannou and A. Pron, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4661].	 
IP(eV) = |e|(Eox(onset) + 5.1)	(1)
EA(eV) = − |e|(Ered(onset) + 5.1)	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Possible structural arrangement of a semiconducting polymer, consisting of a stiff conjugated backbone and flexible lateral solubilizing groups, with respect to the substrate.	 

 	Fig. 3  Thin film field effect transistors (FETs) of different configurations.	 
J = σE	(3)
σ = neeμe + nheμh [cm2 V−1 s−1]	(4)

 	Fig. 4  Typical output (a) and transfer (b) characteristics of a polymeric field effect transistor.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 5  Polymers used in n-channel transistors.	 



n3.1
	—/—	—/4.0–4.5	3 × 10−2	5 × 105	—	BGBC (solution deposition); annealing at 105 °C [ a.o.]	
110


	60000/—	–/4.2	3–7 × 10−3	1 × 104	11–12	BGBC (solution deposition) [a.o.]	
111


n3.2A
	—/—	—/—	1.9 × 10−3	1 × 104	6	BGTC (solution deposition) [a.o.]	
115


n3.2B
	—/—	—/—	5.5 × 10−3	3.3 × 104	6	BGTC (solution deposition) [a.o.]	
115


n3.3
	47800/5.5	5.36/3.91	6 × 10−2	—	—	BGTC (solution deposition)	
118


	51000/5.5	5.36/3.91	0.1–0.85	106–107	5–10	TGBC with ActivInk D2200 dielectric (solution deposition) [a.o.]	
119


	Polyera, ActivInkTM N2200	0.1–0.3	∼106	∼10	TGBC with PMMA dielectric (solution deposition) [a.o.]	
120


	46900/2.1	5.30/3.79	3.9 × 10−2	105	10	BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 150 °C [v.o.]	
128


n3.4
	11000/2.9	5.61/3.96	2 × 10−3	—	—	BGTC (solution deposition)	
118


n3.5A
	14500/2.5	5.62/3.85	3.1 × 10−3	103	20	BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 150 °C [v.o.]	
128


n3.5B
	153000/2.2	5.13/3.76	7.6 × 10−2	105	7	BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 150 °C [v.o.]	
128


n3.6
	42400/2.6	5.95/3.94	7 × 10−2	105	15	BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
129


n3.7
	15000/1.5	5.9/3.9	1.3 × 10−2	104	4.4	BGTC (solution deposition) [i.o.]	
130


	—/—	5.9/3.9	6 × 10−2	104	7	TGBC with PAN/PS dielectric (solution deposition) [a.o.]	
132


n3.8
	5700/1.4	5.5/3.9	1.2 × 10−3	103	8.6	BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 100 °C [v.o.]	
131


n3.9
	3500/2.2	6.3/3.5	1.1 × 10−2	2 × 107	∼75	BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 240 °C [v.o.]	
133


	3600/2.2	6.3/3.5	1.1 × 10−2	2 × 104	93	BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 300 °C [v.o.]	
135


	7200/2.0	6.3/3.5	3.8 × 10−2	2 × 106	68	BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 300 °C [v.o.]	
135


	7200/2.0	6.3/3.5	0.19	105	76	TGBC with ActivInk D2200 dielectric (solution deposition) annealing at 110 °C [v.o.]	
135


n3.10
	57000/3.5	5.0/3.7	1.3 × 10−3	—	—	BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 80 °C [i.o]	
137


n3.11
	6700/3.5	5.8/4.3	0.16	107	5	TGBC (solution deposition) annealing at 110 °C [a.o.]	
148


n3.12
	14000/3.6	5.0/4.4	5.8 × 10−4	—	—	BGTC (solution deposition) annealing at 150 °C [i.o]	
149


n3.13
	—/—	—/—	1.2 × 10−3	3.3 × 104	6.8	BGBC (solution deposition) annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
150


 	Scheme 4  General formula of alternating conjugated polymers containing dithienyl diketopyrrolopyrrole (DT DPP) building blocks.	 

 	Fig. 6  Chemical structures of copolymers containing thiophene units.	 

 	Fig. 7  Chemical structures of copolymers containing thienothiophene units.	 

 	Fig. 8  Chemical structures of the copolymers p4.20–p4.28.	 

 	Fig. 9  Possible interdigitation patterns in conjugated polymers containing side alkyl groups.	 

 	Fig. 10  Chemical structures of copolymers containing bithiazole units.	 

 	Fig. 11  Chemical structures of copolymers containing thiazolo-thiazole or benzobisthiazole units.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chemical structures of copolymers containing dithienopyrrole or silylene-2,2′-bithiophene units.	 

 	Fig. 13  Chemical structures of the copolymers p4.50 and p4.51.	 

 	Fig. 14  Chemical structures of copolymers containing fluorenone units.	 

 	Fig. 15  Chemical structures of copolymers containing thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione units.	 

 	Fig. 16  Chemical structures of copolymers containing 2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione.	 

 	Fig. 17  Chemical structures of the copolymers p4.66–p4.68.	 

 	Fig. 18  Chemical structures of copolymers containing isoindigo units.	 

 	Fig. 19  Chemical structures of copolymers containing benzothiadiazole or naphthobisthiadiazole units.	 

 	Fig. 20  Two types of carbazole unit coupling.	 

 	Fig. 21  Chemical structures of homopolymers or copolymers containing N-substituted, 2,7-coupled carbazole units.	 

 	Fig. 22  Chemical structures of the copolymers p4.81–p4.84.	 

 	Fig. 23  Chemical structures of copolymers containing triarylamine units.	 

 	Scheme 5  Poly(3-hexylthiophene) regioisomers.	 

Nickel-catalyzed coupling polymerization
1	2-Bromo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) LDA (2) MgBr2·Et2O (3) Ni(dppp)Cl2	36	98	12200	1.9	
74, 184

2	2,5-Dibromo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) Rieke zinc (2) Ni(dppe)Cl2	82	99	25500	1.5	
185

3	

Grignard metathesis

2,5-Dibromo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) C12H25MgX/THF (2) Ni(dppp)Cl2/THF
	71	99	21000	1.4	
186d

4	2,5-Dibromo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) iPrMgCl/THF (2) Ni(dppp)Cl2 [monomer]:[Ni(dppp)Cl2] = 20000:1	40	—	≈280000	<1.1	
187



Palladium-catalyzed coupling polymerizations
5	

Stille coupling

3-hexylthiophene, (1) I2/HgO (2) LDA, (3) Bu3SnCl, (4) Pd(PPh3)4
	10–50	96	10000–16000	1.2–1.4	
188

6	

Suzuki–Miyaura coupling

2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) (pin)B–B(pin), [Ir2(μ-Cl)2(η4-COD)2], 4,4′-(tBu)2-2,2′-bipyridine, (2) Pd(tBu3P)2
	50	97	3400	3.3	
189

7	

Suzuki–Miyaura coupling

2-iodo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) (pin)B–B(pin), [Ir2(μ-Cl)2(η4-COD)2], 4,4′-(tBu)2-2,2′-bipyridine, (2) Pd(PPh3)4
	22	97	13900	1.6	
193

8	

Suzuki–Miyaura coupling

2-iodo-3-hexylthiophene, (1) (pin)B–B(pin), [Ir2(μ-Cl)2(η4-COD)2], 4,4′-(tBu)2-2,2′-bipyridine, (2) Pd(PTh3)3
	72	97	26000	2.3	
193



Direct Arylation
9	2-Bromo-3-hexylthiophene, Herrmanns's catalyst/tris(o-Me2N)phosphine Cs2CO3	99	98	30600	1.6	
66

10	2-Bromo-3-hexylthiophene, Pd[(o-tolyl)3]2, Me2NC6H4Br Cs2CO3, KOAc/THF	98	99	11800	1.7	
67



Oxidative coupling polymerizations
11	3-Hexylthiophene FeCl3	62	89	38000	1.9	
35

12	3-Hexylthiophene VO(acac)3, FeCl3, O2	18	81	16000	2.3	
194


 	Scheme 6  Synthesis of regioregular P3HT by Stille coupling reactions.	 

 	Scheme 7  Synthesis of regioregular P3HT by Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reactions.	 



p4.1
	13000/2.23	5.00/—	0.030	2 × 102	—	HMDS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
200


p4.2
	17300/1.32	—/—	0.140	>107	—	OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120–140 °C [a.o.]	
201


p4.3
	22100/1.47	5.04/—	0.020	103	−2.1	TC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
202


p4.4
	12800/1.63	5.31/—	1.4 × 10−5	102	−2.4	TC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
202


p4.5
	6000/1.25	5.84/3.49	0.060	105	—	TC, SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
204


p4.6
	33000/1.80	
	0.630	>107	—	OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120–160 °C [i.o.]	
205


	28000/2.00	—	1.000	—	—	BC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 185 °C [i.o.]	
210


p4.7
	29600/1.82	5.10/—	0.300	106	—	OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120–160 °C [i.o.]	
205


p4.8
	28500/1.80	
	0.300	106	—	OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120–140 °C [i.o.]	
205


p4.9
	12400/1.58	5.23/—	0.250	107	−8.0	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
212


p4.10
	13300/1.89	5.00/3.06	0.030	106	−7.0	TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [i.o.]	
214


p4.11
	15200/1.83	5.10/3.26	0.040	106	−9.0	TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [i.o.]	
214


p4.12
	12100/1.84	5.50/2.76	8.1 × 10−7	101	−39.0	TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [i.o.]	
214


p4.13
	14700/1.93	5.60/2.98	6.4 × 10−6	102	−15.0	TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [i.o.]	
214


p4.14
	26285/1.94	5.15/3.25	1.1 × 10−4	102	−13.0	TC, SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
220


	26285/1.94	5.15/3.25	5.0 × 10−4	103	−11.0	TC, HMDS/SiO2/S annealing at 150 °C i [a.o.]	
220


p4.15A
	9287/1.15	—/—	0.330	105	−10.0	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
219


p4.15B
	13142/1.23	5.20/3.40	0.010	103	−10.0	TC, SiO2/Si, annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
220


	13142/1.23	5.20/3.40	0.072	106	−4.0	TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
220


p4.16
	22922/2.28	5.21/3.31	1.5 × 10−4	102–103	−12.0	TC, SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
220


	22922/2.28	5.21/3.31	1.5 × 10−3	103–104	−9.0	TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
220


p4.17
	7900/1.90	5.14/—	0.300	107	−14.2	BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 160 °C [a.o.]	
221


p4.18A
	38000/1.15	5.06/2.62	9.0 × 10−5	103	—	TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]	
222


p4.18B
	40000/1.26	5.04/2.63	4.7 × 10−5	103	—	TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]	
222


p4.18C
	62000/1.40	5.11/2.59	0.028	2 × 104	−18.9	TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]	
222


p4.18D
	59000/1.47	5.08/2.60	0.015	104	—	TC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]	
222


p4.19A
	29000/2.00	5.30/—	0.150	105	—	BGBC, OTS(HMDS)/SiO2/Si annealing at 100–125 °C [a.o.]	
226


p4.19B
	26000/1.90	5.30/—	0.120	105	—	BGBC, OTS(HMDS)/SiO2/Si annealing at 100–125 °C [a.o.]	
226


p4.20
	15000/1.70	5.20/3.35	0.15	3.67 × 104	−8.5	BGTG, SiO2/Si annealing at 110 °C [a.o.]	
231


p4.21
	16300/3.90	—/—	0.15–0.25	105–106	−5.9	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
235


p4.22
	18000/—	—/—	1.3 × 10−4	2.4 × 102	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]	
236


p4.23A
	22000/—	—/—	2.1 × 10−3	7.1 × 103	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]	
236


p4.23B
	21000/—	—/—	0.027	1.5 × 105	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Siannealing at 100 °C [i.o.]	
236


p4.23C
	21000/—	—/—	0.134	1.9 × 105	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]	
236


p4.24
	18000/2.33	—/—	1.3 × 10−3	3.8 × 103	—	BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]	
239


p4.25A
	7100/1.82	5.00/—	0.050	106	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
240


p4.25B
	24100/1.43	5.00/—	0.370	107	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
240


p4.25C
	28900/1.58	5.00/—	0.540	107	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
240


	28900/1.58	5.00/—	0.540	107	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


	28900/1.58	5.00/—	0.260	107	—	BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


p4.25D
	28100/1.55	5.00/—	0.200	108	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
240


p4.25E
	33400/2.17	5.00/—	0.320	107	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
240


	33400/2.17	—/—	0.320	107	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


	33400/2.17	—/—	0.770	107	—	BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


p4.26A
	29500/1.58	5.10/—	0.086	107	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


	29500/1.58	5.10/—	0.030	107	—	BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


p4.26B
	52100/2.01	—/—	0.150	107	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


	52100/2.01	—/—	0.190	107	—	BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


p4.27A
	21300/1.99	5.10/—	0.029	106	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


	21300/1.99	5.10/—	0.024	106	—	BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


p4.27B
	44100/1.76	—/—	0.037	104	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


	44100/1.76	—/—	0.055	104	—	BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


p4.28A
	27900/1.76	5.20/—	5.9 × 10−3	105	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


	27900/1.76	5.20/—	3.3 × 10−3	105	—	BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


p4.28B
	21700/1.95	—/—	6.6 × 10−3	103	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


	21700/1.95	—/—	0.026	103	—	BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
242


p4.29A
	45000/2.40	5.15/—	0.0015	103	—	BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
248


p4.29B
	20000/2.40	5.20/—	0.1 × 10−5	102	—	BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
248


p4.30
	41000/1.70	5.19/—	0.330	—	−2.6	BTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]	
249


p4.31
	13000/1.70	5.39/3.47	1.1 × 10−3	4.7 × 104	−21.6	BC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]	
250


p4.32
	13200/2.38	5.22/—	5.4 × 10−3	105	−5.0	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C	
251


p4.33
	13800/2.33	5.15/—	0.050	106	−2.0	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C	
251


p4.34
	8800/5.20	4.80/3.40	0.150	102	—	TGBC, annealing at 110 °C [a.o.]	
254


p4.35
	11700/2.00	4.94/3.31	0.250	102	—	TGBC, annealing at 110 °C [a.o.]	
254


p4.36A
	4100/1.50	5.00/3.20	0.050	107	−27.0	BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
255b


p4.36B
	7200/2/40	5.10/3.30	0.140	2 × 106	−33.0	BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
255a


	7200/2.40	5.10/3.30	0.230	107	−31.0	BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
255b


p4.36C
	8700/1.80	5.10/3.30	0.300	107	−30.0	BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
255b


p4.37
	13700/1.80	5.30/3.50	2.7 × 10−4	104	—	BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
256


p4.38
	10000/1.60	5.20/3.40	0.130	106	—	BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
256


p4.39A
	7700/1.40	5.20/3.30	0.120	107	—	BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
256


p4.39B
	7600/1.50	5.20/3.30	0.100	106	—	BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
256


p4.40
	10659/3.66	5.60/2.75	0.020	104	−1.1	BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [a.o.]	
257


p4.41
	14816/5.02	5.30/2.79	0.020	104	−10.0	BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [a.o.]	
257


p4.42A
	8060/1.91	5.2/3.3	0.002	105	−19.0	BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
258


p4.42B
	366500/1.97	—/—	0.010	106	−5.2	BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
258


p4.43
	20500/1.82	5.3/—	0.120	107	−12.0	TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
261


	20500/1.82	5.3/—	0.180	107	−12.0	TC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
261


p4.44
	23000/1.56	5.2/—	0.120	107	<−10	TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
261


	23000/1.56	5.2/—	0.260	107	<−10	TC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
261


p4.45D
	50000/1.70	4.68/2.94	0.026	4	60.0	BGBC OTS/SiO2/Si [i.o.]	
265


p4.47A
	32000/1.70	4.88/3.02	0.210	120	−21.0	BGBC OTS/SiO2/Si [i.o.]	
265


p4.47B
	16000/1.90	4.96/2.96	0.0035	140	−23.0	BGBC OTS/SiO2/Si [i.o.]	
265


p4.49A
	10344/2.90	5.30/3.50	0.050	105	—	TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 250 °C [a.o.]	
269


p4.49B
	13666/3.00	5.20/3.30	0.080	5 × 104	—	TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 250 °C [a.o.]	
269


p4.50A
	36129/3.10	5.80/3.30	6 × 10−5	3 × 104	—	TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 250 °C [a.o.]	
269


p4.50B
	34324/3.70	5.60/3.30	0.006	4 × 106	—	TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 250 °C [a.o.]	
269


p4.51A
	6538/2.60	5.70/3.20	9 × 10−5	2 × 105	—	TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 250 °C [a.o.]	
269


p4.51B
	24242/3.30	5.40/3.00	0.006	2 × 105	—	TC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 250 °C [a.o.]	
269


p4.56
	4800/2.17	5.73/3.27	2.5 × 10−4	6	−16.0	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
277


p4.57A
	14000/1.67	5.54/3.75	0.189	8 × 106	−12.0	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 210 °C [a.o.]	
277


p4.57B
	8300/1.75	5.11/3.45	5.1 × 10−3	6 × 102	−14.0	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 90 °C [a.o.]	
277


p4.58
	7600/1.73	5.50/3.71	0.585	5 × 105	−22.0	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 210 °C [a.o.]	
277


p4.59A
	9400/1.77	5.52/3.70	0.216	105	−18.0	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]	
277


p4.59B
	9800/1.86	5.47/3.71	3.8 × 10−3	103	−10.0	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
277


p4.59C
	14100/1.91	5.41/3.58	0.101	2 × 104	−11.0	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]	
277


p4.59D
	15700/1.72	5.42/3.60	0.141	2 × 105	−17.0	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 210 °C [a.o.]	
277


p4.59E
	18000/1.96	5.40/3.58	0.108	5 × 104	−24.0	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
277


p4.60
	28000/2.90	5.50/4.00	0.110	1.5 × 105	−5.2	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [i.o.]	
138


p4.61
	54000/3.15	5.17/3.61	0.040	—	—	BC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 110 °C [v.o.]	
146


	10000/2.40	5.17/3.61	0.050	—	—	BC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 110 °C [v.o.]	
146


p4.62
	10000/—	5.35/3.53	0.04	—	—	BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [v.o.]	
147


p4.63
	58787/3.36	—/—	1.04	106	−7.0	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
284a


	106000/3.44	5.20/4.00	0.970	106	−2.7	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]	
284b


	45200/2.15	5.20/4.00	0.350–0.390	—	—	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [i.o.]	
284b


p4.64
	19271/3.25	—/—	1.50	106	−12.0	BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]	
284a


p4.65A
	122300/3.58	5.07/3.82	2.53	>105	—	BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si solution-sheared annealing at 220 °C [i.o.]	
285


p4.65B
	269400/4.38	4.91/3.65	3.97	>104	—	BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si solution-sheared annealing at 220 °C [i.o.]	
285


p4.66A
	4700/1.39	5.02/—	7.8 × 10−3	105	—	TC SiO2/Si [i.o.]	
287b


p4.66B
	6200/1.71	5.04/—	0.0226	106	—	TC SiO2/Si [i.o.]	
287b


p4.67A
	10042/1.80	5.02/3.49	5.1 × 10−3	4.9 × 103	−15.5	TC OTMS/SiO2/Si [i.o.]	
292


p4.67B
	34732/1.93	5.16/3.52	6.6 × 10−3	1.3 × 106	−69.7	TC OTMS/SiO2/Si [i.o.]	
292


p4.68
	8995/1.87	4.64/3.47	2.8 × 10−3	2.8 × 104	7.4	TC OTMS/SiO2/Si [i.o.]	
292


p4.69
	19800/2.00	5.80/3.80	0.019	106	—	BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
296


p4.70A
	87900/2.10	5.70/3.70	0.790	107	—	BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
296


	135000/5.50	5.38/3.77	0.57	>105	−2.0	BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 170 °C [a.o.]	
298


	20400/2.00	5.54/3.70	1.060	>106	−18.0	BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
299


p4.70B
	18400/2.00	5.57/3.70	0.400	>105	−10.0	BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
299


p4.70C
	39200/3.20	5.33/3.74	3.620	>106	−2.0	BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 175 °C [a.o.]	
299


p4.70D
	37300/2.30	5.26/3.74	1.760	>106	−5.0	BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 175 °C [a.o.]	
299


p4.70E
	138000/3.3	5.20/3.58	2.48	>106	3.0	BGTC, OTMS/SiO2/Si annealing at 170 °C [a.o.]	
298


p4.71
	74190/2.91	5.66/3.61	4 × 10−3	5.0 × 104	−25.0	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [a.o.]	
300


p4.72
	55276/2.40	5.53/3.70	0.013	9.8 × 106	−17.3	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
300


p4.73
	35000/1.63	5.18/3.59	0.13–0.20	106–107	—	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
302


p4.74
	36100/3.20	5.07/3.53	0.074	105	−8.0	BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
304


p4.75
	52600/2.40	5.16/3.77	0.560	107	−10.0	BGTC, FDTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
304


p4.76
	15000/1.60	5.99/—	6.2 × 10−6	102	−39.0	BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [a.o.]	
307a


p4.77
	27000/2.00	5.94/—	2.0 × 10−5	5 × 103	−35.0	BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [a.o.]	
307a


p4.78
	10000/3.50	5.66/2.76	2.2 × 10−3	5 × 104	−40.0	BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [a.o.]	
307a


p4.79
	17000/2.60	5.64/2.75	1.4 × 10−4	5 × 103	−52.0	BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 120 °C [a.o.]	
307a


p4.80
	3160/1.58	5.21/2.05	1 × 10−5	103	−47.1	BGTC ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C	
322


p4.82A
	3300/1.44	(5.1–5.2)/—	1.5 × 10−5	102	−12.0	BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
224


p4.82B
	5700/1.16	(5.1–5.2)/—	8.0 × 10−4	103	−10.0	BGTC OTS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
224


p4.82C
	11200/2.63	(5.1–5.2)/—	9.6 × 10−3	105	−8.0	BGTC PS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
224


p4.82D
	7000/2.08	(5.1–5.2)/—	1.8 × 10−3	103	−10.0	BGTC PS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
224


p4.82E
	4930/3.34	(5.1–5.2)/—	0.02	105	−4.0	BGTC PS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
224


p4.83A
	19500/2.37	4.96/2.51	6.4 × 10−3	103	−6.7	BGTC HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]	
325


p4.83B
	18600/2.14	4.95/2.48	0.022	104	−2.7	BGTC HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 180 °C [a.o.]	
325


p4.83C
	21700/1.91	4.99/2.49	0.035	104	−4.5	BGTC HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
325


p4.84A
	13000/2.28	5.01/2.60	0.200	1.4 × 106	−1.0	BGTC ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
326


p4.84B
	12000/1.98	5.07/2.65	0.390	4.5 × 106	−6.0	BGTC ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
326


p4.85A
	14100/1.40	4.50/1.6	2.4 × 10−3	1.0 × 104	−7.0	ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C [a.o.]	
335


p4.85B
	8500/2.30	4.50/1.7	9.2 × 10−4	1.3 × 103	−2.0	ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C [a.o.]	
335


p4.86A
	4200/1.92	4.40/1.8	1.1 × 10−5	1.2 × 103	−5.0	ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C [a.o.]	
335


p4.86B
	8200/1.44	4.50/1.8	7.6 × 10−5	1.3 × 102	−6.0	ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C [a.o.]	
335


p4.87A
	13800/1.40	4.80/1.8	5.1 × 10−4	4.3 × 105	−8.0	ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C [a.o.]	
335


p4.87B
	13100/1.76	4.80/1.8	2.2 × 10−3	5.7 × 104	−10.0	ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 80 °C [a.o.]	
335


p4.88
	45500/2.11	5.20/—	4.0 × 10−3	—	−4.2	BCTG CYTOP/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
338


p4.89
	27900/1.89	5.40/—	0.020	—	−6.4	BCTG CYTOP/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
338


p4.90
	15000/1.69	5.50/—	0.040	—	−5.5	BCTG CYTOP/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
338


 	Scheme 8  Synthetic route to pepare p4.6, p4.7 and p4.8.	 

 	Scheme 9  Synthetic route to prepare p4.9.	 

 	Scheme 10  Synthetic pathway leading to p4.10 and p4.11.	 

 	Scheme 11  Two approaches – benzannulation and thienannulation – to benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 12  Synthetic route to prepare p4.29.	 

 	Scheme 13  Synthetic routes to prepare p4.34 and p4.35.	 

 	Scheme 14  Synthetic route to prepare p4.36C.	 

 	Scheme 15  Synthetic route to prepare p4.42.	 

 	Scheme 16  Synthetic route to prepare p4.45.	 

 	Scheme 17  Synthetic route to prepare p4.48.	 

 	Scheme 18  Synthetic route to prepare 2,7-dibromo-9,9-dialkylsilafluorene.	 

 	Scheme 19  Synthetic route to prepare p4.55.	 

 	Scheme 20  Synthetic pathway leading to the dibromo-derivative of 3,6-bis(thiophen-2-yl)-2,5-bis(2-hexyldecyl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione.	 

 	Scheme 21  Synthetic route to prepare 2,5-di(5-bromothienyl)-3,4-(1,8-naphthylene)cyclopentadienone.	 

 	Scheme 22  Synthetic route to prepare 8,10-bis(5-bromo-3-alkylthiophen-2-yl)acenaphtho[1,2-e]thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine.	 

 	Scheme 23  Synthetic route to prepare 6,6′-dibromo-N,N′-(alkyl)isoindigo.	 

 	Scheme 24  Synthetic route to prepare p4.73.	 

 	Scheme 25  Synthetic route to prepare p4.75.	 

 	Scheme 26  Possible synthesis of 2,7-substituted carbazole.	 

 	Scheme 27  Syntheses of p4.76–p4.79.	 

 	Scheme 28  Synthesis of monomers and their polymerization to p4.81 and p4.82via dehalogenative coupling.	 

 	Scheme 29  Synthesis of p4.82 through oxidative coupling.	 

 	Scheme 30  Synthetic pathway leading to p4.83.	 

 	Scheme 31  Synthetic pathway leading to p4.84.	 

 	Scheme 32  Synthetic route to prepare p4.85, p4.86 and p4.87.	 

 	Scheme 33  Chemical structures of copolymers used in a comparative study of electrical transport properties.	 

 	Scheme 34  Typical electron donating units used in the design of donor–acceptor conjugated polymers.	 

 	Scheme 35  Effect of the electron donating strength on IP and EA of diketopyrrolopyrrole copolymers containing different donors. Data taken from ref. 283d and 283f.	 

 	Scheme 36  Typical electron accepting units used in the design of donor–acceptor conjugated polymers.	 

 	Scheme 37  Effect of the electron accepting strength on EA and IP of dithienosilole (DTS) copolymers containing different acceptors. Data taken from ref. 269, 283d and 350.	 

 	Fig. 24  Chemical structures of copolymers containing benzobisthiazole acceptor units.	 



l5.1
	19940/2.84	5.71/3.33/2.37	0.81	3.42	0.63	1.79	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
350b


	19940/2.84	5.71/3.33/2.37	0.63	7.22	0.64	3.00	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alb	
350b


l5.2
	6800/1.68	5.55/3.30/2.25	0.65	0.29	0.32	0.06	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
350b


	6800/1.68	5.55/3.30/2.25	0.61	1.17	0.54	0.39	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alb	
350b


l5.3
	8060/1.91	5.20/3.30/1.90	0.66	7.08	0.45	2.10	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
350b


	8060/1.91	5.20/3.30/1.90	0.61	6.55	0.41	1.70	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alc	
350b


l5.4
	7820/2.46	5.09/3.29/1.80	0.73	3.01	0.55	1.24	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
350b


	7820/2.46	5.09/3.29/1.80	0.62	5.98	0.55	2.03	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alc	
350b


l5.5
	9870/1.41	5.13/3.36/1.77	0.65	6.58	0.51	2.20	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
350b


	9870/1.41	5.13/3.36/1.77	0.55	7.96	0.38	1.68	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alc	
350b


l5.6
	52400/2.82	4.79/3.30/1.49	0.31	3.06	0.32	0.31	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
350b


l5.7A
	8700/1.59	5.06/2.81/2.26	0.76	10.5	0.58	4.68	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Al	
357


l5.7B
	24300/2.00	5.00/3.00/2.00	0.56	7.50	0.49	2.10	ITO/PEDOT/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
350a


l5.7C
	15500/2.30	5.10/2.90/2.20	0.62	10.20	0.65	4.10	ITO/PEDOT/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
350a


l5.7D
	33900/3.90	5.10/3.30/1.80	0.65	12.60	0.61	5.00	ITO/PEDOT/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
350a


l5.7E
	6300/1.47	5.04/3.41/1.63	0.73	11.25	0.71	5.88	ITO/PEDOT/L:PC70BM/Ca/Al	
356


l5.8
	58000/2.90	5.31/3.24/2.07	0.86	9.15	0.62	4.88	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
358


l5.9A
	10700/1.80	5.30/2.80/2.50	0.76	6.32	0.56	2.72	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/Al	
359


l5.9B
	11020/1.30	5.05/3.11/1.94	0.77	6.68	0.51	2.60	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al	
360


l5.10
	14000/2.40	5.31/3.51/1.80	0.67	11.13	0.53	4.03	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Ag	
361


l5.11
	12000/2.33	5.10/3.40/1.70	0.58	4.04	0.47	1.10	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al	
363


l5.12A
	13200/2.60	5.56/3.75/1.81	0.85	9.81	0.66	5.50	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
274a


	35000/2.70	5.40/—/1.73a	0.85	11.50	0.68	6.80	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/Ca/Ald	
274b


l5.12B
	39000/3.00	5.57/—/1.70a	0.81	9.70	0.67	5.70	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/Ca/Ald	
274b


l5.12C
	42000/2.50	5.48/—/1.70a	0.87	8.10	0.56	4.00	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/Ca/Ald	
274b


l5.13A
	6600/1.20	5.11/3.63/1.48	0.66	4.98	0.50	1.63	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Al	
364


	4100/1.30	5.09/3.42/1.67	0.70	6.97	0.39	1.90	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/Al	
365


l5.13B
	10600/1.29	5.16/3.08/2.08/1.59a	0.76	4.69	0.53	1.69	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Ale	
274h


l5.14A
	26700/2.49	5.08/3.43/1.65	0.70	9.22	0.35	2.30	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alf	
367


l5.14B
	39800/2.58	5.12/3.47/1.65	0.75	13.20	0.57	5.70	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alb	
367


l5.14C
	46100/2.29	5.29/3.63/1.66	0.79	13.00	0.59	6.09	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alb	
367


l5.14D
	37700/1.48	5.24/3.55/1.69	0.84	12.70	0.53	5.71	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Alb	
367


l5.14E
	64000/4.70	5.26/3.59/1.67a	0.76	8.12	0.50	3.15	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Al	
274g


l5.15A
	28000/1.60	5.57/3.88/1.69	0.88	12.20	0.68	7.30	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/BCP/Ald	
274l


	10000/—	—	0.89	6.53	0.53	3.10	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/BCP/Alb	
72d


	18000/—	—	0.88	9.91	0.62	5.40	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/BCP/Alb	
72d


	31000/1.58	—	0.91	12.13	0.70	7.70	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/BCP/Alb	
72d


l5.15B
	26000/1.62	—	0.90	10.91	0.62	6.40	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/BCP/Alb	
72d


l5.15C
	25000/1.62	—	0.90	9.65	0.61	5.30	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/BCP/Alb	
72d


l5.15D
	20000/2.58	5.33/3.63/1.70a	0.89	9.40	0.52	4.40	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Age	
274i


l5.15E
	27000/2.56	5.37/3.67/1.70a	0.83	8.40	0.50	3.40	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Ag	
274i


l5.16
	16300/1.90	5.66/3.93/1.73	0.80	9.7	0.53	4.10	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/LiF/Ald	
369


	48000/1.70	5.60/3.50/2.10	0.85	12.6	0.68	7.30	ITO/ZnO/L:PC70BM/MoO3/Agb	
370


l5.17A
	10800/1.44	5.59/3.49/2.10	0.82	3.05	0.43	1.06	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Al	
373


l5.17B
	13600/1.92	5.66/3.66/2.00	1.01	0.62	0.35	0.22	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
374


l5.18A
	34900/1.38	5.52/3.50/2.02	0.86	7.29	0.54	3.41	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Alb	
373


l5.18B
	11700/1.83	5.60/3.59/2.01	0.99	1.15	0.43	0.74	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
374


l5.19
	9200/1.40	5.15/3.48/1.67	0.58	7.03	0.52	2.11	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Alb	
373


l5.20
	39200/2.95	5.44/3.61/1.83	0.90	6.11	0.56	3.11	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
374


l5.21A
	14900/1.37	4.89/3.08/1.81	0.43	6.19	0.46	1.23	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/LiF/Al	
375


l5.21B
	15600/1.36	4.86/3.07/1.79	0.43	11.1	0.43	2.06	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/LiF/Al	
375


l5.21C
	17900/1.63	4.81/3.08/1.73	0.54	11.9	0.44	2.80	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/LiF/Al	
375


l5.22A
	35000/1.30	5.30/3.57/1.73	0.70	11.0	0.60	3.20	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/LiF/Al	
376


l5.23
	18000/1.20	5.05/3.27/1.78	0.68	12.7	0.55	5.10	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Al	
346a


l5.24
	7000/1.71	4.90/3.50/1.40	0.36	4.20	0.53	0.80	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al	
363


l5.25
	38500/2.09	5.32/3.25/2.07	0.81	8.86	0.48	3.47	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al	
377


l5.26A
	38000/2.80	5.40/3.70/1.70	0.75	2.02	0.44	0.66	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al	
378a


l5.26B
	24200/2.51	5.36/3.52/1.84	0.86	10.7	0.60	5.40	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al	
379


	24200/2.51	5.36/3.52/1.84	0.85	11.2	0.67	6.10	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Alg	
379


l5.26C
	33000/7.4	5.30/3.70/1.60	0.74	10.05	0.46	3.39	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al	
378a


l5.26D
	40000/2.2	5.30/3.60/1.70	0.79	11.45	0.49	4.46	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al	
378a


l5.26E
	9000/1.40	5.30/3.60/1.70	0.78	9.75	0.49	3.79	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al	
378a


l5.27
	37000/1.97	5.50/3.60/1.90	0.89	6.92	0.63	3.60	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC61BM/Al	
314a


	—/—	—	0.89	10.60	0.67	6.50	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/CPE/Al	
381


l5.28
	79000/4.20	5.39/—/—	0.90	9.50	0.50	5.40	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC60BM/Al	
383b


l5.29A
	21000/1.50	5.50/—/—	0.95	8.40	0.44	3.50	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al	
384b


l5.29B
	20000/1.30	5.50/—/—	0.97	9.10	0.51	4.50	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/Ca/Al	
384b


l5.30
	—/—	5.01/3.24/1.77	0.62	13.20	0.63	5.15	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Ald	
346b


l5.31
	—/—	5.12/3.35/1.77	0.70	14.70	0.64	6.58	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Ald	
346b


l5.32
	—/—	5.22/3.45/1.77	0.76	15.20	0.66	7.73	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC70BM/Ca/Ald	
346b


l5.33
	—/—	5.15/3.31/1.84	0.76	15.40	0.70	8.24	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/L:PC71BM/PFN/Ca/Ald	
346c


l5.33
	—/—	5.15/3.31/1.84	0.74	17.20	0.74	9.15	ITO/PFN/L:PC71BM/PFN/MoO3/Al or Agd	
346c




l5.1
	19940/2.84	5.71/3.33/2.37	9.3 × 10−3	104	−20.9	3.53	BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
350b


l5.2
	6800/1.68	5.55/3.30/2.25	0.011	105	−15.3	3.70	BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
350b


l5.3
	8060/1.91	5.20/3.30/1.90	2 × 10−3	105	−19.0	—	BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
350b


	366500/1.97	5.20/3.30/1.90	0.010	106	−5.2	—	BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
350b


l5.4
	7820/2.46	5.09/3.29/1.80	7.2 × 10−4	104	−22.8	3.78	BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
350b


l5.5
	9870/1.41	5.13/3.36/1.77	8.5 × 10−4	105	−22.1	3.78	BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
350b


l5.6
	10300/3.12	4.79/3.30/1.49	2.2 × 10−4	104	−28.6	3.64	BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
350b


	52400/2.82	4.79/3.30/1.49	5.5 × 10−4	103	−3.7	3.64	BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
350b


l5.7B
	24300/2.00	5.00/3.00/2.00	0.12	105–106	—	—	BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
350a


l5.7C
	15500/2.30	5.10/2.90/2.20	0.01	105–106	—	—	BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
350a


l5.7D
	33900/3.90	5.10/3.30/1.80	0.03	105–106	—	—	BCBG, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
350a


l5.8
	58000/2.90	5.31/3.24/2.07	3.8 × 10−3	105	—	—	BC, OTS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
358


l5.9A
	10700/1.80	5.30/2.80/2.50	2.8 × 10−3	1180	−19	—	BGTC, ODTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [a.o.]	
359


l5.10
	14000/2.40	5.31/3.51/1.80	1.3 × 10−3	—	−14	—	BG, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [v.o.]	
361


l5.11
	12000/2.33	5.10/3.4/1.70	0.01	103	—	—	BGTC,OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
363


l5.13B
	10600/1.29	5.16/3.08/2.08/1.59a	3.9 × 10−4	104–105	—	—	TC, —/SiO2/Si	
274h


l5.14E
	64000/4.70	5.26/3.59/1.67a	8.9 × 10−3	105	−0.3	—	BGBC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 150 °C [i.o.]	
274g


l5.15A
	28000/1.60	5.57/3.88/1.69	1 × 10−4	—	—	—	BC, SiO2/Si [i.o.]	
274l


	10000/—	—	7 × 10−6	—	—	—	BC, SiO2/Si [i.o.]	
72d


	18000/—	—	1 × 10−4	—	—	—	BC, SiO2/Si [i.o.]	
72d


	31000/1.58	—	3.7 × 10−4	—	—	—	BC, SiO2/Si [i.o.]	
72d


l5.15D
	20000/2.58	5.33/3.63/1.70a	8.2 × 10−4	105	−1.91	—	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
274i


l5.15E
	27000/2.56	5.37/3.67/1.70a	2.4 × 10−3	105	−1.69	—	BGTC, OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [a.o.]	
274i


l5.22B
	10200/2.60	—	0.17	105	—	3.70	BC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
351a


	
13000/—
(11000)/—
	—	0.28	103–104	—	3.7–3.8	BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
351c


	
30000/—
(16000)/—
	—	0.59	103–104	—	—	BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
351c


	
51000/—
(25000)/—
	—	1.20	102–104	—	3.7–3.8	BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
351c


	(35000)/—	—	3.30	105–106	—	3.7–3.8	BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
351c


l5.22C
	1800/—	—	0.016	104	—	—	BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
351c


	6500/—	—	0.20	103–105	—	—	BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
351c


	16000/—	—	0.40	102–103	—	3.7	BGBC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
351c


l5.24
	7000/1.71	4.90/3.5/1.40	0.02	104	—	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si annealing at 200 °C [i.o.]	
363


l5.25
	38500/2.09	5.32/3.25/2.07	2.5 × 10−3	104–105	−15	—	BGTC, HMDS/SiO2/Si [a.o.]	
377


l5.26A
	38000/2.84	5.40/—/—	0.80–1.20	103–104	−25	—	BCTG OTS/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C [a.o.]	
378b


	38000/2.80	5.40/3.70/1.70	1.20	104	—	—	BCTG, PFBT/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C	
378a


l5.26C
	33000/7.40	5.30/3.70/1.60	0.15	104	—	—	BCTG, PFBT/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C	
378a


l5.26D
	40000/2.20	5.30/3.60/1.70	0.57	105	—	—	BCTG, PFBT/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C	
378a


l5.26E
	9000/1.40	5.30/3.60/1.70	3 × 10−3	102	—	—	BCTG, PFBT/SiO2/Si annealing at 100 °C	
378a


l5.20
	79000/4.20	5.39/—/—	1 × 10−3	—	—	—	BG, SiO2/[a.o.]	
383b


 	Fig. 25  Chemical structures of copolymers containing thiazolothiazole acceptor units.	 

 	Fig. 26  Chemical structures of copolymers containing thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione acceptor units.	 

 	Fig. 27  Chemical structures of copolymers containing 1,3-di(thien-2-yl)thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione acceptor units.	 

 	Fig. 28  Chemical structures of copolymers containing benzothiadiazole acceptor units.	 

 	Fig. 29  Chemical structures of copolymers containing 4,7-di(thien-2-yl) benzothiadiazole-acceptor units.	 

 	Fig. 30  Chemical structures of copolymers containing substituted thieno[3,4-b]thiophene acceptor units.	 

 	Scheme 38  Organic chemical moieties bearing spins (spin containing units, SC).	 

 	Fig. 31  Energy levels due to interactions between single electrons in a biradical in the active-electron approximation. E0 corresponds to the energy of a single electron with no interaction with the second single electron. K corresponds to the electrostatic interaction between the two single electrons and J to the exchange interaction (see text).	 
	(6)

 	Fig. 32  Electronic structures of biradicals bonded to 1,2-ethene (left) and 1,1-ethene (right). The schematic view depicts the energy levels and the electronic structures of the π-system of biradicals and the two singly occupied orbitals that are obtained by using Hückel's approximation.	 

 	Fig. 33  Electronic structures of meta-benzoquinodimethane (left) and para-benzoquinodimethane (right) biradicals. This schematic view depicts the energy levels and the two singly occupied orbitals that are obtained by using Hückel's approximation.	 

 	Scheme 39  Biradicals 10–12 exhibiting triplet ground state, S = 1 and biradical 13 exhibiting S = 0.	 
S = ½|N* − N°|	(7)

 	Scheme 40  Examples of simple alternant conjugated hydrocarbons with their expected ground spin state.	 

 	Scheme 41  Star-branched structures with ferromagnetic coupling by the 1,3,5-phenylene unit.	 

 	Scheme 42  3,4′-Biphenyl and 4,4′′-meta-terphenyl groups as ferromagnetic coupling units.	 

 	Scheme 43  2,7-Naphthalene and 2,4,5,7-anthracene as ferromagnetic coupling units.	 

 	Scheme 44  Different ferromagnetic coupling units.	 

Set 6.25	1.555	0.146	0.029	0.006
Set 6.26	1.492	0.248	—	—
Set 6.27	1.146	0.380	0.147	—
Set 6.28	0.842	0.634	0.487	—

 	Fig. 34  Polaronic model of the ferromagnetic polymer.	 

 	Scheme 45  The structure of poly(meta-phenyleneoctatetraene).	 

 	Fig. 35  Model of high-spin polymers designed by grafting SC units as pendant chains on a conjugated polymer backbone.	 

 	Scheme 46  Conjugated polymers and dimers containing pendant phenoxyl radicals.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 36  Example of the analysis of spin multiplicity S in a doped high-spin polyarylamine. M = f(H) is measured and normalized and then compared with Brillouin functions (Bs) corresponding to different values of S. The polymer PN was doped at two equivalents of oxidant per mer. Solid lines represent unpublished calculations (J. M. Mouesca, V. Maurel and I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, 2013) which are compared with the experimental data taken from ref. 432.	 
	(9)

 	Fig. 37  Determination of J in oxidatively doped S = 1 arylamine dimer from the plot of χT = f(T). The solid line represents the calculated values with the best fit parameters using the Bleaney–Bowers equation. The obtained J coupling constant is J/k = 42 K with the definition of J adopted here. [reproduced by permission from R. J. Bushby, N. Taylor and R. A. Williams, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 955–964].	 
	(10)

 	Fig. 38  Example of 2D field-swept pulsed-EPR nutation spectrum for a sample containing a mix of four different spin states. The pulsed-EPR experiment was performed at T = 7 K with a sample of the polymer PAB1 oxidized to the radical cation state at the oxidant:polymer ratio 3:1 [V. Maurel and I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, 2013, unpublished data].	 

 	Fig. 39  Monitoring of the chemical doping of the polymer PN by 2D pulsed-EPR nutation. The polymer PN was oxidized to the radical cation state with the following molar ratios: Ox/PN = 1 (lower frame), 2 (middle frame), and 3 (upper frame) [V. Maurel and I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, 2013, unpublished data].	 

 	Fig. 40  Effect of the lack of a spin due to incomplete doping on the coupling between electronic spins in high-spin polymers designed following the polaronic model or by grafting pendant radical on a conjugated backbone.	 

 	Scheme 47  Oligocarbenes.	 

 	Scheme 48  Polymers containing nitroxide groups.	 

 	Scheme 49  Model compound with aminyl radicals (6.38) and oligo(meta-aniline) (6.39).	 

 	Scheme 50  Polymers containing different conjugated segments as SC units.	 

 	Scheme 51  Poly(m-aniline)s oxidized to radical cations.	 

 	Scheme 52  Oligoarylamines containing 3,4′-biphenyl and meta-terphenyl ferromagnetic couplers.	 

 	Scheme 53  Oligoarylamines containing the m-benzene ferromagnetic coupler.	 

 	Scheme 54  Polyamines containing m–p–p-aniline segments in the main chain.	 

 	Scheme 55  Polymers containing the phenothiazine moiety.	 

 	Scheme 56  The structure of polyacetylene with grafting phenoxy radicals.	 

 	Scheme 57  Conjugated polymer containing pendant nitroxide radicals.	 

 	Scheme 58  Polyacetylenes containing different pendant radical moieties.	 

 	Scheme 59  Polyacetylenes containing arylamine pendant groups.	 

 	Scheme 60  Polyacetylene grafted with diazo and carbene moieties.	 

 	Scheme 61  Poly(phenylenevinylene) grafted with nitroxide and phenoxyl groups.	 

 	Scheme 62  Poly(phenylenevinylene) grafted with two phenoxy radicals.	 

 	Scheme 63  Phenylenevinylene grafted with aryl amine radical cations.	 

 	Scheme 64  Poly(phenylenevinylene) grafted with aryl amine radical cations.	 

 	Scheme 65  Poly(phenylenevinylene) grafted with two aryl amine groups per the polymer unit.	 

 	Scheme 66  Polythiophenes grafted with phenoxyl radicals.	 

 	Scheme 67  Preparation of polythiophene grafted with 1,1,4,4-tetracyanobuta-1,3-diene.	 

 	Scheme 68  1,4-Phenyleneethynylene main chain grafted with phenoxyl radicals and aryl amine radical cations.	 

 	Scheme 69  Poly(8,9-anthryleneethynylene) and anthranyl grafted with phenoxyl radicals.	 

 	Scheme 70  Spin defects in linear/branched and cyclic structures.	 

 	Scheme 71  Hexacarbene.	 

 	Scheme 72  Macrocyclic polyradicals of triarylmethyl calixarenes.	 

 	Scheme 73  Calix[4]arene structure with nitroxides.	 

 	Scheme 74  Azacyclophanes.	 

 	Scheme 75  Tetraazacyclophanes (6.98a and 6.99), hexaazacyclophane (6.100a) and octaazacyclophanes (6.98b and 6.100b).	 

 	Scheme 76  Multicyclophane structures.	 

 	Scheme 77  Belt-shaped polymacrocyclic oligoarylamine (tetraazacyclophane moiety – in red, PD bridge – in blue).	 

 	Scheme 78  The model of two dimensional polyradicals.	 

 	Fig. 41  Spin defects in linear and 2-D structures.	 

 	Scheme 79  Dendritic hexacarbenes (6.105 and 6.106) and 2D network (6.107).	 

 	Scheme 80  Star-branched dendritic triarylmethyl oligoradicals.	 

 	Scheme 81  Triarylmethyl polymers exhibiting S ≈ 5000.	 

 	Scheme 82  Polyarylamines containing 3,4′-biphenyl and meta-terphenyl ferromagnetic couplers.	 

 	Scheme 83  Model compounds containing trifunctional ferromagnetic couplers.	 

 	Scheme 84  2D/3D polyarylamines with conjugated segments of different length.	 

 	Scheme 85  3D polyarylamines containing 1,3-benzenediyl and 1,3,5-benzenetriyl couplers.	 

 	Scheme 86  Poly(1,2-phenylenevinylene) containing arylamine groups or phenoxyl moieties.	 
2D	Two-dimensional
3D	Three-dimensional
3HT	3-Hexylthiophene
A	Acceptor
acac	Acetylacetone
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
BBTz	Benzobisthiazole
BDT	Benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene
BGBC	Bottom-gate/bottom-contact transistor
BGTC	Bottom-gate/top-contact transistor
BHJ	Bulk heterojunction
BisBT	Bis-benzothiadiazole
bpy	2,2′-Bipyridine
BT	Benzothiadiazole
BTA	Benzotriazole
BTz	Bithiazole
C8OTS	Octyltrichlorosilane
CELIV	Carrier extraction by linearly increasing voltage
COD	1,5-Cyclooctadiene
COT	1,3,5,7-Cyclooctatraene
CPDT	Cyclopentadithiophene
CPE	Conjugated polyelectrolyte
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
CW-EPR	Continuous-wave electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy
CYTOP	Commercial perfluorinated polymer, produced by Asahi Glass Co.
D	Donor
DA	Donor–acceptor
DARP	Direct arylation polymerization
dba	Dibenzylideneacetone
DCC	Dicyclohexylcarbodiimide
DEC	Directional epitaxial crystallization
DFT	Density functional theory calculations
DIO	1,8-Diiodooctane
DMA	4-Dimethylaminopyridine
DoI	Double injection
DP	Degree of polymerization
DPP	Diketopyrrolopyrrole
dppp	1,3-Bis(diphenylphosphino)propane
DT DPP	Dithienyl diketopyrrolopyrrole
DTG	Dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]germole
DTP	Dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole
DTS	Dithienosilole
EA	Electron affinity

E
g
	Band gap
EPC	External power efficiency
EPR	Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy
EQE	External quantum efficiency
FC unit	Ferromagnetic coupling unit
FDTS	1H,1H,2H,2H-Perfluorodecyltriethoxysilane
FET	Field effect transistor
GIWAXS	Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering
GIXRD	Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction
GRIM	Grignard metathesis polymerization
HH	Head-to-head
HMDS	Hexamethyldisilazane
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
HOPG	Highly oriented pyrolytic graphite
HT	Head-to-tail
IP	Ionization potential
IPES	Inverse photoelectron spectroscopy
IS	Impedance spectroscopy
ITO	Indium tin oxide
K-BrBz	Potassium 4-bromobenzoate
KCTP	Kumada catalyst transfer polycondensation
LED	Light emitting diode
LFET	Light-emitting field-effect transistor
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MALDI-TOF	Matrix assisted laser desorption and ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry
MDMO-PPV	Poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene]
MEH-PPV	Poly[3-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene]

M
n
	Number average molecular mass
NIR	Near infra-red
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
NT	Naphtho[1,2-c:5,6-c]-bis-[1,2,5]thiadiazole
NTDO	[2,3-c]Thiophene-4,9-dione
ODCB	1,2-Dichlorobenzene, o-dichlorobenzene
ODT	1,8-Octanedithiol
ODTS	Octadecyltrichlorosilane
OFET	Organic field effect transistor
OLED	Organic light emitting diode
OPC	Organic photovoltaic cell
OTFT	Organic field-effect transistor
OTMS	Octadecyltrimethoxysilane
OTS	Octyltrichlorosilane
P3HT	Poly(3-hexylthiophene)
P3TMAHT	Poly[3-(6-trimethylammoniumhexyl)thiophene]
PAN	Polyacrylonitrile
PANI	Polyaniline
PC	Photovoltaic cell
PCE	Power conversion efficiency
PCnBM	Phenyl Cn butyric acid methyl ester, n = 60, 70, 71
PD	
p-Phenylenediamine unit
PDI	Polydispersity index
PEDOT	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PES	Photoelectron spectroscopy
PF2	Poly[9,9-bis(2-ethylhexylfluorene)]
photo-CELIV	Photogenerated charges in CELIV
PPV	Poly(p-phenylene vinylene)
PS	Polystyrene
PSS	Poly(styrenesulfonate)
PTFE	Poly(tetrafluoroethylene)
pulsed-EPR	Electron paramagnetic resonance nutation spectroscopy
PVP	Poly(4-vinyl phenol)
QA	Quinoxaline
ROMP	Ring opening metathesis polymerization
SC unit	Spin containing/carrying unit
SCLC	Space-charge-limited current
SEC	Size exclusion chromatography
SQUID	Superconducting quantum interference device magnetometry
STM	Scanning tunneling microscopy
STTz	
s-Tetrazine
TCB	1,3,5-Trichlorobenzene
TCBD	1,1,4,4-Tetracyanobuta-1,3-diene

T
g
	Glass transition temperature
TGBC	Top-gate/bottom-contact transistor
TOF	Time of flight
TP	Thienopyrazine
TPD	Thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione
TT	Tail-to-tail
TTF–TCNQ	Tetrathiafulvalene–tetracyanoquinonodimethane
TTz	Thiazolothiazole
UPS	Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy
UV-vis-NIR	Ultraviolet-visible-near infrared spectroscopy
VO(acac)2	Vanadium(IV)-oxy acetylacetonate
Footnote
† This partial oxidation reaction is frequently termed “doping” by the community of solid state physicists since it induces profound changes in the physical properties of electronic or magnetic organic compounds, phenomenologically similar to the effect of doping in inorganic semiconductors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
