Atomic spectrometry update. Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materials  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B920784H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B920784H
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24, 1599-1656Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAtomic spectrometry update. Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materials

        
          
            Simon 
            Carter
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Andy S. 
            Fisher
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Phill S. 
            Goodall
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Michael W. 
            Hinds
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Steve 
            Lancaster
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Sian 
            Shore
          
        
      e
aHull Research & Technology Centre, BP, Saltend, East Yorkshire, UK HU12 8DS
bSchool of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth, UK PL4 8AA
cBNFL Sellafield, Seascale, Cumbria, UK CA20 1PG
dRoyal Canadian Mint, 320 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Canada K1A 0G8
eShell Research and Technology Centre, Thornton, P.O. Box 1, Chester, UK CH1 3SH
Received 
      6th October 2009
    , Accepted 6th October 2009First published on 22nd October 2009Contents1 Metals1.1 Ferrous metals and alloys1.2 Non-ferrous metals and alloys2. Chemicals2.1 Petroleum and petroleum products2.2 Organic chemicals and solvents2.3 Inorganic chemicals and acids2.4 Nuclear materials3 Advanced materials3.1 Polymeric materials and composites3.2 Semiconductors and conducting materials3.3 Glasses3.4 Ceramics and refractories3.5 Catalysts4 Glossary of termsReferencesAbstract
This is the latest review covering atomic spectrometric measurements of industrial materials, metals, chemicals and advanced materials. It follows on from last year's review1 and should be read in conjunction with other reviews in the series.2–4 This year has seen the departure of Brian Charlton, one of the writing team for two years. He has, however, been replaced by Simon Carter who is an able successor. Our thanks go to Brian for all of his hard work over the period.

This year has again seen increased interest in nuclear applications, which is presumably a consequence of increased research funding in this area. Similarly, the number of applications involving nano-materials is also still increasing. The number of papers describing the analysis of glass and of ceramics is pretty much stable now, with both sets having a large number of archaeological applications. Much of the atomic spectrometry is not new, but the applications are still interesting because of the data analysis. Both sample types have required the increased use of solid sampling techniques to prevent sample damage. Similar chemometric techniques have also been used for forensic analyses of glasses. The use of LIBS is also still increasing since it offers a stand-off method of analysis, is easily automated and leads to no sample damage.

1 Metals
For all types of metals and alloys, the most interesting contributions continue to centre on solid sample analysis methods. Laser induced breakdown spectrometry (LIBS), in particular, continues to be of interest (22% of abstracts). The overall distribution of abstracts reviewed for the metals section (as %) by instrumental method were: atomic absorption 0%, atomic emission (including ICP and GD) 17%, mass spectrometry 11%, atomic fluorescence 6%, SIMS 9%, XRF 9%, and the use of multiple instrumental methods 26%. Abstracts that are fundamental in nature and/or focus on instrument development were not cited, readers are referred to instrumental reviews.2,3 As always, this part of the review is split between the ferrous metals and non-ferrous metals sections. A Table of applications covering both matrix types is also included (Table 1).
1.1 Ferrous metals and alloys
An overview of the current developments in laser induced breakdown spectrometry (LIBS) was written by Zhang et al.5 Examples of metal alloy applications were mentioned and the instrumental parameters that influence the detection capability were discussed. Boue-Bigne6 presented an overview of LIBS applications in the steel industry. The author claimed the major advantage of LIBS was its ability to generate large scale metal surface maps (60 × 60 mm2, with steps of 50 µm). Li and co-workers7 demonstrated that Al, Co, Mn, Mo, and Ti in stainless steel samples could be determined using laser induced plasma spectrometry (LIPS), with limits of detection lower than 150 µg g−1. LIBS has also been used for the rapid analysis of solid slag samples taken from a vacuum degasser station of a steel factory.8 The LIBS unit was located a distance of 10 m from the vacuum degasser. The analysis time was 80 seconds from the time the sample is set at the analysis position to the end of the measurement and the method was validated against samples analyzed by XRF.
The characterization of a sample introduction system for ICP-OES, that allows for the simultaneous introduction of both hydride and non-hydride forming elements, was outlined in a paper by Wiltsche et al.9 It was observed that limits of detection (LOD) from this multimode sample introduction system were similar for hydride forming elements determined with a conventional hydride generation system and LODs were also similar for non-hydride forming elements compared with convention nebulization systems. The accuracy of the system was verified using high alloy steel and nickel alloy reference materials. The process of spark interaction with inclusions in steel from spark OES has been studied using a high speed camera by Mizukami et al.10 These authors observed 3 stages: 1) a breakdown between the sample surface and the electrode, 2) inclusions are transformed into cathode points and 3) vapour jets spout out to the electrode and collide with electrons, Ar+ and Ar*, which leads to strong plasma light. The process destroyed inclusions and finely dispersed the included material into the matrix. This led the authors to propose a new model for the selective discharge of inclusions in the spark discharge.
Aimoto11 outlined two analytical processes that were rapid, did not require skilled labour, and were energy efficient for the analysis of steels. An electrolytic dissolution process combined with flow injection ICP-OES was used for the determination of P and Si in steel and was in agreement with JIS methods. The other process involved LIBS to check for alumina inclusions in steel from mould flux or the slag, which occurred within 30 minutes at the production site.
ICP-MS was applied to determine the provenance of iron archaeological artefacts by Desaulty et al.12 Low detection limits, good sensitivity and good precision were viewed as advantages for ICP-MS in this application compared with neutron activation analysis (NAA). Samples, rich in Fe, were observed to suppress the analyte signal. Kondo and Hamada studied the application of laser ablation-laser induced fluorescence (LA-LIF) to the determination of C13 and P14 in steels. Linear ranges were reported to be 83–5000 µg g−1 for C and 37–350 µg g−1 for P. The quantitative determination of Fe in iron – zinc alloy coatings by X-ray diffraction was reported by Park and Lee.15 A partial least square method was used to correlate the spectrum components with the concentrations. The authors report satisfactory precision (not specified in abstract) and accuracy to be within 0.17% of values obtained by wet chemical methods.
The review paper by Yip et al.,16 focused on the most common methods for inorganic analysis (including metals and alloys) cited as key comparisons by the Comite Consultatif pour la Quantite de Matiere (CCQM) from 1997 to 2007. Applications of these methods required low uncertainty and bias and were used primarily by national measurement institutes for provision of reference values. Among the methods cited were: inorganic mass spectrometry, ICP-OES, XRF, FAAS, and GFAAS. The review contained 144 refs. Baranowska and Franklin17 investigated the morphology of gas-nitrided austenitic steel by a variety of methods: grazing incidence XRD (GI-XRD), EPMA, WD-XRF, SIMS, X-ray photoelectron spectrometry (XPS), atomic and magnetic force microscopy (AFM/MFM), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Carbon coating on steel, used in polymer electrolyte fuel cells, was investigated in a paper by Mori et al.18 The depth-profile of the coating was determined by GD-OES and XPS. Other characteristics of the thin film were determined by Raman spectroscopy and XPS. A number of techniques for characterizing iron pipe corrosion products were evaluated in a paper by Borch et al.19 Crushed corrosion products from a water system and a synthetic iron oxide thin film were both used in the evaluation as test samples. XRD and grazing incident diffractometry were effective in identifying the mineralogical composition of the test samples. Atomic force microscopy and a combined ToF-SIMS-AFM were excellent for evaluating roughness and depth-profiling (respectively) of the synthetic thin films. Corrosion products were difficult to analyze by AFM because of the surface roughness and the synthetic thin film proved difficult for most spectrometric techniques because of the limited thickness (118 nm). XPS was not useful because of the similarities between Fe hydroxides and oxides. Jandaghi et al.20 studied the change in weld metal composition by XPS and ED-XRF after pulsed laser welding of stainless steel 316. It was observed that there was an undesired loss of volatile elements and corresponding change in properties from laser welding which was predicted by the vaporization model.
McPhail, Chater and Li21 discussed the applications of focused ion beam SIMS in materials science which included substrates such as stainless steel and aerospace alloys. The Fe and N self-diffusion in amorphous FeN was examined by Chakravarty et al.22 using SIMS and neutron reflectivity. SIMS measurements showed that thin layer of (Fe86N14)-Fe-57-N-15 sandwiched between Fe86N14 broadened after annealing the films at different temperatures. It was also determined by SIMS that Fe diffusion was about 2 orders of magnitude less than N. The effect of laser surface texturing on galvanized steel was investigated by Sakata et al.23 The authors used XRF to measure the Zn coating thickness as a function of the process parameters. Both XRF and XRD analyzes indicated that the protective Zn coating remains at the surface after the laser treatment. Atomic force microscopy determined the cavity depth from the laser shots.
1.2 Non-ferrous metals and alloys
Pandhija and Rai24 wrote an overview article which described LIBS and promoted it as an emerging technique for determining trace elements in materials with little or no sample preparation. Within the paper, examples of analyzing a silver ornament and an aluminium plate were given. A paper by Galbacs et al.25 claimed that LIBS in combination with a generalized linear correlation calibration method gave accurate analysis of gold alloys to within a few parts per thousand in comparison with the standard cupellation (fire assay) method. In contrast to the cupellation method, it could provide data within minutes and was virtually non-destructive. The technique of LIBS appears to be applicable to the areas of art conservation and archaeology because it does not require sample preparation, consumes minute quantities of sample and gives both qualitative and quantitative information within seconds, as noted in the paper by Osticioli et al.26 The authors wrote that LIBS is capable of doing depth-profile and, combined with a microscope, can perform the analysis with good spatial resolution (approximately 10 µm). They cited the analysis of metal alloys and layer analysis of a painting as examples. Abdel-Kareem and Harith27 reported that LIBS could be used to analyze the surface of copper embroidery threads after a laser-cleaning procedure. It was reported by Fortes and co-workers28 that LIBS could be used for real time monitoring of the progress of laser-cleaning of metallic objects. It was noted that no signal was observed when the cleaning and LIBS laser operated independently, however a signal enhancement was observed when the two lasers were combined. The emissions from both the pollutants and the underlying materials were monitored.
Lorusso et al.29 described a laser-cleaning procedure for reducing the Cl concentration from metal artefacts but used ED-XRF to measure the concentration change. Guerra30 wrote an overview (84 refs) article about ancient goldsmith's skill, wherein the author also outlined the limitations, advantages and applications of X-ray based techniques (XRF, SEM-EDX, PIXE, and SR-XRF). These techniques were employed in analyzing goldwork. Guilherme and colleagues31 compared the performance of a portable and a stationary XRF in analyzing ancient metallic objects. The spectrometers were non-commercial and significant differences were found between the two systems, in terms of peak shaping and trace element detection.
Laser ablation ICP-MS was used to determine the composition and size of oxide particles (SiO2, MnO, Al2O3, MgO and CaO) on the surfaces of metal and glass according to a paper by Karasev and Inoue.32 The particle size values determined by LA-ICP-MS were within 6 to 13% of the values determined by SEM. Femto-second LA-ICP-MS was used to measure major, minor, and trace elements in ancient Chinese gold artefacts as reported by Brostoff et al.33 The pattern of elements and concentrations were used to develop a “fingerprint” for these materials which can support research on these and other gold artefacts.
Gavillet et al.34 used SIMS to determine the nuclear spallation and activation products in Pb and Pb-Bi alloy encased in a steel tube before and after irradiation. It was found that SIMS provided a mass distribution of irradiation products in the 50–140 atomic mass unit range. SIMS was also shown to be useful in mapping the distributions of trace elements on the surface layers of high voltage anode aluminium foils in a study by Song and co-workers.35 It was found that higher concentrations of Sn in the surface layer correlated with a higher degree of pitting of the aluminium foils.
Elemental “fingerprinting” was evaluated as a method for assessing the provenance of copper artefacts in two studies. Cooper et al.36 used INAA, ICP-MS and LA-ICP-MS to measure the trace elements and Pb isotope ratios to distinguish regional differences in copper artefacts found in North Western North America. Similarly, Dussubieux and colleagues37 successfully used LA-ICP-MS to determine As, Ag, Ni, and Bi as a means to differential between European and American native copper. They also examined the corrosion and heterogeneity of American native copper by SEM-EDX and EPMA. Impurities (H, S, C, O, N, and Cl) were observed in electrochemically deposited copper thin films by ToF-SIMS and GD-MS as reported by Klemm et al.38 The advantages and disadvantages of these techniques for thin film analyses were discussed in the paper but not described in the abstract. The oxidation of silver by gaseous S2− and S4+ species was studied using atomic force microscopy, in-situ micro-balance and ToF-SIMS, as reported by Kleber et al.39 The authors noted that the sulfidation process strongly depends on the relative humidity content and the oxygen in the ambient atmosphere. Zheng and colleagues40 studied the corrosion resistance of a Zr film on TiNi alloys using a variety of methods. AFM showed that the Zr film was relatively smooth with a root mean square roughness of 9.166 nm. XPS and XRD analyses showed only partial oxidation of the film and there was a decrease in the concentration of Ni released from the coated alloyed compared with the uncoated alloy as determined by AAS. Alvar and co-workers41 described the preparation of Pd/Ag/alpha-alumina membranes and the characterization of this material by XRD, XRF, SEM and ICP-AES. It appeared that small changes in composition, annealing temperature and annealing time affect the properties and morphology of the material. Nguyen et al.42 used both XPS and dynamic SIMS to study the distribution and alignment of trace levels of Mg and Na in an aluminium cast alloy. The formation of ultrafine Ag-Pd alloy powder by DC arc plasma evaporation were studied by XRF, XRD, transmission electron microscopy and differential scanning calorimetry as described by Zhang et al.43 It was found that by increasing the amount of Pd in the master alloy and raising the temperature, the alloy Ag84.38Pd14.85 was successfully prepared. Balta et al.44 studied artistic bronze and copper artificial patinas using dynamic SIMS and XPS. The authors noted that SIMS was a good analytical technique for analyzing small amounts of material with high sensitivity and has high depth/lateral resolution in the micron and sub-micron range. XPS can provide detailed chemical information on a variety of solid samples and can examine the surface of the sample (only a few monolayers). Mateo and co-workers45 demonstrated the ability of LA to clean varnishes and other contaminants from brass. The samples were monitored by a LIBS-based detection system during the cleaning process for the analysis of the material removed. The samples were also examined before and after analysis by optical microscopy and by FTIR.
Table 1 Applications of the Analysis of Metals and Alloys




Element
Matrix
Technique; Atomization; Presentation
Comments
Reference




Ge, P
Gold bonding wire
OES; ICP; L
Samples were dissolved with hydrobromic acid and nitric acid at room temperature to retain Ge in solution. Spike recoveries of 98–100% were reported and LODs were 0.012 mg L−1 (Ge 265.11 nm) and 0.009 mg L−1 (P 177.495 nm)

46



O
High purity Cadmium
OES; GD; S
GD-OES measurements were validated by comparison with measurements from an oxygen-nitrogen analyzer.

47



P
Molybdenum Steel
SIMS; -; S
SIMS showed P segregation along austenitic grain boundaries which led to embrittlement.

48



Te
Soldering tin
AFS; HG; L
An electrochemical hydride generator was set for continuous flow into an atomic fluorescence spectrometer. TeH2 was generated on a W cathode and driven by a sweeping gas flow. LOD was 2.2 ng mL−1.

49



Th, U
High Purity Copper
MS; ICP; L
Cu was removed from solution by electro-deposition in order to determine Th-232 and U-238.

50



Various
Bearings
LIBS; -; S
LIBS was used for depth-profiling. LIBS measurements were correlated to acoustic measurements and gave real time profile and layer composition information.

51



Various
Bronze
XRF; -; S

In-situ ED-XRF was used within a museum to determine the composition of patina covering bronze artefacts without any sample preparation.

52



Various (6)
Dental alloys
HR-MS; ICP; L
Metal ion release from dental alloys was studied by varying the dental alloys (stainless steel, nickel-titanium, and thermo Ni–Ti), pH of the solution, and the time of exposure. It was found that all alloys release ions especially in the first week.

53



Various (10)
Lead
OES; ICP; L
Aqueous standards with an added internal standard were used for calibration.

54



Various
Manganese alloys
OES; ICP; L
Recycled manganese alloy residues were crushed and separated by particle size then analyzed for element composition.

55



Various (5)
Metallic Glass
OES; ICP; L
Samples were completely dissolved in a mixture of HF and HNO3 with a microwave-assisted dissolution procedure. Boron and silicon were not vaporized in the dissolution procedure.

56



Various (8)
Silver coins
PIXE;; S
Ancient Iranian silver coins were analyzed by PIXE for elemental components in order to see if there was a correlation with minting time or minting location

57



Various
Tantalum-niobium slag
OES; ICP; L
Samples were treated with potassium chloride and boric acid at 950 °C for 15 minutes then leached by hydrochloric and tartaric acids at 90 °C for 30 minutes. Calibration was performed with matrix matched standards. Recoveries ranged between 94 and 110%.

58





2. Chemicals
2.1 Petroleum and petroleum products
Study of the elemental composition of coal as well as geochemistry of coal rich areas continues to feature strongly in this review period, although much of this work has used standard experimental techniques. Emissions, particulates and residues (fly ash) related to coal combustion are present in a large number of papers. Since most of these offer no advances in analytical knowledge, they have not been discussed in this review.
As in the previous review period, there has been interest in further developing methods for the determination of low level S in fuels. Far lower detection limits than current legislation requires have been achieved, using technology that has been optimized for this requirement. Much of the other work related to the analysis of petroleum products uses routine analysis with novel sample preparation. In many cases the existing sample preparation is adequate, and so there may be little value in these new preparation steps.
There has been increased interest in alternative fuels in this review period which is in contrast to last year where there was little interest in this area. The subjects covered include analysis, refining and the environmental impact of their use. Relatively few papers have been published about wear metal analysis of lubricating oils during this review period. This review will report novel aspects of the analytical techniques, sample pre-treatment, or collection processes.

2.1.1 Petroleum products – gasoline, diesels, gasohol, exhaust particulates. 
Yip and co-workers have given an overview of commonly used methodologies for inorganic analysis in international key comparisons.16 The work by the Comite Consultatif pour la Quantite de Matiere (CCQM) has included many of the standard atomic spectrometry analytical techniques and has been applied to numerous sample types including waters, sediments and soils, metals and alloys, assorted foodstuffs and diesel. The overview concentrated on work performed between 1999 and 2007 and went on to discuss potential future developments. Applications of these methods required low uncertainty and bias and were used primarily by national measurement institutes for provision of reference values.
A method using isotope dilution ICP-MS for trace determination of S was developed by Heilmann and Heumann.59 The sample was injected into a thermal vaporiser, which was directly connected by a heated transfer line to the ICP-MS instrument. The isotope ratio was determined seconds after injection. A major advantage is that there was no sample preparation required. In addition, the fast analysis led to a high sample throughput. The method was validated using gas oil CRMs, and showed good agreement. Other non-certified samples with varying boiling points were also analyzed and showed good agreement with the expected values. The low detection limit achieved (40 ng g−1) meant that this may be an interesting technique for industry to consider as S levels in fuels reduce, and “sulfur free” fuels are produced.
In Japan, taxed diesel fuel from non-taxed fuel oil is illegally produced by removal of the marker, coumarin. The coumarin is removed using concentrated sulfuric acid, which produces a high viscosity hazardous material known as “sulfuric acid pitch” as a by-product. The material is both hazardous to the environment and to health, and the process is associated with organized crime. Kaneko et al.60 used GC-atomic emission detection (AED) in order to distinguish between legal and illegal diesel. The peak area ratio of total S to C was used. Legal diesel has a strictly regulated S concentration and illegal diesel has a greater S concentration because of the marker removal process. This technique was applied to an arson case and was found to be effective for the characterization of the ignitable liquids used. While this technique seems to be effective, it should be noted that existing commercially available instrumentation such as EDXRF would be able to distinguish between S concentrations at the levels present in the diesel samples. Several papers submitted involved emulsion sample preparation followed by routine analysis. Chaves and co-workers61 determined Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni and V in diesel and biodiesel by ETV-ICP-MS. An emulsion was prepared using 1 g of diesel, 2 mL of dispersant (Triton X-100), 0.5 mL nitric acid and water to a final volume of 10 mL. The calibration solutions were aqueous-based, using Rh as an internal standard. The analysis was evaluated using a certified reference material and recoveries seen were between 80% and 120%. Standard industry methods involving direct analysis of the organic material are able to achieve recoveries that are far superior to the results seen here. The analysis also involves more preparation than standard methods and so it is unlikely to be useful to the majority of laboratories. However, laboratories without access to a suitable organic analysis setup may find this useful. Another paper using emulsion preparation was submitted by Santelli and co-workers.62 Total S was determined in kerosene, gasoline and diesel by ICP-OES after emulsion preparation. Excellent recoveries between 97 and 103% were seen and the LOQ achieved was 2.4 mg kg−1 (LOD = 0.7 mg kg−1). While this work was successful, it should be noted that existing equipment and methodologies capable of this analysis are already available. Emulsification has also been used by Brandao and colleagues63 who determined Mn in diesel, gasoline and naphtha. These authors used sample, nitric acid and propan-1-ol to form the emulsions and used central composite design to optimize the process. The same optimization process was used to optimize the GFAAS temperature programmes. Calibration was achieved using aqueous standards and the results obtained were comparable to those obtained using a reference method.
Xie et al.64 developed a method for rapid analysis of twenty elements in residual fuel oil. The method used microwave digestion of the sample with nitric acid followed by analysis using ICP-MS. The matrix effects were overcome with the use of an internal standard and the recoveries for the elements reported were good. The ability to undertake rapid analysis of fuel oils is of interest to industry and a robust high speed method would be well received. However, a major limitation of this study was that silicon was not included in the analysis. Silicon is of great importance in the analysis of samples of this type, and it is unlikely to be successfully determined using this preparation route.


2.1.2 Fuels - coal, fly ash, particulates/emissions. 
Schone et al.65 reported a comparison between Prompt Gamma Neutron Activation Analysis (PGNAA) and LIBS for online coal ash content monitoring. The main advantages of the LIBS system were that it did not contain a radioactive source, and that it was smaller than traditional PGNAA systems. On a trial installation alongside a PGNAA system, good correlation was reported. It should be noted however that one disadvantage of the LIBS systems was that only the surface and not the bulk of the sample was analyzed.
Release of volatile sodium during coal combustion is a significant factor in the fouling and corrosion within industrial coal fired boilers. A method for measuring the temporal release of atomic Na from a single coal particle has been developed by van Eyk and colleagues.66 Laser absorption was used to calibrate laser induced fluorescence measurements in a purpose-designed environment. This is believed to be the first in situ quantitative measurement of the concentration field of atomic Na in a plume above a burning particle. A kinetic model has been used to estimate the rate of Na decay in the post flame gases. It is not clear how this work will relate to industrial scale combustion, and this may be an interesting subject for further work.
Mujuru and co-workers67 carried out a novel and potentially very useful preparation step for analysis of bituminous coals. Wet grinding coal using various slurry preparations was studied, and varying concentrations of dispersants were used. The most effective dispersant mix was found to be 0.1% Triton X-100 with 10% DMF. It was found that the wet grinding drastically reduced particle size when compared to dry grinding. The small particle size led to improved transport efficiencies during the analysis by ICP-OES, which achieved excellent results for Al, Ca, Fe, Mg, S, Si and Ti. It was suggested that this slurry technique could be used for the routine analysis of bituminous coals.
The speciation of Hg in coals has been reported by Gao and colleagues.68 The authors compared several different extraction techniques including shaking, ultrasonic extraction, microwave assisted extraction, using several different extraction solutions (including potassium hydroxide/methanol, hydrochloric acid and acidic copper sulfate/potassium bromide). Microwave assisted extraction (90 W for 5 mins) using a solution of tetramethylammonium hydroxide proved to have the best extraction efficiency. The Hg species were separated and then detected using HPLC-CV-AFS. The method was validated by the analysis of the CRM-580.


2.1.3 Oils - crude oil, lubricants. 
A review entitled “wear metal analysis of oils” that contained 143 references has been produced by Vahaoja and colleagues.69 The overview gave a description of assorted sample preparation methods as well as the different quantitative and qualitative analysis techniques. The techniques were compared and advantages and drawbacks of each discussed.
Zinc dialkyldithiophosphate (ZDDP) is a traditional automotive engine oil additive used for wear protection and friction modification. However, deposits of phosphorus are known to poison catalytic converters. Fischer et al.70 investigated titanium additives as a catalyst friendly replacement for ZDDP. Fully formulated engine oils incorporating this additive have been found to be effective in reducing wear and controlling friction in a high frequency reciprocating rig (HFRR), four ball bench wear, and engine tests. Analysis shows that Ti species had been incorporated into the wear tracks. It is thought that Ti provides anti-wear enhancement through formation of FeTiO3.
Akinlua et al.71 performed an interesting study of the natural radioactivity of crude oil from the Niger Delta in order to assess health and environmental effects. Radioactivity was assessed using a High Purity Germanium (HPGe) system, and the metal contents using a GFAAS method. The results agreed with existing data and showed that the Niger Delta oil has low metal contents. The equivalent radiation doses were very low (0.007 mSv/year) and do not constitute any health hazards. On a similar topic Al-Saleh and Al-Harshan72 studied the naturally occurring radioactive materials in twenty seven samples (14 products and 13 waste samples) from Riyadh Refinery. It was found that the concentrations of the radionuclides (U-238, Th-232, Ra-226, Ra-224, K-40 and U-235) in the petroleum wastes were higher than those of the petroleum products. Other analytes (Al, Ca, Cl, Fe, Mg, S and Si) were determined using XRF spectrometry.
Caumette and co-workers73 produced a review of various elemental speciation techniques for petroleum and related materials. The review, which contained 95 references, was wide-ranging and discussed the limitations of the techniques. Crude and residual oils, gas and gas condensates as well as oil fractions were included in the paper. Particular attention was given to chromatography coupled with ICP-MS and ICP-OES.
A comparison of sample preparation methods for the determination of Cu, Cr, Fe, Ni, Pb, Sb, and Zn in lubricating oils has been reported by Resta and colleagues.74 The methods compared were microwave assisted acid digestion, dilution in kerosene and emulsification. For the acid digested samples, the different analytical techniques of FAAS and high resolution continuum source FAAS were compared. Inevitably, considering the multi-element capability of the technique, the continuum source FAAS proved to be more rapid than standard FAAS. In addition, it was also more sensitive. The ultrasonic probe used for the emulsification procedure led to contamination by Cr, but the other analytes yielded better results than for the other preparation methods. A similar paper by Amorim and Neto made similar comparisons and drew similar conclusions for the analytes Al, Ba, Mo, Si and V.75 Silicon was, however, determined successfully only in the acid digested samples. Lubricating oils have also been analyzed by Polidorio and co-workers who developed a solid sampling device for sample introduction to GFAAS.76 The authors used a mixture of 1.0% (v/v) nitric acid +15% (v/v) hydrogen peroxide + 0.1% (m/v) Triton X-100 and a temperature of 400 °C as an in-situ ashing aid to dispose of the large amount of carbon present. Results for the determination of Cr and Ni in reference materials showed good agreement with certified values.


2.1.4 Alternative fuels. 
An interesting study was reported by Eseller et al.77 A miniature LIBS-based sensor was developed, and used to study CH4/air and biodiesel flames. The spectra of the flames were recorded with differing ethanol concentrations and at different axial locations within the flames. A linear relationship between intensity ratio of H and O lines and the calculated equivalence ratio was observed.
Trans-esterification of palm oil to methyl esters (biodiesel) was studied by Noiroj and co-workers.78 Potassium hydroxide was loaded on Al2O3 and NaY zeolite supports as heterogeneous catalyst, and parameters such as reaction time, potassium hydroxide loading, molar ratio of oil to methanol, and the quantity of catalyst were optimized for the production of biodiesel. A yield of 91.07% was achieved at temperatures below 70 °C within 2–3 hours at a 1:15 molar ratio of palm oil to methanol and 3–6 wt% of catalyst. Leaching of potassium in both spent catalysts was observed, but the concentration of leached catalyst in the KOH/Al2O3 was greater than the KOH/NaY catalyst. The prepared catalysts were characterized using several techniques such as XRD, BET, TPD and XRF. Refining of biodiesels was also the subject of a study by Wang et al.79 who used a ceramic membrane separation process to reduce the water consumption of the conventional water washing process. The crude biodiesel was micro-filtered to remove residual soap and free glycerol.
Fuels are routinely analyzed for S content by WD-XRF. Oxygen is well known to have an absorptive effect on the X-ray signal. It is expected that when oxygen containing biofuels are analyzed by this technique, a difference in response will be seen compared with standard fuels. A study by Barker and colleagues80 used gravimetric standard addition to counter this issue, with good effect. However, another, perhaps more simple, solution could be to use matrix matched standards during the calibration. This issue is likely to become more significant with the increased use of biofuels, and standardization bodies have also begun work to investigate this issue.
The relative amount of C-14 in atmospheric particulate matter (PM) allows the US Environmental Protection Agency to infer the fraction of PM derived from anthropogenic pollution sources. With increased use of C-14 containing biofuels this assumption may become invalid. A study by Bennett et al.81 determined C-14 content of PM emitted from a diesel engine running on commercial biodiesel. Various blends of soy based biodiesel were used, and a dilution tunnel was used to collect PM10 emissions on quartz filters. The percent modern carbon of PM10 increased linearly with the percentage of biodiesel present in the fuel. It was proposed that emissions from biodiesel fuels will likely affect efforts to distinguish between biogenic and anthropogenic emissions based on C-14 content.
Fuel ethanol has been introduced directly to an ICP-MS instrument by Tormen and co-workers who used a micro-concentric nebulizer.82 By using a high gas flow rate and a low RF power the authors successfully managed to determine the analytes Cu, Cd, Ni, Pb, T1 and Sn. Results obtained using external calibration were comparable to those obtained using ID. Fuel ethanol has also been analyzed by Bianchin et al. who developed a method whereby Cd was determined using an on-line FI-based SPE pre-concentration procedure and FAAS detection.83 The SPE sorbent was a commonly used garden fertilizer (a vermicompost) and the parameters for the pre-concentration (i.e. sorbent mass, sample pH, buffer concentration and sample flow rate) were optimized using a full factorial design. Method validation was by spike/recovery tests which indicated that recoveries in the range 94–100% were obtained. A pre-concentration factor of 32 was achieved yielding a LOD of 1.7 µg L−1.

2.2 Organic chemicals and solvents
During this review period it is noted that synchrotron radiation sources are becoming more widely reported, especially for the analysis of historical artefacts and valuable paintings. Laser based analytical spectroscopies including Raman, molecular fluorescence, laser ablation and ionization techniques including LIBS were also prominent. Of particular note is the use of multiple analytical techniques encompassing both molecular and atomic spectroscopy. These combined techniques are providing valuable and comprehensive information, particularly when data fusion techniques are employed to maximize the information which can be obtained. Speciation is, as usual, a strong theme and the combination of molecular and atomic techniques is similarly being increasingly employed to facilitate comprehensive identification and structure elucidation. This is particularly noteworthy in one paper, which employs a combination of atomic and molecular techniques to gain an understanding of the interactions of a pharmaceutical molecule within biological systems. Not all of the papers are reviewed in detail, but several which are thought to be of interest are shown in Table 2 which contains references to work which compliment the review, or are of interest from an applications point of view.

2.2.1 Imaging techniques and analysis of archaeological and art objects. 
The analysis of archaeological and art objects and the authentication of documents continues to be a widely reported field within analytical chemistry. The knowledge gained from the analysis of such objects has provided a valuable contribution to historical, cultural and religious studies and is essential in their preservation and restoration. The diverse and often valuable and delicate nature of many historical artefacts and the requirement for a detailed knowledge of their chemical and physical composition is driving development of many chemical and physical analytical techniques. An excellent and informative review of the applications of modern spectroscopic based techniques was presented by Georgiou et al. (with 88 refs).84 This paper discussed the relationships between ancient artworks and modern materials technology. For example, the iridescence of certain ceramic glazes has been found to be due to the formation of nano-clusters of Ag and Cu. Ancient Greeks and Romans prevented cracking in pottery by purposely introducing small defects for ‘fracture arrest’. In addition to this discussion on ancient parallels with modern materials science, the paper presents a useful review of current laser-based analytical spectroscopic techniques including Raman, molecular fluorescence, laser ablation/ionization techniques and LIBS. A number of interesting and novel techniques were discussed, including the use of a time resolved fluorescence imaging technique known as Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging (FLIM) for the mapping of various deposits on Michelangelo's David, and fluorescence LIDAR was reviewed as a technique for the remote mapping of outdoor monuments. The authors also presented a review of laser-based cleaning methodologies, which are becoming increasingly important,85 together with a discussion on the mechanisms of such processes. Interestingly, this paper also looks into the future with an overview of femto-second laser techniques and terahertz spectroscopy. Femto-second laser techniques are more usually associated with time resolved studies of fast chemical systems. However, this technology has the ability to deliver high intensity but low energy—therefore non-destructive—pulses with applications in non-linear spectroscopic techniques, several of which were reviewed. Knowledge of the nature of pigments and support materials, for example, is providing valuable information for historians and archaeologists in establishing for example the provenance of objects. Multiple analytical techniques encompassing both molecular and elemental spectroscopy, synchrotron radiation sources, high resolution and miniaturization of instrumentation have proved to be of significant benefit for this field. It is likely that the need for this kind of analysis/imaging will drive the use of a range of molecular and elemental spectroscopy, including the use of synchrotron sources for chemical analysis. One example of the use of portable and combined analytical techniques for the analysis of very significant historical documents is the use of portable Raman spectroscopy in conjunction with portable XRF to characterize inks used to write the oldest known Gospels in Latin, known as A Codex.86 Here, the analysis of the inks used in this manuscript verified that all the pages were written in the same period by the same hand. It also identified posthumous additions to the script. An example of the use of synchrotron-based X-ray techniques, including µ-XANES, is the characterization of degraded cadmium yellow pigment in oil paintings.87 Van der Snickt et al. employed this technique to gain an understanding of the cause of gradual fading of bright yellow areas painted with cadmium yellow. The chemical transformations leading to this fading were elucidated and were found to be due to the slow oxidation of sulfidic (S2−) sulfur to the sulfate form which migrated to the surface of the painting and re-precipitated causing white globules. Micro-cross-sectional analysis enabled an understanding of the penetration depth of the oxidation front. Multiple techniques including XRD, LIBS, TGA and SEM-EDX have been employed by Serifaki and colleagues for the characterization of materials used in the production of historic oil paintings.88 Mossbauer spectroscopy is a technique very rarely reported in the field of organic analysis, however it has recently been employed in conjunction with XRF by Rusanov and co-workers for the measurement of authentic and counterfeited banknote pigments.89 High quality forgeries of US currency are printed with magnetite black pigment and can therefore pass simple magnetic tests and appear as genuine. Mossbauer studies have shown that a number of currency notes contain varying amounts of iron and counterfeiting requires a reproduction of the properties of these pigments. A discussion on the composition of the pigments and the associated Mossbauer spectra was presented. The Mossbauer parameters of the pigments found in 13 different counterfeit notes was found to be very similar and were very sensitive to changes in composition or deterioration during circulation. The authors proposed that this technique may also be applicable to the analysis of art and archaeological objects. A portable XRF spectrometer has been employed in conjunction with Raman spectroscopy by Sawczak and colleagues for the non-destructive analysis of historical paint layers in 15th century paintings and frescos.90 Principal component analysis was applied to associate the most intense lines of the elements present with a range of colours. This allowed the number of micro-samples taken for extraction prior to Raman analysis to be minimized. The use of synchrotron radiation for imaging and chemical analysis is widely reported in this review period, particularly for the examination of historical objects and valuable paintings. A confocal µ-XRF setup employing synchrotron radiation at the Beijing synchrotron radiation facility has been constructed and its application for the analysis of bamboo paint was described.91 The spatial resolution capabilities of this technique were explored and were used to characterize the depth-profile and, thus, the historical restoration programmes of the historically significant paint in Emperor Qianlong's Lodge of Retirement in the Forbidden City. In a completely different application, synchrotron µ-XRF has been employed by Laib et al. in a study of the in-vivo degradation of a Ru-labelled polysaccharide-based hydrogel used in bone tissue engineering.92 The labelled hydrogel was implanted into rabbit bone defects and the degradation was monitored over time after surgery. Cotte et al.93 described the applications of synchrotron based micro-imaging techniques to the chemical analysis of ancient paintings. The paper described the procedures involved in sample preparation, together with a range of experiments using synchrotron radiation, including µ-FTIR, µ-XRF, µ-XANES and µ-XRD. Results from a combination of µ-XRF and µ-XAS for the study or cinnabar blackening of damaged but nonetheless valuable and historically significant art work from the monastery of Pedralbes in Barcelona were discussed together with data from a combination of µ-FTIR, µ-XRD and µ-XRF from the analysis of Bamiyan Buddhist painting techniques. The unique properties of synchrotron radiation, which include very high brightness, small probe size and wavelength tunability, proved advantageous for this kind of analysis. The technique of µ-FTIR was particularly useful for the detection and special location of organic binders such as fats, proteins and resins. The technique of µ-XRD was useful for the identification of minerals and, when combined with µ-XRF, it proved a powerful tool for the precise characterization of pigments, plasters and various alteration products. The major advantage of µ-XANES is the ability to study the chemical environment of a particular element even when present in at low concentrations in a complex matrix. The combination of all these synchrotron based micro-analytical techniques was a unique and integrated approach to the chemical analysis of art objects, particularly paintings. Cotte and colleagues have also reported the use of synchrotron-based micro-analytical techniques for the analysis of varnishes on historical musical instruments94 and this paper presented results showing the identification of both organic and inorganic compounds distributed within the individual layers of a varnish micro-sample using spatially resolved synchrotron FTIR microscopy. A very useful review of the characterization of varnishes used on ancient stringed musical instruments was presented by Echard and Lavedrine.95 This paper explained that the quality and aesthetic appeal of instrument varnishes has declined since the mid 18th century and the analysis of these materials was reviewed. An analytical strategy, including sequence of techniques for both organic and inorganic analysis, was proposed for a more thorough understanding of their composition. The identification of the mineral phases was accomplished by synchrotron XRD. Synchrotron XRF has been employed for the visualization of lost paintings.96 This technique allows element specific scanning
of sub-surface layers and has been used for XRF mapping of hidden or over-painted paintings by Van Gogh. Portable XRF instrumentation is being used increasingly for the in situ analysis of valuable objects, including the investigation of pigments.97 Perhaps more significantly, the use of portable and combined techniques to gain both atomic and molecular information is becoming more widely reported in the analysis of works of art and historically significant objects. For example, TXRF and SEM-EDX has been employed with FTIR by Civici and co-workers for the study of Byzantine and post Byzantine art and architecture.98 In addition, TXRF, FTIR and GC-MS have been employed by Vazquez and colleagues to maximize the data derived from complex archaeological samples.99 EDXRF in combination with visible reflectance spectroscopy has been applied to wood or canvas paintings to obtain stratigraphic information in a non-destructive way,100 with EDXRF being used for inferring the thickness of the detected layers and reflectance spectroscopy to quantify the pigment in the surface layer. The use of a fully integrated spectroscopic approach employing FTIR, Raman and visible reflectance spectroscopy together with EDXRF was employed by Bruni et al. for the study of very small and highly valuable objects.101 This approach allowed the characterization of supports, pigments, stratigraphical sequences and binders on a valuable 15th century parchment. The evaluation of the spectroscopic data from a prototype instrument combining a range of instrumentation (XRF, FT-IR and GC-MS), known as the PRAXIS instrument, was described. It was used for the analysis of pigments in manuscripts by µ-XRF, µ-Raman spectroscopy and µ-XRD.102 Micro-Raman spectroscopy has also been used in conjunction with XRF for the in situ and non-destructive classification of ochre pigments in art objects, also using the PRAXIS prototype.103 Raman spectroscopy provides information on the molecular structure of the material under investigation. It also provides information on molecular and crystal lattice vibrations and is therefore able to yield information on the composition, chemical environment and crystalline structure of the art material analyzed. This paper introduced an improved method for classification of pigments in objects of cultural heritage. The data was collected from the same spot on the sample and the multiple data types were combined using various data-fusion strategies. Data fusion allows the combination of spectral information from several sources to produce a single model and this was discussed in some detail. The data-fusion strategies were tested on experimental data obtained from reference and test samples of ochre pigments and an evaluation of their predictions related to the classification of these pigments was considered. The results were presented in distinct parts. In the first part, the classification of ochre pigments by each individual technique (first Raman spectroscopy and then XRF) was discussed. In both studies Principle Component Analysis (PCA) was performed for a pre-visualization of the patterns present in each data set. After that, partial least squares discriminant analysis was used for the classification and prediction of different groups of ochre pigments. The two data-fusion strategies (described in the paper) were then implemented in order to improve the ochre classification results. Finally, results obtained with both strategies were compared and the benefits and drawbacks of these methodologies applied to these types of data were discussed. In addition to the need for the use of multiple spectroscopic techniques, there is an increasing requirement for miniaturization of instrumentation so that analysis can be performed with mobile instrumentation so that in the case of important or valuable objects, or buildings and archaeological objects, the instrument can be taken to where the analysis is required. For these reasons, Castro et al.104 employed a multi-analytical approach to carry out a complete analysis of an eighteenth century map. They employed a range of non-invasive techniques, using portable µ-Raman microprobe spectroscopy, EDXRF and non-invasive NMR. SEM-EDX and FTIR were also employed. The authors described the characterization of the cellulose support material, mineral fillers and pigments and stressed the value of using multi-analytical techniques for a complete understanding of the object under investigation. Particle induced X-ray emission (PIXE) is a technique which is valuable for the detection of elements heavier than sodium. As a means of complementing this technique and allowing lighter elements to be determined, together with accessing data on the layered structure of paint, Beck et al.105 combined Rutherford (RBS) and non-Rutherford (EBS) backscattering with PIXE employing the DataFurnace code{7,8} to extract elemental depth-profiles of paint layers using simultaneous and self consistent fitting of the RBS/EBS/PIXE spectra. This enabled the pigments present to be characterized and localized in various paint layers. A different approach has been reported by Smit et al. for the measurement of concentration profiles in paint layers by making depth-resolution measurements for low Z elements, by differential PIXE.106 Here, the authors present a useful and detailed theoretical discussion. Their analysis of frescoes and oil paintings by differential PIXE was able to distinguish structures including single or double layers. Smit also reports the use of differential PIXE for a study on the plating of archaeological metallic objects107 and demonstrated the ability of this technique to measure distinct tin profiles in tinned bronze artefacts. The non-destructive nature, versatility and multi-element capability of PIXE has been employed in the analysis of a range of cultural heritage objects, using a broad proton beam or a microbeam, by Desnica and colleagues.108


2.2.2 LIBS and laser ablation including SIMS. 
In the previous review period,1 several interesting developments in LIBS technology were noted and some interesting and important developments from the LIBS community were reviewed. Papers from the current review period would suggest that the importance of LIBS is continuing to grow, particularly with respect to the use of LIBS for the remote analysis of organic compounds in a range of applications, matrices and sample types and is emerging as a useful technique for the quantitative and qualitative analysis of pharmaceutical materials. A paper by Doucet and co-workers has reported the use of molecular band emission from small molecular fragments coupled with chemometrics to evaluate the primary chemical structures of both the active pharmaceutical ingredients and excipients in model pharmaceutical formulations.109 The experimental conditions were described in detail in this paper. The emission from the molecular fragments was analyzed using an optical spectrometer. Instrument control and data analysis was via a custom application within LabVIEW 6, which is a software package used for automation of data acquisition and instrument control and a Partial Least Squares (PLS) regression model was used. Highly reproducible spectra of the formulations were produced under an argon atmosphere designed to minimize any contribution from air and to maximize molecular emissions. The authors demonstrated that LIBS coupled with chemometrics could be used to provide a complete qualitative and quantitative prediction of all the ingredients present in the formulation. A similar procedure has been evaluated by Madamba and co-workers as an early phase process analytical technology (PAT) tool for the rapid characterization of pharmaceutical tablet coatings.110 Thickness and uniformity of the coating were measured as a function of the number of laser shots required to penetrate the coating. Prediction of photo-degradation potential was well correlated with coating thickness, allowing this parameter to be inferred. A comparison of LIBS and XRF was made for the on-site evaluation of Pb in paint.111 In this paper, Myers and colleagues measured paint samples including NIST traceable Pb paint reference materials and synthetic Pb in paint standards prepared by mixing commercially available paints with lead oxide or lead carbonate. LIBS was seen to offer several advantages over hand held XRF instruments, particularly the ability to detect Pb concentration as a function of depth, and lower detection limits. However, LIBS technology is currently not able to compete with XRF on a cost basis for this kind of application. LIBS has also been employed to characterize 4-nitroaniline and 4-nitrotoluene by measuring the intensity of the oxygen and nitrogen atomic lines.112 The ability to detect explosives remotely (at standoff distances) is an important requirement for military and security purposes. In a series of important publications in this field, De Lucia and co-workers have used LIBS as a means to study the remote detection of explosives.113–115 The work from this group outlines the development of LIBS as a means of detecting explosive materials, and illustrates the great potential for using this technique in military and other applications. The basic LIBS procedures were improved by using double pulse LIBS to minimize interferences from atmospheric gases and then extended this research to detecting explosive residues using a double pulse standoff system. Work was also presented which showed the classification of the spectra as either that of an explosive or a non-explosive using a variety of chemometric techniques. The most effective chemometric tool for explosive residue detection was found to be partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA). A variety of samples were prepared, including different types of explosives, sample types not included in the chemometric model, explosives mixed with non-explosives, two non-explosives mixed together with spectra collected at different standoff distances. The PLS-DA model was largely successful when applied to classify samples as either explosive or non-explosive. For many of the tests, the mis-classification rate was low or even zero % (out of several determinations), however the authors stressed the need for care in building the model, which is susceptible to changes in sampling conditions. In a continuation of their work, the authors presented the discrimination of explosive residues on various surfaces including both organic and inorganic substrates115 and showed a correlation between the hardness of the substrate and the ability to discriminate residues on that surface. It was also shown that the use of full spectra in the chemometric model can improve the classification of the sample types within the model, the use of intensities and ratios specific to explosive residues improves the classification of samples which are not part of the model. It seems likely that further improvements will result in even higher success rates and allow the technique to be applied to other areas such as industrial spillage analysis and chemical warfare applications. The majority of LIBS experiments employ the Nd:YAG fundamental beam at 1064 nm or one of its harmonics (532, 355 or 266 nm). This is a useful laser for portable equipment due to its small size and low power consumption. One problem, however, is the low threshold of damage to the eye as compared with slightly longer wavelengths.116 These slightly longer wavelengths of 1.5–1.6 µm lie within the atmospheric window. The LIBS spectra of a number of organic residues on aluminium substrates obtained from plasmas generated at 1.064 µm and 1.5 µm were compared. The LIBS intensity at 1.5 µm is significantly less than at 1.064 µm. Some differences in intensity ratios of various emission lines were observed, most significant were that the ratio of the C2 and CN molecular bands were smaller relative to the H atomic line for the aromatic compounds with the longer wavelength laser. This was thought to be due to a lower atom population resulting in less recombination to give molecular emission. In addition to the above sample types, LIBS is also proving increasingly valuable for the analysis of historical and high value objects and works of art (see the table for references to LIBS in archaeological and art analysis). These advantages arise from the fact that qualitative and often quantitative information can be derived from the LIBS spectra, the analysis is rapid and little or no sample preparation is required. Depth-profiling is also a possibility and is very controllable by determining the number of pulses required. LIBS systems can also be transportable and relatively inexpensive. This means that the analysis can be performed in archaeological sites and museums and the optimization of the LIBS parameters for LIBS microprobe analysis of works of art have been discussed by Osticioli et al.26 LIBS parameters were optimized on brass and aluminium alloys to simulate the composition of bronze artefacts. The optimized LIBS conditions were then employed for the analysis of laboratory prepared paint layers and actual historical icons and painting cross sections. A detailed description of the optimization of the various LIBS parameters so that the least amount of material is removed during the analysis whilst achieving the best quality data was presented. In most cases, good spectra were obtained using only one laser pulse with only micrograms of material being destroyed. One limitation which was noted, however, was the alteration of pigments within paintings. The use of a nano-second pulse resulted in unavoidable darkening of the pigment, even with very low laser energies.
Multi-collector ICP-MS (MC-ICP-MS) is widely used for the measurement of isotope ratios and has been used with near infra-red femto-second laser ablation (LA-MC-ICP-MS) for the measurement of the isotope ratios of Cu in geochemical materials with very high precision and accuracy. This analysis, however, requires that the samples have to be digested prior to analysis, which can lead to errors and contamination issues. To resolve these issues a new technique for the rapid in-situ Cu isotope ratio measurements on a wide range of copper rich materials, using a NIR femto-second LA system has been reported by Ikehata and co-workers.117 This system has a 15 µm spot diameter, combined with detection using MC-ICP-MS. Time resolved analysis was employed for the acquisition of each analysis and a calibration bracketing procedure was employed for calibration to correct for fractionation and drift. The authors presented Cu isotope results for a range of materials including pure copper, cuprite, chalcocite and chalcopyrite. The reproducibility and accuracy of Cu isotope ratio measurements were compared with solution MC-ICP-MS for pure copper samples over a six month period. The accuracy and precision data for pure and native copper samples was comparable with the established solution technique. The copper isotope ratios for cuprite samples were determined using a NIST copper standard and accuracy and precision data were again comparable with conventional solution based analysis, although matrix matched standards were required for the reliable in-situ analysis of chalcocite and chalcopyrite samples. Analytical data were significantly improved when compared with previous work employing nano-second LC-MC-ICP-MS.
Fundamental studies of various mass spectrometric processes have been reported in this review period. A fundamental study of the redox behaviour of various imidazophenazine dyes under the following mass spectrometry ionization conditions was reported:118 MALDI, laser desorption/ionization (LDI) from metal and graphite surfaces, electrospray, low temperature SIMS and FAB. This work was carried out to improve the understanding of the different availability of protons and electrons which are available for reduction in the above ionization techniques. Various reduction products were observed which allowed the proposal of appropriate reduction and oxidation mechanisms. In SIMS analysis, the effectiveness of various primary ion beam clusters have been investigated so that the molecular ion yield can be enhanced without damaging the surface. C60n+ clusters have been used for depth-profiling of organic multilayer materials, biological systems, and drug doped polymers, whilst yielding a good molecular signal. To understand the limitations and potential uses for C60n+ depth-profiling, it is necessary to understand how this cluster ion sputters material. Work has been carried out to analyze the interface of an organic material deposited on a wafer using C60n+ as a primary ion beam in SIMS depth-profiling.119 Various parameters were examined to investigate the optimum method for determining the interface position, which determines the accuracy of the depth scale and subsequent calculations of the sputtering yield or layer thickness. Controlled thickness and flatness molecular films of Irganox 1010 were deposited by thermal evaporation. Depth resolution of interfacial materials is often poor and this may be due to roughening of the organic layer during sputtering. The amount of this roughening was determined by AFM, with images taken at varying primary ion energies. Very clear images of the topography of the layers after sputtering with different doses and energies of the primary ion cluster show that the roughness is correlated with dose. A decrease in depth resolution is correlated with increasing primary ion dose. The resolution also decreases with increasing primary ion energy. This work demonstrated the complexity of the organic/inorganic interface and showed that the choice of ion used to define the interfacial position had a strong effect on the quantitation of the film thickness.


2.2.3 Speciation analysis. 
Speciation continues to be a very prominent area in the field of elemental analysis. One theme which is very strongly evident is the use of both molecular and atomic spectrometric techniques to facilitate the comprehensive identification and structure elucidation of molecules, as well as their sensitive quantification. An extension of this kind of analysis is the elucidation of the interactions of pharmaceutical molecules within biological systems. In the case of cisplatin, it is known that this molecule forms covalent bonds to the bases of guanine and adenine with a preference for adjacent guanine units from the same DNA strand, although not all such interactions have been studied. In a very interesting paper, Bruchert et al.120 described a novel approach for the analysis of these interactions by continuous elution gel electrophoresis coupled to isotope dilution ICP-MS, together with MALDI-ToF-MS to elucidate the molecular detail. Since detection sensitivity for DNA fragments has been shown to be compound independent, oligonucleotides were quantified with ICP-MS using external standardization with phosphate. Platinum was quantified by ICP-MS using species unspecific isotope dilution – the first time this has been used in conjunction with gel electrophoresis. The authors described the studies to elucidate the binding kinetics of cisplatin to the oligonucleotides using GE-ICP-MS, together with the use of matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI)-MS for the analysis of the cisplatin adducts. They reported the successful continuous monitoring of the interactions between cisplatin and two oligonucleotides. The quantification data has allowed the binding constants of cisplatin to two adjacent guanine units to be determined. Additionally, MALDI-MS provided evidence of the structure of the reaction intermediates. This work should be important in opening up a new field of research for studying interactions of DNA with molecules of biological or environmental importance. In a separate study, a novel analytical method utilizing capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE) coupled with the element-specific detection capabilities of ICP-MS has been applied for the assessment of the hydrolytic stability of three ruthenium-based anticancer compounds.121 The stability of drug candidates in aqueous medium constitutes an essential requirement for pharmaceutical formulation and for intravenous administration the characterization of the hydrolytic behaviour candidate molecule is of primary importance. The sensitivity of ICP-MS as a detector for capillary electrophoresis has enabled the detection of minute amounts of impurities or decomposition products and enables kinetic profiles to be determined with higher precision than the more frequently employed UV/vis detection. Characterization of the hydrolytic stability of the complexes under simulated physiological conditions was reported. The authors confirmed that work to be reported in the future would include the use of molecular mass spectrometry in addition to ICP-MS. In addition to the traditional analysis of metallic elements, ICP-MS can also assess many non-metallic elements. HPLC has been coupled with ICP-MS for the sensitive and rapid quantification of non-metallic elements in pharmaceuticals and a useful review of this has been presented by Carr and colleagues who outlined the application and theory of such analysis.122 This review outlined the inverse correlation of sensitivity with ionization potential and a table showing these parameters for a range of metals and non-metals to fluorine was shown. A useful discussion on the principal types of interferences (polyatomic ions, isobaric and the formation of molecules such as oxides and hydroxides) and the ways of removing or minimising these interferences was included, as was a useful table of the more common interfering species. Sample introduction techniques discussed included membrane desolvation, pneumatic nebulization and ultrasonic nebulization. The merits of the latter for the determination of non-metals were discussed. Recent literature detailing the determination of non-metals was reviewed. In a very relevant application of the determination of non-metallic elements in drug formulations, the detection of counterfeit tablets of an anti-viral drug using δ34S measurements by MC-ICP-MS and confirmation by LA-MC-ICP-MS and HPLC-MC-ICP-MS has been reported.123 As counterfeiting techniques are becoming more sophisticated many such tablets may consist of a very similar elemental composition to the genuine tablet, therefore the approach based on the measurement of small isotopic variations in S-containing compounds are potentially very useful. The work described is a comprehensive study of a pharmaceutical drug for S isotope ratios by MC-ICP-MS using the three approaches outlined above for sample introduction. The signature δ34S values - based on n(34S)/n(32S) measurements - and associated uncertainty were compared with that of suspected counterfeits. All three of the sample introduction procedures were able to differentiate the genuine from counterfeit tablets. Furthermore, four distinct groups of counterfeit tablets were detected which may, when coupled with trace metal quantification and molecular techniques such as NIR, be used to source the counterfeiting laboratories. Chemical warfare agents present an important analytical challenge. Caruso's research group124 presented work exploring the HPLC separations compatible with ICP-MS detection for the quantification of 31P in a range of chemical warfare agent degradation products (CWADP) in food matrices containing high phosphate levels, together with the use of the HPLC separations with electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS detection to obtain structural information on the molecules of interest. Structurally, organophosphorus CWADPs are similar, often differing by only one methyl group and this can make HPLC separation challenging, especially for P specific ICP-MS detection, when spectral enhancement of resolution is not possible. This paper presented a detailed discussion on the development of the separation procedures. Three procedures were developed for the separation of a range of CWADPs including methyl phosphonic acid, ethylmethyl phosphonic acid, and isopropyl methylphosphonic acid to provide a rapid screening for VX or sarin exposure. A second separation procedure was developed for the separation of ten CWADPs and a third procedure was compatible with ESI-MS for structure confirmation. The procedures described were suitable for rapid screening of a range of food matrices including beverages and vegetable extracts. The major hydrolysis degradation products of the mustard class of chemical warfare agents have been identified by Kroening and co-workers using HPLC with ICP-MS using 32S element specific detection.125 The use of collision/reaction cell technology with xenon as an optional gas was employed to minimize the polyatomic interferences traditionally present when determining S. One interesting and very useful feature of this work was the use of displacement chromatography. Here, the use of alcohols as displacers was employed to maximize apparent column efficiency and therefore increase the peak height of the analyte components. Two different displacement methods were evaluated employing different reversed phase columns and alcohol displacers. Chromatograms showing the effects of varying concentrations of the displacer alcohols were presented and the resulting improvement in efficiency and peak tailing, and therefore peak height, was significant. Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDE) are flame retardants employed in numerous polymer and resin materials. There are concerns over their potential health risks and the concentration of PBDEs in the environment are increasing. Because of this, there is a requirement for methodology to quantify the materials in the environment and a comparison of GC-NCI-MS and GC-ICP-MS has been presented by Swarthout and colleagues.126 A standard solution containing 28 PBDE congeners, 84 PCB congeners and several chlorinated pesticides was prepared. Various SRM materials were analyzed and the values found were in good agreement with the published values. Detection limits for GC-ICP-MS were between 6 and 122 times lower than those with GC-negative chemical ionization (NCI)-MS. The use of multiple techniques for the ‘fingerprinting of complex substances such as herbal and traditional medicines has now been accepted by the World Health Organization as a valid strategy. Ni et al.127 described the characterization or ‘fingerprinting’ of traditional Chinese medicines using data from HPLC with diode array detection in combination with those from ICP-OES. An expanded data matrix including both molecular and atomic information was made. Multivariate and pattern recognition methods were employed, including PCA, k-nearest neighbours (KNNs) method and linear discriminant analysis (LDA). 51 samples of a traditional Chinese medicine (chinensis DC) were collected from five provinces and processed by different procedures. When HPLC fingerprint data were processed using the multivariate procedures, the medicines were grouped according to the processing methods used on the raw samples. A similar procedure using the ICP-OES data resulted in the medicines being grouped according to their geographic origin, but when the combined molecular and atomic two-way data were processed the samples were discriminated on the
basis of the processing methods but more interestingly, within each such group the samples were separated according to their origin. This work implied that the combination of two types of data into one matrix, in this case molecular and elemental, can provide very powerful means of determining both origin and preparation procedure of complex materials such as traditional medicines.
A number of S containing analogues of arsenic oxides have been reported in foodstuffs including rice, mussels, fish and seaweed. Thio-arsenicals have also been detected as urinary metabolites following ingestion of oxo-arsenicals by rats, sheep and humans. In a paper which will be very useful to anyone undertaking work in As speciation studies, Conklin et al.128 stated that the two routes to thio-arsenical exposure are direct ingestion and in-vivo formation, but that it is unclear which route contributes most to the toxicity of these species. Additionally, speciation analysis can easily be influenced by extraction, storage, separation and analytical procedures resulting in significant errors. In this case, it is known that the oxide/sulfide distribution of these species is influenced by the presence and concentration of S e.g., as hydrogen sulfide, in addition to the pH and temperature. Because of such effects the extraction, separation and storage conditions prior to speciation could alter their oxide/sulfide distribution. This paper describes a study of the exchange of oxygen and sulfur as a function of pH on monomethyl arsonic acid, dimethyl arsenic acid trimethyl arsine oxide. Additionally, the stability of the three analogous thio-arsenicals (monomethylthioarsonic acid, dimethylthioarsenic acid and trimethyl arsine sulfide were investigated when stored in conditions of varying pH and temperature conditions. All samples were analyzed by HPLC-ICP-MS. Identification and quantification was based on calibration with synthetic standards. Sulfur was monitored by sulfide selective ISE. The results of this work showed that pH, temperature and the presence of free sulfide will result in very significant changes in arsenic speciation and that these processes must be understood with respect to pH and temperature in order for the impact of these effects to be minimized.
For several decades, organotin compounds have been used in a range of applications including fungicides, insecticides, wood preservatives or PVC stabilisers. Consequently, these compounds are now present in various ecosystems including waters, sediments and soils. Due to their toxicity, there is an ongoing need for the quantification and speciation of these compounds and they have been extensively studied in aquatic systems, though little work has been reported concerning these compounds in soils. Because of this, Heroult et al.129 described the development of a simple and robust procedure for the simultaneous determination of nine organotins in soils. Lyophilization was evaluated and found to be unnecessary. Four extractions techniques (mechanical stirring, accelerated solvent extraction, microwave and ultrasonic) were investigated and, perhaps surprisingly, mechanical stirring gave the best extraction yields and repeatability. The organotins were derivatized by ethylation to form thermally stable and volatile species prior to GC separation and pulsed flame photometric detection was employed. Calibration was by standard addition before extraction and detection limits were at the low µg/kg level with recoveries between 93% and 115% for a range of organotins spiked into soil samples. During GC-ICP-MS determinations, the instrumental response can be susceptible to drift due to the build up of carbon deposits on the sampling cone and ion lenses. To overcome this problem, a high speed switching method between mixed plasma gas containing oxygen and pure argon plasma gas has been developed.130 An oxygen permeation tube was employed together with a switching valve to enable rapid switching. This enabled the carbon deposits to be oxidized off the cones and lenses during the cleaning procedure, resulting in the repeatability and sensitivity of the determination of polybrominated diphenyl ether (PBDE) to be significantly improved. The sensitivity drift over an 8 hour run was better than 5%. Precision and sensitivity were also improved significantly by this procedure. It was noted that if the addition of oxygen to the plasma was continuous, the sensitivity of poorly ionized elements, particularly the halogens, was significantly worse. For this reason, the oxygen was not introduced during the acquisition of data and this was facilitated by high speed valve switching. It was noted however that the nana and deca congeners of PBDE were not sufficiently stable for GC analysis, with up to 40% decomposition on the column being observed.
Mercury is an important toxic pollutant in the global environment. The reduction of oxidized Hg species to elemental mercury by organic acids is an important pathway for understanding the cycling of Hg between the atmosphere and aqueous systems. The speciation of Hg is therefore important in determining its physical-chemical properties and, consequently, dramatically affects the fate, transport and potential toxicity of mercury to the ecosystems. Si and Ariya131 discussed the life time of atmospheric elemental and oxidized Hg species in a range of natural systems, including marine boundary layers. They also discussed the reduction of oxidized species which can be facilitated in different environmental situations, e.g., by complexation with carboxylic acid and diacids. In this paper the authors investigated the kinetics of the photo-reduction of HgII using an extended set of three carboxylic acids, i.e. oxalic, malonic and succinic acid, at near environmental conditions. Kinetic studies were carried out by monitoring the production of elemental mercury by CV-AFS and the effects of several parameters including light, chloride ions and dissolved oxygen were determined. They also reported for the first time the detailed product analysis for the reaction between HgII and di-carboxylic acids and proposed a mechanism for the reaction. The reaction products were analyzed by MALDI-ToF-MS. The environmental implications were also discussed. A combination of XPS and ToF-SIMS has been employed by Abdallah and Taylor for the characterization of asphaltenes.132 These complex organic compounds are found in crude oil feedstocks and are defined as a class of materials which are soluble in toluene but insoluble in alkanes. These organic materials are relatively polar and consequently have a tendency to adsorb on surfaces. There is a need in the petroleum business to understand the structure and stability of the asphaltenes and, thus, what factors play an important role in their adsorption on pipeline surfaces which is a primary cause of blockages. In this paper, asphaltenes which had been adsorbed onto stainless steel surfaces were characterized by XPS and ToF-SIMS. XPS data is presented and showed the elemental composition and depth-profiling for a range of adsorbed asphaltenes. High resolution spectra allowed for some speciation information of the elements to be obtained. The use of SIMS data and SIMS imaging of the surfaces together with the elemental data obtained from XPS allowed a comprehensive characterization of the surfaces and the adsorbed asphaltenes.


2.2.4 Extraction and pre-concentration. 
The phenomenon of cloud point extraction was the subject of review in 2007133 and has recently been employed for the extraction/pre-concentration of Rh, Pd and Pt in pharmaceutical products prior to ICP-MS determination.134 In this study, a complexing agent (2-mercaptobenzothiazole) and a surfactant (Triton X-100) were employed. The use of microwave energy (microwave assisted cloud point extraction, (MW-CPE)) and ultrasound energy, to facilitate the extractions, was also investigated. A rather involved extraction procedure was optimized and conventional hot plate-CPE was compared with ultra-sound-Hot plate CPE and microwave-CPE procedures. The MW procedure was found to increase the efficiency of the extraction significantly as compared with the conventional hot plate procedure. The sonication of the micellar solutions did not show any improvement above the conventional hot plate procedure. The authors presented data showing that the microwave – CPE-ICP-MS procedure gives excellent recovery for all the metals when spiked into preparations and the results compared well with those from direct ICP-MS analysis. They proposed that this procedure was applicable for the trace analysis of PGMs in various pharmaceutical products. Ligandless cloud point extraction was described by Candir and colleagues for the extraction of Bi(III), Cd(II), Cr(III), Cu(II), Ni(III) and Pb(II) in environmental samples.135 In this case, a non-ionic surfactant (Tween 80) was employed for the pre-concentration of these elements in a range of environmental matrices including water, food and pharmaceutical samples with determination of the metals in the surfactant-rich phase by atomic absorption. The paper described the optimization of the variables involved in the extraction procedure and investigated a range of potential anionic and cationic interferences. Recovery studies for water samples indicated quantitative recovery for all elements (92% – 110%) and for a range of solid samples including crushed wheat, hazelnut and tomato paste (63% – 120%). A procedure which combined ICP-OES quantification with a co-precipitation technique for the determination of a range of potentially toxic metals in naturally occurring crude drugs has been developed by Araki and co-workers.136 As these drugs are naturally occurring, it is important to quantify the presence of toxic elements such as Cd and Pb. This paper discussed the use of yttrium phosphate as a reagent to quantitatively co-precipitate seven elements (Al, Bi, Cd, Cr, Fe, Pb and Zn) whilst leaving many potential interfering elements including Na, K, Mg and Ca in solution. The procedure employed the addition of an yttrium solution followed by modification of the pH and centrifugation, followed by removal of the supernatant liquid and re-dissolution by addition of nitric acid. The paper discussed the optimization of the precipitation procedure and shows that detection limits in the µg/kg were achieved with quantitative recovery of the elements in a range of spiked drug materials. Similarly, wine is a natural product and may also be an important dietary source of some potentially harmful elements including lead, arsenic and cadmium. When dealing with the wine manufacturing process some elements may also influence the taste of the wine and therefore their concentrations need to be monitored. A microwave desolvation system (MWDS) has been employed with ICP-OES and ICP-MS and has been found to result in significantly enhanced sensitivity and a reduction in matrix effects arising from the presence of organic carbon. The performance of the MWDS system for the multi-element analysis of wine samples by ICP-OES and ICP-MS has been evaluated in terms of matrix effects, precision, accuracy and sample throughput.137 This work by Grindlay et al. has shown that the MWDS is a useful device for the analysis of wine samples and can result in lower detection limits, a reduction in matrix effects caused by ethanol and minimization of certain spectral interferences for example argon carbide during chromium determination by ICP-MS. Different metal species can affect the wine quality and influence the bio-availability of the metals. For this reason a tandem column solid phase extraction (SPE) procedure for the determination of Fe species in wine has been developed by Pohl and Prusisz.138 The wine was filtered prior to analysis and then passed through an XAD-7HP column followed by cation exchange on a Dowex50W-x8-200 column. Three Fe groupings were discriminated including hydrophobic species bound to phenolic substances, cationic species including Fe cations and other labile Fe species and anionic and/or neutral Fe complexes. The fractionation procedure was described in detail and a schematic diagram of the columns shows how the three different fractions were isolated prior to detection by FAAS. The origin of taints in wine has also been the object of several reports139 and this paper investigated the use of head space solid phase micro extraction (HS-SPME) for the determination of 12 haloanisoles in wine and spirits using GC with atomic emission detection. The paper described in detail the optimization of the chromatographic and HS-SPME procedures. A range of SPME fibres were investigated and the best phase was found to be polydimethyl siloxane (PDMS) containing the copolymers DV8 and Carboxen. Matrix effects were shown to be significant by comparing standard addition calibration data with aqueous standards. An internal standard (5-bromo-4-chloroanisole) was therefore employed and this eliminated any matrix effects, confirmed by using a paired t-test at the 95% confidence level. The optimized procedure was applied to 20 different beverage samples and these results were discussed based on possible causes of taints.
Pre-concentration of heavy metals by solid phase extraction is a relatively well known technique140 and a range of sorbent materials have been employed. This paper described the use of the biological material, B. thuringiensis israelensis which was loaded onto Dowex optipore V-493 support. This was then used for the separation and enrichment of Cu, Fe and Zn. The pre-concentration parameters were optimized and used for the analysis of various materials including tap water, apple leaves, multi-vitamin tablets, walnut, tea and chickpeas. The optimized separation procedures resulted in recoveries of 77 – 99% for Cu, Fe and Zn with FAAS detection limits in the low µg L−1 range. Fifteen potential interfering cations and anions were also investigated at concentrations often encountered in real samples and had little effect on the recoveries of Cu. A study on various sample pre-treatment procedures to minimise the ethanol matrix effect for ICP-OES metal determination in Orujo spirit samples has been reported by Barciela and colleagues.141 Procedures investigated included dilution, digestion, evaporation and cryogenic desolvation. The authors reported that sample digestion and a nitrogen evaporation procedure gave the optimum results, with the evaporation procedure being the quickest.
A number of papers employing atomic absorption techniques are included in this review because of the novel way in which samples are presented to the instrument. In one paper, a procedure for the direct determination of Cd, Cu and Pb in wine employing a relatively new procedure known as thermospray flame furnace atomic absorption (TS-FF-AAS) has been reported.142 This procedure is described in brief in the paper and involved the introduction of the sample without nebulization into a tube which is heated within a flame. Nebulization losses are avoided and the residence time of the atomic cloud within the beam is increased, resulting in much lower detection limits, and eliminating the need for any sample digestion. 3σ detection limits for Cu in wine and grape juice samples were 12.9 and 13.7 µg/L, respectively. Calibration by standard addition was found to be a requirement. A useful review (116 refs) of the analysis of metals in alcoholic beverages, including sources, effects, pre-concentration, removal, speciation and analysis was prepared by Ibanez and co-workers.143 Of particular note from an analytical point of view is the discussion of the redox and physico-chemical environments and their influence on the species of the metals of interest, including the effect on bioavailability and toxicity. This review did not include spectrometric methods but covered several electrochemical methods of analysis including potentiometry, voltammetry, polarography and stripping analysis. Atmospheric deposition and soil uptake are the two major sources of Hg in tobacco. Tobacco is therefore an important indicator for environmental contamination. Mercury analyzers which are based on sample pyrolysis and pre-concentration by gold amalgamation and analysis by AA are commercially available. A commercial system has been evaluated and optimized for the direct determination of Hg in various types of tobacco and in saliva after the use of chewing tobacco.144 Once optimized, this system gave good recoveries (104 ±5%) for samples which had been fortified with certified reference tobacco. On a similar theme, a pressurized fluid extraction procedure for the determination of a range of metals (Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn) in tobacco has been developed by Mauri-Aucejo and colleagues.145 The extraction procedure was optimized and the analytes determined by ETAAS. Certified tobacco samples were analyzed and recoveries of 95–100% were achieved.
Table 2 Applications of the analysis of organic materials and chemicals




Element
Matrix
Technique; Atomization; presentation
Comments
Reference




Br
Polymers and paints
MS; ICP; FI
A fast screening procedure for brominated flame retardants in waste materials employing microwave digestion, prior to analysis. ICP-MS was advantageous due to the ability to use matrix independent calibration. KBr standards were used and 50 mg samples size required.

146



Cr
Pharmaceuticals, including gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, sparfloxacin
AAS
Formation of ion pair with ammonium reineckate

147



Cr
Cephalosporins
AAS
Formation of ion pair with ammonium reineckate

148



Eu
Ink
OES; ICP; L
Inks spiked with europium thenoyltrifluoroacetonate Sodium tungstate employed to enhance the florescence intensity of Eu3+. Fluorescence measured at λexc 270 nm and λem 605 nm. Results compared favourably with ICP-OES

149



Pd
Active pharmaceutical ingredients
High energy polarized beam EDXRF
Determination of catalyst metal residues. Sub ppm detection limit reported with spike recoveries of >95%

150



Sb
Injectable pharmaceutical preparations
OES; ICP; HG
Quantification of Sb(III) and total Sb

151



Various (7)
Composted agricultural waste
Cryo-trapping GC-ICP-MS
Fermentation gases collected in Tedlar bags. Identification/semi-identification of volatile organo-metallics by comparison with standard materials or a quantitative structure-activity relationship through boiling point correlation with retention time.

152



Various (61)
Wine
ICP-OES
Mulivariate statistics employed to discriminate wines by geography

153,154



Various
Croatian wines
Flow-through stripping chrono-potentiometry, FAAS, Zeeman GFAAS
A range of metals, including lead, cadmium, copper and zinc measured at µg L−1 levels.

155



Various (3)
Sugar cane spirits
GFAAS
Quantitative recoveries of As, Cu and Pb were demonstrated when using bismuth and antimony as internal standards. Matrix matching calibration was not required.

156



Various
Pigments in historical hand coloured map from the seventeenth century
XRF and Raman spectroscopy
Complete study of the document is described including determination of a range of pigments. The role of copper in the oxidation of the cellulosic support is discussed

157



Various including C and H
Pains and varnishes
EDXRF; -; S
Multivariate calibration by partial least squares is presented, for the analysis of density of varnishes and the Stormer viscosity of paints.

158



Various
Pigments in a mural painting
EDXRF, XRD, SEM & FTIR
Identification of a variety of pigments including yellow and red ochres, green earth, black earth, umber, copper pigments.

159



Various
Painting materials
XRF; -; S
XRF with PCA for the analysis and classification of inorganic materials in paintings. A range of pigments were identified. Complimentary data was obtained from reflectance near- and mid-IR.

160



Various
Gothic paintings from North East Slovakia
XRF; -; S
Handheld instrument used for the confirmation of the presence of zinc dolomites and copper and zinc arsenates together with layer stratigraphy determined the provenance of the paintings. Microscopy and XRD also used.

161



Various
Polychromated Pedro Millain sculpture
XRF; -; S
Non-destructive analysis of pigments and supports identified pigment materials used.

162



Various
Art and archaeological artefacts
XRF; -; S
Development of a mobile instrument for taking to the object. Case studies of medieval paintings presented

163



Various
Stucco decorations
MS; ICP; LA
This work involved the analysis of Baroque stucco decorations and brought together analytical scientists and art historians to assist in the interpretation of the data. Microscopy, GC-MS, XRD and FTIR also used.

164



Various
Leather
XRF; -; S
XRF applied to leather characterization, specifically type of tanning and heavy metal content.

165



Various
Paper documents
XRF; -; S
18th & 19th century documents were characterized by determining their metal content.

166



Various
Ink
EDXRF; -; S
Inks were spiked with a range of trace elements. These inks were used for writing and documents analyzed by EDXRF for signature authentication purposes.

167



Various
Archaeological dyes
LIBS; -; S µ-Raman, µ-FTIR
Non-destructive and micro-destructive analysis of materials used in ancient Roman building decorations to identify pigment composition and their interactions with the matrix. Another example of combination elemental and molecular techniques for maximum information yield.

168



Various
Pigments in paintings
LIBS; -; S
A range of pigments were characterized. Attenuated total reflection (ATR)-FTIR also used.

169



Various
Pigment residues in archaeological sites in Tierra del Fuego
XRD, SEM-EDX, FTIR, GC-MS
Characterization of both organic and inorganic components in pigment residues.

170



Various and Ti
Sunscreen preparations
EDXRF; -; L
These papers describe methodology for the determination in vitro of the protection factor of commercial sun screen preparations. Conventional procedures require exposure of the skin to UV radiation with and without the application of the sunscreen.

171,172



Various
Flaked paints from buildings in Nigeria
AAS; F; L
Paint samples digested in acid and a range of metals including Pb, Cr, Fe, Cd, Zn and Cu determined. Analysis not novel but important public health issue in Africa addressed.

173






2.3 Inorganic chemicals and acids

2.3.1 Production of certified reference materials. 
This review period has seen the certification (or re-certification) of three CRMs that could be categorized as inorganic materials. Two of these materials are isotopic standards with one paper by Mann and co-workers producing data for revised delta S-34 reference values for the IAEA materials S-2 and S-3174 and the other, by Richter and colleagues who reported the data from a new series of uranium isotope reference materials.175 In the paper by Mann et al. the delta 34S values for two materials were determined using both gas source isotope ratio mass spectrometry (GIRMS) and multi-collector thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS). Although the GIRMS method has traditionally been regarded as being a more robust technique for relative isotopic differences, the authors pointed out that the TIMS method offers a viable alternative that provided unbiased and more precise data. The results for the materials along with the associated expanded uncertainties were 22.62 ± 0.16 parts per thousand for the IAEA S-2 and 32.49 ± 0.16 parts per thousand for the IAEA S-3. In the paper by Richter and colleagues,175 the production was reported of a new series (entitled IRMM-074) which is a direct replacement for the now exhausted IRMM-072 series of gravimetrically prepared uranium isotope ratio materials. The series kept the 235U/238U ratio constant, but varied the 233U/238U ratio from 1 to 10−6. The method of preparation of the different isotopes and the mixing of the materials were described in detail. The authors noted an improvement in the expanded uncertainty values compared with the previous IRMM-072 series. The materials were thought to be ideal for techniques such as TIMS and MC-ICP-MS that use secondary electron multipliers as detectors, since they offer a long linear range.
The final paper relevant to this section was by Winchester et al. who reported the determination of the Be mass fraction in SRM 1877 beryllium oxide powder using high performance ICP-OES.176 The result (including the expanded uncertainty) at the 95% confidence level was found to be 0.3576 ± 0.0024 g/g. The authors found that best results were obtained when Mn was used as an internal standard and when the calibration standards were as closely matched to the samples in terms of both matrix as well as Be and Mn concentration. Since the material is toxic, it was sent only to laboratories that have worked with NIST and such a material previously. Each laboratory reportedly used a unique digestion protocol and then, after sample preparation, the digests were shipped to NIST for the analysis. Each laboratory had been supplied with solution preparation kits and spreadsheets to maintain traceability.


2.3.2 Applications. 
The number of applications of the analysis of inorganic materials is very large. There is continued interest in the analysis of cements and concretes as well as forensic applications. There has also been renewed interest in the use of different matrix modifiers during GFAAS analyses. An assortment of some of the more interesting or novel applications will also be discussed. In this review period, there has been considerable interest in the determination of halogens and also the analysis of compounds of rare earth elements.
2.3.2.1 Matrix modifiers. 
The use of permanent modifiers has become popular in recent years since it normally requires only a simple impregnation of the graphite tube with the relevant modifier. Many permanent modifiers have been tested over the years, but they have tended to be highly refractory elements, many of which form even more refractory carbides with the graphite tube. In a recent example by Lopez-Garcia and co-workers, sodium tungstate was used as a permanent modifier for the determination of In in slurried samples of soils.177 The soils (100 mg) were suspended in 1% v/v concentrated nitric acid and 10% v/v hydrofluoric acid and the 15 µL aliquots were injected into the GFAAS for analysis. The authors used a matrix matching calibration protocol where In (in the range 4–80 µg L−1) was added to the suspension medium. Precision was found to be 2.8% RSD (n = 10) for a concentration of 40 µg L−1 and the LOD was 0.1 µg g−1. The overall protocol was validated by the analysis of two CRMs and by the use of an alternative technique. In the second example of this type of paper, Freschi and colleagues evaluated several different rhodium-based modifiers for the determination of As, Bi, Pb, Sb and Se and of Co, Cr, Cu, Fe and Mn.178 Several different types of modifier were tested including rhodium coated platforms, tungsten – rhodium carbide and zirconium – rhodium carbide coated platforms, as well as tungsten carbide and zirconium carbide coatings only. Co-injection of the sample with rhodium chloride solution was also tested. Sample preparation was a simple ten-fold dilution of the milk samples in 1% nitric acid and then injection into the tube for analysis. The optimal matrix modifier was found to differ for different analytes. For the first set of analytes (As, Bi, Pb, Sb and Se), which are generally regarded as being volatile, rhodium chloride co-injected with the sample in combination with a tungsten coated platform was found to yield the best results. For the more refractory second group of analytes (Co, Cr, Cu, Fe and Mn), pre-treatment of the graphite tube with the carbide forming mixture tungsten-rhodium was found to be optimal.
2.3.2.2 Analysis of cements and concretes. 
Many of the applications associated with the analysis of such materials have used analytical methods capable of analyzing solid samples directly. The various forms of XRF have proven to be the most common although there have also been some LIBS applications.
The effect of particle size and heterogeneity on the emitted X-ray intensity of powdered cement samples analyzed using a WDXRF instrument have been determined by Demir et al.179 Powdered samples were made into pellets using pressures of between 3.5 and 1.41 × 107 kg/m2. Pellets of varying particle size were prepared with particle sizes ranging from <32 µm, 32–38 µm, 38–45 µm, 45–63 µm, 63–75 µm, 75–106 µm and 106–150 µm. Results for the k-alpha X-ray intensities indicated a difference of up to 17% between different particle sizes. Mertens and co-workers used numerous analytical techniques including XRD, XRF, SEM-EDX, particle grain size analyses, FTIR and BET surface area measurements to analyze the starting materials for the pozzolanic reactions between portlandite, a number of natural zeolites (analcime, phillipsite, chabazite, erionite, mordenite and clinoptilolite-rich tuffs) and water mixed in a ratio of 1:1:2 by weight.180 The reactions were monitored over a time period of between 3 and 180 days. The difference in reactivity of materials with differing Si/Al ratios, clinopilolite-rich samples exchanged with different cations or ground to different grain size were all assessed. Results indicated that the external surface area affected only the short term reactivity whereas the cation content affected both long- and short-term reactivity. The long-term reactivity was found to be affected mainly by the Si/Al ratio of the zeolites; with the samples rich in Si reacting faster than the Al-rich counterparts. The extent of positive ion intrusion from de-icing solutions into concretes has been measured by Davis and colleagues using a milli-XRF technique.181 The method combined a traditional energy dispersive spectrometer with a moving stage. In that way, the depth of ion infiltration could be measured over an area of tens of mm of concrete. The procedure had the advantage of requiring minimal sample preparation. The paper discussed the technique in detail and also described the use of X-ray spectrum imaging (XSI). A combination of the two techniques was used to determine the extent of K infiltration into, and hence the durability, of paving stones.
Since metallic elements can be leached from cements, it is worth identifying the mechanisms of this release so that potential ways of combating it may be developed. A paper by Benard and co-workers determined and modelled the molecular mechanisms of Pb leaching from Portland cement.182 Using a combination of methods (XRD, µ-XRF and X-ray absorption fine structures (XAFS)), the authors determined that the Pb leaching was strongly related to its speciation, i.e. its atomic environment and the nature of its bearing phase. Once the authors had obtained their data, they proposed a model for the leaching mechanism and then set about testing it using a reactive transport code system (CHESS/HYTEC). The combined results indicated that in both the unaltered core and the altered layer of the leached cement, Pb(II) would be retained through C–S–H ‘nano-structure’. In the altered layer, the presence of Fe in the atomic environment of Pb was highly probable. Unfortunately, little is known of the Fe phases in cement, so the authors could not conclusively state that the Fe did have a bearing on the leaching process. The formation of oxyanion-forming metals (Cr, Mo and V) and metalloids (As, Sb and Se) in leachates of cement-based materials has been studied by Mulugeta et al.183 A pH range of 3–13 and a strong anion exchanger (SAX) was used to form the leachates. Other variables included the percolation rate, sorbent type and sorbent conditioning. The authors found that a polymer-based SAX conditioned with a buffer close to the natural pH of the cement (or sometimes water) gave the best retention of the analytes. Measurement of the analytes was by ICP-MS. It was found that the extent of leaching was very dependent on the pH, with Cr, Mo, Se and V forming anionic species at pH > 12 and not below, whereas the As and Sb formed some anionic species at most pH values.
Sulfate attack continues to be a major problem for concretes and other building materials. Detailed depth-profiles of sulfate ingress into concrete have been measured using LIBS determination of S by Weritz et al.184 The technique enabled an assessment of the extent of damage and could potentially be used to assess the effectiveness of protective coatings. Spatial resolution of 1 mm was achieved enabling a rapid assessment to be made. The authors illustrated their work with the application of the technique to the analysis of concretes at three sewage plants. Another paper that has tested the resistance of lime-based mortars to sulfate attack has been presented by Karatasios and colleagues.185 By adding barium hydroxide to the material, the authors hoped to bind the sulfate at, or close to, the surface; hence decreasing the degradation rate. Different mixtures of barium hydroxide and lime were used as the binders in the materials in an attempt to determine the optimal composition and then subjected the materials to simulated acid rain attack. The authors used XRD, SEM-EDX and ICP-OES to characterize their materials and concluded that the presence of the barium hydroxide did increase the durability of the mixture without affecting the micro-structure characteristics.
2.3.2.3 Other applications. 
There are several types of “other applications” that have been described. The application of atomic spectroscopy to forensic analysis continues to garner interest. There has been an up-surge in the determination of rare earth elements (REEs) in awkward matrices (such as rare earth element oxides). Similarly, there has been an upsurge in the number of papers determining halides/halogens. These applications, and others, will be discussed below.
The use of LIBS for two forensic applications has been noted. In one, Godwal and co-workers used µ-LIBS, where the laser pulse is below 100 µJ, for the detection of latent finger prints as well as for the LA followed by LIF determination of Pb in water samples.186 For the fingerprints application the authors used a laser shot of duration 130 fs at 266 nm with an energy of below 15 µJ to determine Na. Using a 5 µJ laser shot, a fingerprint on a silicon wafer was successfully demonstrated. The lowest energy that was found to be useful for this application was 3.5 µJ. For the LA-LIF application, the initial LIBS pulse of 170 µJ at 266 nm produced a plume of material that was then re-excited using a nano-second laser pulse tuned to a specific transition of Pb. The overall sensitivity was found to be greatly enhanced, with a LOD of 60 ng mL−1 being achieved for 1000 shots. The authors anticipated that the effects could also be obtained using a fiber or microchip laser with multi-kHz repetition rates and a fiber Bragg grating tuning element. The development of a portable µ-LIBS system was therefore envisaged. In the other forensic application, Rosenberg and Dockery determined the lifetime of detectable amounts of gunshot residue on the hands of a shooter using LIBS.187 After several shots of primer from a revolver were fired, samples were collected at multiple hour intervals using an adhesive tape pressed against the skin. The samples were then analyzed directly using a commercial LIBS instrument. The analyte used for the experiment was Ba, since this was present as barium nitrate in the primer. Population statistics were used to compare the suspected gunshot residue with a library of blank samples. This enabled a threshold value to be established. The authors then found that statistically significant results in which gunshot residue could positively be identified were obtained after 5.27 days after the firearm was discharged.
Several papers have described the determination of halogens/halides in samples. Vtorushina et al. have optimized the conditions required for the oxidation and vapour generation of bromine, chlorine and iodine in aqueous solutions.188 Various oxidants were tested including potassium persulfate, hydrogen peroxide, potassium permanganate, sodium nitrate, potassium bromate, potassium chlorate and potassium iodate. The analytes were determined at 134.724 nm for Cl, 154.065 nm for Br and 178.276 nm for I. The authors stated that after the optimization, a highly sensitive method was developed. In another paper, Huang and co-workers used high resolution continuum source ETAAS and measured the molecular absorption spectra of AlBr (at 278.914 nm) and CaBr (at 625.315 nm) on a high resolution echelle spectrometer.189 The only spectral interference observed was from a strong absorbance band by CaF at approximately 625.3 nm, which caused problems with the CaBr determination. The CaBr absorption was found to be affected by the presence of aluminium, chloride, potassium and sodium whereas the AlBr was unaffected by these ions. Conversely, inorganic acids (nitric, phosphoric and sulfuric) adversely affected AlBr but had no influence on the CaBr. The authors applied their method to the determination of Br in water from the Dead Sea and in a pharmaceutical sample. The results were in good agreement with those obtained using two other independent methods. Other figures of merit include the precision, (5% RSD), the LOD (2 ng) and the linear range extended to at least 250 ng Br. Oh and co-workers have described the determination of total Cl in a sanitizer liquid using a helium plasma on a polymer microchip.190 The authors used helium instead of the customary argon in an attempt to increase ionization efficiency of the Cl. The approach was successful since an argon-based plasma led to no Cl signal. The helium plasma was sustained at a power of between 30 and 70 W. A combination of potassium permanganate and sulfuric acid was used to volatilize the Cl into the plasma on the chip where it was excited and detected at wavelengths of 438.2 and 837.7 nm. The authors reported a LOD of 0.81 µg mL−1 which was sufficiently low to detect Cl in the sanitizer liquids which have concentrations of typically 100–200 µg mL−1.
Palcut and colleagues have used SIMS to determine the diffusion of Pr-141 in dense polycrystalline lanthanum manganate, lanthanum cobaltate and lanthanum ferrate.191 The experiments were conducted in air and in a temperature range of 1373–1673 K. Data indicated that there were two distinct regions with very different slopes. The first, shallow region was used to evaluate the bulk diffusion coefficients. The activation energies for bulk diffusion in the permanganate, cobaltate and ferrate were 126 ± 6, 334 ± 68 and 258 ± 75 kJ mol−1, respectively. These were significantly lower than those predicted by atomistic simulations. Diffusion in the permanganate was enhanced compared with the other two matrices and this was attributed to the fact that it has more point defects, especially at lanthanum site vacancies. Spectral interferences observed during the determination of Sc, Y and REEs in “pure” rare earth matrices (terbium oxide, dysprosium oxide, holmium oxide and thulium oxide) by ICP-OES have been studied by Kolibarska and colleagues.192 The interference effects were quantified in terms of Q values for line interference (Q(1(a)) and wing background interference (Q(W(delta lambda a)). The best analysis lines were selected and the LODs reported. A sensitive and rapid on-line method was developed by Jia et al. that determined Ce, La, Nd and Y in high purity samarium oxide, europium oxide, gadolinium oxide, terbium oxide, dysprosium oxide, yttrium oxide and lutetium oxide.193 After dissolution of the samples, the analytes were separated/pre-concentrated on a strongly basic cinnamene anion exchange resin. The analytes were then eluted on-line using nitric acid into a microwave plasma for OES detection. The operating conditions such as flow rate, loading time, acidity and eluent flow rate and concentration were all optimised. Under the optimal conditions, precision was found to be 1.54, 4.29, 4.95 and 3.90% for La, Ce, Nd and Y, respectively, whereas the LOD were reported as being 0.89, 2.02, 1.56 and 0.78 µg L−1, respectively. Recovery for the analytes in the assorted sample matrices ranged from 95.1 to 104.8%. Another paper that discussed potential interferences and a way of circumventing them has been reported by Smolik and Jakobik-Kolon.194 These authors determined <100 mg kg−1 Hf in a zirconium matrix. After dissolution, the analyte/matrix were separated using chelation exchange on a Diphonix resin. The result was a sample that contained a hafnium matrix with less than 10 ppm zirconium. Detection was by both ICP-OES and ICP-MS and results from the two techniques were in good agreement. A certified reference material (BCR-098 zircaloy-4) was also analyzed. The overall procedure was found to be effective for Hf concentrations between 0.0082 and 2.4%.
There have been several applications published that have concentrated on the determination of a particular analyte that, under normal circumstances, can be problematic. An example presented by Zawisza and Sitko determined Be by XRF using an indirect method.195 The Be was precipitated as the hexamminecobalt (III) carbonatoberyllate complex, filtered and then pipetted onto Mylar foil ready for analysis. The ratio of Be to Co was therefore 1:3, but this still enabled the Be to be determined with reasonable sensitivity; which is a huge improvement considering that Be is not readily determinable directly. Another important advantage of the method was that it had a simple calibration procedure, which used a standard solution of cobalt pipetted onto the Mylar foil. In another example, Bednar determined V using an ICP-MS instrument equipped with a reaction cell.196 In the absence of a reaction or collision cell, V can suffer several polyatomic interferences, including 37Cl14N+, 33S18O+ and 35Cl16O+. Under normal circumstances, a reactive gas, e.g. hydrogen, oxygen or helium, is introduced to the reaction cell to split the interfering polyatomic species into their constituent components and hence facilitating the determination of the analyte at its mass to charge ratio (m/z). In this paper, the author introduced oxygen to the reaction cell, but instead of splitting the polyatomic species, the oxygen combined with the V forming a polyatomic analyte that had a m/z of 67. The only interferent was an isobaric interference from Zn, but this could be overcome using a standard mathematical correction equation. The method was applied to the successful determination of V in a series of water samples that had a high chloride or sulfate content.
There have been a number of other interesting applications published in this review period. The direct speciation of Cr in solid state materials using a GD-ToF-MS approach has been described by Robertson-Honecker and colleagues.197 The milli-second GD operated with a RF power and was described as a versatile ion source that could provide elemental, structural and molecular information depending on the operating conditions. By carefully tuning the operating parameters, it is possible to adjust the plasma so that it forms cluster ions from the sample. The cluster ions formed by CrVI and CrIII ions in the sample differ markedly and hence, it is possible to differentiate between the two forms. The CrIII ions were found to give a signal at both m/z 104 and 120, corresponding to 52Cr2+ and 52Cr216O+ respectively and the CrVI ions formed a molecule at m/z 100, corresponding to the molecule 52Cr16O3+. The authors discussed the impact of the operating conditions on the appearance of these cluster ions. Another speciation-based paper has been presented by Chen and co-workers, who determined metal-EDTA complexes using the complimentary techniques of FI coupled with electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) and liquid chromatography coupled with ICP-MS.198 The ESI-MS technique enabled the qualitative determination of the molecules {Mn(EDTA)}2−, {Co(EDTA)}2−, {Ni(EDTA)}2−, {Cu(EDTA)}2−, {Zn(EDTA)}2−, {Pb(EDTA)}2− and {Fe(EDTA)}−. Chromatographic separation of the same species using an anion exchange column and a mobile phase consisting of 30 mM ammonium hydrogen diphosphate at pH 7.5 occurred within 7 min and the ions could then be detected quantitatively using an ICP-MS system. The LOD of the system was found to be between 0.1 and 0.5 µg L−1 depending on the particular ion, but was much poorer for the Fe molecule that had a LOD of 15 µg L−1.
Although field flow fractionation (FFF) was developed several years ago, it still has not become a routinely used method. There is therefore still considerable novelty with its use. Contado and Pagnoni have coupled FFF with ICP-OES in an attempt to characterize the particle size distribution of TiO2 in commercial sunscreen lotion.199 These authors characterized two different TiO2 nano- and microstandard materials, namely Aeroxide TiO(2) Degussa P-25 and TiO2 rutile 0.1–0.2 µm size. Although the separations were detected on-line using UV, fractions were collected and analyzed by ICP-OES off-line. The Ti signal was then correlated with the UV signal. The authors described the technique as being relatively simple and rapid as well as being of low cost. In the last application of note in this part of the review, Xing and Beauchemin have continued their determination of stability constants of metal complexes using ICP-MS.200 Previous publications had reported the determination of free metals and metal complexes by ion exchange separation followed by ICP-MS detection. A plot of log(peak area of complex/peak area of free metal) against log(total free EDTA concentration) for a series of solutions containing the analytes and a range of EDTA concentrations yielded straight lines, the intercepts of which corresponded to the stability constants. There were, however, problems with the developed method in that the chelation numbers differed significantly from the expected value of unity. The authors found that this was attributed to the erroneous assumption that the ligand was in excess. In addition, the previous publication had assumed that all of the ligand was present as EDTA4−, whereas EDTA3−, EDTA2−etc were also present. In the present paper, the authors made no such assumptions and the corresponding log-log plot yielded an intercept corresponding to log k-f′ and a slope corresponding to the chelation number.


2.3.3 Nano-materials. 
There is still a huge interest in the use of nano-materials. This is because they may be used for applications as diverse as drug delivery vehicles, sun tan lotions, catalysts and materials used in electronic components. This section will therefore just give a general overview of some of the applications of such materials and also some of the techniques commonly used to analyze them. Nano-materials have been made of an assortment of metallic and non-metallic products and the review will describe some of these in turn.
2.3.3.1 New methods and reference materials. 
Pinnick and co-workers have described the use of SIMS to analyze individual aluminium monohydrate nano-whiskers.201 These authors used a suite of projectiles including Au-1+, Au-3+, Au-9+ and Au-4004+. The authors described this as the first time that free standing nano-whiskers were being bombarded using kilo electron volt projectiles of atomic to nano-particle size (Au-4004+)−. The projectile has a diameter of approximately 2 nm, which is similar to the actual nano-whisker it was bombarding. The majority of ions produced were either AlO− or AlO2−, but the proportion of each varied significantly. There was a noticeable difference in secondary ion response from sample volumes too small for full projectile energy deposition. For instance in bulk samples, the majority of ions produced were AlO2− whereas nano-whiskers produced a majority of AlO− ions. In addition, the bulk samples also gave a significant number of {(Al2O3)(n)AlO2−} and {(Al2O3)(n)OH}− ions, whereas these minority ions were produced at an order of magnitude less concentration from the nano-whiskers. The preparation and characterization of palladium/alumina and palladium nano-particles as test materials for chemical and biochemical studies of traffic related emissions has been described by Leopold and co-workers.202 The palladium nano-particles (24 nm) dispersed on alumina particles were very similar to those produced from catalytic converters by mechanical abrasion. The palladium only nano-particles (5–10 nm in diameter) were proposed to be useful for exposure studies when the presence of the alumina particles may lead to confusion or interference during the determination of biological and biochemical effects. The preparation procedures were optimized to ensure that the particles were close to the desired size with a narrow particle size distribution. The materials were then characterized using techniques such as TEM, HRTEM, selective area diffraction, laser granulometry and the Pd concentrations were determined using GFAAS.
2.3.3.2 Carbon nano-tubes. 
The preparation and detection of carbon nano-tubes has been a popular area of research in this review period. A paper by Ge and colleagues discussed how the presence of metallic impurities in carbon nano-tubes can have a negative impact on health if they are used in the biomedical field and then presented some analytical methods for determining the concentration of these impurities.203 The authors presented two different instrumental methods of analysis; namely NAA, which was regarded as being a non-destructive standard technique, and ICP-MS. For the ICP-MS analysis, the analytes had first to be removed from the nano-tubes so different sample pre-treatments were developed. These pre-treatments included a dry ashing coupled with an acid extraction, a wet digestion and a combination of dry ashing and acid digestion. The extraction efficiencies of the pre-treatments were compared using ICP-MS and the results of these analyses were compared with data obtained using NAA. The authors found that the quantitative determination of impurities was highly dependent upon the pre-treatment procedure and that the conditions for the procedure differed markedly from those required for the analysis of biological or environmental samples. A method of purification as well as chemical functionalization and dispersion of multi-walled carbon nano-tubes has been described by Chen and Mitra.204 Metallic impurities within the nano-tube that may be the remnants of the catalysts used to prepare them were removed by a microwave assisted, weak acid and complexing agent leach. The side walls of the nano-tubes were then derivatized by attaching hydrophilic groups. This improved the dispersibility of the materials to the extent that 1 mg/mL of material could be suspended in water and 0.5 mg/mL could be suspended in ethanol. Oxidized nano-tubes containing –COOH groups could then be functionalized further, e.g. amidation. The multi-walled nano-tubes were found to be less reactive than single walled tubes and also had lower solubility. The materials were further characterized using electron microscopy, FTIR, TGA and AAS. An interesting application of the use of carbon nano-tubes has been described by Bussy et al. who exposed macrophages to the materials and then used techniques such as µ-XRF to determine where in the cell they were present and in what ways the cell became modified.205 Purified and un-purified versions of both single-walled and multi-walled tubes were used for the studies. It was found that for the unpurified version of both single- and multi-walled tubes, there was a buildup of Ca in the cells. The authors discussed the toxicological aspects of this.
2.3.3.3 Nano-materials used for biomedical applications. 
There have been several publications describing the use of nano-materials for biomedical applications. These will be discussed in this part of the review. Of these applications, the most common has been to use nano-materials as a means of cellular or molecular imaging. One such application has been described by Pan and co-workers who developed a modified solvent extraction/evaporation method for the preparation of nano-particles of poly(lactide acid)-d-alpha-tocopheryl polyethylene glycol 1000 succinate (PLA-TPGS) to form quantum dots.206 The authors characterized their material using an array of techniques including laser light scattering for size and size distribution measurement, FTIR, TEM, AFM, XPS and field emission SEM for surface analysis and ICP-OES for the determination of encapsulation efficiency. Photo-stability was measured using fluorescence intensity versus irradiation time and the uptake of the materials into MCF-7 cells was measured using confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). It was hoped that these materials would exhibit less toxicity than mercaptoacetic acid (MMA) coated quantum dots used previously. It was found that the materials did have less toxicity than the MMA-coated quantum dots and also had a higher fluorescence intensity and higher photo-stability than the bare quantum dots. Manganese-based nanoscale metal-organic frameworks for magnetic resonance imaging have been discussed by Taylor and colleagues.207 The materials were synthesized using either a reverse-phase micro-emulsion technique at room temperature or a surfactant-assisted procedure at 120 °C with microwave heating. The particles produced were characterized using SEM, TEM, TGA, PXRD and ICP-MS. The materials were found to be an efficient vehicle for the delivery of large doses of Mn2+ ions which afforded excellent magnetic resonance imaging enhancement capabilities. The particle shell was then modified with the attachment of a cyclic RGD peptide and an organic fluorophore. These enhanced the particles' capability to target cancer cells. The authors concluded that such materials may also be the ideal platform for targeted delivery of other imaging and therapeutic agents to diseased tissues. In a similar paper, Wu and co-workers described the preparation of modularly assembled magnetic nano-particles for enhanced in-vivo targeting for magnetic resonance cancer imaging.208 The materials were synthesized through self-assembly of nickel nitrilotriacetate targeting moieties on the surfaces of functional Fe3O4 nano-particles. A hexahistidine tag on RGD4C peptides resulted in the precisely controlled orientation of targeting peptides. The materials were tested using an oral cancer hamster model and both magnetic resonance imaging and AAS were used to demonstrate the improved targeting capabilities and reduced hepatic uptake compared with the conventional chemical cross-link particles. In addition, the materials were found to be cleared from the liver and kidneys after only one week.
Other materials that have found biomedical applications include a Si-substituted hydroxyapatite nanopowder that was shown by Bianco et al. to have improved biological performance in terms of enhanced bone apposition, bone in-growth and cell-mediated degradation.209 The authors prepared the materials using two different methodologies which were (a) a precipitation of Ca(NO3)2·4H2O and (b) the titration of Ca(OH)2. The materials were characterized using electron microscopy, IR, ICP-OES, thermal analysis, nitrogen adsorption measurements and XRD. The semi-crystalline Si-substituted hydroxyapatite powders were needle-like structures that had a surface area of between 84 and 110 m2 g−1. The materials produced from the two different preparation procedures differed in their thermal properties, with those produced from method (a) decomposing at 1000 °C whereas those prepared using procedure (b) being stable to 1200 °C but exhibiting a distinct decreased thermal stability with respect to the homologous pure sample. The Si-substituted powders could be sintered at a higher temperature and had increased total shrinkage compared with the pure powders. In the last biomedical application to be discussed in this section, Ieva and colleagues characterized chitosan-cyclodextrin hybrid nano-particles that could be used for drug delivery applications.210 The materials were formed by the ionic gelation process in the presence of glutathione (the chosen drug). The materials produced were characterized using TEM and zeta potential measurements. In addition, XPS was used to both analyze the samples conventionally and to undertake depth-profiling measurements. The nano-particles were demonstrated to efficiently encapsulate the glutathione within their inner cores, thus showing promise as a drug carrier.
2.3.3.4 Other applications.. 
There have been several other applications of the analysis of nano-materials. Although these are interesting, they are of lesser importance in the field of atomic spectrometry than those discussed previously. Consequently, they will be summarized in Table 3 rather than discussed at length in the text.
Table 3 Applications of the analysis of nano-materials




Analyte
Matrix
Technique; Atomization; Presentation
Comments
Reference




Ag
Silver nano-particles on/in a glass slide
ToF-SIMS; -; S
Glass substrate coated with silver using ultrasonic irradiation. Material characterized using XRD, TEM, HRTEM, AFM, HRSEM and ToF-SIMS. Material dependent upon sonication time and temperature. ToF-SIMS demonstrated that the Ag diffused by a distance of 60 nm into the glass substrate. The coated glass exhibited an anti-bacterial capability.

211



Ag
Silver nano-particles and their environment
SIMS; -; S
Silver nano-particles of 5 nm diameter deposited on glycine. SIMS used to analyze the material using primary ions of Au-3+, C-60+ and Au-4004+ which had energy of 34, 26 and 136 keV respectively. The highest secondary ion yields were obtained using Au-4004+. The method could analyze single particles, determine surface coverage or analyze multi-layered structures.

212



Ni
Magnetic particles of nickel oxide
XPS; -; S
Nickel oxide nano-particles modified by atmospheric room temperature (not greater than 325 K) plasma fluidized bed using hexamethyldisiloxane as the monomer. Materials characterized using FTIR, XPS, and SEM. Material's wetability changed from super-hydrophilic to super-hydrophobic.

213



Various
Al65Cu23Fe12 crystal
LIBS; -; S
Double pulse LIBS used to form nano-particles (250 fs ablating laser) and then analyze them (ns laser placed at a fixed distance). The authors assumed local thermodynamic equilibrium and determined the role of the time lag between laser pulses on the plasma excitation temperatures and electronic densities. The ns excitation laser confirmed that the particles formed by the first pulse were largely widespread in space and time and were representative of the initial target material. However, a delay of < 100 µs between the pulses could lead to modest compositional changes.

214



Various
Mixed metal oxide nano-powders of composition (CeOx)(1−x)(Al2O3)
XRF; -; S XPS; -; S
A range of materials were prepared using liquid feed flame spray pyrolysis of mixtures of N(CH2CH2))3Al and Ce(O2CCH2CH3)(OH) and then characterized using an assortment of techniques including XRF, XPS, SEM, TEM, STEM, XEDS, FTIR and TGA.

215



Various
A series of uniform spinel ferrite nano-particles of form MFe2O4 (M = Co, Mn, Ni and Zn)
AES; ICP; L
Materials prepared by direct hydrothermal decomposition of trinuclear heterometallic oxocentered acetate cluster of {MFe2O(CH3CO2)6(H2O)3·nH2O}.Crystal structure, composition and size of nano-particles were characterized using XRD, ICP-OES, TEM and HRTEM.

216



Various
Amorphous Ca5Ge2O9 nanowires
XRF; -; S MS; ICP; L
Germanium nano-particles were first prepared by a vapour condensation technique. Then, on immersion of these nano-particles in calcium hydroxide, nanowires of the formula Ca5Ge2O9 were formed rapidly. XRD was used to determine the phase, and the Ca: Ge ratio was determined using energy dispersive XRF and ICP-MS.

217



Zn
Zinc oxide nano-particles
MS; ICP, L
Zinc oxide nano-particles formed by Pechini method. The effect of molar ratios of reagents and calcinations temperature on particle size were determined. Calcination temperature was found to have a significant effect, with size varying between 16 and 76 nm being achieved for calcination temperatures of between 400 and 800 °C. ICP-MS was used to study homogeneity of particles.

218






2.4 Nuclear materials
Last year's review reported a sudden upsurge in the number of papers reporting the application of atomic spectrometric analysis to nuclear materials. This trend has continued into this review period with increased numbers of AMS and TIMS papers being reported. In addition, the number of papers that report the analysis of actual nuclear materials rather than the determination of radioactive materials in the environment has also increased. This review will therefore concentrate less on the environmental applications than it has in previous years.

2.4.1 Reviews, certified reference materials and inter-laboratory comparisons. 
There have been two reviews of AMS published in this review period. In one, Fifield discussed how AMS, which is currently the most sensitive technique for measuring actinides with a half-life of greater than 5000 years, has been applied to the determination of Pu-239, Pu-240, Pu-242, Pu-244 and U-236.219 The review, which contained 45 references, also discussed the principles of the technique and methodology used for such applications. In the second review, Hellborg and Skog discussed (with 147 refs) how AMS can detect exceptionally low concentrations of both radionuclides and stable isotopes at a concentration range of between 10−12 and 10−16.220 In addition, the technique requires very small quantities of sample (mg level or less) and has a shorter measurement time (approximately one hour) compared with other radiometric techniques. Different instrumentation designs were also discussed with the electrostatic tandem accelerator being used in the large majority of instruments although some of the newer instrumentation uses a different design. Similarly, the authors discussed how the large majority of applications (approximately 90%) discuss the determination of C-14, whereas only relatively few discuss the determination of isotopes such as Be-10, Al-26, Cl-36, Ca-41, Ni-59, I-129, U and Pu.
Hou and co-workers have reviewed (with 164 refs) the determination of I-129 in environmental and biological materials.221 The authors discussed how the I-129 occurs both naturally but has also been introduced to the environment by activity at nuclear re-processing plants. Indeed, the I-127/I-129 ratio found in nature has risen from 10−12 to a range of between 10−10 and 10−4, depending on the sampling site, since the start of the nuclear age. The review goes on to compare the analytical techniques used for the determination of I-129 and also discussed the occurrence, sources, inventory and concentration of the species in the environment. An overview of the methods of I-129 speciation was also presented.
Ketterer and Szechenyi have prepared a review entitled “determination of plutonium and other transuranic elements by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry: a historical perspective and new frontiers in the environmental sciences”.222 The review contained 182 references and discussed how sector field instrumentation has become one of the most popular methods of analysis for these analytes over recent years. The authors stated that the popularity of this instrumentation stems from its speed of analysis, simplicity of sample preparation, relatively straightforward operation and the relatively high availability of the instrumentation itself. Applications of the technique were discussed and included the determination of Pu ratios in assorted matrices, tracing Pu activity through ocean currents, and the possibility that activity measurements of Pu-239 + Pu-240 could supplement or even replace the use of Cs-137 as a tracer of erosion, deposition and sedimentation.
An inter-comparison exercise considered the use of Cl-36 as a component of a new dosimetry system for Nagasaki/Hiroshima.223 Nine granite samples taken from buildings within 1200 m of the hypocenter at Hiroshima and standard solutions activated using a Cf-252 source were analyzed at three laboratories (Germany, USA and Japan). Good agreement between these laboratories was observed and with the expected values estimated from the Cf-252 source neutron fluence and activation cross-sections.
The results and statistical analysis of a “round-robin” exercise for U isotopic measurements were reported.224 A total of fourteen laboratories took part using a variety of ICP-MS and TIMS instruments. For each solution and each isotopic ratio, a statistical analysis based on ISO 5725 was carried out to calculate the mean, the repeatability and reproducibility standard deviations, the z-score, the zeta score, any bias with respect to target values and precision. The determination of U-234/U-238 and U-235/U-238 ratios was independent of the instrument type and showed no significant bias with respect to the target values. The results were less satisfactory for U-236/U-238 measurements where differences between laboratories were observed. It is probably not surprising that those institutions specializing in the measurement of low abundance isotopes and high precision analysis tended to show better agreement with the target values for U-236/U-238 ratios.
The preparation and certification of a new series of U isotopic standards (IRMM-074) to replace the exhausted IRMM-072 series was reported.175 The primary purpose of these materials was stated to be the calibration and monitoring of mass spectrometers (MC-ICP-MS, TIMS) equipped with secondary electron multiplier detector technology but also for other forms of mass spectrometry such as AMS and RIMS. The aim was to produce a series of standards where the U-235/U-238 ratio was held constant and the U-233/U-238 ratio varied from 1–10−6. These materials were prepared gravimetrically by dissolution of highly enriched stoichiometric oxides to form two stock solutions (U-235 + U-238, U-233) followed by preparation of the individual standards by mixing of these stock solutions. Two measurement procedures for assessing the linearity of response were suggested with particular reference to MC-ICP-MS and TIMS.


2.4.2 TIMS analyses. 
As stated in the introduction, there has been an increase in the number of TIMS applications published in this review period. Shinonaga and colleagues have been responsible for two of these publications. In one, the authors reported the isotopic analysis of single U and Pu particles using chemical treatment and mass spectrometry (using both TIMS and ICP-MS).225 Particles were first deposited on a carbon planchet and then analyzed using SEM-EDX. Then, using a manipulator, the samples were transferred to a silicon wafer, dissolved in nitric acid and then the isotopic ratios measured. The results obtained using both techniques showed good agreement with the certified values when particles of certified materials were analyzed. In addition, the precision data obtained were similar for both analytical techniques. The second paper by Shinonaga and colleagues discussed the age determination of single plutonium particles after chemical separation.226 The study used the radioactive decay of Pu-241 into Am-241 for the age determination, with the Pu-241/Am-241 ratio in the particles being determined. The authors used five individual particles of the CRM NBS 947 for their measurements. The procedure was similar to the one reported in the previous paper, with the individual particles (measuring a few pm) being placed on a carbon planchet and then being analyzed using SEM-WDX. This gave the Pu-Am ratio. Then, using a manipulator the particles were transferred to a silicon wafer and digested in acid. The Pu was then chemically separated from the Am and U before the Pu-240/Pu-239, Pu-241/Pu-239 and Pu-242/Pu-239 ratios measured using TIMS. The age of the material was found to agree with the expected age of 35.9 years.
A sample preparation procedure for isotopic measurements of pg-sized plutonium samples using TIMS has been described by Jakopic and colleagues.227 These authors prepared carburized rhenium filaments in a special vacuum container in which the filaments were exposed to benzene vapour and then carburized electrothermally. The carburized filaments were then used in conjunction with a new multiple ion counting system that enabled the Pu isotope ratios to be measured. The overall procedure was used during the analysis of the NBL-137 isotopic standard and also to the NUSIMEP 5 inter-laboratory comparison campaign. The multi-dynamic measurement system used in combination with the carburized filaments improved the precision and accuracy of the isotopic analysis of environmental samples containing very low (part per trillion) levels of Pu.
A chronological review of the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) bioassay program demonstrated the evolution of this task from its inception in 1944 to the present day.228 During this time, improvements in sample collection and processing, radiochemical separations, alpha spectrometry, TIMS and clean room techniques have produced significant improvements in limits of detection. This report was complemented by the results of a 2 year comparison of TIMS and alpha spectrometry for Pu bioassay from the same laboratory.229 The samples contained Pu-239 present at two different activity levels, namely 75–150 and from 1200–1600 µBq sample−1, whereas the Pu-238 was present at 3700–7400 µBq sample−1.
Fission track TIMS has been used by Shen and co-workers to determine the isotopic ratio of individual uranium-bearing particles in swipe samples.230 Fission track was used to search and locate the particle which was then transferred to the rhenium filament of the TIMS instrument. The fission track process had an efficiency of 90% when particles in the range 0.5–20 pm were being measured, but the efficiency of transfer to the rhenium filament was dependent on the particle size, with efficiencies of 90%, 73% and 43% being obtained for particles of 0.5–5, 5–10 and 10–20 µm, respectively.


2.4.3 AMS applications. 
The growth in applications of accelerator mass spectrometry to problems of interest to the nuclear sector has continued. A review of the use of AMS in the determination of actinides suggested that it was the most sensitive technique available currently for isotopes with t½>5000 years.219 The implementation of heavy ion AMS in various laboratories was described and a range of real and potential applications in environmental sciences, biomedicine and safeguards were considered.
Specific examples of applications of AMS have included; Cl-36,223 Sr-90,231 I-129,232 U-236233 and Pu-isotopes.234 The extension of AMS to the determination of Sr-90231 was suggested to have an advantage over other forms of mass spectrometry in terms of relative freedom from molecular ion isobars. However, in common with these other forms of mass spectrometry, the limiting factor was the presence of a pervasive interference from Zr-90 that resulted in an instrumental background of ca. 108 atoms (∼75 mBq Sr-90). The authors suggested that a redesign of the detector coupled with the use of alternative target materials might be expected to reduce these instrumental backgrounds below 106 atoms and close to the theoretical limits of AMS. If these improvements could be realized and appropriate sample preparation protocols developed, a range of uses in homeland security, environmental monitoring and human health were considered as areas for future exploration. The determination of I-129 at “background” levels in soils collected from areas removed from nuclear facilities provided an interesting contrast between AMS and NAA.232 Detection limits of ca. 10 µBq kg−1 I-129 were considered to be far superior to those obtained by these authors previously with NAA. These limits for AMS were achieved with much smaller sample sizes (<1 g) than the corresponding NAA methodology (100 g). The soils were prepared by separation of the iodine by pyrohydrolysis, purification of the resultant solution by solvent extraction and source preparation by precipitation as AgI. The AMS methodology was applied to the determination of very low I-129 concentrations in soils from forests, pastures and rice paddies. The ultra-low level determination of U-236 in a range of IAEA reference materials from marine environments using both AMS and SF-ICP-MS was described by Lee and co-workers.233 Detection limits for AMS were reported to be ca. two orders of magnitude superior to those obtained by SF-ICP-MS (cf. U-236/U-235 = 10−8vs. 10−6). The use of AMS for Pu determinations is obviously developing and provides a potentially useful adjunct to radiochemical methodologies for environmental analysis. The determination of Pu-239/Pu-240 ratios by AMS provides complementary information to that obtained by alpha spectrometry where these isotopes are not mutually resolved. For example, AMS was applied by Srncik and co-workers to the characterization of a series of Austrian soils as part of a larger radiochemical analytical scheme.235 Similarly, a methodology for the determination of Pu and Pu isotopes in soils and sediments using AMS was reported by Child et al.234 The analysis of a series of reference materials was offered as validation in terms of method reproducibility for Pu-239/Pu-240 isotope ratios. At this point, it is perhaps worthwhile to reiterate the general observation from previous ASU reviews that low level environmental and biomedical Pu measurements, especially for dosimetry applications, often require the determination of Pu-238 and Pu-241.


2.4.4 ICP-MS applications. 
As always, there have been a large number of ICP-MS-based applications. Some of these have been relatively simple applications, e.g. extraction of the analytes from a solid material followed by the use of redox chemistry reactions to ensure the analytes are in an appropriate form and then a commercial resin to preconcentrate the analytes and remove many of the interferences present in the matrix. Farmer and co-workers have used such an approach and have then introduced the analytes via an APEX nebulizer to an ICP-MS instrument.236 Use of this nebulizer increased sensitivity further and reduced the background signal. The authors also used mass bias correction procedures. The overall result was that the LOD for Pu and U approached the high attogram level. Deb and co-workers have determined Th in a uranium matrix by separating the analyte by solvent extraction using Aliquat 336 in xylene followed by anion exchange.237 Since no suitable CRM was available, the authors validated the procedure using standard additions and by use of an independent gamma spectrometry technique in which they used a Th-234 tracer. Recovery was found to be better than 92% for both the ICP-MS and the gamma counting techniques. Precision (n = 10) was 3.2% RSD for a Th concentration of 0.2 µg g−1.
Several authors have used LA-ICP-MS as a means of analysis. This solid sampling technique minimizes sample manipulation requirements and therefore potentially increases the overall safety of the analysis. The advantages and limitations of this approach were discussed by Stefanska and colleagues who used LA sample introduction to a sector field ICP-MS instrument for the rapid determination of U isotopic information in uranium oxide materials seized in Hungary.238 The results obtained were compared with independent analytical techniques. Varga applied LA-ICP-MS to the isotopic analysis of single uranium particles of dimension of 10 µm;239 managing to determine U-234, U-235, U-236 and U-238 accurately. Even when using a single collector ICP-MS instrument, the ratio of U-235/U-238 could be obtained with a precision of only a few percent. Precision could be improved by taking repeat measurements of the same particle. Higher resolution (R = 4000) was necessary for some of the U isotopes to overcome spectral interferences. Ha et al. have reported the use of a “shielded” LA-ICP-MS system that was designed to increase the safety of the overall analysis.240 The authors applied their methodology to the analysis of the “rim region” of high burnup fuel (the region of approximately 200 µm in width that contains high concentrations of fission products produced during the high burnup procedure). The LA-ICP-MS system enabled analysis with micrometer resolution to be achieved.
Several papers have reported the use of dynamic reaction cells or collision cells to overcome isobaric or polyatomic interferences during the analysis of nuclear materials. One such paper was by Brennetot and colleagues who used experimental designs to optimize the operating conditions of a quadrupole-based instrument that was equipped with a hexapole reaction cell to determine Se-79 in spent nuclear fuel.241 After an initial screening to identify the influential parameters, these were then studied more closely using a Doehlert design. The reaction cell gas was studied with oxygen, oxygen/helium, oxygen/neon, oxygen/argon and oxygen/nitrogen all being considered. The goal of the study was to optimize both the resolution of Se from the argon dimer and to obtain maximum sensitivity of the determination. A blank was therefore used to ensure maximum resolution was obtained, whereas a standard of 5 ng g−1 of natural Se was used to obtain best sensitivity. The best operating conditions were an oxygen/helium mix introduced at 0.6/8 mL min−1 which led to a sensitivity of 8000 counts per ppb of Se-80. The optimized procedure was then applied to the analysis of an irradiated fuel. The same group also discussed a method by which Pm-147 could be measured at the same time as other lanthanide and actinide elements.242 The results were compared with those obtained using liquid scintillation counting and good agreement between the techniques was found. The presence of zirconium in samples at elevated concentration causes problems during the determination of several radionuclides and several authors have reported methods to help overcome this. Feuerstein et al. have used a two-step process to overcome interference effects from Zr-90 which is present at a factor of more than 106 over the Sr-90 analyte.243 The authors first used a Sr specific resin to separate the bulk matrix away from the analyte and then introduced oxygen to a reaction cell to overcome remaining problems. Although the LOD reported was impressive (0.2 pg g−1), it was still inferior to that obtained using other commonly used radiometric techniques. The authors stated, however, that the method described could still be used as a rapid and cost-effective alternative. Moureau and co-workers used nitrous oxide in the reaction cell of a multi-collector instrument to separate Zr interferences during the determination of Mo isotopes.244 The isotopes Mo-92 and Zr-92 coincide but introduction of nitrous oxide formed a ZrO product, effectively forming a molecule of different mass to the Mo, which was unaffected. The authors explained this phenomenon in the text. The procedure led to accurate data being produced from analyses of natural and isotopically enriched Mo samples with and without Zr. The same research group has also used nitrous oxide introduced to a reaction cell to facilitate the determination of Cs in spent nuclear fuels.245 In the absence of the nitrous oxide, the analyte was interfered with by Ba isotopes, but the presence of the gas led to the formation of BaO and BaOH, again effectively separating it from the Cs which was unaffected by the cell gas.
There are a couple of environmental applications of note. Many countries intend to bury nuclear waste in deep repositories. The presence of siderophores may accelerate leaching from the nuclear materials and enhance its mobility in the environment. The effect of the presence of siderophores (organic ligands) on leaching of spent nuclear fuel has been examined by Johnsson et al.246 Two siderophores were used – deferoxamine mesylate (a commercial hydroxamate) and pyoverdin isolated from cultures of Pseudomonas fluorescens. The siderophores were dissolved in synthetic groundwater and fragments of spent nuclear fuel were then soaked in it. Aliquots were taken on days 0, 1, 5, 9 and 14 and the elemental composition in the groundwater determined using ICP-MS. The pyoverdin spiked groundwater was found to contain significantly higher concentrations of Np and Pu compared with un-adulterated groundwater after 14 days (0.02 nM Np and 0.31 nM Pu compared with 0.01 nM Np and 0.13 nM Pu, respectively). Both siderophores were capable of leaching Ru from the fuel. A microwave assisted digestion method was described by Negre and colleagues for the extraction of Pa, Th and U from marine sediments.247 Using aqua regia as extractant, the authors managed to extract all of the Th and U, although approximately 40% of the Pa remained in the sediment after one extraction procedure. They then used reverse aqua regia and a short hot-plate digestion to extract the remnants of the Pa. The overall procedure was still more rapid than the traditional hotplate extraction and did not require the use of perchloric acid. Once extraction was complete, the authors used Dowex AG1-X8 resin to separate and purify the analytes. The resin was obtained from two sources and interestingly, although the recovery from the column was similar for Th and U from both sources, the Pa recovery differed significantly. Final detection was achieved using a multi-collector ICP-MS instrument. Overall recoveries from the process were relatively poor, with yields of 50% Pa, 60% Th and 70% U being obtained.
Nuclear forensics is still an area that is attracting much research. Svedkauskaite-LeGore and colleagues collected 35 uranium ore and 10 yellow cake samples from different mines world-wide and then used ICP-MS to determine their impurities.248 Use of pattern recognition techniques such as cluster analysis on the analytical data enabled the samples to be characterized according to their geographical origin. The results apparently showed a clear relationship between samples of the same region and the authors concluded that a satisfactory finger-printing method had been developed. Where any ambiguity did arise, the authors resolved the problem by measuring the composition of radiogenic Pb. Varga and Suranyi developed a method for the detection of previous neutron irradiation and re-processing of illicit nuclear materials.249 Both alpha spectrometry and sector field ICP-MS were used during the study with sample introduction to the latter being by either LA or by solution nebulization. The analytes determined were U-232, U-236 and Pu isotopes. The measurement of the radionuclides and isotope ratios enabled confirmation of the provenance of illicit nuclear materials.


2.4.5 Other techniques. 
Both EDXRF and LIBS have been used for nuclear applications in this review period. Most of these applications have been based on the direct analysis of the solid materials. However, Dhara and co-workers reported a method in which both Th and U were determined in advanced heavy water reactor fuel that had undergone a dissolution step.250 The authors added a fixed amount of Y internal standard to each sample and calibration solution and then introduced 20 µL aliquots to a filter paper. After drying, the filter paper was analyzed using a rhodium target tube operated at 40 kV and at 500 µA. Calibration plots were made by plotting the U/Y, U/Th and Th/Y amount ratios against the intensity signals. The authors quoted a precision of 3% RSD and claimed that the approach required only microgram quantities of sample material, hence decreasing the amount of generated radioactive waste as well as decreasing the overall hazard. Natarajan and co-workers have published three papers in this review period that have used EDXRF to analyze nuclear materials. In one,251 metallic impurities in thorium oxide were determined. A series of thorium oxide standards were synthesized that contained the analyte (Ca, Cr, Cu, Fe and Ni) impurities in the range 10–100 (or 100–500) µg g−1. The accuracy and precision was evaluated by analyzing three synthetic samples. A similar approach was taken to the determination of Ca, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, V, W and Zn in triuranium octoxide (U3O8).252 A series of U3O8 standards containing the analytes were synthesized at a concentration range of 100–1000 µg g−1 and then two synthetic samples and five reference standards obtained through an inter-laboratory comparison exercise were analyzed. The method was reported to be fast, required no chemical treatment, had good precision and the results obtained were in agreement with the added amounts. In the third of the applications, Natarajan and colleagues determined U covering the concentration range 2–80% in mixed uranium–thorium oxides.253 Pellets of 1 cm diameter were prepared that contained a 1:1 mixture of thorium-uranium mixed oxide standard and cellulose. Calibration was achieved using both L-alpha and L-beta peaks of U, with precision being better than 3% and 4%, respectively.
Several authors have used LIBS to obtain measurements direct from solid samples. Among these were Zheng and colleagues who used LIBS to analyze a cerium dioxide composite powder which was a surrogate for plutonium oxide.254 Determination of the analytes Al, Ce, Cr, Fe, Gd, Mg, Ni, Si, Ta, W and Zn in both pellets and powdered samples was successful, although the pellet samples yielded better precision. An interesting study by Oh et al. investigated the use of LIBS for slurry samples used in the vitrification process of liquid radioactive wastes.255 Two different systems were used; one of which employed a Czerny-Turner monochromator coupled with an intensified diode array detector (IDAD) whereas the other employed an echelle spectrometer with an intensified charge coupled device. The echelle system gave a high efficiency, simultaneous multi-element detection capability but, although the Czerny-Turner system worked, it required signal normalization to the entire plasma emission area in order to improve the precision. Sarkar and co-workers have used LIBS in two publications, one of which was the determination of trace contaminants (Al, Ca, Cu, Fe, Mg, Mo and Ni) in thoria256 and the other was the analysis of mixed thorium-uranium fuel.257 In the first of the applications, thoria powder was pressed into a pellet and then analyzed using LIBS under optimized conditions. The method was validated using a CRM obtained from the Nuclear Fuel Complex in Hyderabad, India. Results were found to be in good agreement with expected values indicating that LIBS was capable of the accurate determination of the analytes without recourse to matrix removal. In the second application, the authors mixed (1:1) thorium–uranium mixed standards with boric acid and then determined U at the wavelengths 367.007, 263.553, 447.233 and 454.363 nm. Analysis of two independent synthetic mixed oxide samples yielded results in good agreement with the expected values, although it should be noted that all of the lines, except 263.553 nm, exhibited saturation effects arising from self-absorption when the U concentration was above 20%. The authors concluded that LIBS was a perfectly viable analytical technique for this sample type and had the advantage that it did not require sample dissolution; a procedure known to be problematic for thorium-based fuels.

3 Advanced materials
A review by Pisonero and Gunther has highlighted the fundamentals and capabilities of femto-second LA-ICP-MS for depth-profiling analysis of materials such as polymers, semiconductors and metals (82 refs).258 The authors emphasized the analytical capabilities of LA for the determination of major, minor and trace analytes, but also highlighted the drawbacks associated with the use of nano-second LA systems that tended to cause fractionation problems associated with the aerosol generation, aerosol transport and aerosol excitation – ionization within the ICP. Femto-second LA systems suffer fewer such problems and the review gave examples of the more recent applications of IR and UV systems. The review also discussed currently achievable figures of merit, the ablation processes for both ns- and fs-LA, the influence of beam profile, aerosol structure and transport efficiency.
3.1 Polymeric materials and composites

3.1.1 Reviews and development of CRMs. 
The differing types of sample preparation, sample digestion methods and solid sampling techniques have been reviewed by Cadore and co-workers (in Portuguese, with 65 refs).259
Assorted Japanese workers have published reports of the development of several reference materials. Included in this number is a paper by Kimura et al. who described the development of powdered polyethylene reference materials for XRF analysis (in Japanese).260 The materials were analyzed for their Br, Cd, Cr and Pb content and the authors used the CRMs BCR 680 and 681 to validate their results. The LOD were described as being 3.2, 5.7, 3.9 and 1.7 mg kg−1 for Br, Cd, Cr and Pb, respectively. Another group of workers have developed a series of materials for the determination of Br using XRF in which disk samples were prepared by filling aluminium moulds with liquid polyester resin containing a hardener and a Br compound (in Japanese).261 After hardening at room temperature for 12 h, the sides of the disks were polished using a milling machine. Homogeneity of the disks was reportedly excellent. The Br contents of the materials were certified through an inter-laboratory comparison in which 19 laboratories participated. The authors noted that the median of the results had to be used rather than the mean average because there was a low bias from some laboratories. Another report in Japanese described the preparation of acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) resin pellets CRMs (designated NMIJ 8102-a, 8103-a, 8112-a and 8113-a) for the determination of Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb.262 The materials were analyzed using several different techniques, including isotope dilution mass spectrometry. The results showed good agreement between the different methods and the authors concluded that the materials developed were SI traceable. In a final report (in Japanese), Ishibashi and colleagues discussed the results of the four proficiency tests of the determination of hazardous elements in plastics.263 Again, the analytes were Br, Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb and these were determined in polyester disks or chips over four tests spanning the dates from 2003 to 2007. The number of laboratories participating ranged from 104 (for the fourth test) to 140 (for the second). Analytical methods employed included chemical tests and XRF. The concentrations ranged from 1 mg kg−1 for Hg and 5–10 mg kg−1 for the other analytes in the low-dosed materials in the first proficiency test. Other materials had substantially higher concentrations. It was found that more than 80% of the participating laboratories had a z-score of less than 2, i.e. their data was satisfactory. It was noted though that those laboratories using XRF analysis tended to have a higher uncertainty than those that used chemical analysis techniques. This was true for all analytes except for Br, where the opposite was observed. This was attributed to incomplete chemical decomposition of the samples.
A study by Simons and co-workers studied the homogeneity of polymeric calibration materials using LA-ICP-MS.264 The authors developed a homogeneity index and then demonstrated that elements present in organic compounds could be introduced into polymeric materials with a higher homogeneity than inorganic compounds unless special treatments were used. As an example, Br introduced as organic compounds was between 20 and 30 times more homogenous than when it was introduced as silver bromide. Similarly, Pb introduced as the stearate or the acetate was 10 times more homogeneous than Pb introduced as the chromate. For lead introduced as its oxide, homogeneity could be improved if multiple extrusion and mechanical treatments were used to decrease the particle size.


3.1.2 Solid sampling techniques. 
In general, plastic materials demonstrate resistance to wet chemical dissolution methods, and hence incomplete digestion can lead to poor analytical results. Similarly, the digestion procedures may require heating, which can lead to analyte losses through volatilization, especially for analytes such as Hg. Therefore, many workers have used solid sampling techniques that are capable of analyzing the materials directly. One of the more popular techniques to use is LIBS since it is relatively sample non-destructive, requires no sample preparation and may be used in a stand-off manner. An example of its use is a paper by Rusak et al. who depth-profiled chemically etched polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) for its F, H, Na and O content.265 It was found that H, Na and O signals were greatest at the surface of the material and then decreased as the laser passed from the etched materials into the bulk. Conversely, the F content was found to be at a minimum at the surface and increased at depth. The authors calculated that each laser pulse ablated 1.9 µm of material. Siddiqui and co-workers used LIBS (as well as an arsenal of other analytical techniques) to identify different types of polymers in plastic waste.266 Low density polyethylene (LDPE), high density polyethylene (HDPE), polypropylene (PP), polystyrene (PS), polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) were used as model plastics and randomly selected plastic waste such as yoghurt pots, water bottles and caps etc. were studied. The LIBS was used to determine the C to H ratio for each of the plastics. This, combined with the other techniques of IR, XRD and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), was found to yield a very useful and effective method for plastic waste management. A similar paper by Anzano and co-workers used the C to C2 (Swan band) ratios (measured at 247.9 and 516 nm, respectively), as well as the CN (388 nm), H (656.3 nm), O (777.2 nm) and N (746.8 nm) contents to classify plastics.267 Using laser induced plasma spectrometry (LIPS), the authors successfully identified several plastics. The most useful ratios were found to be the C2/C and the H/C. Judge et al. compared femto-second LIBS with remote filament induced breakdown spectroscopy (R-FIBS) during the measurement of carbon/clay ratios between three graphite composites of different hardness.268 Both techniques could be used in a standoff manner (in this study it was 6 m). Both techniques were equally capable of exciting emission and were equally selective. However, the R-FIBS was found to produce more accurate results overall and this was attributed to the intensity clamping nature of the filament ablation source. Measurement of the plasma temperatures indicated very different temperatures between the metallic emission lines (8500 K) and the Swan bands (4500 K). The authors concluded that the plasmas from the clay and graphite micro-domains were not in equilibrium.
Other techniques capable of analyzing solid materials directly have also been used. Canulescu and colleagues described the potential applications of negative ions from a pulsed radiofrequency glow discharge in argon.269 The authors detected the ions produced from the glow discharge using a ToF mass spectrometer and illustrated their work with the analysis of PTFE. The authors noted a considerable enhancement in the “afterglow” region of the negative ion signal for halogens and halogenated molecules along with a concomitant reduction in the background signal. Fernandez and colleagues characterized poly(ethylene-co-vinyl acetate) filled with low grade magnesium hydroxide using an assortment of analytical techniques including XRF and XRD.270 The low grade magnesium hydroxide was used as a cheap alternative to other more expensive flame retardants. The material was also found to contain reasonably high concentrations of magnesium and calcium carbonate.


3.1.3 Sample digestion procedures. 
Although the majority of new applications utilize solid sampling methodologies, there have still been several applications describing wet chemical methods of sample destruction followed by more traditional methods of analysis. Matoso and Cadore tested several different methods for the destruction of polyvinyl acetate (PVAc) including calcinations, low and high temperature acid digestion on a hotplate and a microwave digestion procedure.271 Under optimal conditions for the microwave digestion procedure, only 0.1% residual carbon was found and recoveries for the analytes As, B, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hg, Ni, Pb and Sb determined using ICP-OES were between 100 and 107%. A microwave-assisted double insert vapour phase digestion procedure has been described by Eilola and Peramaki.272 Sample was placed on a quartz sample insert and this was then placed in a third generation Teflon microwave vessel. Sulfuric acid was added to the vessel and it is this sulfuric acid that acted to absorb the microwave radiation and hence transfer the energy to the sample. Further charring of the sample occurred by the addition of nitric acid. Overall, the authors concluded that the set-up produced a highly efficient digestion method that was capable of digesting samples that had previously been impervious to other sample decomposition methods. The authors validated the method by determining numerous analytes (Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Mo and Zn) in several different CRMs including both biological materials (dogfish liver and bovine liver) and polyethylenes numbered 001 and 004, available from IRMM. Results were, in general, in good agreement with certified values, although the Cd results were often lower than certified values. The authors attributed this to volatilization losses. Malaxechevarria and Millan have used experimental design procedures in an attempt to optimize the wet acid digestion procedure for the determination of Cd in plastic materials.273 These authors first used a 24 – 7 Plackett-Burman design for screening the significant factors and then a 24-1 central composite design to optimize these significant experimental variables. They used the material ERM-EC680 polyethylene that has a certified Cd content to validate the procedure. Using 0.200 g of this material, it was found that 2 mL of nitric acid heated at 130 °C for 30 min followed by the addition of 1 mL of sulfuric acid and further heating at 140 °C for 30 min led to sample dissolution. Using atomic absorption, the Cd content was found to be 101.3% of the certified value and precision was typically 5.6%. The LOD was described as being 0.23 mg kg−1 and the method was applied to assorted materials including commercial packings and plastic toys.


3.1.4 Surface Analysis and depth-profiling Techniques. 
Surface analysis techniques have continued to increase in popularity over the last few years. This is true of many analytical fields including polymers and composites. There are many techniques available, but some of the most common include the various types of SIMS and ToF-SIMS. Ogaki and co-workers have discussed the relative drawbacks of the surface analysis technique of static SIMS (SSIMS).274 The drawbacks include the difficulty of spectral interpretation that relies largely on the individual analyst's expertise and by reference to the very limited spectral libraries that exist. The authors discuss the technique of G-SIMS, a library-independent method that facilitates the interpretation of spectra since it produces parent fragments that are formed without degradation or rearrangement. The authors illustrated its use by the analysis of biodegradable polymers such as poly (glycolic acid) (PGA), poly-l-(lactic acid) (PLA), poly-6-(hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) and poly-epsilon-(caprolactone) (PCL). Straif and Hutter have used bismuth cluster ion (Bi(n)+ where n = 1–7) SIMS to investigate polymer thin films.275 The authors found that the highly specific signal enhancement of these primary ions combined with the individual fragmentation pattern of the poly (4-vinylphenol) and poly (methyl methacrylate) could be used to reduce the amount of data produced and hence simplify interpretation. They also demonstrated that characteristic polymer-relevant species could be refined from the large amount of unspecific and highly fragmented secondary ions enabling a more precise and direct interpretation of complex organic molecules which, consequently, enables even more complex materials to be investigated. The surface molecular characteristics of different epoxy resins subjected to UV and high temperature accelerated degradation have been studied using the techniques of ToF-SIMS and XPS by Awaja and Pigram.276 The resins had been reinforced with either E-glass, 3D glass or carbon fibre and results indicated that the extent of oxidative degradation was dependent on the type of reinforcement material used. Results from XPS studies indicated that the 3D-glass resin composites suffered greater oxidation than the other two types. Principal components analysis (PCA) of ToF-SIMS positive ion data demonstrated that the oxidative stress could take one of two forms. The E-glass and 3D-glass resin composites suffered chain scission whereas the carbon fibre composite suffered both chain scission and cross-linking reactions. The PCA could be used to indicate both the extent of the reactions and proposing the reaction mechanisms. A slight modification to the technique of XPS has been used by Nobuta and Ogawa, who used C-60+ ions rather than the more conventional Ar+ ions to obtain accurate depth-profiles in polymers.277 The normal Ar+ ions have a tendency to destroy the chemical composition of the polymer by carbonizing the sample making depth-profiling impossible. The C-60+ ions caused far less damage for most of the polymers investigated (e.g. for aliphatic polymers and aromatic polymers). However, in the case of non-aromatic polymers that contained halogens, hydroxyl, carboxyl and ether groups in their backbones, functional group ratios were found to change by over 10% and new functional groups were formed. These reactions were found to occur simultaneously. In general though, the C-60+ ions were found to be more useful than the conventional Ar+ ions.
Tuccitto and co-workers have discussed the use of pulsed radiofrequency GD-ToF-MS for the molecular depth-profiling of polymer-based films.278 It was found that the technique benefited from the presence of fragment ions in the afterglow of the discharge that could be related to the structures of the polymers under study. Several polymer types were studied and the authors found that depth-profiling could successfully be achieved. When multi-layered samples containing different polymers were analyzed, it was found to be possible to differentiate between different layers, even when they had similar chemical composition.


3.1.5 Applications of Polymer analysis. 
Braun and co-workers have used a number of analytical techniques including thermogravimetry, thermogravimetry coupled with IR, SEM-EDX and XRF to determine the flame retardancy mechanisms of aluminium and zinc phosphinates both in the presence and absence of melamine cyanurate in glass fibre reinforced poly(butylene terephthalate).279 It was found that the Al analogues, at a dosage of 13–20%, fulfilled the requirements of electrical engineering and electronics applications whereas the Zn ones did not. However, it was noted that the results from the use of a cone calorimeter (forced flaming conditions) were similar for both metals. The authors concluded that both the metal phosphinates and the melamine cyanurate interact with the polymer changing the decomposition characteristics, but that it is the phosphinates that enter the gas phase and cause the flame inhibition. However, since the Al and Zn phosphinates have a different decomposition process, the Al phosphinate-terephthalate molecule is more stable than the Zn analogue.
There have been other, very simple, applications. Examples include the study by Nnorom and Osibanjo who characterized the toxicity of waste mobile phone plastics.280 The authors collected together an assortment of plastic housing units from different manufacturers (n = 60) and then subjected them to acid digestion using a mixture of 1:1 sulfuric acid and nitric acid. The digests were then analyzed using AAS for their Ag, Cd, Ni and Pb content. In general, approximately 90% of each metal was present at a concentration of <100 mg kg−1 and only 7% were >300 mg kg−1. The authors concluded that there was no immediate danger posed by such casings at the end of their life as long as they are managed properly. Burning of the materials would, however, potentially cause environmental hazards. An on-line ionic liquid-based preconcentration system coupled with FAAS has been developed by Martinis and colleagues for the determination of Cd in plastic food packaging materials.281 After sample digestion, the Cd was complexed with 2-(5-bromo-2-pyridylazo)-5-diethylaminophenol and the complex was extracted into 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate. The mixture was then loaded onto a micro-column filled with silica gel which retained the analyte. The retained analyte could then be eluted directly to the FAAS instrument for Cd determination. A preconcentration factor of 35 was observed when a sample volume of 20 mL was used, yielding a LOD of 6 ng g−1. Precision (n = 10) at the 10 µg L−1 level was found to be 3.9% RSD using peak height measurements. The accuracy of the procedure was tested using both spike/recovery experiments and by comparing the results with those obtained using ETAAS. The Cd content of the materials was found to lie in the range 0.04 – 10.4 µg g−1. Metals contained in and leached from rubber granulates used in synthetic turf have been determined by Bocca and co-workers.282 For the “total” measurements, the material (0.5 g) was mixed with nitric, hydrofluoric and perchloric acids and then microwave digested at powers between 250 and 600 W. For the leachate experiments, the material (5 g) was soaked in either slightly acidic medium (pH 5) or in water for 24 hours. A total of 25 analytes were determined using the techniques of ICP-OES and HR-ICP-MS. Although some of the elements were found to be present in appreciable concentrations in some of the solid materials (e.g. Zn at 10,299 mg kg−1 and Al at 755 mg kg−1), other elements were found to be present at only a few mg kg−1. The leachates contained much lower concentrations with Zn and Mg being the worst at 2300 and 2500 µg L−1 respectively. Most of the other analytes had far lower concentrations and some, e.g. Be, Hg, Se, Sn, Tl and W were found to be < LOD.

3.2 Semiconductors and conducting materials
As always, this area has been a prolific source of papers with the need for ever increasing sensitivity being one of the driving factors for instrumental development. The electronics industry has, therefore, become one of the biggest users of atomic spectrometric techniques, especially those of ultra-trace capability and the capacity to analyze surfaces or thin layers.

3.2.1 Reviews and overviews. 
A review by Pisonero and Gunther that contained 82 references discussed the relative merits of femtosecond LA-ICP-MS for depth-profiling analysis.258 The authors discussed nanosecond LA-ICP-MS and concluded that it is subject to fractionation effects that are caused by differences in aerosol generation, aerosol transport and aerosol excitation/ionization. The more recent applications of UV and IR femtosecond lasers were then discussed and it was found that these faster lasers are less prone to inter-matrix problems and that they may be used to ablate materials more reliably so that more analytes may be determined accurately. These improvements have proven significant for the analysis of conducting, semi-conducting and even non-conducting materials that often have a layered structure where each layer may differ in thickness in the range of mm down to nm. The capabilities of the femto-second LA introduction devices as well as currently achievable figures of merit were discussed. In addition, the review also discussed the ablation processes that occur for both ns and fs UV lasers, the influence of the laser beam profile, aerosol structure and transport efficiency and the efficiency with which the ICP excites and ionizes the aerosol. An overview by Zschech and co-workers discussed the rapidly increasing usage of nano-scale analysis using synchrotron-radiation-based techniques.283 In addition to XRD and TXRF, an ever increasing number of other analytical techniques are being used both in analytical laboratories and also in-line, enabling increasingly rapid analyses to be performed. Such techniques include small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), that may be used for pore size characterization, advanced transmission X-ray microscopy (TXM), X-ray computed tomography, SR-XRD, SR-XPS and XAFS. The authors discussed the high potential that these X-ray-based techniques have for the semiconductor industry, their implementation to both current and future applications and emphasize that the last decade has seen almost a quantum leap in terms of the industrial application of X-ray techniques. The applications discussed in the paper concentrate mainly on nano-structures of dimensions less than 100 nm, mono-layers and thin films. Budri has published an overview on “the utilization of TXRF in order to improve front-end semiconductor processing”.284 Although the overview contained only three references, it did summarize how the introduction of in-line TXRF monitoring can provide detailed information on Al, Mo and Ti contamination levels. Since it may be achieved in-line, several process steps may be improved which helps minimize product yield loss and also makes it possible to successfully manufacture multiple products and process geometries in the same fabrication platform. The last paper to be discussed in this part of the review is by Boulsina and colleagues who used deconvolution of SIMS depth-profiles in an attempt to simplify and improve the speed of analysis.285 The ever-decreasing reduction in the size of semiconductor components has pushed SIMS to “unprecedented degrees of high depth resolution”. Therefore, in the last 10 years, several deconvolution methods have been developed including the iterative algorithm with hard constraints and Miller regularization. The paper discussed both algorithms and tested them on several theoretical structures and on a real structure. The authors demonstrated that the algorithm without the regularization term provided solutions close to the results given by the basic algorithm but used a lower number of iterations. It was also found that gains in depth resolution and maximum peak intensity were obtained without the regularization term.


3.2.2 Analytical Techniques. 
As is often the case during the analysis of such samples, solid sampling techniques have proved to be popular since they require minimal sample preparation and often do not lead to sample destruction. Therefore X-ray based techniques, LIBS and assorted mass spectrometric techniques have been most commonly used analytically. Over recent years, the use of ultra-short pulse laser ablation has become more common since it has many advantages over longer duration ablation techniques. Wu and Shin have developed a simplified predictive model for high fluence ultra-short pulsed laser ablation of semiconductors and dielectrics.286 The need for a model is desirable since it enables process design optimization. However, molecular dynamics or hydrodynamic models are time-consuming and difficult to apply for practical applications. The model developed in this study did not involve any free adjustable variables (unlike many other simplified models) and yielded predictions that were in good agreement with experimental measurements using fs LA. The model was, however, found to be less reliable when shot duration was greater than 10 ps. A new technique for the detection of thickness loss in thermal barrier coatings caused by erosion or foreign/domestic object damage has been described by Das and colleagues.287 These authors used femto-second LIBS with fluence levels as low as 18 J cm−2 to inspect a sample of 7 yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ) for a layer of gadolinium zirconate that had been embedded at a critical depth. The authors reported that damage to the sample was minimal and that each shot of the laser led to a circular crater of approximately 30 µm diameter being created. In addition, the laser shot did not cause any cracking of the 7 YSZ layer. The overall lack of collateral damage to the sample led the authors to conclude that the fs-LIBS technique was ideally suited to the characterization of the thermal barrier samples.
Meirer and co-workers have discussed the potential use of synchrotron radiation induced TXRF (SR-TXRF) combined with XANES for the determination of Fe and, indeed, the chemical state of Fe on silicon wafer samples.288 The need for such analyses is clear, since it enables the determination of any contaminants and may also assist in identifying where or how the contamination took place during the manufacturing process. Another novel coupling of methods has been described by Qin and colleagues who combined SIMS with angle resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (ARXPS) so that more accurate assessments of retained dopant dose and profile measurements could be obtained.289 The technique was applied to ultra-low energy implants such as that from conventional beamline implantation and plasma immersion ion implantation (PIII). Using the proposed technology, the authors demonstrated that diborane (B2H6) PIII demonstrated thicker native oxide and much more B dose loss during rapid thermal processing and surface cleaning treatments than did the conventional beamline ion implantation. It was concluded that to match the electrical parameters of the device, PIII requires the use of higher nominal dose to compensate for the loss of the B.
Interference effects observed during the GD-MS analysis of three superalloy samples were efficiently overcome by Yu et al. who used a combination of interference correction methods.290 Methods included the simple measures of picking isotopes that were not interfered with and matrix matching as well as mathematical methods such as multi-variable linear regression. The authors reported the mass spectral interferences and also described the extent to which each was a problem. The measures taken enabled the analytes Ag, As, B, Bi, Ga, In, Mg, Pb, Sb, Sn, Te and Tl to be determined successfully. Another paper that reported the use of GD-MS was prepared by Ghosh et al.291 These authors first optimized the zone refining process parameters, e.g. zone length, zone travel rate, number of passes and the effect of molten zone stirring, during the ultra-high purification of gallium. Under optimal conditions, 5N.2 (99.9992% pure) gallium was subjected to zone refining for 50 passes and stirred mechanically at 20–35 rpm by a rotational mechanism in the directional freezing system. The result was refined gallium that had a purity of 7N2 (i.e. 99.999992% pure). The GD-MS analysis indicated that, with respect to 24 analytes, the total impurity concentration had been reduced to 77.7 ppb. The purified gallium was used to grow gallium arsenide epitaxial layers, the quality of which was tested by SIMS, Hall measurements and low-temperature photo-capacitance techniques. A similar paper by the same research group used zone refining to purify gallium from 4N (99.99% pure) to 6N5 (99.99995% pure).292 The yield was only 30%, but a yield of 70% could be achieved if the purity was degraded slightly to 6N; i.e. 99.9999%. The contaminants Al, Bi, Ca, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Si and Zn were determined using techniques such as ICP-OES, GFAAS and high resolution ICP-MS. A model was also developed that could predict the zone length so that the purifying process could be optimized. The experimental and predictive results were compared during the study. The effect of different energies and surface concentrations of caesium during the caesium primary ion bombardment of H-terminated silicon wafers was determined by Brison et al. who used ToF-SIMS for depth-profiling purposes.293 The different primary ion energies were 250 eV, 750 eV and 2000 eV whereas the different surface concentrations of caesium were obtained by diluting the primary ion with xenon ions; with the range being from zero (pure xenon) to 100% (pure caesium). It was found that the Si+ signals decreased with increasing caesium concentration and at lower energy. Other secondary ions, e.g. Cs+, SiCs+ and Cs2+ were found to exhibit a maximum for well defined caesium/xenon mixes and were also dependent on the beam energy, with the maxima being found at higher caesium beam content and at increased energy. The craters on the sample were analyzed using XPS and computer simulations enabled the conversion the caesium beam scale to a caesium surface concentration. The work was extended in a second publication294 in which the authors used Auger electron spectroscopy to measure the Cs surface concentrations in-situ. Takahashi and co-workers have described a new mass spectrometric method for the surface imaging of materials.295 The positions of ion sputtered neutrals produced from gallium arsenide and gold materials were identified using vacuum UV light from a synchrotron source. The materials were also analyzed using SIMS so that a direct comparison could be made. It was found that species such as As-2, Au and Au-2 were more efficiently detected using the neutral method whereas clusters larger than dimers were more efficiently detected using SIMS. By continuous tuning of the photon wavelength, photoionization curves could be obtained for sputtered species such as As-m (where m = 1 or 2) and Au-n (where n = 1–4).


3.2.3 Applications. 
There have been a large number of applications in this field over this review period. Some of the more important ones will be discussed in detail in the text whereas others of less importance or in which there is less experimental detail will only be discussed in brief in Table 4.
A number of analytical techniques (XRD, ICP-OES, XPS and TEM) were employed by Su and colleagues to analyze indium and sulfur-doped lithium manganate (LiMnO2) samples with orthorhombic structure that could be used as cathode materials in lithium ion batteries.296 The authors first prepared the materials using a hydrothermal method and then the analytical techniques were used to characterize them before their electrochemical performance was determined using the galvanostatic method. All of the materials prepared exhibited improved cycling stability and high rate discharge ability compared with the un-doped Li0.99MnO2 material. In addition, the In/S doped materials also slowed down the capacity decay to a great extent although the materials did have a down-side in that the transformation to spinel occurred during electrochemical cycling. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) has been used in several guises by different groups of workers to characterize materials that they have prepared. Soft XPS has been used by Tsutsui and co-workers to characterize the chemical bonding states of B embedded in shallow P+/N junctions on silicon substrates.297 The study revealed three chemical bonding states and the concentration profile of the B was determined by a combination of soft XPS and step by step etching. The results from the profiling were in agreement with those obtained using the technique of SIMS. The concentration profile of B in holes was also determined, but this time, Hall measurements were combined with the step by step etching. Boron with the lowest binding energy (i.e. activated B) was found to be associated with the holes whereas the B with the higher binding energy was classed as being deactivated B. Layers of BCxNy were produced on silicon wafers by Baake et al. using a chemical vapour deposition process with trimethylamine borane, helium, nitrogen and ammonia as precursors.298 The wafers were then characterized using the techniques of XPS, TXRF and near edge X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (NEXAFS). Differing the composition of the precursors had the effect of varying the composition of the final product, with the material produced without any ammonia having the B–C bonds with an atomic ratio of B:C of 1:1. Introducing ammonia with a partial pressure of up to 1.3 Pascal yielded a product that was identified as being B2C2N. Increasing the percentage of ammonia further yielded products of general formula h-BCN. It was noted that O was present as an impurity in all cases. Silicon wafers that have undergone an amino-silanization process may be used as microarray platforms and therefore Graf and colleagues have discussed the characterization of silicon wafers that had undergone an optimized cleaning and amino-silanization protocol.299 The optimized process led to a free amine content of 94% being reached. The surface chemistry of the wafer was then analyzed using techniques such as XPS, ToF-SIMS and NEXAFS. The authors compared the amino-silanization process with others reported in the literature.
Other analytical techniques have also been used to characterize materials. For instance, Maekawa and colleagues successfully improved the reliability of copper interconnects by applying a copper–aluminium alloy seed, but had to use nano-SIMS and the measurement of activation energy values in an attempt to try and elucidate how the process worked.300 The authors concluded that the electro-migration using the copper-aluminium alloy arises through the copper grain boundaries and that the nano-SIMS indicated that the Al present is mainly localized at these grain boundaries. Positron annihilation was then used to probe the vacancy-type defects in the copper films. It was found that the CuAl films before re-crystallization contain larger and higher density vacancy-type defects whereas the re-crystallized films after annealing at 250 °C contained smaller and lower density defects. When annealing at a higher temperature (>350 °C) was used, there was found to be a deficiency of Al inside the grains. The authors concluded that the Al therefore migrates from the grains to the grain boundaries and this excess Al at the grain boundaries prevents the Cu from diffusing away. The mechanism of degradation of copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) thin film solar cells under high temperatures has been studied by Kijima and Nakada.301 A temperature range of between 100 and 450 °C for a time period of 30 min in a vacuum was studied. It was found that the CIGS devices with chemical bath deposited cadmium sulfide and zinc sulfide (O,OH) buffer layers were stable below 320 °C and 350 °C, respectively, indicating that they had sufficient heat resistance for practical usage. Electron beam induced current (EBIC) and SIMS analyses revealed that the main cause for the degradation at high temperature was attributable to a shift of the space charge region towards the molybdenum back contact and that this was because of an excess diffusion of Cd into the CIGS absorber layer. Iron phosphate on platinum for use as anodes in rechargeable lithium batteries was prepared by Liu and colleagues by mixing 0.01 M iron (II) nitrate nonahydrate and 0.01 M di-ammonium hydrogen phosphate.302 After preparation, the samples were annealed and then characterized using ICP-OES, XRD, FTIR, field emission SEM, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), differential thermal analysis (DTA) and charge/discharge testing. The deposited material was found to be Fe(OH)PO4·H2O, but on heating at 200 °C, this was found to be dehydrated to form Fe(OH)PO4. Heating at higher temperatures (600 °C) for a period of 10 h formed the sponge-like FePO4 of hexagonal structure. This material yielded a performance of 757, 185 and 117 mA h/g for the first, second and 50th discharge test. A study by Patsch and co-workers investigated the epitaxial process-induced stacking faults on silicon wafers using assorted surface analytical techniques.303 The methods employed included automatic SEM-EDX for identifying the coordinates and composition of the defects, AFM for supplying information on the topography and micro-Raman spectroscopy for supplying data on the stress yields of the defects. In addition, the defects were sputtered using argon or oxygen ions so that Auger electron spectroscopy and ToF-SIMS could be used in an attempt to identify the cause of the defect. The results demonstrated that the geometrical type of an epi-defect depended on the chemical composition and the physical phase of the contamination. The performance of an organic electronic device such as organic LEDs, transistors, diodes or solar cells depends critically on the chemical composition of the metal/organic interfaces which inject or extract charges into or from the device. Therefore, Scholz et al. produced a study in which they combined a number of techniques, e.g. XPS, SIMS and laser desorption/ionization ToF-MS, in an attempt to explain the differences in charge injection from metallic top and bottom contacts into either preferentially hole or preferentially electron transporting materials.304 The authors discovered that the deposition of metal onto organic semiconductors led to the formation of an organic-inorganic mixed inter-layer between the two main layers. In the case of electron injection, this inter-layer was found to act as a highly doped injection layer, whereas for the hole injection, no significant improvement was observed. Differing evaporation conditions led to varied concentrations of oxygen which caused partial oxidation of the metal on organic interfaces. The origin and binding behaviour of this oxygen in the metal on organic inter-layer was also studied and discussed. The authors also noted that organic materials evaporated onto metals did not have this inter-layer. Instead, an abrupt interface was seen for which no self-doping effect was observed. Another paper that described the characterization of an interface has been published by Shimakawa and colleagues.305 The sample was an annealed zinc magnesium oxide/copper indium gallium selenide (Zn1-xMgxO/CIGS) and the authors used UV light excited time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) for the characterization. It was found that annealing temperatures lower than 200 °C had no effect on the TRPL lifetime, whereas at higher annealing temperatures (>250 °C) the TRPL lifetime increased. Increasing the temperature further (>300 °C) sharply decreased the TRPL lifetime again. The authors then used SIMS to observe the Zn migration from the zinc magnesium oxide film into the CIGS layer. The authors noted that excess Zn present at the CIGS surface acted as a non-radiative centre at the interface. Palacio and Arranz used XPS, angle resolved XPS (ARXPS), UV photoelectron spectroscopy and iterative target testing transformation factor analysis (ITTFA) to study the ion beam mixing at metal/silicon interfaces.306 The interface was produced by metal thin film deposition on silicon substrates and the ion beam mixing was caused by either Ar+ or reactive N2+ low energy ion beams. When the argon ion beam was used, metal silicide was formed whereas when the nitrogen beam was used, there was a rapid nitrogen incorporation in the near surface region, followed by a steady state concentration.
Table 4 Applications of the analysis of electronic materials




Analyte
Matrix
Technique; Atomization; Presentation
Comments
Reference




Al
Thermal and Plasma enhanced atomic layer deposited aluminium oxide on gallium arsenide substrate
TXRF; -; S ARXPS; -; S
Comparison of atomic layer deposition techniques. In addition, the effect of cleaning and partial cleaning of substrate surface to remove the native oxide was also determined. Ellipsometry and TXRF were used to study the growth of the layers whilst ARXPS was used to determine the composition of the interlayer. Both deposition techniques were fairly independent of the starting surface. Based on capacitance measurements, the thermally deposited materials were found to have better electrical characteristics.

307



Au
High reflective p-GaN/Ni/Ag/Ti/Au ohmic contacts for flip chip LEDs
SIMS; -;S
SIMS depth-profiles indicated that Au in-diffusion occurs in Ni/Ag/Au contacts after annealing and that this was responsible for a low reflectance (63% at 465 nm). A diffusion barrier layer consisting of either Ti or Mo was therefore used between the Ni/Ag and the Au. Reflectivity was found to increase to 93%.

308



O
Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3 (BSCF) high temperature oxygen permeation membranes.
SIMS; -; S
BSCF films produced by laser deposition on magnesium oxide single crystal substrates. O isotope exchange then measured using SIMS so that tracer diffusion coefficients and effective surface exchange constants could be determined. The materials were found to have a low activation energy (0.5 eV) and exhibited a larger O diffusion coefficient than that of (La, Sr)(Fe,Co)O3 delta perovskites.

309



O
Large area aluminium nitride wafers
MS; GD; S SIMS; -; S
High quality aluminium nitride bulk crystals grown by sublimation – recondensation. Impurity levels determined using GDMS and SIMS. O content measured by SIMS. Material also characterized using rocking curves in the double axis configuration, thermal conductivity measurements, XRD and X-ray backscattering.

310



Si
Silicon nanocrystals embedded in silicon oxide layers
SIMS; -; S XPS; -; S
Silicon nano-crystals were obtained using thermal annealing of silicon rich oxide at 900–1200 °C. Authors used SIMS, XPS and AFM to study silicon rich oxide layers close to interfaces with silicon nitride or c–Si. The 2 nm thick layer was found to be deficient in Si. The depleted layer was of importance for both electrical transport and charge storage in the silicon rich oxide.

311



Various
Electrical and electronic waste equipment
XRF; -; S OES; ICP; L
Inhomogeneity of printed circuit boards caused problems during analyses for reduction of hazardous substances compliance testing (RoHS). Use of micro-spot, benchtop, hand-held and polarizing XRF spectrometers led to poor precision. Shredding samples to < 0.5 mm improved precision sufficiently for RoHS testing using XRF or by acid dissolution and ICP analysis. Milling for 90 sec using a puck and ring mill decreased particle size to < 90 µm, but led to sample loss. The authors concluded that shredding alone was the optimal sample preparation procedure.

312



Various (4)
Electrical and electronic equipment.
OES; ICP; L
Testing of materials for Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb for RoHS purposes. Microwave assisted acid extraction of materials used. The procedure was rapid and led to little analyte loss or contamination (recoveries 85–115%). Precision was reported to be better than 3% RSD.

313



Various (6)
Bismuth-based superconductor powder
OES; ICP; L
The influence of acid type and concentration was examined. The analytes Al, Ba, Cr, Fe, Ni and Si were determined. Interference effects from bismuth, strontium, lead, calcium and copper were studied systematically. Interference coefficients were calculated and a mutual interference matrix was developed. Using this interference matrix and the Gaussian elimination with full pivoting method, the authors successfully overcame interference effects and obtained recoveries of 99.5–100.5%. Results agreed well with those obtained using ICP-MS. In Chinese.

314



Various
Thin film silicon solar cells
SIMS; -; S ToF-SIMS; -; S
The chemical memory effect on the performance of the materials was tested. Analysis indicated a high impurity concentration in the intrinsic (i) layer of the p-i-n solar cell which adversely affected cell performance. An F content greater than 1.5 × 1019 cm−3 was found to be critical. The use of the fluorinated gases nitrogen trifluoride or sulfur hexafluoride + oxygen as cleaning agents succeeded in reducing contaminants. The nitrogen trifluoride was especially successful. Additional procedures such as increasing total gas flow rate during deposition, hydrogen plasma treatment of reaction chamber improved quality of solar cells further.

315



Various (3)
Aged graphite anodes
SIMS; -; S
Dynamic SIMS was used to determine whether or not an impedance rise in aged cells arises because of the dissolution of transition metals from the oxide electrode form a high impedance layer at the negative electrode. The analytes Co, Mn and Ni were determined on fresh, formed and aged graphite anodes. Results indicated an accumulation of these analytes in the aged cells.

316



Various (3)
YBa2Cu3O7 – delta superconductor
XRF; -; S
The K XRF cross sections of the analytes Ba, Cu and Y were measured in the compounds copper oxide, yttrium oxide and barium carbonate as well as the superconductor materials prepared by a solid state reaction technique. Samples were irradiated with gamma rays from an americium-241 source and the analytes X-rays detected using a Si(Li) detector. The obtained X-ray cross section values were compared with theoretical values for the pure elements. The cross section values changed in the superconductor sample depending on the calcined and sintered states.

317



Various (3)
Galvanostatically polarized K+ selective solid state sensors with PVC membrane
MS; ICP; LA
Cl, K and Na distribution within the sensor phases were studied using LA-ICP-MS. K was found to accumulate during the course of cathodic galvanostatic polarization. The surface content of K was found to be linearly dependent on the applied current.

318



Various (4)
Components of spent Lithium ion batteries
XRF; -; S AAS; F; L
Analytical techniques such as atomic absorption, XRF, XRD used to determine metal content of anodes and cathodes of such batteries. A hydrometallurgical method based on sodium hydroxide leaching of Al followed by sulfuric acid/hydrogen peroxide dissolution of the remaining Co and Li was used to separate the components for re-cycling purposes. Variables such as concentration of the dissolution reagents and temperature were all optimized.

319



Various
Low k dielectric materials
ToF-SIMS; -; S XPS; -; S
Low k dielectric materials formed on silicon wafers by chemical vapour deposition. Materials were then cured using UV light at different wavelengths (172, 185 or 222 nm). Effect of pressure on the UV curing was then determined. Materials characterized using ToF-SIMS, XPS, FTIR, contact angle measurement, XRR, surface acoustic wave spectrometry (SAW) and purged UV spectroscopic ellipsometry (PUVSE). The depth-profiles were found to be homogeneous for all curing wavelengths.

320



Various (3)
Biologically metal-doped protein semi-conducting biopolymer
AAS; F; L
Metal doped (copper oxide, cadmium oxide and lead oxide) muscle protein from fish was isolated, purified and characterized for its potential as a semi-conducting biopolymer. Characterization techniques used for the crude protein included circular dichroism, AAS and FTIR. Protein thin film prepared and then characterized using SEM-EDX, XRD, Raman shift, optical coefficient and electron transfer reactions such as conductivity and cyclic voltammetry. Cd and Cu analogues were found to have semiconductor potential.

321



Yb
Yb diffusion doped superconductor material of the type YBa2Cu3O7-x (Y123)
EDXRF; -; S
Effect of Yb diffusion on structural evolution and superconducting properties of Y123 ceramic were determined. Yb diffusion over a temperature range of 800–900 °C determined using EDXRF. Yb doped material had increased critical current density compared with un-doped material. Authors hypothesized that Yb inclusion improved structural quality at the grain boundaries.

322



Zn
Cadmium zinc telluride ingot
MS; GD, S
Distribution of Zn in vertical Bridgman grown Cd1-xZnxTe ingot determined using GD-MS. Other characterization trechniques used included photoluminescence, photo-induced current transient spectroscopy, resistivity, and photosensitivity-mapping.

323







3.2.4 Thin films. 
As is usual with this sample type, surface analysis and depth-profiling methods are the most commonly used analytical techniques. This part of the review will be split between the different analytical techniques, i.e. the X-ray-based methods will be discussed together, as will the different SIMS techniques.
3.2.4.1 CRMs and Reviews. 
A cobalt thin film on gold has been prepared by sputter deposition and has now been certified as a reference material when synchrotron radiation µ-XRF is used as the analytical method.324 According to the authors, Adriaens et al., the material could be used to quantify cobalt phthalocyanine and cobalt porphyrin modified gold electrodes.
There have been several reviews of different aspects of the analysis of thin films. Bengtson produced a review containing 29 references that discussed the use of GD-OES for depth-profiling purposes.325 As well as discussing older work in which the nature of the molecular emission spectra was discussed, the author also described more recent work from the sputtering of polymers and thin films that have a large content of lighter elements and when a Grimm type source was used. For the latter cases, substantial emission may be observed from light diatomic molecules such as CO, CH, OH, NH and the carbon dimer; and these may lead to significant analytical errors for several atomic lines and hence false depth-profiles. In addition, results from a recent study in which mixed gases were used in the Grimm discharge were discussed. The author noted that dissociation and recombination reactions occurred which could lead to the formation of molecules that were not present in the original plasma gas. Another review (66 refs) has been prepared by Chen and colleagues,326 who discussed the use of pulsed laser ablation in a paper entitled “Pulsed laser ablation for tin dioxide: nucleation, growth and microstructures”. The paper discussed how the quantum dots, made using the pulsed laser deposition method, blossomed into a sub-monolayer regime which was devoted to nucleation and growth of the films.
3.2.4.2 SIMS and ToF-SIMS Applications. 
There have been a number of applications using various types of SIMS. De Mondt and colleagues discussed the use of molecular depth-profiling by means of mechanical erosion of successive layers followed by ToF-static-SIMS analysis of the different layers as they became exposed.327 The authors stated that the proposed method was non-sputtering in nature and that the relation between the signal intensity and the local concentration remained the same as that at the surface. Fujii and co-workers described an extension to the use of their “own unique technique” of shave-off depth-profiling by nano-beam SIMS.328 The original method involved the fast horizontal sweep of a focused ion beam (FIB) combined with a slow vertical sweep. The procedure allowed highly precise depth-profiling data to be acquired that had an absolute depth scale, pin-point depth-profiling and could be used for rough surfaces and hetero-interfaces. This new method of multilane shave off depth-profiling provided some lateral information precisely by synchronizing signal acquisition with FIB control. Over recent years the increasing interest in surface analysis techniques that have excellent depth-resolution capability, better detection sensitivity and higher throughput has been one of the driving forces behind the use of static SIMS using low energy primary beams. A paper by Jiang et al. described the use of sub keV energy O2+ ions at glancing incidence to sputter secondary ions from silicon.329 Results demonstrated that surface roughening was minimal provided that beams of 250 or 500 eV were used at an angle of above 80°. However, at an angle of between 60 and 80°, roughening happened rapidly. It was noted that the depth resolution of B and Ge varied considerably with differing incidence angle. The authors said that the explanation for this was the different diffusion/segregation behaviour of the two analytes during the oxygen ion bombardment. A glancing angle of above 80° favoured a thinner altered layer, a short surface transient a minimal apparent shift in depth-profiles, a better depth resolution (but not for B in silicon), a good sputter rate but a poor overall yield of positive secondary ions; i.e. decreased sensitivity. A simple erosion dynamics model of molecular sputter depth-profiling has been developed by Wucher.330 The model described the essential features commonly observed in molecular depth-profiling and made predictions of the dependence of measured molecular ion signals on the primary ion fluence when SIMS or SNMS was used to analyze a surface. The results produced from the model were compared with experimental data obtained using cluster ion initiated SIMS. Wucher and co-workers have also reported the use of ToF-SIMS imaging and cluster ion beam erosion to perform three-dimensional analysis of molecular films.331 Artifacts inherent in sputter depth-profiling that arise through lateral inhomogeneities of either the erosion rate or the sample itself could be assessed using the technique. Ultra-high depth resolution SIMS for the analysis of interfaces of complex low-dimensional structures has been discussed by Chakraborty.332 The author stated that by using extremely low primary beam current (as little as 10 nA), a low impact energy (below 1 keV), an appropriate impact angle and effective profile reconstruction approaches, it is possible to obtain very high depth-resolution studies with high precision and repeatability starting from the top layer of a structure downwards. The author illustrated the work with examples from some of his recent studies. Other SIMS-based techniques are discussed in Table 5.
3.2.4.3 X-ray-based techniques. 
Yang and co-workers have described the development of a new glancing incident XRF (GIXRF) spectrometer that made use of a parallel polycapillary X-ray lens.333 The use of a zirconium filter and slits enabled a highly collimated and monochromatic X-ray beam to be achieved and eliminated the monochromator used for conventional GIXRF measurements. The parallel X-ray lens also enabled an increase in intensity to be obtained for the excitation spectrum. The authors applied the new spectrometer to the analysis of a single crystal and a thin film sample. The same research group has also used a polycapillary lens system during the development of another new technique that they have entitled grazing exit micro XRF (GE-MXRF).334 The polycapillary lens collected X-rays from the source in a large solid angle and formed a very intense X-ray beam. This was then used to glean information on film composition, thickness and density. A two-dimensional scan of the film also enabled information on the film uniformity to be acquired. Pollakowski and colleagues have combined the use of GIXRF with near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) analysis to obtain information on Ti present in a deeply buried TiOx nano-layer.335 The combined use of GIXRF and NEXAFS enabled information on both the layer composition and the Ti speciation to be obtained. Varying the angle of incidence enabled the penetration depth to be varied within the range of a few to several hundred nanometers. The authors applied the technique to the analysis of 30 nm thick titanium nano-layers that had experienced different extents of oxidation, buried in 5 nm thick carbon layers. The structures had been produced using ion beam sputtering deposition. The results demonstrated that GIXRF-NEXAFS has the potential to make substantial contributions to the speciation analysis of deeply buried nano-layers. Although analysis at a constant incident angle demonstrated that it was not possible to find an angle of incidence that ensured a constant penetration depth for NEXAFS, appropriate angular corrections could be made to ensure that the penetration depth was kept constant. The determination of thickness and composition of thin films by XRF spectrometry using theoretical influence coefficient algorithms to overcome matrix interferences is a subject that has been tackled by Sitko.336 Two algorithms were proposed. In the first, the coefficients were treated as constants whereas in the second, they were linear functions of sample thickness and concentration of all matrix elements. The coefficients were calculated from composition and theoretical relative radiation intensity of hypothetical pure element films and binary films. The algorithms were then applied to the analysis of both hypothetical ternary (iron-chromium-nickel) and binary (iron-nickel and chromium nickel) films where the composition for each of the analytes was in the range 5–95% m/m and to experimental data obtained from an iron-nickel binary system and from a copper film. The authors concluded that the algorithms facilitated the accurate determination of the composition and thickness of films whilst also providing a clear and easy to understand interpretation of the data. This latter function is, according to the authors, a clear advantage over the fundamental parameters method. Other applications papers based on X-ray techniques may also be present in Table 5.
3.2.4.4 Alternative techniques and comparisons of methods. 
The application of ultra-short duration pulsed laser ablation for the preparation of thin films by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and then the analysis of such films by dual pulse LIBS has been described by Teghil and colleagues.337 The authors discussed how the application of these lasers differs from more traditional longer pulse lasers in terms of the characteristics of the plasma that is produced by femto-second or nano-second lasers. The most important feature of these plasmas is that a very high concentration of nm sized particles is produced. This is advantageous for both the deposition and the analysis. A novel method of analysis for the sensitive determination of C depth-profiling in thin samples of a heavier matrix has been described by Radovic and co-workers.338 The method was based on the C–C elastic scattering coincidence measurement. Recoiled C as well as scattered C ions from the primary beam were detected by two solid-state detectors placed at 45° around the direction of the beam. Scattering products were detected in the forward direction meaning that the method could only be applied for transmission samples with a thickness of the order of several micrometers. The technique was used for the analysis of several samples with known composition and depth-distribution of C. Parameters such as the sensitivity were also discussed.
Several papers have been published that have compared several analytical techniques and discussed the relative merits and drawbacks of each. In one such paper, Rozenblat et al.339 described the profiling of silicon oxynitride thin films using techniques as diverse as XPS-based controlled surface charging (CsC), ARXPS and ToF-SIMS. The techniques all identified that the sample had an inhomogeneous composition with a significant N enrichment at the top of the oxide layer. The authors discussed the capabilities of the CSC method in treating hetero-structures of poor chemical contrast. The analysis of nano-scale layered samples has been discussed by Baake and colleagues who used a large number of analytical techniques including SR-XRF, µ-XRF, WD-XRF, RBS and XRR to analyze the samples non-destructively and SIMS to analyze it destructively.340 The objective of the study was to identify the elements present in the nano-layers and to determine the purity as well as examining the roughness, density, homogeneity and thickness of each layer. The XRF-based techniques were successful for the determination of the majority of these properties; especially for commercial samples. For the thickness, the results from XRR, RBS, SIMS as well as SR-XRF, WD-XRF and µ-XRF all agreed, within experimental uncertainty, with each other. The authors noted that in preliminary studies, they had experienced some serious discrepancies in the results of the X-ray based methods. These deviations were explained and then overcome by introducing various corrections into the evaluation or by re-determining some fundamental parameters. Parallel ARXPS has been used by Pelissier et al. to study the oxidation of tungsten and tungsten silicide thin films on 12 inch wafers.341 After deposition of the layers, the wafers were exposed to air for defined periods of time and the angle resolved data were used to obtain accurate tungsten oxide thickness measurements. The results from the ARXPS study were compared with those obtained using XRR. The authors obtained a precise measurement of the oxidation velocity and bonding environment. The non-destructive profile of the top five nm of the tungsten silicide surface was also obtained using the ARXPS data. These were compared with that obtained using ToF-SIMS.
Table 5 Application of the analysis of thin films




Analyte
Matrix
Technique; Atomization; Presentation
Comments
Reference




Cr
Nanometer metal multi-layers
OES; GD; S SIMS; -; S RBS; -; S
Overview of the three techniques discussing the advantages and disadvantages of each. Ultra-thin chromium layers of 2.5 and 5 nm buried at different depths in titanium matrices were analyzed. Depth resolution for each of the techniques was discussed.

342



H
Titanium manganese (TiMn2) type metal hydride alloy
XPS; -; S SNMS; -; S TDMD; -; S
TDMS used to determine H content in storage alloy and to determine activation energy for the desorption. XPS used to indicate the oxidation state of the main alloy elements. SNMS used to analyze the top 18 nm thick layer. An oxide layer formed during manufacture and during long term storage prevents H from being absorbed. An activation process is required.

343



N
Interface of silicon oxide films on silicon
ToF-SIMS; -; S
Silica films deposited on silicon by plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD). ToF-SIMS used to determine Si3+ and from this, the depth-resolution function. The full width half maximum of the resolution function was approximately 1.6 nm for 22 kV Au3+ primary ions and sputter etching by Ar+ at 1 kV. The intensity profile of Si3O2N+ secondary ion species was measured at the interface.

344



Na
Titanium dioxide films on soda lime glass and silicon dioxide pre-coated glass
OES; GD; S XRR; -; S
Films produced via sol-gel spin and dip-coating techniques. Films characterized by XRD, XRR, GD-OES and optical profilometry. Na migration detected in the amorphous TiO2 films which were deposited on soda lime glass substrate. A barrier layer was therefore introduced between the film and the substrate. The mechanism by which the barrier works was proposed according to GD-OES depth-profile measurements.

345



Various
Inter-metallic phases of a nickel-zinc coating on iron and nickel and titanium/silicon films on silicon carbide
SNMS; -; S
Quantitative determination of chemical solid phases using SNMS was described.

346



Various (primarily O, but also Al and Fe)
Oxide films
OES; GD; S
Calibration curves obtained by combining bulk CRMs and well-characterized coated calibration samples. Oxide layers analyzed using 700 Pa of pressure and 30 W forward power. Qualitative and quantitative data were in agreement with nominal values. Preliminary results for oxidation state speciation of Al and Fe were compared with XRD data.

347



Various (primarily O, but also Cr and Fe)
Metal oxide films
OES; GD; S
An extension to the previous work. Iron oxide film deposited on silicon and a chromate conversion coating were analyzed. Metal to O ratios were determined during depth-profiling. AFM and XPS used to study the surface of the films. XPS data of the surface and of the craters of GD sites indicated that the GD had the effect of reducing the metal elements. This was attributed to the preferential sputtering of O, leaving an enriched but reduced metal layer.

348






3.3 Glasses
As with previous review periods, the work undertaken this year has focused largely on solid sample analysis. Such analyses do not require the use of unpleasant dissolution media, tend to be far less time-consuming and are usually less damaging to the original sample than traditional liquid sampling. The solid sampling techniques have come in several forms, the most common of which have been LA-ICP-MS. Other techniques, e.g. LIBS, PIXE and/or PIGE; XRF and glow discharge have also found use. This part of the review will therefore be split into several sub-sections that discuss the different analytical techniques and will also discuss some of the applications. The applications have been split into two broad areas. The use of analytical techniques for forensic purposes is still proving to be a very popular area of study. However, archaeological applications are by far the largest area of study. It should be noted that the content of many of the sub-sections will overlap. It is therefore worth reading through all of the sub-sections to ensure that all of the papers of interest to the reader have been located.

3.3.1 LA-ICP-MS determinations. 
Several papers have discussed the application and advantages of femto-second LA. Walle and colleagues discussed the detection efficiencies of both nano- and femto-second LA sample introduction to ICP-MS.349 The detection efficiency was defined as the ratio of ions reaching the detector and the atoms released by the LA process. Materials used for the analysis included pure silicon, silicate glasses and zircon. The gas used to transport the ablated materials to the plasma was found to have an effect when nano-second LA was used. When helium was used, the detection efficiency for a silicate glass was 1 × 10−7 for low mass and 1 × 10−5 for high mass elements which was independent of the wavelength used for ablation. When argon was used, the detection efficiency was found to decrease by a factor of approximately 5 across the entire mass range. This was attributed to less efficient aerosol to ion conversion and less efficient ion transmission inside the ICP-MS instrument. A second paper by Walle et al. discussed the use of femto-second LA-ICP-MS for the analysis of brass and silicate glass.350 These authors attempted to use liquid calibrants during the analysis but met with mixed success. For many elements the average deviation from the expected values was 11.1% for desolvated calibrants and 8.4% for non-desolvated ones. This indicated that the performance improved under “wet” operating conditions. However, for some elements, e.g. Cd and Zn, accuracy ranged from just a few percent up to approximately 50%.
Glass reference materials have been analyzed using femto-second LA-ICP-MS by Shaheen and co-workers.351 A total of 63 major, minor and trace elements were determined in the materials NIST 610, 612 and 614, as well as some USGS materials, using femto-second near IR laser ablation into the ICP-MS instrument and the analytes ranged in mass from Li up to U. Using Ca-43 as an internal standard and the NIST 612 as the external calibrant, the authors managed to correct for matrix effects, drift and the amount of sample ablated. Accurate data were obtained (agreement to within 10% of certified or previously published data), with a precision of better than 10% RSD for most elements. Fractionation for most elements was found to be minimal. Kent352 has determined Pb isotope homogeneity in NIST 610 and 612 glass materials with a spatial resolution of 100 µm using LA-multi-collector-ICP-MS. It was impossible to identify any inhomogeneity because of the analytical uncertainty. Between 73 and 133 measurements across a 1.5 mm glass wafer yielded no results greater than the two standard deviation level. However, it was noted that there were significant differences in the Tl/Pb ratio, indicating that there were regions of the materials that were depleted in the volatile element Tl.


3.3.2 Other solid sampling techniques. 
Shen and Lu have used a combination of LIBS and LIF to determine U in a glass sample.353 The authors used a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser to generate ions and atoms from the glass and then an optical parametric oscillator wavelength-tunable laser to resonantly excite these species. An excitation wavelength of 385.96 nm was used to excite the ions whereas detection was at 409 nm. A concentration of 462 ppm was found in the glass sample analyzed.
A pulsed radiofrequency glow discharge ToF-MS method of analysis has been described by Muniz and co-workers who applied it to the direct analysis of bulk and thin coated glasses.354 The signal was monitored during the pre-peak, plateau and afterglow periods of the GD and it was found that the analytes showed the highest ionic signals in the afterglow which occurred a few hundred micro-seconds after the maximum of the argon signal. The exact timing of the maximum signal was, however, analyte dependent and was also influenced by the isotope mass and the pressure of the GD. After optimization of the operating conditions, analysis of the CRM NIST 1411 indicated that the best results were obtained using a low pressure (150–200 Pa) and high power (135 W). The authors applied their procedure to the analysis of thin coatings on thick glass substrates. The depth resolution was comparable to that found using GD-OES although the best overall resolution was obtained using ToF-SIMS.
A synthetic germanium–bismuth glass prepared by Wiedenbeck and colleagues can be used for the coarse mass calibration of SIMS instruments.355 The binary glass was doped with five trace elements that could be used to anchor the entire mass table up to a m/z of 209 with an accuracy of better than 0.5 dalton. The material was used to calibrate a commercial instrument in less than five minutes. Since a large proportion of the mass range could be calibrated, switching from low to high mass measurements was greatly simplified.


3.3.3 Forensic applications. 
There have been several forensic applications in this review period. This is representative of the fact that many forensic laboratories frequently have to perform tests to determine whether or not there is an association between glass from a crime scene and that found on a suspect. One of the more common instrument types used for this sort of analysis is ICP-MS because of its high sensitivity and precision and relative lack of interferences. However, until relatively recently, most quadrupole-based ICP-MS instruments, that have only unit resolution, suffered from polyatomic interferences during the determination of Fe at m/z 56, 57 and 58. These arise from argon oxide species (40Ar16O, 40Ar16OH, 40Ar18O) as well as some calcium oxide species (40Ca16O). Since Fe has previously been identified as being a good discrimination element, these interferences have historically caused problems. However, since the advent of instrumentation that has either a reaction or a collision cell, these problems can potentially be overcome. Castro and co-workers have used such an instrument to determine Fe in glass and have then compared the data in terms of accuracy, precision and LOD with those obtained using high resolution ICP-MS instrumentation.356 The analyses were performed using both conventional dissolution/liquid sample introduction and by LA of the solid material. Use of the reaction cell or the high resolution instrument reduced or resolved the interference problems and method LODs were 0.03 and 0.14 µg g−1 for LA and liquid sample introduction respectively. Another forensic application that has used ICP-MS for the analysis was reported by Suzuki and colleagues.357 These authors used ICP-MS to determine 10 elements (Ba, Ca, Ce, Co, La, Mo, Pb, Rb, Sr and Zr) in sheet glass before and after it had been exposed to high temperature (764 °C) for two minutes. The concentrations were not found to differ markedly before and after the heat exposure and this was found to be advantageous because the refractive index (RI) was found to change significantly. The authors therefore concluded that forensic discrimination of glass that had been exposed to heat (e.g. an attempt to destroy the crime scene using fire) cannot be achieved using RI, but that ICP-MS analysis was perfectly feasible.
Rodriguez-Celis et al. have discussed the use of LIBS as a tool for the forensic discrimination of glass.358 These authors managed to discriminate between glass of various car windows using linear and rank correlation methods. Although a spectral mask was necessary to eliminate some of the high intensity emission lines, the authors did manage to provide an effective identification and discrimination at a 95% confidence level. As well as being a multi-elemental technique, LIBS had the added advantage of requiring virtually no sample preparation.
Brozek-Mucha studied the use of SEM-EDX to determine the persistence of glass fragments on clothing.359 Although the amount of glass present depended on the retentive properties of the clothing, how far from the source of glass the suspect was standing and the time between the incident and the time of testing, the results from simulated break-ins or vandalism enabled the author to conclude that important information could still be obtained.


3.3.4 Archaeological applications. 
As with all archaeological applications, as little damage as possible must be inflicted on the samples. Therefore, there has been a proliferation of solid sampling techniques that cause minimal (if any) sample deterioration or loss. Most of these applications are published in archaeological-based journals and therefore do not describe the experimental detail at any length. They are therefore best presented in a Table (Table 6), where the reader may easily understand the number of different applications with which atomic spectrometry may help archaeologists.
Table 6 Archaeological applications of glass analysis




Element
Matrix
Technique; Atomization; Presentation
Comments
Reference




Ca
Ancient glazes and glasses
XAFS; -; S XANES; -; S
Ca known to alter transparency of some glasses, but the mechanism was not fully understood. XAFS study at the Ca K- and L-edges undertaken to try and elucidate mechanism. XANES study at the K-edge used to corroborate findings.

360



Various (40)
Glass fragments of Parthian and Sasanian epoch
MS; ICP; L
41 glass fragments analyzed for major, minor and trace elements. K and Mg ratio helped identify different glass preparation techniques.

361



Various (38)
47 glass fragments from Sasanian epoch (3rd – 7th century AD) in Iraq
MS; ICP; L
Materials represented finished objects, raw glass and waste glass. Mg and P data showed evidence of different kinds of plant ash being used during the manufacture.

362



Various
Glass from Roman ship Iulia Felix
XRF; -; S Electron microprobe
Analytical and chemometric techniques used in conjunction with archaeological methods to determine composition of assorted glasses. A “re-cycling index” based on the Sb content was developed to quantify the extent of re-cycling.

363



Various
Late Roman and Carolingian period glasses from Slovenia
PIXE; -; S PIGE; -; S
Combined use of PIXE-PIGE using a proton beam in air was applied to the analysis of the glass objects. Majority of the objects were made of the normal Roman Natron type glass. Increase Ti indicated that some of the glass had been re-cycled several times.

364



Various
Polychrome glasses from Etruscan sites dating from 7th – 4th centuries BC
µ-XRF; -; S µ-XANES; -; S X-ray powder diffraction
Since sample damage was absolutely forbidden, authors used a range of synchrotron – based techniques. High levels of Pb were identified in yellow samples. Sb was elevated in white and light blue samples and Mn and Fe were present at higher concentrations in purple and black samples respectively. µ-XANES and XRD used to try and identify the analytes' bonding structure.

365



Various
Historical glass
MS; ICP; LA SEM-EDX
LA-ICP-MS and SEM-EDX used as complementary techniques. LA-ICP-MS enabled determination of elements that were less than the LOD obtainable by SEM-EDX as well as B, an element that cannot be determined using EDX. A good correlation between the data sets was obtained.

366



Various
Ancient glass beads
MS; ICP; LA
Similar glass beads found at archaeological sites in Asia and Africa. LA-ICP-MS used to determine elemental fingerprints from beads in India, Sri Lanka and East Africa. Two sub-groups identified. One dated from 4th century BC – 5th century AD and was found in Sri Lanka and India, the other dated from later (9th – 19th century AD) and was found in both Kenya and at Chaul in India.

367



Various
Medieval glass from Siponto (Italy)
OES; ICP;L AAS; ETV; L
Atomic spectrometry used for investigating glass production technology. All glasses, independent of colour, were silica-soda-lime in nature. Chemometric techniques of PCA, CA, and factor analysis used to obtain technological information.

368



Various
Roman glass excavated in Croatia
XRF; -; S
A portable XRF instrument was used to analyze 109 objects. The instrument has an X-ray tube with a palladium target that operated at 40 kV, a silicon drift detector with a polymer window and an enlargeable vacuum sampling chamber. The instrument was capable of determining light elements e.g. Na and Mg as well as heavier analytes.

369






3.4 Ceramics and refractories
This has, as usual, been a popular area of research in this review period. Applications have been split between new methods of analysis, the study of archaeological materials and bio-ceramics. Other applications have included the measurement of diffusion through ceramic bodies. An increase in the number of ceramics used in the electronics industry has also been observed. This latter class may equally be discussed under section 3.2.

3.4.1 Methods of analysis. 
There have been several papers that have discussed new or modified methods of analysis for ceramic based samples. The capabilities of LIBS for such analyses and for the analysis of raw materials have been discussed by Ctvrtnickova and co-workers.370 Single pulse LIBS was compared with orthogonal re-heating double pulse LIBS. Results from both were found to be comparable in terms of analytical performance once the operating conditions and detection systems had been optimized. Resano et al. used LA-ICP-MS equipped with a dynamic reaction cell into which neon was introduced to determine Pb (Pb-206, Pb-207 and Pb-208) isotope ratios in Spanish antique lead-glazed ceramics.371 The authors concluded that the presence of the neon made a significant improvement in the precision of the analysis with values of 0.15–0.25% RSD being achieved; an improvement by a factor of between two and three over standard analysis. The improvement in precision enabled different groups of sample to be distinguished from each other. Another advantage of the technique was that it enabled spatial resolution of Pb isotopes in a relatively short time (30 min) whilst causing only minimal damage with ng levels being ablated. Unfortunately, the presence of neon did exacerbate mass discrimination effects that could only be overcome by exact matrix matching. In this work, the authors analyzed one sample of each type by an independent technique to obtain a suitable reference value. The authors emphasized though that the large majority of the samples could still be analyzed in a rapid and non-destructive way. An ICP-MS instrument equipped with a reaction cell has been used by Nonose and colleagues during the determination of V in silicon nitride fine ceramic powders.372 The National Metrology Institute of Japan is currently developing CRMs of such materials using isotope dilution. Unfortunately, ID requires the presence of at least two isotopes that are free from interferences and this is particularly problematic for many of the first row transition elements. Isobaric interferences arising from Cr-50 or Ti-50 can cause problems in the determination of V in ceramics. The authors therefore proposed the use of a reaction gas consisting of a mixture of ammonia and CH3F. Such a mixture formed molecules of general formula MF2(NH3)4 where M is Cr, Ti or V; but the rate of formation could be optimized for individual metals. It was therefore possible to optimize the system (in terms of gas flow rates for the ammonia and the CH3F for the formation of VF2(NH3)4. The results obtained using this new method of ID-MS compared well with those obtained using a matrix matching calibration system.
Electrothermal vaporization is a commonly used sample introduction technique for this sample type because it readily enables the analysis of solid samples directly. Aramendia et al. have coupled ETV with an ICP-MS instrument to determine six impurities (As, Cd, Hg, Pb, Sb and Zn) in titanium dioxide samples.373 Optimization of the temperature program and careful selection of the analytes' isotopes enabled reliable results to be obtained since potential problems arising from spectral interferences were avoided. The optimized programme was found not to require a pyrolysis stage and vaporization was at a relatively low temperature of 1700 °C. This volatilized the analyte whereas the bulk matrix remained in the vaporizer. This enabled the determination of Zn which would otherwise have been interfered with by the polyatomic molecule TiO+. A direct solid sampling introduction method has been applied by de Mattos and co-workers who determined seven impurities (Cr, Cu, Fe, K, Mn, Sb and Zn) in silicon nitride powders by GFAAS.374 No problems were observed with the background correction methods and calibration could be achieved using aqueous standards. For the determination of Fe, it was necessary to coat the platform with an extra layer of graphite powder in order to achieve quantitative vaporization and to increase the lifetime of the platform. The increase in platform lifetime was also useful for the determination of Cr and Cu. When 2 mg samples were analyzed, precisions were typically 5–18% (n = 5) and LODs were as low as 0.1 ng g−1 for Zn. The results were compared with those obtained using four other techniques, including neutron activation analysis.
An alternative to ICP-OES has been devised by Banno and colleagues who described the use of liquid electrode plasma optical emission spectrometry (LEP-OES) for the determination of Li and Na in zirconium dioxide powders.375 The solid material is dissolved in sulfuric acid and then the sample solution is put into a narrow channel within a small cuvette. An electrical pulse is then applied to both ends of the channel and, since the channel narrows towards the middle, the current and voltage increases at this spot and a plasma is generated. Emission from the zirconium is rather weak, which is an advantage because the zirconium has many emission lines, leading to problems using a standard ICP-OES instrument. The emission generated from the analytes may therefore be measured more easily. The authors studied the effects of increasing the voltage applied and altering the distance of the channel and found that an increase in either leads to an increase in Na signal compared with that of H. According to the authors, this implied that the selectivity for the excitation was, to some extent, directly controllable by using different operating conditions. Detection limits were described as being 5 µg g−1 and 33.25 µg g−1 for Na and Li, respectively.
Jaroszewicz and co-workers described a method of preparing ceramics of the Ti-B-C type (non-oxidic) using the pulse plasma method on highly pure powders of titanium, boron, graphite and nickel starter materials and then analyzing them using a combination of micro-beam XRD and XRF.376 The combination of these two analytical methods enabled the visualization of the distribution of additional phases present in the sintered samples. These were found to be dependent on the sintering conditions used. The microbeam XRD demonstrated the presence of three phases comprising TiB2, TiC and TiB when sintering occurred over a short time interval whereas the presence of the nickel as a sintering facilitator yielded an extra phase comprising Ni3B.


3.4.2 Biomedical ceramics. 
These materials are increasingly being used in bio-medical applications because of their relative stability and inertness. Some, however, have the capability of stimulating bone regeneration and it is this latter property that prompted Verne and colleagues to prepare and characterize a bioactive and anti-bacterial glass ceramic.377 These workers prepared a material that also incorporated silver ions (as the anti-bacterial agent) and then analyzed the product using a suite of analytical techniques including SEM-EDS and XRD. The release of Ag ions was verified by GFAAS analysis. Biological studies using osteoblast cells were undertaken and the anti-bacterial activity on Staphylococcus Aureus was also tested. A paper by Gonzaga et al. studied sub-critical crack growth in glass ceramics and glass-infiltrated alumina composites for dental restorations.378 Pellets of each of the sample types had cracks induced by an indenter and the lengths of the cracks were measured using optical microscopy. The pellets were then soaked in artificial saliva and the microstructure analyzed using SEM-EDS, XRD and XRF. Tanaka and co-workers prepared hydroxyapatite whiskers for biomedical use using a hydrothermal method and then analyzed them using IR and ICP-OES.379 It was found that the whiskers were Ca deficient hydroxyapatite. Further analysis of their conduction properties indicated that they had a similar temperature dependence as those of sintered hydroxyapatites at a temperature of above 600 °C. The conduction mechanisms were elucidated and were found to originate from an increase in the number of protons generated from HPO42−. A decrease in conductivity was found to correspond to a conversion of HPO42− to P2O74− at 500 °C.


3.4.3 Analysis of archaeological ceramic samples. 
The analysis of archaeological porcelains/ceramics has again proved to be very popular. For the study of the archaeological materials, it is the norm to cause as minimal damage as possible. Therefore, the use of techniques such as the various forms of XRF, LA and LIBS has proved popular. A useful overview entitled “archaeometry and museums: fifty years of curiosity and wonder” that contained 202 references has been prepared by Guerra.380 The paper emphasized the importance of museum items for the understanding of the past. Another important overview of the analysis of archaeological and/or historical samples has been produced by Giussani and co-workers381 who discussed the role of LA-ICP-MS during the analysis of such materials. The review had 115 references and discussed the analysis of ceramics, pottery, metal objects, human remains and other relevant materials. The advantages and drawbacks of the technique were also discussed in detail.
Many of the studies also used chemometric methods to maximize the information derived from the analytical data. Provenance studies, trade routes and different methods of sample preparation from the same kilns over different time periods were identified in many of the studies. The studies are best discussed in a table (Table 7), since many are very much application based and tend not to go into large amount of analytical detail.
Table 7 Applications of the analysis of archaeological ceramics




Analyte
Matrix
Technique; Atomization; Presentation
Comments
Reference




Pb
Ancient Spanish lead glazed ceramics
MS; ICP; LA
Pb isotope ratios determined by LA-ICP-MS using a dynamic reaction cell. Introduction of neon to the cell improved precision on the ratios to 0.15–0.25% (a factor of 2–3). This was sufficient to be able to distinguish between different samples types. The process could give spatially resolved isotopic information in less than 30 minutes whilst consuming negligible quantities of sample (ng level). The drawback was that the use of the reaction cell increased the amount of mass bias that had to be corrected for.

371



Zn
Ancient tile glazes of Portuguese origin
XANES; -; S
Lead-rich blue and white tile glazes analyzed using XANES to assess the speciation and coordination environment of Zn (a fuser metal in ancient glazes). Zinc oxide and zinc carbonate were used as model compounds for Zn ions in tetrahedral and octahedral forms respectively. Comparison between calculated and actual spectra demonstrated some differences that the authors attempted to explain. However, the overall results indicated that the Zn was present probably in a tetrahedral form.

382



Various
Late Roman oil lamps from Egnatia
Various analytical techniques; SEM, XRD
Provenance of lamps determined using statistical multivariate analysis of analytical data. Data compared with coeval pottery whose origin was known. Data indicated that pottery could be split between locally produced and those imported from North Africa. The imported lamps could also be segregated further into those produced in central Tunisia and those from Northern Tunisia.

383



Various
Ancient pottery from Aiani, Greece
XRF; -; S XRD, SEM-EDX
Ancient pottery ranging from pre-historic to Hellenistic times analyzed. Preliminary result indicated a local provenance and an improvement in ceramic manufacture technology. The presence of Gehlenite or pyroxene minerals indicated a higher firing temperature whereas phylosilicate minerals indicated a lower firing temperature.

384



Various
51 medieval ceramics from Canosa castle, Italy.
AAS; ET, L AAS; F; L AES; ICP; L XRF; - S SEM-EDX
Elemental composition of ceramics, glazes and pigments determined. Multivariate techniques used to analyze analytical data.

385



Various
Source material of Cypriot bronze age white ceramics
XRF; -; S MS; ICP; -
XRD and EPMA also used to distinguish samples. Four groupings identified according to their raw material sources and technological analogies.

386



Various
Ancient pottery from Ainos (Turkey)
EDXRF; -; S XRD
FTIR and X-ray techniques enabled mineralogical composition and firing conditions of fifth and sixth century BC samples to be determined. By re-firing sherds at 800 °C it was possible to determine that, initially, the sherds had been fired at less than 800 °C in an oxidizing environment.

387



Various
Potsherd pavements from Nigeria
MS; ICP; L
PCA and cluster analysis used to analyze analytical data.

388



Various
Ancient Egyptian and Nubian ceramics
XRF; -; S
Nubian style sherds contained sand, silt and clay sediment that was finer grained and poorer in quartz compared with the sediment mixture used to prepare the Egyptian pottery.

389



Various
Ancient Chinese Jun and Ru porcelain and glaze
µXRF; -; S
The layer between the glaze and the porcelain body was analyzed using µXRF. It was determined that glaze turned into a glassy state and infiltrated the body during firing.

390



Various
Porcelain from the Longquan kiln in Zhejiang province, China
WDXRF; -; S
Multivariate statistical analysis of data from non-destructive WDXRD analysis of samples and their glazes used to determine provenance.

391



Various
Underglaze painted tiles from 19th century Persian objects
XRF; -; S XANES, PIXE, confocal Raman and visible spectroscopies
Non-destructive analysis of under glaze painted tiles. It was established that the colours contained Cr and U, new materials in Persian tile making. The concentrations of K, Na, Pb and Sn were identified as markers for different workshops.

392



Various
Raw materials for different porcelains
XRF; -; S
Dynamic fuzzy cluster analysis used to analyze data from different porcelains from the Dangyangyu kiln. Differences between the glazes and the starting materials were observed between porcelain types.

393



Various
Chinese blue and white porcelains from the Yuan to the Ming dynasties
EDXRF; -; S
Non-destructive method of analysis used. Similarly, SEM and TEM also used. Samples that underwent EDXRF analysis then had data subjected to correspondence analysis. Differences in composition between production sites and between the two dynasties were observed.

394



Various
Hispano-Moresque lustred ceramic
AES; ETV; S Ion beam techniques, SEM, XRD
Non-destructive ion beam analysis and XRD techniques used, with supplementary information obtained by ETV-AES. These methods enabled analysis of the glazes as well as different layers. Results indicated a) a constant source of supply of the terra cotta; b) Significant changes in the glaze composition around the 17th century; c) Significant evolutions of the structure and composition of luster layers; d) Analogies and some differences between these samples and Italian Majolica ones and e) a change in quality of the blue pigment during the 16th century.

395



Various
Archaeological ceramics
LIBS; -; S
Artificial neural networks (ANN) used to classify provenance of ceramics following LIBS analysis. Two ANN networks proposed. One used the entire LIBS spectrum whereas the other used only the most intense peaks. When both procedures were used, better than 95% correct classification could be achieved.

396



Various
Whitewares from Nanwa site in China
MS; ICP; L TIMS
Elemental composition and Sr isotope ratio (Sr-87/Sr-86) used to compare Nanwa whitewares with those from the Tang (Gongxian kiln) and Song dynasties. All Nanwa samples were chemically consistent. However, isotope ratios indicated that Nanwa samples were prepared using a different clay to the other samples, even though the Nanwa and the Gongxian sites are only 25.5 km apart.

397



Various
Black glazed bowl sherds from Jian kiln, China
EDXRF,-; S XRD
Chemical composition, microstructure and visual appearance used to analyze samples. Two types of micro-structural forming mechanics identified.

398



Various
Ancient Chinese ceramic
XRF; -; S
A fundamental parameter-based reference-free XRF quantitation method was developed and validated. XRF spectra recorded at different excitation energies provided a means to evaluate relevant fundamental parameters and secondary enhancement processes simultaneously. With a few exceptions, the method yielded data in agreement with target values given within a proficiency test.

399



Various
Patinas from architectural heritage samples
EDXRF; -; S
Non-destructive study of the thin films (5–500 µm) on the surface of stone building materials using a portable EDXRF spectrometer. Some patinas were deliberately prepared, whereas others were formed naturally. The authors concluded that the portable instrument was capable of qualitative and even semi-quantitative analysis of the patinas in-situ.

400



Various
English polychromated alabaster sculptures.
µEDXRF; -; S µ-Raman and FTIR
The supports, pigments and binders of the sculptures were analyzed. Pigments analyzed included minium, vermilion, lead white, carbon black, red iron oxide, gold leaf and a degraded green copper pigment. The presence of the degraded green pigment as well as calcium oxalate dihydrate indicated that microbiological degradation had occurred. PCA was used to determine whether or not the materials came from the same quarry.

401



Various
Archaeological ceramics
TXRF; -; L
Two strategies were devised. The first involved acid leaching of the samples whereas the second involved acid leaching followed by a process to eliminate the iron present in the sample. Results compared with those obtained using INAA.

402



Various
Ancient ceramics
XRF; -; S XRD and EDX
The damage mechanisms of ancient ceramics were investigated.

403







3.4.4 Depth-profiling/diffusion studies. 
Several analytical techniques may be used for this, with one of the more popular being SIMS. Konarski and colleagues compared the results obtained from both SIMS and GD-MS during the measurement of the depth-profiles in hard coatings of titanium nitride and chromium nitride.404 For the SIMS, the authors applied a 5 keV argon ion beam of approximately 100 µm in diameter in a digitally controlled spiral manner. The resultant ions from the sample were separated using a quadrupole mass spectrometer prior to detection. The GD-MS analysis took place in an atmosphere of 1 kPa argon using a 1.5 kV DC voltage. The area of the analysis was approximately 4 mm2 and the ions produced were again separated using a quadrupole mass spectrometer prior to detection. The results from the two techniques were comparable although the authors did say that the results obtained from the GD-MS instrument were sometimes superior to the commercial SIMS instrument. Ultra-low energy SIMS ion beams of oxygen and nitrogen have been used by Fearn et al. for the depth-profiling of oxygen conducting ceramics.405 A ceramic pellet of general composition La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 that had been annealed in oxygen was investigated in an attempt to identify the surface layer composition and to determine any perturbing ion beam–target interactions. By ratioing the cationic species, the authors demonstrated that only Sr segregation at the surface occurred and that there was no surface oxide layer. This increase in Sr concentration at the surface altered the sample's vacancy concentrations and hence the surface exchange coefficient. Other authors have demonstrated the use of SIMS to measure O transport around gold/oxide ion conducting oxides such as gadolinium doped ceria (GDC) and yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ).406 The active area of O exchange was clearly demonstrated to be in the vicinity of Au/YSZ/oxygen triple phase boundary at a temperature of 973 K. For the GDC sample, O exchange took place around the Au/GDC interface. Other studies that have reported diffusion/depth-profiling studies include a paper by Lovas and colleagues who measured Na diffusion through the polycrystalline ceramic arc tube of high density discharge lamps.407 Several distinct steps of the process were identified including 1) solution in the ceramic, 2) diffusion through the ceramic, 3) leaving the bulk phase and 4) evaporation from the surface. The techniques of SIMS and XPS were used to determine the concentration depth-profiles. Results indicated that the grain boundary diffusion played an important role in the overall transport process. Diffusion coefficients at both the bulk and grain boundary regions were calculated along with the activation energy at each site. One final example of diffusion/depth-profiling is a paper by Koerfer and co-workers who measured the diffusion of Sr and Zr in samples of barium titanate single crystals in air at temperatures of between 1000 and 1250 °C.408 Thin films of strontium titanate (deposited by spin-coating a precursor solution) or of zirconium (deposited by sputtering) were used as diffusion sources. The depth-profiles of the target analytes were measured using a ToF-SIMS instrument and the results were discussed in terms of different diffusion mechanisms.

3.5 Catalysts
For the purposes of this review, catalysts and catalyst function have been broadly categorized as follows: Photocatalysts, catalytic decomposition on zeolytes, selective reduction and oxidation reactions, fuel cells, carbon nano-tubes and their applications, automotive catalysts, refining, alkylation and isomerization and polymer immobilized catalysts. As usual, many of the papers in this review period deal primarily with the synthesis of catalysts and the investigation of their catalytic activity, with characterization by spectroscopic and physico-chemical techniques being described in brief. This review therefore includes papers on the broader field of catalyst preparation and characterization, but there are several papers which do have a significant analytical content. Amongst these are papers outlining the use of synchrotron radiation sources for grazing angle XRF, ToF-SIMS, LA-ICP-MS and various ion beam analytical techniques. Additionally, electronic information is becoming increasingly important in understanding catalytic activity and selectivity. Techniques which can yield this kind of information, including X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) feature strongly in this current review. One paper of particular interest used an in-situ synchrotron spectroscopy fuel cell (XAS-cell) which allowed structural determination of the catalyst during use. An interesting way of determining the intermediates of electrochemical reactions was via the acquisition of mass spectrometric cyclic voltammograms, recorded at selected masses. LIBS has also made an appearance with one paper reporting this as a technique for the analysis of platinum group metals (PGM) in automotive catalysts.

3.5.1 Photocatalysts. 
Heterogeneous photocatalytic materials are attracting much attention because of their potential environmental applications for the total destruction of organic pollutants in air and water. Recently, photocatalytic activity of tantalum oxide (Ta2O5) has been reported, but reports on the preparation and catalytic activity of tantalum oxide, doped with rare earth oxides are much less common. Rare earth doping of TiO2 has resulted in improved photocatalytic acidity and Yang et al. have reported on the preparation of a Eu2O3 doped Ta2O5 catalyst via a sol-gel procedure.409 A range of analytical procedures were employed to characterize the morphology, phase structure and electronic properties. Field emission scanning electron microscopy revealed the shape and particle sizes of the material. XRD revealed the phase structures of the material and the excellent dispersion of europium under the conditions employed. XPS was carried out to confirm the chemical states of the europium dopant and XPS spectra are presented together with data showing the binding energies of Eu and Ta in various preparations. Conduction band gap energies were measured using UV-vis/DRS. The photocatalytic activity of the prepared materials with respect to the decomposition of rhodamine B and 4-nitrophenol were discussed together with the measured properties. Titania co-doped with cerium and iodine has been prepared and characterized using BET, XRD, SEM, XPS and UV-Visible absorption by Song et al.410 The material was employed as an effective catalyst for the photocatalytic degradation of oxalic acid. Porous titania containing gold nano-particles has been synthesized and this has also been shown to exhibit photocatalytic activity. Gold on TiO2 catalysts have been prepared using various synthetic routes411 and the authors presented a useful discussion on the fabrication of the nano-composite materials together with their characterization using the usual suite of techniques. Of particular interest from an analytical perspective was their use of SIMS to examine the distribution of the gold nano-particles within the porous titanium dioxide matrix. Mass spectral data was collected at m/z 65 to monitor the matrix (49Ti16O+) with gold being monitored at m/z 197. A depth-profile of Au was presented and the Au concentration and uniformity were monitored in relation to the different preparation procedures. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a self-limiting and sequential surface modification technique that allows for the conformal coating on flat and powder surfaces. The application of this procedure for the surface modification of Au/TiO2 catalysts by silica has been demonstrated by Ma and colleagues.412 The resulting materials were characterized by SEM/TEM and EDX. High resolution TEM images of the materials were also shown and the presence of the silica modified gold nano-particle was confirmed by TEM-EDX, resulting in greater stability to sintering. Fine tuning of the catalytic activity in both CO and hydrogen oxidation modes was possible. In an unusual and novel application of metal phosphates as supports for catalyst metals, nano-sized lanthanum phosphate has been employed as a support for gold nano-particles413 which were subsequently employed for CO oxidation. This work suggests that these materials could form the basis of a new catalyst system which should be studied in future work. A further use of doped titania was presented by Fresno and co-workers.414 SnO2 and ZrO2 doped TiO2 were studied for the photocatalytic degradation of toluene. Experiments were carried out in a continuous flow annular photo-reactor. Species adsorbed on the catalyst were extracted in solvent and analyzed using GC-MS. Solid catalyst was characterized using TXRF and XRD for elemental composition and crystalline structure. Oxidative destruction of organic pollutants involving the photocatalytic generation of hydroxyl radicals are an important process in wastewater treatment. The hydroxyl radical can be produced by several semiconductor materials under light irradiation through the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide. The effect of doping a Si-wafer with gold and copper, on its photocatalytic decomposition to yield hydroxyl radicals has been investigated by Ramalho and colleagues.415 The material was characterized using a number of techniques including, most interestingly, grazing incidence XRF (GIXRF) performed in the XRF Beam Line at the synchrotron facility of the Brazilian Synchrotron Light Laboratory. The GIXRF is a non-destructive method capable of investigating the depth-profiling of materials and is a variant of TXRF. This work presents GIXRF measurements showing the depth-profile of both Au and Cu atoms. The data suggests that Au atoms self-diffuse more easily into silicon and that thermal treatment strongly increased this diffusion. The doping significantly reduced the band gap, hence smaller energy values were found for Si–Cu. Data showing the relationship between these properties and oxygen liberation from hydrogen peroxide were presented.


3.5.2 Zeolites. 
During the last decade, transition metal containing zeolites have attracted a great deal of attention because of their excellent catalytic and adsorptive properties. Copper and silver ions are widely used to prepare catalysts for various reactions including catalytic decomposition of NO, selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NO by NH3, and the synthesis of various organic molecules. A copper/aluminium bifunctional MCM-41 zeolite for the simultaneous reduction of NOx and oxidation of volatile organic compounds (VOC), without the need for additional materials such as NH3 has been reported by Karthik et al.416 The catalysts were well characterized using XRD, N2-adsorption-desorbtion, TEM, 27Al MAS-NMR and ICP-MS. UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DIS) was also used to gain information on the coordination of Cu2+ ions within the framework. When increasing Cu content from 0.57 to 1.39 wt.% for Cu-Al-MCM-41, the intensity of the broad band observed at ∼320 nm increased monotonically, corresponding to well dispersed nano-crystalline CuO species on the surface. The absence of a very broad adsorption band ∼ 800 and 300 nm indicated, however, that there was no formation of extra-framework CuO species. In addition to UV-Vis DIS, EPR was used to further understand the Cu2+ environment. Silver and copper exchanged zeolites have also been considered for many other industrial applications including olefin/paraffin separation, olefin purification by removal of dienes, separation of CO, as well as aromatics from aliphatics, and sulfur removal from transportation fuels (gasoline, diesel and jet fuels), ref. 417 and references therein. For olefin/paraffin separation (ethane/ethylene and propane/propylene), the authors cited several patents which focused on the development of new selective adsorbents relying mainly on the control of pore size in order to achieve a high selectivity. Higher selectivities can also be achieved with Cu- and Ag-exchanged X type zeolites, but the main difficulty is that the olefin is strongly held and the desorption becomes difficult. Additionally, olefin polymerization which is associated with the acidity of the adsorbent induces the loss of the adsorption capacity. Most of the many studies cited in this paper were devoted to the acidity effect. The analysis of acidity strength and the concentration of Si–OH–Al groups in the zeolite framework, employs methods such as TPD, micro-calorimetry and IR spectroscopy. The acidity of the faujasite zeolite is mainly dependent on the Si/Al ratio, the treatment conditions and the ion nature (exchange by alkali and alkaline-earth cations). However, the information related to the variation of acidic properties with exchange degree is limited and the associated phenomena are not well understood. The liquid phase dehydration of methanol to dimethyl ether is becoming a very important reaction and has been investigated by Khandan and colleagues using various synthetic zeolites.418 The key parameters investigated were the Si/Al ratio and cation exchange properties. Zeolites exchanged with protons exhibited the highest activity in the dehydration of methanol. The zeolites were then modified with various metals to improve selectivity. Characterization was achieved using atomic spectrometric techniques, XRD, ammonia TPD and ammonia FT-IR and BET surface area measurements. The activity of the materials was correlated with its acidity and Al-modified mordenite zeolite exhibited optimum activity, selectivity and stability for methanol dehydration. Dry methane reforming can be an important route for increasing hydrogen production and reducing CO2 and CH4 emissions that contribute to the greenhouse effect. Although methane conversion processes have been studied for over 100 years, the biggest obstacle preventing commercialization is their endothermic nature, which requires high temperatures and in turn increases coke formation. The activity, stability and coke resistance of modified zeolites together with a platinum activated carbon catalyst were compared for the production of hydrogen by dry reforming of methane.419 Commercially available type Y and BEA zeolites were de-aluminated by refluxing in hydrochloric acid and samples loaded with either Ni, Pt or a combination of the two. Catalysts were characterized before and after exposure to reaction conditions. The surface elemental content and the metal-to-silicon ratio was measured by XPS with in-situ reduction of the sample to simulate the activation conditions. ICP-OES was used to determine the bulk Pt and Ni content in each sample synthesized after dissolution in hydrofluoric acid. Bulk Al was determined by AAS. Structural information such as pore size and crystallinity were examined by N2–adsorption and XRD and the catalytic properties of both fresh and spent catalysts were studied by TPR, ammonia TPD and pyridine adsorption. A Pt containing de-aluminated BEA zeolite was found to exhibit excellent potential for the dry reforming of methane because of its stability and resistance to coke formation.
Since the concentration and strength of Lewis and Brønsted acid sites depend subtly on the nature and the rate of ion exchange, the evaluation of the acidity of various Ag-and Cu-exchanged X zeolites has been studied.417 The paper presented information about the global acidity, and FTIR of pyridine adsorption, used to elucidate the nature and strength of acid sites resulting from the Ag and Cu exchange in zeolites. Zeolite synthesis was described, as was the chemical and physico-chemical characterization of the zeolites, determined by elemental analysis, nitrogen adsorption, acidity measurement by ammonia TPD and FTIR spectroscopy of pyridine adsorption and XRD. Total, Brønsted and Lewis acidity of the various Ag or Cu exchanged materials was presented. One of the issues with the use of natural zeolites is the presence of impurities which may inhibit the desirable catalytic properties. For example, metals such as vanadium and chromium inhibit the elimination of sulfur in hydrocarbons. It is therefore important to know the precise composition of the zeolite material. In an analytically significant paper, Andrade et al.420 described the use of various ion beam analytical (IBA) techniques coupled with SEM-EDS procedures for the elemental characterization of several natural zeolites. The IBA techniques employed were Rutherford Back Scattering (RBS) for sensitive determination of the heavy elements, Nuclear Reaction Analysis (NRA) using a deuterium ion beam for the determination of medium light elements including oxygen and carbon and Particle Induced X-ray Emission (PIXE) for the trace elements. XRD measurements were made to study the crystal structure of the samples. The results were presented for a range of zeolite materials and a comprehensive analysis of major and trace components was presented. It was shown that, where beamlines are available, this technology may be a useful option for full elemental analysis of catalytic materials.


3.5.3 Selective oxidation/reduction reactions. 
Due to the requirement of the Kyoto protocol to reduce carbon emissions, it is necessary to minimise carbon dioxide emissions from vehicles. New technologies including lean burn engines, which operate under a large excess of oxygen are being developed. These engines are able to reduce fuel consumption and thereby reduce the CO2 emissions. The main problem arises with the NOX emissions. Due to the excess of oxygen present in the exhaust and to the hydrothermal conditions needed (water content up to 12 vol.%), the NOX cannot be removed by conventional three-way catalysts. Selective catalytic reduction using hydrocarbons (HC-SCR) is therefore an attractive and effective way for reducing the NOX emissions from lean burn engines. The development of a micro-reactor based on etched plates coated with alumina and further impregnated with silver, for this kind of reduction process has been described by Carruci et al.421 The authors stated that the high surface to volume ratios of these reactors coupled with excellent heat transfer properties make them ideal for studying the NOX conversion over a Ag/Al2O3 catalyst by means of HC-SCR. The plates containing the micro-channels previously coated with Al2O3 were successfully impregnated with Ag. Pulse experiments inside the micro-reactor were carried out in order to determine the flow patterns inside the micro-channels. In addition, because of the sizes of the micro-channels, the amounts of reagent employed for the catalytic testing were much lower compared with the total quantity needed in conventional reactors, resulting in a significant improvement in safety while dealing with dangerous chemicals and reactions which are highly exothermic or potentially explosive. This is a key issue in laboratory research. The construction of the micro-channel reactor was described, together with the silver impregnation and the nature of the pulsed experiments. Catalyst characterization was achieved using LA-ICP-MS with varying Ag concentrations and Ag and Al being monitored. Silver content was also monitored with SEM-EDX and these results were shown, together with those from LA-ICP-MS. Continuous NO reduction by hydrocarbons in excess oxygen was investigated over the impregnated micro-channels in the temperature range 150–500 °C. The impregnated metal/support catalyst showed good activity in the reduction of NO with hydrocarbons under lean conditions similar to those in fixed-bed mini-reactors. The NO reduction increased with the chain length of the hydrocarbon used.
Gold immobilized on titania is becoming a very important catalytic material in a range of reactions, particularly those involving oxidation, and the characterization of Au on titania catalyst materials has been described by Centeno and co-workers.422 The authors presented a very comprehensive discussion on the use of a range of analytical techniques including BET, XRD, TEM, qualitative XPS, XRF and band gap analysis by UV-Vis. Analysis showed a good correlation between surface Au as measured by XPS and bulk Au measured by XRF. Additionally, UV-Vis analysis showed a band gap which was highly correlated with gold particle size. This was thought to be because of surface plasmon resonance of gold particles. The relationship between photocatalytic activity and band gap value of the solid was discussed. Bimetallic Au/Cu on titania has been studied and characterized by Ou and co-workers, for the partial oxidation of methanol to hydrogen.423 The catalytic properties of the bimetallic catalysts, including activity, selectivity and stability were superior to those of monometallic gold on titania. Bismuth and mono-metallic gold and palladium nano-particles have been deposited on polyaniline and their structural properties together with their catalytic behaviour for benzyl alcohol oxidation has been investigated by Marx and Baiker.424 These catalysts were characterized for their chemical, structural and electronic properties using dark field STEM and AAS. The electronic changes occurring upon mixing Pd and Au were examined with X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) and XPS. The binding energy of core level electrons and the valence d-band occupation in the bimetallic particles were significantly altered in comparison to the monometallic particles, which together with the core shell structure was thought to be the main reason for the observed changes in the catalytic behaviour. The production and detailed analysis of a gold on MgOx on TiO2 catalyst for the preferential oxidation of CO in hydrogen was presented by Chang and colleagues.425 This reaction has potential fuel cell applications. The ICP-MS, XRD, TEM and XPS analysis was presented in detail, with XPS being performed to determine the states of all the surface species, including binding energies and oxidation states of Au, TiO2 and MgOx. The catalytic activity of a range of atomic cations for the catalytic oxidation of molecular hydrogen by N2O has been investigated by Blagojevic et al.426 Kinetic measurements were made using an ICP/selected ion flow tube (ICP/SIFT) tandem mass spectrometer. Only four of the cations studied were found to have catalytic properties. In a study by Du and co-workers, a series of rhodium/SBA-15 catalysts was prepared and then investigated for their catalytic behaviour during the decomposition of N2O.427 Various analytical techniques were employed and data showed that the dispersion of rhodium species on the catalysts was correlated with the molecular size and hydrophobicity of the precursors used in the catalytic preparation. Mesoporous titania support materials have been synthesized using tetrabutyl titanate as the precursor,428 and phosphotungstic acid as the catalyst for the oxidative desulfurization of dibenzothiophene. Various quaternary ammonium bromides were investigated as structure-directing agents. XRF, XRD, FTIR, TEM and nitrogen adsorption/desorption measurements showed that the structure of the synthesized material was a mesoporous agglomeration of TiO2 nano-particles with a disordered wormhole like structure without discernable long – range order. The material showed good performance and oxidation of a 300 ppm dibenzothiophene mixture was up to 98% within only two minutes. Copper oxide loaded mesoporous silica materials have been shown to have catalytic activity in many heterogeneous oxidation reactions, ref. 429 and references therein. A novel and direct method of preparation was discussed and catalysts characterized using XRD, TEM, BET and ICP-OES. UV-Vis DIS, FT-IR and XPS were also used to investigate the state of the Cu. The redox properties of the copper oxide loaded on mesoporous silica were also explored by cyclic voltammetry measurements, where the working electrode was made of 25 mg sample mixed with 125 mg carbon black bonded together with liquid paraffin around a copper wire. Osmium-containing hydrotalcites have been studied by Naicker and co-workers for the heterogeneous oxidation of cyclohexene to cis-diols.430 Several hydrotalcites were prepared by the co-precipitation method and characterized using a suite of techniques, including XPS. Results showed that doping with various divalent (Ni, Mg, Co, Zn and Cu) metals significantly influenced the structure and catalytic properties of the materials. The direct incorporation of a large loading of V into the 3-dimensional structure of SBA-16 molecular sieve has been achieved and employed as a catalyst for the oxidation of styrene.431 The material was characterized using XRD, SEM and TEM and nitrogen physisorption. The coordination properties of the V sites were studied by FT-Raman, ESR, Si-29 NMR and UV-diffuse reflectance spectroscopy.


3.5.4 Fuel cells. 
Polymer electrolyte fuel cells (PEMFC) are promising electrical supply devices for transportation, when fed with pure hydrogen fuel. Hydrogen rich syn gas from steam reforming of hydrocarbons or partial oxidation of alcohols is a practical alternative fuel for PEMFC. One of the main ways of producing pure hydrogen is the reforming of fossil fuels, such as diesel. Perovskite oxide systems are a particularly suitable catalyst precursor for the extraction of hydrogen from diesel because of their resistance to sulfur poisoning, coke formation and thermal sintering. However, an important drawback of perovskite oxide systems is a low surface area. To overcome this, pre-shaped support structures have been used. Villoria et al.432 presented work on the incorporation of the LaCoO3 perovskite system onto a ZrO2 support. Elemental analysis was performed using TXRF. Surface analysis was performed using XPS equipped with a hemispherical electron analyzer and an Al Kά 120 W X-ray source. Quantification of the atomic fractions on the sample surface was obtained by integrating the peaks with appropriate corrections for sensitivity. Surface area, crystalline structure and morphology of the sample were characterized using N2 adsorption, XRF and SEM EDX respectively. ZrO2 supported LaCoO3 perovskite systems were found to be useful in hydrogen release from diesel. A much simpler approach is the direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC) in which the reforming step is eliminated, thus making the devices smaller and more suitable for portable applications. Stoupin et al.433 reported an interesting paper on the structural analysis of sono-chemically prepared PtRu catalyst. They used, among other techniques, an in-situ synchrotron spectroscopy fuel cell (XAS-cell) which allowed structural determination of the catalyst during use. Pt data was collected in transmission mode. However, the lower amount of Ru in the catalyst was found to produce a high signal to noise ratio for the Ru K-edge. Ru data was therefore collected in fluorescence mode using a Lytle detector operated with flowing argon position below the path of incident X-ray beam. Comparison of XAS-cell data with XRD and EXAFS data collected from fresh catalyst showed a change in the size of nano-particle crystalline domains. It was believed this was because of a modification in the catalyst morphology, and was further manifested by an increase in the EXAFS first shell total coordination number. The downside to the DMFC approach, however, is that the amount of platinum catalyst required is over ten times that for the reforming gas fed PEMFC. In both cases, the carbon monoxide by-product adsorbs onto the catalytic surface at the anode and blocks the hydrogen oxidation reaction. The development of metal nano-particles with a high tolerance to CO oxidation is therefore one of the main areas of research in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells. The novel synthesis of CO tolerant PtRu-MoOx nano-particles and their structural characterization and performance evaluation for methanol electro-oxidation has been described by Martinez-Huerta and co-workers.434 Structural and surface characterization methods included TGA, ICP-OES and TXRF for the evaluation of Pt/Ru ratio. Metal phases and crystalline particle size were determined using XRD and morphology and PtRu dispersion were evaluated using TEM. XPS spectra were obtained to elucidate surface species oxidation states, on an instrument which was equipped with a hemispherical electron analyzer for measurement of the kinetic energies of the photoelectrons. Electrochemical studies were carried out using three-electrode electrochemical cells and differential electrochemical mass spectrometry experiments were also carried out to identify products and intermediates of the electrochemical reactions via the acquisition of mass spectrometric cyclic voltammograms, recorded at selected masses. This was particularly useful in determining the onset potential of CO oxidation by monitoring the formation of CO2 at m/z = 44. FTIR studies were also performed. The ion current at m/z = 44 was superimposed on the conventional cyclic voltammogram correlating the onset potential of CO oxidation with the formation of CO2. The effect of the surface structure on the catalytic behaviour of Ni:Cu/Al and Ni:Cu:K/Al catalysts for the production of a range of materials including carbon fibres and hydrogen has been investigated by Hussain et al.435 Several analytical procedures were employed, including XPS and static SIMS. The surface morphology of these materials was revealed and evidence for the formation of bi- and tri-metallic surface cationic sites was clear. This study yielded a great deal of information on the relationship of the surface structure and catalytic behaviour of these systems.


3.5.5 Nano-carbon catalysts. 
Hydro-treating is an important crude oil refining process that removes nitrogen and sulfur containing hydrocarbon molecules from gas oil by their catalytic reaction with hydrogen. Developments in petroleum refining are being driven by the need to produce clean fuels with less than 15 ppm S and this is driving the search for novel and more efficient catalysts. Industrial hydro-de-nitrogenation (HDN) and hydro-de-sulfurization (HDS) processes have been largely carried out over sulfided Mo-based catalysts promoted with Ni or Co, supported on γ-alumina. Recently, attention has shifted to mesoporous materials like MCM-41 HMS and silicaceous and transition metal substituted SBA-15-based systems. New forms of carbon nano-materials such as carbon nano-tube (CNT), fullerene nano-tube (FNT) and carbon nano-sphere (CNS) are considered to be important because of their potential application in many fields of nano-technology and a few attempts have been made to use them in catalysis. Among the above carbon allotropes, multi-walled carbon-nano-tubes (MWCNT) are receiving increasing attention as novel support materials in catalysis. The catalytic applications investigated have involved selective hydrogenation, hydroformylation, selective de-hydrogenation, ammonia synthesis, Fischer-Tropsch synthesis, methanol synthesis and higher alcohol synthesis.436 Other workers cited in this paper have studied the use of MWCNTs as supports for Co–Mo sulfide catalyst for HDS of thiophene. They found a significant increase in the molar percentage of catalytically active Mo species in the total Mo-amount and, hence, a pronounced enhancement of the reversibly adsorbed hydrogen at the surface of the functioning catalyst, resulting in a significant increase in HDS activity. It was found that the main active molybdenum species in the oxide state MoO3/CNT catalysts was MoO2, rather than MoO3 as generally expected. The HDS of dibenzothiophene showed that the Co–Mo/CNT catalyst was more active than that the Co–Mo/Al2O3 and the hydrogenolysis/hydrogenation selectivity of the Co–Mo/CNT catalyst was also much higher than the Al2O3-based catalyst. Further, a catalyst with Co/Mo atomic ratio of 0.7 showed the higher activity. The effect of surface modification using nitric acid on HDS activity of the Co–Mo/MWCNT was studied and it was found that the dispersion of Co–Mo on MWCNT improved significantly after the acid modification treatment. The authors cited a number of reports on MWCNT in catalysis, but none of the studies have targeted the Ni–Mo-related catalysts for the hydro-treating of gas oil derived from Athabasca bitumen. This paper describes for the first time the preparation of highly active MWCNT supported NiMo sulfide catalyst. The catalysts had their catalytic performances in HDN and HDS of light gas oil (LGO) derived from Athabasca bitumen evaluated and compared with the reference system based on conventional Al2O3 under similar experimental conditions. Also, the effect of P addition to NiMo/MWCNT catalyst on hydro-treating activity was studied. The morphological as well as structural features of the purified MWCNT were analyzed using SEM, TEM, XRD and Raman spectroscopy and the microstructure of MWCNT was studied using TEM. The XRD pattern of the MWCNT sample was recorded in the 2θ range 20–50°. The vibrational modes of MWCNT were measured in the range of 1000–2000 cm−1 by Raman spectroscopy and the absorption bands were assigned to various vibrational modes of graphitic carbon. The elemental compositions of the catalysts were determined using ICP-MS and the reducibility of the prepared NiMo/MWCNT catalysts was studied by H2-TPR. Diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) of adsorbed CO is an efficient tool to monitor the changes in the nature of Mo-related active species that occur because of Ni addition and therefore sulfided NiMo/MWCNT catalysts were subjected to DRIFT spectroscopy of adsorbed CO. The textural characteristics of the NiMo/CNT catalysts were analyzed using N2 adsorption following a BET procedure. The N2 adsorption studies showed typical Type II isotherms for all the NiMo/MWCNT catalysts and a typical isotherm of 3 wt.% Ni–12 wt.% Mo/MWCNT was shown. The results of the above analytical techniques were discussed in some detail. The SEM and TEM analyzes of purified MWCNT confirm their structural and morphological characteristics. The graphitic nature of carbon in grown MWCNT was confirmed by XRD and Raman spectroscopy. The N2 adsorption of NiMo/MWCNT catalysts indicated that the added NiMo particles entered inside the pores of MWCNT. The XRD and TPR of NiMo/MWCNT catalysts showed that the MoO3 dispersion increased with increasing Ni addition resulting in smaller particles. The number of Ni promoted MoS2 sites was found to increase with increasing Ni addition while a fall in unpromoted MoS2 sites was noted from DRIFT spectra of catalysts adsorbed with CO.
Lanthanide doped SBA-15 has been synthesized and characterized by Mu and co-workers437 and of note in this paper is the use of diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectroscopy for the study of the coordination environment of the lanthanide dopants. Shan et al.438 also reported the use of a Cu, Ce doped bi-metallic zeolite Y as a suitable material for hydro-de-sulfurization, because of its high adsorption properties. XRD, ICP-OES and XPS were used to characterize the materials. Amorphous Co-B has been reported to be a useful catalyst in selective hydrogenation reactions and has undergone surface modification by plasma treatment.439 The effect of the plasma treatment was investigated using the liquid phase hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde as a model compound. The paper described the catalyst preparation using a glow discharge plasma system in some detail, together with activity tests, which showed an increase in conversion of cinnamaldehyde to cinnamyl alcohol. The paper also described the analysis using XRD before and after plasma treatment and showed increased crystallinity. Bulk composition was determined using ICP-OES. TEM images were presented which suggested that plasma treatment resulted in larger and more uniformly spherical Co-B nano-particles than the untreated material. This was attributed to forces within the plasma inducing the growth of the magnetic Co-B particles. Using nitrogen desorption, plasma treatment was also shown to result in enhanced porosity and the presence of mesopores was confirmed. A mechanism for these plasma induced changes was proposed. XPS analysis showed that the binding energies of the cobalt in both treated and untreated samples were similar, but were different for boron, suggesting the transfer of electrons from the alloyed boron to the vacant d-orbital of metallic cobalt. These results suggested that a synergistic effect between the cobalt and boron was enhanced after plasma treatment, and the surface boron content was increased.
Spent HDS catalyst is classed as hazardous waste and is governed by strict disposal regulations. The determination of the elemental content is therefore very important. Classically, the catalyst is digested on a hot plate with a combination of mineral acids for measurement by spectroscopic techniques. Szymczycha-Madeja and Mulak440 compared four digestion procedures and verified them for their applicability to the determination of major and trace elements in spent HDS catalyst using ICP-OES. Two procedures were carried out in closed microwave vessels using (1) HCl + HNO3 + H2O2 and (2) HNO3 + HF. Two others were carried out in open systems using (3) aqua regia + NH4F, HNO3, H2SO4 and (4) HF + HClO4, H3BO3, HCl. Procedure 1 gave good agreement between measured and reference values for almost all elements. The precision was assessed to be better than 5% RSD. Procedure 1 was also found to be the only method applicable to the digestion of spent HDS catalyst.


3.5.6 Automotive catalysts. 
Among the proposed solutions to reduce environmental pollution, the automotive catalyst is one of the best-known technological applications for controlling vehicle emissions. Although well established, this technology is still in continuous development and has been adopted by the majority of countries for controlling vehicle emissions. Work in this field is being performed to develop products and processes that meet increasingly strict environmental regulations. Significant reduction of vehicle emissions and longer durability of the automotive catalyst (100000 km or 5 years) being an on-going objective. Not only does this development affect catalyst manufacturers but also automobile manufacturers and oil companies. The investigation of the effect of aging on a series of commercial three way catalysts, from the same supplier, by analyzing their chemical, textural, structural and catalytic properties has been reported by Fernandes and colleagues.441 The catalysts were aged in a motor bench test involving runs of 150 or 300 h and, as sulfur compounds present in the gasoline may interact with the catalyst after combustion, the effects of gasoline with two sulfur levels: 400 and 700 ppm were studied. The catalysts were characterized using XRD and XRF. In addition, surface area, pore volume and pore diameter were also measured. The catalytic activities were determined based on CO and propane conversions. The characterization results from a group of commercial automotive catalysts, engine bench aged, showed that the catalysts exposed to higher aging temperatures presented a decay in surface area and pore volume and an increase in pore diameter. The authors also noted the presence of sigma and gamma alumina and palladium oxide phases. In inlet regions it was noted that crystalline compounds containing contaminants including cerium phosphate were formed. CO and C3H8 conversion activities were consistent with the surface area of the aged catalysts, provided residual chloride ions were not present. It was concluded that the major contribution to catalyst deactivation came from thermal effects.
The installation of three-way catalysts (TWC) has become the automotive industry's adopted approach to comply with legislation concerning the emission of the most toxic components of gasoline-fuelled passenger cars. Poisoning of these catalysts can be caused by contaminating elements which are deposited on the TWC under working conditions and include P, Ca, and Zn, derived from lubricant oil additives (anti-wear and detergent additives), and iron deposits from metallic engine parts. The role of these contaminants in the deactivation of TWC is not yet fully understood. However, fouling by physical blockage of catalyst pore structure, due to the formation of an impermeable glassy Zn phosphate and an amorphous glaze-like Ca phosphate, has been described for vehicle-aged TWC.442 Here, it was reported that the textural, structural, surface, and oxygen storage and release (OSR) properties of CeZrO4 were modified by incorporating Ca on the catalyst surface. The Ce–Zr–Ca solids were then studied using a range of techniques including TGS, nitrogen adsorption, XRD and XPS to determine whether Ca cations migrated to the bulk of the solid to become part of the framework of the CeZr mixed oxides or remained at the surface of the solid. The OSR properties were studied using FTIR. The paper presents a comprehensive discussion of the analysis of the above properties of the TWC and clearly showed that calcium is implicated in its deactivation.
Catalytic converters have been shown to expel Pd, Pt and Rh, as very fine particulates, along with the car's exhaust fumes. Release of the metals deposited on the catalytic substrate by the hot gases coming from the car's engine, has been advocated as the main reason for emission of the metal particulates. Several different approaches have been implemented to assess the extent of contamination through the presence of Pd, Pt and Rh in the fumes of motor vehicles. The analysis of samples such as air, soil dust, vegetation and even Greenland fresh snow and ancient ice has been proposed using a wide variety of analytical techniques and sample treatments including TXRF after high pressure digestion.443 In this work, automotive exhaust gases from vehicles using catalytic converters were filtered through cellulose filter papers to collect suspended particles along with the engine's escape fumes. A specially designed sample collector was used for supporting the filter papers during collection. The collector was manufactured from a new car's exhaust pipe. A cellulose circular paper filter of 11 cm diameter was attached to one end of the pipe and kept centered by pressing it against the borders of the pipe by means of a perforated aluminium cap, slightly wider than the pipe, used to cover this end of the collector. Filter papers loaded with the solid particles were acid-digested using a modified domestic microwave oven to bring the solid material into solution. The resulting solutions were analyzed for Pt using GFAAS and for Pd and Rh using ICP-OES. Results showed that concentration of these elements in the particulate material is higher for new vehicles, having new catalytic converters, than for old ones. Maximum Pd, Pt and Rh in the samples analyzed were found to be 5.36, 12.60 and 1.03 µg g−1, respectively.
Automobile catalysts used for emission control is the largest sector of demand for platinum group metals (PGM). Nearly 60% of newly mined platinum has been consumed by the automotive industry in 2006, along with 65% of new palladium supplies. This demand is set to rise with increasingly more stringent emission regulations. Coupled with the significant value of these precious metals there is an increasing need to reuse and recycle them. It is therefore important to have a fast, accurate and inexpensive quantitative determination of the PGM elemental concentration of the scrap material. A rapid in-situ method based on LIBS for the determination of PGM elemental concentrations has been reported by Asimellis and colleagues.444 The use of LIBS, rather than the more classical techniques such as ICP and AAS, allowed the direct, near real-time analysis of automotive catalyst materials. Good precision and high accuracy was demonstrated on calibration curves ranging from 5 wt % to low ppm. The samples were homogenized and pressed to ensure representation of the bulk volume but the method does not require sample preparation other than a few cleaning shots prior to analysis. The investigation of line selection in ICP-OES for the quantification of PGM as well as Ba and Pb in automotive catalysts is the subject of a useful and very relevant paper prepared by Petrova and co-workers.445 This work employed a data base of Q values. This is a parameter for the quantification of spectral interferences and can thus be used for quantifying and therefore eliminating line interferences for the range of metals of interest. The accuracy of the procedure was verified with an auto-catalyst CRM.


3.5.7 Polymer-supported catalysts. 
The catalytic hydro-silylation as applied to many industrial processes is the addition of Si–H across an unsaturated bond such as C≡C, CC, CO or C≡N promoted by transition-metal catalysts. Although noble metal complexes including Pt, Pd, Ru, Rh, Ir and Os are very active they are too expensive to be widely used in this application. Less expensive transition metals, especially of nickel complexes have exhibited good activity and selectivity in some hydro-silylations; but they are less stable and easily lose activity and this limits their uses. Xu et al.446 described an effective route to heterogenize an active C5H5NiLX complex for the immobilization of the solid catalyst onto a polymer support. The procedure for the attachment of the nickel complex onto the polymer is described and the techniques used for characterization included IR, solid diffuse reflectance UV–vis, 31P CP MAS-NMR spectra and ICP-OES elemental analysis. These procedures were described in detail in the paper. The materials used were considerably cheaper than the noble metal catalysts. The solid catalyst showed high activity, selectivity and an excellent re-cyclability for the hydro-silylation of alkenes with trichlorosilane under relatively mild conditions. This demonstrated the feasibility of this methodology for heterogenizing active homogeneous components.


3.5.8 Refining catalysts. 
In recent years the petroleum refining industry has been facing important challenges because of the continuously decreasing permissible amount of emissions, such as SOx, NOx and aromatics from the combustion of fossil fuels. These improvements can often require changes in the refining processes and the cost of these developments may be offset by the development of novel catalysts. An ideal solution would require minimal modifications to the plant and involve the use of a novel multi-functional catalyst, which could replace conventional catalysts in the currently used reactors. In the last decade, efforts have been made to develop such catalysts for hydro-processing. Metal carbides have been identified as being potential catalysts for such applications. Interstitial carbides of early transition metals (groups IVB–VIB) are produced by dissolving carbon atoms into the metal lattices. These carbide materials have interesting physical and chemical properties, which combine the characteristic properties of three different classes of materials: covalent solids, ionic crystals, and transition metals. It has been proposed that the introduction of carbon into the lattice of the early transition metals results in an increase of the lattice parameter. This leads to an increase in the d-electron density providing that the same number of levels is retained. The early transition metals then exhibit considerable noble metals-like behaviour (ref. 447 and references therein). Additionally, the development of transition metal nano-particles has received a lot of attention because of their different physical and chemical properties to those of the same materials in the bulk. The main reasons for these differences originate in the electronic properties and in the very high ratio between superficial atoms and total number of atoms in the particles found in these nano-materials. The above properties led the authors to design a new method for preparing carbon-supported vanadium nano-powder by means of the reduction of the metal adduct VCl3·3THF with K[BEt3H] at room temperature, obtaining a mixture of vanadium carbide and V2O3. This was well confirmed by their experimental results. Compared with conventional processes (high temperature), the reaction conditions are much simpler, and the as-obtained vanadium carbide nano-powder is the main phase and is well dispersed. The catalytic activity of this material was assessed using thiophene hydro-de-sulfurization. A range of techniques were employed in its characterization, including XRD, ICP-OES, high resolution TEM and XPS. XPS was used to investigate the elemental composition of the V/carbon nano-crystals, and provided evidence for the formation of vanadium carbide. The XPS spectrum for the vanadium/carbon systems exposed to air showed three different signals in the region for V2p3/2 with binding energies at 516.6 eV, 515.3 eV and 513.4 eV. This was evidence for the V2p3/2 species of VO2, V2O3 and V8C7 (or V4C3), respectively and references are given. The results agreed well with the XPS spectrum of the relevant energy region for vanadium carbide.
Natural clays often exhibit desirable catalytic activity including low deactivation and thermal stability. In some cases the clays present activity in their raw form, but it is usually necessary to perform a chemical activation step, based upon their ion exchange capacity. Among the predominantly used natural clays, the smectites are useful for producing active materials with interesting physico-chemical properties, because of their potential for modifying the interlayer distance through the exchange of compensating cations including sodium, calcium and others, by hydroxonium ions, as in the case of K10 and other commercial acid clays, or cations and polyoxocations in the case of intercalated and pillared clays. Pillared clays are layered materials prepared by the exchange of compensating cations for oligomeric or polymeric hydroxymetals, followed by calcination. The calcination promotes the dehydration and dehydroxylation of the polycations, with the formation of metal oxides that act as pillars, maintaining the separation between the layers with the appearance of interlayer and interpillar spaces with molecular scale dimensions. Guerra et al.448 described the preparation and characterization of Brazilian and Wyoming zirconium-pillared clays. They used zirconium acetate as a Zr precursor, in order to minimize de-alumination of the clay structure. In addition, they compared the properties of the active sites to the catalytic performance of these materials for the alkylation of benzene with olefins of different chain lengths, in order to evaluate the effect of micro-porosity on the activity and selectivity. Characterization was achieved using XRF, XRD, XPS, TGA, DTG and ammonia desorption. Textural characterization and surface area were determined by BET using accelerated surface area and porosity equipment. Chemical changes in the zirconium species were monitored by XPS for the determination of their binding energies. The X-ray slides were prepared by oriented slide and powder methods which allowed the characterization of the effect of intercalation time upon the structure of the pillared clays. Zeolite materials are widely used throughout industry and gallium-containing MFI-type zeolites exhibit high selectivity to aromatics in the catalytic conversion of olefins and paraffins. Gallium species are said to be effective in various forms when incorporated into the zeolitic framework. The catalytic roles of framework and extra-framework gallium has been a matter of interest.449 This paper described a study of the passivation problem of the Pt metallic centres by gallium, comparing the Pt systems with the analogue Pd/H[Ga]ZSM5 catalysts, employing a series of characterization techniques, such as XRD, ICP-OES elemental analysis, N2 physisorption, TEM and XPS. In order to establish which are the chemical species present in the surfaces of the catalysts, XPS was carried out in the C 1s, O 2s, Si 2p, Ga 3d, Pd 3d, and Pt 4f regions. The authors presented a full discussion of the interpretation of the XPS data and showed that binding energies reflect the interaction of the surface Pt(II) species with the Ga(III)[O] (Ga2O3) extra-framework ones, possibly with formation of mixed Pt–Ga oxides. Infra-red studies have been performed by Gora-Marek and colleagues on a range of ZSM-5 zeolite materials for the quantification of Co in +2 and +3 oxidation states.450 In this study, probe molecules of NO and CO were employed to react selectively with the different sites and obtain quantitative information on the nature of the Co in Co – exchanged zeolites. The results were in excellent agreement with analysis carried out using AAS.


3.5.9 Isomerization catalysts. 
Tungsten-zirconium oxide is a strong acid catalyst often employed in the catalytic skeletal isomerization of n-butane and xylenes, amongst others. The catalytic activity depends strongly upon the amount of WOx and the calcination temperatures used. Several studies have indicated that the state of the surface tungsten species in these catalysts is an important factor in catalytic activity. Yamamoto et al.451 described the analysis of a tungsten-zirconium oxide catalyst by tungsten K-edge and L1-edge XAFS. The XAFS spectra of ZrW2O8 were obtained and K-edge analysis gave more accurate information on the coordination environment of the tungsten species than had been previously obtained. L1-edge XANES was employed to quantitatively estimate the proportion of WO4 to total WOx species.


3.5.10 Other catalyst applications. 
ToF-SIMS, with a 25 kV, ∼2.8 pA Ga beam and a 3 kV, 60 nA Ar beam for sputtering, was used to measure Pd deposited on a TiN barrier film prior to electrodeless plating of Cu.452 Palladium was deposited on a TiN, etched with a mix of mineral acids and deposited a second time in an attempt to create a smooth surface for plating. Field emission SEM was used to observe Pd deposited at each stage together with SIMS. However, no Pd could be observed by FESEM, although its presence was clearly indicated using SIMS. It was concluded that Pd existed on a size scale below the resolution of FESEM. Gold catalyzed vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) grown silicon wires are key components of novel solid-state devices. Their optical and electrical properties depend greatly on their purity and distribution of impurities within their cross sectional composition. Secondary ion mass spectrometry has been employed by Putnam et al. for the characterization of these wires,453 particularly with respect to the presence of gold catalyst within them. SIMS was employed for the quantification of both surface and bulk Au within the wires. This paper presented an informative discussion of the analytical procedures and related the electrical properties of the wires to the Au distribution.
Over the last two decades, group 4 catalysts, particularly those of Zr, have become important materials for olefin polymerization processes. Alterations to the metallocene structures, such as ligands in the cyclopentadiene rings and bridged rings, can alter the stability, activity and selectivity of the catalyst. Silveira et al.454 have used EXAFS and XPS to study the structural and electronic properties of these materials and the influence on olefin polymerization catalysis. EXAFS data was collected around the Zr K edge in transmission mode using the EXAFS 1 beamline and the Si (220) channel monochromator. The Fourier transform of the collected data was used to determine the differences in coordination number and the Zr–C, Zr–Cl bond lengths. XPS data were collected using monochromatic Al Kα radiation from samples mounted on copper tape. It was found that as the donating capacity of the cyclopentadiene ring increased the binding energy decreased, which in turn reduced activity. A combination of changes to the Zr–C bond length and the binding energy of the rings affected the catalytic behaviour of Zr metallocene.

4 Glossary of terms

AASAtomic absorption spectrometry
AEDAtomic emission detection
AMSAccelerator mass spectrometry
ANOVAAnalysis of Variance
ANSIAmerican National Standards Institute
APDCAmmonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
ATRAttenuated total reflection
BCRBureau of Community Reference
CFPCirculating fluidized bed
CMOSComplementary metal oxide semiconductor
CPECloud point extraction
CRMCertified reference material
CWADPChemical warfare agent degradation product
CZECapillary zone electrophoresis
DCPDirect current plasma
DMFCDirect methanol fuel cells
DPTDiphenyl tin
DRIFTSDiffuse reflectance infra-red Fourier transform spectroscopy
DRSDiffuse reflectance spectroscopy
DTADifferential thermal analysis
DTPADiethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
EDXEnergy dispersive X-ray analysis
EDXRFEnergy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EPMAElectron probe microanalysis
ERDAElastic recoil detection analysis
ESIElectrospray ionization
ESPElectrostatic precipitator
ESRElectron spin resonance
ETAASElectrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
ETVElectrothermal vaporisation
FFFast flow
FIFlow injection
FIBFocused ion beam
FLIMFluorescence lifetime imaging
FTAFission track analysis
FT-IRFourier transform-infra red
FTSFischer-Tropsch synthesis
GCGas chromatography
GDGlow discharge
GFAASGraphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy
GI-XRDGrazing incidence XRD
GI-XRFGrazing incident XRF
HPLCHigh performance liquid chromatography
IBMKIsobutylmethyl ketone
ICPInductively coupled plasma
IDIsotope dilution
INAAInstrumental neutron activation analysis
LALaser ablation
LDALinear discriminant analysis
LEDLight emitting diode
LEISLow energy ion scattering
LIBSLaser induced breakdown spectroscopy
LIFLaser induced fluorescence
LIPSLaser induced plasma spectroscopy
LODLimit of detection
LOQLimit of quantitation
MALDIMatrix assisted laser desorption/ionization
MFMMagnetic force microscopy
MC-ICP-MSMultiple collector ICP-MS
MIMMetal insulator metal
MOCVDMetal organic chemical vapour deposition
MPTMonophenyl tin
MSMass spectrometry
MWDSMicrowave desolvation system
Nd:YAGNeodymium: yttrium aluminium garnet
NEXAFSNear edge X-ray absorption fine structure
NISTNational Institute of Standards and Technology
NMRNuclear magnetic resonance
NRRANuclear resonant reaction analysis
OESOptical emission spectrometry
OSLOptical stimulated luminescence
PB/HC-OESParticle beam/hollow cathode optical emission spectrometry
PBDEPolybrominated diphenyl ethers
PCAPrinciple component analysis
PETPolyethyleneterephthalate
PGMPlatinum group metals
PIGEProton induced gamma ray emission
PIXEParticle induced X-ray emission
PLSPartial Least Squares
PLS-DAPartial least squares discriminant analysis
PVDPhysical vapour deposition
RBSRutherford backscattering spectrometry
REEsRare earth elements
RFRadio frequency
RIRefractive index
RMMRelative molecular mass
RSDRelative standard deviation
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SFSector field
SIMCASoft independent modelling of class analogy
SIMSSecondary ion mass spectrometry
SNMSSecondary neutral mass spectrometry
SPESolid phase extraction
SPMScanning probe microscopy
SPMESolid phase micro-extraction
SRMStandard reference material
SRXRFSynchrotron radiation induced X-ray fluorescence
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
TIMSThermal ionization mass spectrometry
TMAHTetramethyl ammonium hydroxide
TMPPTris(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl) phosphonium propylamine
TOCTotal Organic Carbon
ToFTime of flight
TPRTemperature programmed reduction
TPTTriphenyl tin
TSLThermally stimulated luminescence
TRXPSTotal reflection X-ray photoelectric spectroscopy
TXRFTotal reflection X-ray fluorescence spectrometry
USNUltrasonic nebuliser
UVUltra violet
VPD-DCVapour phase decomposition-droplet collection
VUVVacuum ultra violet
WDXRFWavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XANESX-ray absorption near edge spectrometry
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
XRFX-ray fluorescence
XRRX-ray reflectometry

5 References
B. Charlton, A. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. Lancaster and S. Shore, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2008, 23(12), 1636–1692 RSC .
E. H. Evans, J. A. Day, C. D. Palmer, W. J. Price, C. M. M. Smith and J. F. Tyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(6), 889–918 RSC .
M. West, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, P. J. Potts, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(10), 1409–1437 RSC .
O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. M. Davidson, C. F. Harrington and D. L. Miles, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2009, 24(2), 131–177 RSC .
X. P. Zhang, J. Z. Chen, Q. L. Guo, S. F. Huai and Y. H. Wei, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2008, 28(3), 656–662 CAS .

          F. Boue-Bigne, presented at 4th Euro Mediterranean Symposium on Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy, Paris, FRANCE,  Sep 11–13, 2007 Search PubMed .
J. Li, C. Zhai, S. D. Zhang, J. Q. Zhang and X. R. Meng, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2008, 28(4), 930–933 CAS .

          V. Sturm, H. U. Schmitz, T. Reuter, R. Fleige and R. Noll, presented at 4th Euro Mediterranean Symposium on Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy, Paris, FRANCE,  Sep 11–13, 2007 Search PubMed .
H. Wiltsche, I. B. Brenner, K. Prattes and G. Knapp, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(9), 1253–1262 RSC .
K. Mizukami, M. Sugiyama and M. Tsuji, Tetsu to Hagane-Journal of the Iron and Steel Institute of Japan, 2008, 94(11), 532–538 Search PubMed .
M. Aimoto, Bunseki Kagaku, 2009, 58(1), 49–50 CAS .
A. M. Desaulty, C. Mariet, P. Dillmann, J. L. Joron and P. Fluzin, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(11), 1253–1262 Search PubMed .
H. V. Kondo and N. Hamada, Tetsu to Hagane-Journal of the Iron and Steel Institute of Japan, 2008, 94(5), 155–159 Search PubMed .
H. Kondo and N. Hamada, Tetsu to Hagane-Journal of the Iron and Steel Institute of Japan, 2008, 94(11), 517–521 Search PubMed .
H. Park and C. S. Lee, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(5), 561–564 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Yip, J. C. W. Lam and W. F. Tong, Trac-Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 2009, 28(2), 214–236 CrossRef CAS .
J. Baranowska and S. E. Franklin, Wear, 2008, 264(9–10), 899–903 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mori, M. Ueda, M. Hashimoto, Y. Aoi, S. Tanase and T. Sakai, Surface & Coatings Technology, 2008, 202(17), 4094–4101 Search PubMed .
T. Borch, A. K. Camper, J. A. Biederman, P. W. Butterfield, R. Gerlach and J. E. Amonette, Journal of Environmental Engineering-Asce, 2008, 134(10), 835–844 Search PubMed .
M. Jandaghi, P. Parvin, M. J. Torkamany and J. Sabbaghzadeh, Journal of Physics D-Applied Physics, 2008, 41(23) Search PubMed .
D. S. McPhail, R. J. Chater and L. B. Li, Microchimica Acta, 2008, 161(3–4), 387–397 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chakravarty, M. Gupta, A. Gupta, S. Rajagopalan, A. K. Balamurugan, A. K. Tyagi, U. P. Deshpande, M. Horisberger and T. Gutberlet, Acta Materialia, 2009, 57(4), 1263–1271 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Sakata, A. M. E. Santo, W. Miyakawa, R. Riva and M. S. F. Lima, Surface Engineering, 2009, 25(3), 180–186 Search PubMed .
S. Pandhija and A. K. Rai, Pramana-Journal of Physics, 2008, 70(3), 553–563 Search PubMed .
G. Galbacs, N. Jedlinszki, G. Cseh, Z. Galbacs and L. Turi, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(5), 591–597 Search PubMed .
I. Osticioli, M. Wolf and D. Anglos, Applied Spectroscopy, 2008, 62(11), 1242–1249 CrossRef CAS .
O. Abdel-Kareem and M. A. Harith, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254(18), 5854–5860 CrossRef CAS .

          F. J. Fortes, L. M. Cabalin and J. J. Laserna, presented at 4th Euro Mediterranean Symposium on Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy, Paris, FRANCE,  Sep 11–13, 2007 Search PubMed .
A. Lorusso, V. Nassisi, A. Buccolieri, G. Buccolieri, A. Castellano, L. S. Leo, M. Di Giulio, L. Torrisi, F. Caridi and A. Borrielli, Radiation Effects and Defects in Solids, 2008, 163(4–6), 325–329 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Guerra, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 317–327 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guilherme, A. Cavaco, S. Pessanha, M. Costa and M. L. Carvalho, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 444–449 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Karasev and R. Inoue, Materials Transactions, 2009, 50(2), 341–348 Search PubMed .
L. B. Brostoff, J. J. Gonzalez, P. Jett and R. E. Russo, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2009, 36(2), 461–466 CrossRef .
D. Gavillet, M. Martin and Y. Dai, Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2008, 377(1), 213–218 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Song, W. M. Mao, H. Yang and H. P. Feng, Journal of Materials Science & Technology, 2008, 24(5), 718–722 Search PubMed .
H. K. Cooper, M. J. M. Duke, A. Simonetti and G. Chen, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2008, 35(6), 1732–1747 CrossRef .
L. Dussubieux, A. Deraisme, G. Frot, C. Stevenson, A. Creech and Y. Bienvenu, Archaeometry, 2008, 50, 643–657 CrossRef CAS .
D. Klemm, M. Stangl, A. Peeva, V. Hoffmann, K. Wetzig and J. Eckert, Surface and Interface Analysis, 2008, 40(3–4), 418–422 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kleber, R. Wiesinger, J. Schnoller, U. Hilfrich, H. Hutter and M. Schreiner, Corrosion Science, 2008, 50(4), 1112–1121 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zheng, D. Liu, X. L. Liu and L. Li, Applied Surface Science, 2008, 255(2), 512–514 CrossRef CAS .
E. N. Alvar, M. R. Golmohammadi, M. Rezaei, H. N. Alvar, A. Mardanloo, S. H. Nouhian and M. Didari, Journal of Natural Gas Chemistry, 2008, 17(4), 321–326 Search PubMed .
C. L. Nguyen, A. Atanacio, W. Zhang, K. E. Prince, M. M. Hyland and J. B. Metson, Applied Surface Science, 2009, 255(9), 4880–4885 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Zhang, C. J. Jiang, F. X. Zhao, Z. W. Duan and J. Cao, Rare Metal Materials and Engineering, 2008, 37(11), 1987–1991 Search PubMed .
I. Z. Balta, S. Pederzoli, E. Iacob and M. Bersani, Applied Surface Science, 2009, 255(12), 6378–6385 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Mateo, T. Ctvrtnickova, E. Fernandez, J. A. Ramos, A. Yanez and G. Nicolas, Applied Surface Science, 2009, 255(10), 5579–5583 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Choi, G. H. Lee and J. K. Han, Bulletin of the Korean Chemical Society, 2008, 29(2), 393–397 CAS .
G. Anil, M. R. P. Reddy, S. T. Ali, N. R. Munirathnam and T. L. Prakash, Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 29(3), 90–92 CAS .
S. Sathyanarayanan, A. Moitra, K. G. Samuel, G. Sasikalaa, S. K. Ray and V. Singh, Materials Science and Engineering a-Structural Materials Properties Microstructure and Processing, 2008, 488(1–2), 519–528 Search PubMed .
X. J. Jiang, W. E. Gan, S. P. Han and Y. Z. He, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(6), 710–713 Search PubMed .
E. W. Hoppe, C. E. Aalseth, R. Brodzinski, A. R. Day, O. T. Farmer, T. W. Hossbach, J. I. McIntyre, H. S. Miley, E. E. Mintzer, A. Seifert, J. E. Smart and G. A. Warren, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2008, 277(1), 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Alvira, D. J. O. Orzi and G. M. Bilmes, Applied Spectroscopy, 2009, 63(2), 192–198 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bonizzoni, A. Galli and G. Poldi, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 388–394 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuhta, D. Pavlin, M. Slaj, S. Varga, M. Lapter-Varga and M. Slaj, Angle Orthodontist, 2009, 79(1), 102–110 CrossRef .
N. G. Pelevina, Inorganic Materials, 2008, 44(14), 1554–1558 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. de Faria, E. L. Reis, F. G. D. Araujo, C. B. Vieira, F. L. Von Kruger and N. Jannotti, Materials Research-Ibero-American Journal of Materials, 2008, 11(4), 405–408 Search PubMed .
M. Ishikuro and K. Wagatsuma, Bunseki Kagaku, 2008, 57(11), 897–900 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hajivaliei, Y. Mohammadifar, K. Ghiyasi, B. Jaleh, M. Lamehi-Rachti and P. Oliaiy, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(8), 1578–1582 Search PubMed .
X. H. Wang, S. L. Zheng, H. B. Xu and Y. Zhang, Spectroscopy and Spectral Analysis, 2009, 29(3), 805–808 Search PubMed .
J. Heilmann and K. Heumann, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2009, 393(1), 393–397 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kaneko, H. Yoshida and S. Suzuki, Forensic Science International, 2008, 177(2–3), 112–119 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Chaves, F. G. Lepri, J. S. A. Silva, D. P. C. de Quadros, T. D. Saint'Pierre and A. J. Curtius, Journal of Environmental Monitoring, 2008, 10(10), 1211–1216 RSC .
R. E. Santelli, E. P. Oliveira, M. D. B. de Carvalho, M. A. Bezerra and A. S. Freire, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(7), 800–804 Search PubMed .
G. P. Brandao, R. C. de Campos, E. V. R. de Castro and H. C. de Jesus, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(8), 880–884 Search PubMed .
H. L. Xie, K. L. Huang, J. C. Liu, X. D. Nie and L. Fu, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2009, 393(8), 2075–2080 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Gaft, E. Dvir, H. Modiano and U. Schone, presented at 4th Euro Mediterranean Symposium on Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy, Paris, FRANCE,  Sep 11–13, 2007 Search PubMed .
P. J. van Eyk, P. J. Ashman, Z. T. Alwahabi and G. J. Nathan, Combustion and Flame, 2008, 155(3), 529–537 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mujuru, R. I. McCrindle, B. M. Botha and P. P. Ndibewu, Fuel, 2009, 88(4), 719–724 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Gao, G. B. Jiang, B. He, Y. G. Yin and J. B. Shi, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(10), 1397–1400 RSC .
P. Vahaoja, I. Valimaki, K. Roppola, T. Kuokkanen and S. Lahdelma, Critical Reviews in Analytical Chemistry, 2008, 38(2), 67–83 CrossRef CAS .

          J. M. Guevremont, G. H. Guinther, D. Szemenyei, M. T. Devlin, T. C. Jao, C. Jaye, J. Woicik and D. A. Fischer, presented at 62nd Annual Meeting of the Society-of-Tribologists-and-Lubrication-Engineers, Philadelphia, PA,  May 06–10, 2007 Search PubMed .
T. R. Ajayi, N. Torto, P. Tchokossa and A. Akinlua, Environmental Geochemistry and Health, 2009, 31(1), 61–69 Search PubMed .
F. S. Al-Saleh and G. A. Al-Harshan, J. Environ. Radioact., 2008, 99(7), 1026–1031 CrossRef CAS .
G. Caumette, C. P. Lienemann, I. Merdrignac, B. Bouyssiere and R. Lobinski, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2009, 24(3), 263–276 RSC .
V. Resta, A. Filho and J. A. Gomes, Analytical Letters, 2008, 41(9), 1555–1570 CrossRef .
V. R. Amorim and J. A. G. Neto, Analytical Sciences, 2009, 25(1), 95–100 CrossRef .
D. I. Polidorio, J. Naozuka, E. C. Vieira and P. V. Oliveira, Analytical Letters, 2008, 41(9), 1547–1554 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Eseller, F. Y. Yueh and J. P. Singh, Applied Optics, 2008, 47(31), G144–G148 CrossRef CAS .
K. Noiroj, P. Intarapong, A. Luengnaruemitchai and S. Jai-In, Renewable Energy, 2009, 34(4), 1145–1150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. G. Wang, Y. F. Liu, S. Y. Ou, Y. L. Tan and S. Z. Tang, Fuel Processing Technology, 2009, 90(3), 422–427 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Barker, W. R. Kelly and W. F. Guthrie, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22(4), 2488–2490 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bennett, J. Volckens, R. Stanglmaier, A. P. McNichol, W. D. Ellenson and C. W. Lewis, Journal of Aerosol Science, 2008, 39(8), 667–678 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tormen, E. S. Chaves, T. D. Saint'Pierre, V. L. A. Frescura and A. J. Curtius, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(9), 1300–1304 RSC .
J. N. Bianchin, E. Martendal, R. Mior, V. N. Alves, C. S. T. Araujo, N. M. M. Coelho and E. Carasek, Talanta, 2009, 78(2), 333–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Georgiou, D. Anglos and C. Fotakis, Contemporary Physics, 2008, 49(1), 1–27 CrossRef CAS .
J. Marczak, A. Koss, P. Targowski, M. Gora, M. Strzelec, A. Sarzynski, W. Skrzeczanowski, R. Ostrowski and A. Rycyk, Sensors, 2008, 8(10), 6507–6548 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aceto, A. Agostino, E. Boccaleri and A. C. Garlanda, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 286–292 CrossRef CAS .
G. Van der Snickt, J. Dik, M. Cotte, K. Janssens, J. Jaroszewicz, W. De Nolf, J. Groenewegen and L. Van der Loeff, Analytical Chemistry, 2009, 81(7), 2600–2610 CrossRef CAS .
K. Serifaki, H. Boke, S. Yalcin and B. Ipekoglu, Materials Characterization, 2009, 60(4), 303–311 Search PubMed .
V. Rusanov, K. Chakarova, H. Winkler and A. X. Trautwein, Dyes and Pigments, 2009, 81(3), 254–258 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sawczak, A. Kaminska, G. Rabczuk, M. Ferretti, R. Jendrzejewski and G. Sliwinski, Applied Surface Science, 2009, 255(10), 5542–5545 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wei, Y. Lei, T. X. Sun, X. Y. Lin, Q. Xu, D. L. Chen, Y. Zou, Z. Jiang, Y. Y. Huang, X. H. Yu, X. L. Ding and H. J. Xu, X-Ray Spectrometry, 2008, 37(6), 595–598 CrossRef CAS .
S. Laib, B. H. Fellah, A. Fatimi, S. Quillard, C. Vinatier, O. Gauthier, P. Janvier, M. Petit, B. Bujoli, S. Bohic and P. Weiss, Biomaterials, 2009, 30(8), 1568–1577 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cotte, J. Susini, V. A. Sole, Y. Taniguchi, J. Chillida, E. Checroun and P. Walter, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(6), 820–828 RSC .
J. P. Echard, M. Cotte, E. Dooryhee and L. Bertrand, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 77–81 Search PubMed .
J. P. Echard and B. Lavedrine, Journal of Cultural Heritage, 2008, 9(4), 420–429 Search PubMed .
J. Dik, K. Janssens, G. Van der Snickt, L. van der Loeff, K. Rickers and M. Cotte, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80(16), 6436–6442 CrossRef CAS .
V. Desnica, K. Skaric, D. Jembrih-Simbuerger, S. Fazinic, M. Jaksic, D. Mudronja, M. Pavilicic, I. Peranic and M. Schreiner, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 19–23 Search PubMed .
N. Civici, M. Anastasiou, T. Zorba, K. M. Paraskevopoulos, T. Dilo, F. Stamati and M. Arapi, Journal of Cultural Heritage, 2008, 9(2), 207–213 Search PubMed .
C. Vazquez, M. S. Maier, S. D. Parera, H. Yacobaccio and P. Sola, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391(4), 1381–1387 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bonizzoni, S. Caglio, A. Galli and G. Poldi, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 203–210 Search PubMed .
S. Bruni, S. Caglio, V. Guglielmi and G. Poldi, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 103–108 Search PubMed .
G. Van Der Snickt, W. De Nolf, B. Vekemans and K. Janssens, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 59–68 Search PubMed .
P. M. Ramos, I. Ruisanchez and K. S. Andrikopoulos, Talanta, 2008, 75(4), 926–936 CrossRef CAS .
K. Castro, N. Proietti, E. Princi, S. Pessanha, M. L. Carvalho, S. Vicini, D. Capitani and J. M. Madariaga, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 623(2), 187–194 CrossRef CAS .
L. Beck, C. Jeynes and N. P. Barradas, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(8), 1871–1874 Search PubMed .
Z. Smit, M. Ursic, P. Pelicon, T. Trcek-Pecak, B. Seme, A. Smrekar, I. Langus, I. Nemec and K. Kavkler, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(9), 2047–2059 Search PubMed .
Z. Smit, J. Istenic and T. Knific, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(10), 2329–2333 Search PubMed .
V. Desnica, S. Fazinic, Z. Pastuovic and M. Jaksic, Strojarstvo, 2007, 49(5), 393–400 Search PubMed .
F. R. Doucet, P. J. Faustino, M. Sabsabi and R. C. Lyon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(5), 694–701 RSC .
M. C. Madamba, W. M. Mullett, S. Debnath and E. Kwong, Aaps Pharmscitech, 2007, 8(4) Search PubMed .
R. A. Myers, N. J. Kolodziejski and M. R. Squillante, Applied Optics, 2008, 47(31), G7–G14 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rai, A. K. Rai and S. N. Thakur, Applied Physics B-Lasers and Optics, 2008, 91(3–4), 645–650 Search PubMed .
F. C. De Lucia, J. L. Gottfried, C. A. Munson and A. W. Miziolek, Applied Optics, 2008, 47(31), G112–G121 CrossRef .
F. C. De Lucia, J. L. Gottfried and A. W. Miziolek, Optics Express, 2009, 17(2), 419–425 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Gottfried, F. C. De Lucia and A. W. Miziolek, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2009, 24(3), 288–296 RSC .
D. M. Wong and P. J. Dagdigian, Applied Optics, 2008, 47(31), G149–G157 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ikehata, K. Notsu and T. Hirata, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(7), 1003–1008 RSC .
M. V. Kosevich, V. V. Chagovets, I. V. Shmigol, S. V. Snegir, O. A. Boryak, V. V. Orlov, V. S. Shelkovsky, V. A. Pokrovskiy and A. Gomory, Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 2008, 43(10), 1402–1412 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Green, A. G. Shard, I. S. Gilmore and M. P. Seah, Analytical Chemistry, 2009, 81(1), 75–79 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bruchert, R. Kruger, A. Tholey, M. Montes-Bayon and J. Bettmer, Electrophoresis, 2008, 29(7), 1451–1459 CrossRef .
M. Groessl, C. G. Hartinger, P. J. Dyson and B. K. Keppler, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2008, 102(5–6), 1060–1065 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Carr, A. E. Dill, K. Kwok, J. W. Carnahan and G. K. Webster, Current Pharmaceutical Analysis, 2008, 4(4), 206–214 CrossRef CAS .
R. Santamaria-Fernandez, R. Hearn and J. C. Wolff, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(9), 1294–1299 RSC .
K. M. Kubachka, D. D. Richardson, D. T. Heitkemper and J. A. Caruso, J. Chromatogr. A, 2008, 1202(2), 124–131 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Kroening, D. D. Richardson, S. Afton and J. A. Caruso, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2009, 393(8), 1949–1956 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Swarthout, J. R. Kucklick and W. C. Davis, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2008, 23(12), 1575–1580 RSC .
Y. N. Ni, Y. Y. Peng and S. Kokot, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 616(1), 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Conklin, M. W. Fricke, P. A. Creed and J. T. Creed, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(5), 711–716 RSC .
J. Heroult, T. Zuliani, M. Bueno, L. Denaix and G. Lespes, Talanta, 2008, 75(2), 486–493 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tao, T. Nakazato, M. Akasaka, R. B. Rajendran and S. Elouali, Analytical Sciences, 2008, 24(12), 1529–1536 CrossRef CAS .
L. Si and P. A. Ariya, Environmental Science & Technology, 2008, 42(14), 5150–5155 Search PubMed .
W. A. Abdallah and S. D. Taylor, Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 2008, 112(48), 18963–18972 Search PubMed .
B. Charlton, A. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. Lancaster and M. Salisbury, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(12), 1517–1560 RSC .
K. Simitchiev, V. Stefanova, V. Kmetov, G. Andreev, N. Kovachev and A. Canals, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(5), 717–726 RSC .
S. Candir, I. Narin and M. Soylak, Talanta, 2008, 77(1), 289–293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Araki, S. Kagaya, K. Sakai, Y. Matano, K. Yamamoto, T. Okubo and K. Tohda, Journal of Health Science, 2008, 54(6), 682–685 Search PubMed .
G. Grindlay, J. Mora, S. Maestre and L. Gras, Analytica Chimica Acta, 2008, 629(1–2), 24–37 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pohl and B. Prusisz, Talanta, 2009, 77(5), 1732–1738 CrossRef CAS .
N. Campillo, R. Penalver and M. Hernandez-Cordoba, Journal of Chromatography A, 2008, 1210(2), 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tuzen, E. Melek and M. Soylak, Journal of Hazardous Materials, 2008, 159(2–3), 335–341 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barciela, M. Vilar, S. Garcia-Martin, R. M. Pena and C. Herrero, Analytica Chimica Acta, 2006, 628(1), 33–40 .
D. Schiavo, J. Y. Neira and J. A. Nobrega, Talanta, 2008, 76(5), 1113–1118 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Ibanez, A. Carreon-Alvarez, M. Barcena-Soto and N. Casillas, Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 2008, 21(8), 672–683 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Panta, S. Z. Qian, C. L. Cross and J. V. Cizdziel, Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis, 2008, 83(1), 7–11 Search PubMed .
A. R. Mauri-Aucejo, A. Campos-Candel, R. Marin-Saez and M. Llobat-Estelles, Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 29(6), 217–223 CAS .
A. S. Vazquez, J. M. Costa-Fernandez, J. R. Encinar, R. Pereiro and A. Sanz-Medel, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 623(2), 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Al-Ghannam, Spectroc. Acta Pt. A-Molec. Biomolec. Spectr., 2008, 69(4), 1188–1194 Search PubMed .
S. M. Al-Ghannam, Journal of Food and Drug Analysis, 2008, 16(2), 19–25 Search PubMed .
S. D. Maind, N. Chattopadhyay, C. Gandhi, S. C. Kumar and M. Sudersanan, Science & Justice, 2008, 48(2), 61–66 Search PubMed .
E. Margui, K. Van Meel, R. Van Grieken, A. Buendia, C. Fontas, M. Hidalgo and I. Queralt, Analytical Chemistry, 2009, 81(4), 1404–1410 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Cabral, V. N. M. Juliano, L. R. S. Dias, C. B. Dornelas, C. R. Rodrigues, M. Villardi, H. C. Castro and T. C. dos Santos, Memorias Do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, 2008, 103(2), 130–137 Search PubMed .
R. Pinel-Raffaitin, C. Peckheyran and D. Amouroux, Atmospheric Environment, 2008, 42(33), 7786–7794 CrossRef .
F. Galgano, F. Favati, M. Camso, T. Scarpa and A. Palma, Lwt-Food Science and Technology, 2008, 41(10), 1808–1815 Search PubMed .
A. Gonzalvez, A. Llorens, M. L. Cervera, S. Armenta and M. de la Guardia, Food Chemistry, 2009, 112(1), 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
M. Serugal, I. Nemet and B. Laslavic, Deutsche Lebensmittel-Rundschau, 2008, 104(11–12), 46–55 Search PubMed .
N. M. Caldas, S. R. Oliveira and J. A. G. Neto, Analytica Chimica Acta, 2009, 636(1), 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
K. Castro, S. Pessanha, N. Proietti, E. Princi, D. Capitani, M. L. Carvalho and J. M. Madariaga, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391(1), 433–441 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. V. Pereira and M. Bueno, Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 2008, 92(2), 131–137 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gil, M. L. Carvalho, A. Seruya, I. Ribeiro, P. Alves, A. Guilherme, A. Cavaco, J. Mirao and A. Candeias, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 328–337 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rosi, A. Burnstock, K. J. Van den Berg, C. Miliani, B. G. Brunetti and A. Sgamellotti, Spectrochimica Acta Part a-Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 2009, 71(5), 1655–1662 Search PubMed .
D. Hradil, J. Hradilova, P. Bezdicka and S. Svarcova, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 376–382 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kriznar, M. V. Munoz, F. de la Paz, M. A. Respaldiza and M. Vega, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 355–359 CrossRef CAS .
C. Herm, Chimia, 2008, 62(11), 887–898 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rampazzi, B. Rizzo, C. Colombo, C. Conti, M. Realini, U. Bartolucci, M. P. Colombini, A. Spiriti and L. Facchin, Analytica Chimica Acta, 2008, 630(1), 91–100 CAS .
D. C. Shelly and H. Huang, Journal of the American Leather Chemists Association, 2008, 103(6), 176–181 Search PubMed .
M. Manso, M. Costa and M. L. Carvalho, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(11), 1320–1323 Search PubMed .
V. S. Hatzistavros and N. G. Kallithrakas-Kontos, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2008, 277(2), 399–404 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ponterio, S. Trusso, C. Vasi, G. F. La Torre and A. T. Raffa, Radiation Effects and Defects in Solids, 2008, 163(4–6), 535–543 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Mateo, T. Ctvrtnickova and G. Nicolas, Applied Surface Science, 2009, 255(10), 5172–5176 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fiore, M. Maier, S. D. Parera, L. Orquera and E. Piana, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2008, 35(12), 3047–3056 CrossRef .
F. L. Melquiades, D. D. Ferreira, C. R. Appoloni, F. Lopes, A. G. Lonni, F. M. Oliveira and J. C. Duarte, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 613(2), 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lonni, J. C. Duarte, F. M. Oliveira, F. L. Melquiades, D. D. D. Ferreira and C. R. Appoloni, Latin American Journal of Pharmacy, 2008, 27(5), 661–667 Search PubMed .
J. K. C. Nduka, O. E. Orisakwe and C. A. Maduawguna, Toxicology and Industrial Health, 2007, 23(9), 525–528 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Mann, R. D. Vocke and W. R. Kelly, Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, 2009, 23(8), 1116–1124 CrossRef CAS .
S. Richter, A. Alonso, Y. Aregbe, R. Eykens, F. Kehoe, H. Kuhn, N. Kivel, A. Verbruggen, R. Wellum and P. D. P. Taylor, International Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 2009, 281(3), 115–125 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Winchester, G. C. Turk, T. A. Butler, T. J. Oatts, C. Coleman, D. Nadratowski, R. Sud, M. D. Hoover and A. B. Stefaniak, Analytical Chemistry, 2009, 81(6), 2208–2217 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lopez-Garcia, R. E. Rivas and M. Hernandez-Cordoba, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391(4), 1469–1474 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. G. Freschi, C. D. Freschi and J. A. G. Neto, Microchimica Acta, 2008, 161(1–2), 129–135 CrossRef CAS .
F. Demir, O. Simsek, G. Budak and A. Karabulut, Instrumentation Science & Technology, 2008, 36(4), 410–419 Search PubMed .
G. Mertens, R. Snellings, K. Van Balen, B. Bicer-Simsir, P. Verlooy and J. Elsen, Cement and Concrete Research, 2009, 39(3), 233–240 Search PubMed .
J. M. Davis, D. E. Newbury, P. R. Rangaraju, S. Soundrapanian and C. Giebson, Cement & Concrete Composites, 2009, 31(3), 171–175 Search PubMed .
A. Benard, J. Rose, J. L. Hazemann, O. Proux, L. Trotignon, D. Borschneck, A. Nonat, L. Chateau and J. Y. Bottero, Advances in Cement Research, 2009, 21(1), 1–10 Search PubMed .
M. Mulugeta, G. Wibetoe, C. J. Engelsen and W. Lund, Talanta, 2009, 78(3), 736–742 CrossRef CAS .
F. Weritz, A. Taffe, S. Dieter and G. Wilsch, Construction and Building Materials, 2009, 23(1), 275–283 Search PubMed .
I. Karatasios, V. Kilikoglou, P. Theoulakis, B. Colston and D. Watt, Cem. Concr. Compos., 2008, 30(9), 815–821 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Godwal, M. T. Taschuk, S. L. Lui, Y. Y. Tsui and R. Fedosejevs, Laser and Particle Beams, 2008, 26(1), 95–103 CAS .
M. B. Rosenberg and C. R. Dockery, Applied Spectroscopy, 2008, 62(11), 1238–1241 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Vtorushina, A. I. Saprykin and G. Knapp, J. Anal. Chem., 2008, 63(7), 643–648 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Huang, H. Becker-Ross, S. Florek, U. Heitmann and M. Okruss, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(5), 566–570 Search PubMed .
J. Oh, Y. H. Kim and H. B. Lim, Bulletin of the Korean Chemical Society, 2009, 30(3), 595–598 CAS .
M. Palcut, J. S. Christensen, K. Wiik and T. Grande, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 2008, 10(43), 6544–6552 RSC .
I. Kolibarska, S. Velichkov and N. Daskalova, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(5), 603–606 Search PubMed .
Q. Jia, X. F. Kong, W. H. Zhou and L. H. Bi, Microchemical Journal, 2008, 89(1), 82–87 CrossRef CAS .
M. Smolik and A. Jakobik-Kolon, Analytical Chemistry, 2009, 81(7), 2685–2687 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zawisza and R. Sitko, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2008, 23(12), 1628–1631 RSC .
A. J. Bednar, Talanta, 2009, 78(2), 453–457 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Robertson-Honecker, N. Zhang, A. Pavkovich and F. L. King, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2008, 23(11), 1508–1517 RSC .
Z. L. Chen, Q. Sun, Y. F. Xi and G. Owens, Journal of Separation Science, 2008, 31(21), 3796–3802 CrossRef CAS .
C. Contado and A. Pagnoni, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80(19), 7594–7608 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Xing and D. Beauchemin, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2009, 24(3), 336–339 RSC .
V. Pinnick, S. Rajagopalachary, S. V. Verkhoturov, L. Kaledin and E. A. Schweikert, Analytical Chemistry, 2008, 80(23), 9052–9057 CrossRef CAS .
K. Leopold, M. Maier and M. Schuster, Sci. Total Environ., 2008, 394(1), 177–182 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Ge, F. Lao, W. Li, Y. F. Li, C. Y. Chen, Y. Qiu, X. Y. Mao, B. Li, Z. F. Chai and Y. L. Zhao, Analytical Chemistry, 2008, 80(24), 9426–9434 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Chen and S. Mitra, Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 2008, 8(11), 5770–5775 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bussy, J. Cambedouzou, S. Lanone, E. Leccia, V. Heresanu, M. Pinault, M. Mayne-I'Hermite, N. Brun, C. Mory, M. Cotte, J. Doucet, J. Boczkowski and P. Launoist, Nano Letters, 2008, 8(9), 2659–2663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, Y. Wang and S. S. Feng, Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 2008, 101(3), 622–633 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. L. Taylor, W. J. Rieter and W. B. Lin, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2008, 130(44), 14358 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Wu, C. H. Su, F. Y. Cheng, J. C. Weng, J. H. Chen, T. L. Tsai, C. S. Yeh, W. C. Su, J. R. Hwu, Y. Tzeng and D. B. Shieh, Bioconjugate Chemistry, 2008, 19(10), 1972–1979 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bianco, I. Cacciotti, M. Lombardi and L. Montanaro, Materials Research Bulletin, 2009, 44(2), 345–354 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ieva, A. Trapani, N. Cioffi, N. Ditaranto, A. Monopoli and L. Sabbatini, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2009, 393(1), 207–215 CrossRef CAS .
N. Perkas, G. Amirian, G. Applerot, E. Efendiev, Y. Kaganovskii, A. V. Ghule, B. J. Chen, Y. C. Ling and A. Gedanken, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19(43) Search PubMed .
S. Raiagopalachary, S. V. Verkhoturov and E. A. Schweikert, Analytical Chemistry, 2009, 81(3), 1089–1094 CrossRef .
G. L. Chen, S. H. Chen, W. R. Feng, W. X. Chen and S. Z. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254(13), 3915–3920 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santagata, G. Albano, D. Spera, R. Teghil, P. Villani, G. P. Parisi, A. De Bonis and D. J. Sordelet, Applied Surface Science, 2009, 255(10), 5159–5162 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, T. R. Hinklin and R. M. Laine, Chemistry of Materials, 2008, 20(16), 5154–5162 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Chen, Y. M. Shen and J. F. Bai, Materials Letters, 2009, 63(12), 1099–1101 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Tsai, C. Y. Yu and T. P. Perng, Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 2008, 8(12), 6376–6380 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rautio, P. Peramaki, J. Honkamo and H. Jantunen, Microchemical Journal, 2009, 91(2), 272–276 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Fifield, Quaternary Geochronology, 2008, 3(3), 276–290 CrossRef .
R. Hellborg and G. Skog, Mass Spectrometry Reviews, 2008, 27(5), 398–427 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Hou, V. Hansen, A. Aldahan, G. Possnert, O. C. Lind and G. Lujaniene, Analytica Chimica Acta, 2009, 632(2), 181–196 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Ketterer and S. C. Szechenyi, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(7), 719–737 Search PubMed .
M. Hoshi, S. Endo, K. Tanaka, M. Ishikawa, T. Straume, K. Komura, W. Ruhm, E. Nolte, T. Huber, Y. Nagashima, R. Seki, K. Sasa, K. Sueki, H. Fukushima, S. D. Egbert and T. Imanaka, Radiation and Environmental Biophysics, 2008, 47(3), 313–322 Search PubMed .
G. Granier, F. Pointurier and F. Chartier, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 2009, 279(3), 875–884 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shinonaga, F. Esaka, M. Magara, D. Klose and D. Donohue, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(11), 1324–1328 Search PubMed .
T. Shinonaga, D. Donohue, A. Ciurapinski and D. Klose, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2009, 64(1), 95–98 Search PubMed .
R. Jakopic, S. Richter, H. Kuhn, L. Benedik, B. Pihlar and Y. Aregbe, International Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 2009, 279(2–3), 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Efurd, R. E. Steiner, S. P. LaMont and D. Lewis, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2008, 276(2), 499–504 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Bores, M. K. Schultz, J. M. Rankin, A. J. Denton, G. F. Payne, R. E. Steiner, S. P. LaMont and S. B. Ortiz, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2008, 276(2), 513–518 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, Y. G. Zhao, S. L. Guo, J. Y. Cui, Y. Liu, J. H. Li, J. Xu and H. Z. Zhang, Radiation Measurements, 2008, 43, S299–S302 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Tumey, T. A. Brown, T. E. Hamilton and D. J. Hillegonds, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(10), 2242–2245 Search PubMed .
Y. Muramatsu, Y. Takada, H. Matsuzaki and S. Yoshida, Quaternary Geochronology, 2008, 3(3), 291–297 CrossRef .
S. H. Lee, P. P. Povinec, E. Wyse and M. A. C. Hotchkis, Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 2008, 66(6–7), 823–828 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Child, M. A. C. Hotchkis and M. L. Williams, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(5), 765–768 RSC .
M. Srncik, E. Hrnecek, P. Steier, A. Wallner, G. Wallner and P. Bossew, Radiochimica Acta, 2008, 96(9–11), 733–738 CrossRef CAS .
O. T. Farmer, K. B. Olsen, M. L. Thomas and S. J. Garofoli, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2008, 276(2), 489–492 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Deb, M. K. Saxena, B. K. Nagar and K. L. Ramakumar, Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 29(2), 39–44 CAS .
Z. Stefanska, R. Katona and Z. Varga, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(7), 1030–1033 RSC .
Z. Varga, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 625(1), 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Ha, S. H. Han, H. G. Kim, W. H. Kim and K. Y. Jee, Nuclear Engineering and Technology, 2008, 40(4), 311–318 Search PubMed .
R. Brennetot, L. Pierry, T. Atamyan, G. Favre and D. Vailhen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(10), 1350–1358 RSC .
R. Brennetot, G. Stadelmann, C. Caussignac, C. Gombert, M. Fouque and C. Lamouroux, Talanta, 2009, 78(3), 676–681 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feuerstein, S. F. Boulyga, P. Galler, G. Stingeder and T. Prohaska, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity, 2008, 99(11), 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS .
J. Moureau, M. Granet, F. Chartier, G. Favre, H. Isnard and A. Nonell, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2008, 23(11), 1538–1544 RSC .
M. Granet, A. Nonell, G. Favre, F. Chartier, H. Isnard, J. Moureau, C. Caussignac and B. Tran, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(11), 1309–1314 Search PubMed .
A. Johnsson, A. Odegaard-Jensen, G. Skarnemark and K. Pedersen, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 2009, 279(2), 619–626 CrossRef CAS .
C. Negre, A. L. Thomas, J. L. Mas, J. Garcia-Orellana, G. M. Henderson, P. Masque and R. Zahn, Analytical Chemistry, 2009, 81(5), 1914–1919 CrossRef CAS .
J. Svedkauskaite-LeGore, G. Rasmussen, S. Abousahl and P. van Belle, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 2008, 278(1), 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Varga and G. Suranyi, Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 2009, 67(4), 516–522 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dhara, S. S. Kumar, N. L. Misra and S. K. Aggarwal, X-Ray Spectrometry, 2009, 38(2), 112–116 CrossRef CAS .
V. Natarajan, B. Rajeswari, B. A. Dhawale, N. S. Hon, S. V. Godbole and V. K. Manchanda, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 2009, 280(1), 27–31 CrossRef CAS .
V. Natarajan, B. A. Dhawale, B. Rajeswari, N. S. Hon, S. K. Thulasidas, N. K. Porwal, S. V. Godbole and V. K. Manchanda, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(7), 817–819 Search PubMed .
V. Natarajan, M. J. Kulkarni, N. K. Porwal, B. A. Dhawale, N. S. Hon, S. V. Godbole and V. K. Manchanda, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(14), 3290–3294 Search PubMed .
H. B. Zheng, F. Y. Yueh, T. Miller, J. P. Singh, K. E. Zeigler and J. C. Marra, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(9), 968–974 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Oh, F. Y. Yueh, J. P. Singh, C. C. Herman and K. Zeigler, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2009, 64(1), 113–118 Search PubMed .
A. Sarkar, D. Alamelu and S. K. Aggarwal, Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2009, 384(2), 158–162 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sarkar, D. Alamelu and S. K. Aggarwal, Talanta, 2009, 78(3), 800–804 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pisonero and D. Gunther, Mass Spectrometry Reviews, 2008, 27(6), 609–623 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cadore, E. Matoso and M. C. Santos, Quimica Nova, 2008, 31(6), 1533–1542 Search PubMed .
M. Kimura, K. Nakano and T. Nakamura, Bunseki Kagaku, 2008, 57(6), 411–415 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakano, T. Nakamura, I. Nakai, J. Noro, A. Kawase, M. Hasegawa, Y. Ishibashi, I. Inamoto, K. Sudou, M. Kozaki, S. Turuta, A. Bando, A. Ono, K. Kakita, K. Takimoto and M. Sakata, Bunseki Kagaku, 2008, 57(6), 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ohata, M. Kurahashi and A. Hioki, Bunseki Kagaku, 2008, 57(6), 417–426 CrossRef .
Y. Ishibashi, M. Hasegawa, K. Sudo, K. Nakano, A. Bando, S. Tsuruta, A. Ono, K. Kakita and M. Sakata, Bunseki Kagaku, 2008, 57(11), 901–910 CrossRef CAS .
C. Simons, S. Hanning, A. Wegner, C. Mans, A. Janssen, M. Kreyenschmidt and J. A. C. Broekaert, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(7), 1038–1041 RSC .
D. A. Rusak, K. D. Weaver and B. L. Taroli, Appl. Spectrosc., 2008, 62(7), 773–777 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Siddiqui, M. A. Gondal and H. H. Redhwi, Journal of Environmental Science and Health Part a-Toxic/Hazardous Substances & Environmental Engineering, 2008, 43(11), 1303–1310 Search PubMed .
J. Anzano, R. J. Lasheras, B. Bonilla and J. Casas, Polymer Testing, 2008, 27(6), 705–710 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Judge, G. Heck, E. B. Cerkez and R. J. Levis, Analytical Chemistry, 2009, 81(7), 2658–2663 CrossRef CAS .
S. Canulescu, J. Whitby, K. Fuhrer, M. Hohl, M. Gonin, T. Horvath and J. Michler, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2009, 24(2), 178–180 RSC .
A. I. Fernandez, L. Haurie, J. Formosa, J. M. Chimenos, M. Antunes and J. I. Velasco, Polymer Degradation and Stability, 2009, 94(1), 57–60 CrossRef CAS .
E. Matoso and S. Cadore, Journal of the Brazilian Chemical Society, 2008, 19(7), 1284–1289 CAS .
K. Eilola and P. Peramaki, Analytica Chimica Acta, 2009, 634(2), 205–208 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Malaxechevarria and E. Millan, Spectroscopy Letters, 2009, 42(1), 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ogaki, F. M. Green, S. Li, M. Vert, M. R. Alexander, I. S. Gilmore and M. C. Davies, Surface and Interface Analysis, 2008, 40(8), 1202–1208 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Straif and H. Hutter, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2009, 393(8), 1889–1898 CrossRef CAS .
F. Awaja and P. J. Pigram, Polymer Degradation and Stability, 2009, 94(4), 651–658 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nobuta and T. Ogawa, Journal of Materials Science, 2009, 44(7), 1800–1812 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tuccitto, L. Lobo, A. Tempez, I. Delfanti, P. Chapon, S. Canulescu, N. Bordel, J. Michler and A. Licciardello, Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, 2009, 23(5), 549–556 CrossRef CAS .
U. Braun, H. Bahr, H. Sturm and B. Schartel, Polymers for Advanced Technologies, 2008, 19(6), 680–692 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Nnorom and O. Osibanjo, Journal of Hazardous Materials, 2009, 161(1), 183–188 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Martinis, R. A. Olsina, J. C. Altamirano and R. G. Wuilloud, Talanta, 2009, 78(3), 857–862 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bocca, G. Forte, F. Petrucci, S. Costantini and P. Izzo, Science of the Total Environment, 2009, 407(7), 2183–2190 CrossRef CAS .
E. Zschech, H. Geisler, J. Rinderknecht, G. Schneider, R. Spolenak and D. Schmeisser, Curr. Nanosci., 2008, 4(3), 256–266 Search PubMed .
T. Budri, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254(15), 4768–4773 CrossRef CAS .
F. Boulsina, M. Berrabah and J. C. Dupuy, Applied Surface Science, 2008, 255(5), 1946–1958 CrossRef CAS .
B. X. Wu and Y. C. Shin, Applied Surface Science, 2009, 255(9), 4996–5002 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Das, J. P. McDonald, C. G. Levi, S. M. Yalisove and T. M. Pollock, Surface & Coatings Technology, 2008, 202(16), 3940–3946 Search PubMed .
F. Meirer, C. Streli, G. Pepponi, P. Wobrauschek, M. A. Zaitz, C. Horntrich and G. Falkenberg, Surface and Interface Analysis, 2008, 40(12), 1571–1576 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qin, K. Zhuang, S. F. Lu, A. McTeer, W. Morinville and K. Noehring, Ieee Transactions on Plasma Science, 2009, 37(1), 139–145 Search PubMed .
X. Yu, X. J. Li and H. Z. Wang, European Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 2008, 14(4), 211–218 Search PubMed .
K. Ghosh, V. N. Mani and S. Dhar, Journal of Crystal Growth, 2009, 311(6), 1521–1528 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ghosh, V. N. Mani and S. Dhar, Journal of Applied Physics, 2008, 104(2) Search PubMed .
J. Brison, R. G. Vitchev and L. Houssiau, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, 2008, 266(24), 5159–5165 Search PubMed .
J. Brison, J. Guillot, B. Douhard, R. G. Vitchev, H. N. Migeon and L. Houssiau, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, 2009, 267(3), 519–524 Search PubMed .
L. K. Takahashi, J. Zhou, K. R. Wilson, S. R. Leone and M. Ahmed, Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 2009, 113(16), 4035–4044 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Su, Z. W. Lu, X. P. Gao, P. W. Shen, X. J. Liu and J. Q. Wang, Journal of Power Sources, 2009, 189(1), 411–415 Search PubMed .
K. Tsutsui, T. Matsuda, M. Watanabe, C. G. Jin, Y. Sasaki, B. Mizuno, E. Ikenaga, K. Kakushima, P. Ahmet, T. Maruizumi, H. Nohira, T. Hattori and H. Iwai, Journal of Applied Physics, 2008, 104(9) Search PubMed .
O. Baake, P. S. Hoffmann, A. Klein, B. Pollakowski, B. Beckhoff, W. Ensinger, M. Kosinova, N. Fainer, V. S. Sulyaeva and V. Trunova, X-Ray
Spectrometry, 2009, 38(1), 68–73 CrossRef CAS .
N. Graf, E. Yegen, A. Lippitz, D. Treu, T. Wirth and W. E. S. Unger, Surface and Interface Analysis, 2008, 40(3–4), 180–183 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maekawa, K. Mori, N. Suzumura, K. Honda, Y. Hirose, K. Asai, A. Uedono and M. Kojima, Microelectronic Engineering, 2008, 85(10), 2137–2141 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kijima and T. Nakada, Applied Physics Express, 2008, 1(7) Search PubMed .
H. C. Liu, W. H. Ho, C. F. Li and S. K. Yen, Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 2008, 155(12), E178–E182 Search PubMed .
B. Patsch, A. Ehlert and E. Lankmayr, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155(7), H540–H544 CrossRef CAS .
S. Scholz, Q. Huang, M. Thomschke, S. Olthof, P. Sebastian, K. Walzer, K. Leo, S. Oswald, C. Corten and D. Kuckling, Journal of Applied Physics, 2008, 104(10), 10 .
S. Shimakawa, Y. Hashimoto, S. Hayashi, T. Satoh and T. Negami, Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 2008, 92(9), 1086–1090 CrossRef CAS .
C. Palacio and A. Arranz, Surface and Interface Analysis, 2008, 40(3–4), 676–682 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sioncke, A. Delabie, G. Brammertz, T. Conard, A. Franquet, M. Caymax, A. Urbanzcyk, M. Heyns, M. Meuris, J. L. van Hemmen, W. Keuning and W. M. M. Kessels, Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 2009, 156(4), H255–H262 Search PubMed .
L. B. Chang, C. C. Shiue and M. J. Jeng, Applied Surface Science, 2009, 255(12), 6155–6158 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, R. Merkle, J. Maier, T. Acarturk and U. Starke, Applied Physics Letters, 2009, 94(7), 3 .
R. T. Bondokov, S. G. Mueller, K. E. Morgan, G. A. Slack, S. Schujman, M. C. Wood, J. A. Smart and L. J. Schowalter, Journal of Crystal Growth, 2008, 310(17), 4020–4026 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vanzetti, M. Barozzi, E. Iacob, M. Bersani, G. Pucker and P. Bellutti, Surface and Interface Analysis, 2008, 40(3–4), 543–546 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Gore, E. S. Heiden and R. J. Field, Environmental Science & Technology, 2008, 42(11), 4088–4092 Search PubMed .
L. Hua, Y. P. Wu, B. An and X. W. Lai, Spectroscopy and Spectral Analysis, 2008, 28(11), 2665–2670 Search PubMed .
R. Bao, J. Q. Li, C. H. Ji, H. L. Fan, X. H. Song and S. S. Chen, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2008, 28(6), 1390–1393 CAS .
D. Grunski, B. Rech, R. Schmitz, A. Muck, O. Pincon, U. Breuer and W. Beyer, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516(14), 4639–4644 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Abraham, T. Spila, M. M. Furczon and E. Sammann, Electrochemical and Solid State Letters, 2008, 11(12), A226–A228 Search PubMed .
H. Baltas and U. Cevik, Solid State Communications, 2009, 149(5–6), 231–235 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pawlowski, A. Michalska, M. Wojciechowski, J. Golimowski, E. Bulska and K. Maksymiuk, Journal of Solid State Electrochemistry, 2009, 13(1), 107–113 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Ferreira, L. M. Z. Prados, D. Majuste and M. B. Mansur, Journal of Power Sources, 2009, 187(1), 238–246 Search PubMed .
L. Prager, P. Marsik, L. Wennrich, M. R. Baklanov, S. Naumov, L. Pistol, D. Schneider, J. W. Gerlach, P. Verdonck and M. R. Buchmeiser, Microelectronic Engineering, 2008, 85(10), 2094–2097 CrossRef CAS .
T. Arockiados, F. P. Xavier and M. Babu, Materials Chemistry and Physics, 2008, 111(2–3), 517–523 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ozturk, S. Celik, U. Cevik and E. Yanmaz, Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 2008, 456(1–2), 34–39 CrossRef CAS .
V. Babentsov, J. Franc, A. Fauler, M. Fiederle and R. B. James, Journal of Crystal Growth, 2008, 310(15), 3482–3487 CrossRef CAS .
A. Adriaens, K. De Wael, D. Bogaert, H. Buschop, T. Schoonjans, B. Vekemans, D. Depla and L. Vincze, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(9), 988–991 Search PubMed .
A. Bengtson, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(9), 917–928 Search PubMed .
Z. W. Chen, C. M. L. Wu, C. H. Shek, J. K. L. Lai, Z. Jiao and M. H. Wu, Critical Reviews in Solid State and Materials Sciences, 2008, 33(3–4), 197–209 Search PubMed .
R. De Mondt, L. Van Vaeck, A. Heile, H. F. Arlinghaus, F. Vangaever and J. Lenaerts, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2009, 393(8), 1917–1921 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujii, Y. Ishizaki, M. Nojima, M. Owari and Y. Nihei, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, 2009, 267(4), 660–664 Search PubMed .
Z. X. Jiang, K. Kim, T. Guenther, B. Robichaud, J. Benavides, L. Contreras and D. D. Sieloff, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 2008, 26(5), 1120–1127 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wucher, Surface and Interface Analysis, 2008, 40(12), 1545–1551 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wucher, J. Cheng, L. Zheng and N. Winograd, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2009, 393(8), 1835–1842 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chakraborty, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(8), 1858–1865 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, D. D. Zhao, Q. Xu and X. L. Ding, Applied Surface Science, 2009, 255(13–14), 6439–6442 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, K. Tsuji, D. Y. Han and X. L. Ding, X-Ray Spectrometry, 2008, 37(6), 625–628 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pollakowski, B. Beckhoff, F. Reinhardt, S. Braun and P. Gawlitza, Physical Review B, 2008, 77(23) Search PubMed .
R. Sitko, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(3), 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
R. Teghil, A. Santagata, A. De Bonis, G. Albano, P. Villani, D. Spera, G. P. Parisi and A. Galasso, Physica Scripta, 2008, 78(5) Search PubMed .
I. B. Radovic, M. Jaksic and F. Schiettekatte, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2009, 24(2), 194–198 RSC .
A. Rozenblat, Y. Rosenwaks, L. Segev and H. Cohen, Applied Physics Letters, 2009, 94(5), 3 .
O. Baake, P. S. Hoffmann, S. Flege, H. M. Ortner, S. Gottschalk, W. Berky, A. G. Balogh, W. Ensinger, B. Beckhoff, M. Kolbe, M. Gerlach, B. Pollakowski, J. Weser, G. Ulm, M. Haschke, E. Blokhina, M. Peter, D. Porta and M. Heck, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2009, 393(2), 623–634 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pelissier, A. Beaurain, J. P. Barnes, R. Gassilloud, F. Martin and O. Joubert, Microelectronic Engineering, 2008, 85(9), 1882–1887 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Galindo, R. Gago, A. Lousa and J. M. Albella, Trac-Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 2009, 28(4), 494–505 CrossRef .
M. Schulke, G. Kiss, H. Paulus, M. Lammers, V. Ramachandran, K. Sankaran and K. H. Muller, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2009, 393(8), 1843–1856 CrossRef .
K. Chiba, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80(16), 6286–6292 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yuksel, E. D. Sam, O. C. Aktas, M. Urgen and A. F. Cakir, Applied Surface Science, 2009, 255(7), 4001–4004 CrossRef CAS .
H. Oechsner, R. Getto and M. Kopnarski, Journal of Applied Physics, 2009, 105(6) Search PubMed .
J. Malherbe, B. Fernandez, H. Martinez, P. Chapon, P. Panjan and O. F. X. Donard, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(10), 1378–1387 RSC .
J. Malherbe, H. Martinez, B. Fernandez, C. Pecheyran and O. F. X. Donard, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2009, 64(2), 155–166 Search PubMed .
M. Walle, J. Koch, L. Flamigni, S. Heiroth, T. Lippert, W. Hartung and D. Gunther, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2009, 64(1), 109–112 Search PubMed .
M. Walle, J. Koch and D. Gunther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(9), 1285–1289 RSC .
M. Shaheen, J. E. Gagnon, Z. P. Yang and B. J. Fryer, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2008, 23(12), 1610–1621 RSC .
A. J. R. Kent, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2008, 32(2), 129–147 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Shen and Y. F. Lu, Applied Optics, 2008, 47(11), 1810–1815 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Muniz, J. Pisonero, L. Lobo, C. Gonzalez, N. Bordel, R. Pereiro, A. Tempez, P. Chapon, N. Tuccitto, A. Licciardello and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(9), 1239–1246 RSC .
M. Wiedenbeck, D. Schulze and I. Veksler, Geostandards and Geoanalytical Research, 2009, 33(1), 111–114 CrossRef CAS .
W. Castro, T. Trejos, B. Naes and J. R. Almirall, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 392(4), 663–672 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Suzuki, H. S. Kikkawa, M. Kasamatsu, Y. Higashikawa and S. Suzuki, Anal. Sci., 2008, 24(6), 745–749 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Rodriguez-Celis, I. B. Gornushkin, U. M. Heitmann, J. R. Almirall, B. W. Smith, J. D. Winefordner and N. Omenetto, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391(5), 1961–1968 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Brozek-Mucha, X-Ray Spectrometry, 2009, 38(1), 58–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Veiga and M. O. Figueiredo, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 229–233 Search PubMed .
P. Mirti, M. Pace, M. M. N. Ponzi and M. Aceto, Archaeometry, 2008, 50, 429–450 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mirti, M. Pace, M. Malandrino and M. N. Ponzi, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2009, 36(4), 1061–1069 CrossRef .
A. Silvestri, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2008, 35(6), 1489–1501 CrossRef .
Z. Smit, D. Jezergek, T. Knific and J. Istenic, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, 2009, 267(1), 121–124 Search PubMed .
R. Arletti, G. Vezzalini, S. Quartieri, D. Ferrari, M. Merlini and M. Cotte, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 127–135 Search PubMed .
B. Wagner, A. Nowak, E. Bulska, J. Kunicki-Goldfinger, O. Schalm and K. Janssens, Microchimica Acta, 2008, 162(3–4), 415–424 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dussubieux, C. M. Kusimba, V. Gogte, S. B. Kusimba, B. Gratuze and R. Oka, Archaeometry, 2008, 50, 797–821 CrossRef CAS .
A. Genga, M. Siciliano, A. Tepore, A. Mangone, A. Traini and C. Laganara, Microchemical Journal, 2008, 90(1), 56–62 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tantrakarn, N. Kato, A. Hokura, I. Nakai, Y. Fujii and S. Gluscevic, X-Ray Spectrometry, 2009, 38(2), 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ctvrtnickova, L. Cabalin, J. Laserna, V. Kanicky and G. Nicolas, Applied Surface Science, 2009, 255(10), 5329–5333 CrossRef CAS .
M. Resano, P. Marzo, J. Perez-Arantegui, M. Aramendia, C. Cloquet and F. Vanhaecke, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(9), 1182–1191 RSC .
N. Nonose, M. Ohata, T. Narukawa, A. Hioki and K. Chiba, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2009, 24(3), 310–319 RSC .
M. Aramendia, M. Resano and F. Vanhaecke, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2009, 24(1), 41–50 RSC .
J. C. P. de Mattos, E. Flores and V. Krivan, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(7), 931–937 RSC .
M. Banno, E. Tamiya and Y. Takamura, Analytica Chimica Acta, 2009, 634(2), 153–157 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jaroszewicz, W. De Nolf, K. Janssens, A. Michalski and G. Falkenberg, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391(4), 1129–1133 CrossRef CAS .
E. Verne, S. Ferraris, M. Miola, G. Fucale, G. Maina, G. Martinasso, R. A. Canuto, S. Di Nunzio and C. Vitale-Brovarone, Advances in Applied Ceramics, 2008, 107(5), 234–244 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Gonzaga, H. N. Yoshimura, P. F. Cesar and W. G. Miranda, Journal of Materials Science-Materials in Medicine, 2009, 20(5), 1017–1024 Search PubMed .
Y. Tanaka, S. Takata, K. Shimoe, M. Nakamura, A. Nagai, T. Toyama and K. Yamashita, Journal of the Ceramic Society of Japan, 2008, 116(1355), 815–821 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Guerra, Archaeometry, 2008, 50, 951–967 CrossRef CAS .
B. Giussani, D. Monticelli and L. Rampazzi, Analytica Chimica Acta, 2009, 635(1), 6–21 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Veiga and M. O. Figueiredo, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 458–461 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mangone, L. C. Giannossa, R. Laviano, C. S. Fioriello and A. Traini, Microchemical Journal, 2009, 91(2), 214–221 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iordanidis, J. Garcia-Guinea and G. Karamitrou-Mentessidi, Materials Characterization, 2009, 60(4), 292–302 Search PubMed .
A. Mangone, L. C. Giannossa, C. Laganara, R. Laviano and A. Traini, Journal of Cultural Heritage, 2009, 10(1), 134–143 Search PubMed .
C. Tschegg, T. Ntaflos and I. Hein, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2009, 36(5), 1103–1114 CrossRef .
S. Akyuz, T. Akyuz, S. Basaran, C. Bolcal and A. Gulec, Vibrational Spectroscopy, 2008, 48(2), 276–280 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. Ige, B. A. Ogunfolakan and E. O. B. Ajayi, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2009, 36(1), 90–99 CrossRef .
J. L. Carrano, G. H. Girty and C. J. Carrano, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2009, 36(3), 785–797 CrossRef .
L. Cheng, R. W. Li, Q. L. Pan, G. X. Li, W. J. Zhao and Z. G. Liu, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, 2009, 267(1), 117–120 Search PubMed .
S. L. Feng, X. Q. Feng, J. H. Zhu, G. X. Xie, L. T. Yan, L. Li, G. Li and Q. H. Shen, Chinese Physics C, 2008, 32, 284–288 Search PubMed .
I. Reiche, S. Rohrs, J. Salomon, B. Kanngiesser, Y. Hohn, W. Malzer and F. Voigt, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2009, 393(3), 1025–1041 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Zhang, Z. W. Zhao, D. W. Yang, S. Wang and W. Y. Guo, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 2009, 279(1), 307–312 CrossRef CAS .
W. Juan, P. L. Leung and L. Jiazhi, Studies in Conservation, 2007, 52(3), 188–198 Search PubMed .
D. Chabanne, A. Bouquillon, M. Aucouturier, X. Dectot and G. Padeletti, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 11–18 Search PubMed .
A. Ramil, A. J. Lopez and A. Yanez, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 197–202 Search PubMed .
B. P. Li, L. Liu, J. X. Zhao, X. C. Chen, Y. X. Feng, G. H. Han and J. X. Zhu, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(11), 2614–2622 Search PubMed .
W. D. Li, H. J. Luo, J. N. Li, J. Z. Li and J. K. Guo, Ceramics International, 2008, 34(6), 1473–1480 Search PubMed .
B. Beckhoff, M. Kolbe, O. Hahn, A. G. Karydas, C. Zarkadas, D. Sokaras and M. Mantler, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 462–465 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vazquez-Calvo, B. G. Tubio, M. A. de Buergo, I. O. Feliu, R. Fort and M. A. Respaldiza, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 399–409 CrossRef CAS .
K. Castro, A. Sarmiento, M. Maguregui, I. Martinez-Arkarazo, N. Etxebarria, M. Angulo, M. U. Barrutia, J. M. Gonzalez-Cembellin and J. M. Madariaga, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 392(4), 755–763 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fernandez-Ruiz and M. Garcia-Heras, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(9), 975–979 Search PubMed .
S. M. A. Emami, J. Volkmar and R. Trettin, Surface Engineering, 2008, 24(2), 129–137 Search PubMed .
P. Konarski, K. Kaczorek, M. Cwil and J. Marks, Vacuum, 2008, 82(10), 1133–1136 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fearn, J. Rossiny and J. Kilner, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179(21–26), 811–815 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kishimoto, N. Sakai, K. Yamaji, T. Horita, M. E. Brito, H. Yokokawa, K. Amezawa and Y. Uchitnoto, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179(27–32), 1343–1346 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lovas, V. K. Josepovits and Z. Toth, Applied Surface Science, 2009, 255(6), 3581–3585 CrossRef CAS .
S. Koerfer, R. A. De Souza, H. I. Yoo and M. Martin, Solid State Sciences, 2008, 10(6), 725–734 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, L. L. Xu, X. D. Yu, W. Li, K. X. Li, M. X. Huo and Y. H. Guo, Colloids and Surfaces a-Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 2008, 320(1–3), 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, J. J. Tu, L. J. Xu, X. Xu, Z. Q. He, J. P. Qiu, J. G. Ni and J. M. Chen, Chemosphere, 2008, 73(9), 1401–1406 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Wang, D. R. G. Mitchell, K. Prince, A. J. Atanacio and R. A. Caruso, Chemistry of Materials, 2008, 20(12), 3917–3926 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, S. Brown, J. Y. Howe, S. H. Overbury and S. Dai, Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 2008, 112(25), 9448–9457 Search PubMed .
Z. Ma, H. F. Yin, S. H. Overbury and S. Dai, Catalysis Letters, 2008, 126(1–2), 20–30 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fresno, M. D. Hernandez-Alonso, D. Tudela, J. M. Coronado and J. Soria, Applied Catalysis B-Environmental, 2008, 84(3–4), 598–606 Search PubMed .
T. C. Ramalho, H. W. P. Carvalho, A. P. L. Batista, C. A. Perez and A. L. Gobbi, Journal of Materials Science, 2009, 44(4), 1029–1034 CrossRef CAS .
M. Karthik, L. Y. Lin and H. Bai, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 2009, 117(1–2), 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
F. Benaliouche, Y. Boucheffa, P. Ayrault, S. Mignard and P. Magnoux, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 2008, 111(1–3), 80–88 CrossRef CAS .
N. Khandan, M. Kazemeini and M. Aghaziarati, Applied Catalysis a-General, 2008, 349(1–2), 6–12 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Pinheiro, A. Valentini, J. M. Sasaki and A. C. Oliveira, Applied Catalysis a-General, 2009, 355(1–2), 156–168 CrossRef CAS .
E. Andrade, C. Solis, J. M. Aceves, R. Miranda, J. Cruz, M. F. Rocha and E. P. Zavala, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(10), 2379–2382 Search PubMed .
J. R. H. Carucci, K. Arve, K. Eranen, D. Y. Murzin and T. Salmi, Catal. Today, 2008, 133, 448–454 CrossRef .
M. A. Centeno, M. C. Hidalgo, M. I. Dominguez, J. A. Navio and J. A. Odriozola, Catal. Lett., 2008, 123(3–4), 198–206 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Ou, F. W. Chang and L. S. Roselin, Journal of Molecular Catalysis a-Chemical, 2008, 293(1–2), 8–16 CrossRef CAS .
S. Marx and A. Baiker, Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 2009, 113(15), 6191–6201 Search PubMed .
L. H. Chang, Y. W. Chen and N. Sasirekha, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 2008, 47(12), 4098–4105 Search PubMed .
V. Blagojevic, A. Bozovic, G. Orlova and D. K. Bohme, Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 2008, 112(41), 10141–10146 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Du, W. W. Kuang, H. L. Xu, W. Shen and D. Y. Zhao, Applied Catalysis B-Environmental, 2008, 84(3–4), 490–496 Search PubMed .
D. Huang, Y. J. Wang, Y. C. Cui and G. S. Luo, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 2008, 116(1–3), 378–385 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Kong, H. W. Wang, X. Yang, Y. W. Hou and Y. K. Shan, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 2009, 118(1–3), 348–353 CrossRef CAS .
T. Naicker, A. K. Datye and H. B. Friedrich, Applied Catalysis a-General, 2008, 350(1), 96–102 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Jermy, S. Y. Kim, K. V. Billeesh and D. W. Park, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 2009, 117(3), 661–669 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Villoria, M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, R. M. Navarro, Y. Briceno, F. G. Alvarez, F. Rosa and J. L. G. Fierro, Catalysis Today, 2008, 138(3–4), 135–140 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stoupin, H. Rivera, Z. R. Li, C. U. Segre, C. Korzeniewski, D. J. Casadonte, H. Inoue and E. S. Smotkin, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 2008, 10(42), 6430–6437 RSC .
M. V. Martinez-Huerta, J. L. Rodriguez, N. Tsiouvaras, M. A. Pena, J. L. G. Fierro and E. Pastor, Chemistry of Materials, 2008, 20(13), 4249–4259 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Hussain, S. Gul, M. Mazhar, D. H. Anjum and F. Larachi, Journal of Natural Gas Chemistry, 2008, 17(4), 374–382 Search PubMed .
I. Eswaramoorthi, V. Sundaramurthy, N. Das, A. K. Dalai and J. Adjaye, Applied Catalysis a-General, 2008, 339(2), 187–195 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mu, J. J. Li, Z. P. Hao and S. Z. Qiao, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 2008, 113(1–3), 72–80 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Shan, X. Q. Liu, L. B. Sun and R. Cui, Energy & Fuels, 2008, 22(6), 3955–3959 Search PubMed .
T. Dong-Ge, H. Jing-Yan, C. Wei, Z. Tao and J. Xiao-Yang, Materials Letters, 2008, 62(17–18), 2746–2749 .
A. Szymczycha-Madeja and W. Mulak, Journal of Hazardous Materials, 2009, 164(2–3), 776–780 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Fernandes, A. Alcover, M. J. B. Cardoso and F. M. Z. Zotin, Catal. Today, 2008, 133, 574–581 CrossRef .
M. L. Granados, A. Gurbani, R. Mariscal and J. L. G. Fierro, Journal of Catalysis, 2008, 256(2), 172–182 Search PubMed .
A. Goncalves, J. R. Dominguez and J. Alvarado, Talanta, 2008, 75(2), 523–527 CrossRef CAS .
G. Asimellis, N. Michos, I. Fasaki and M. Kompitsas, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(11), 1338–1343 Search PubMed .
P. P. Petrova, S. V. Velichkov, I. P. Havezov and N. N. Daskalova, Bulgarian Chemical Communications, 2009, 41(1), 65–71 Search PubMed .
Z. Xu, X. H. Lu, Q. H. Xia, Z. W. Lou, C. P. Ye and Z. M. Liu, Catalysis Communications, 2008, 9(8), 1793–1798 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pinto, L. D'Ornelas and P. Betancourt, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254(17), 5390–5393 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Guerra, L. Merat, R. Gil and L. C. Dieguez, Catal. Today, 2008, 133, 223–230 CrossRef .
L. Melo, Y. Diaz, M. Mediavilla, A. Llanos, A. Albornoz and J. L. Brito, Catal. Today, 2008, 133, 99–105 CrossRef .
K. Gora-Marek, B. Gil and J. Datka, Applied Catalysis a-General, 2009, 353(1), 117–122 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto, A. Orita and T. Tanaka, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(3), 226–231 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Lau and C. C. Wong, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517(6), 1939–1943 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Putnam, M. A. Filler, B. M. Kayes, M. D. Kelzenberg, Y. B. Guan, N. S. Lewis, J. M. Eiler and H. A. Atwater, Nano Letters, 2008, 8(10), 3109–3113 CrossRef CAS .
F. Silveira, D. S. de Sa, Z. N. da Rocha, M. D. M. Alves and J. H. Z. dos Santos, X-Ray Spectrometry, 2008, 37(6), 615–624 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

Ge, P	Gold bonding wire	OES; ICP; L	Samples were dissolved with hydrobromic acid and nitric acid at room temperature to retain Ge in solution. Spike recoveries of 98–100% were reported and LODs were 0.012 mg L−1 (Ge 265.11 nm) and 0.009 mg L−1 (P 177.495 nm)	
46

O	High purity Cadmium	OES; GD; S	GD-OES measurements were validated by comparison with measurements from an oxygen-nitrogen analyzer.	
47

P	Molybdenum Steel	SIMS; -; S	SIMS showed P segregation along austenitic grain boundaries which led to embrittlement.	
48

Te	Soldering tin	AFS; HG; L	An electrochemical hydride generator was set for continuous flow into an atomic fluorescence spectrometer. TeH2 was generated on a W cathode and driven by a sweeping gas flow. LOD was 2.2 ng mL−1.	
49

Th, U	High Purity Copper	MS; ICP; L	Cu was removed from solution by electro-deposition in order to determine Th-232 and U-238.	
50

Various	Bearings	LIBS; -; S	LIBS was used for depth-profiling. LIBS measurements were correlated to acoustic measurements and gave real time profile and layer composition information.	
51

Various	Bronze	XRF; -; S	
In-situ ED-XRF was used within a museum to determine the composition of patina covering bronze artefacts without any sample preparation.	
52

Various (6)	Dental alloys	HR-MS; ICP; L	Metal ion release from dental alloys was studied by varying the dental alloys (stainless steel, nickel-titanium, and thermo Ni–Ti), pH of the solution, and the time of exposure. It was found that all alloys release ions especially in the first week.	
53

Various (10)	Lead	OES; ICP; L	Aqueous standards with an added internal standard were used for calibration.	
54

Various	Manganese alloys	OES; ICP; L	Recycled manganese alloy residues were crushed and separated by particle size then analyzed for element composition.	
55

Various (5)	Metallic Glass	OES; ICP; L	Samples were completely dissolved in a mixture of HF and HNO3 with a microwave-assisted dissolution procedure. Boron and silicon were not vaporized in the dissolution procedure.	
56

Various (8)	Silver coins	PIXE;; S	Ancient Iranian silver coins were analyzed by PIXE for elemental components in order to see if there was a correlation with minting time or minting location	
57

Various	Tantalum-niobium slag	OES; ICP; L	Samples were treated with potassium chloride and boric acid at 950 °C for 15 minutes then leached by hydrochloric and tartaric acids at 90 °C for 30 minutes. Calibration was performed with matrix matched standards. Recoveries ranged between 94 and 110%.	
58


Br	Polymers and paints	MS; ICP; FI	A fast screening procedure for brominated flame retardants in waste materials employing microwave digestion, prior to analysis. ICP-MS was advantageous due to the ability to use matrix independent calibration. KBr standards were used and 50 mg samples size required.	
146

Cr	Pharmaceuticals, including gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, sparfloxacin	AAS	Formation of ion pair with ammonium reineckate	
147

Cr	Cephalosporins	AAS	Formation of ion pair with ammonium reineckate	
148

Eu	Ink	OES; ICP; L	Inks spiked with europium thenoyltrifluoroacetonate Sodium tungstate employed to enhance the florescence intensity of Eu3+. Fluorescence measured at λexc 270 nm and λem 605 nm. Results compared favourably with ICP-OES	
149

Pd	Active pharmaceutical ingredients	High energy polarized beam EDXRF	Determination of catalyst metal residues. Sub ppm detection limit reported with spike recoveries of >95%	
150

Sb	Injectable pharmaceutical preparations	OES; ICP; HG	Quantification of Sb(III) and total Sb	
151

Various (7)	Composted agricultural waste	Cryo-trapping GC-ICP-MS	Fermentation gases collected in Tedlar bags. Identification/semi-identification of volatile organo-metallics by comparison with standard materials or a quantitative structure-activity relationship through boiling point correlation with retention time.	
152

Various (61)	Wine	ICP-OES	Mulivariate statistics employed to discriminate wines by geography	
153,154

Various	Croatian wines	Flow-through stripping chrono-potentiometry, FAAS, Zeeman GFAAS	A range of metals, including lead, cadmium, copper and zinc measured at µg L−1 levels.	
155

Various (3)	Sugar cane spirits	GFAAS	Quantitative recoveries of As, Cu and Pb were demonstrated when using bismuth and antimony as internal standards. Matrix matching calibration was not required.	
156

Various	Pigments in historical hand coloured map from the seventeenth century	XRF and Raman spectroscopy	Complete study of the document is described including determination of a range of pigments. The role of copper in the oxidation of the cellulosic support is discussed	
157

Various including C and H	Pains and varnishes	EDXRF; -; S	Multivariate calibration by partial least squares is presented, for the analysis of density of varnishes and the Stormer viscosity of paints.	
158

Various	Pigments in a mural painting	EDXRF, XRD, SEM & FTIR	Identification of a variety of pigments including yellow and red ochres, green earth, black earth, umber, copper pigments.	
159

Various	Painting materials	XRF; -; S	XRF with PCA for the analysis and classification of inorganic materials in paintings. A range of pigments were identified. Complimentary data was obtained from reflectance near- and mid-IR.	
160

Various	Gothic paintings from North East Slovakia	XRF; -; S	Handheld instrument used for the confirmation of the presence of zinc dolomites and copper and zinc arsenates together with layer stratigraphy determined the provenance of the paintings. Microscopy and XRD also used.	
161

Various	Polychromated Pedro Millain sculpture	XRF; -; S	Non-destructive analysis of pigments and supports identified pigment materials used.	
162

Various	Art and archaeological artefacts	XRF; -; S	Development of a mobile instrument for taking to the object. Case studies of medieval paintings presented	
163

Various	Stucco decorations	MS; ICP; LA	This work involved the analysis of Baroque stucco decorations and brought together analytical scientists and art historians to assist in the interpretation of the data. Microscopy, GC-MS, XRD and FTIR also used.	
164

Various	Leather	XRF; -; S	XRF applied to leather characterization, specifically type of tanning and heavy metal content.	
165

Various	Paper documents	XRF; -; S	18th & 19th century documents were characterized by determining their metal content.	
166

Various	Ink	EDXRF; -; S	Inks were spiked with a range of trace elements. These inks were used for writing and documents analyzed by EDXRF for signature authentication purposes.	
167

Various	Archaeological dyes	LIBS; -; S µ-Raman, µ-FTIR	Non-destructive and micro-destructive analysis of materials used in ancient Roman building decorations to identify pigment composition and their interactions with the matrix. Another example of combination elemental and molecular techniques for maximum information yield.	
168

Various	Pigments in paintings	LIBS; -; S	A range of pigments were characterized. Attenuated total reflection (ATR)-FTIR also used.	
169

Various	Pigment residues in archaeological sites in Tierra del Fuego	XRD, SEM-EDX, FTIR, GC-MS	Characterization of both organic and inorganic components in pigment residues.	
170

Various and Ti	Sunscreen preparations	EDXRF; -; L	These papers describe methodology for the determination in vitro of the protection factor of commercial sun screen preparations. Conventional procedures require exposure of the skin to UV radiation with and without the application of the sunscreen.	
171,172

Various	Flaked paints from buildings in Nigeria	AAS; F; L	Paint samples digested in acid and a range of metals including Pb, Cr, Fe, Cd, Zn and Cu determined. Analysis not novel but important public health issue in Africa addressed.	
173


Ag	Silver nano-particles on/in a glass slide	ToF-SIMS; -; S	Glass substrate coated with silver using ultrasonic irradiation. Material characterized using XRD, TEM, HRTEM, AFM, HRSEM and ToF-SIMS. Material dependent upon sonication time and temperature. ToF-SIMS demonstrated that the Ag diffused by a distance of 60 nm into the glass substrate. The coated glass exhibited an anti-bacterial capability.	
211

Ag	Silver nano-particles and their environment	SIMS; -; S	Silver nano-particles of 5 nm diameter deposited on glycine. SIMS used to analyze the material using primary ions of Au-3+, C-60+ and Au-4004+ which had energy of 34, 26 and 136 keV respectively. The highest secondary ion yields were obtained using Au-4004+. The method could analyze single particles, determine surface coverage or analyze multi-layered structures.	
212

Ni	Magnetic particles of nickel oxide	XPS; -; S	Nickel oxide nano-particles modified by atmospheric room temperature (not greater than 325 K) plasma fluidized bed using hexamethyldisiloxane as the monomer. Materials characterized using FTIR, XPS, and SEM. Material's wetability changed from super-hydrophilic to super-hydrophobic.	
213

Various	Al65Cu23Fe12 crystal	LIBS; -; S	Double pulse LIBS used to form nano-particles (250 fs ablating laser) and then analyze them (ns laser placed at a fixed distance). The authors assumed local thermodynamic equilibrium and determined the role of the time lag between laser pulses on the plasma excitation temperatures and electronic densities. The ns excitation laser confirmed that the particles formed by the first pulse were largely widespread in space and time and were representative of the initial target material. However, a delay of < 100 µs between the pulses could lead to modest compositional changes.	
214

Various	Mixed metal oxide nano-powders of composition (CeOx)(1−x)(Al2O3)	XRF; -; S XPS; -; S	A range of materials were prepared using liquid feed flame spray pyrolysis of mixtures of N(CH2CH2))3Al and Ce(O2CCH2CH3)(OH) and then characterized using an assortment of techniques including XRF, XPS, SEM, TEM, STEM, XEDS, FTIR and TGA.	
215

Various	A series of uniform spinel ferrite nano-particles of form MFe2O4 (M = Co, Mn, Ni and Zn)	AES; ICP; L	Materials prepared by direct hydrothermal decomposition of trinuclear heterometallic oxocentered acetate cluster of {MFe2O(CH3CO2)6(H2O)3·nH2O}.Crystal structure, composition and size of nano-particles were characterized using XRD, ICP-OES, TEM and HRTEM.	
216

Various	Amorphous Ca5Ge2O9 nanowires	XRF; -; S MS; ICP; L	Germanium nano-particles were first prepared by a vapour condensation technique. Then, on immersion of these nano-particles in calcium hydroxide, nanowires of the formula Ca5Ge2O9 were formed rapidly. XRD was used to determine the phase, and the Ca: Ge ratio was determined using energy dispersive XRF and ICP-MS.	
217

Zn	Zinc oxide nano-particles	MS; ICP, L	Zinc oxide nano-particles formed by Pechini method. The effect of molar ratios of reagents and calcinations temperature on particle size were determined. Calcination temperature was found to have a significant effect, with size varying between 16 and 76 nm being achieved for calcination temperatures of between 400 and 800 °C. ICP-MS was used to study homogeneity of particles.	
218


Al	Thermal and Plasma enhanced atomic layer deposited aluminium oxide on gallium arsenide substrate	TXRF; -; S ARXPS; -; S	Comparison of atomic layer deposition techniques. In addition, the effect of cleaning and partial cleaning of substrate surface to remove the native oxide was also determined. Ellipsometry and TXRF were used to study the growth of the layers whilst ARXPS was used to determine the composition of the interlayer. Both deposition techniques were fairly independent of the starting surface. Based on capacitance measurements, the thermally deposited materials were found to have better electrical characteristics.	
307

Au	High reflective p-GaN/Ni/Ag/Ti/Au ohmic contacts for flip chip LEDs	SIMS; -;S	SIMS depth-profiles indicated that Au in-diffusion occurs in Ni/Ag/Au contacts after annealing and that this was responsible for a low reflectance (63% at 465 nm). A diffusion barrier layer consisting of either Ti or Mo was therefore used between the Ni/Ag and the Au. Reflectivity was found to increase to 93%.	
308

O	Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3 (BSCF) high temperature oxygen permeation membranes.	SIMS; -; S	BSCF films produced by laser deposition on magnesium oxide single crystal substrates. O isotope exchange then measured using SIMS so that tracer diffusion coefficients and effective surface exchange constants could be determined. The materials were found to have a low activation energy (0.5 eV) and exhibited a larger O diffusion coefficient than that of (La, Sr)(Fe,Co)O3 delta perovskites.	
309

O	Large area aluminium nitride wafers	MS; GD; S SIMS; -; S	High quality aluminium nitride bulk crystals grown by sublimation – recondensation. Impurity levels determined using GDMS and SIMS. O content measured by SIMS. Material also characterized using rocking curves in the double axis configuration, thermal conductivity measurements, XRD and X-ray backscattering.	
310

Si	Silicon nanocrystals embedded in silicon oxide layers	SIMS; -; S XPS; -; S	Silicon nano-crystals were obtained using thermal annealing of silicon rich oxide at 900–1200 °C. Authors used SIMS, XPS and AFM to study silicon rich oxide layers close to interfaces with silicon nitride or c–Si. The 2 nm thick layer was found to be deficient in Si. The depleted layer was of importance for both electrical transport and charge storage in the silicon rich oxide.	
311

Various	Electrical and electronic waste equipment	XRF; -; S OES; ICP; L	Inhomogeneity of printed circuit boards caused problems during analyses for reduction of hazardous substances compliance testing (RoHS). Use of micro-spot, benchtop, hand-held and polarizing XRF spectrometers led to poor precision. Shredding samples to < 0.5 mm improved precision sufficiently for RoHS testing using XRF or by acid dissolution and ICP analysis. Milling for 90 sec using a puck and ring mill decreased particle size to < 90 µm, but led to sample loss. The authors concluded that shredding alone was the optimal sample preparation procedure.	
312

Various (4)	Electrical and electronic equipment.	OES; ICP; L	Testing of materials for Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb for RoHS purposes. Microwave assisted acid extraction of materials used. The procedure was rapid and led to little analyte loss or contamination (recoveries 85–115%). Precision was reported to be better than 3% RSD.	
313

Various (6)	Bismuth-based superconductor powder	OES; ICP; L	The influence of acid type and concentration was examined. The analytes Al, Ba, Cr, Fe, Ni and Si were determined. Interference effects from bismuth, strontium, lead, calcium and copper were studied systematically. Interference coefficients were calculated and a mutual interference matrix was developed. Using this interference matrix and the Gaussian elimination with full pivoting method, the authors successfully overcame interference effects and obtained recoveries of 99.5–100.5%. Results agreed well with those obtained using ICP-MS. In Chinese.	
314

Various	Thin film silicon solar cells	SIMS; -; S ToF-SIMS; -; S	The chemical memory effect on the performance of the materials was tested. Analysis indicated a high impurity concentration in the intrinsic (i) layer of the p-i-n solar cell which adversely affected cell performance. An F content greater than 1.5 × 1019 cm−3 was found to be critical. The use of the fluorinated gases nitrogen trifluoride or sulfur hexafluoride + oxygen as cleaning agents succeeded in reducing contaminants. The nitrogen trifluoride was especially successful. Additional procedures such as increasing total gas flow rate during deposition, hydrogen plasma treatment of reaction chamber improved quality of solar cells further.	
315

Various (3)	Aged graphite anodes	SIMS; -; S	Dynamic SIMS was used to determine whether or not an impedance rise in aged cells arises because of the dissolution of transition metals from the oxide electrode form a high impedance layer at the negative electrode. The analytes Co, Mn and Ni were determined on fresh, formed and aged graphite anodes. Results indicated an accumulation of these analytes in the aged cells.	
316

Various (3)	YBa2Cu3O7 – delta superconductor	XRF; -; S	The K XRF cross sections of the analytes Ba, Cu and Y were measured in the compounds copper oxide, yttrium oxide and barium carbonate as well as the superconductor materials prepared by a solid state reaction technique. Samples were irradiated with gamma rays from an americium-241 source and the analytes X-rays detected using a Si(Li) detector. The obtained X-ray cross section values were compared with theoretical values for the pure elements. The cross section values changed in the superconductor sample depending on the calcined and sintered states.	
317

Various (3)	Galvanostatically polarized K+ selective solid state sensors with PVC membrane	MS; ICP; LA	Cl, K and Na distribution within the sensor phases were studied using LA-ICP-MS. K was found to accumulate during the course of cathodic galvanostatic polarization. The surface content of K was found to be linearly dependent on the applied current.	
318

Various (4)	Components of spent Lithium ion batteries	XRF; -; S AAS; F; L	Analytical techniques such as atomic absorption, XRF, XRD used to determine metal content of anodes and cathodes of such batteries. A hydrometallurgical method based on sodium hydroxide leaching of Al followed by sulfuric acid/hydrogen peroxide dissolution of the remaining Co and Li was used to separate the components for re-cycling purposes. Variables such as concentration of the dissolution reagents and temperature were all optimized.	
319

Various	Low k dielectric materials	ToF-SIMS; -; S XPS; -; S	Low k dielectric materials formed on silicon wafers by chemical vapour deposition. Materials were then cured using UV light at different wavelengths (172, 185 or 222 nm). Effect of pressure on the UV curing was then determined. Materials characterized using ToF-SIMS, XPS, FTIR, contact angle measurement, XRR, surface acoustic wave spectrometry (SAW) and purged UV spectroscopic ellipsometry (PUVSE). The depth-profiles were found to be homogeneous for all curing wavelengths.	
320

Various (3)	Biologically metal-doped protein semi-conducting biopolymer	AAS; F; L	Metal doped (copper oxide, cadmium oxide and lead oxide) muscle protein from fish was isolated, purified and characterized for its potential as a semi-conducting biopolymer. Characterization techniques used for the crude protein included circular dichroism, AAS and FTIR. Protein thin film prepared and then characterized using SEM-EDX, XRD, Raman shift, optical coefficient and electron transfer reactions such as conductivity and cyclic voltammetry. Cd and Cu analogues were found to have semiconductor potential.	
321

Yb	Yb diffusion doped superconductor material of the type YBa2Cu3O7-x (Y123)	EDXRF; -; S	Effect of Yb diffusion on structural evolution and superconducting properties of Y123 ceramic were determined. Yb diffusion over a temperature range of 800–900 °C determined using EDXRF. Yb doped material had increased critical current density compared with un-doped material. Authors hypothesized that Yb inclusion improved structural quality at the grain boundaries.	
322

Zn	Cadmium zinc telluride ingot	MS; GD, S	Distribution of Zn in vertical Bridgman grown Cd1-xZnxTe ingot determined using GD-MS. Other characterization trechniques used included photoluminescence, photo-induced current transient spectroscopy, resistivity, and photosensitivity-mapping.	
323


Cr	Nanometer metal multi-layers	OES; GD; S SIMS; -; S RBS; -; S	Overview of the three techniques discussing the advantages and disadvantages of each. Ultra-thin chromium layers of 2.5 and 5 nm buried at different depths in titanium matrices were analyzed. Depth resolution for each of the techniques was discussed.	
342

H	Titanium manganese (TiMn2) type metal hydride alloy	XPS; -; S SNMS; -; S TDMD; -; S	TDMS used to determine H content in storage alloy and to determine activation energy for the desorption. XPS used to indicate the oxidation state of the main alloy elements. SNMS used to analyze the top 18 nm thick layer. An oxide layer formed during manufacture and during long term storage prevents H from being absorbed. An activation process is required.	
343

N	Interface of silicon oxide films on silicon	ToF-SIMS; -; S	Silica films deposited on silicon by plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD). ToF-SIMS used to determine Si3+ and from this, the depth-resolution function. The full width half maximum of the resolution function was approximately 1.6 nm for 22 kV Au3+ primary ions and sputter etching by Ar+ at 1 kV. The intensity profile of Si3O2N+ secondary ion species was measured at the interface.	
344

Na	Titanium dioxide films on soda lime glass and silicon dioxide pre-coated glass	OES; GD; S XRR; -; S	Films produced via sol-gel spin and dip-coating techniques. Films characterized by XRD, XRR, GD-OES and optical profilometry. Na migration detected in the amorphous TiO2 films which were deposited on soda lime glass substrate. A barrier layer was therefore introduced between the film and the substrate. The mechanism by which the barrier works was proposed according to GD-OES depth-profile measurements.	
345

Various	Inter-metallic phases of a nickel-zinc coating on iron and nickel and titanium/silicon films on silicon carbide	SNMS; -; S	Quantitative determination of chemical solid phases using SNMS was described.	
346

Various (primarily O, but also Al and Fe)	Oxide films	OES; GD; S	Calibration curves obtained by combining bulk CRMs and well-characterized coated calibration samples. Oxide layers analyzed using 700 Pa of pressure and 30 W forward power. Qualitative and quantitative data were in agreement with nominal values. Preliminary results for oxidation state speciation of Al and Fe were compared with XRD data.	
347

Various (primarily O, but also Cr and Fe)	Metal oxide films	OES; GD; S	An extension to the previous work. Iron oxide film deposited on silicon and a chromate conversion coating were analyzed. Metal to O ratios were determined during depth-profiling. AFM and XPS used to study the surface of the films. XPS data of the surface and of the craters of GD sites indicated that the GD had the effect of reducing the metal elements. This was attributed to the preferential sputtering of O, leaving an enriched but reduced metal layer.	
348


Ca	Ancient glazes and glasses	XAFS; -; S XANES; -; S	Ca known to alter transparency of some glasses, but the mechanism was not fully understood. XAFS study at the Ca K- and L-edges undertaken to try and elucidate mechanism. XANES study at the K-edge used to corroborate findings.	
360

Various (40)	Glass fragments of Parthian and Sasanian epoch	MS; ICP; L	41 glass fragments analyzed for major, minor and trace elements. K and Mg ratio helped identify different glass preparation techniques.	
361

Various (38)	47 glass fragments from Sasanian epoch (3rd – 7th century AD) in Iraq	MS; ICP; L	Materials represented finished objects, raw glass and waste glass. Mg and P data showed evidence of different kinds of plant ash being used during the manufacture.	
362

Various	Glass from Roman ship Iulia Felix	XRF; -; S Electron microprobe	Analytical and chemometric techniques used in conjunction with archaeological methods to determine composition of assorted glasses. A “re-cycling index” based on the Sb content was developed to quantify the extent of re-cycling.	
363

Various	Late Roman and Carolingian period glasses from Slovenia	PIXE; -; S PIGE; -; S	Combined use of PIXE-PIGE using a proton beam in air was applied to the analysis of the glass objects. Majority of the objects were made of the normal Roman Natron type glass. Increase Ti indicated that some of the glass had been re-cycled several times.	
364

Various	Polychrome glasses from Etruscan sites dating from 7th – 4th centuries BC	µ-XRF; -; S µ-XANES; -; S X-ray powder diffraction	Since sample damage was absolutely forbidden, authors used a range of synchrotron – based techniques. High levels of Pb were identified in yellow samples. Sb was elevated in white and light blue samples and Mn and Fe were present at higher concentrations in purple and black samples respectively. µ-XANES and XRD used to try and identify the analytes' bonding structure.	
365

Various	Historical glass	MS; ICP; LA SEM-EDX	LA-ICP-MS and SEM-EDX used as complementary techniques. LA-ICP-MS enabled determination of elements that were less than the LOD obtainable by SEM-EDX as well as B, an element that cannot be determined using EDX. A good correlation between the data sets was obtained.	
366

Various	Ancient glass beads	MS; ICP; LA	Similar glass beads found at archaeological sites in Asia and Africa. LA-ICP-MS used to determine elemental fingerprints from beads in India, Sri Lanka and East Africa. Two sub-groups identified. One dated from 4th century BC – 5th century AD and was found in Sri Lanka and India, the other dated from later (9th – 19th century AD) and was found in both Kenya and at Chaul in India.	
367

Various	Medieval glass from Siponto (Italy)	OES; ICP;L AAS; ETV; L	Atomic spectrometry used for investigating glass production technology. All glasses, independent of colour, were silica-soda-lime in nature. Chemometric techniques of PCA, CA, and factor analysis used to obtain technological information.	
368

Various	Roman glass excavated in Croatia	XRF; -; S	A portable XRF instrument was used to analyze 109 objects. The instrument has an X-ray tube with a palladium target that operated at 40 kV, a silicon drift detector with a polymer window and an enlargeable vacuum sampling chamber. The instrument was capable of determining light elements e.g. Na and Mg as well as heavier analytes.	
369


Pb	Ancient Spanish lead glazed ceramics	MS; ICP; LA	Pb isotope ratios determined by LA-ICP-MS using a dynamic reaction cell. Introduction of neon to the cell improved precision on the ratios to 0.15–0.25% (a factor of 2–3). This was sufficient to be able to distinguish between different samples types. The process could give spatially resolved isotopic information in less than 30 minutes whilst consuming negligible quantities of sample (ng level). The drawback was that the use of the reaction cell increased the amount of mass bias that had to be corrected for.	
371

Zn	Ancient tile glazes of Portuguese origin	XANES; -; S	Lead-rich blue and white tile glazes analyzed using XANES to assess the speciation and coordination environment of Zn (a fuser metal in ancient glazes). Zinc oxide and zinc carbonate were used as model compounds for Zn ions in tetrahedral and octahedral forms respectively. Comparison between calculated and actual spectra demonstrated some differences that the authors attempted to explain. However, the overall results indicated that the Zn was present probably in a tetrahedral form.	
382

Various	Late Roman oil lamps from Egnatia	Various analytical techniques; SEM, XRD	Provenance of lamps determined using statistical multivariate analysis of analytical data. Data compared with coeval pottery whose origin was known. Data indicated that pottery could be split between locally produced and those imported from North Africa. The imported lamps could also be segregated further into those produced in central Tunisia and those from Northern Tunisia.	
383

Various	Ancient pottery from Aiani, Greece	XRF; -; S XRD, SEM-EDX	Ancient pottery ranging from pre-historic to Hellenistic times analyzed. Preliminary result indicated a local provenance and an improvement in ceramic manufacture technology. The presence of Gehlenite or pyroxene minerals indicated a higher firing temperature whereas phylosilicate minerals indicated a lower firing temperature.	
384

Various	51 medieval ceramics from Canosa castle, Italy.	AAS; ET, L AAS; F; L AES; ICP; L XRF; - S SEM-EDX	Elemental composition of ceramics, glazes and pigments determined. Multivariate techniques used to analyze analytical data.	
385

Various	Source material of Cypriot bronze age white ceramics	XRF; -; S MS; ICP; -	XRD and EPMA also used to distinguish samples. Four groupings identified according to their raw material sources and technological analogies.	
386

Various	Ancient pottery from Ainos (Turkey)	EDXRF; -; S XRD	FTIR and X-ray techniques enabled mineralogical composition and firing conditions of fifth and sixth century BC samples to be determined. By re-firing sherds at 800 °C it was possible to determine that, initially, the sherds had been fired at less than 800 °C in an oxidizing environment.	
387

Various	Potsherd pavements from Nigeria	MS; ICP; L	PCA and cluster analysis used to analyze analytical data.	
388

Various	Ancient Egyptian and Nubian ceramics	XRF; -; S	Nubian style sherds contained sand, silt and clay sediment that was finer grained and poorer in quartz compared with the sediment mixture used to prepare the Egyptian pottery.	
389

Various	Ancient Chinese Jun and Ru porcelain and glaze	µXRF; -; S	The layer between the glaze and the porcelain body was analyzed using µXRF. It was determined that glaze turned into a glassy state and infiltrated the body during firing.	
390

Various	Porcelain from the Longquan kiln in Zhejiang province, China	WDXRF; -; S	Multivariate statistical analysis of data from non-destructive WDXRD analysis of samples and their glazes used to determine provenance.	
391

Various	Underglaze painted tiles from 19th century Persian objects	XRF; -; S XANES, PIXE, confocal Raman and visible spectroscopies	Non-destructive analysis of under glaze painted tiles. It was established that the colours contained Cr and U, new materials in Persian tile making. The concentrations of K, Na, Pb and Sn were identified as markers for different workshops.	
392

Various	Raw materials for different porcelains	XRF; -; S	Dynamic fuzzy cluster analysis used to analyze data from different porcelains from the Dangyangyu kiln. Differences between the glazes and the starting materials were observed between porcelain types.	
393

Various	Chinese blue and white porcelains from the Yuan to the Ming dynasties	EDXRF; -; S	Non-destructive method of analysis used. Similarly, SEM and TEM also used. Samples that underwent EDXRF analysis then had data subjected to correspondence analysis. Differences in composition between production sites and between the two dynasties were observed.	
394

Various	Hispano-Moresque lustred ceramic	AES; ETV; S Ion beam techniques, SEM, XRD	Non-destructive ion beam analysis and XRD techniques used, with supplementary information obtained by ETV-AES. These methods enabled analysis of the glazes as well as different layers. Results indicated a) a constant source of supply of the terra cotta; b) Significant changes in the glaze composition around the 17th century; c) Significant evolutions of the structure and composition of luster layers; d) Analogies and some differences between these samples and Italian Majolica ones and e) a change in quality of the blue pigment during the 16th century.	
395

Various	Archaeological ceramics	LIBS; -; S	Artificial neural networks (ANN) used to classify provenance of ceramics following LIBS analysis. Two ANN networks proposed. One used the entire LIBS spectrum whereas the other used only the most intense peaks. When both procedures were used, better than 95% correct classification could be achieved.	
396

Various	Whitewares from Nanwa site in China	MS; ICP; L TIMS	Elemental composition and Sr isotope ratio (Sr-87/Sr-86) used to compare Nanwa whitewares with those from the Tang (Gongxian kiln) and Song dynasties. All Nanwa samples were chemically consistent. However, isotope ratios indicated that Nanwa samples were prepared using a different clay to the other samples, even though the Nanwa and the Gongxian sites are only 25.5 km apart.	
397

Various	Black glazed bowl sherds from Jian kiln, China	EDXRF,-; S XRD	Chemical composition, microstructure and visual appearance used to analyze samples. Two types of micro-structural forming mechanics identified.	
398

Various	Ancient Chinese ceramic	XRF; -; S	A fundamental parameter-based reference-free XRF quantitation method was developed and validated. XRF spectra recorded at different excitation energies provided a means to evaluate relevant fundamental parameters and secondary enhancement processes simultaneously. With a few exceptions, the method yielded data in agreement with target values given within a proficiency test.	
399

Various	Patinas from architectural heritage samples	EDXRF; -; S	Non-destructive study of the thin films (5–500 µm) on the surface of stone building materials using a portable EDXRF spectrometer. Some patinas were deliberately prepared, whereas others were formed naturally. The authors concluded that the portable instrument was capable of qualitative and even semi-quantitative analysis of the patinas in-situ.	
400

Various	English polychromated alabaster sculptures.	µEDXRF; -; S µ-Raman and FTIR	The supports, pigments and binders of the sculptures were analyzed. Pigments analyzed included minium, vermilion, lead white, carbon black, red iron oxide, gold leaf and a degraded green copper pigment. The presence of the degraded green pigment as well as calcium oxalate dihydrate indicated that microbiological degradation had occurred. PCA was used to determine whether or not the materials came from the same quarry.	
401

Various	Archaeological ceramics	TXRF; -; L	Two strategies were devised. The first involved acid leaching of the samples whereas the second involved acid leaching followed by a process to eliminate the iron present in the sample. Results compared with those obtained using INAA.	
402

Various	Ancient ceramics	XRF; -; S XRD and EDX	The damage mechanisms of ancient ceramics were investigated.	
403

AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AED	Atomic emission detection
AMS	Accelerator mass spectrometry
ANOVA	Analysis of Variance
ANSI	American National Standards Institute
APDC	Ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
ATR	Attenuated total reflection
BCR	Bureau of Community Reference
CFP	Circulating fluidized bed
CMOS	Complementary metal oxide semiconductor
CPE	Cloud point extraction
CRM	Certified reference material
CWADP	Chemical warfare agent degradation product
CZE	Capillary zone electrophoresis
DCP	Direct current plasma
DMFC	Direct methanol fuel cells
DPT	Diphenyl tin
DRIFTS	Diffuse reflectance infra-red Fourier transform spectroscopy
DRS	Diffuse reflectance spectroscopy
DTA	Differential thermal analysis
DTPA	Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
EDX	Energy dispersive X-ray analysis
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EPMA	Electron probe microanalysis
ERDA	Elastic recoil detection analysis
ESI	Electrospray ionization
ESP	Electrostatic precipitator
ESR	Electron spin resonance
ETAAS	Electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
ETV	Electrothermal vaporisation
FF	Fast flow
FI	Flow injection
FIB	Focused ion beam
FLIM	Fluorescence lifetime imaging
FTA	Fission track analysis
FT-IR	Fourier transform-infra red
FTS	Fischer-Tropsch synthesis
GC	Gas chromatography
GD	Glow discharge
GFAAS	Graphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy
GI-XRD	Grazing incidence XRD
GI-XRF	Grazing incident XRF
HPLC	High performance liquid chromatography
IBMK	Isobutylmethyl ketone
ICP	Inductively coupled plasma
ID	Isotope dilution
INAA	Instrumental neutron activation analysis
LA	Laser ablation
LDA	Linear discriminant analysis
LED	Light emitting diode
LEIS	Low energy ion scattering
LIBS	Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy
LIF	Laser induced fluorescence
LIPS	Laser induced plasma spectroscopy
LOD	Limit of detection
LOQ	Limit of quantitation
MALDI	Matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization
MFM	Magnetic force microscopy
MC-ICP-MS	Multiple collector ICP-MS
MIM	Metal insulator metal
MOCVD	Metal organic chemical vapour deposition
MPT	Monophenyl tin
MS	Mass spectrometry
MWDS	Microwave desolvation system
Nd:YAG	Neodymium: yttrium aluminium garnet
NEXAFS	Near edge X-ray absorption fine structure
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
NRRA	Nuclear resonant reaction analysis
OES	Optical emission spectrometry
OSL	Optical stimulated luminescence
PB/HC-OES	Particle beam/hollow cathode optical emission spectrometry
PBDE	Polybrominated diphenyl ethers
PCA	Principle component analysis
PET	Polyethyleneterephthalate
PGM	Platinum group metals
PIGE	Proton induced gamma ray emission
PIXE	Particle induced X-ray emission
PLS	Partial Least Squares
PLS-DA	Partial least squares discriminant analysis
PVD	Physical vapour deposition
RBS	Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
REEs	Rare earth elements
RF	Radio frequency
RI	Refractive index
RMM	Relative molecular mass
RSD	Relative standard deviation
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SF	Sector field
SIMCA	Soft independent modelling of class analogy
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
SNMS	Secondary neutral mass spectrometry
SPE	Solid phase extraction
SPM	Scanning probe microscopy
SPME	Solid phase micro-extraction
SRM	Standard reference material
SRXRF	Synchrotron radiation induced X-ray fluorescence
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TIMS	Thermal ionization mass spectrometry
TMAH	Tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide
TMPP	Tris(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl) phosphonium propylamine
TOC	Total Organic Carbon
ToF	Time of flight
TPR	Temperature programmed reduction
TPT	Triphenyl tin
TSL	Thermally stimulated luminescence
TRXPS	Total reflection X-ray photoelectric spectroscopy
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence spectrometry
USN	Ultrasonic nebuliser
UV	Ultra violet
VPD-DC	Vapour phase decomposition-droplet collection
VUV	Vacuum ultra violet
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge spectrometry
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence
XRR	X-ray reflectometry

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
