Multiscale tomographic analysis of polymer–nanoparticle hybrid materials for solar cells   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR03202G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR03202G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10945-10955Multiscale tomographic analysis of polymer–nanoparticle hybrid materials for solar cells†Miguel Lopez-Haroa, Tonggang Jiub, Pascale Bayle-Guillemauda, Pierre-Henri Jouneau*a and Frédéric Chandezon*baINAC/SP2M (UMR-E CEA-UJF)/LEMMA, Minatec, CEA-Grenoble, 17 rue des Martyrs, F-38054 Grenoble cedex 9, France. E-mail: pierre-henri.jouneau@cea.frbINAC/SPrAM (UMR 5819 CEA-CNRS-UJF)/LEMOH, CEA-Grenoble, 17 rue des Martyrs, F-38054 Grenoble cedex 9, France. E-mail: frederic.chandezon@cea.frReceived 21st June 2013, Accepted 21st August 2013First published on 27th August 2013AbstractThe present work focuses on the study of the three-dimensional (3D) morphology of polymer and nanoparticle hybrid nanocomposites used as active layers in solution-processed solar cells. The hybrid consists of blends of regioregular poly(3-alkylthiophene) and CdSe nanorods. Electron tomography (ET) analysis performed in high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) allows resolving single nanorods in the hybrid blend. These results are compared with those obtained using focused ion beam coupled with scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM), operated in a so-called 3D “slice-and-view” mode. This technique allows 3D information to be obtained on a whole device stack (hybrid active layers plus electrodes and the substrate) for significantly larger surface areas than with ET (∼10 vs. ∼0.1 μm2). The combination of ET and 3D FIB “slice-and-view” reconstructions provides complementary and coherent information on the 3D morphology of the hybrid systems at different length scales. Phase separation between the nanoparticles and the polymer is investigated by a quantitative analysis of the reconstructed volumes and is related to the performances of the hybrid devices.1. IntroductionIn line with the rising demand of society for green energy, there is a worldwide research effort to develop efficient and low-cost renewable energy sources. Amongst these, harvesting solar energy through photovoltaic conversion seems particularly promising as the sun is a quasi-unlimited energy source.1 Inorganic silicon solar cells are presently the most efficient with state-of-the-art solar cells having a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 27.6% (ref. 2) but they nevertheless remain expensive mainly due to high processing costs. Novel cost-effective solar cell technologies are thus being developed in parallel to the standard silicon-based devices. Polymer solar cells (PSCs) are one of these and have the potential to become a leading technology for photovoltaic conversion in the near future due to several advantages: these cells are light, flexible and they can be printed at low cost from inks on large area flexible substrates using e.g. roll-to-roll techniques.3,4 Moreover, the PCE of PSCs has recently passed the 10% PCE threshold.5,6 Meeting this challenge implies developing novel low bandgap π-conjugated polymers whose absorption spectrum better matches the solar spectrum and which furthermore show good charge carrier transport properties.In a PSC, the active layer consists of a blend of a semiconducting π-conjugated polymer (electron donor and hole transporter) such as regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) with an n-type material (electron acceptor and transporter). There are presently two main families of electron acceptors: (i) fullerene derivatives such as 1-(3-methoxycarbonyl) propyl-1-phenyl[6,6]C61 (PC61BM) and (ii) inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) such as CdSe or ZnO NCs. The former case corresponds to organic PSCs whereas in the latter case, the devices are referred to as hybrid PSCs.1,2,7–10 The working principle is nevertheless the same for both types of cells: the absorption of a photon by the polymer or by the NPs (for hybrid PSCs) leads to the creation of an exciton. If during its lifetime the exciton reaches an interface between the donor and the acceptor, and provided that their HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) and LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) energy levels are properly aligned, the exciton will split into free charge carriers with the hole in the polymer phase and the electron in the PCBM or NC phase. These charge carriers will thereafter percolate towards the respective electrodes, thus generating a photovoltaic current. As the typical diffusion length of excitons in semiconducting polymers is about 10 nm (ref. 11) and a thickness of 100 nm is typically required to efficiently absorb solar light, a bilayer morphology generally leads to poor PCEs.12 The solution to this issue is the “bulk heterojunction” (BHJ) morphology with an interpenetrating network of donor- and acceptor-rich domains having a high interfacial area while providing channels for charge transport to the electrodes.13 The key to efficient PSCs lies therefore in the control of the morphology of the active layer at the nanoscale. This entails progress not only in nanofabrication but also in the development of novel 3D characterization techniques to properly relate the material's 3D-nanostructure with the device efficiency.14Until recently, the most common way to obtain 3D structural information on the active layer was based on transmission electron microscopy (TEM) or on scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis of delaminated active layers and of transversal sections of the same prepared by ultramicrotomy. This provided information on the morphology both in the plane and along the transversal direction of the nanocomposite thin film.9,15–17 Nonetheless, these techniques require damaging the cell structure and the transversal information is limited to the prepared 2D section. More recently, 3D analysis has been performed using electron tomography (ET) in a transmission electron microscope.10,18–24 This technique makes it possible to obtain the three-dimensional structures of the nanomaterials with nanometer resolution. The first application of electron tomography to PSCs was published in 2007 by J. Loos and his colleague.18 The authors obtained 3D reconstructions of the MDMO–PPV–PCBM blend system, where MDMO–PPV stands for poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene]. ET results were in agreement with the morphological analysis derived from classical TEM or SEM.15 In 2009, the same group applied this technique to a photoactive blend of P3HT and PCBM and showed that after thermally annealing the active layer, a 3D network of P3HT nanofibers is formed and results in favourable concentration gradients of both substances throughout the thickness of the layer.19 Subsequently, Andersson et al. derived a 3D representation of the morphology of another blend of interest for organic solar cells based on a copolymer of fluorene from ET, namely poly[2,7-(9,9-dioctyl-fluorene)-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothia-diazole)] or APFO-3, blended with PCBM.20 More recently, Hammond et al. used energy filtered electron tomography to study the high performance bulk heterojunction blend consisting of PC71BM with the thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-alt-benzodithiophene copolymer.25In all the above-mentioned studies, the electron donor and acceptor are organic materials showing low contrasts in ET, which renders the volume reconstruction difficult. Oosterhout et al. were the first to study with ET a hybrid bulk heterojunction-like polymer–nanocrystal for which the contrast between the donor and acceptor is higher. They studied P3HT–ZnO NC blends using ET in bright field TEM (BF-TEM).10,23 From the obtained 3D reconstructions of the active layer, they performed a detailed analysis and quantified the length scale of phase separation between the organic and inorganic components and the connectivity of each phase to the relevant electrode. The results were correlated with the efficiencies of the derived devices. More recently, Hindson et al. using ET in HAADF-STEM imaged and quantified a blend of CdSe nanocrystals with P3HT,21 while Li et al. linked the 3D structure and the photocarrier dynamics of polymer–TiO2 NCs using ET operated in BF-TEM mode.22 Likewise, Roiban et al. used ET to map the 3D distribution of highly oriented and nanostructured P3HT–CdSe nanocrystal hybrid materials prepared by directional epitaxial crystallization.24 Therefore, the application of ET techniques combined with statistical analysis appears to be a powerful tool to study “all-organic” or hybrid nanocomposites of interest for solar cells, and to extract relevant morphological parameters like the scale of phase separation between the donor and acceptor, and the amount of interface between these two components and to image the percolation pathways leading to the top/bottom electrodes at the nm scale. However, one drawback of this technique is that it is limited to small analysis areas of the active layers, typically a few hundreds of nm2 and up to approximately 1 μm2, in the latter case with a loss of resolution. For example, in ref. 21 and 22, the surface areas analyzed are only 0.01 to 0.1 μm2 in size. As a consequence, the representativeness of the results could be questioned for some nanocomposites. In addition, the ET analysis can only be performed on delaminated active layers and not on the whole device stacks, with an intrinsic limit on the film thickness in order to have sufficient transmitted electrons for the subsequent volume reconstruction.In this context, combined focused ion beam (FIB)/SEM instruments are becoming excellent tools to obtain 3D information for significantly larger surface areas than ET.26 To achieve 3D imaging with a dual-beam FIB/SEM, the surface of a cross-section of the specimen is sequentially milled with the gallium ion beam, and imaged with the scanning electron beam using either the secondary or backscattered electron signal. This serial sectioning procedure used for obtaining 3D information is sometimes referred to as “slice-and-view”. Recent progress in ion and electron optics allows obtaining an ultimate spatial resolution of a few nm3 in 3D (typically with slices of up to about 2 nm imaged in SEM with an ultimate resolution of about 1 nm resolution) with this technique. As the slice thickness and the pixel resolution in SEM can be equal, it is possible to directly transform a stack of images in a 3D volume with isometric voxels without any reconstruction. Another interesting feature of this technique is that it can be applied even for non-conductive materials when working at low accelerating voltage (around 1 kV), thanks to novel in-lens secondary electron and in-lens backscattered electron detectors.We show in this work that, combining both imaging techniques (ET and 3D FIB “slice and view”), one can obtain a full and complementary picture of the 3D morphology of PSCs. Applying ET to delaminated active layers, one can image individual nanocrystals and after proper image treatment and analysis the percolation pathways for the electrons towards the cathode can be quantified. The “slice-and-view” technique can be applied to the whole device stack (active layers, interfacial layers, electrodes and the substrate). It allows us to extend the analysis of the phase separation of the donor and acceptor phases in the active layer on a μm length scale but without fully distinguishing individual NCs. One potential limitation of the “slice-and-view” imaging technique could be artifacts due to the heating and Ga implantation by the FIB during the slicing step, which might damage the material and therefore bias the results.27 This aspect might be especially critical for “all-organic” solar cells made e.g. of polymer–PCBM blends. In this case, the local heating induced by the FIB could affect the microstructure of both phases and induce diffusion of the low molecular weight PCBM component thus leading to modifications of the local morphology of the blend.28 For hybrid nanoparticle–polymer solar cells, these limitations are less critical as, even if the local microstructure of the polymer phase might be affected by the slicing process, the diffusion of the bulky NCs should not be significant and therefore the local phase separation is not modified. Additionally, in hybrid materials the contrast in the images is essentially due to the large difference in electron density between the electron-rich NCs and the polymer and is therefore not so dependent on local changes in crystallinity of the polymer phase. It may also be noticed that numerous reports in the literature now prove that this technique works well on polymeric materials, e.g. those used as embedding resins for the preparation of biological materials.29 To the best of our knowledge, no over-heating artifact has been reported on those materials, and the images obtained are very similar to those obtained in transmission electron microscopy. This is probably due to the fact that the slicing step is performed at a relatively low ion current (in our case 300 pA) and at a low incidence angle (a few degrees), with only the tail of the ion beam.In this paper, we have combined HAADF-STEM ET and 3D FIB “slice and view” techniques to study the nanomorphology of polymer–nanoparticle hybrid solar cells. HAADF-STEM electron tomography was applied to investigate the 3D structure of surface areas of about 300 × 300 nm2 allowing us to observe the separation between the polymer and the network of NCs with a resolution sufficient to distinguish individual NCs. Complementarily, the 3D FIB “slice and view” technique was used to image larger surface areas, at the μm length scale, of the same samples. The derived reconstructed volumes using these two techniques were quantified and analyzed so as to extract relevant parameters regarding the nano-morphology and the percolation pathways for the charge carriers, and the results were correlated with the device performances. This methodology was applied to solution-processed polymer–nanoparticle hybrid materials to serve as model systems for the present work. More precisely, we studied two different types of hybrid materials which show different performance in devices (i.e. power conversion efficiency η and short circuit current Jsc): (i) P3HT:CdSe nanorod blends solution-processed from orthodichlorobenzene (ODCB) or chloroform (CF) as the solvent; (ii) poly(3-butylthiophene) (P3BT) or P3HT nanofibers (NFs) blended with CdSe nanorods (NRs).30 In the nanofiber-based materials, thanks to the tomographical analysis, it was possible to visualize both the inorganic nanocrystals as well as the polymer fibrils using both HAADF-STEM ET and 3D FIB “slice and view”. Quantitative analysis obtained with both methods was in good agreement and complementary. This demonstrates that when handled with care, 3D FIB “slice and view” is a useful technique to image and analyze hybrid polymer–nanoparticle blends of interest for large area and flexible electronics.2. Results and discussionCdSe nanorods (NRs) of 50–90 nm long and 5–9 nm in diameter were used for the hybrid nanocomposites studied in this work. The UV-Vis absorption spectrum and a typical high-resolution TEM image of the NRs can be found in the ESI (Fig. S1†). Details about the synthesis route used to prepare the CdSe NRs are given in the Experimental section. Solar cell devices based on these NR blends with regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) or poly(3-butylthiophene) – P3HT and P3BT in short – were prepared and characterized under an inert atmosphere in a glove box at the French National Institute for Energy (INES, Chambéry, France). Four different types of hybrid materials giving different performances in solar cells were studied throughout this work. Two involved P3HT:CdSe nanorod blends (9:1 wt:wt) were solution-processed using either orthodichlorobenzene (ODCB) or chloroform (CF) as the solvent. In the following, these samples are referred to as cell 1 (ODCB) and cell 2 (CF), respectively. The two others were based on blends of P3BT or P3HT nanofibers with CdSe NRs with blend proportions of 1:3 or 1:5 (wt:wt), respectively. They are named as cell 3 (P3HT NFs) and cell 4 (P3BT NF). The average widths and heights of the nanofibers as determined from a combined TEM and atomic force microscopy analysis are 13 and 5 nm for P3BT NFs, and 17 and 6 nm for P3HT NFs and they are several μm long. More details about the P3BT and P3HT NFs (synthesis route, UV-Vis absorption spectrum, TEM image) and the elaboration of the hybrid materials are given in the Experimental section.Typical I–V characteristics obtained for the four hybrids in devices are displayed in Fig. 1. The blend compositions and terminology as well as the device characteristics are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). For each hybrid composition, approximately ten devices were prepared and tested at different times using different batches of CdSe NRs and P3HT or P3BT NFs. The device characteristics (Voc, Jsc, FF, and η) were reproducible within ±15% of the average values. A representative cell for each composition was selected for the present study. It should moreover be emphasized that the hybrid materials investigated here were used as model systems for the present tomography study. Although not at the state of the art in terms of device efficiencies, the devices have an active area of 28 mm2, i.e. significantly larger than that reported in most of the published work in the field of polymer–nanoparticle solar cells, where the reported active areas are often below 10 or even 5 mm2.12 Differences in performance obtained for the devices mainly originate from the short circuit currents Jsc which range from 4.6 mA cm−2 for the device with the highest efficiency (cell 1, ODCB) to 0.95 mA cm−2 for the lowest efficiency cell (cell 2, CF). These two values correspond to P3HT:CdSe NR blends processed using two solvents with different boiling points, namely orthodichlorobenzene (ODCB, Tbp = 180.5 °C) and chloroform (CF, Tbp ≈ 61 °C). It is well documented in the literature for “all-organic” and hybrid PSCs that the choice of the processing solvent can have a strong influence on the final morphology at the nanoscale level of the active layer, and therefore on the performance of the derived devices.31,32 We attribute the difference in Jsc and PCE for cells 1 and 2 to such an effect. Regarding the nanofiber-based hybrid blends (cell 3, P3HT NFs and cell 4, P3BT NFs), the use of pre-shaped NFs of the electron donor polymer should also have a large influence on the final performance of the hybrids in the devices. Indeed, the P3HT or P3BT NFs are expected to behave as preferential pathways for the photogenerated holes towards the collecting ITO anode, and thus the detailed morphology of the network of NFs is of high importance for the efficient collection of the holes. Therefore, in all the above-mentioned cases, a detailed knowledge of the three-dimensional morphology of the hybrid blends is needed in order to properly understand their performance when embedded in solar cell devices. These data would also provide valuable information to finely tune the processing of the hybrids in order to improve the efficiencies of the derived devices. Fig. 1  Current density versus voltage for photovoltaic devices fabricated using pyridine exchanged CdSe NRs (8 nm × 70 nm) blended with poly(3-alkylthiophene) under simulated solar illumination (AM 1.5 conditions, 100 mW cm−2). The detailed composition of the blends and the characteristics of the solar cells are given in Table S1 (ESI). Fig. 2 shows representative HAADF-STEM images at low magnification of the ODCB and CF-processed hybrids (Fig. 2a and b), and of the P3BT NF and P3HT NF-based ones (Fig. 2c and d). These images are taken in a direction normal to the film plane, and they only provide 2D information averaged along the whole film thickness. They show a good contrast of the hybrid blends as the HAADF signal is approximately proportional to the average Z2 (where Z is the atomic number).33,34 Thus, bright contrast areas correspond to elements with high atomic numbers, namely CdSe NRs while darker areas correspond to lower average atomic numbers, in our case the P3HT or P3BT matrix. Likewise, we can notice how, at this magnification, these 2D images do not present large differences for samples of the same type (i.e. without or with NFs). In particular, there is no striking difference between the images for cells 1 (ODCB) and 2 (CF) which show a good and homogeneous dispersion of the CdSe NRs in the polymer matrix while on the other hand these devices exhibit the largest differences in terms of the PCEs (Fig. 1 and Table S1†). In the case of P3HT NFs (cell 3) or P3BT NFs (cell 4) based samples, the hybrids appear less homogeneous with high density CdSe NR aggregates surrounded by CdSe NR poor zones which appear black on the images. The nanofibers are more difficult to observe in these dense hybrids: some grey intensity stripes corresponding to P3BT nanofibers are visible in Fig. 2d. The NFs can be more easily observed in thinner hybrid samples processed from hybrid solutions diluted by a factor of ten, see e.g. the TEM image of the P3BT NF:CdSe NR hybrid in Fig. S3 (ESI†). Fig. 2  STEM-HAADF images of the hybrid polymer:nanoparticle active layers of the photovoltaic cells studied throughout this work: (a) ODCB (cell 1): P3HT:CdSe nanorods 1:9 (wt%) solution-processed from orthodichlorobenzene (ODCB); (b) CF (cell 2): P3HT:CdSe nanorods 1:9 (wt%) solution-processed from chloroform (CF); (d) P3HT NFs (cell 3): P3HT nanofibers:CdSe nanorods 1:5 (wt%); (c) P3BT NFs (cell 4): P3BT nanofibers:CdSe nanorods 1:3 (wt%). The scale bars in the images correspond to 200 nm. Following this preliminary 2D analysis, HAADF-STEM electron tomography was carried out in order to investigate the 3D morphological structure of the BHJ at the nanometer scale and to correlate it with the performances of these hybrids in devices (see Table S1†). The ET acquisitions were performed in regions of the active layer with a medium-density of CdSe NRs to obtain sufficiently high imaging contrast. Fig. 3 presents a series of plane-view slices at different depths extracted from the reconstructed tomograms (in the xy plane), and a series of cross-sectional slices (xz or yz). One can now notice strong differences between the four samples. For the ODCB-processed hybrid, the slices taken parallel to the surface at different depths (Fig. 3a-1 and a-2) and the orthoslice (Fig. 3a-3) show a network of nanorods with a good connectivity. On the other hand, for the CF-sample the CdSe NRs present a homogeneous distribution in the xy planes (Fig. 3b-4 and b-5) but not along the transversal direction z: a depletion of NRs can be observed in the central part of the film (Fig. 3b-6). This could induce a gap in the percolating network of the CdSe NRs transporting electrons, and it could be responsible for the lower PCE compared to the ODCB-processed sample (0.25% as compared to 1.46%, see Table S1†). Fig. 3c and d present respectively the 3D volume reconstructions for the P3BT and P3HT NF-based solar cells: Fig. 3c-7 and d-10 correspond to slices taken parallel to the surface whilst Fig. 3c-8, c-9, d-11 and d-12 show transversal slices taken along two perpendicular planes. In these sets of images, the path of the poly(3-alkylthiophene) NF network amidst the NR network is marked by arrows. It should be emphasized that the path of NFs is only detectable after reconstructing the volumes, as a consequence of their low electronic contrast with respect to the CdSe NRs. These appear to be closely arranged around the NFs therefore forming an interpenetrated 3D network of interconnected NFs and NRs. Such a morphology should provide efficient pathways for electron and hole transport in the hybrid solar cells. Fig. 3  HAADF-STEM electron tomography reconstructed volumes of active layers of the polymer:nanoparticle photovoltaic cells studied in this work: (a) ODCB: slices taken in the plane of the film (1) close to the cathode, and (2) close to the anode; (3) transversal slice; (b) CF: planar slice taken (4) close to the cathode, (5) close to the anode; (6) transversal slice; (c) P3HT NF: (7) planar slice taken out of the reconstructed volume in the middle of the layer; (8) and (9) transversal slices along two different directions; (d) P3BT NF: (10) planar slice taken in the middle of the layer; (11) and (12) transversal slices along two different directions. The arrows on the slices (7) to (12) indicate the paths of the P3HT or P3BT nanofibers. All these results show that ET provides reliable volume reconstructions of hybrid solar cells. However, the size of the reconstructed volumes could appear as too limited when compared to the total area of the solar cells. The question remains therefore whether such ET reconstructed volumes are sufficiently representative of the overall morphology of the hybrid nanocomposites. For example, for the ODCB-processed hybrid (cell 1), the imaged area in the xy plane is only ∼0.07 μm2 out of a total of 28 mm2 for the total effective cell surface.30 One possible method to circumvent this would be to perform the ET imaging at a decreased resolution in order to analyze areas on the μm2 scale.Alternatively, in order to analyze larger volumes, we have used the 3D FIB “slice-and-view” technique to investigate the four samples (Fig. 4).35,36 Contrary to the HAADF-STEM used in ET that can only image the hybrid active layer (after delamination), the 3D FIB allows us to view the whole device stack – i.e. the active layer with the aluminum electrodes and the PEDOT:PSS contact layer. The backscattered electron signal was used for SEM imaging of the freshly exposed surfaces after slicing. It is less sensitive than the secondary electron one to small topographical fluctuations such as curtaining effects, and gives a contrast roughly proportional to the average atomic mass. An isometric voxel size of 3 nm was chosen (that is with slices of 3 nm imaged at a magnification giving a 3 nm pixel size). This is close to the ultimate resolution that can be achieved for the technique on this material with our microscope. We have checked that a smaller voxel size does not provide better results. As for the HAADF-STEM images (Fig. 3) higher intensity regions correspond to CdSe NRs and the lower intensity ones correspond to the P3HT (or P3BT) polymer matrix. The slicing step was performed in a cross-sectional plane of the sample along the y axis, therefore accumulating a stack of transversal xz views of the device in order to reconstruct the volume. Therefore xy and xz slices correspond to planar and transversal views of the devices, respectively (Fig. 4). Slices in the xz plane provide a full view of the device structure in cross-section with the active layer lying in the middle, the PEDOT:PSS/ITO layers below, and overcoated by the aluminum electrode with the overlayer of platinum and carbon specifically deposited for the purpose of the “slice-and-view” analysis (vide infra). The xy slice provides in-plane information on a much larger surface area as compared to what is obtained using ET (Fig. 3). For cell 1, the extracted area is close to 3.1 μm2 which is 45 times larger than what was achieved with ET. Note that even if this technique provides a large field of view, the spatial resolution is still good enough to detect the presence of the P3HT or P3BT nanofibers (see e.g.Fig. 4d). Crystalline polymer nanofibers appear clearly in the tomograms, which is a strong indication that there are no artifacts in the nanocomposite images due to possible heating effects induced by Ga ion milling during the “slice-and-view” process. Fig. 4  Cross-sections and plane view images of the active layers obtained via “slice and view” 3D FIB electron tomography (using backscattered electrons) of the photovoltaic cells: (a) ODCB; (b) CF; (c) P3HT NF; (d) P3BT NF. Quantification of the ET and 3D FIB tomograms was carried out to get more relevant parameters on the morphology of the active layers in order to interpret their performances. Segmentation of the reconstructed volumes was performed to separate the CdSe NRs from polymer voxels. Fig. 5 and 6 present the segmented reconstructed volumes of the hybrid P3HT:CdSe NR photovoltaic cells using ET and 3D FIB, respectively. The green regions correspond to the CdSe NRs whereas the polymer matrix is represented as transparent. It appears on these images that individual CdSe nanorods are less clearly resolved with 3D FIB due to the slightly lower spatial resolution of this technique. Quantitative parameters extracted from the analysis of these segmented volumes are grouped in Table 1. Fig. 5  3D surface rendered of the hybrid polymer:CdSe nanorod photovoltaic cells. The green areas correspond to CdSe NRs while the polymer areas are transparent: (a) ODCB; (b) CF; (c) P3HT NF; (d) P3BT NF.  Fig. 6  3D surface rendered of the hybrid polymer:nanoparticle photovoltaic cells obtained from 3D FIB electron tomography (using backscattered electrons) data after segmentation. The green areas correspond to CdSe NRs while the polymer areas are transparent: (a) ODCB: 2,6 μm × 1,2 μm; (b) CF: 2,6 μm × 1,1 μm; (c) P3HT NF: 2,6 μm × 0,85 μm; (d) P3BT NF: 4,7 μm × 3,3 μm. 
Table 1 Summary of the quantification analysis based on the tomographical reconstructed volumes obtained by HAADF-STEM electron tomography and by the 3D FIB “slice-and-view” technique. The average distance of a polymer voxel from an interface is calculated from the curves in Fig. 7a and b

Cell name (number)Active layer thickness (nm)CdSe NRs ΦNR volume fraction (%)Average distance of a polymer voxel from an interface (nm)Fraction of CdSe NRs monotonously connected to the cathode (%)ET3D FIBEstimatedET3D FIBET3D FIBET3D FIBODCB (cell 1)48.049.065.034.559.23.04.88493CF (cell 2)124.0110.565.028.553.13.14.77587P3HT NFs (cell 3)73.0158.745.219.638.77.48.96392P3BT NFs (cell 4)66.0109.738.222.832.45.917.76065The first parameter extracted from the 3D segmented data is the thickness of the BHJ. Values obtained by ET and 3D FIB are in good agreement for the ODCB and CF processed cells while they are significantly different for the hybrids based on P3HT and P3BT NFs. This difference might originate from the fact that as ET is only examining a small area of the active layer, it does not provide a representative value of the average thickness of the active layers for those samples with quite high roughness. This latter effect could be a direct consequence of the presence of the NFs in the hybrid ink used to solution process the nanocomposites.Another important parameter is the volume fraction ΦNR of CdSe NRs for each sample. This factor governs the performance of the hybrid solar cells as it is necessary to have a percolating network of the NRs for the photogenerated electrons to reach the cathode. A theoretical average ΦNR value can be calculated from the blending ratio used to prepare the hybrids, based on the density of the polymer matrix (ρP3HT ≈ 1.2 g cm−3 for P3HT) and on the bulk density of the CdSe for the NRs (ρCdSe ≈ 5.8 g cm−3).7 The estimated CdSe NR volume fraction ΦNR for the ODCB-processed and CF-processed samples is higher than those for the P3HT and P3BT NF films as the CdSe NR concentration used was higher for cells 1 and 2 than for cells 3 and 4. The ΦNR values derived from the ET and 3D FIB analysis follow this trend. Nevertheless, the ΦNR values obtained for 3D FIB are systematically higher than those derived from ET and are closer to the estimates based on the blend ratios of CdSe NRs and polymer (Table 1). This trend could be related to the fact that the ET analysis was carried out on those areas of the nanocomposites with a medium density of CdSe NRs in order to have a sufficiently high signal of transmitted electrons, therefore leading to a systematic underestimation of ΦNR as compared to the real value. In addition, it is understandable that the ΦNR value derived from the 3D FIB analysis is closer to the real value as the sample area probed is significantly larger than that for ET. A possible explanation for the experimental 3D FIB values of ΦNR being lower than the estimated ones could be related to the fact that these are calculated using the bulk density of CdSe, not taking into account the ligand shell surrounding each NR. The effective density of the NRs should thus be lower compared to bulk CdSe and the calculated ΦNR values given in Table 1 are overestimates as compared to the real values.37 To summarize, the volume fraction ΦNR of the NRs in the hybrid nanocomposites as derived from 3D FIB should be a quite reliable estimate of this quantity.The next parameter investigated was the length scale of phase separation between acceptor (CdSe NRs) and donor (P3HT or P3BT) phases. It is known that the exciton diffusion length is limited in organic polymeric semiconductors and that in order to generate free charge carriers that contribute to the photovoltaic effect, these species should be photogenerated within an approx. 10 nm distance of a donor–acceptor interface.11,12 Thus, from the segmented data, the shortest distance from a polymer voxel to the NR interface can be measured. From the derived distribution of all polymer voxels, one can obtain: (i) the cumulative percentage of polymer voxels that are less than a given distance to an interface (Fig. 7a and b); (ii) the average distance of polymer voxels to an interface (Table 1). The curves derived from ET and 3D FIB analysis are in reasonable agreement (see Fig. 7a and b). It turns out that for both ODCB and CF, more than 95% of the polymer voxels are located within 10 nm of an interface with the acceptor phase; the average distance being ∼3.0 nm (ET) and ∼4.7 nm (3D-FIB) for both samples (see Table 1). It should be noticed that these are statistical values that can be given with a better accuracy than the spatial resolution of the technique (about 3 nm for 3D FIB). However, they could be slightly higher than the true values depending on the spatial resolution of the images and on the density of the nanorods. Indeed, if close nanorods are not individually resolved during the segmentation, the polymer phase between them, corresponding to short distances in the distribution, is ignored thus underestimating the distribution of polymer voxels to an interface at the shortest distance. The difference between the two techniques is thus reasonable, taking into account the difference in spatial resolution between the two techniques. We can then deduce that for cells 1 and 2 the length scale of the phase separation is not a limiting factor. On the other hand, the P3BT and P3HT NF nanocomposites display a larger phase separation; see Fig. 7 and Table 1. The presence of NFs with widths around 10 nm could explain such a result.30 More specifically, for P3HT NFs, more than 95% of the polymer voxels are located within 24 nm of an interface with an average distance of 7.0 nm (ET) and 8.9 nm (3D FIB). A larger discrepancy between the ET and 3D FIB analysis is found for the P3BT NF sample. In particular, 95% of the polymer voxels are within 18 nm (ET) and 40 nm (3D FIB). This difference can be due to the presence of P3BT aggregates with inhomogeneous widths detected by the 3D-FIB reconstruction (see Fig. 4d). The ET tomograms may have missed such aggregates explaining such a difference. We believe that the aggregates observed in Fig. 4d were not initially present in the P3BT NF solution and were instead formed when solution processing the active layer. Their shapes recall the nanoribbons that were previously observed for P3HT precipitated from solution using a marginal solvent of P3HT such as anisole at concentrations around 0.2–0.5 mg mL−1.38 In the present case, the formation of these aggregates could be explained by the presence of pyridine in the solvent mixtures used for the hybrid P3BT:CdSe NR solutions, pyridine being known to be an aggregating agent of P3ATs.39 Fig. 7  Comparative results of the quantification based on the tomographic analysis used in this work i.e. HAADF electron tomography and “slice-and-view” 3D FIB. Top: percentage of polymer voxels that are within a certain distance of a polymer–nanoparticle heterojunction for (a) HAADF electron tomography and (b) slice and view 3D FIB. Bottom: distribution of the CdSe NR corresponding voxels throughout the (normalized) thickness of the cells obtained from the (c) HAADF-STEM electron tomography and (d) slice and view 3D FIB. Along the X axis, 0 correspond to the Al cathode electron collecting side whereas 1 corresponds to the ITO hole collecting anode side. To further correlate the reconstructed volumes of the hybrid nanocomposites with their performance in solar cells in a quantitative way, we studied the vertical distribution of CdSe NRs through the thickness of the layer. A preferential segregation of the electron acceptor material (CdSe NR in the present case) on the top (cathode side) and in parallel an enrichment of electron donor material (P3HT or P3BT) on the bottom (anode side) should enhance the performance of the PSC. The volume fraction of CdSe NR volume in each slice was determined to highlight this behavior. Fig. 7c and d show the vertical distribution of the CdSe NRs through the thickness of each active layer calculated from both the ET and 3D FIB techniques. For all samples, the 3D-FIB concentration profiles are shifted upwards compared to the ET ones due to the fact that the overall volume fraction of CdSe NRs is higher for the 3D-FIB tomograms compared to the ET ones (see the discussion above and data in Table 1).Both techniques show similar trends for cells 1 and 2 in terms of the segregation of CdSe NRs through the thickness of the active layer whereas significant differences in the ET and 3D-FIB profiles can be noticed for cells 3 and 4. The ODCB-processed cell (cell 1) presents a high density of CdSe NRs at the center of the active layer and an impoverishment close to the cathode and the anode. By contrast, the CF-processed cell (cell 2) shows a depletion of CdSe NRs in the middle of the active layer and enrichment close to the anode side which is in accordance with what was observed in the transversal slice reconstruction (see Fig. 3b-3). This preferential segregation of CdSe NRs to the anode side is expected to be a disadvantage for collection of electrons at the cathode side. Consequently, the significantly lower PCE of the CF cell compared to the ODCB could be related to this NR distribution.In the case of the P3HT and P3BT NF based devices, the 3D-FIB profiles exhibit a concentration gradient of CdSe NRs with enrichment close to the hole collecting (anode) side (see Fig. 7d). This effect appears to be much more pronounced for the P3BT NF sample than for P3HT NFs and is faint for the P3BT NF sample (ET). This shows that the area sampled by ET is not large enough to be representative of these two sample morphologies and 3D-FIB appears to be much more relevant. A concentration profile with an accumulation of the electron transporting CdSe NRs at the ITO anode side is clearly an unfavorable situation for charge collection and therefore for the performance of the devices. Such a concentration gradient is the opposite of what was observed for a PCBM–fibrillar P3HT blend by electron tomography.20 A possible explanation comes from the fact that as the CdSe NRs are much denser than the PCBM and the P3BT and consequently the P3BT fibrils, they will sediment on the ITO substrate during the spin-coating deposition of the active layer.7 This shows that, for these hybrid materials, an inverted type solar cell might be a better option to improve the efficiency of the devices.40Finally, we studied the connectivity of the CdSe NRs to the cathode electron collecting side. To this end, we calculated the number of CdSe NR voxels that are monotonously connected to the cathode, i.e. with pathways having strictly rising paths, and that do not require an energy-costly movement of the charge carriers against the macroscopic electric field applied over the active layer of the device. This means in particular that voxels connected to the cathode but corresponding to dead ends of the polymer network are excluded. The corresponding values are presented in Table 1. The value derived from the ET and 3D-FIB data is higher for cell 1 (ODCB) than for cell 2 (CF). Thus, we attribute the lower performance of cell 2 to the depletion of CdSe NRs in the center of the active layer (see Fig. 7c and d) which affects the connectivity of the CdSe NR network and therefore the charge collection. The length scale of phase separation between the donor and the acceptor cannot explain such an effect as it is similar in both cases.The interpretation we can give for P3HT NFs (cell 3) and P3BT (cell 4) is different. Once more there is a disagreement between the data derived from ET and 3D-FIB because of the difference in the volumes sampled by the two techniques. From 3D-FIB data, the fraction of CdSe NRs monotonously connected to the cathode is 92% for cell 3 (P3HT NFs) and 65% for cell 4 (P3BT NFs). This large difference goes along with the fact that the accumulation of NRs on the anode side is much more marked for cell 4 compared to cell 3 which therefore affects the connectivity of the CdSe NRs to the cathode. Although the active layers of cells 3 (P3HT NFs) and 4 (P3BT NFs) present this unfavorable gradient of concentration with accumulation of the electron acceptors on the anode side, their performances in terms of the short-circuit current Jsc are intermediate between those of the CF-processed and ODCB-processed cells studied in the present work, being in fact closer to that of the high performance cell 2. The exact reasons for these discrepancies remain unclear. Nevertheless, this emphasizes that the unfavorable morphology might be counterbalanced by another effect such as an improved charge transport in the fibrillar samples, in particular for the holes due to the presence of the polymer fibrils.3. ConclusionsWe have applied STEM-HAADF electron tomography and 3D FIB “slice-and-view” techniques to perform a complementary multi-scale analysis of poly(3-alkylthiophene)–CdSe nanorod hybrid nanocomposites used as active layers in solution-processed solar cells. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study coupling both techniques on such materials. Whereas the analyzed areas by electron tomography were around 0.1 μm2, this value amounts to approx. 10 μm2 for the “slice-and-view” technique. This allows 3D FIB reconstruction of a whole device directly without any time-consuming and potentially damaging sample preparation as required for electron tomography. The quantitative analysis of the reconstructed volumes and of the phase separation between the nanoparticles and the polymer phases shows similar trends using both techniques. This study emphasizes the potential of the 3D FIB technique in complement with electron tomography, for studying such materials which turns out to be especially relevant for materials where several length scales are present such as for the μm long poly(3-alkylthiophene) nanofiber based composites studied in the present work. Moreover, analysis of thicker samples is possible with 3D FIB. With STEM electron tomography the sample thickness should be small as a sufficient transmitted electron signal is required. Additional advantages such as the robustness and easier-handling of “slice-and-view” as compared to electron tomography should promote the former as a quasi-routine technique in the near future.4. Experimental sectionMaterialsRegioregular head-to-tail poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT, regioregularity 93–95%, Mw ≈ 40 kDa) and poly(3-butylthiophene) (P3BT, regioregularity > 97%, Mw ≈ 54 kDa) were purchased from Rieke Metals Inc. and Aldrich, respectively. p-Xylene (99%) and o-orthodichlorobenzene (ODCB) were provided by Fluka and Acros Organics respectively. N-Decylphosphonic acid (DPA) was purchased from PCI Synthesis (Newburyport, Massachusetts). The other reagents for nanocrystal synthesis such as trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO, 99%) were obtained from Aldrich. All chemicals were used as received.CdSe nanorod synthesis and functionalizationCdSe nanorods (NRs) of 50–90 nm in length and 5–9 nm in diameter were synthesized following the procedure described in ref. 30 and 41. Briefly, NRs were prepared by injecting slowly six times 0.2 mL (total duration of the injection 1 min) of a 1.0 M TOPSe solution every 10 min at 255 °C into a solution containing 50 mg CdO, 150 mg DPA, and 2.9 g TOPO, previously degassed for 1 h at 300 °C. After a reaction time of 60 min, the NRs were precipitated and washed with methanol. The as-synthesized NRs were dispersed afterwards in neat pyridine and the solution was stirred and heated to 110 °C for 10 minutes. Hexane was added to the cooled solution to precipitate the pyridine-treated NRs. The solution was then centrifuged, decanted and redispersed in either an ODCB:pyridine mixture (90%:10% v/v) or in a p-xylene:pyridine:ODCB mixture (85%:5%:10% v/v/v). The concentration of the resulting dispersion was determined by weighing the dry residue obtained from a known volume of the solution. Dispersions containing pyridine-treated NRs were kept under permanent stirring until preparation of the co-solutions with P3HT or P3BT and were used within two days after the pyridine treatment as they tend to precipitate with time. The UV-Vis absorption spectrum as well as a TEM image of a representative sample of the CdSe NRs used throughout this work is displayed in Fig. S1 (ESI†).Preparation of P3HT and P3BT nanofibersP3HT nanofibers (NFs) were prepared according to the procedure described in ref. 42. First, 20 mg of P3HT was dissolved in 2 g of p-xylene at 80 °C under stirring (corresponding to a concentration of 8.6 mg mL−1). The obtained transparent solution was then slowly cooled to room temperature at a rate of approx. 20 °C h−1. The solution turned to dark violet due to formation of the P3HT nanofibers. During the entire process of growth of NFs as well as for the conservation of the NF dispersion, the solution was protected from light and air. The preparation of P3BT NFs follows the procedure described in ref. 43. First, 30 mg of P3BT was dissolved in 5 mL ODCB heated at 90–100 °C and the solution was kept under permanent stirring for 24 h. The hot solution was then kept in the dark and in an air-free environment for 72 h to allow the formation and growth of the P3BT NFs. During this step, the color of the solution changed from orange brown to dark violet. The formation of P3HT or P3BT nanofibers in the solutions was evidenced by UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy by (i) a broadening and a red-shift of the absorption spectrum as compared to that of the pristine polymer solution and (ii) the appearance of shoulders on the red side of the spectra corresponding to the vibrational fine structure of the polymer (see Fig. S2 in the ESI†). Further evidence of the presence of the NFs was obtained by AFM or TEM imaging on a drop-cast sample of the NF dispersions (see e.g. Fig. S3-a† for a TEM image of P3BT NFs). The average widths and heights of the NFs as measured by AFM and TEM are 13 and 5 nm for P3BT NFs, and 17 and 6 nm for P3HT NFs.Preparation of co-solutions of pyridine-coated CdSe nanorods and P3ATsIn order to prepare the hybrid materials, a solution of pyridine coated NRs in a solvent mixture containing a co-solvent (CHCl3, CB or ODCB) with 5 vol% of pyridine was blended with a solution of P3HT in the same solvent mixture. A small amount of pyridine is always needed as otherwise the NRs would precipitate within a few hours. The concentration of the CdSe NRs and polymer solution was adjusted so as to obtain hybrid co-solutions with an absolute concentration of the polymer of about 6–10 mg mL−1. For the CdSe NR:P3HT NF blends, as the P3HT nanofibers cannot be handled in the same solvents as the CdSe NRs, a dispersion of CdSe NRs in ODCB–pyridine was blended with a dispersion of P3HT NFs in p-xylene. The final ternary solvent, p-xylene/ODCB/pyridine, composition was 50/40/10 v/v/v. The CdSe NR and P3BT NF blends were prepared using ODCB the majority co-solvent with 5 vol% of pyridine. All solutions were maintained under permanent stirring before preparing the solar cells, which was done within a maximum delay of 2 days. No precipitation of the CdSe NR:polymer blend dispersions was observed during this 2 days period.Fabrication and characterization of photovoltaic devicesPreparation and characterization of the solar cell devices were performed at the French National Institute for Solar Energy (INES, Chambéry). The cells were prepared on glass/ITO substrates (10 Ω □−1, PGO Germany). The ITO substrates were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with water and acetone and were subsequently exposed to UV-ozone for 30 min. PEDOT:PSS (Baytron PH) was then spin-coated and dried for 15 min at 150 °C. Thin films of P3AT and pyridine-coated CdSe NR blends were deposited by spin-coating an approximate volume of 100 μL of the hybrid solution without any filtration under an inert atmosphere in a glove box. Finally, LiF/Al electrodes were deposited by evaporation. The active surface area of the devices was 0.28 cm2. The current–voltage characteristics and Power Conversion Efficiency (PCE) values of the solar cells were measured in a glove box via a computer-controlled Keithley SMU 2400 unit using 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5 simulated white light from a Steuernagel Solar Constant 575 simulator. A single-crystalline silicon solar cell, calibrated at the Fraunhofer-Institut für Solare Energiesysteme (Freiburg, Germany) was used as the reference cell to confirm stabilization of the 100 mW cm−2 illumination. The mismatch factor was not taken into account. The temperature of the polymer heterojunction, measured using a thermocouple (Pt 100) mounted on the ITO substrate, reached 30 °C during the initial current–voltage characterization. For each composition of the hybrid material investigated in the present work, approximately ten devices were prepared and tested at different times and using different batches of CdSe NRs and P3HT or P3BT NFs. The reported parameters (Voc, Jsc, FF and η) were reproduced within ±15% of the average values. A representative cell for each type of hybrid material composition was selected for the present work. More details about the solar cell devices and the evolution of the performances of the solar cell devices with material composition and processing can be found in ref. 30.Electron tomographyThe sample preparation involved selecting areas of the active hybrid layers that were delaminated from the solar cells by dipping the devices into a water bath. The floating hybrid thin films were then transferred onto copper TEM grids. Electron tomography (ET) analysis was performed in the high angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) mode on a FEI TITAN 80-300 LB electron microscope equipped with a probe Cs-corrector, operating at 200 kV and using a Fischione 2020 ultrahigh-tilt tomography holder. Before recording a series of images, the aberrations of the condenser lenses were corrected up to the second-order using the Zemlin tableau. A convergence angle of 10 mrad was used in order to improve the depth of focus. The data collections were performed by tilting the specimen around a single axis perpendicular to the electron beam in a range of −68° to +66° every 2°. The tilt series was aligned and reconstructed using a SIRT algorithm in the FEI Inspect 3D software.3D “slice and view”3D FIB was performed on a dual-beam Zeiss NVision 40 microscope. A thin platinum layer (5 nm) and a thick carbon layer (≈1 μm) were first deposited onto the solar cell devices in order to protect the sample surface and to limit charging and curtaining effects. A large rectangular trench is milled in the sample at high ion beam current. The cross-section of this trench is then alternatively polished using a low ion beam current (300 pA at 40 kV) to remove a thin slice of material during the “slicing” step, and imaged in SEM mode using backscattered electrons in the ensuing “view” step. In the dual-beam instrument, this “slice and view” process is done without moving the sample. Using the scanning electron microscope at low voltage (1.5 kV) allows us to avoid charging effects and to keep a good spatial resolution in backscattered electron imaging. The thickness of the slices was set to 3 nm, which is equal to the pixel size chosen for the images. The average slice thickness was checked at the end of the acquisition by measuring the total thickness of the removed volume. After the acquisition, residual misalignments between adjacent images, resulting from slight mechanical or electrical drifts or from small charging effects, were corrected by a rigid body translation using the “MultiStackReg” plugin in ImageJ.44 An alignment also corrects possible long range drift during the acquisition to keep the interfaces horizontal. The final tomographic volume has isometric voxels of 3 nm long sides.Volume reconstruction and analysisAvizo 6.2 and Fiji softwares were used to process the reconstructed volumes of the hybrid solar cells. The segmentation for ET was carried out following the procedure described in ref. 21. For 3D FIB “slice and view”, only the active layer was segmented using the Niblack algorithm.45 Thereafter, both ET and 3D FIB segmented data were manually refined. This procedure allowed us to separate the NRs from the polymer matrix: once the segmentation is done, each voxel of the active layer was attributed either to the polymer phase or to a nanorod. The quantification is thereafter straightforward. The relative fractions of both phases correspond directly to the ratio of their added voxels. The average distance between a voxel and the closest nanorod in the polymer is calculated using the Avizo “DistanceMap” procedure. Finally the fraction of CdSe connected to the anode has been computed by determining all the possible paths from all the pixels in CdSe toward the anode. We have considered only the paths going directly (i.e. monotonously) to the anode, without allowing backward portions. This part of the analysis has been done, thanks to a small code written in Python.AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank P. Reiss, S. Bailly, R. de Bettignies and S. Guillerez for their help in the preparation of the nanorods and solar cell devices. M.L.H. acknowledges financial support from the CEA “Programme Transverse Nanosciences” (project TOMOENER), from Eurotalents, which is funded by CEA and the Marie Curie Actions of the European Commission, and from the MECD Spanish Ministry (ref. EX2010-1135).ReferencesB. R. Saunders, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 369, 1–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .http://www.nrel.gov/pv/, 2011.S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .M. Helgesen, R. Sondergaard and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 36–60 RSC .Y. Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. B. Xia, S. T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. P. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. F. Service, Science, 2011, 332, 293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. R. Saunders and M. L. Turner, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 138, 1–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Aldakov, T. G. Jiu, M. Zagorska, R. de Bettignies, P. H. Jouneau, A. Pron and F. Chandezon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7497–7505 RSC .S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818–824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. E. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3516–3520 CrossRef CAS .P. Reiss, E. Couderc, J. De Girolamo and A. Pron, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 446–489 RSC .G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .S. van Bavel, S. Veenstra and J. Loos, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1835–1845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45–61 RSC .W. Ma, C. Yang and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1387–1390 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Moon, J. K. Lee, S. Cho, J. Byun and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 230–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Yang and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1353–1362 CrossRef CAS .S. S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. V. Andersson, A. Herland, S. Masich and O. Inganas, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 853–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. C. Hindson, Z. Saghi, J.-C. Hernandez-Garrido, P. A. Midgley and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 904–909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S.-S. Li, C.-P. Chang, C.-C. Lin, Y.-Y. Lin, C.-H. Chang, J.-R. Yang, M.-W. Chu and C.-W. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11614–11620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. D. Oosterhout, L. J. A. Koster, S. S. van Bavel, J. Loos, O. Stenzel, R. Thiedmann, V. Schmidt, B. Campo, T. J. Cleij, L. Lutzen, D. Vanderzande, M. M. Wienk and R. A.
J. Janssen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .L. Roiban, L. Hartmann, A. Fiore, D. Djurado, F. Chandezon, P. Reiss, J.-F. Legrand, S. Doyle, M. Brinkmann and O. Ersen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7212–7220 RSC .M. R. Hammond, R. J. Kline, A. A. Herzing, L. J. Richter, D. S. Germack, H.-W. Ro, C. L. Soles, D. A. Fischer, T. Xu, L. Yu, M. F. Toney and D. M. DeLongchamp, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8248–8257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. A. Midgley and R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 271–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. S. van Bavel and J. Loos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3217–3234 CrossRef CAS .X. N. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. J. Bushby, K. M. Y. P'ng, R. D. Young, C. Pinali, C. Knupp and A. J. Quantock, Nat. Protoc., 2011, 6, 845–858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Tonggang, P. Reiss, S. Guillerez, R. D. Bettignies, S. Bailly and F. Chandezon, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 1619–1626 Search PubMed .B. Q. Sun and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3557–3560 RSC .S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841–843 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Pennycook and D. E. Jesson, Ultramicroscopy, 1991, 37, 14–38 CrossRef .S. J. Pennycook and D. E. Jesson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1990, 64, 938–941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Holzer, F. Indutnyi, P. H. Gasser, B. Munch and M. Wegmann, J. Microsc., 2004, 216, 84–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. J. Inkson, M. Mulvihill and G. Mobus, Scr. Mater., 2001, 45, 753–758 CrossRef CAS .A. Striolo, J. Ward, J. M. Prausnitz, W. J. Parak, D. Zanchet, D. Gerion, D. Milliron and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5500–5505 CrossRef CAS .J. Liu, M. Arif, J. Zou, S. I. Khondaker and L. Zhai, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 9390–9393 CrossRef CAS .M. Brinkmann, F. Chandezon, R. B. Pansu and C. Julien-Rabant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2759–2766 CrossRef CAS .C. Waldauf, M. Morana, P. Denk, P. Schilinsky, K. Coakley, S. A. Choulis and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 233517 CrossRef .F. Shieh, A. E. Saunders and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8538–8542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Berson, R. de Bettignies, S. Bailly, S. Guillerez and B. Jousselme, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3363–3370 CrossRef CAS .H. Xin, F. S. Kim and S. A. Jenekhe, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2008, 130, 5424–5425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij.J. Ohser and K. Schladitz, 3D Images of Materials Structures, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,  2009 Search PubMed .Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The UV-Vis absorption spectrum together with a transmission electron microscopy image of the CdSe nanorods. A table summarizing the photovoltaic performances of the four devices studied by electron tomography and 3D-FIB “slice-and-view”. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr03202gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Current density versus voltage for photovoltaic devices fabricated using pyridine exchanged CdSe NRs (8 nm × 70 nm) blended with poly(3-alkylthiophene) under simulated solar illumination (AM 1.5 conditions, 100 mW cm−2). The detailed composition of the blends and the characteristics of the solar cells are given in Table S1 (ESI).	 

 	Fig. 2  STEM-HAADF images of the hybrid polymer:nanoparticle active layers of the photovoltaic cells studied throughout this work: (a) ODCB (cell 1): P3HT:CdSe nanorods 1:9 (wt%) solution-processed from orthodichlorobenzene (ODCB); (b) CF (cell 2): P3HT:CdSe nanorods 1:9 (wt%) solution-processed from chloroform (CF); (d) P3HT NFs (cell 3): P3HT nanofibers:CdSe nanorods 1:5 (wt%); (c) P3BT NFs (cell 4): P3BT nanofibers:CdSe nanorods 1:3 (wt%). The scale bars in the images correspond to 200 nm.	 

 	Fig. 3  HAADF-STEM electron tomography reconstructed volumes of active layers of the polymer:nanoparticle photovoltaic cells studied in this work: (a) ODCB: slices taken in the plane of the film (1) close to the cathode, and (2) close to the anode; (3) transversal slice; (b) CF: planar slice taken (4) close to the cathode, (5) close to the anode; (6) transversal slice; (c) P3HT NF: (7) planar slice taken out of the reconstructed volume in the middle of the layer; (8) and (9) transversal slices along two different directions; (d) P3BT NF: (10) planar slice taken in the middle of the layer; (11) and (12) transversal slices along two different directions. The arrows on the slices (7) to (12) indicate the paths of the P3HT or P3BT nanofibers.	 

 	Fig. 4  Cross-sections and plane view images of the active layers obtained via “slice and view” 3D FIB electron tomography (using backscattered electrons) of the photovoltaic cells: (a) ODCB; (b) CF; (c) P3HT NF; (d) P3BT NF.	 

 	Fig. 5  3D surface rendered of the hybrid polymer:CdSe nanorod photovoltaic cells. The green areas correspond to CdSe NRs while the polymer areas are transparent: (a) ODCB; (b) CF; (c) P3HT NF; (d) P3BT NF.	 

 	Fig. 6  3D surface rendered of the hybrid polymer:nanoparticle photovoltaic cells obtained from 3D FIB electron tomography (using backscattered electrons) data after segmentation. The green areas correspond to CdSe NRs while the polymer areas are transparent: (a) ODCB: 2,6 μm × 1,2 μm; (b) CF: 2,6 μm × 1,1 μm; (c) P3HT NF: 2,6 μm × 0,85 μm; (d) P3BT NF: 4,7 μm × 3,3 μm.	 


ODCB (cell 1)	48.0	49.0	65.0	34.5	59.2	3.0	4.8	84	93
CF (cell 2)	124.0	110.5	65.0	28.5	53.1	3.1	4.7	75	87
P3HT NFs (cell 3)	73.0	158.7	45.2	19.6	38.7	7.4	8.9	63	92
P3BT NFs (cell 4)	66.0	109.7	38.2	22.8	32.4	5.9	17.7	60	65

 	Fig. 7  Comparative results of the quantification based on the tomographic analysis used in this work i.e. HAADF electron tomography and “slice-and-view” 3D FIB. Top: percentage of polymer voxels that are within a certain distance of a polymer–nanoparticle heterojunction for (a) HAADF electron tomography and (b) slice and view 3D FIB. Bottom: distribution of the CdSe NR corresponding voxels throughout the (normalized) thickness of the cells obtained from the (c) HAADF-STEM electron tomography and (d) slice and view 3D FIB. Along the X axis, 0 correspond to the Al cathode electron collecting side whereas 1 corresponds to the ITO hole collecting anode side.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The UV-Vis absorption spectrum together with a transmission electron microscopy image of the CdSe nanorods. A table summarizing the photovoltaic performances of the four devices studied by electron tomography and 3D-FIB “slice-and-view”. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr03202g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
