A surface photovoltaic effect-related high-performance photodetector based on a single CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 micro/nanowire  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC00257G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC00257G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 6558-6564A surface photovoltaic effect-related high-performance photodetector based on a single CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire

        
          
            Huiying 
            Zhou
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jianjun 
            Li
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Baochang 
            Cheng
          
        
      *bc
aComputer and Information Engineering School, Central South University of Forestry and Technology, Hunan 410004, P. R. China. E-mail: T20070600@csuft.edu.cn; bcheng@vip.sina.com
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanchang University, Jiangxi 33003, P. R. China
cNanoscale Science and Technology Laboratory, Institute for Advanced Study, Nanchang University, Jiangxi 330031, P. R. China
Received 
      14th January 2020
    , Accepted 1st April 2020First published on 2nd April 2020AbstractWith the decrease of materials to the nanoscale, their surface states will play a crucial role in their performance. Here, an individual CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire-based photodetector can show excellent sensitivity and responsivity to light with a wide wavelength range from 200 to 850 nm. A surface state-related photovoltaic effect is proposed. For the two-terminal devices, two back-to-back diodes associated with a surface barrier can be formed due to a depletion of majority carriers (holes) in the surface space charge region. At a low operation voltage, the photodetector can exhibit a low dark current. Upon illuminating near the end connected to the positive electrode, the light-induced decrease of the surface barrier leads to enhanced conduction, showing a large photocurrent. At zero bias, additionally, the photodetector can show a relatively large photogenerated voltage and current when only the vicinity of one end is illuminated. Based on the CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanostructure performance herein, surface photovoltaic-controlled photodetectors with superior performance will have important applications in new-generation optoelectronic devices.
1. Introduction
In the range of the ultraviolet-visible (UV-VIS) to near-infrared (NIR) spectrum, photodetection has important applications in optical communications, security, the military, biomedical and video imaging, environmental monitoring, and space exploration, and correspondingly photodetectors have garnered enormous attention.1–6 For photodetectors, their performance is entirely determined by the effective absorption of incident light, the efficient production of photoexcited electron–hole pairs, and the quick separation induced by a built-in or external electric field. Extensive strategies have been devoted to developing high-performance photodetectors using novel materials with low cost and superior functionalities. However, the structure and size of devices strongly affect their performance. Especially for one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures, it is extraordinarily beneficial to design two-terminal devices. Moreover, it is much easier to identify the physical mechanism of simple configured devices.7–9 For 1D nanostructures, in addition, a lot of surface states exist on their surface, resulting in a depletion of majority carriers in the surface space charge region. Their performance is intensively dependent on the surface barrier. Consequently, they are ideal building blocks to construct high performance nanodevices.10–14 Up to date quantities of novel 1D optoelectronic nanomaterials have emerged as photoactive layers.15–22
More recently, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have attracted extensive research interest in optoelectronic devices such as solar cells, light-emitting diodes, and optically pumped lasers owing to their superior electrical and optoelectrical properties including high carrier mobility, high absorption coefficients, and long carrier diffusion lengths.23–30 Similarly, the application prospects of perovskites in light detection has been widely investigated as well. Perovskite photodetectors, constructed with a variety of device configurations, have achieved unprecedented progress in the photoelectric detection performance.31–42 Especially for low-dimensional nanostructures including 1D nanowires and 2D nanosheets, they can obtain ultrahigh gain and photoresponsivity resulting from quantum-size effects, which renders them highly promising for applications in ultrasensitive light detection.43–50 For 1D perovskites, such as nanowires and nanorods, they have well-defined single crystal structures and limited 1D transport direction, which offer a lower trap density, longer carrier charge, and reduced recombination rate. Therefore, photodetectors based on 1D nanowire aggregates have attracted extensive investigation. For 1D perovskites, however, they have affluent surface states due to their large surface area to volume ratio. Therefore, quantities of electronic trap centres can be created on the highly disordered structure surfaces, which is extremely disadvantageous for their optoelectronic performance.51–54
Motivated by the desire to utilize CH3NH3PbI3 for a practical photodetection application and a surface state as a high performance device, while needing to understand the origin and modulation of nanostructure photodetectors, thereby, herein, a single CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire was selected to fabricate a two-terminal device on an insulation substrate. By systematically exploring the photoresponse performance under illumination of different regions of light, the origin of the photoresponse can clearly be identified as the light-induced variation of the surface barrier near the end connected to the positive electrode. When the barrier is very thin, its photoresponse performance is only determined by a thermionic emission-controlled variation of barrier height. Thus, a high performance photodetector can be effectively obtained by a simple two-terminal device based on an individual CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire. At zero bias, more interestingly, a self-powered photodetector with a symmetrical two-terminal electrode structure can be realized simultaneously when only one end is illuminated. For the CH3NH3PbI3 nanostructure-based photodetector, the identification of the surface photovoltaic-controlled photoresponse is not only beneficial to the realization of high-performance detectors, but a self-powered photodetection effect can also be obtained.
2. Experimental
For the CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires utilized in this experiment, they were synthesized via a one-step low temperature solution method followed by post-annealing, which has been depicted in detail in our previous work.42,43 For the fabrication of the photodetector, a single CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire was peeled and then transferred to an Al2O3 ceramic insulation substrate which was thoroughly cleaned with acetone, ethanol and deionized water. After that, Ag electrodes were fabricated at two ends by a semi-dried silver paste. Finally, the devices were encapsulated by polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) to prevent the decomposition induced by H2O and O2 in air. The electrical measurements were conducted by using a synthesized function generator (Stanford Research System Model DS345) and a low-noise current preamplifier (Stanford Research System Model SR570). A continuous and monochromatic wavelength-light source was provided via a fluorescence spectrophotometer (Hitachi F-4600) with a 150 W Xe lamp. For the micro-optical detection, a microscope objective was used to control the spot size of the incident light.
3. Results and discussion
At different power densities of incident light, the spectral response properties of the single CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire-based photodetectors were measured at 1 V DC bias voltage, as depicted in Fig. 1. It can be clearly seen that the photocurrent is intensively determined by the power density and wavelength of incident light. The device presents an obvious photoresponse to the light with a wide wavelength range from 200 to 850 nm, indicating that it can be applied desirably in broadband VIS photodetectors. Moreover, the ratio of photocurrent to dark current is very large, suggestive of an ultrahigh sensitivity. As seen from the optical absorption spectrum, the inset in Fig. 1b, the bandgap of the as-synthesized CH3NH3PbI3 is about 1.48 eV, indicating that visible light can be absorbed by it.
 Fig. 1  (a) The current response of the photodetector vs. wavelength at a fixed bias voltage of 2 V at different illumination intensities, controlled by the slot width of the incident light in a fluorescence spectrophotometer. The insets in (a) correspond to field-emission scanning electron microscope images of the aggregate and a peeled single micro/nanowire of the as-synthesized CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires. (b) The photocurrent response when illuminated by light with different wavelengths from 200 to 900 nm with an interval of 50 nm in-turn. The inset in (b) corresponds to an optical absorption spectrum of the CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires, showing a bandgap of about 1.48 eV. 
The photoresponse performance of the photodetector was further characterized by measuring the current variation under a periodic irradiation with VIS light, as shown in Fig. 2. It can be seen that a relatively large ratio of light–dark current can be obtained under VIS light illumination. Moreover, the on/off switching ratio of the current increases with the increase in irradiation intensity, and it can reach approximately 103 at an illumination intensity of 12.5 mW cm−2. The external quantum efficiency (photoconductive gain G), which is the ability to collect a number of electrons by electrodes due to the excitation of one incident photon, can be calculated by the following equation: G = (hν/e)(ΔI/SP), where S is the irradiated area of an individual NR, P is the effective light power irradiated on the NW, ΔI is the difference between the photo-excited current, h is Planck's constant, ν is the frequency of the incident photon, and e is the electronic charge.17,55–57 Considering that the distance is about 0.1 mm between two Ag electrodes and the diameter of the CH3NH3PbI3 micro-/nanowire is around 400 nm, the photoconductive gain can be estimated to be about 103. According to the equation Rλ = ΔI/PS, similarly, the spectral responsivity (Rλ) can be calculated to be approximately 4 × 102 A W−1 at an incident light power density of 12.5 mW cm−2. As seen from Fig. 2b, in addition, the response and decay time, defined as the time needed to recover to 1/e (37%) of the maximum photocurrent,58 are around 0.25 and 0.35 s, respectively.
 Fig. 2  (a) Under different illumination intensities of VIS light, the on/off current response of a single CH3NH3PbI3 micro-/nanowire-based photodetector at a fixed bias voltage of +2 V over 5 cycles of on/off measurements. (b) One on/off process under an illumination intensity of 12.5 mW cm−2, showing a detailed response and decay time. 
To further investigate the photoresponse behavior of a single CH3NH3PbI3 nanowire-based photodetector, the I–V characteristics were measured under different VIS illumination densities, as shown in Fig. 3. A schematic diagram of the device for photodetection is shown in Fig. 3a, revealing that the entire device including the positive and negative electrodes is illuminated by VIS light. As seen from Fig. 3b, the dark current of the device is fairly low, and accordingly the device is nearly nonconductive. With increasing illumination intensity, the conductance increases. Moreover, the photocurrents present a saturation tendency with increasing bias voltage. From Fig. 3b and c, in addition, it can be seen that the photocurrents are almost symmetrical in both the forward and backward directions.
 Fig. 3  Under the illumination of the entire device with VIS light, the current response properties of a single CH3NH3PbI3 nanowire-based photodetector. (a) A schematic diagram of the device for photodetection. (b) At 1 V bias, the I–V characteristics under different illumination intensities. (c) On the on/off current response at a ±1 V fixed bias voltage. (d) A schematic diagram of the photoresponse mechanism, showing that the barrier heights both decrease at the two ends connected with the electrodes. 
To further identify the origin of the photoresponse in more detail for the individual nanowire-based device, the measurement of the photoresponse performance was conducted under irradiation of the vicinity of the positive or negative electrode, respectively, as depicted in Fig. 4 and 5. As seen from Fig. 4, the photocurrent presents an asymmetrical variation in the forward and backward directions. When the vicinity of the end connected with the negative electrode is illuminated, the photocurrent shows a more distinguishing increase in the backward-biased voltage direction than that in the forward-biased voltage direction, suggestive of a diode-like characteristics with a rectification ratio of about 4 at ±2 V voltage. Moreover, it is easy for the photocurrent in the forward direction to reach a saturation tendency. As from Fig. 4c, the photocurrent increases with increasing irradiation time at a negative DC bias voltage of −1 V, and eventually it reaches a stable state. When the vicinity of the end connected with the positive electrode is illuminated, as seen from Fig. 5, the photoresponse behaviour is just the opposite to that when the vicinity of the end connected with the negative electrode is illuminated. The photocurrent shows a much larger increase in the forward direction than that in the backward direction. Likewise, the I–V curve presents a rectification-like asymmetrical behaviour.
 Fig. 4  Under illumination only near the end connected with the negative electrode, the current response properties of a single CH3NH3PbI3 nanowire-based photodetector. (a) A schematic diagram of the device for photodetection. (b) At 1 V bias, the I–V characteristics under different illumination intensities. (c) The on/off current response at a ±1 V fixed bias voltage. (d) A schematic diagram of the photoresponse mechanism, showing the decrease of the surface barrier height and the formation of the photovoltaic effect at the end connected with the negative electrode. 
 Fig. 5  The current response properties of a single CH3NH3PbI3 nanowire-based photodetector when only illuminated near the end connected with the positive electrode. (a) A schematic diagram of the device for photodetection. (b) At 1 V bias, the I–V characteristics under different illumination intensities. (c) The on/off current response at a ±1 V fixed bias voltage. (d) A schematic diagram of the photoresponse mechanism, showing that the decrease of surface barrier height and the formation of the photovoltaic effect at the end connected with the positive electrode. 
To clarify more deeply the actual origin and possible mechanism of the photoresponse, the I–V characteristics of the single micro/nanowire-based two-terminal device were measured as well at a very low bias voltage of 0.15 V by illuminating different regions using a micro-beam light from an optical microscopy objective, as described in Fig. 6. When the entire device including two end electrodes is illuminated, its photocurrent can show a significant increase compared with the dark current, which is suggestive of a distinct increase in conductivity. Moreover, its I–V curve almost passes through zero-point, revealing that there exists no potential difference between two end electrodes. When the end connected with the positive electrode is illuminated, remarkably, I–V curves deviate upward from zero-point, indicative of the presence of a potential difference between the two end electrodes, and moreover the potential of the unilluminated end is positive. The short-circuit current (Isc) can show an apparent increase with raising the illumination intensity. Although the open-circuit voltage (Voc) increases as well with the increase of illumination intensity, its variation amplitude is relatively weak compared with that of Isc. At the illumination intensity of 12.5 mW cm−2, the Isc and Voc can reach 5 nA and 0.12 V, respectively. On the contrary, the I–V curves deviate downward from zero-point when the vicinity of the negative electrode is illuminated. The reverse variation indicates that a conversion takes place in the potential direction. This firmly demonstrates that a photovoltaic effect can be generated at the interface between the Ag electrode and CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire, and moreover the CH3NH3PbI3 is p-type. The variation laws of Isc and Voc are similar to that of the illumination vicinity of the negative electrode. At the illumination density of 12.5 mW cm−2, the Isc and Voc are around 2.5 nA and 0.12 V, respectively.
 Fig. 6  Under the illumination of different regions, the I–V characteristics of a single nanowire-based photodetector at a low bias voltage of about 0.15 V. (a) The I–V characteristics while illuminating different regions with a power density of 12.5 mW cm−2. (b) The near zero point I–V characteristics while illuminating the vicinity of the electrode connected with the positive terminal of the voltmeter and ammeter with different intensities. (c) The near zero point I–V characteristics while illuminating the vicinity of the electrode connected with the negative terminal of the voltmeter and ammeter with different intensities. 
At zero bias voltage, their photovoltage and photocurrent were also measured as a function of time with light chopping by illuminating different regions with a micro-beam light, respectively, as ascribed in Fig. 7. Upon illuminating the vicinity of one electrode, the device can show a relatively large photovoltage and photocurrent, indicating a superior self-powered photodetection effect. Moreover, the unilluminated end shows a positive potential. In addition, their response and decay speeds are all quick. From the illuminated area which is about 500 × 500 nm at the end connected with electrode, the responsivity can be calculated to be around 1.8 × 105 and 5.6 × 104 A W−1 at the illumination intensity of 12.5 and 2.5 mW cm−2, respectively.
 Fig. 7  At zero bias voltage, the photocurrent and photovoltage responses of the photodetector while periodically illuminating the vicinity of the end connected with the negative terminal of the voltmeter and ammeter by a micro-beam light: (a) photocurrent; and (b) photovoltage. 
For the appearance of the illumination region and intensity dependence of photoconduction and photovoltaic effect-related self-powered photodetection, it is conceivable that it should originate from the surface effect of the CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires. CH3NH3PbI3 is a p-type semiconductor. For the micro-/nanowires, moreover, quantities of surface states exist due to a huge surface area to volume ratio, and the majority carriers of holes are depleted in the surface space charge region. Correspondingly, its surface barrier is formed, and furthermore a surface built-in electric field with a direction from the surface to the interior is constructed. The electrical properties of the micro-/nanowire are entirely determined by the surface barrier. For a single micro/nanowire-based device with two electrodes, two back-to-back diodes related to surface barrier are formed. Regardless of the positive or negative voltage, one is conductive and the other is nonconductive. Therefore, it is exceedingly difficult for the device to conduct at a relatively low bias voltage, showing a profoundly low dark current. When the incident light illuminates only the surface of one end of the electrode, photoexcited electron–hole pairs can be effectively separated by the built-in electric field of the surface barrier at the illuminated end. The electrons are separated first onto the surface on the micro/nanowire and then transfer to the Ag electrode at the illuminated end, resulting in an accumulation of electrons. Conversely, holes are first separated into the core of the wire and subsequently diffuse quickly toward the non-illuminated end along the core of the 1D micro/nanowire. For the transferred holes, they can freely pass through the non-illuminated end barrier which is forward-biased for them, and finally accumulate on the Ag electrode at the non-illuminated end. As a result, a difference of Fermi level exists between the two Ag electrodes due to the effective separation and opposite transfer of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, and a potential difference is generated. Moreover, the potential is negative at the illuminated end due to the accumulation of electrons. On the contrary, the potential is positive at the non-illuminated end due to the accumulation of holes. Meanwhile, the height of the surface barrier decreases at the illuminated end. Under illumination, the photocurrent presents a saturation tendency with bias voltage, indicating that it mainly originates from the reverse current of the barrier height-controlled thermionic emission diode, revealing that the height of the barrier plays an extremely critical role in the electric transport of the CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire rather than its width. The height of the surface band bending corresponds to a maximum Voc for the self-powered photodetector. Under illumination, the increase of free carriers is quicker, and moreover the surface depletion region becomes thin. Accordingly, the resistance of the entire wire decreases dramatically, and the photocurrent can present a much quicker increase than the photovoltage. Under illumination of the entire device including the positive and negative electrodes, the two-end surface barriers almost symmetrically decrease, and thereby the photocurrent and photovoltage between the two end electrodes are both close to zero without loading external bias since two photogenerated voltages of the same magnitude are generated in opposite directions. However, the surface barrier of the whole wire decreases drastically, and moreover quantities of free carriers are formed, resulting in a dramatic decrease of the entire wire resistance. Moreover, an externally applied electric field can trigger a rapid separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs as well. As a result, the device can show an excellent photoconduction effect under illumination of the entire device. From the appearance of the incident light intensity-dependence of the photovoltaic effect when only illuminating near one end of the electrode at zero bias, it can be firmly validated that the photoconductivity effect originates from the variation of the surface barrier. When the illuminated end is connected with the positive electrode, where the surface diode is biased reversely and blocks the conduction of device, the direction of the externally applied electric field is identical with that of the surface built-in electric field, increasing a quick separation of photogenerated electrode–hole pairs, and furthermore the non-irradiated end is forward biased. Accordingly, the photocurrent can show a considerable increase compared with the dark current. On the contrary, when the illuminated end is connected with the negative electrode, the direction of the externally applied electric field is just opposite to that of the surface built-in electric field, and therefore the separation effect of the photoexcited electrode–hole pairs is weakened. Moreover, the barrier height of the non-irradiated end, where the surface diode is reversely biased, almost maintains unchanged. Accordingly, the photocurrent cannot show a tremendous increase. When the vicinity of one end of the electrode is illuminated, I–V curves can present a rectification-like feature and the photoconduction effect is asymmetrical. Under illuminating different regions, the expected energy band diagrammatic sketches of the photodetector are given in Fig. 3d, 4d and 5d, respectively.
4. Conclusions
For CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires, the majority carriers of holes are depleted in their surface space charge region due to the presence of surface states. For the photodetector based on an individual micro/nanowire with two-terminal electrodes, therefore, two back-to-back diodes associated with the surface barrier are formed and, moreover, the width of the surface barrier is relatively thin. As a consequence, its photoresponse performance is intensively determined by thermionic emission-controlled barrier height variation. Regardless of the application of a forward or backward voltage, one of the two diodes is reversely biased and, accordingly, the photodetector can show a very low dark current at a relatively low operation voltage. Upon illuminating near the end connected with the positive electrode, where the surface diode is backward biased, the light induced decrease of the surface barrier leads to enhanced conduction. Correspondingly, the device can show excellent sensitivity and responsivity to incident light with wavelengths ranging from 200 to 850 nm. Moreover, its photocurrent is intensively dependent on the power density of the incident light. Meanwhile, the decrease of barrier height accompanies the emergence of the photovoltaic effect. At zero bias, the photodetector can show a relatively large photovoltage and photocurrent only when the vicinity of one end of the electrode is illuminated. The surface state-controlled photodetector based on a single CH3NH3PbI3 1D micro/nanostructure can not only exhibit superior photoconduction performance, but it can also show excellent self-powered photodetection performance related to the photovoltaic effect, making it an important candidate for applications in new-generation optoelectronic devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51571107), and the Key Project of Hunan Provincial Department Education (Grant No. 17A222).
Notes and references
M. Razeghin and A. Rogalski, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 7433–7473 CrossRef .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2006, 442, 180–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Sariciftci, D. Braun, C. Zhang, V. I. Srdanov, A. J. Heeger, G. Stucky and F. Wudl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 585–587 CrossRef CAS .
H. Morkoc, S. Strite, G. B. Gao, M. E. Lin, B. Sverdlov and M. Burns, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 76, 1363–1398 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rogalski, Prog. Quantum Electron., 2003, 27, 59–210 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tian, H. P. Zhou and L. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1702107 CrossRef PubMed .
W. L. Chen, J. Zhao, B. Liu, B. C. Cheng, Y. H. Xiao and S. J. Lei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 480, 13–25 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zheng, R. W. Shao, Q. S. Deng, Y. F. Zhang, Y. J. Li, X. D. Han, Z. Zhang and J. Zou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 013111 CrossRef .
W. W. Ji, H. Y. Zhou, Y. L. Ye, J. Zhao, Y. H. Xiao, S. J. Lei and B. C. Cheng, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 1901154 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tian, Y. D. Wang, L. Chen and L. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1701848 CrossRef PubMed .
B. C. Cheng, L. Xiong, Q. S. Cai, H. P. Shi, J. Zhao, X. H. Su, Y. H. Xiao and S. J. Lei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34648–34658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Liu, C. X. Shan, B. H. Li, Z. Z. Zhang, C. L. Yang, D. Z. Shen and X. W. Fan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 251102 CrossRef .
R. R. LaPierre, M. Robson, K. M. Azizur-Rahman and P. Kuyanov, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 123001 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, B. C. Cheng, Y. H. Xiao, R. Guo and S. J. Lei, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 1500395 CrossRef .
S. J. Wang, J. Zhao, T. Tong, B. C. Cheng, Y. H. Xiao and S. J. Lei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14932–14943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Shi, B. C. Cheng, Q. S. Cai, X. H. Su, Y. H. Xiao and S. J. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8399–8406 RSC .
T. Tong, S. J. Wang, J. Zhao, B. C. Cheng, Y. H. Xiao and S. J. Lei, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 138–147 RSC .
P. V. Chandrasekar, S. Yang, J. Hu, M. Sulaman, Y. Shi, M. I. Saleem, Y. Tang, Y. Jiang and B. Zou, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 5188 RSC .
W. F. Jin and L. D. Hu, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Sun, M. Peng, Y. S. Zhang, L. Zhang, R. Peng, C. C. Miao, D. Liu, M. M. Han, R. F. Feng, Y. D. Ma, Y. Dai, L. B. He, C. X. Shan, A. L. Pan, W. D. Hu and Z. X. Yang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5920–5929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Zhou and J. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700256 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Peng, L. F. Hu and X. S. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5321–5328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, S. H. Jeong, M. H. Park, Y. H. Kim, C. Wolf, C. L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T. W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Yu, D. B. Kim, E. D. Jung, B. R. Lee and M. H. Song, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7036–7042 RSC .
L. Meng, E. P. Yao, Z. R. Hong, H. J. Chen, P. Y. Sun, Z. L. Yang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603826 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xing, F. Yan, Y. Zhao, S. Chen, H. Yu, Q. Zhang, R. Zeng, H. V. Demir, X. Sun, A. Huan and Q. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6623–6630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fu and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 557–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Zhu, Y. P. Fu, F. Meng, X. X. Wu, Z. Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Zhang, D. B. Kuang and W. Q. Wu, Small Methods, 2019, 1900662 Search PubMed .
N. Li, W. X. Lan, Y. S. Lau, L. F. Cai, A. A. Syed and F. R. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 9573–9580 RSC .
J. L. Yang, K. W. Liu, Z. Cheng, P. T. Jing, Q. Ai, X. Chen, B. H. Li, Z. Z. Zhang, L. G. Zhang, H. F. Zhao and D. Z. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34744–34750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Dong, T. Q. Pang, J. G. Yu, Y. C. Wang, Y. W. G. Zhu, H. D. Zheng, J. H. Yu, R. X. Jia and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 14205–14211 RSC .
W. Q. Wu, X. D. Wang, X. Han, Z. Yang, G. Y. Gao, Y. F. Zhang, J. F. Hu, Y. W. Tan, A. L. Pan and C. F. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805913 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Yu, X. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Zhou, M. N. Xue, Y. Xu, Z. S. Li, C. Ye, J. Zhang, P. A. van Aken, P. D. Lund and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7302–7308 Search PubMed .
T. Gao, Q. Zhang, J. N. Chen, X. Xiong and T. Y. Zhai, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700206 CrossRef .
W. Tian, H. P. Zhou and L. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1702107 CrossRef PubMed .
F. P. G. D. Arquer, A. Armin, P. Meredith and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16100 CrossRef .
L. Shen, Y. Fang, D. Wang, Y. Bai, Y. Deng, M. Wang, Y. Lu and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Rao, W. G. Li, B. X. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602639 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Feng, X. Yan, Y. Liu, H. Gao, Y. Wu, B. Su and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605993 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, H. Peng, K. Wang, C. Wei, Z. Wang and X. Gong, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 27–36 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xiao, Y. Hou, Y. P. Fu, X. Peng, Q. Wang, E. Gonzalez, S. Jin and D. Yu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7710–7717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, X. He, J. Ren, Q. Liao, J. Yao and H. Fu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5766–5773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Spina, E. Bonvin, A. Sienkiewicz, B. Nafradi, L. Forro and E. Horvath, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bekenstein, B. A. Koscher, S. W. Eaton, P. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 16008–16011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hassan, Y. Song, R. D. Pensack, A. I. Abdelrahman, Y. Kobayashi, M. A. Winnik and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Li, Z. F. Shi, L. Z. Lei, H. F. Ji, D. Wu, T. T. Xu, X. J. Li and G. T. Du, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 191, 275–282 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. F. Shi, Z. Z. Ma, F. Zhang, S. Li, D. Wu, T. T. Xu, X. J. Li, C. X. Shan and G. T. Du, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 2524–2532 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. F. Shi, L. Z. Lei, F. Zhang, Z. Z. Ma, D. Wu, T. T. Xu, Y. T. Tian, Y. T. Zhang, G. T. Du, C. X. Shan and X. J. Li, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6744–6755 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hong, J. Zhao, S. J. Li, B. C. Cheng, Y. H. Xiao and S. J. Lei, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3360–3369 RSC .
Z. Hong, J. Zhao, K. F. Huang, B. C. Cheng, Y. H. Xiao and S. J. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4259–4266 RSC .
W. H. Li, H. P. Dong, G. F. Dong and L. D. Wang, Org. Electron., 2015, 26, 208–212 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Y. Lv, L. Zhou, X. L. Chen, J. R. Chen, Y. Zhou, V. A. L. Roy and S. T. Han, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1600–1617 RSC .
L. Li, P. C. Wu, X. S. Fang, T. Y. Zhai, L. Dai, M. Y. Liao, Y. S. Kido, H. Q. Wang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3161–3165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Z. Shen, J. Xu, X. F. Wang, H. T. Huang and D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 771–775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Chiquito, C. A. Amorim, O. M. Berengue, L. S. Araujo, E. P. Bernardo and E. R. Leite, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 24, 225303 Search PubMed .
B. C. Cheng, J. Xu, Z. Y. Ouyang, X. H. Su, Y. H. Xiao and S. J. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1808–1814 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The current response of the photodetector vs. wavelength at a fixed bias voltage of 2 V at different illumination intensities, controlled by the slot width of the incident light in a fluorescence spectrophotometer. The insets in (a) correspond to field-emission scanning electron microscope images of the aggregate and a peeled single micro/nanowire of the as-synthesized CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires. (b) The photocurrent response when illuminated by light with different wavelengths from 200 to 900 nm with an interval of 50 nm in-turn. The inset in (b) corresponds to an optical absorption spectrum of the CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires, showing a bandgap of about 1.48 eV.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Under different illumination intensities of VIS light, the on/off current response of a single CH3NH3PbI3 micro-/nanowire-based photodetector at a fixed bias voltage of +2 V over 5 cycles of on/off measurements. (b) One on/off process under an illumination intensity of 12.5 mW cm−2, showing a detailed response and decay time.	 

 	Fig. 3  Under the illumination of the entire device with VIS light, the current response properties of a single CH3NH3PbI3 nanowire-based photodetector. (a) A schematic diagram of the device for photodetection. (b) At 1 V bias, the I–V characteristics under different illumination intensities. (c) On the on/off current response at a ±1 V fixed bias voltage. (d) A schematic diagram of the photoresponse mechanism, showing that the barrier heights both decrease at the two ends connected with the electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 4  Under illumination only near the end connected with the negative electrode, the current response properties of a single CH3NH3PbI3 nanowire-based photodetector. (a) A schematic diagram of the device for photodetection. (b) At 1 V bias, the I–V characteristics under different illumination intensities. (c) The on/off current response at a ±1 V fixed bias voltage. (d) A schematic diagram of the photoresponse mechanism, showing the decrease of the surface barrier height and the formation of the photovoltaic effect at the end connected with the negative electrode.	 

 	Fig. 5  The current response properties of a single CH3NH3PbI3 nanowire-based photodetector when only illuminated near the end connected with the positive electrode. (a) A schematic diagram of the device for photodetection. (b) At 1 V bias, the I–V characteristics under different illumination intensities. (c) The on/off current response at a ±1 V fixed bias voltage. (d) A schematic diagram of the photoresponse mechanism, showing that the decrease of surface barrier height and the formation of the photovoltaic effect at the end connected with the positive electrode.	 

 	Fig. 6  Under the illumination of different regions, the I–V characteristics of a single nanowire-based photodetector at a low bias voltage of about 0.15 V. (a) The I–V characteristics while illuminating different regions with a power density of 12.5 mW cm−2. (b) The near zero point I–V characteristics while illuminating the vicinity of the electrode connected with the positive terminal of the voltmeter and ammeter with different intensities. (c) The near zero point I–V characteristics while illuminating the vicinity of the electrode connected with the negative terminal of the voltmeter and ammeter with different intensities.	 

 	Fig. 7  At zero bias voltage, the photocurrent and photovoltage responses of the photodetector while periodically illuminating the vicinity of the end connected with the negative terminal of the voltmeter and ammeter by a micro-beam light: (a) photocurrent; and (b) photovoltage.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
