Bismuth ferrite (BiFeO 3 ) perovskite-based advanced nanomaterials with state-of-the-art photocatalytic performance in water clean-up  - Environmental Science: Water Research & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EW00027J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EW00027J
(Tutorial Review)
Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2022, 8, 1590-1618Bismuth ferrite (BiFeO3) perovskite-based advanced nanomaterials with state-of-the-art photocatalytic performance in water clean-up

        
          
            Shikha 
            Gulati
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Kartika 
            Goyal
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Aryan 
            Arora
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sanjay 
            Kumar
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Manoj 
            Trivedi
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Shradha 
            Jain
          
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Chemistry, Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi-110021, India. E-mail: shikha2gulati@gmail.com
bDepartment of Biological Sciences, Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi-110021, India
Received 
      10th January 2022
    , Accepted 15th June 2022First published on 22nd June 2022AbstractNowadays, as we face a massive epidemic of water-borne diseases, it is essential to find effective techniques for treating wastewater. Against the drawbacks of conventional treatment methods such as the generation of a lot of sludge, photocatalytic decomposition appears to be an effective technology for the treatment of water against industrial wastewater, especially azo dyes and other organic pollutants. This fascinating technique solves two problems of humanity, water crises as well as environmental problems. In terms of capacities, bismuth ferrite nanoclusters appear to be an effective semiconductor material for the degradation of a wide range of dyes due to their acceptable frequency range, wide visible light absorption, and good stability. These properties are known to increase to a greater extent when thin sheets of bismuth ferrite are modified. This review summarizes in detail the limitations associated with the use of conventional methods, emerging techniques for photocatalyst degradation, perovskite structure of photocatalysts, degradation mechanisms, and modifications of bismuth ferrite nanoparticles to improve photocatalytic performance and characterization studies. Basically, the modification involves a doping technique, i.e., combining support materials, preparing heterojunctions, and creating oxygen vacancies. In addition, future challenges and prospects are presented to focus on an area that requires the special interest of researchers. Therefore, this review aims to provide an overview and contribute to knowledge on bismuth ferrite photocatalysts by summarizing the current state of research and providing information on efficient techniques to handle bismuth environments.Shikha GulatiDr. Shikha Gulati (M.Sc., PhD.) is working as an Assistant Professor of Chemistry at Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi. She has expertise in Inorganic Chemistry, Nano-materials, Green Chemistry, Catalysis, and Analytical Chemistry. Dr. Shikha has authored several research papers in International Journals of repute and written numerous books as well as chapters in diverse books which attest to her research aptitude, and good writing skills. Her books are referred to in diverse Universities across India for different undergraduate courses. Dr. Gulati has also been awarded the Young Researcher Award 2020 for her work in the field of Nanotechnology.Kartika GoyalKartika Goyal is pursuing a bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi. She was born in Uttar Pradesh, India, in 2000. Studies of drug delivery and the significance of nanotechnology in the food sector, air treatment, and water treatment fascinate her. She has co-authored reviews on anticancer agents, CNTs, and several chapters on metal–organic frameworks, nanotechnology for food preservation, and drug delivery applications. A happy person, she loves to read about medicinal discoveries across the globe.Aryan AroraAryan Arora is a student at the Chemistry department, Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi. His research interests include innovation in chemistry for environmental remediation. He has authored a research paper on air purification in International Journals of repute and written a chapter in a book that attests to his good research aptitude an outdoor person who wants to fight climate change through innovative research in the field of environmental science and chemistry.Sanjay KumarProf. Sanjay Kumar has been working as a Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Sri Venkateswara College, the University of Delhi since 2000. He did Ph.D. in the field of molecular spectroscopy from the University of Delhi in 1998. He has also worked as a post-doctoral fellow at IGIB, New Delhi in the field of molecular immunology. Currently, he is focusing on the field of nanotechnology and cancer research. He has authored several research papers in International Journals of repute and written several books on Chemistry and Environmental Sciences.Manoj TrivediDr. Manoj Trivedi (MSc, MTech, PhD) is working as an Assistant Professor of Chemistry at Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India. He has expertise in inorganic chemistry, nano-materials, and applied homogeneous catalysis, for example, he developed efficient catalysts for the conversion of CO2 to formic acid or formate and methanol through hydrogenation. Dr. Manoj has authored several research papers in reputable international journals and written chapters in diverse books which attest to his research aptitude, and good writing skills.Shradha JainShradha Jain is from Guna, Madhya Pradesh. Presently, she is pursuing a Bachelor's in Biological Sciences from Sri Venkateshwara College, Delhi University. She is inclined toward research in biochemical aspects of pollution in the environment and climate change. She is also interested in wildlife conservation. She had also authored a chapter on Toxicological Perspectives and environmental risks of Consumer Nanoproducts published by Springer.

Water impact
Our review focuses on stimulating potential techniques of photocatalytic decomposition for potable reuse of waste water highlighting the importance of water sustainability in current times. Against the drawbacks of conventional treatment methods such as the generation of a lot of sludge, photocatalytic decomposition using bismuth ferrite nanoclusters appears to be a sustainable technology for the treatment of water against industrial wastewater.

1. Introduction
With the increase in global population and industrialization, there is a discernible increase in water pollution which has greatly affected the availability of pure water. According to the data from the World Health Organization, at least 2 billion people use polluted drinking water resources.
These contaminated sources largely contain toxic and non-biodegradable pollutants like inorganic compounds and organic materials which can have a plethora of adverse effects on human health and the surrounding environment. They can interact with the normal physiological pathways, photosynthetic activity, and soil fertility. Also, they can cause reproductive, and neurological toxicity, and fatal diseases like cancer.1,2
In this context, the discharged dyes from the textile, cosmetics, paper, and printing industries happen to be one of the largest contaminants of water. 70000 tons of dyes are used by the textile industry alone, making it one of the largest contributors of discharged dyes.3 Annually, around 280000 tons of dyes are discharged into water bodies, posing a calamitous impact on the ecological system.4 Since the discovery of synthetic dyes by William Henry Perkin in 1856, the use of organic dyes has decreased exponentially. Developing countries like China, and India have turned out to be the largest consumers of synthetic dyes. Among all the dyes available, azo dyes are the most used and difficult to decompose.3 Explicitly, dyes have complex structural morphology with high molecular weight. Their LD50 values range from 250–2000 mg kg−1 of body weight.5
These dyes linger in the environment for a long time and are therefore hazardous to the human body. Some of them are carcinogenic and teratogenic in nature inducing nausea, vomiting, eye burns, jaundice, etc. when exposed. Moreover, they exhibit high solubility and chemical stability due to which they easily surpass conventional water treatment methods.6 Around 3000 m3 of water containing 12–20 tons of dyes, harmful metals such as As, Cr, Zn, and Cu are led out per day. These chemicals that are present in water are resistant to sunlight and do not allow it to reach the aquatic biota, thereby increasing the biological oxygen demand. Discharged dyes are persistent to heat, light, and many oxidizing agents, thus they do not degrade easily.7,8
Precisely mentioning azo dyes, they produce aromatic amines on degradation, which are exceedingly carcinogenic and a potential explosive.7,9 These discharged amines also pose harm to skin, and lungs, and form hemoglobin adducts, causing a high potential health risk. In some cases, it also leads to malignant tumors, by damaging the DNA.10 These dyes require separation and elimination from water bodies by potent and feasible treatments at sewage treatment plants or by removing, decomposing, and neutralizing the detrimental pollutants, on-site.11–13 So, it is extremely important to treat the wastewater which in turn demands highly efficient wastewater treatment techniques.14–18
Conventional treatment methods include adsorption, biological treatment, ozonation, ultrafiltration, etc. Despite having various advantages, these techniques share some common set of limitations like they only transfer the pollutants from one phase to another but can't degrade them completely and have constraints in terms of cost and effectiveness.19,20 Due to the manifold chemical nature of textile effluents, such as detergents, surfactants, solids with unused dyes, etc., they are often burdensome to treat by conventional approaches.10
These constraints urged researchers to look for newer alternatives to treat wastewater. In the current era, the advent of nanotechnology i.e., the use of semiconductor-based nanomaterials for the degradation of pollutants in wastewater has increased tremendously and thus gained attraction for possible solutions in near future.12,21 One such technique named ‘photocatalysis’ incorporating semiconductor materials as photocatalyst has been widely reported by researchers to treat wastewater effectively by breaking large organic pollutants like rhodamine-B (RhB), Congo red (CR), methyl violet (MV), methyl blue (MB), methyl orange (MO), and crystal violet (CV), etc. into the tiny harmless molecules. Broadly, it comes under the technique of advanced oxidation process (AOPs) where a material with a particular band gap absorbs light to produce electron–hole pairs which further migrate to the surface of the photocatalyst and initiate oxidation and reduction reactions that help in the degradation of organic pollutants.15,22
Though the technique of photocatalysis has gained tremendous attention but the research to look for novel photocatalyst material is still in its early stage and needs more attention. Initially, TiO2 and ZnO were used as photocatalytic material but they have lower efficiency due to the wide band gap which limits the light absorption ability to the UV region only. This further restricts their application. Also, some ferrites, tantalates, and titanates are widely exploited for their photocatalytic activity. Potentially among others bismuth ferrite (BiFeO3, abbreviated as BFO) stands out as a novel future photocatalyst having a smaller band gap, chemical stability, and low cost.23,24 It degrades organic dye under visible light and thus treats wastewater against hazardous azo dyes more effectively.25 This material is reported to have ABO3-type perovskite structure. These materials are far better than other photosensitive semiconductors in their degradation activity.26,27 In nature, this novel material is known to exist in many forms like BFO ceramics, thin films, other nanostructures, etc.
In this review, various synthesis techniques have been reported that had played a vital role in the development of BFO nanoparticles for their various photocatalytic applications. Besides, band gap structure has been extensively studied to understand the uniqueness of the discussed photocatalyst. With the positive results, research to look for the potential of bismuth ferrite stimulated around 2007 which continued till date but it was observed that pure BFO has certain setbacks to work effectively on the large scale treatment of waste water. It was reported that pure BFO showed the highest recombination rate among photo-induced charges. Against this, some researchers suggested tuning the original band-gap structure of pristine BFO particles for which various modification approaches have been reported in the literature.28 Primarily, these techniques are known to inhibit the recombination of photo-induced electron–hole pairs that facilitates their easy transfer and hence improve the photoactivity of modified structures by multiple folds than the pure material. Some of them are doping formation of heterojunction between semiconductors, and the creation of oxygen vacancies.29–32
A recent study suggested another etching method through the construction of Sn–BiOBr/BiOIO3 heterojunction. Hereby Sn-doping amplifies the charge transfer channels at the interface improving the photocatalytic activity for the removal of pollutants and CO2 reduction.33 Similar methods for improving photocatalytic activity are discussed in section 7 of this review.
Recently, a group of researchers have added up new insights into the research of BFO materials where they synthesized maleated liquid natural rubber (MLNR) based hydrogel supported bismuth ferrite (BiFeO3) and differently, response surface methodology (RSM) was utilized to observe the adsorption of the methylene blue (MB) dye which was later found to be as high as 99% as compared to pristine hydrogel in absorption time of 3 hours.32 In another study, a plate-like morphology was developed for novel gelatin-assisted bismuth ferrite (g-BFO) nanoparticles using one-step sol–gel method. Furthermore, this catalyst utilized in the study was magnetically separable and reusable unlike the conventional Fenton process.34
Thus, this review covers the systematic explanation of photocatalytic degradation and highlights the use of bismuth ferrite as a potential photocatalyst for waste water treatment against azo dyes. Further various spectroscopy techniques were reported to look for active species attacking the pollutants and different degradation intermediate formed during the mechanism. Thus, this review article will provide insights for greener and more effective environmental remediation techniques and focus on the need to study further the domain of photocatalysis.35–39
2. Conventional methods for wastewater treatment and their shortcomings
Conventional approaches for water treatment can be classified into three categories: chemical methods, physical treatments, and biological treatments. Fig. 1 shows the broad classification of conventional approaches for water treatment.3,40
 Fig. 1  Classification of conventional approaches for water treatment. 
2.1 Chemical methods
Chemical methods imply the principal action of sorption or bonding to remove the dissolved dye contaminants from discharged water. They are usually oxidative processes, with H2O2 being the most commonly used oxidant. H2O2 requires activation through some medium, like ultra violet radiations.41,42Table 1 shows the various chemical methods and their corresponding limitations and advantages.
Table 1 Disadvantages and advantages of conventional chemical methods of dye removal for waste water treatment




S. no.
Chemical methods
Advantages
Limitations
Ref.




1
Fentons reagent (H2O2–Fe(II) salts
(i) Simple operation
(i) Sludge generation

31



(ii) Chemical oxygen demand removal
(ii) Non-environment friendly


2
Ozonation
(i) Effective against almost all microbes
(i) Very short half-life (approx. 20 minutes)

10, 32


(ii) Quiet efficient
(ii) Formation of harmful by-products


3
Photochemical oxidation
(i) Simple operation
(i) Use of strong UV radiations

10



(ii) Often effective for multiple cycles
(ii) Formation of harmful by-products


4
Oxidation with sodium hypochlorite
(i) Easy reagent preparation
(i) Release of aromatic amines

33



(ii) Simple operation
(ii) Non-environment friendly


5
Coagulation and precipitation
(i) Simple operation
(i) Difficult process control

30





2.2 Physical methods
Physical methods are often effective with a small volume of effluents however they have a plethora of setbacks in large-scale industrial treatment.10

Table 2 shows the various physical methods and their corresponding limitations and advantages.
Table 2 Advantages and disadvantages of conventional physical methods of dye removal for waste water treatment




S. no.
Physical methods
Advantages
Limitations
Ref.




1
Adsorption
(i) Effective
(i) Sludge generation

34



(ii) High capacity
(ii) High cost due to some expensive adsorbents like activated carbon


2
Membrane filtration
(i) Simple execution
(i) Repeated membrane coagulation

4, 35


(ii) It can decompose almost all dyes
(ii) By-products formed are difficult to decompose


3
Irradiation
—
(i) High cost

10



—
(ii) Requires a lot of dissolved oxygen


4
Ion exchange
(i) Operative with no loss of regeneration
(i) Not effective for all dyes

33



(ii) High removal efficiency for heavy metals
(ii) High cost


5
Reverse osmosis
—
(i) Sludge generation

30



—
(ii) Non-environment friendly




2.3 Biological methods
Biological approaches can be classified into aerobic and anaerobic methods. Micro-organisms like bacteria and fungi are used in these methods.10
These conventional approaches are quite inefficient as they only have the potential to convert one type of pollutant to another. For instance, take adsorption, which adsorbs pollutants on a solid surface, although this removes the pollutant from the contaminated source, but transfers it to an altogether new form and thus leads to sludge formation.3
The conventional aerobic approaches used in the municipal wastewater plants are ineffectual in dyes degradation, especially the azo dyes.43 Conventional systems that are based on biological activity also fail to degrade brightly colored, and water-soluble azo dyes.44 Therefore, despite certain advantages more efficient techniques are required that completely degrade the pollutant instead of simple conversion or transfer to any other form of pollutant.
3. Photocatalysis: potential waste water treatment strategy in the current time
Conventional methods discussed earlier were designed to remove pollutants from discharged water, but they eventually lead to the production of secondary pollutants, such as – soluble refractory organic compounds, which require separate treatment. Therefore, water treatment requires new, viable, and environment-friendly approaches.45
Currently, various advance oxidation processes (AOPs) such as photocatalysis, Fenton oxidation, ozonation, supercritical water oxidation, and electrochemical methods, were reported to inculcate one of those techniques for an integrated solution of waste water treatment.46 Basically, the goal of AOPs is to lessen the toxicity and hazardous compounds in wastewater to an optimum level before being discharged into water streams. Broadly, AOPs is a chemical treatment designed to remove organic pollutants from wastewater wherein contaminants are fully or partially oxidized, by using a combination of oxidizing agents.47–49 Highly potential hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) are generated in situ that react with dyes and convert those pollutants into a greener product. Fig. 2 summarizes some of them.50–53
 Fig. 2  Various advanced oxidation processes. 
Photocatalytic water treatment is a propitious AOP for the sustainable treatment of discharged water. It is regarded as safe, highly efficient, and a cost-effective technique. It can be used under ambient conditions, without high temperatures and pressure. Photocatalysis solves the problems posed by conventional methods: It oxidizes the non-biodegradable organic pollutants, kills waterborne pathogens without the generation of any toxic by-products, utilizes less energy and chemicals, transforms metallic ions and metalloids into comparatively less toxic species, making their separation easier.54–57
In photocatalytic processes, ultra violet radiation is used to activate a semiconductor photocatalyst, which assists the formation of hydroxyl radicals, leading to the degradation of environmental pollutants like azo dyes.58 D. P. Kumar et al. reported the photocatalytic degradation of diverse compounds like chlorinated aromatics, surfactants, pesticides, herbicides, etc.59 Another group reported the effective de-colorization of textile dyes including, methylene blue, methyl orange, Congo red, and malachite green using the simple phenomenon of photocatalysis.60 Lau et al. degraded 10 ppm MO in 5 hours and MB in 3 hours effectively utilizing the application of photocatalysis.61 Another practical ability of photocatalysis was verified by causing effective degradation of MO dye where white and blue light-emitting diodes (LEDs) were used as a source of visible light.62
Photocatalytic processes can be classified into two categories: homogeneous and heterogeneous photocatalysis. This classification is based on the oxidation of man-made/natural pollutants by molecular oxygen, ozone, and hydrogen peroxide under the influence of artificial UV light or sunlight in the presence of dissolved, suspended, or immobilized photocatalysts.63
3.1 Homogeneous photocatalysis
Homogeneous photocatalysis plays an important role in the self-purification of water naturally, by an ultra violet component of solar light. Hydro complexes of transition metals such as iron, copper, chromium, etc. in higher oxidation states facilitate the process.63 Accumulation in the solution of different organic radicals is caused by generated hydroxyl radicals that react with the substrate. In this case, the oxidation of substrate hydroxyl radicals is the one-channel flow photochemical process. These hydroxyl radicals are formed in the hydraulic field inside the metal ions (Me) in a higher oxidation state, because of the photo transfer charge. MeOHn+ + hv → Me(n−1)+ + OH˙(1) MeLn+ + hv → Me(n−1)+ + L˙(2)Atmospheric oxygen regenerates the original form of transition metal along with the formation of superoxide ions, peroxylic radicals, and radical oxidation of the substrate products. The organic pollutants such as azo dyes interact with the hydroxyl radicals generated in reaction (1), in the presence of molecular oxygen, which also leads to the generation of hydrogen peroxide. The photochemical process can be carried out by photo-induced inner-sphere electron transfer from ligand to the metal ion, accompanied by the formation of organic radical, thereby reducing transition metal ions.2 The reduced form of the metal, organic radicals, and radical ions are then consumed in the thermal reactions that follow.63
Fenton oxidation and photocatalytic treatment can be accompanied. This photo-Fenton process provides a higher removal of several classes of organic compounds. Oxidation of organic contaminants by Fe3+ ions is the last step in this combined process. The increase in temperature and pH drop increases the degradability of contaminants.63 LFe3+ + hv → Fe2+ + L˙(3)Specific consumption of hydrogen peroxide can be reduced by selecting an appropriate initial concentration of the oxidizing agent. Aeration at certain stages also reduces hydrogen peroxide's consumption, thereby the capital for this treatment.50,63,64
3.2 Heterogeneous photocatalysis
The photo-Fenton system based on homogeneous photocatalysis, includes the high cost of H2O2 storage, additional acidification and neutralization systems, UV lamps, and electric power. It also forms slurries that need to be utilized or buried.63 There, heterogeneous photocatalysis water treatment based on semiconductors has prospered a lot in the last few decades,65,66 This approach is still in its early development stages but has a promising future because of its simplicity, efficiency, and the possibility of employing solar light as compared to homogeneous photocatalysis. It is based on the principle of the use of irradiation to initiate chemical reactions. Photocatalysis in the presence of an irradiated semiconductor is even more effective.48 In this procedure, electrons and holes are generated from semiconductors under light-irradiation. Semiconductors have an energy band gap (Ebg), which is devoid of energy levels that separates the highest occupied energy band i.e., valence band (VB), and the lowest occupied energy band i.e., conduction band (CB), as shown in Fig. 3. This electronic structure makes semiconductors a favorable choice for photocatalysts. Photo generated holes oxidized organic molecules and the reduction of dioxygen forms reactive radicals such as O2− and OH−. All these radical species are oxidizing agents; thus, they reduce the organic contaminants non-selectively,49,67 This approach leads to complete mineralization in most cases, without any added reagents.
 Fig. 3  Electron–hole pair generation in a semi-conductor,59,101 reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
Many semiconductor powders such as sulphides, and oxides have been used as photocatalysts, but TiO2 is the most popularly used photocatalyst. Other semiconductors such as WO3, Fe2O3, ZnO, CdS, ZnS, SnO2, SrTiO3, etc. have limited applications because of solubility in water and toxicity. TiO2 stands out from the rest of the semiconductors because of its ability of a material to generate an electron–hole pair under the action of UV light, resistance to photo-corrosion, biological immunity, ambient operating conditions, can be suspended in the reaction medium or immobilized as a film on solid.48,68,69 The following series of reactions show a brief mechanism of how TiO2 is used in water treatment. TiO2 + hv(UV) → TiO2(e−) + TiO2(h+)(4) h+ + H2O → OH˙ + H+(5) e− + O2 → O2˙−(6) H2O + O2˙− → HO2˙ + OH˙(7) 2HO2˙ + H2O2 + O2(8) H2O2 + O2˙− → 2OH˙ + OH− + O2(9) Organic pollutants + OH˙ → H2O + CO2(10)These reactions depict three key processes: (a) TiO2 forms an electron–hole pair when it absorbs photons (b) migration of photogenerated carriers to the surface of TiO2 to form reactive oxygen species (c) organic pollutants react with holes and reactive oxygen species.55
Titanium dioxide doped with non-metal elements such as C, N, and P is even more effective as it increases its optical absorption and photocatalytic activity.49 Titanium dioxide-based photocatalytic treatment can be used as a pre-treatment as well as an advanced treatment. It is usually used prior to the biochemical unit to enhance biodegradability for better biological oxidization of the organic substrates.26 But further research exploration for TiO2 as photocatalytic material revealed some potential drawbacks that limit its application under visible light illumination.
3.3 Limitations associated with the use of TiO2 as photocatalytic material
The bandgap of pure TiO2 is about 3.2 eV, which is quite wide, thus, making it respond to only UV light. Utilization efficiency is not high for such pure semiconductors.70,71 For TiO2 photocatalyst to be effective, the water should be transparent as extremely polluted water blocks the light, thus inhibiting the action of TiO2. The cost of TiO2 depends on dosage, for instance, a dose of 0.1–2 wt% TiO2 is normally used in water treatment and it is very costly for one-time use. Under this dosage, the cost for treating 1 m3 varies from 3 to 60 USD, which amounts to 3000 USD per ton of TiO2 powder.72 Dong et al. summarized low adsorption of hydrophobic contaminants by TiO2 that impedes the commercialization of mentioned material.73 Various other researchers have reported similar setbacks with practical usage of TiO2 that are summarized in Fig. 4.74,75
 Fig. 4  Various limitations of TiO2 as a semiconductor photocatalyst material. 
4. BiFeO3: potential perovskite material and an effective semiconductor-based photocatalyst material
A photocatalyst is a substance that gets activated by adsorbing a photon and can accelerate a reaction without being consumed. The catalyst used in a photocatalytic process varies according to the approach used. Even though photocatalysis has gained remarkable attention from researchers across the globe for environmental remediation, it remains a great challenge to look for semiconductor photocatalysts that can effectively utilize solar energy for efficient energy consumption. For that reason, various studies and modifications have been done to search for a noble and promising photocatalyst for the removal of dyes and organic contaminants.76
Semiconductors discussed in the previous section (CdS, ZnS, ZnO, and TiO2), have been studied for photocatalytic activity, but have some major drawbacks. They have a comparatively high band gap, absorb light energy only in the UV region accounting for only 4% of sunlight, and have a fast recombination rate of electrons and holes, thus finally lowering the efficiency of photocatalyst.77,78 UV and visible light make up 4 and 43% of the solar spectrum, respectively. Therefore, materials that can function under the visible light spectrum are required.79–82 Bismuth ferrites happen to be a prospective material, as they overcome the shortcomings of previously mentioned semiconductors. Bismuth ferrite (BiFeO3 or BFO) belongs to the family of transition metal oxides, which finds applications in spintronics, data storage microelectronics, sensors, photocatalyst, and actuators.83–86 BiFeO3 have gained attention because of the following properties: (i) narrow optical band gap (Eg ∼ 2.0–2.2 eV),87,88 (ii) band gap exists in the visible-region (iii) multi-ferroic existence at room temperature (298 K), supporting an effective separation of cations and anions (iv) high chemical stability (v) long-range magnetic and electric ordering.89–95 However, BFO is a complex compound, but it stands out as a visible-light-driven photoactive material.88,96,97 It has received immense attention over the last few decades and several new results have been observed in different forms.
Bismuth ferrite belongs to the class of perovskite materials. The origin of perovskite materials dates back to 1839, when a Russian mineralogist, Perovski discovered calcium titanate (CaTiO3). Materials with the same type of structure as CaTiO3 are known as perovskite materials.98 The perovskite structure has the general formula of ABX3, where A and B are different-sized cations, in which the size of A is normally bigger than B. These cations define the properties of these crystals. X can be an oxide or a halide. An ideal ABX3 material has a cubic symmetry with space group Pm3m, where B is a 6-fold coordinated and A is a 12-fold cube octahedral coordinated, surrounded by X-anion's octahedron. Fig. 5 shows the structure of a typical perovskite. These substances usually have lattice distortions, resulting in the transfer of crystal phases in sequence such as monoclinic, tetragonal, triclinic, and orthogonal phases. Different orientations result in different properties of these compounds. These materials are better than other photosensitive semi-conductors.99–101 They exhibit diverse physio-chemical properties in bulk and the flexibility of their electronic and crystal structure accounts for their establishment in making highly active, selective, and stable catalysts.102,103
 Fig. 5  Perovskite structure of ABX3 type crystal101 reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
Fei et al. reported the synthesis of tunable perovskite BiFeO3 crystallites through a facile one-pot hydrothermal method. Furthermore, the result obtained showed a remarkable enhanced visible light response owing to the dominant facets {111}c of BiFeO3 crystallites.104
4.1 Various forms of bismuth ferrite
BiFeO3 are inorganic perovskites, which exist in different forms including BFO ceramics, thin films, and nanostructures. BFO nanostructures exhibit excellent properties unlike ceramics and thin films, because of their large surface areas and various morphologies. The various forms have been summarized in Fig. 6.105
 Fig. 6  Various forms of BiFeO3 (BFO). 

4.1.1 BFO ceramics. 
It was first synthesized in 1957 and has become a vital BFO-based nanomaterial. The volatility of Bi3+ and aggregation of oxygen vacancies, results in some secondary phases during the synthesis process, making its production difficult. The conversion of ferric ions to ferrous ions also causes leakage of current at times. Therefore, strategies such as ion substitution and alloying with ABO3 compounds are used to enhance its physical behavior.106–112


4.1.2 BFO thin films. 
Fabrication of high-quality BFO film is comparatively easier as compared to the synthesis of BFO ceramic. This is why it has attracted more attention in recent times. The structure of an epitaxial BFO film is related to the thickness of the film and epitaxial strain on a different substrate.
Doping or forming solid solutions can also affect its structure.113–120


4.1.3 BFO nanostructures. 
BFO nanostructures are a research hotspot because of their different behaviors in photocatalyst and magnetic properties.97 They have different morphologies including nanodots, nanofibers, nanosheets, nanoplates, nanotubes, nano islands, nanoparticles, microplates, and nanowires, which in turn affect their properties. Increasing the particle size increases the magnetic response. They have a large surface area and exhibit significantly enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activity and magnetization.121–127
In a study, Wang et al. prepared BFO nanofibers by combining the electrospinning technique with sol–gel chemistry. The photoactivity of as-prepared nanofiber was evaluated by its degradation efficiency against rhodamine-B dye. Excellent results were obtained under UV light as well as visible light in presence of H2O2.128 In another approach, single-crystal BiFeO3 (BFO) microplates were fabricated by a facile hydrothermal approach.129

4.2 Methods of synthesis for BiFeO3
Traditionally, perovskite oxides were usually prepared using a solid-state reaction of single oxides at high temperatures or using mechanical activation at low temperatures. Wet chemical methods have also gained popularity in recent times. Fig. 7 shows all the methods available under these approaches.130,131
 Fig. 7  Preparation techniques for bismuth ferrite49 reproduced with permission from ref. 49 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 

4.2.1 Oxide precursors. 
Conventional solid-state reaction. 
This method includes mixing by milling the appropriate metal oxides/carbonates and calcinating at higher temperatures allowing interdiffusion of cations. The reaction occurs by the solid-state diffusion of ions. The initial reaction between Bi2O3 and Fe2O3 is rapid but gradually slows down. Many times, unwanted phases such as Bi2Fe4O9, Bi25FeO40, Bi2O3 occur during the reaction. As soon as the BFO phase occurs, samples are ground, pressed, and sintered to produce a compact ceramic. This method is cheap, simple, and gives satisfactory results. Poor sintering behavior, non-uniformity of particle size and shape, lack of reproducibility, multiphase character, and loss of stoichiometry is one of the drawbacks of this method.86
Rapid liquid sintering. 
The calcination stage is skipped in this method, whereas the initial stages are the same as in the solid-state route. The samples are then sintered at 1153 K for 450 s. The melting point of Bi2O3 is 1090 K, therefore the appearance of the liquid phase plays an important role in this synthesis. The liquid phase accelerates synthesis by facilitating the sintering and preventing the formation of a second phase. The density of ceramics obtained by this method is quite high.86
Mechanical activation. 
This method significantly improves the reactivity of starting material, making calcination feasible at low temperatures. Unlike to previously mentioned technique, this method produces the BiFeO3 phase at 998 K, although small amounts of secondary phases can be detected.86


4.2.2 Wet chemical methods. 
Wet-chemical methods are widely used because of their low energy requirements along with inexpensive and easy to control solutions.
Sol–gel method. 
Metal-complex method. 
Metal chelating is used to seek a homogeneous solution as well as to a reduction in motion of metals. Citric, tartaric, oxalic, and malic acids are the most commonly used chelating agents. The calcination step releases the organics and forms the desired phase.
Modified Pechini method. 
It aims to reduce the mobility of ions, by encircling stable metal–chelate complexes steadily by a growing polymer net. Polymeric polyesterification is the principal reaction of this method. Citric acid and ethylene glycol are most widely used in this process.
Polymer complex solution. 
Polyvinyl alcohol usually acts as a coordinating organic polymer to cations in this reaction. This strongly modifies the rheological characteristics of the precursor solution. Metal ions act as cross-linking agents between polymers. Random cross-linking entraps water, forming a three-dimensional network, turning into a gel.
Glycol–gel reaction. 
Park et al.132 employed this method in the synthesis of single-crystalline BFO. Bismuth and iron nitrates were dissolved in ethylene glycol. Two hydroxyl groups keep the heterometallic units during the hydrolysis reaction. No secondary phases were reported.86
Co-precipitation method. 
It includes the separation of a solid containing different ionic species from a solution phase. Precipitating agents that render the cations insoluble, are used to ensure homogeneous co-precipitation w.r.t. metal ions at an atomic level. Achieving ideal conditions is however quite difficult.86
Hydrothermal synthesis. 
It is used for the synthesis of advanced inorganic material that is difficult to synthesize by high-temperature solid-state reactions. Hydrated materials are prepared by this method. The effective boiling point of the solvent is raised by heating it in a sealed vessel, as the reactivity increases under high pressures and moderate temperatures.86 It is one of the most widely used approaches because of its low-temperature synthesis. T. Soltani et al. fabricated mesoscale BFO octahedral particles by using (0.5–12 M) concentration of KOH and employing hydrothermal synthesis.133
Sonochemical method. 
Rates for a homogeneous reaction depend on the vapor pressure of precursors, solvent vapor pressure, and ambient gas used. Highly volatile precursors are required for high chemical yields, as the vapor inside the cavitating bubble is the reaction site for a sonochemical reaction. The solvent vapor pressure should be low at sonication temperature. BFO particles with sizes 4–50 nm are an example of this preparation.86
Combustion method. 
Smoldering reactions, flaming reactions, and explosive reactions are covered under the combustion method. The rate of combustion determines the nature of a certain reaction. Ceramic oxides are synthesized by smoldering and flaming reactions.86
Microwave hydrothermal synthesis. 
Prado-Gonjal et al. obtained single-phase BFO without high purity reactants. KOH solution, iron, and bismuth nitrate were placed in an autoclave and a commercial milestone was used at 473 K.134

4.3 Crystal and band structure of BiFeO3

4.3.1 Crystal structure. 
BFO was discovered in the 1950s. It is one of the few single-phase multiferroic materials, possessing both (anti)ferromagnetic and ferroelectric properties at room temperature.107,108,113 It has a Neel temperature of 647 K and a ferroelectric curie temperature of 1103 K.135–137 It has a typical perovskite structure of the form ABX3. In BFO the larger cation i.e., Bi is located in the corners of the unit cell, and the smaller cation i.e., Fe is located in the center of the unit of the cell. Each face has an oxygen ion in its center and forms forming an octahedral network, which is similar to the structure shown in Fig. 5. Bi fills the dodecahedral holes and the Fe fills the octahedral sites,137,138 In the bulk phase, grounded BFO has a rhombohedral structure with R3c (a = 5.58 Å and c = 13.9 Å) space group, at room temperature. The rhombohedral angle varies from 89.30° to 89.48° and has a lattice parameter of 3.965 Å.139 Zhang et al. represented peaks at 2θ = 25.3°,101 37.8° (004), 48.0°,200 53.8°,105 54.9°,211 and 62.5°,204 clearly showing a rhombohedral phase.140Fig. 8 shows this representation.
 Fig. 8  X-ray diffraction pattern of rhombohedral phase BiFeO3 (ref. 140) reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2012 Elsevier. 
BFO structure can also be explained using a hexagonal frame of reference, where the diagonal of the cube is parallel to the c-axis, for e.g., [001]hexagonal‖[111]pseudocubic. [001]hex, [100]hex, [110]hex, [010]hex, are the hexagonal axis in the unit cell of BFO [2–46]. Fig. 9 shows the structure of BFO in the hexagonal frame of reference. Some researchers have also formulated a pseudo cubic frame of reference, which finds application in photocatalysis. Here, [111]c corresponds to [001]hex.141
 Fig. 9  Structure of BFO through the hexagonal frame of ref. 142 reproduced with permission from ref. 142 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
The angle of rotation for the oxygen octahedra plays an important role in the structural point of view. Variation in the ionic radius of Bi and Fe can also distort the cubic symmetry, simultaneously tilting the oxygen octahedral. In 1926, Gold-Schmidt recognized a parameter known as tolerance factor ‘t’, to define the constancy of a typical perovskite structure. He defined t as:  where r is the respective ionic radii. Changing the value of t, along with a change in the ionic species affects the crystallographic symmetry.143


4.3.2 Band gap structure. 
Two kinds of band gaps have been reported in BFO, indirect and direct/optical band gaps. Value for direct band gap lies in the range 2.2 eV to 2.8 eV and that for indirect lies between 0.4 to 1.0 eV. Temperature has a considerable impact on these band gaps.106,144–149Fig. 10 shows the relationship between temperature and band gap. Band gap decreases with an increase in temperature.
 Fig. 10  Relation between temperature and band gap. 
In the case of BFO, the valence band consists of the O 2p states along with Fe 3d and Bi 6p states in small quantities. The conduction is dominated by Fe 3d states, hybridized with Bi 5p states. Hybridization is also present between several O bands and Fe, Bi bands.145 Wang et al.150 showed that the dielectric function is directly related to the band structure. BFO has the ideal band gap and position to meet the photocatalytic requirements to treat contaminated water. It has also been extensively reported that BFO nanohybrids have a narrower band gap of 2.2 EV as compared to TiO2 and ZnO due to which they manifest photocatalytic properties even under visible light.151,152

5. Properties of BFO
In various reported literature BFO particles were known to exhibit an excellent set of properties that further makes them a perfect choice for a photocatalyst material. These properties are summarized systematically in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Schematic for various properties of BFO nanoparticles. 
5.1 Ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties
Syed Irfan et al. have reported that BFO nanohybrids exist as a multiferroic substance at room temperature.24,153 Multiferrocity is defined as proficiency in exhibiting more than one primary ferroic property, which includes ferromagnetism, ferroelectricity, and ferroelasticity, in the same phase. The piezoelectric effect, which is the capability of a substance to generate an electric charge in response to applied mechanical stress, is also exhibited by BFO nanohybrids.
BFO nanohybrids exhibit simultaneous coupling between ferroelectric and ferromagnetic properties due to which it manifests wide-ranging applications.154,155 Due to their magnetic properties, the BFO catalysts can be easily recovered from the solution by an external magnetic field.156
It has been observed that the spontaneous polarization of BFO which originates from the relative shift of Bi3+ from the oxygen octahedron, stimulates an electric dipole moment. The volatility of the Bi elements and the fluctuation of the valence of the Fe element give rise to a large number of oxygen vacancies and second phase during the preparation of BFO, which perceptibly increases the leakage current and makes it difficult to obtain a saturated ferroelectric hysteresis loop at room temperature. Considerable efforts have been put on to decrease the leakage currents to further promote the ferroelectric and piezoelectric performance. Ion substitution and formation of solid solutions of BFO with other ABO3-type perovskite are the most effective methods to suppress the high leakage.157
It has also been demonstrated that modulating the phase structure by the ion can effectively increase the ferroelectric and piezoelectric performance. Substitution by other ions, besides there are ions that can also affect the phase structure and relevant properties. For instance, a decrease has been observed in the leakage current density in high electric fields in 3–5% Mn-doped BFO films.158
5.2 Magnetic properties
It was observed that BFO shows a G-type antiferromagnetic order, which has resulted from the Fe3+ electron spins in the rhombohedral distorted perovskite. The magnetic properties of BFO nanohybrids are greatly affected by the morphologies and the size.159
Sando et al.160 have reported that the BFO films at low compressive strain exhibit bulk-like cycloid spin modulation, whereas, pseudo collinear antiferromagnetism exists at high strain both tensile and compressive. B-Site replacing of Fe3+, besides doping, can also modify the magnetic properties, such as Co,118,161,162 Cr,163 Ni,164 and Mn.163
5.3 Magnetoelectric coupling
Magnetoelectric coupling is one of the most remarkable features of BFO-based nanomaterials characterized by the mutual coupling of ferroelectric and magnetic properties. A lot of research has been done on combining magnetic and electric properties.119 For the first time, Zhao et al.165 demonstrated the electrical control of antiferromagnetic domain structure in a single-phase BFO film which showed a strong coupling between the two types of order at room temperature. The spontaneous polarization is along the [111] direction. 71°, 109°, and 180° denote three different polarization switching, and the antiferromagnetic plane is located perpendicular to the polarization direction.
Wu et al.166 have demonstrated the electrical control of exchange bias using the LSMO/BFO system. The reversible Switch between two exchange bias states can be realized by switching the ferroelectric polarization of BFO.
5.4 Photovoltaic effect
Because of the photovoltaic effect of BFO, it has been one of the most prospecting ferroelectric nanomaterials for photovoltaics. The ferroelectric nano materials for photovoltaics have photoelectric responses that are switchable and photo voltages that are above the band gap. Researchers have reported that many factors can determine the photovoltaic effect of ferroelectric nanomaterials, such as the structure of the domain,167 the polarization of direction,166 and bandgap.
The conventional ferroelectric nanomaterials exhibit a large bandgap of 2.8–3.5 eV. On the contrary, the BFO-based nanomaterials exhibit a relatively narrow bandgap (<2.7 eV) which makes it possible for BFO-based nanomaterials to achieve excellent photovoltaic effects. The mismatch between bandgaps of ferroelectric oxides and the solar spectrum is the major challenge to obtaining high power conversion efficacy and large photocurrent. Studies are being conducted for narrowing the bandgap to better match the solar spectrum.166
5.5 Photocatalysis
Apart from the photovoltaic effect of BFO particles bandgap of BFO nanomaterials lies in the visible-light region of the solar spectrum that expands its horizons in the domain of photocatalysis. Many factors were reported to affect the photocatalysis action of BFO particles, like the effect of size, structural morphologies, and inclusion of effective dopant ions.
For different morphologies, there is a different band gap structure in a particular BFO nanoparticle due to which they were known to exhibit different photocatalytic activities.97 The further photoactivity of BFO nanoparticles is discussed in detail in the next section.
Also, it was reported that BFO nanohybrids display a high degree of chemical stability which adds to their extensive application. Due to all these comprehensive properties, BFO nanohybrids are apt candidates for photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes.154,168
6. Photoactivity and degradation mechanism of BiFeO3
Back in 2007, researchers across the globe were actively evolving their theories over the potential of BiFeO3 for its photocatalytic application. Up to the current time, it showed significant photoactivity for water treatment against azo dyes. Potentially, it was reported to treat waste water effectively against organic pollutants like rhodamine-B, Congo red, methyl violet, methyl blue, methyl orange, crystal violet, etc.
6.1 Photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants to treat wastewater
In a study, the photocatalytic performance of mesoporous BFO hollow spheres was investigated for the degradation of rhodamine-B dye. 500 W Xe lamp was used as a source of light for visible light illumination in an experimental study. It was observed that among solid-state BiFeO3 (BFO-SSR), ground BiFeO3 (BFO-2-500(G)), and aerosol-spraying prepared BiFeO3 (BFO-2-500), the highest decomposition of dye was displayed by BFO-2-500 in the presence of visible light illumination.143
Huo et al. suggested that the BFO microsphere displayed eight times higher photoactivity for the visible light degradation of MB than that obtained for TiO2 due to its high ability to degrade the organic pollutants.139
Bharathkumar et al. proposed that BFO mesh was efficient in degrading up to 98% of the MB dye after 4 hours of exposure to sunlight. They stated that the BFO mesh photocatalysis improvement was due to the BFO band-bending process and increased interaction between the dye molecules and photocatalyst. This band-bending at various band edge positions leads to the formation of an additional pathway for the easy migration of photoinduced electron–hole at the interface of photocatalyst and dye, resulting in the decrease of charge carrier recombination and thus enhanced photocatalytic activity.169–172
6.2 Degradation mechanism of BiFeO3
The process of photocatalytic degradation involves the following five main steps:-152 (i) absorption of light by the semiconductor. (ii) Production of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. (iii) Transportation and recombination of electron–hole pairs. (iv) Initiation of adsorption of reactants and desorption of products. (v) Occurrence of redox reactions on the surface of photocatalyst. Fig. 12 systematically shows the steps involved in the mechanism of degradation of organic pollutants present in contaminated water sources.
 Fig. 12  Steps involved in the degradation of pollutants. 
It has been meticulously reported that when visible light is incident on the catalyst surface, the electrons get excited from the valence band and jump into the conduction band of the catalyst. This creates holes in the valence band. The excited electrons have a reduction ability and the holes in the valence band have the oxidizing ability.
During the photocatalysis process, the oxygen (O2) molecules in the air will capture the electrons in the conduction band and this results in the formation of superoxide anions. This superoxide ion will contribute toward further oxidation process and also prevent the recombination of electron–hole and hence increasing the photocatalytic efficiency. The hole in the valence band of the catalyst will also react with water (H2O) molecules on the catalyst surface and leads to the formation of OH− radicals. The resultant superoxide anion O2− and OH− radicals are highly reactive and unstable and will degrade the harmful dyes into simpler substances like H2O and CO2,19,25,173,174
The reactions involved in the process are as follows: BFO + hv → BFO (e−CB) + (h+VB)(11) h+ + H2O → OH˙ + H+(12) 2O2˙− + H˙ → 2OH + O2˙(13) 2O2˙− + → HO2(14)It was commonly observed that substances follow different mechanism strategies under visible light and dark conditions. For example – it has been demonstrated that when Congo red is added to the catalytic solution under dark conditions, no dye degradation occurs as the generation of charge carriers i.e., electrons and holes haven't taken place. When carried out under visible-light conditions, dye degradation does occur because of the formation of charge carriers.175
The above case belongs to the class of heterogeneous photocatalysis however for homogeneous catalysis mechanism is often explained by the Fenton process.

Fenton process. 
Fenton reaction employs a mixture of ferrous ions along with hydrogen peroxide in the acidic medium as a catalyst to oxidize contaminants of wastewater. This reaction generates OH− ions which oxidize the contaminants. It was reported to facilitate the production of OH− by a photochemical route according to eqn (16) due to the decomposition of the photoactive Fe(OH)2+ species in mildly acidic solutions. In these reactions, iron is cycled between the +2 and +3 oxidation states, so Fe2+ is not depleted and OH− production is limited only by the availability of light and H2O2. Tayyebe Soltani et al. have reported that Fenton reagent alone under visible is inefficient in the degradation of phenol. Contrary to this, the Fenton catalyst along with BFO exhibits remarkably high proficiency in the degradation of phenol.156
The reactions involved are as follows: Fe2+ + H2O2 + H+ → Fe3+ + OH˙ + H2O(15) Fe(OH)2+ + hv → Fe2+ + OH˙(16)Zhong et al. have reported that the degradation of methyl orange was insignificant (<3% in 3 h) in absence of BFO even when H2O2 was added under visible light illumination. Contrary to this, there was a rapid decrease in the concentration of methyl orange (70–98%) in the presence of BFO catalyst indicating that nanostructured bismuth ferrite clusters can effectively promote visible light photo-Fenton oxidation.45

7. Methods to enhance the photocatalytic activity for bismuth ferrite nanostructures
During the photocatalytic reaction, the photo-induced electron–hole pairs can either move back to the surface of the photocatalyst and begin redox reactions or recombine and generate useless heat. It has been reported that various modification and alteration of a photocatalyst is required to enhance its surface activity and suppress the rate of charge recombination and subsequently enhance the photocatalytic performance by avoiding any useless generation of heat. These include doping, designing of heterojunction, and surface morphology. As a potential photocatalyst, bismuth ferrite has also undergone certain modifications to improve its functioning that made it a better fit for the applications related to the recent technologies.176–178
7.1 Effect of doping
Doping is an effective way that is utilized to modify the structure of the present catalyst giving it an edge in recent technologies related to photocatalytic degradation. The properties of a perovskite material can be altered by doping with smaller ions to improve the existing substances.179 Studies depict that doping at either site A or B in the structure of BFO will give it an extra photocatalytic advantage by reducing the bandgap. To date, various dopants have been reported to improve the photoactivity of bismuth ferrite. The inclusion of apt dopants as impurity produces multiple energy trap states in between the valence band and conduction band as shown in Fig. 13. Due to these multiple energy traps, there is efficient carrier charge separation. It increases the number of electrons in the conduction band and eventually slows down the recombination process, hence serving a better photocatalytic activity.24,180
 Fig. 13  Effect of metal ion doping on the energy band gap of BFO nanoparticles reproduced with permission from ref. 180 Copyright 2020 Springer. 
In a recent study by a group of researchers, La and Mn – codoped nanohybrid of bismuth ferrite with varying doping concentrations were prepared using a double solvent sol–gel method. Further, these were embedded into transition metal carbide sheets (MXene–Ti3C2) to prepare a nanocomposite and their resulting photocatalytic activity was observed against a sample of Congo red dye as shown in Fig. 14. Result showed that Bi0.9La0.9FeO3 (BLFO)/Ti3C2 degrade 92% dye in dark whereas Bi0.9La0.1Fe0.95Mn0.05O3 (BLFMO-5)/Ti3C2 degrade 93% dye in dark and further showing 100% degradation within 20 minutes of irradiation.181
 Fig. 14  BFO/MXene nanohybrid degrading Congo red dye molecules reproduced with permission from ref. 181 Copyright 2019 ACS Publications. 
In another study, BFO/MXene nanocomposite was fabricated utilizing a low-cost double-solvent solvothermal method. It was noted that only 33% of the Congo red dye was degraded by pure BFO under visible light irradiation in 42 min which proves that pure BFO is very stable and hence non-effective for degradation. Whereas, pure water was obtained in just 42 min when BFO/MXene is used as a photocatalyst with visible light irradiation.82 Here, fast and effective degradation of dye compared with pure BFO is attributed to two factors: (i) larger surface area of 147 m2 g−1, which is reported to be the highest among all BFO nanoparticles and derivatives, and (ii) lower electron–hole recombination rate, which makes the BFO/MXene nanohybrid as a novel and promising candidate for greener applications in wastewater treatment.
Irfan et al. investigated the enhanced photocatalytic performance of BiFeO3 when co-doped with La3+ and Se4+ against Congo red dye under UV visible and NIR light. A 5 W LED bulb was used as a source of UV light, and a 300 W xenon lamp with filters of 420 nm and 800 nm was used as visible light and NIR light source respectively. It was observed that pure BFO degraded about 44%, 21%, and 31% of the Congo red dye solution in the UV, visible, and NIR light regions in 120 min, respectively. However, in the presence of the BLFO powder, nearly 85%, 84%, and 82% of the Congo red solution were degraded under UV, visible, and NIR light, respectively, within the period. Interestingly, when doping with Se4+ reached 7.5%, 97% pure water was obtained after the photo-degradation of Congo red solution in 50 min under light irradiation in the UV, visible, and NIR regions. This activity is attributed to increased optical absorption, effective migration of charge carriers, and decreased band gap.182
The electronic structure of bismuth ferrite was tuned effectively under visible light irradiation via La, Se co-doping where phase transition from perovskite rhombohedral to orthorhombic was observed and bandgap significantly decreased from 2.04 eV to 1.76 eV further improving the photoactivity. To characterize this photoactivity, an aqueous solution of Congo red dye was used as a model dye. Owing to these attributes, the developed Bi0.92La0.08Fe1−xSexO3 (BLFSO) catalyzes 90% dye in the first 30 minutes of visible light irradiation.183
In a study, molybdenum doped bismuth ferrite was prepared through a facile chemical route. It was observed that photocatalytic activity increased four-fold in a pristine sample. In just 5 min 80% of rhodamine-B (RhB) was degraded under visible light irradiation without using any significant promoter. The process is almost pH-independent which is beneficial for application purposes. The obtained nanohybrid was also effective against some other dyes like methylene blue and Bismarck brown.184
Gadolinium doped bismuth ferrite (Gd:BFO) nanoparticles were prepared using an auto combustion technique. An optical study reveals that doping with Gd reduces the band gap value of BFO from 2.21 eV to 2.17 eV. Also, it was found that the highest degradation efficiency of 85% was exhibited by Gd:2BFO against crystal violet in comparison to pure BFO.152
The photocatalytic activity of yttrium (Y)-doped and undoped BiFeO3 was investigated for the degradation of methylene blue under direct sunlight. The data from experiments showed that BiFeO3 photocatalysts were recyclable up to four consecutive cycles without any remarkable loss of their photocatalytic efficiencies as shown in Fig. 15.185 Also, a significant effect of 1% dopant concentration in pure BFO is demonstrated with almost 100% efficiency in the first phase.
 Fig. 15  Recyclability of doped and undoped BFO nanoparticles reproduced with permission from ref. 185 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
An effective bismuth oxoiodide (BiFeO3/BiOI) composite photocatalytic material was prepared through a simple wet impregnation process and photocatalytic performances were assessed by the catalytic degradation of rhodamine B (RhB) and bisphenol A (BPA) in visible-light illumination. Photodegradation efficiency of 100% RhB and 71% BPA were obtained using the optimized composite when compared to merely 56% and 36% using pure BiOI, respectively. The enhancement in the photodegradation rates of RhB (5 times) and BPA (2 times) pollutants using 2% BiFeO3/BiOI composite is caused due to the efficient charge separation of hole–electron pairs. Composite is known to retain its photoactivity up to 3 cycles of degradation experiments.174Fig. 16 shows this effective charge separation in a schematic form thus lowering the rate of recombination and improving the activity of the developed composite structure.
 Fig. 16  Plausible energy-level diagram and process of migration for photo-induced charges over BiFeO3/BiOI system for photocatalytic degradation of rhodamine B (RhB) or bisphenol A (BPA) reproduced with permission from ref. 174 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
In a study, newly-discovered photo-catalysts, composed of gadolinium (Gd) and tin (Sn), co-doped bismuth ferrite (BGFSO) deposited over graphene nanoplatelet (GNP) surface have been fabricated using a two-step method. The photocatalytic activities of the nanohybrid under both, visible light and dark conditions have been increased, and the highest degradation activity (74%) of Congo-red dye is obtained for 25% Sn-doped BGFSO/GNP nanohybrid.15
An innovative bismuth ferrite, with concurrent formation of nanostructured clusters and controllable morphologies, was obtained by employing a delicate synthesis process. The relatively pure mullite (Bi2Fe4O9) structure of the nanostructured bismuth ferrite clusters obtained showed the excellent photocatalytic property. On irradiation of visible light, 99% of methyl orange was degraded in 80 min. In dark, 96% of MO could be removed in 4 h.25
In another study, TiO2/porous BiFeO3 nanocomposites were prepared by a wet-chemical method. The obtained nanocomposite demonstrates larger charge separation than porous BiFeO3 alone. This leads to improved visible-light activities for degrading pollutants in industrial wastewater and producing H2.186
The effect of Gd dopant was studied on the photocatalytic activity of BFO nanoparticles. The as-prepared BGFOx (x = 0, 0.05, 0.1, and 0.15) reflected to decompose rhodamine-B more effectively under visible-light illumination as x increases from zero to 0.1 and then shows a sudden fall for x = 0.15. The highest photocatalytic activity was obtained when x = 0.1 which was caused due to changing of the polar behavior of the nanoparticles.187
BiFeO3 nanoparticles were synthesized by a co-precipitation method with different dopant concentrations of copper (Cu) varying from 0.5–5.0 mol%. It was experimentally observed that this doping has a significant effect on the photoactivity of BiFeO3 nanoparticles for methyl orange pollutants. The results obtained indicated that Cu–BiFeO3 exhibited a larger extent of photodegradation as compared to pristine BiFeO3. Also, the developed structure is recyclable for up to five consecutive cycles in testing its ability for photocatalytic degradation under visible light illumination.188 In another study based on La dopant inclusion in nanocrystal of BiFeO3, the degradation was observed to improve by a certain extent (71%) than pristine BiFeO3.189Table 3 summarizes the recent progress in the effect of doping of BFO nanoparticles.
Table 3 Recent progress in the effect of doping of BFO nanoparticles




S. no.
Materials
Pollutant
Dye degradation (%)
Time
Ref.


UV
Visible
Dark
NIR




1
BFO/GNP
Congo-red dye
—
30%
32%
—
120 min

15



2
BGFSO-5/GNP
Congo-red dye
—
12%
48%
—
120 min

15



3
BGFSO-15/GNP
Congo-red dye
—
15%
44%
—
120 min

15



4
BGFSO-20/GNP
Congo-red dye
—
3%
56%
—
120 min

15



5
BGFSO-25/GNP
Congo-red dye
—
23%
51%
—
120 min

15



6
BiFeO3
Rhodamine-B dye
—
10%
—
—
120 min

170



7
BiOI
Rhodamine-B dye
—
56%
—
—
120 min

170



8
BFO/BI-1
Rhodamine-B dye
—
79%
—
—
120 min

170



9
BFO/BI-2
Rhodamine-B dye
—
100%
—
—
120 min

170



10
BFO/BI-3
Rhodamine-B dye
—
64%
—
—
120 min

170



11
BiFeO3
Bisphenol-A dye
—
7%
—
—
120 min

170



12
BiOI
Bisphenol-A dye
—
36%
—
—
120 min

170



13
BFO/BI-1
Bisphenol-A dye
—
59%
—
—
120 min

170



14
BFO/BI-2
Bisphenol-A dye
—
71%
—
—
120 min

170



15
BFO/BI-3
Bisphenol-A dye
—
54%
—
—
120 min

170



16
Undoped BiFeO3
Methylene blue dye
—
87%
—
—
120 min

181



17
1% Y–BiFeO3
Methylene blue dye
—
92.60%
—
—
120 min

181



18
2% Y–BiFeO3
Methylene blue dye
—
88%
—
—
120 min

181



19
5% Y–BiFeO3
Methylene blue dye
—
85.20%
—
—
120 min

181



20
Bi2Fe4O9
Methyl orange dye
—
99%
96%
—
80 min (light)

23



4 h (dark)


21
BFO-Doped with Gd, Sm
Methylene blue dye
—
95%
—
—
40 min

186



22
BFO-Doped with Gd
Methylene blue dye
94%
94%
—
—
240 min

187



23
BFO-Doped with Gd
Rhodamine B dye
94%
94%
—
—
120 min

183



24
BFO-Doped with Nd
Rhodamine B dye
—
59%
—
—
120 min

188



25
BFO-Doped with Y
Rhodamine B dye
—
8%
0%


60 min

189



26
BFO-Doped with Dy
Methylene blue dye
—
92%
—
—
240 min

190



27
BFO-Doped with TiO2
Congo red dye
—
70%
—
—
120 min

191



28
BFO-Doped with Pt
Methylene orange dye
—
70%
—
—
210 min

192



29
BFO-Doped with Ag
Rhodamine B dye
—
79%
—
—
180 min

193



30
BFO-Doped with Ag
Methylene orange dye
—
100%
—
—
90 min

194



31
BFO-Doped with Pb
Malachite green dye
—
96%
—
—
240 min

195



32
BFO-Doped with N
Bisphenol-A dye
—
94%
—
—
120 min

196



33
BFO-Doped with N
Congo red dye
—
92%
—
—
180 min

197



34
BiFeO3/TiO2 (1:1)
Congo red dye
—
70%
—
—
120 min

191



35
BiFeO3
Rhodamine B dye
—
50%
—
—
240 min

198



36
BiFeO3–graphene
Congo red dye
—
71%
—
—
120 min

199



37
Bi0.90La0.10FeO
—
—
48%
—
—
100 min

178



38
Bi0.97Gd0.03FeO3
Rhodamine B dye
—
55%
—
—
270 min

1



39
Bi0.98Y0.02FeO3
—
—
18%
—
—
180 min

200



40
Bi0.95Sm0.05Fe0.80Mn0.20O3
Methyl blue, Congo red, and methyl violet dye
83%
97%
—
—
180 min

201



41
Bi0.90Gd0.10Fe0.95Sn0.05O3
—
83%
95%
—
79%
180 min

178



42
Bi0.90La0.10Fe0.95Mn0.05O3
Congo red dye
—
97%
—
—
120 min

202



43
Bi0.90Gd0.05Sm0.05FeO3
Congo red dye
—
95%
—
—
40 min

186



44
Bi0.92La0.08Fe0.925Se0.075O3
—
97%
97%
—
97%
50 min

178





7.2 Heterojunctions
Heterojunction involves the overlapping of two band gaps from different semiconductors which facilitates the inhibition of charge recombination due to the creation of the Schottky barrier that further improves the photocatalytic activity. Although ceasing electron–hole recombination is a very typical task, it can be achieved by the execution of proper design in the structure of a photocatalyst. Among all other reported strategies, framing heterojunctions in photocatalysts has been proved to be one of the most hopeful ways for the synthesis of advanced photocatalysts due to its feasibility and effectiveness for the spatial separation of electron–hole pairs as shown in Fig. 17,186,190 As shown, in the case of a single photocatalyst, photogenerated electron–hole pair recombines due to operational coulombic forces. However, due to the generation of heterojunction in the case, a second spatial separation was observed that prevents electron–hole from recombination and besides transfer the ease that enhances photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 17  Effect of formation of heterojunction on the photocatalytic performance of semiconductors reproduced with permission from ref. 190 Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. 
Particularly, well-engineered BiFeO3-based heterojunction photocatalysts are reported to accomplish higher photocatalytic activity. Jingxiang Low et al. and his co-workers state five types of heterojunctions namely, conventional type-II heterojunctions, p–n heterojunctions, surface heterojunctions, direct Z-scheme heterojunctions, and semiconductor–graphene (SC–graphene) heterojunctions. In the next section, the applications of the above-mentioned heterojunctions in photocatalysts are discussed.
A research group prepared a Pt–BiFeO3 heterostructure and noticed its photodegradation efficiency for methyl orange under visible light illumination. The developed heterostructure showed five times more efficiency in the degradation of methyl orange as compared to pure BiFeO3.191 However, it is important to note that heterojunctions do not always lead to an increase in photocatalytic activity. For say, type-I heterojunctions do not contribute much to enhanced photocatalytic activity owing to their straddling gap structure.192
Carbon materials have piqued great interest in a plethora of environmental remediation techniques owing to their excellent features of corrosion resistance, strong thermal stability, large surface area, and good electronic properties. Earlier reports have affirmed that the carbon–semiconductor material heterojunctions can inhibit the recombination of electron–hole pairs and improve the capability of pollutant adsorption on the composite, leading to the enhancement of photoactivity.193 Wang et al. reported the fabrication of heterojunction between graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and bismuth ferrite particles. The as-prepared g-C3N4/BiFeO3 heterojunction was administered closely for its photodegradation efficiency against methyl orange dye under visible light illumination. The result showed that the activity of g-C3N4/BiFeO3 heterojunction increased by two folds as compared to pure g-C3N4 photocatalyst. They stated that this improved behavior is due synergic effect between g-C3N4 and BiFeO3.194
BiFeO3–(Na0.5Bi0.5)TiO3 (BFO–NBT) was fabricated from Shirozu butterfly wings by a sol–gel method followed by calcination. The developed heterojunction has ordered macropores which produce a higher surface area that is further attributed to increased photocatalytic activity of as-prepared BFO–NBT heterojunction.195
In another study, the BiFeO3/α-Fe2O3 system was developed featuring the fast removal, selective adsorption, and magnetic recycle capability of anionic methyl orange (MO) dye. Adsorption of MO dye was observed at acidic pH, while desorption takes place at basic pH.196 An innovative type II CuS/BiFeO3 heterojunction photocatalyst was prepared by a two-step process. The developed heterojunction exhibited improved charge separation efficiency under visible light illumination.197
A Z-scheme Bi2MoO6/BiFeO3 heterojunction was fabricated. The obtained heterostructure showed much higher photocatalytic activity under visible light illumination for rhodamine-B dye than pure BiFeO3 nanofibers or pure Bi2MoO6 nanosheets. This increased photoactivity was caused due to formation of Z-scheme heterojunction which effectively prevents the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Also, the result showed that activity was not decreased further with successive cycles giving evidence for the stability of Bi2MoO6/BiFeO3 heterojunction.198
The discrete heterojunction nanofibers (DH-NFs) were prepared by growing Bi2WO6 nanosheets (NSs) on electrospun BiFeO3 nanofibers (NFs) through the solvothermal method. The as-prepared BiFeO3/Bi2WO6 DH-NFs show two times more efficiency for charge separation than BiFeO3 NFs and Bi2WO6 NSs. Also, the reaction rate of BiFeO3/Bi2WO6 DH-NFs was found to be 36.7 times higher for degradation of rhodamine-B dye than those of BiFeO3 NFs. Besides, the BiFeO3/Bi2WO6 DH-NFs showed higher recycling performance due to the magnetic-separable property derived from the ferromagnetic property of BiFeO3.199 The improved efficiency of the heterojunction could be attributed to the three facts: (i) 1D heterojunctions cause effective charge separation and help in axial transport of photo-induced charges. (ii) The discrete structure could ease the spatial separation of redox reaction sites as well as photo-induced charges. (iii) The higher surface area of BiFeO3/Bi2WO6 DH-NFs facilitates more active sites for photocatalytic reaction.
In another study, researchers synthesized M@BFO nanocomposites (M = Ag, Au) bowl arrays through a template-assisted thermal evaporation technique, and their efficiency in photodegrading rhodamine-B dye was evaluated. Under visible light illumination, the M@BFO composites showed higher photocatalytic efficacy than the pristine BFO.96
BiFeO3/SiO2/CuS dual Z-scheme photocatalyst was synthesized rationally by hydrothermal technique. The as-prepared heterojunction system was tested for photodegradation of methyl orange dye. The experimental result demonstrated that 99% of methyl orange dye was degraded in just 60 min showing par excellence than pure BiFeO3. Moreover, BiFeO3/CuS/SiO2 displayed remarkable recycling efficiency up to over six catalytic cycles.200
A novel BiFeO3–GdFeO3 (BFO–GFO) perovskite nanocomposite photocatalyst was fabricated using the sol–gel method for the first time. Methylene blue (MB) dye degradation activity of BFO–GFO nanocomposites showed that the as-prepared powder was capable of degrading 98% of dye and simultaneously converting them to reusable water, whereas the pristine compounds namely BiFeO3 and GdFeO3 found to be able of degrading 76% and 42% of MB dye. Besides, it was observed that the stability of BFO–GFO remains unchanged even in the third run of the experiment.30
In another study, facile synthesis of Bi2Fe4O9/Bi2WO6 Z-scheme heterojunction photocatalyst with improved photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation was reported. Results observed demonstrate that 100% of rhodamine-B dye was degraded by Bi2Fe4O9 (7%)/Bi2WO6 in 90 min, which is far better than the pristine form of parent compounds. Furthermore, no significant reduction in catalytic performance was observed up to five cycles of the heterojunction stability test.201
Lijing Di et al. proposed a novel preparation technique for the synthesis of Z-scheme Ag2S/BiFeO3 heterojunction composites. The photocatalytic performance of prepared heterojunction was tested through the degradation of methyl orange dye under visible-light illumination. The most favorable composite sample was observed for 15% Ag2S/BiFeO3, which facilitates 97% degradation of methyl orange dye within 4 hours. Moreover, any further addition of H2O2 enhances the dye degradation efficiency owing to the synergistic effects of photo- and Fenton catalysis.202
The photocatalytic activity of BiFeO3/CuWO4 heterojunction was investigated for the degradation of methyl orange and rhodamine-B dye. The result showed that heterojunction with the 1:1 weight ratio has the highest capability for photocatalytic degradation of both the dyes. Besides, a recyclable test of BiFeO3/CuWO4 demonstrated durability up to five consecutive cycles of testing.203
In another study, CuO was uniformly deposited on the surface of BiFeO3 particles leading to the formation of a p–n heterojunction at the interface between CuO and BiFeO3. This heterojunction significantly eases the separation and transfer of photo-induced electron–hole pairs. The optimum photocatalytic degradation efficiency of CuO/BiFeO3 was observed for 15% loading content of CuO where 50% degradation was achieved which was more than 3 times higher than that of pristine BFO and CuO.204
Photocatalytic activity of BiFeO3/ZnFe2O4 nanocomposites was investigated under visible light illumination for methylene blue dye. The highest efficacy for the photodegradation of methylene blue was possessed by the composite having 25 wt% of ZnFe2O4 owing to the induced synergic effect between BiFeO3 and ZnFe2O4, as demonstrated by the results of photoluminescence spectroscopy.205
Tarun et al. reported superior photocatalytic activity of nitrogen-doped graphene oxide (N-rGO) supported bismuth ferrite (BiFeO3/N-rGO) towards the degradation of rhodamine B dye under visible light irradiation. The activity of rhodamine B was improved fivefold as compared to the pristine form of BiFeO3. Experimental observations confirmed the formation of heterojunction between BiFeO3 and N-rGO that facilitates the easy and effective charge transfer further improving the photocatalytic behavior of obtained composite.206
Many other researchers reported various other heterojunction photocatalysts such as SrTiO3/BFO, CuO/BFO, Z-scheme Bi2S3/BiFeO3, and Fe2O3/BFO, etc. for improved photocatalytic performance using visible light. The outcome of these studies authenticates that the heterostructure materials could be another potential method for enhancing the photocatalytic performance of BiFeO3.31,207–213
8. Characterizations
8.1 For active species attacking pollutants
In the previous sections, the mechanism of bismuth ferrite accommodated photocatalysis has been discussed in brief. As explained, the process of degradation involves multiple steps. Reported literature suggested that ˙OH radicals happened to be the key active species responsible for the photocatalytic process of BFO particles.214
In literature, various indirect techniques were developed to characterize this active species. Here, the addition of a probe molecule in the medium was suggested. These probe molecules reacted chemically with active radical ions leading to quantifiable signal generation over a longer time,169,215 Namely, these techniques are electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR),216 electron spin resonance,217 UV-vis absorption spectroscopy,218 luminescence,215 and fluorescence.169
A group of researchers made use of the EPR spin-trapping technique to investigate the active species formed in the BFO system under visible light illumination.216 In another study, the generation of ˙OH radicals over BFO nanoparticles was investigated in an aerated aqueous solution utilizing terephthalic acid (TA) as a fluorescence probe.169 Besides, radical scavengers have also been used extensively for getting information about different involved active species. In a similar evaluation, MO was used as a model dye and further tert-butyl alcohol (TBA, 2 mM) was added to it as a source of ˙OH radical scavenger. The result obtained suggested that ˙OH was prominent active species.216
In a nutshell, these obtained results gave the required affirmation that ˙OH played a remarkable role in the decomposition of azo dyes from contaminated water.
8.2 For degradation intermediates and identifying pathways
In chemistry, to explain any reaction pathway, classification and proper identification of reaction intermediates is a crucial step. Gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/MS), high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), high-performance liquid chromatography/mass spectroscopy (HPLC/MS), and Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy are some of the most common characterization techniques utilized to reveal the reaction intermediates.
In a study, the degradation mechanism of RhB was investigated to look for plausible reaction intermediates using GC/MS, FTIR spectroscopy techniques under visible light illumination.219 As per obtained results, it was concluded that the degradation reaction is followed by breakage of the central carbon atom that produced aromatic rings and then final rupture of aromatic rings leading to the formation of low molecular weight substrates.
Another group of researchers observed three major peaks in UV-vis spectra of reactive black 5 correspond to the formation of sulfone, sulfonate, and amine group intermediates.220
9. Future outlook and challenges
Semiconductor photocatalysis has been a desirable approach to treating wastewater resources. BFO nanohybrid undeniably proved to be a worthwhile photocatalytic material efficient in treating wastewater and coping with environmental pollution. Due to their wide-ranging significant properties such as low bandgap, high recombination time, multiferroicity, visible light irradiation, and exceptionally high stability are indeed potential agents for pollutant degradation. Many of the most recent advances in photocatalysis have been reported but the short recombination time of electrons–hole pairs has been a major challenge. But the practical implication of BFO nanohybrids at ground level is indeed a major task. Further, the environmental perspective and toxicological aspects of BFO nanohybrids are still a field of further research and investigation. Nevertheless, there is less reported literature about degradation in the gaseous phase. There is a wide range of possibilities for further studies in the gaseous phase. Besides, the photocatalytic activity of BFO nanohybrids has an enormous scope of greater interest and research due to their vitality in current situations of global environmental pollution and should be extensively studied.
10. Concluding remarks
The rationale of this review is to put forward a step ahead solution for wastewater treatment and pollutant degradation which is far better than the conventional techniques in terms of efficiency, environmental friendliness, and cost. It discusses the recent developments of BiFeO3 nanohybrids as prospective photocatalysts for the degradation of organic dyes. It also gives an account of the conventional approaches for wastewater treatment and their shortcomings and advantages, various forms of BFO nanohybrids, major properties of BFO nanohybrids and their structure, the synthesis methods, encompassing the brief mechanism of photocatalytic degradation under visible light. BFO nanohybrids doped with metals such as gadolinium, barium, chromium, etc. in combination with MXene sheets proved to be better photocatalysts than pure BFO nanoparticles. Further BFO nanohybrids are a better alternative to other photocatalysts such as ZnO and TiO2 which, in addition to having a broader band and lower efficiency under visible light, cause environmental harm such as neurotoxicity, affecting the survival and growth of aquatic animals, affecting plant growth, etc.
Abbreviations

BiFeO3/BFOBismuth ferrite
AOPAdvanced oxidation process
RhBRhodamine-B
CRCongo red
MVMethyl violet
MBMethyl blue
MOMethyl orange
CVCrystal violet

E
bg
Energy bandgap
VBValence band
CBConduction band
EPRElectron paramagnetic resonance
TBA
tert-Butyl alcohol
TATerephthalic acid
GC/MSGas chromatography/mass spectroscopy
HPLCHigh-performance liquid chromatography
HPLC/MSHigh performance liquid chromatography/mass spectroscopy
FTIRFourier-transform infrared spectroscopy

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
N. Zhang, D. Chen, F. Niu, S. Wang, L. Qin and Y. Huang, Enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity of Gd-doped BiFeO3 nanoparticles and mechanism insight, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6(May), 1–11 Search PubMed .
S. Shukla, A. K. Sood, K. Goyal, A. Singh, V. Sharma and N. Guliya, 
            et al., Chalcone Scaffolds as Anticancer Drugs: A Review on Molecular Insight in Action of Mechanisms and Anticancer Properties, Anti-Cancer Agents Med. Chem., 2020, 20, 1–21 CrossRef .
P. Mehdizadeh, Y. Orooji, O. Amiri, M. Salavati-Niasari and H. Moayedi, Green synthesis using cherry and orange juice and characterization of TbFeO3 ceramic nanostructures and their application as photocatalysts under UV light for removal of organic dyes in water, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 252, 119765 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jiang, K. Ye, J. Deng, J. Lin, W. Ye and S. Zhao, 
            et al., Conventional Ultrafiltration As Effective Strategy for Dye/Salt Fractionation in Textile Wastewater Treatment, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52(18), 10698–10708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. C. Ventura-camargo and M. A. Marin-morales, Azo Dyes: Characterization and Toxicity– A Review, Textiles and Light Industrial Science and Technology, 2013, 2(2), 85–103 Search PubMed .
F. Maria Enrica, R. Leone, F. Brunello, C. Monastra, F. Tezza and P. Vincenzo Storti, Mutagenic activity in wastewater concentrates from dye plants, Mutation Research/Genetic Toxicology, 1992, 298(2), 91–95 CrossRef .
M. P. Shah, Microbial Decolorization of Reactive Azo Dyes by Bacillus spp. ETL-1949 under Anaerobic Condition, Int. J. Environ. Biorem. Biodegrad., 2014, 2(1), 30–36 Search PubMed .
A. Al-Kdasi, A. Idris, K. Saed and C. T. Guan, Treatment of textile wastewater by advanced oxidation processes– A review, Global NEST J., 2004, 6(1), 222–230 Search PubMed .

          S. Gulati, S. Kumar, P. Singh, A. Diwan and A. Mongia, Biocompatible Chitosan-Coated Gold Nanoparticles: Novel, Efficient, and Promising Nanosystems for Cancer Treatment, Handbook of Polymer and Ceramic Nanotechnology,  2020, pp. 1–29 Search PubMed .
R. D. Saini, Textile Organic Dyes: Polluting effects and Elimination Methods from Textile Waste Water, Int. J. Chem. Eng. Res., 2017, 9(1), 975–6442 Search PubMed .
S. Kumar, A. Diwan, P. Singh, S. Gulati, D. Choudhary and A. Mongia, 
            et al., Functionalized gold nanostructures: Promising gene delivery vehicles in cancer treatment, RSC Adv., 2019, 9(41), 23894–23907 RSC .
S. Gulati, P. Singh, A. Diwan, A. Mongia and S. Kumar, Functionalized gold nanoparticles: Promising and efficient diagnostic and therapeutic tools for HIV/AIDS, RSC Med. Chem., 2020, 11(11), 1252–1266 RSC .
S. Kumar, A. Mongia, S. Gulati, P. Singh, A. Diwan and S. Shukla, Emerging theranostic gold nanostructures to combat cancer: Novel probes for Combinatorial Immunotherapy and Photothermal Therapy, Cancer Treat. Res. Commun., 2020, 25, 100258 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cai, J. Li, Y. Liu, X. Hu, X. Tan and S. Liu, 
            et al., Design and Preparation of Chitosan-Crosslinked Bismuth Ferrite / Biochar Coupled Magnetic Material for Methylene Blue Removal, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 2019, 1–19 Search PubMed .
S. Fatima, S. I. Ali and M. Z. Iqbal, Congo Red Dye Degradation by Graphene Nanoplatelets / Doped Bismuth Ferrite Nanoparticle, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 367 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma, S. Sharma, S. Gulati and A. Pandey, Fabrication of a novel nano-composite carbon paste sensor based on silica-nanospheres functionalized with isatin thiosemicarbazone for potentiometric monitoring of Cu2+ ions in real samples, Anal. Methods, 2013, 5(6), 1414–1426 RSC .
R. K. Sharma, S. Gulati and S. Sachdeva, One pot and solvent-free synthesis of 2,9,16,23-tetrachlorometal(II) phthalocyanines, Green Chem.
Lett. Rev., 2012, 5(1), 83–87 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Si, Y. Xia, S. K. Shang, X. B. Xiong, X. R. Zeng and J. Zhou, 
            et al., Enhanced visible light driven photocatalytic behavior of BiFeO3/reduced graphene oxide composites, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8(7), 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tariq, S. I. Ali, D. Akinwande and S. Rizwan, Efficient Visible-Light Photocatalysis of 2D-MXene Nanohybrids with Gd 3 + − and Sn 4 + -Codoped Bismuth Ferrite, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 13828–13836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Dixit, S. Sharma and A. S. K. Sinha, Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing Synergistic effect of N-rGO supported Gd doped bismuth ferrite heterojunction on enhanced photocatalytic degradation of rhodamine B, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2020, 105538 Search PubMed .
S. Kumar, A. Diwan, P. Singh, S. Gulati, D. Choudhary and A. Mongia, 
            et al., Functionalized gold nanostructures: Promising gene delivery vehicles in cancer treatment, RSC Adv., 2019, 9(41), 23894–23907 RSC .
F. Mushtaq, X. Chen, M. Hoop, H. Torlakcik, E. Pellicer and J. Sort, 
            et al., Piezoelectrically Enhanced Photocatalysis with BiFeO3 Nanostructures for Efficient Water Remediation, iScience, 2018, 4, 236–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Lam, 
            et al.
          , IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci., 2018, 151, 012021 CrossRef .
B. Sa, S. M. Masoudpanah, M. Hasheminiasari and A. Ghasemi, RSC Adv., 2018, 3, 6988–6995 Search PubMed .
Z. T. Hu, S. K. Lua, X. Yan and T. T. Lim, RSC Advances Nanostructured hexahedron of bismuth ferrite clusters: delicate synthesis processes and an e ffi cient multiplex catalyst for organic pollutant, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 86891–86900 RSC .
J. Shi and L. Guo, ABO3-based photocatalysts for water splitting, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2012, 22(6), 592–615 CrossRef .
Z. H. Jaffari, S. M. Lam, J. C. Sin, H. Zeng and A. R. Mohamed, Magnetically recoverable Pd-loaded BiFeO3 microcomposite with enhanced visible light photocatalytic performance for pollutant, bacterial and fungal elimination, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 236, 116195 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. M. Ridzuan, N. H. M. Kaus, M. A. S. Md Lazim, T. Kobayashi, R. Adnan and M. Z. Othman, 
            et al., Photocatalytic heterostructures-based BiFeO3embedded liquid natural rubber (LNR) for highly removal of cationic dye under direct sunlight, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(5), 104152 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Y. Shen, C. Yang, Y. Lei, Y. Guan and Y. Lin, 
            et al., Significant enhancement in the visible light photocatalytic properties of BiFeO3-graphene nanohybrids, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1(3), 823–829 RSC .
Y. Subramanian, V. Ramasamy, R. J. Karthikeyan, G. R. Srinivasan, D. Arulmozhi and R. K. Gubendiran, 
            et al., Investigations on the enhanced dye degradation activity of heterogeneous BiFeO3–GdFeO3 nanocomposite photocatalyst, Heliyon., 2019, 5(6), e01831 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sepahvand and S. Sharifnia, Photocatalytic overall water splitting by Z-scheme g-C3N4/BiFeO3 heterojunction, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(42), 23658–23668 CrossRef CAS .
M. Krishnamoorthy, N. H. Ahmad, H. N. Amran, M. A. Mohamed, N. H. M. Kaus and S. F. M. Yusoff, BiFeO3 immobilized within liquid natural rubber-based hydrogel with enhanced adsorption-photocatalytic performance, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 182, 1495–1506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, J. Huang, L. Jiang, L. Leng, K. Yi and W. Zhang, 
            et al., In situ construction of Sn-doped structurally compatible heterojunction with enhanced interfacial electric field for photocatalytic pollutants removal and CO2 reduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120618 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jayababu, M. Inbasekaran and S. Narayanasamy, Significantly improved solar photodegradation
of water pollutant by new plate-like bismuth ferrite nanoparticles tuned by gelatin, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2021, 123, 108306 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, B. Yang, H. He, S. Yang, X. Duan and S. Wang, Bismuth-based complex oxides for photocatalytic applications in environmental remediation and water splitting: A review, Sci. Total Environ., 2022, 804, 150215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ma, Y. Chen, Z. Tong, Y. Liu, Y. Ma and R. Wang, 
            et al., Research progress of magnetic bismuth-based materials in photocatalysis: A review, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 886, 161096 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, J. Ma, Y. Chen, Y. Qian, B. Xu and W. Chu, 
            et al., Recent progress of silver-containing photocatalysts for water disinfection under visible light irradiation: A review, Sci. Total Environ., 2022, 804, 150024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, P. Raizada, N. Verma, A. Hosseini-Bandegharaei, V. K. Thakur and Q. Van Le, 
            et al., Recent advances on water disinfection using bismuth based modified photocatalysts: Strategies and challenges, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 297, 126617 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subhiksha, S. Kokilavani and S. Sudheer Khan, Recent advances in degradation of organic pollutant in aqueous solutions using bismuth based photocatalysts: A review, Chemosphere, 2022, 290(September 2021), 133228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Paździor, A. Klepacz-Smółka, S. Ledakowicz, J. Sójka-Ledakowicz, Z. Mrozińska and R. Zyłła, Integration of nanofiltration and biological degradation of textile wastewater containing azo dye, Chemosphere, 2009, 75(2), 250–255 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. M. Slokar and A. Majcen Le Marechal, Methods of decoloration of textile wastewaters, Dyes Pigm., 1998, 37(4), 335–356 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Mohan, Y. V. Bhaskar and J. Karthikeyan, Biological decolourisation of simulated azo dye in aqueous phase by algae Spirogyra species, Int. J. Environ. Pollut., 2004, 21(3), 211–222 CrossRef CAS .
K. Paździor, A. Klepacz-Smółka, S. Ledakowicz, J. Sójka-Ledakowicz, Z. Mrozińska and R. Zyłła, Integration of nanofiltration and biological degradation of textile wastewater containing azo dye, Chemosphere, 2009, 75(2), 250–255 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Moran, M. E. Hall and R. Howell, Effects of sewage treatment on textile effluent, J. Soc. Dyers Colour., 1997, 113(10), 272–274 CrossRef CAS .
E. Brillas and C. A. Martínez-Huitle, Decontamination of wastewaters containing synthetic organic dyes by electrochemical methods. An updated review, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166–167, 603–643 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiménez, M. Andreozzi, M. M. Micó, M. G. Álvarez and S. Contreras, Produced water treatment by advanced oxidation processes, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 666, 12–21 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Khin, A. S. Nair, V. J. Babu, R. Murugan and S. Ramakrishna, A review on nanomaterials for environmental remediation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(8), 8075–8109 RSC .

          A. E. Segneanu, C. Orbeci, C. Lazau, P. Sfirloaga, P. Vlazan and C. Bandas, et al., Waste water treatment methods, Water treatment,  2013 Search PubMed .

          Y. Li, F. Chen, R. He, Y. Wang and N. Tang, Semiconductor Photocatalysis for Water Purification, Nanoscale Materials in Water Purification, Elsevier Inc.,  2018, pp. 689–705 Search PubMed .
N. W. C. Jusoh, A. A. Jalil, S. Triwahyono, H. D. Setiabudi, N. Sapawe and M. A. H. Satar, 
            et al., Sequential desilication-isomorphous substitution route to prepare mesostructured silica nanoparticles loaded with ZnO and their photocatalytic activity, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 468, 276–287 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Jaafar, A. A. Jalil, S. Triwahyono and N. Shamsuddin, New insights into self-modification of mesoporous titania nanoparticles for enhanced photoactivity: Effect of microwave power density on formation of oxygen vacancies and Ti3+ defects, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(110), 90991–91000 RSC .
C. B. Ong, L. Y. Ng and A. W. Mohammad, A review of ZnO nanoparticles as solar photocatalysts: Synthesis, mechanisms and applications, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81(July 2016), 536–551 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wang and L. J. Xu, Advanced oxidation processes for wastewater treatment: Formation of hydroxyl radical and application, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 42(3), 251–325 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Ibrahim, M. Hayyan, M. A. AlSaadi, A. Hayyan and S. Ibrahim, Environmental application of nanotechnology: air, soil, and water, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2016, 23(14), 13754–13788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, H. Wang, H. Luo and P. Xu, Enhanced photocatalysis using side-glowing optical fibers coated with Fe-doped TiO2 nanocomposite thin films, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2015, 307–308, 88–98 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Braslavsky, A. M. Braun, A. E. Cassano, A. V. Emeline, M. I. Litter and L. Palmisano, 
            et al., Glossary of terms used in photocatalysis and radiation catalysis (IUPAC recommendations 2011), Pure Appl. Chem., 2011, 83(4), 931–1014 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Litter, Mechanisms of removal of heavy metals and arsenic from water by TiO2-heterogeneous photocatalysis, Pure Appl. Chem., 2015, 87(6), 557–567 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Puma and P. L. Yue, Effect of the radiation wavelength on the rate of photocatalytic oxidation of organic pollutants, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2002, 41(23), 5594–5600 CrossRef .
D. P. Kumar, A. R. Mohamed and S. Bhatia, Wastewater Treatment Using Photocatalysis: Destruction of Methylene Blue Dye from Wastewater Streams, Journal of Engineering, 2002, 14, 17–30 Search PubMed .
P. Reeves, R. Ohlhausen, D. Sloan, K. Pamplin, T. Scoggins and C. Clark, 
            et al., Photocatalytic destruction of organic dyes in aqueous TiO2 suspensions using concentrated simulated and natural solar energy, Sol. Energy, 1992, 48(6), 413–420 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Lau, C. A. C. Abdullah, W. A. N. W. Ahmad, S. Assaw and A. L. T. Zheng, Eco-friendly photocatalysts for degradation of dyes, Catalysts, 2020, 10(10), 1–16 CrossRef .
O. Sacco, M. Stoller, V. Vaiano, P. Ciambelli, A. Chianese and D. Sannino, Photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes under visible light on n-doped TiO2 photocatalysts, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2012, 2012, 626759 Search PubMed .
R. V. Prihod'ko and N. M. Soboleva, Photocatalysis: Oxidative processes in water treatment, J. Chem., 2013, 2013, 168701 Search PubMed .
C. Byrne, G. Subramanian and S. C. Pillai, Recent advances in photocatalysis for environmental applications, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6(3), 3531–3555 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, T. Wu, K. Wu, K. Oikawa, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, Photoassisted degradation of dye pollutants. 3. Degradation of the cationic dye rhodamine B in aqueous anionic surfactant/TiO2 dispersions under visible light irradiation: Evidence for the need of substrate adsorption on TiO2 particles, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32(16), 2394–2400 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Xiong, B. Cheng and S. Liu, Fabrication and characterization of Ag-TiO2 multiphase nanocomposite thin films with enhanced photocatalytic activity, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 60(3–4), 211–221 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mills, R. H. Davies and D. Worsley, Water purification by semiconductor photocatalysis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1993, 22(6), 417–425 RSC .
N. Serpone and A. V. Emeline, Suggested terms and definitions in photocatalysis and radiocatalysis, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2002, 4(3), 93–131 CrossRef .
A. Mitsionis, T. Vaimakis, C. Trapalis, N. Todorova, D. Bahnemann and R. Dillert, Hydroxyapatite/titanium dioxide nanocomposites for controlled photocatalytic NO oxidation, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 106(3–4), 398–404 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Gosmanov and S. Dagogo-Jack, Predicting, managing and preventing new-onset diabetes after transplantation, Minerva Endocrinol., 2012, 37(3), 233–246 CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Heterogeneous photocatalyst materials for water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38(1), 253–278 RSC .
S. Mozia, P. Brozek, J. Przepiórski, B. Tryba and A. W. Morawski, Immobilized TiO2 for phenol degradation in a pilot-scale photocatalytic reactor, J. Nanomater., 2012, 2012, 949764 Search PubMed .
H. Dong, G. Zeng, L. Tang, C. Fan, C. Zhang and X. He, 
            et al., An overview on limitations of TiO2-based particles for photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants and the corresponding countermeasures, Water Res., 2015, 79, 128–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Javed, D. Zhang, D. Li, R. Kamath and K. McVey, 
            et al., Merits and limitations of TiO2-based photocatalytic pretreatment of soils impacted by crude oil for expediting bioremediation, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2017, 11(3), 387–394 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gomes, J. Lincho, E. Domingues, R. M. Quinta-Ferreira and R. C. Martins, N–TiO2 Photocatalysts: A Review of Their Characteristics and Capacity for Emerging Contaminants Removal, Water, 2019, 11, 373 CrossRef CAS .
M. Du, B. Qiu, Q. Zhu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Fluorine doped TiO 2/mesocellular foams with an efficient photocatalytic activity, Catal. Today, 2010, 2019(327), 340–346 Search PubMed .
K. Rajeshwar, M. E. Osugi, W. Chanmanee, C. R. Chenthamarakshan, M. V. B. Zanoni and P. Kajitvichyanukul, 
            et al., Heterogeneous photocatalytic treatment of organic dyes in air and aqueous media, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9(4), 171–192 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Herrmann, J. J. Haider and R. W. Fischer, Rhenium-catalyzed oxidation of arenes An improved synthesis of vitamin K3, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1999, 138(2–3), 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
B. Vijayan, N. M. Dimitrijevic, T. Rajh and K. Gray, Effect of calcination temperature on the photocatalytic reduction and oxidation processes of hydrothermally synthesized titania nanotubes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(30), 12994–13002 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xin, H. Jing and C. Dong, Visible-light-induced photocatalyst based on nickel titanate nanoparticles, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47(14), 4750–4753 CrossRef .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Visible-light photocatalysis in nitrogen-doped titanium oxides, Science, 2001, 293(5528), 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Iqbal, A. Tariq, A. Zaheer, S. Gul, S. I. Ali and M. Z. Iqbal, 
            et al., Ti3C2-MXene/Bismuth Ferrite Nanohybrids for Efficient Degradation of Organic Dyes and Colorless Pollutants, ACS Omega, 2019, 4(24), 20530–20539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Remya and C. H. Suresh, Non-covalent intermolecular carbon-carbon interactions in polyynes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(40), 27035–27044 RSC .
S. Pearton, Doped nanostructures, Nanoscale, 2010, 2(7), 1057 RSC .
J. Wang, J. B. Neaton, H. Zheng, V. Nagarajan, S. B. Ogale and B. Liu, 
            et al., Epitaxial BiFeO3 multiferroic thin film heterostructures, Science, 2003, 299(5613), 1719–1722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Silva, A. Reyes, H. Esparza, H. Camacho and L. Fuentes, BiFeO3: A review on synthesis, doping and crystal structure, Integr. Ferroelectr., 2011, 126(1), 47–59 CrossRef CAS .
L. Loh, J. Briscoe and S. Dunn, Enhanced performance with bismuth ferrite perovskite in ZnO nanorod solid state solar cells, Nanoscale, 2014, 6(12), 7072–7078 RSC .
P. Yilmaz, D. Yeo, H. Chang, L. Loh and S. Dunn, Perovskite BiFeO3 thin film photocathode performance with visible light activity, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27(34), 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kuchin, S. Platonov, V. Gaviko and M. Yakovleva, Magnetic and Structural Properties of GdFe1-xTixSi, IEEE Magn. Lett., 2019, 10, 1–4 Search PubMed .
S. Godara, N. Sinha, G. Ray and B. Kumar, Combined structural, electrical, magnetic and optical characterization of bismuth ferrite nanoparticles synthesized by auto-combustion route, J. Asian Ceram. Soc., 2014, 2(4), 416–421 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, G. Xu, Z. Ren, X. Wei, W. Weng and P. Du, 
            et al., Low temperature polymer assisted hydrothermal synthesis of bismuth ferrite nanoparticles, Ceram. Int., 2008, 34(6), 1569–1571 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tang, D. Kuang, S. Yang and Y. Zhang, The structural, optical and enhanced magnetic properties of Bi1-xGdxFe1-yMnyO3 nanoparticles synthesized by sol-gel, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 622, 194–199 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Han, W. F. Liu, P. Wu, X. L. Xu, M. C. Guo and G. H. Rao, 
            et al., Effect of aliovalent Pd substitution on multiferroic properties in BiFeO3 nanoparticles, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 661, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu and X. An, Enhanced magnetic and optical properties of pure and (Mn, Sr) doped BiFeO3 nanocrystals, Solid State Commun., 2009, 149(17–18), 711–714 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Wei, J. Zhang, L. Ji, Y. Huang and Z. Chen, Synthesis of pure-phase BiFeO3 nanopowder by nitric acid-assisted gel, Mater. Lett., 2014, 124, 242–244 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, B. Wang, X. Wang, X. Xiao, Z. Dai and W. Wu, 
            et al., Preparation of M@BiFeO3 Nanocomposites (M = Ag, Au) Bowl Arrays with Enhanced Visible Light Photocatalytic Activity, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 98(7), 2255–2263 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. H. Lin, B. P. Zhang, Y. Wang and C. W. Nan, Controlled fabrication of BiFeO3 uniform microcrystals and their magnetic and photocatalytic behaviors, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(7), 2903–2908 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, R. R. Rao, L. Giordano, Y. Katayama, Y. Yu and Y. Shao-Horn, Perovskites in catalysis and electrocatalysis, Science, 2017, 358(6364), 751–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, M. O. Tadé and Z. Shao, Research progress of perovskite materials in photocatalysis- and photovoltaics-related energy conversion and environmental treatment, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44(15), 5371–5408 RSC .
J. Shi and L. Guo, ABO3-based photocatalysts for water splitting, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2012, 22(6), 592–615 CrossRef .
S. Irfan, Z. Zhuanghao, F. Li, Y. X. Chen, G. X. Liang and J. T. Luo, 
            et al., Critical review: Bismuth ferrite as an emerging visible light active nanostructured photocatalyst, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2019, 8(6), 6375–6389 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Singh, S. Chaudhary, A. M. Kayastha and A. Yadav, Decolorization and degradation of textile effluent with the help of Enterobacter asburiae, Indian J. Biotechnol., 2015, 14(1), 101–106 CAS .
C. Ponraj, G. Vinitha and J. Daniel, A review on the visible light active BiFeO3 nanostructures as suitable photocatalyst in the degradation of different textile dyes, Environ. Nanotechnol., Monit. Manage., 2017, 7, 110–120 Search PubMed .
L. Fei, J. Yuan, Y. Hu, C. Wu, J. Wang and Y. Wang, Visible light responsive perovskite BiFeO3 pills and rods with dominant {111}c facets, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11(4), 1049–1053 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Z. Fan, D. Xiao, J. Zhu and J. Wang, Multiferroic bismuth ferrite-based materials for multifunctional applications: Ceramic bulks, thin films and nanostructures, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2016, 84, 335–402 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, X. Luo, L. Han, Z. Zhang, R. Zhang and H. Olin, 
            et al., Structure, Performance, and Application of BiFeO3 Nanomaterials, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12(1), 1–23 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qi, N. Ma and Y. Yang, Photovoltaic–Pyroelectric Coupled Effect Based Nanogenerators for Self-Powered Photodetector System, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5(3), 1–8 Search PubMed .
J. Qi, N. Ma, X. Ma, R. Adelung and Y. Yang, Enhanced Photocurrent in BiFeO3 Materials by Coupling Temperature and Thermo-Phototronic Effects for Self-Powered Ultraviolet Photodetector System, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(16), 13712–13719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhao, N. Ma, J. Qi, Y. K. Mishra, R. Adelung and Y. Yang, Optically Controlled Abnormal Photovoltaic Current Modulation with Temperature in BiFeO 3, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5(3), 1–9 Search PubMed .
T. Zheng and J. Wu, Effects of site engineering and doped element types on piezoelectric and dielectric properties of bismuth ferrite lead-free ceramics, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3(43), 11326–11334 RSC .
C. H. Yang, D. Kan, I. Takeuchi, V. Nagarajan and J. Seidel, Doping BiFeO 3: Approaches and enhanced functionality, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14(46), 15953–15962 RSC .
S. V. Kalinin, M. R. Suchomel, P. K. Davies and D. A. Bonnell, Potential and impedance imaging of polycrystalline BiFeO3 ceramics, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2002, 85(12), 3011–3017 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guo, L. You, Y. Zhou, Z. S. Lim, X. Zou and L. Chen, 
            et al., Non-volatile memory based on the ferroelectric, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4(May), 2–6 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, W. Ren, W. Zhu, Z. G. Ye, P. Shi and X. Chen, 
            et al., Improved dielectric and ferroelectric properties in Ti-doped BiFeO3-PbTiO3 thin films prepared by pulsed laser deposition, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518(6), 1637–1640 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Khan, T. P. Comyn and A. J. Bell, Large remanent polarization in ferroelectric BiFe O3 -PbTi O3 thin films on PtSi substrates, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91(3), 2005–2008 CrossRef .
F. Yan, T. J. Zhu, M. O. Lai and L. Lu, Enhanced multiferroic properties and domain structure of La-doped BiFeO3 thin films, Scr. Mater., 2010, 63(7), 780–783 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bertinshaw, R. Maran, S. J. Callori, V. Ramesh, J. Cheung and S. A. Danilkin, 
            et al., Direct evidence for the spin cycloid in strained nanoscale bismuth ferrite thin films, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Y. Kuo, Y. Tang, L. R. Dedon and Q. Li, 
            et al., Complex strain evolution of polar and magnetic order in multiferroic BiFeO3 thin films, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Kuo, Z. Hu, J. C. Yang, S. C. Liao, Y. L. Huang and R. K. Vasudevan, 
            et al., Single-domain multiferroic BiFeO3 films, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–7 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. R. Liu, H. Y. Yoong, T. R. Paudel, J. X. Xiao and R. Guo, 
            et al., Direct observation of room-temperature out-of-plane ferroelectricity and tunneling electroresistance at the two-dimensional limit, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 1–8 CrossRef .
F. Gao, X. Chen, K. Yin, S. Dong, Z. Ren and F. Yuan, 
            et al., Visible-light photocatalytic properties of weak magnetic BiFeO3 nanoparticles, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19(19), 2889–2892 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, Y. Yuan, K. F. Wang, X. Y. Chen, F. Chen and J. M. Liu, 
            et al., Preparation and photoabsorption characterization BiFeO 3 nanowires, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89(10), 3–6 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Y. Wang, G. Tian, P. Li, L. Zhao and F. Zhang, 
            et al., High-density array of ferroelectric nanodots with robust and reversibly switchable topological domain states, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3(8), 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. Ma, J. Ma, Q. Zhang, R. Peng, J. Wang and C. Liu, 
            et al., Controllable conductive readout in self-assembled, topologically confined ferroelectric domain walls, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13(10), 947–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. George Philip, A. Senthamizhan, T. Srinivasan Natarajan, G. Chandrasekaran and H. Annal Therese, The effect of gadolinium doping on the structural, magnetic and photoluminescence properties of electrospun bismuth ferrite nanofibers, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41(10), 13361–13365 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jeon, H. Y. Joo, Y. M. Kim, D. H. Lee, J. S. Kim and Y. S. Kim, 
            et al., Selector-free resistive switching memory cell based on BiFeO3 nano-island showing high resistance ratio and nonlinearity factor, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6(January), 4–13 Search PubMed .
X. Y. Zhang, C. W. Lai, X. Zhao, D. Y. Wang and J. Y. Dai, Synthesis and ferroelectric properties of multiferroic BiFeO3 nanotube arrays, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87(14), 1–3 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, N. Li, Y. Chi, Y. Li, W. Yan and X. Li, 
            et al., Electrospinning of magnetical bismuth ferrite nanofibers with photocatalytic activity, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39(4), 3511–3518 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, G. Xu, Z. Ren, X. Wei, C. Chao and S. Gong, 
            et al., The hydrothermal synthesis and formation mechanism of single-crystalline perovskite BiFeO3 microplates with dominant (012) facets, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16(20), 4176–4182 RSC .
J. M. Xue, D. M. Wan and J. Wang, Functional ceramics of nanocrystallinity by mechanical activation, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 151(1–4), 403–412 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Cushing, V. L. Kolesnichenko and C. J. O'Connor, Recent advances in the liquid-phase syntheses of inorganic nanoparticles, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104(9), 3893–3946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Park, G. C. Papaefthymiou, A. J. Viescas, A. R. Moodenbaugh and S. S. Wong, Size-Dependent Magnetic Properties of Nanoparticles, Nano Lett., 2007, 7(3), 766–772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Soltani and M. H. Entezari, Solar photocatalytic degradation of RB5 by ferrite bismuth nanoparticles synthesized via ultrasound, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2013, 20(5), 1245–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Prado-Gonjal, M. E. Villafuerte-Castrejón, L. Fuentes and E. Morán, Microwave-hydrothermal synthesis of the multiferroic BiFeO3, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44(8), 1734–1737 CrossRef CAS .
G. Catalan and J. F. Scott, Physics and applications of bismuth ferrite, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21(24), 2463–2485 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, J. J. Sen, F. Z. Qian, D. M. Jiang, C. M. Wang and W. G. Zhang, Effect of Ba doping on magnetic and dielectric properties of nanocrystalline BiFeO3 at room temperature, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 507(1), 29–32 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, H. Fan, P. Ren and C. Yang, Structural, electronic and optical properties of BiFeO3 studied by first-principles, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509(5), 1901–1905 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lam, J. C. Sin and A. R. Mohamed, A newly emerging visible light-responsive BiFeO3 perovskite for photocatalytic applications: A mini review, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 90, 15–30 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huo, Y. Jin and Y. Zhang, Citric acid assisted solvothermal synthesis of BiFeO3 microspheres with high visible-light photocatalytic activity, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 331(1–2), 15–20 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. A. Gondal, W. Wei, T. Zhang, Q. Xu and K. Shen, Preparation of room temperature ferromagnetic BiFeO 3 and its application as an highly efficient magnetic separable adsorbent for removal of Rhodamine B from aqueous solution, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 530(3), 107–110 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zavaliche, S. Y. Yang, T. Zhao, Y. H. Chu, M. P. Cruz and C. B. Eom, 
            et al., Multiferroic BiFeO3 films: Domain structure and polarization dynamics, Phase Transitions, 2006, 79(12), 991–1017 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lam, J. C. Sin and A. R. Mohamed, A newly emerging visible light-responsive BiFeO3 perovskite for photocatalytic applications: A mini review, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 90, 15–30 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huo, M. Miao, Y. Zhang, J. Zhu and H. Li, Aerosol-spraying preparation of a mesoporous hollow spherical BiFeO3 visible photocatalyst with enhanced activity and durability, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47(7), 2089–2091 RSC .
H. Wang, Y. Jia, S. Wang, H. Zhu and X. Wu, Bioavailability of cadmium adsorbed on various oxides minerals to wetland plant species Phragmites australis, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 167(1–3), 641–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, R. C. Rai, N. J. Podraza, S. Denev, M. Ramirez and Y. H. Chu, 
            et al., Linear and nonlinear optical properties of BiFeO3, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92(12), 67–70 Search PubMed .
J. F. Ihlefeld, N. J. Podraza, Z. K. Liu, R. C. Rai, X. Xu and T. Heeg, 
            et al., Optical band gap of BiFe O3 grown by molecular-beam epitaxy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92(14), 2006–2009 CrossRef .
S. R. Basu, L. W. Martin, Y. H. Chu, M. Gajek, R. Ramesh and R. C. Rai, 
            et al., Photoconductivity in BiFeO3 thin films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92(9), 90–93 Search PubMed .
K. McDonnell, N. Wadnerkar, N. J. English, M. Rahman and D. Dowling, Photo-active and optical properties of bismuth ferrite (BiFeO3): An experimental and theoretical study, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 572, 78–84 CrossRef CAS .
R. Palai, R. S. Katiyar, H. Schmid, P. Tissot, S. J. Clark and J. Robertson, 
            et al., β phase and γ-β metal-insulator transition in multiferroic BiFe O3, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77(1), 1–11 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Y. Zheng, M. Q. Cai, H. Huang and H. L. W. Chan, First-principles study on the electronic and optical properties of BiFeO3, Solid State Commun., 2009, 149(15–16), 641–644 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-p. Zhang, H.-f. Liu, H.-l. Hu, R.-s. Xie, G.-h. Ma, J.-c. Huo and H.-b. Wang, Orientation-dependent structural and photocatalytic properties of LaCoO3 epitaxial nano-thin films, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2018, 5, 171376 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kossar, I. B. S. Banu, N. Aman and R. Amiruddin, Investigation on photocatalytic degradation of crystal violet dye using bismuth ferrite nanoparticles, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2020, 0(0), 1–10 Search PubMed .
S. Irfan, Z. Zhuanghao, F. Li, Y. X. Chen, G. X. Liang and J. T. Luo, 
            et al., Critical review: Bismuth ferrite as an emerging visible light active nanostructured photocatalyst, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2019, 8(6), 6375–6389 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xue, G. Tan, A. Xia, Z. Chai, L. Lv and H. Ren, 
            et al., Multi-doped bismuth ferrite thin films with enhanced multiferroic properties, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45(10), 12806–12813 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Rouhani, J. Karimi-Sabet, M. Mehdipourghazi, A. Hadi and A. Dastbaz, Response surface optimization of hydrothermal synthesis of Bismuth ferrite nanoparticles under supercritical water conditions: Application for photocatalytic degradation of Tetracycline, Environ. Nanotechnol., Monit. Manage., 2019, 11(December 2018), 100198 Search PubMed .
T. Soltani and M. H. Entezari, Solar-Fenton catalytic degradation of phenolic compounds by impure bismuth ferrite nanoparticles synthesized via ultrasound, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 251, 207–216 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Teague, R. Gerson and W. J. James, Dielectric hysteresis in single crystal BiFeO3, Solid State Commun., 1970, 8(13), 1073–1074 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Singh, H. Ishiwara and K. Maruyama, Room temperature ferroelectric properties of Mn-substituted BiFeO 3 thin films deposited on Pt electrodes using chemical solution deposition, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88(26), 3–6 CrossRef .
J. T. Heron, D. G. Schlom and R. Ramesh, Electric field control of magnetism using BiFeO3-based heterostructures, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2014, 1(2), 0–18 CAS .
D. Sando, A. Agbelele, D. Rahmedov, J. Liu, P. Rovillain and C. Toulouse, 
            et al., Crafting the magnonic and spintronic response of BiFeO 3 films by epitaxial strain, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12(7), 641–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Saenrang, B. A. Davidson, F. Maccherozzi, J. P. Podkaminer, J. Irwin and R. D. Johnson, 
            et al., Deterministic and robust room-temperature exchange coupling in monodomain multiferroic BiFeO3 heterostructures, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8(1), 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Chauleau, E. Haltz, C. Carrétéro, S. Fusil and M. Viret, Multi-stimuli manipulation of antiferromagnetic domains assessed by second-harmonic imaging, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16(8), 803–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Wang and Y. Deng, Competition between compressive strain and Mn doping on tuning the structure and magnetic behavior of BiFeO3 thin films, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2015, 8(6), 1–5 CrossRef .
Y. J. Yoo, J. S. Hwang, Y. P. Lee, J. S. Park, J. H. Kang and J. Kim, 
            et al., High ferromagnetic transition temperature in multiferroic BiFe 0.95Ni0.05O3 compound, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114(16), 1–6 CrossRef .
T. Zhao, A. Scholl, F. Zavaliche, K. Lee, M. Barry and A. Doran, 
            et al., Electrical control of antiferromagnetic domains in multiferroic BiFeO 3 films at room temperature, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5(10), 823–829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Wu, S. A. Cybart, P. Yu, M. D. Rossell, J. X. Zhang and R. Ramesh, 
            et al., Reversible electric control of exchange bias in a multiferroic field-effect device, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9(9), 756–761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Yang, J. Seidel, S. J. Byrnes, P. Shafer, C. H. Yang and M. D. Rossell, 
            et al., Above-bandgap voltages from ferroelectric photovoltaic devices, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5(2), 143–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pooladi, I. Sharifi and M. Behzadipour, A review of the structure, magnetic and electrical properties of bismuth ferrite (Bi2Fe4O9), Ceram. Int., 2020, 46(11), 18453–18463 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bharathkumar, M. Sakar, R. Vinod and S. Balakumar, Versatility of electrospinning in the fabrication of fibrous mat and mesh nanostructures of bismuth ferrite (BiFeO3) and their magnetic and photocatalytic activities, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(27), 17745–17754 RSC .

          S. V. Khikhlovskyi and G. Blake, The renaissance of multiferroics: bismuth ferrite (BiFeO 3 )-a candidate multiferroic material in nanoscience,  2010 Search PubMed.

          Y. Feng, Fabrication and characterization of chemically modified multiferroic bismuth ferrite thin films, PhD thesis, National University of Singapore,  2011 Search PubMed .

          M. Helmi Bin and A. Mubin, Synthesis and characterization of bismuth ferrite nanoparticles with sillenite phase via sol gel auto combustion route, PhD thesis, University of Technology Malaysia,  2018 Search PubMed .
M. Siddique, N. M. Khan and M. Saeed, Photocatalytic Activity of Bismuth Ferrite Nanoparticles Synthesized via Sol-Gel Route, Z. Phys. Chem., 2019, 233(5), 595–607 CrossRef CAS .
A. Malathi, P. Arunachalam, V. S. Kirankumar, J. Madhavan and A. M. Al-Mayouf, An efficient visible light driven bismuth ferrite incorporated bismuth oxyiodide (BiFeO3/BiOI) composite photocatalytic material for degradation of pollutants, Opt. Mater., 2018, 84(June), 227–235 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, M. Zhao, B. Zheng, D. Xiao, L. Wu and Y. Guo, Influence of pH on the fluorescence properties of graphene quantum dots using ozonation pre-oxide hydrothermal synthesis, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22(48), 25471–25479 RSC .
J. Zhou, L. Jiang, D. Chen, J. Liang, L. Qin and L. Bai, 
            et al., Facile synthesis of Er-doped BiFeO3 nanoparticles for enhanced visible light photocatalytic degradation of tetracycline hydrochloride, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2019, 90(3), 535–546 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, J. Liu, W. Fang, M. Xu, Z. Qin and Z. Jiang, 
            et al., Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution with simultaneous antibiotic wastewater degradation via the visible-light-responsive bismuth spheres-g-C3N4 nanohybrid: Waste to energy insight, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 944–954 CrossRef CAS .
P. Anand, D. Prabu Jaihindh, W. K. Chang and Y. P. Fu, Tailoring the Ca-doped bismuth ferrite for electrochemical oxygen evolution reaction and photocatalytic activity, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 540, 148387 CrossRef CAS .
A. Haruna, I. Abdulkadir and S. O. Idris, Visible Light Induced Photodegradation of Methylene Blue in Sodium Doped Bismuth Barium Ferrite Nanoparticle Synthesized by Sol-gel Method, Avicenna J. Environ. Health Eng., 2018, 5(2), 120–126 CrossRef CAS .
A. Haruna, I. Abdulkadir and S. O. Idris, Effect of annealing temperature on the synthesis and photocatalytic properties of Bi0.65K0.2Ba0.15FeO3 perovskite-like nanoparticle synthesized by sol-gel method, Beni-Suef Univ. J. Basic Appl. Sci., 2020, 9, 8 CrossRef .
M. A. Iqbal, S. I. Ali, F. Amin, A. Tariq, M. Z. Iqbal and S. Rizwan, La-and Mn-Codoped Bismuth Ferrite/Ti 3 C 2 MXene Composites for Efficient Photocatalytic Degradation of Congo Red Dye, ACS Omega, 2019, 4(5), 8661–8668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Irfan, L. Li, A. S. Saleemi and C. W. Nan, Enhanced photocatalytic activity of La3+ and Se4+ co-doped bismuth ferrite nanostructures, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(22), 11143–11151 RSC .
M. Umar, N. Mahmood, S. U. Awan, S. Fatima, A. Mahmood and S. Rizwan, Rationally designed la and Se co-doped bismuth ferrites with controlled bandgap for visible light photocatalysis, RSC Adv., 2019, 9(30), 17148–17156 RSC .
S. Chakraborty and M. Pal, Enhanced and ultrafast dye contaminated wastewater remediation using molybdenum doped bismuth ferrite nanoparticles, Beilstein Arch., 2019, 20 Search PubMed .
N. S. Abdul Satar, R. Adnan, H. L. Lee, S. R. Hall, T. Kobayashi and M. H. Mohamad Kassim, 
            et al., Facile green synthesis of ytrium-doped BiFeO3 with highly efficient photocatalytic degradation towards methylene blue, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45(13), 15964–15973 CrossRef CAS .
M. Humayun, A. Zada, Z. Li, M. Xie, X. Zhang and Y. Qu, 
            et al., Enhanced visible-light activities of porous BiFeO3 by coupling with nanocrystalline TiO2 and mechanism, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 219–226 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guo, L. Fang, W. Dong, F. Zheng and M. Shen, Enhanced photocatalytic activity and ferromagnetism in Gd doped BiFeO 3 nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(49), 21390–21396 CrossRef CAS .
B. Samran, P. Krongkitsiri and S. Chaiwichian, Effect of Copper Dopants on Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalytic Activity of BiFeO3 Photocatalysts, Mod. Environ. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4(3), 234–243 Search PubMed .
H. Maleki, Photocatalytic activity and magnetic enhancements by addition of lanthanum into the BiFeO3 structure and the effect of synthesis method, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29(14), 11862–11869 CrossRef CAS .
J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Heterojunction Photocatalysts, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(20), 1601694 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Niu, D. Chen, L. Qin, T. Gao, N. Zhang and S. Wang, 
            et al., Synthesis of Pt/BiFeO3 heterostructured photocatalysts for highly efficient visible-light photocatalytic performances, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 143, 386–396 CrossRef CAS .
J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Heterojunction Photocatalysts, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(20), 1–20 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Lam, J. C. Sin and A. R. Mohamed, A review on photocatalytic application of g-C3N4/semiconductor (CNS) nanocomposites towards the erasure of dyeing wastewater, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2016, 47, 62–84 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, W. Mao, J. Zhang, Y. Han, C. Quan and Q. Zhang, 
            et al., Facile fabrication of highly efficient g-C3N4/BiFeO3 nanocomposites with enhanced visible light photocatalytic activities, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 448, 17–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Guo, B. Guo, W. Dong and D. Zhang, BiFeO 3-(Na 0.5Bi 0.5)TiO 3 butterfly wing scales: Synthesis, visible-light photocatalytic and magnetic properties, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 32(16), 4335–4340 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Tseng and L. R. De, BiFeO3/α-Fe2O3 core/shell composite particles for fast and selective removal of methyl orange dye in water, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 428, 95–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Bhoi and B. G. Mishra, Photocatalytic degradation of alachlor using type-II CuS/BiFeO3 heterojunctions as novel photocatalyst under visible light irradiation, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 344, 391–401 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tao, C. Shao, X. Li, X. Li, S. Liu and S. Yang, 
            et al., Bi2MoO6/BiFeO3 heterojunction nanofibers: Enhanced photocatalytic activity, charge separation mechanism and magnetic separability, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 529, 404–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tao, X. Li, X. Li, S. Liu, C. Shao and Y. Liu, Discrete heterojunction nanofibers of BiFeO3/Bi2WO6: Novel architecture for effective charge separation and enhanced photocatalytic performance, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 572, 257–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Dutta, S. Sharma, P. Raizada, A. Hosseini-Bandegharaei, J. Kaushal and P. Singh, Fabrication of visible light active BiFeO3/CuS/SiO2 Z-scheme photocatalyst for efficient dye degradation, Mater. Lett., 2020, 270(3), 2–5 Search PubMed .
B. Li, C. Lai, G. Zeng, L. Qin, H. Yi and D. Huang, 
            et al., Facile Hydrothermal Synthesis of Z-Scheme Bi2Fe4O9/Bi2WO6 Heterojunction Photocatalyst with Enhanced Visible Light Photocatalytic Activity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(22), 18824–18836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Di, H. Yang, T. Xian, X. Liu and X. Chen, Photocatalytic and photo-fenton catalytic degradation activities of Z-scheme Ag 2 S/BiFeO 3 heterojunction composites under visible-light irradiation, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9(3), 399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ramezanalizadeh and F. Manteghi, Design and development of a novel BiFeO3/CuWO4 heterojunction with enhanced photocatalytic performance for the degradation of organic dyes, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 338, 60–71 CrossRef CAS .
F. Niu, D. Chen, L. Qin, N. Zhang, J. Wang and Z. Chen, 
            et al., Facile Synthesis of Highly Efficient p-n Heterojunction CuO/BiFeO3 Composite Photocatalysts with Enhanced Visible-Light Photocatalytic Activity, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7(20), 3279–3289 CrossRef CAS .
B. Safizade, S. M. Masoudpanah, M. Hasheminiasari and A. Ghasemi, Photocatalytic activity of BiFeO3/ZnFe2O4 nanocomposites under visible light irradiation, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(13), 6988–6995 RSC .
T. K. Dixit, S. Sharma and A. S. K. Sinha, Development of heterojunction in N-rGO supported bismuth ferrite photocatalyst for degradation of Rhodamine B, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2020, 117(April), 107945 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo and P. A. Maggard, Hydrothermal synthesis and photocatalytic activities of SrTiO 3-coated Fe2O3 and BiFeO3, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18(4), 514–517 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qu, Z. Liu, A. Wu, C. Piao, S. Li and J. Wang, 
            et al., Preparation of a coated Z-scheme and H-type SrTiO3/(BiFeO3@ZnS) composite photocatalyst and application in degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol with simultaneous conversion of Cr(VI), Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 240(January), 116653 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fan, C. Chen, Z. Tang, Y. Ni and C. Lu, Synthesis and characterization of g-C3N4/BiFeO3 composites with an enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 40, 439–445 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, T. Wang, W. Zhou, X. Meng, H. Zhang and H. Liu, 
            et al., Crystal-facet-dependent hot-electron transfer in plasmonic-Au/semiconductor heterostructures for efficient solar photocatalysis, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3(29), 7538–7542 RSC .
Y. Ma, P. Lv, F. Duan, J. Sheng, S. Lu and H. Zhu, 
            et al., Direct Z-scheme Bi2S3/BiFeO3 heterojunction nanofibers with enhanced photocatalytic activity, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 834, 1–12 CrossRef .
S. Bargozideh, M. Tasviri, S. Shekarabi and H. Daneshgar, Magnetic BiFeO3decorated UiO-66 as a p-n heterojunction photocatalyst for simultaneous degradation of a binary mixture of anionic and cationic dyes, New J. Chem., 2020, 44(30), 13083–13092 RSC .
E. Karamian and S. Sharifnia, Enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity of BiFeO3-ZnO p-n heterojunction for CO2 reduction, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2018, 238–239(December), 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lam, J. C. Sin and A. R. Mohamed, A review on photocatalytic application of g-C3N4/semiconductor (CNS) nanocomposites towards the erasure of dyeing wastewater, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2016, 47, 62–84 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Tsai, A. Stern, J. F. Chiou, C. L. Chern and T. Z. Liu, Rapid and specific detection of hydroxyl radical using an ultraweak chemiluminescence analyzer and a low-level chemiluminescence emitter: Application to hydroxyl radical-scavenging ability of aqueous extracts of food constituents, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2001, 49(5), 2137–2141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gao, Z. Chen, F. Niu, D. Zhou, Q. Huang and Y. Zhu, 
            et al., Shape-controlled preparation of bismuth ferrite by hydrothermal method and their visible-light degradation properties, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 648, 564–570 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, L. Zhu, M. Lei, Y. She, M. Cao and H. Tang, Ligand-induced drastic enhancement of catalytic activity of nano-BiFeO 3 for oxidative degradation of bisphenol A, ACS Catal., 2011, 1(10), 1193–1202 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Aruoma, Deoxyribose assay for detecting hydroxyl radicals, Methods Enzymol., 1994, 233(C), 57–66 CAS .
T. Soltani and M. H. Entezari, Sono-synthesis of bismuth ferrite nanoparticles with high photocatalytic activity in degradation of Rhodamine B under solar light irradiation, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 223, 145–154 CrossRef CAS .
T. Soltani and M. H. Entezari, Solar photocatalytic degradation of RB5 by ferrite bismuth nanoparticles synthesized via ultrasound, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2013, 20(5), 1245–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Shikha Gulati	Dr. Shikha Gulati (M.Sc., PhD.) is working as an Assistant Professor of Chemistry at Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi. She has expertise in Inorganic Chemistry, Nano-materials, Green Chemistry, Catalysis, and Analytical Chemistry. Dr. Shikha has authored several research papers in International Journals of repute and written numerous books as well as chapters in diverse books which attest to her research aptitude, and good writing skills. Her books are referred to in diverse Universities across India for different undergraduate courses. Dr. Gulati has also been awarded the Young Researcher Award 2020 for her work in the field of Nanotechnology.
Kartika Goyal	Kartika Goyal is pursuing a bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi. She was born in Uttar Pradesh, India, in 2000. Studies of drug delivery and the significance of nanotechnology in the food sector, air treatment, and water treatment fascinate her. She has co-authored reviews on anticancer agents, CNTs, and several chapters on metal–organic frameworks, nanotechnology for food preservation, and drug delivery applications. A happy person, she loves to read about medicinal discoveries across the globe.
Aryan Arora	Aryan Arora is a student at the Chemistry department, Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi. His research interests include innovation in chemistry for environmental remediation. He has authored a research paper on air purification in International Journals of repute and written a chapter in a book that attests to his good research aptitude an outdoor person who wants to fight climate change through innovative research in the field of environmental science and chemistry.
Sanjay Kumar	Prof. Sanjay Kumar has been working as a Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Sri Venkateswara College, the University of Delhi since 2000. He did Ph.D. in the field of molecular spectroscopy from the University of Delhi in 1998. He has also worked as a post-doctoral fellow at IGIB, New Delhi in the field of molecular immunology. Currently, he is focusing on the field of nanotechnology and cancer research. He has authored several research papers in International Journals of repute and written several books on Chemistry and Environmental Sciences.
Manoj Trivedi	Dr. Manoj Trivedi (MSc, MTech, PhD) is working as an Assistant Professor of Chemistry at Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India. He has expertise in inorganic chemistry, nano-materials, and applied homogeneous catalysis, for example, he developed efficient catalysts for the conversion of CO2 to formic acid or formate and methanol through hydrogenation. Dr. Manoj has authored several research papers in reputable international journals and written chapters in diverse books which attest to his research aptitude, and good writing skills.
Shradha Jain	Shradha Jain is from Guna, Madhya Pradesh. Presently, she is pursuing a Bachelor's in Biological Sciences from Sri Venkateshwara College, Delhi University. She is inclined toward research in biochemical aspects of pollution in the environment and climate change. She is also interested in wildlife conservation. She had also authored a chapter on Toxicological Perspectives and environmental risks of Consumer Nanoproducts published by Springer.

Water impact
Our review focuses on stimulating potential techniques of photocatalytic decomposition for potable reuse of waste water highlighting the importance of water sustainability in current times. Against the drawbacks of conventional treatment methods such as the generation of a lot of sludge, photocatalytic decomposition using bismuth ferrite nanoclusters appears to be a sustainable technology for the treatment of water against industrial wastewater.


 	Fig. 1  Classification of conventional approaches for water treatment.	 

1	Fentons reagent (H2O2–Fe(II) salts	(i) Simple operation	(i) Sludge generation	
31

(ii) Chemical oxygen demand removal	(ii) Non-environment friendly
2	Ozonation	(i) Effective against almost all microbes	(i) Very short half-life (approx. 20 minutes)	
10, 32
(ii) Quiet efficient	(ii) Formation of harmful by-products
3	Photochemical oxidation	(i) Simple operation	(i) Use of strong UV radiations	
10

(ii) Often effective for multiple cycles	(ii) Formation of harmful by-products
4	Oxidation with sodium hypochlorite	(i) Easy reagent preparation	(i) Release of aromatic amines	
33

(ii) Simple operation	(ii) Non-environment friendly
5	Coagulation and precipitation	(i) Simple operation	(i) Difficult process control	
30


1	Adsorption	(i) Effective	(i) Sludge generation	
34

(ii) High capacity	(ii) High cost due to some expensive adsorbents like activated carbon
2	Membrane filtration	(i) Simple execution	(i) Repeated membrane coagulation	
4, 35
(ii) It can decompose almost all dyes	(ii) By-products formed are difficult to decompose
3	Irradiation	—	(i) High cost	
10

—	(ii) Requires a lot of dissolved oxygen
4	Ion exchange	(i) Operative with no loss of regeneration	(i) Not effective for all dyes	
33

(ii) High removal efficiency for heavy metals	(ii) High cost
5	Reverse osmosis	—	(i) Sludge generation	
30

—	(ii) Non-environment friendly

 	Fig. 2  Various advanced oxidation processes.	 
MeOHn+ + hv → Me(n−1)+ + OH˙	(1)
MeLn+ + hv → Me(n−1)+ + L˙	(2)
LFe3+ + hv → Fe2+ + L˙	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Electron–hole pair generation in a semi-conductor,59,101 reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 
TiO2 + hv(UV) → TiO2(e−) + TiO2(h+)	(4)
h+ + H2O → OH˙ + H+	(5)
e− + O2 → O2˙−	(6)
H2O + O2˙− → HO2˙ + OH˙	(7)
2HO2˙ + H2O2 + O2	(8)
H2O2 + O2˙− → 2OH˙ + OH− + O2	(9)
Organic pollutants + OH˙ → H2O + CO2	(10)

 	Fig. 4  Various limitations of TiO2 as a semiconductor photocatalyst material.	 

 	Fig. 5  Perovskite structure of ABX3 type crystal101 reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Various forms of BiFeO3 (BFO).	 

 	Fig. 7  Preparation techniques for bismuth ferrite49 reproduced with permission from ref. 49 Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  X-ray diffraction pattern of rhombohedral phase BiFeO3 (ref. 140) reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2012 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structure of BFO through the hexagonal frame of ref. 142 reproduced with permission from ref. 142 Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 10  Relation between temperature and band gap.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic for various properties of BFO nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 12  Steps involved in the degradation of pollutants.	 
BFO + hv → BFO (e−CB) + (h+VB)	(11)
h+ + H2O → OH˙ + H+	(12)
2O2˙− + H˙ → 2OH + O2˙	(13)
2O2˙− + → HO2	(14)
Fe2+ + H2O2 + H+ → Fe3+ + OH˙ + H2O	(15)
Fe(OH)2+ + hv → Fe2+ + OH˙	(16)

 	Fig. 13  Effect of metal ion doping on the energy band gap of BFO nanoparticles reproduced with permission from ref. 180 Copyright 2020 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 14  BFO/MXene nanohybrid degrading Congo red dye molecules reproduced with permission from ref. 181 Copyright 2019 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 15  Recyclability of doped and undoped BFO nanoparticles reproduced with permission from ref. 185 Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  Plausible energy-level diagram and process of migration for photo-induced charges over BiFeO3/BiOI system for photocatalytic degradation of rhodamine B (RhB) or bisphenol A (BPA) reproduced with permission from ref. 174 Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 


1	BFO/GNP	Congo-red dye	—	30%	32%	—	120 min	
15

2	BGFSO-5/GNP	Congo-red dye	—	12%	48%	—	120 min	
15

3	BGFSO-15/GNP	Congo-red dye	—	15%	44%	—	120 min	
15

4	BGFSO-20/GNP	Congo-red dye	—	3%	56%	—	120 min	
15

5	BGFSO-25/GNP	Congo-red dye	—	23%	51%	—	120 min	
15

6	BiFeO3	Rhodamine-B dye	—	10%	—	—	120 min	
170

7	BiOI	Rhodamine-B dye	—	56%	—	—	120 min	
170

8	BFO/BI-1	Rhodamine-B dye	—	79%	—	—	120 min	
170

9	BFO/BI-2	Rhodamine-B dye	—	100%	—	—	120 min	
170

10	BFO/BI-3	Rhodamine-B dye	—	64%	—	—	120 min	
170

11	BiFeO3	Bisphenol-A dye	—	7%	—	—	120 min	
170

12	BiOI	Bisphenol-A dye	—	36%	—	—	120 min	
170

13	BFO/BI-1	Bisphenol-A dye	—	59%	—	—	120 min	
170

14	BFO/BI-2	Bisphenol-A dye	—	71%	—	—	120 min	
170

15	BFO/BI-3	Bisphenol-A dye	—	54%	—	—	120 min	
170

16	Undoped BiFeO3	Methylene blue dye	—	87%	—	—	120 min	
181

17	1% Y–BiFeO3	Methylene blue dye	—	92.60%	—	—	120 min	
181

18	2% Y–BiFeO3	Methylene blue dye	—	88%	—	—	120 min	
181

19	5% Y–BiFeO3	Methylene blue dye	—	85.20%	—	—	120 min	
181

20	Bi2Fe4O9	Methyl orange dye	—	99%	96%	—	80 min (light)	
23

4 h (dark)
21	BFO-Doped with Gd, Sm	Methylene blue dye	—	95%	—	—	40 min	
186

22	BFO-Doped with Gd	Methylene blue dye	94%	94%	—	—	240 min	
187

23	BFO-Doped with Gd	Rhodamine B dye	94%	94%	—	—	120 min	
183

24	BFO-Doped with Nd	Rhodamine B dye	—	59%	—	—	120 min	
188

25	BFO-Doped with Y	Rhodamine B dye	—	8%	0%	
	60 min	
189

26	BFO-Doped with Dy	Methylene blue dye	—	92%	—	—	240 min	
190

27	BFO-Doped with TiO2	Congo red dye	—	70%	—	—	120 min	
191

28	BFO-Doped with Pt	Methylene orange dye	—	70%	—	—	210 min	
192

29	BFO-Doped with Ag	Rhodamine B dye	—	79%	—	—	180 min	
193

30	BFO-Doped with Ag	Methylene orange dye	—	100%	—	—	90 min	
194

31	BFO-Doped with Pb	Malachite green dye	—	96%	—	—	240 min	
195

32	BFO-Doped with N	Bisphenol-A dye	—	94%	—	—	120 min	
196

33	BFO-Doped with N	Congo red dye	—	92%	—	—	180 min	
197

34	BiFeO3/TiO2 (1:1)	Congo red dye	—	70%	—	—	120 min	
191

35	BiFeO3	Rhodamine B dye	—	50%	—	—	240 min	
198

36	BiFeO3–graphene	Congo red dye	—	71%	—	—	120 min	
199

37	Bi0.90La0.10FeO	—	—	48%	—	—	100 min	
178

38	Bi0.97Gd0.03FeO3	Rhodamine B dye	—	55%	—	—	270 min	
1

39	Bi0.98Y0.02FeO3	—	—	18%	—	—	180 min	
200

40	Bi0.95Sm0.05Fe0.80Mn0.20O3	Methyl blue, Congo red, and methyl violet dye	83%	97%	—	—	180 min	
201

41	Bi0.90Gd0.10Fe0.95Sn0.05O3	—	83%	95%	—	79%	180 min	
178

42	Bi0.90La0.10Fe0.95Mn0.05O3	Congo red dye	—	97%	—	—	120 min	
202

43	Bi0.90Gd0.05Sm0.05FeO3	Congo red dye	—	95%	—	—	40 min	
186

44	Bi0.92La0.08Fe0.925Se0.075O3	—	97%	97%	—	97%	50 min	
178


 	Fig. 17  Effect of formation of heterojunction on the photocatalytic performance of semiconductors reproduced with permission from ref. 190 Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons.	 
BiFeO3/BFO	Bismuth ferrite
AOP	Advanced oxidation process
RhB	Rhodamine-B
CR	Congo red
MV	Methyl violet
MB	Methyl blue
MO	Methyl orange
CV	Crystal violet

E
bg
	Energy bandgap
VB	Valence band
CB	Conduction band
EPR	Electron paramagnetic resonance
TBA	
tert-Butyl alcohol
TA	Terephthalic acid
GC/MS	Gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy
HPLC	High-performance liquid chromatography
HPLC/MS	High performance liquid chromatography/mass spectroscopy
FTIR	Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
