 In situ optical spectroscopy characterization for optimal design of lithium–sulfur batteries  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00381A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00381A
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5432-5453
In situ optical spectroscopy characterization for optimal design of lithium–sulfur batteries

        
          
            Li 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Qian
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xingyu 
            Zhu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhongli 
            Hu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Mengfan 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Liya 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Jiang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jing-Hua 
            Tian
          
          
        
      *abc and 

        
          
            Chenglin 
            Yan
          
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Energy, Soochow Institute for Energy and Materials Innovations & Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China. E-mail: jhtian@suda.edu.cn; c.yan@suda.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Advanced Carbon Materials and Wearable Energy Technologies of Jiangsu Province, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China
cInstitute of Chemical Power Sources, Soochow University, Suzhou 215600, China
Received 
      31st May 2019
    First published on 24th October 2019AbstractThe lithium–sulfur (Li–S) battery is one of the most promising high-energy-density secondary battery systems. However, it suffers from issues arising from its extremely complicated “solid–liquid–solid” reaction routes. In recent years, enormous advances have been made in optimizing Li–S batteries via the rational design of compositions and architectures. Nevertheless, a comprehensive and in-depth understanding of the practical reaction mechanisms of Li–S systems and their effect on the electrochemical performance is still lacking. Very recently, several important in situ optical spectroscopic techniques, including Raman, infrared and ultraviolet-visible spectroscopies, have been developed to monitor the real-time variations of the battery states, and a bridge linking the macroscopic electrochemical performance and microscopic architectures of the components has been set up, thus playing a critical role in scientifically guiding further optimal design of Li–S batteries. In this tutorial review, we provide a systematic summary of the state-of-the-art innovations in the characterization and optimal design of Li–S batteries with the aid of these in situ optical spectroscopic techniques, to guide a beginner to construct in situ optical spectroscopy electrochemical cells, and develop strategies for preventing long-chain polysulfide formation, dissolution and migration, thus alleviating the shuttle effect in Li–S batteries and improving the cell performances significantly.
Li Zhang
Prof. Li Zhang received his BS degree in Chemistry (2003) and PhD degree in physical chemistry (2008) from Xiamen University, China. During 2009–2012, he was a research associate in the Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering at the University of Alberta, Canada, and National Institute for Nanotechnology, Canada. He became an associate professor at the College of Energy of Soochow University in 2012 and was promoted to a full professor in 2017. He has published more than 60 peer-reviewed research journal publications. His current research interests are focused on electrochemistry, lithium-ion batteries, flexible/wearable energy storage and solar/chemical energy conversion.
Jing-Hua Tian
Jing-Hua Tian received his BS degree in chemistry (2003) and PhD degree in physical chemistry (2009) from Xiamen University, China. During 2009–2010, he was a post-doctoral research fellow at Ecole Normal Superieure, Paris, France, and then he moved to the Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, as a research associate (2010–2013). At present, he is a full professor at the College of Energy of Soochow University. He has published more than 30 peer-reviewed research journal publications. His current research interests are focused on electrocatalysis, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, energy storage and conversion systems.
Chenglin Yan
Chenglin Yan is a Professor and Dean of the College of Energy at Soochow University in Suzhou, China. He received his PhD from Dalian University of Technology in 2008. In 2011, he became a staff scientist and a group leader at the Institute for Integrative Nanoscience at the Leibniz Institute in Dresden (Germany). In 2013, the IFW-Dresden awarded Dr Chenglin Yan the IIN Research Prize 2013 for his outstanding research into in situ characterization techniques of battery materials. He received the Thousand Young Talents Award from the Chinese Thousand Talents Program in 2014. His primary research interests focus on electrochemical energy storage.

Key learning points
(1) The significant latest advancements of optimal design of Li–S batteries with the aid of in situ optical spectroscopic techniques.
(2) The representative strategies for alleviating polysulfide dissolution and suppressing the shuttle effect, which have been characterized and analysed with in situ optical spectroscopic techniques.
(3) The advantages, limitations and feasibility of current in situ optical spectroscopic techniques with respect to Li–S battery research.
(4) Rational design of more advanced in situ optical spectroscopic techniques for Li–S batteries.
(5) Future directions and challenges with respect to in situ optical spectroscopic techniques for Li–S battery research.

1. Introduction
The ever-growing demand for high-energy, long-life, green and economic energy devices has motivated extensive research beyond conventional lithium-ion battery (LIB) systems. Among these systems, rechargeable lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries, as a promising next-generation energy storage technology, have captured vast interest because of their high energy density, a large abundance of sulfur and their environmental compatibility.1–5
Typically, the anode side of the lithium plate dissolves into the electrolyte as Li+, which transfers to the cathode side, reacting with S to form Li2S2/Li2S during the discharge process. The reverse reactions occur during the charge process.1,4,5 Considering an average cell voltage of 2.15 V vs. Li/Li+, the Li–S battery can reach a theoretical specific energy and volumetric energy density of approximately 2600 W h kg−1 and 2800 W h L−1, respectively (based on complete Li2S formation), which are far superior to the theoretical upper values of 420 W h kg−1 and 1400 W h L−1 achieved in the state-of-the-art traditional LIB systems.1,2,4,5
The concept of the Li–S full cell configuration was proposed in the 1960s,6 even before LIBs were established. Despite decades of intensive research, the Li–S batteries have not achieved the same great success in commercial applications as LIBs thus far. The primary cause of this phenomenon can be the highly complex electrochemical reaction routes of Li–S batteries. Unlike the common electrode materials in LIBs that undergo solid-state phase changes (e.g., silicon),7,8 Li–S batteries experience special “solid–liquid–solid” phase transitions during cycling due to the formation of a series of intermediate, soluble long-chain lithium polysulfide species, resulting in an alternating “void/refilled” electrode status and severe volume changes (∼79.2%). More seriously, the free migration of soluble polysulfides to the lithium metal anode would lead to harmful side reactions and a shuttle effect, which give rise to a continuous loss of active materials, lithium metal consumption, low coulombic efficiency and thereby a rapid capacity decay.1,2,4,5
To tackle these challenges, tremendous efforts have been devoted to the rational design of the composition and architecture of Li–S batteries in the past decade.1,4,5 In 2019, a major breakthrough was achieved by Nazar et al., who reported a highly ordered, mesoporous carbon–sulfur hybrid cathode for use in Li–S batteries.3 The mesoporous carbon, CMK-3, precisely constrained sulphur nanofillers within its conductive channels, rendering Li–S batteries with high capacity and stable cyclability. After that, a dramatically increasing number of technical solutions have been proposed to constantly improve the performance of Li–S cells. Although great advances have been made, a comprehensive and in-depth understanding is still lacking regarding the battery fading mechanisms of Li–S systems, as well as the side-reactions within them during operation.4,5
This raises another, perhaps more important, question regarding how to monitor the practical electrochemical reaction routes and, thus, effectively evaluate the optimization in the composition and architecture for Li–S batteries.1,5,9,10 The current evaluation methodologies of Li–S batteries are mainly focused on establishing the relationship between the macroscopic electrochemical performance, such as cycling stability, rate capability, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and the structure and composition changes within the Li–S batteries, and further assessing the optimized effect. However, these “black box” methods are incapable of describing the real-time variation of the chemical/physical states of the electrode materials during cycling (i.e., electrochemical transient states at certain potential values).5,9,10 In other words, electrochemical measurements can hardly clarify how the microscopic state changes of the electrode affect these steps during the charge/discharge processes. Considering the high complexity of the “solid–liquid–solid” reaction routes of Li–S batteries, it is imperative to develop novel in situ characterization techniques to monitor the cell components/environment, especially the electrode states at different depths of discharges (DODs) and states of charges (SOCs), and therefore, setting up a bridge linking the macroscopic electrochemical performance and microscopic architectures of the electrode. This could provide us with a deeper understanding of the real electrochemical reaction routes of Li–S batteries with different internal designs and help scientifically put forward further optimization strategies.1,4,5,9,10
In recent years, numerous in situ/operando characterization methods, including X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES), X-ray tomography (XRT), X-ray radiography (XRR), X-ray fluorescence (XRF), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), Raman spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectroscopy, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)/electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), have been developed to track the internal electrochemical processes and the degradation mechanism of Li–S batteries.1,4,5,10 Herein, it should be pointed out that “in situ” means monitoring the Li–S batteries on site, without cell disassembling and post-treatment on analytic targets. In contrast, “operando” means collecting information during battery operation without interruption. Among the aforementioned techniques, in situ optical spectroscopic techniques (e.g., Raman, FT-IR and UV-vis) have gained great attention due to their excellent compatibility with the current Li–S cell configuration and powerful capability to consecutively collect abundant structural information of the intermediate polysulfides during battery operation on site.4,5,10 Accordingly, these methods are widely accepted and popular as an efficient, qualitative, sensitive and powerful tool to monitor the extremely quick electrochemical reactions and guide the structure and composition optimization of Li–S batteries.
In this tutorial review, the state-of-the-art innovations in the characterization and optimal design of Li–S batteries with the aid of in situ optical spectroscopic techniques will be summarized. We will first provide a general overview of the principle and challenges of Li–S batteries, followed by a presentation of the limitations of the current electrochemical characterization techniques and the advantages of in situ optical spectroscopic techniques compared to current electrochemical methods and other spectroscopic techniques with regard to Li–S systems. We then discuss in detail how in situ optical spectroscopic techniques (Raman, FT-IR and UV-vis) guide the optimal design of Li–S batteries. Subsequently, we present a discussion on further rational design of more sensitive and powerful in situ optical spectroscopic techniques for Li–S batteries. Finally, we conclude in the last section with an overview of the key challenges and prospects in this exciting field. In the past several years, in situ optical spectroscopic techniques, which could supply abundant information with high energetic and high spatial resolution, have indeed made a substantial contribution to scientifically guide the optimal design of Li–S batteries, including sulfur cathodes, binders, electrolytes, interlayers and lithium metal. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is still a lack of a comprehensive review dealing with these important advances. The review we present here aims to inform readers who are interested in this emerging field of the in situ working mechanism of battery research.
2. Electrochemistry and challenges of Li–S batteries
Typically, Li–S batteries operate via the following electrochemical reaction: S8 + 16Li+ = 8Li2S,1,4 which offers a theoretical capacity of 1675 mA h g−1.1,2,4,5 Although the overall reaction seems fairly simple, the practical electrochemical process is much more complex. During the initial discharge process, the sulfur cathode is first lithiated to form a series of intermediate, soluble long-chain lithium polysulfides (S8 → Li2S8 → Li2S6 → Li2S4),2–5,9 corresponding to the upper potential plateau at approximately 2.3 V vs. Li/Li+ (Fig. 1a). The formation of long-chain lithium polysulfides contributes only 25% of the theoretical capacity of sulfur (419 mA h g−1). However, this process, in turn, becomes the decisive step in determining the subsequent electrochemical behaviour of the sulfur cathode. Upon further lithiation, the dissolved long-chain polysulfides convert to solid-state short-chain sulfide species (Li2S4 → Li2S3 → Li2S2 → Li2S) at a lower voltage plateau (2.15 V vs. Li/Li+), which contributes the remaining 75% of the theoretical capacity of sulfur (1256 mA h g−1) (Fig. 1a).1–5,10 Unlike the whole-process of solid-state electrochemical reactions, the special solid–liquid–solid phase transitions of the sulfur cathode during cycling may give rise to a series of critical challenges, as follows (Fig. 1b):1,2,5,10
 Fig. 1  (a) A typical two-plateau discharge–discharge voltage profile of Li–S batteries in ether-based organic electrolytes. (b) Schematic drawing of a typical Li–S battery and possible electrochemical/chemical reactions at both the sulfur cathode and lithium metal anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 4. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
(i) The free diffusion of intermediate lithium polysulfides into the ether-based electrolyte results in a continuous loss of active materials and capacity fading because a portion of dissolved polysulfides can no longer be recycled.
(ii) The massive lithium ion storage does not just lead to a considerable volumetric change of the sulfur cathode during the discharge process; more seriously, the dissolution and precipitation of long-chain sulphur polysulfides may further result in the alternating “void/refilled” electrode status and, thus, significantly destroy the mechanical properties of the electrode laminate.
(iii) Long-chain polysulfides that migrate to the lithium metal side can be electrochemically reduced to low-order polysulfides, which then transfer back to the cathode side to be re-oxidized. The resultant shuttle effect of polysulfides may lead to severe self-discharging and low coulombic efficiency during cycling.
Apart from the aforementioned challenges, Li–S batteries also suffer from the electrically and ionically insulating nature of the sulfur and Li2S at the two sides of the electrochemical reactions.1–5,11,12 This would bring about high polarization, poor material utilization, and rapid capacity fading. Moreover, the non-uniform and dynamically changing solid-state electrolyte interphase (SEI) on the lithium metal, the uncontrollable growth of lithium dendrites and the harmful side reactions between polysulfides and the Li metal would further consume the limited lithium and electrolyte inventory during long-term cycling (Fig. 1b).1,2,4,5
Given the above, it can be concluded that Li–S batteries may undergo the most complicated reaction routes in the existing secondary battery systems. Accordingly, all corresponding optimization strategies should be put forward based on a comprehensive and in-depth understanding of the practical electrochemical reaction mechanisms of Li–S batteries.
3. When in situ optical spectroscopic techniques meet Li–S batteries
3.1. The limitation of current evaluation methodologies
The overall reaction routes between sulfur and lithium sulfides are clearly demonstrated above. Nevertheless, the detailed steps (i.e., the practical electrochemical mechanisms) involved in these routes are much more complicated. More importantly, the practical electrochemical routes may be significantly altered when different optimization strategies are adopted for Li–S systems.1,4,5 In this sense, the method used to monitor the practical electrochemical reaction routes may play a key role in investigating the variations in the composition and architecture of Li–S batteries adopting various optimization strategies.1,2,5,13–15 So far, however, electrochemical measurements, including cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic discharge–charge profiles at various current rates upon different cycles (i.e., cycling performance and rate capability) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), are still the mainstream methods to estimate Li–S batteries with different internal designs. By establishing the connection between macroscopic electrochemical performance and the structure and composition changes within Li–S batteries, the proposed optimization strategies can be indirectly evaluated. Nevertheless, these “black box” methods are incapable of describing the on-site variations of the chemical/physical states of the electrode materials during cycling.5,10 In other words, the adopted electrochemical measurements can hardly clarify how the microscopic state changes of the electrode affect these steps during the charge/discharge process. In response, a variety of ex situ techniques, such as SEM, TEM, XRD, XPS, Raman spectroscopy, FT-IR spectroscopy, etc., have been widely used to detect the morphology and chemical states of the electrode laminates with different DODs and SOCs that are obtained from the dismantled cells. Despite their easy access and low cost, such ex situ investigations might not provide accurate information owing to the necessary post-treatment and time delay.5,10 Moreover, the ex situ measurements are incapable of capturing any information stemming from the intermediate, soluble long-chain lithium polysulfide species and, therefore, cannot precisely describe the real electrochemical reaction routes during the discharge/charge processes.
Considering the high complexity of the “solid–liquid–solid” reaction routes of Li–S batteries, in situ characterization techniques are highly desirable to supply real-time and console-displayed signals related to the electrode states at different DODs and SOCs on site, and thus, setting up a bridge linking the macroscopic electrochemical performance and microcosmic architectures of the electrode.5,8,10,14,16,17 This could provide us with a deeper understanding of the real electrochemical routes of Li–S batteries with different compositions and architectures and scientifically guide further optimization strategies.
3.2. The advantages of in situ optical spectroscopic techniques for Li–S battery characterization

3.2.1 The basic principles of current representative optical spectroscopic techniques. 
Optical spectroscopic techniques, including Raman, FT-IR and UV-vis, have gained much attention and have been widely adopted, owing to their ease of operation, non-destructive nature, high time and spatial resolutions, ample information, etc. As one of the most popular applied optical spectroscopic techniques, Raman spectroscopy is commonly utilized to distinguish between different molecules by providing their structural fingerprints, which are used to survey the vibrational, rotational, and other low-frequency modes in a studied system.18 Normally, a laser beam in the visible, near-infrared, or ultraviolet range is focused on the studied system, which interacts with the molecules in the system, resulting in the energy of the laser photons being shifted up or down. The shift in energy gives characteristic information about the vibrational modes of the reacted molecules. This wavelength shifting is also called the Raman shift. The energy shift of the emitted photon as a result of this phenomenon is unique for each specific molecule. In a Raman spectrum, individual bands are characteristic of specific molecular motions and can, therefore, be used to identify and quantify specific molecules. For Li–S battery research, in situ Raman spectroscopy can gather high time- and space-resolved information from both the polarizable electrode surface and liquid organic electrolyte.18 More importantly, in situ Raman can qualitatively or semi-quantitatively monitor the lithium polysulfides dissolved in an ether-based electrolyte during cycling, which is important for researchers to evaluate the electrode material status at different DODs and SOCs in the electrolyte.17
Infrared spectroscopy (IR) is a kind of absorption spectroscopy, which detects the molecular bond vibrations and rotation upon absorption of infrared light. IR spectroscopy has been adopted widely for chemical structure analysis, chemical fingerprinting and chemical imaging, since chemical functional groups absorb IR light at different frequencies. In particular, Fourier transform-infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), a well-established spectroscopic technique, has the feature of low cost, easy operation under electrochemical evaluation to monitor Li–S batteries. With the combination of theoretical calculations and FT-IR spectra of the standard polysulfide solutions prepared by dissolving different stoichiometric mixtures of sulfur and lithium, FT-IR has been used to distinguish between different lithium polysulfide species based on the S–S vibrational mode. In situ FT-IR in the ATR mode has also been successfully applied to investigate both the polysulfide evolution and trifluoromethanesulfonate (triflate, CF3SO3−) anion coordination states for Li–S batteries.19,20
UV-vis spectroscopy is also a type of absorption spectroscopy, which has the advantages of rapid sample analysis, suitability for a wide variety of analytes, easy operation and so on. Molecules containing π-electrons or non-bonding electrons (n-electrons) can absorb energy in the UV and visible light region to excite these electrons to higher anti-bonding molecular orbitals.15,21,22 UV-vis spectroscopy has been proven to be a powerful characterization tool to analyse solution-based electrochemical reactions. Specifically, lithium polysulfide compounds are well known to absorb the UV-visible radiation. Hence, UV-vis spectroscopy has been widely adopted for the qualitative and quantitative analysis of lithium polysulfide species in Li–S batteries.


3.2.2 Typical optical spectroscopy responses of sulfur, polysulfides and radicals. 
According to theoretical calculations and previous reports, typically, the Raman shifts of polysulfide dianions and radicals are all below 550 cm−1.5,10 The characteristic Raman peaks of S8 are located at approximately 150, 219 and 474 cm−1. The high-order polysulfide dianions (S82−, S62− and S42−) can be detected by Raman spectroscopy, while usually the low order ones (S32−and S22−) cannot be detected. Additionally, the peak signal of the radical anion (S3˙−, ˙ indicates free electron) at 525–535 cm−1 could be detected, which is in good agreement with most theoretical and experimental studies.23–26
FT-IR has been used to study both the polysulfide evolution and triflate anion coordination states for Li–S batteries. From the IR spectrum, the polysulfides (Li2Sx, in which x = 2–8) with different orders could be assigned with the following approximate peaks: 2 (475.8 cm−1), 3 (479.5 cm−1), 3.5* (483.3 cm−1, * indicates the mixture of two polysulfide species), 4.5* (487.8 cm−1), 5 (490.6 cm−1), 6 (495.2 cm−1) and 8 (504.0 cm−1).19,20 There is no peak corresponding to the seventh-order polysulfide, possibly due to the 2-electron reduction step for the reduction of S82−. The presence of 3.5* and 4.5* is most likely due to the existence of both S3˙− radical and S32− species, S4˙− radical and S42−, respectively. Moreover, the electrolyte, for example, the triflate anion coordination state, could also be monitored clearly while simultaneously cycling the batteries with FT-IR.19,20
For UV-vis spectroscopy, generally, S8 or elemental S shows a weak characteristic absorption peak at approximately 270–280 nm owing to its low solubility.1,4,5,10 Polysulfide dianions could be detected in the range of 350 to 500 nm, and the radical S3˙− shows a strong absorption located at approximately 620 nm. Normally, longer chain polysulfides tend to have stronger absorption at larger wavelength. For instance, the absorption band for Li2S8 locates at approximately 500 nm, whereas it is located at 400 nm for Li2S4.27–29
Actually, seeing what is happening on the solid side or inside the cathode is quite difficult. S8 and Li2S are the two main species that normally could be detected on the solid side, while the polysulfides are normally dissolved in the electrolyte. With in situ Raman spectroscopy, signals of the polysulfides from both the electrolyte and solid side could be detected simultaneously. When the laser is focused in the vicinity of the cathode surface,23 or the carbon host that has been functionally engineered (such as nitrogen doping or blending with FeP nanocrystal, VO2 nanobelts, etc.), polysulfides could be captured for the spectroscopy measurement.30–32 Nevertheless, the observation of the phase changes on the solid side could be even difficult with in situ UV-vis and FT-IR, due to their low solubility and weak absorption. Meanwhile, the observation of different Li2Sx species is truly not equally easy. The high-order polysulfide dianions can be captured by Raman spectra, while the low order ones cannot be captured; in particular, Li2S2/Li2S, which are hard to detect with Raman owing to the low cross section. In contrast, S8 shows a weak absorption peak due to the low solution, and so do Li2S2/Li2S. Besides, longer chain polysulfides tend to have stronger absorption at larger wavelength. However, it is worth mentioning that all these optical spectroscopic techniques are very sensitive to the testing conditions, including the electrolyte/cathode composition, sulfur loading, electrolyte/sulfur (E/S) ratio, etc.1,5,10,23,28 Hence, the peak positions of different sulfur species produced during the Li–S battery operation could be only assigned according to the conditions of the real batteries. Here, we just list the representative peaks of various sulfur-containing species from some special studies with in situ Raman, FT-IR and UV-vis measurements in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the characteristic peak positions in Raman, FT-IR and UV-vis spectra of S8, polysulfide dianions and radicals




Techniques
Peak information
Ref.


S8
S82−
S72−
S62−
S52−
S4.52−
S42−
S3.52−
S32−
S22−
S3˙−




Raman/cm−1
154, 220, 474
340–420 (S62− to S82−)
420–480 (S32− to S52−)
200, 148
535

5, 10 and 23–26



FT-IR/cm−1


504.0


495.2
490.6
487.8


483.3
479.5
475.8



19 and 20



UV-vis/nm
270–280
350–500 (S22− to S82−)
620

4, 10 and 27–29







3.2.3 Advantages of in situ optical spectroscopic investigations compared to electrochemical methods. 
As we know, each technique has its own strengths and limitations. Traditional electrochemical characterization possesses an ultra-high sensitivity to sub-monolayer materials. However, these electrochemical methods show inferior spatial resolution (10 μm) and energetic resolution (0.01 V) (Table 2).18 Therefore, it is difficult to give some electrochemical steps with more detailed structural information. By contrast, the in situ spectroscopic investigations, for example, Raman spectroscopy could offer an ultra-high energetic resolution (10−4 eV, 1 cm−1) and good spatial resolution (1 μm), which could provide abundant information during the electrochemical process, including surface bonding, conformation and orientation.18 Additionally, in situ techniques can track the electrochemical reaction processes while the batteries are under operation, which could exclude the influence and uncertainty of the post-treatment processes of the electrode. Hence, the in situ spectroscopic methods are capable of providing the systematic and accurate fingerprint information of the intermediate species with a high sensitivity.5,8,10,12,16,23,28 Therefore, the in situ spectroscopic methods have been proven to be powerful tools for the study of reaction mechanisms in many fields, such as electrochemical cells (batteries and supercapacitors), electrochemical catalysis, materials synthesis, and drug release.
Table 2 Comparison of sensitivity, energetic and spatial resolutions between electrochemical methods and the Raman spectroscopic technique






Traditional electrochemical methods
Raman spectroscopy




Sensitivity
Ultrahigh sub-monolayer
High, monolayer/few layers


Energetic resolution
Poor 0.01 V
Ultrahigh 10−4 eV (1 cm−1)


Spatial resolution
Poor, 10 μm
Good, 1 μm






3.2.4 Advantages of in situ optical spectroscopic techniques compared to other in situ/ex situ spectroscopic techniques. 
Distinguishing and tracking these highly soluble intermediate species during the battery operation is critical in understanding the fundamental mechanisms in Li–S batteries. Various studies have demonstrated in situ monitoring of Li–S redox with non-destructive spectroscopy to probe an electrochemical battery at different stages under operation. For instance, X-ray absorption (XAS), XRD, NMR and EPR have been performed on Li–S batteries to understand the reaction steps during cycling.1,2,5,10 Although these in situ approaches are non-destructive, most of them are limited to a particular species, requiring complicated instrumentation and long acquisition times, and/or rely on a specific electrochemical cell design for adapting to the spectrometer.1,2,5,10 For instance, XAS offers information on nearly all redox species for Li–S batteries. However, such a technique needs sophisticated equipment with a complex cell design, especially which is working under a synchrotron radiation source, thus making it inaccessible and inconvenient for many researchers.33 Overall, in order to observe the conversion and changes at the molecular-level and in real time, in situ techniques should have the following advantages, such as easy access, simple operation, easy cell design, rapid acquisition time, and the ability to distinguish between different intermediate species.1,2,5,10,31 Optical spectroscopic techniques, including Raman, FT-IR and UV-vis, could well fulfil these requirements and reveal the interactions between polysulfides, electrolytes and electrodes under different electrochemical operating conditions at the molecular level quantitatively or semi-quantitatively, which is quite important to understand the detailed reactions during the operation of Li–S batteries, and develop more efficient sulphur hosts, electrolytes and additives.

3.3. Design of spectro-electrochemical cells for in situ Li–S research
As aforementioned, in the context of measurements, “in situ” means that the samples are measured in their natural position and working status. In the case of the optical spectroscopic investigation, this refers to studies inside the electrochemical cell.5,10 Accordingly, the in situ electrochemical cells need to be intelligently designed to guarantee the effective excitation input (e.g., light/laser beam from the light source, and voltage/current from the potentiostat) and signal output back to the spectrometer and potentiostat (Fig. 2). For in situ Li–S battery research, the electrochemical reactions occur in a closed cell filled with an organic electrolyte; the electrochemical cells are, hence, commonly fabricated based on the following five basic principles: (i) The excitation input has no negative effect on the electrochemical processes of the Li–S batteries. (ii) The electrochemical cell should be perfectly sealed to separate the battery from air and moisture during repeated cycling. (iii) A transmission window should be assembled into an electrochemical cell to promise the light/laser beam input for the in situ Raman, FT-IR and UV-vis tests. (iv) All components of the electrochemical cells (in particular, the gasket rings and glues) should be chemically stable in the organic electrolyte of the Li–S batteries. (v) The input signals should precisely reach the electrode/electrolyte interface or the specified regions. Therefore, an auxiliary microscopic imaging system is sometimes required.1,4,5,10–12,21,23,25,26,28
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the basic configuration of the in situ electrochemical spectroscopy coupling setups. The in situ electrochemical cells need to be intelligently designed to guarantee the effective excitation input (e.g., light/laser beam from the light sources and voltage/current from the potentiostat) onto the electrode/electrolyte interface (right panel) and signal output back to the spectrometer and potentiostat. 
In this section, the basic configuration and cell designs for in situ Raman, FT-IR and UV-vis spectroscopy measurements will be summarized in detail.

3.3.1 
            In situ Raman electrochemical cells. 
All in situ electrochemical Raman cells are assembled in an inert gas-filled glove box and work in an air atmosphere. Hence, the cell should be perfectly sealed to separate the battery from air and moisture during repeated cycling.9,23–27,34,35 Hagen et al. designed the first in situ electrochemical Raman for Li–S research in 2013.25 The photo of the built in situ Raman cell and the corresponding drawing and assembly are shown in Fig. 3a. Briefly, the in situ Raman cell was made of stainless steel with a rectangular chamber. Four glass slides were put at the bottom of the chamber to isolate the electrode stack from the housing. Then the rectangular electrodes and separator were placed in the chamber onto the glass slides, and fixed by stainless steel contact bars from two sides. Several key issues have to be carefully handled during assembly, such as the short circuit and contamination from the used glue. Although this initial design is quite complex, various polysulfides under different DODs and SOCs have been detected with in situ Raman measurements successfully.
 Fig. 3  Development of an in situ Raman electrochemical cell for Li–S battery investigation. (a) Raman in situ cell. Left panel: Photo on cell window with the electrode stack; right panel: drawing and assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2013, the Electrochemical Society. (b) A simple sealed bottle-type in situ Raman cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. (c) Photograph of the in situ scanning Raman setup. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d and e) Simply-modified coin cell-based in situ Raman cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8 and 34. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH, respectively. 
In the subsequent several years, researchers continued to simplify the cell structure, finally realizing in situ Raman measurements on a simply modified coin cell or punch cell (Fig. 3c–e).8,9,26,34 Typically, there are two different configurations for the in situ investigation. For studying the changes within the sulfur cathode during the charge/discharge processes, a transparent observation window was assembled onto the negative side, and the perforated lithium metal anode and separator were utilized to guarantee that the focused laser beam could reach the sulfur cathode surface (Fig. 3c and e).9,34 In this sense, the surface chemical information of the sulfur cathode can be collected in real time. Conversely, for monitoring the produced intermediates near the sulfur electrode during Li–S battery cycling, a small hole was punched at the centre of the sulfur cathode, and the laser beam was focused at a point close to the sulfur electrode with the aid of an auxiliary microscope (Fig. 3d).8 Upon the discharge/charge processes, the Raman signals of soluble polysulfide species surrounding the sulfur cathode could be collected to real-time monitor the compositional variation of the electrolyte. Note that a laser beam of a wavelength of 532 nm is commonly used for the in situ Raman tests of the Li–S system. Additionally, Wang et al. proposed a simple sealed bottle-type cell for in situ Raman measurements of the polysulfide mediators in the absence of the separator (Fig. 3b).35 This configuration is much more easily accessible for a researcher who is new to this field.


3.3.2 
            In situ ATR FT-IR electrochemical cells. 
In recent years, in situ FT-IR spectroscopy has become one of the most popular and powerful techniques to characterize various species (fragmented molecules, functional groups, and radicals) of the electrodes, but has rarely been adopted in Li–S batteries for monitoring the real-time reactions for the following two reasons: first, the standard composite electrodes used in Li–S cells cannot be applied for the FT-IR cell, because of the low reflectivity of the conductive carbon additives in the composite electrode. Another challenge is the configuration of the in situ electrochemical cell for FT-IR measurements. With the internal reflection geometry, the electrode surface should face the observing window rather than the lithium metal anode. This unconventional cell configuration may have a negative impact on the discharge/charge processes.
Very recently, Porter et al. and Kalra et al. demonstrated novel electrochemical cells for realizing in situ infrared studies of Li–S batteries (Fig. 4a, top panel).19,20,36 As Fig. 4a demonstrates, the bottom part of the cell is a commercial ATR FT-IR accessory. A raised diamond crystal was placed on top of a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) disc and a Cu foil disc with a hole cut in the centre. The Cu foil here was used as the current collector. The cathode, separator and anode were then assembled on top of these layers sequentially. The in situ Li–S cell assembly closely replicated a coin cell without changing the key components of a typical Li–S battery, such as the electrolyte volume, cathode, sulfur loading, etc.
 Fig. 4  Development of the in situ FT-IR electrochemical cell for Li–S battery investigation. (a) Top panel: Schematic representation of the in situ ATR FT-IR spectro-electrochemical cell. Bottom panel: Illustration of the battery's configuration and the diamond window, the IR beam input and that reflected through the ATR crystal, absorbed by the electrolyte in a porous cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. (b) Schematic of the in situ infrared spectro-electrochemical experiment with a Li–S cell on the ATR crystal of the FT-IR spectrometer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The working mechanism of ATR FT-IR is based on the formation of an evanescent wave at the boundary which penetrates into the medium beyond the crystal when an infrared beam undergoes a total internal reflection within the diamond crystal. The penetration depth of the wave depends on the wavelength and the incident angle of the IR beam, the refractive indexes of the crystal and the medium used (Fig. 4a, bottom panel).19,36 The effective penetration depth of the evanescent wave to detect the polysulfides is ∼20 μm, which is close to a typical cathode thickness in a Li–S coin cell.36 Therefore, in order to effectively measure the polysulfides in the electrolyte by using ATR FT-IR spectroscopy, a porous cathode has to be adopted and placed on the diamond crystal, with the pores accommodating the electrolyte. To further increase the porosity of the sulfur cathode, Kalra et al. fabricated a novel S-CNF cathode via ultra-rapid sulfur melt infusion into electrospun carbon nanofibers, thus producing a freestanding, binder-free and highly-porous cathode with excellent cycling stability (Fig. 4b).20 It should be noted that, with ATR FT-IR, all the signals come from the solution layer between the cathode and diamond ATR crystal, not from the solution layer between the electrodes and the observation window.


3.3.3 
            In situ UV-vis electrochemical cells. 
Different from Raman spectroscopy, UV-vis spectroscopy is a type of absorption spectroscopy with a series of absorption bands in the UV-vis region. To obtain the information of in situ UV-vis absorption spectra from a working Li–S cell, a reflection configuration was designed by Dominko and co-workers for the first time in 2013.28 As Fig. 5a demonstrates, the in situ UV-vis cell is a pouched cell configuration with a sealed cover glass, assembled by placing the cathode opposite the glass, then covered with the wetted separator and lithium anode with a 16 mm hole in the centre. The in situ UV-vis spectra were measured in the reflection mode, by placing the cell in the beam of the incident light. Similarly, Marceau et al. designed an all-solid-state punch cell for in situ UV-vis analysis in 2016. Two quartz windows were glued to the cell assembly using an epoxy resin (Henkel Hysol E-20NS) (Fig. 5b).37 A solid polyether-based polymer (SPE) containing LiTFSI salt was used as the electrolyte. The cells were cycled at 70 °C heated with a resistive film heater. Meanwhile, the UV-vis spectra were collected in the region of 900 to 200 nm, in steps of 1.5 nm using an integration time of 250 ms with an Agilent Cary 60 dual beam. The beam was focused on an area of approximately 1.5 mm2. Very recently, in 2017, Yan et al. realized in situ UV-vis measurements on a simply modified coin cell using a reflection mode (Fig. 5c).21 Briefly, a transparent observation window was assembled onto the negative side, and the perforated lithium metal anode was utilized to guarantee that the light beam could reach the separator surface.
 Fig. 5  (a) A photograph of the in situ UV-vis punch cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic view of each assembly unit of the Li–S cell used in in situ UV-vis spectroscopy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. (c) Simply modified coin cell-based in situ UV-vis cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 

4. How in situ optical spectroscopic techniques guide the optimal design of Li–S batteries
As mentioned above, Li–S batteries suffer from a series of challenges due to their special “solid–liquid–solid” reaction mechanisms. In response, tremendous efforts have been devoted to the rational design of the composition and architecture of Li–S batteries in the past decade. Generally, all the proposed techniques are based on the following four guiding principles: (i) restricting the dissolution and free diffusion of long-chain polysulfides into the electrolyte via appropriate host materials and sulfur cathode modification, (ii) introducing a conductive and functional interlayer between the cathode and separator to confine the soluble polysulfides within the cathode side, (iii) developing and optimizing novel functional electrolytes (including solid-state electrolytes) and binder materials, (iv) ex situ and in situ protecting the lithium metal and preventing side-reactions between the polysulfides and lithium, as well as guaranteeing gentle lithium plating and stripping during the repeated cycling.1,2,4,5,10,11 Apparently, the practical electrochemical reaction routes would be significantly changed when different optimization strategies are adopted for Li–S systems. In this sense, real-time monitoring of the practical reaction mechanism is the critical first step to evaluating these optimization solutions. In this section, we review in detail the latest advances in Li–S system optimization with the aid of in situ optical spectroscopy by case-studying the representative strategies for alleviating polysulfide dissolution and suppressing the shuttle effect, guiding a beginner to characterize and analyse the reaction mechanisms with in situ optical spectroscopy step by step.
4.1. Distinguishing polysulfide species with in situ optical spectroscopic techniques
Various liquid electrolytes have been applied in Li–S batteries, including DOL:DME-, acetonitrile-, ether- and carbonate-based electrolytes, and ionic liquids, which play an important role in the cell performances, including the cycle life, rate capability and coulombic efficiency.1,4,5,10 With the aid of in situ optical spectroscopic techniques, the existing states of polysulfides in different electrolytes could be investigated and monitored along the discharging and charging processes, thus providing valuable hints regarding further optimization of the electrolyte compositions.
In 2012, Alloin and colleagues investigated the electrolyte composition at different discharge potentials in a Li–S battery with a TEGDME-based electrolyte through in situ UV-vis for the first time (Fig. 6a).27 The in situ UV-vis results showed that S82− and S62− dianions are first produced. Then, S52− and S3˙− are produced by disproportionation reactions. Afterward, S42− and S32− are produced through the reduction of S62− and S3˙−. Finally, shorter polysulfide compounds are produced at the end of the reduction process, such as S32−, S22−, and S2−. The practical reaction mechanism based on the in situ spectra clearly demonstrates the reason for the incomplete sulfur active material utilization (the third step giving only 700 mA h g−1 experimentally, instead of 1256 mA h g−1 theoretically).27
 Fig. 6  (a) Proposed sulfur reduction mechanism of a Li–S battery with different intermediates and the corresponding capacity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (b) First discharge/charge curves of the Li–S battery with the corresponding in situ UV/Vis spectra, collected during the first discharge and the first charge (the cycle from the start to the end is displayed with the colour change from black through red to blue). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (c) CV of 2.0 mM S8-1.0 M LiTFSI in DMSO and in situ UV-vis spectra of each reaction step (change in colour from dark to light with the arrow in each panel represents the changes over time). Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) The Raman spectra evolution of the sulfur electrode with 0.5 M LiTFSI-PY13-FSI as the electrolyte cycled at a rate of C/48 (the inset is the enlarged Raman spectra at two different voltages of discharge). The green areas have been zoomed-in and displayed at the top right. The bottom left is the corresponding discharge–discharge curves with specific S-species, and the bottom right is the intensity ratio of different S-species as a function of voltage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2017, RSC Publishing. 
Later, Dominko and co-workers adopted in situ UV-vis spectroscopy for the qualitative and quantitative detection of polysulfides in 2013.28 The typical discharge/charge profiles with corresponding intermediates marked at different stages are given in Fig. 6b, and the cycling tests were performed in 1 M bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI) in sulfolane electrolyte at a rate of C/20 for one complete cycle. In situ UV-vis spectra were recorded every 15 min and compared from the beginning of discharge to the end of charge in the range of 250 and 800 nm simultaneously. Selected spectra of every 3rd cycle from the 1st discharge and charge have been taken out, which clearly indicate the evolution of long-chain polysulfides to the short-chain one during the discharge process, and the reverse direction during the charge process (the colour in all figures changes from black to red to blue). Similarly, Lu et al. applied in situ UV-vis spectroscopy to investigate the Li–S redox reactions in the commonly-used low-donor-number (low-DN) solvent, i.e., DOL:DME (v/v 1:1), and a classic high-DN solvent, i.e., DMSO, as model electrolytes. Fig. 6c shows the CV curves of 2.0 mM S8–1.0 M LiTFSI in DMSO and in situ UV-vis spectra of each reaction step. The colour change from dark to light with the arrow in each panel represents the changes over time.29 The authors proposed that the Li–S redox reactions in DMSO undergo a series of electrochemical and chemical reactions involving S82−, S62−, S42−, and S3˙−, where S3˙− is the most stable and dominant reaction intermediate. By contrast, the dominant reaction intermediate of the Li–S redox reactions is found to be S42− in DOL:DME. They further concluded that the solvents that facilitate the formation of redox-active polysulfides could improve the reaction rates of the Li–S cells.29
In 2016, in situ Raman spectroscopy was employed by Zhu et al. to investigate the polysulfide species produced in electrolytes of 0.5 M LiTFSI-PY13-FSI and 1 M LiTFSI-DOL–DME during Li–S battery cycling.26 The aim was to understand the discharge mechanism and the influence of the electrolyte on the dissolution of sulfur and polysulfides. Fig. 6d shows the evolution of Raman spectra of the sulfur electrode with 0.5 M LiTFSI-PY13-FSI as the electrolyte cycled at a rate of C/48. The inset provides the enlarged Raman spectra at two different voltages of discharge (2.6 V and 2.8 V). S8n− was detected as the dominant species at the high discharge voltage plateau together with cycloocta-S8. S42−, S22− and S2− were detected soon when the potential reaches the low voltage plateau. Based on the above results, a discharge mechanism in the PY13-FSI has been proposed, which provides important information for further optimizing and designing better cathodes. Further investigations demonstrated that the same polysulfide species are present in the ionic liquid. However, the rates of polysulfide formation and diffusion to the anode in the two electrolytes are clearly different, which are slower in the ionic liquid compared to those in the ether-based electrolyte, due to different ionic mobilities of various species in the two electrolytes.
Considering the unavoidable “solid–liquid–solid” reaction routes of Li–S in a liquid electrolyte, the development of solid-state Li–S batteries offers a means to prevent the “liquid–solid” phase changes and enhance the cycling performance and safety of Li–S batteries. Thus, solid-state Li-ion conductors, encompassing inorganic electrolytes and organic polymer electrolytes (PEs), have emerged as promising alternatives to these conventional liquid electrolytes.4,5 Several types of solid electrolytes have been investigated as Li-ion conducting materials for solid-state Li–S systems, including those based on pure polymeric components, ceramic electrolytes, and composite electrolytes (mix of ceramic and other electrolytes). Cui et al. reported the facile synthesis of Al3+/Nb5+ co-doped cubic Li2La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) nanoparticles and LLZO nanoparticle decorated porous carbon foam (LLZO@C) by the one-step Pechini sol–gel method. The sulfur cathode based on LLZO@C can deliver an attractive specific capacity over 900 mA h g−1 at human body temperature and a remarkably stable cycling performance.38
As a typical example, Zaghib and co-workers adopted in situ UV-vis spectroscopy to identify the soluble sulfur species in the polymer electrolyte during charge and discharge in Li–S cells with an all-solid-state polymer electrolyte (SPE) (Fig. 7).37Fig. 7a shows the in situ UV-vis absorption spectra, in which major absorption bands are highlighted with vertical markers. Fig. 7b and c exhibit the voltage vs. time profiles and the corresponding time evolution of the normalized absorbance of different sulfur species, respectively. This technique allowed the accumulation of various solvated polysulfides, including Li2S in the SPE, to be observed. As a result, the authors found that the charge and discharge mechanisms mostly differ by the formation of S42− during discharge and S62− during charge. A polysulfide shuttle mechanism was observed that was accompanied by a large increase in the concentration of S42−.37
 Fig. 7  (a) In situ UV-vis absorption spectra of the soluble S-species in the polymer electrolyte with an all solid electrolyte during discharge and charge. Major absorption bands are guided with vertical lines. (b) The voltage profile as a function of time. (c) Time evolution of the normalized absorbance of different sulfur species. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. 
4.2. Strategies for alleviating polysulfide dissolution and suppressing the shuttle effect

4.2.1 Anchoring soluble polysulfides with engineered host materials. 
By means of in situ Raman measurements, Dong and co-workers found that the charging process terminates on a sulfur/super P composite at Li2S6 and that the polysulfides cannot be oxidized back to element sulfur S8 on the super P carbon surface in a Li–S battery (Fig. 8a and b).25 The upper left and bottom left images in Fig. 8a show the time sequence of the Raman spectra obtained during battery operation, which clearly indicate the variation of sulfur and polysulfides during the discharge and charge processes. The red curves are for the discharging and charging processes. The right upper and lower right images in Fig. 8a indicate the selected corresponding original Raman spectra without the background subtraction. The in situ Raman results clearly revealed that a large amount of Li2S4 and Li2S6 can still be detected even after a full charge (Fig. 8a), which means the irreversible capacity of a Li–S battery in the first cycle. With the aid of the density-functional (DFT) study, they found that Li2S8 accepts electrons more readily than S8 and Li2S6 so that it is kinetically unstable. However, it can be stabilized by using a conductive Lewis base matrix. Guided by this theoretical calculation, they synthesized a nitrogen-doped super P surface and studied the cycling process with in situ Raman spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 8b, the top panel exhibits the time sequence of Raman spectra collected during the charge processes of the sulfur/N-super P composite; the contributions from the cell background were subtracted for clarity. And the bottom panel indicates the representative original Raman spectra corresponding to the top panel. The in situ Raman results clearly demonstrated that the adsorption of Li2Sn can be enhanced, thus facilitating the oxidization of Li2S6 → Li2S8 → S8. Thereby, the S utilization and cycle stability can be significantly improved even at a high sulfur loading (70%, m/m).
 Fig. 8  (a) Upper left and bottom left: Time sequence of the Raman spectra obtained during discharging–charging processes of the sulfur/super P composite at 0.1C. The background of the Raman spectra in the images has been subtracted for clarity. The red curves are for the voltage profiles for the discharging and charging, respectively. Right upper and lower right: Selected corresponding original Raman spectra without the background subtraction. (b) Top panel: Time sequence of Raman spectra obtained for the sulfur/super P–N composite at 0.1C during the charging process; the contributions from the cell background have been subtracted for clarity. Bottom panel: Two representative original Raman spectra corresponding to the top panel, which were collected at the start and final charging states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) In situ Raman spectra and the corresponding voltage profiles collected during the discharge/charge processes from 1.5 to 2.8 V for the S/NGC cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Left panel: Typical discharge–charge profile of a Li–S battery based on the FeP/rGO/CNTs–S cathode and right panel: in situ Raman spectra collected at the A, B, C, D, E and F points in the left panel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (e) In situ Raman spectra based on G-VS2 hosts obtained during the discharging process at 0.5C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Fichtner and co-workers also found the stepwise conversion of S8 to different soluble polysulfides (Li2Sx, x = 8–4) and finally to Li2S during the discharge process from 1.5 to 2.8 V with a nitrogen-rich carbon (NGC) matrix by means of the in situ Raman test (Fig. 8c).39 The reverse process occurred during the charging process. At a high discharge potential, the host matrices containing the oxygen functional group could react with the longer chain polysulfides (Li2Sx, x ≥ 4), forming polythionate complexes (SxO62−, x = 3–5) bound to the surface, along with the formation of shorter chain polysulfides, and the whole process has been confirmed by in situ Raman spectroscopy. The Raman peak located at 442 cm−1 represents the formation of thiosulfate, and the peak at 1065 cm−1 corresponds to the formation of intermediate polythionate complexes (SxO62−, x≥ 3). The polythionates and shorter chain polysulfides are less soluble in the electrolyte than the longer chain ones, thus keeping the sulfur at the cathode electrode and suppressing the shuttle effect effectively. Apparently, this is an effective approach to enhance the formation of bonds between the sulfur and oxygen functional groups present on the carbon support (especially via thiosulfate formation) through the incorporation of nitrogen into the carbon matrix, thus improving the battery performances.39
Huang et al. monitored the discharge–charge processes with in situ Raman spectroscopy, by adopting the multifunctional iron phosphide (FeP) nanocrystals incorporated onto a 3D porous rGO-CNT scaffold as an efficient host material (Fig. 8d).30 A typical discharge–charge profile of the Li–S battery based on the FeP/rGO/CNTs–S cathode is shown in the left panel, and the in situ Raman spectra collected at the A, B, C, D, E and F points in the left panel are shown in the right panel. During discharging, the Raman peaks from S8 become very weak due to the transformation of S8 into polysulfides (Li2Sx, x = 4–8). After recharging to 2.32 V, the Raman modes of the polysulfide species reappear. Upon further charging to 2.8 V, the polysulfides transform back into solid sulfur. The authors believed that the FeP nanocrystals can promote highly effective chemical adsorption of polysulfides and facilitate the redox reaction, thus suppressing the polysulfide shuttle effectively and enhancing the reaction kinetics. This Li–S battery enables ultra-stable cycling (0.04% capacity decay per cycle) and excellent rate performance (613.1 mA h g−1 at 3C).30
We have also investigated and distinguished the polysulfides by adopting VO2 nanobelts and VS2-rGO hybrids as efficient host materials for the sulfur cathode with in situ Raman spectroscopy.31,40 In detail, with both host materials the Raman signals of soluble Li2S8 (∼282 cm−1) and Li2S6 (∼176 and 399 cm−1) gradually decrease and finally disappear during the discharge process (Fig. 8e). This can be attributed to the strong and ultrafast entrapment of polysulfides by the VO2 nanobelts and VS2-rGO hybrids. Consequently, the polysulfide shuttling in Li–S batteries was greatly suppressed. In consequence, the as-obtained Li–S batteries show outstanding reversible capacity, excellent rate capability, superior cycling stability and high areal capacity.
With the aid of in situ Raman, Chen et al. clearly demonstrated the high reversibility between the sulfur and Li2S nanodots within the nano-sulfur cathode.32 During discharging, three characteristic peaks of S located at 474, 221 and 152 cm−1 are assigned to the symmetric S–S bond stretching, the symmetric bond-bending, and the anti-symmetric bond bending mode, respectively. The above three peaks disappeared at a voltage of 1.5 V during discharge, and a new peak belonging to Li2S was detected at 370 cm−1. This indicates that S has been converted to Li2S after discharging. More importantly, the peak of Li2S disappeared and S peaks were detected again when the batteries were charged to 2.8 V. This process was repeatable in the following cycling, indicating excellent reversibility on the nano-S cathode. The optimized cathode with 0.45 mg cm−2 sulfur loading on Ni foam displayed a high initial discharge capacity of 1458 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, a high rate capability of 521 mA h g−1 at 10C, and long cycling stability (895 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 0.5C and 528 mA h g−1 after 1400 cycles at 5C).32


4.2.2 Accelerating the long-chain polysulfide conversion. 
Polar hosts (in most cases, transition metal oxides, nitrides and sulfides with inferior electrical conductivity) have been widely investigated to capture the soluble polysulfides in the past ten years.1,2,4,10 However, only if a polysulfide molecule is adsorbed on a conductive substrate will the liquid-involving polysulfide redox be electrochemically available. From another point of view, instead of trying to block the dissolution and diffusion of polysulfides, accelerating the polysulfide conversion through catalytic redox is another promising strategy to alleviate the notorious flooding of polysulfides and to improve the battery performance, including the coulombic efficiency and the cycle life of the sulfur cathodes.1,2,4,10
Nazar et al. first proposed strong polysulfide/Li2S binding with a Magneli-phase Ti4O7 host and surface-mediated redox chemistry to enhance the Li–S reaction (Fig. 9a).41 They clearly showed that upon reduction of S8 on a carbon host, LiPSs (Li2Sx) desorb from the surface and undergo solution-mediated reactions, thus leading to broadly distributed precipitation of Li2S (top panel of Fig. 9a). Upon reduction of S8 on the metallic polar Ti4O7, LiPSs adsorb on the surface and reduce to Li2S via a surface-mediated reduction at the interface (bottom panel of Fig. 9a). Similarly, Cui and co-workers demonstrated that a hybrid electrode surface of carbon/tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) could enhance the redox kinetics of polysulfides and mediate their deposition.1,4,5 Very recently, high-surface-area Co9S8 with hierarchical porosity was proposed by Pang et al. to afford superior polysulfides with an affinity for long-life and high-loading Li–S batteries. Although it is noted that the hetero-polar feature of the conductive surface favours the charge transfer from the host material to polysulfides, the mechanism by which the polar surface accelerates polysulfide redox has not been clearly revealed yet. Zhang et al. introduced sulfiphilic cobalt disulfide (CoS2) into carbon/sulfur cathodes (Fig. 9b).42 The interfaces between CoS2 and the electrolyte served as strong adsorption and activation sites for the polar polysulfides, which could accelerate the redox reactions of the polysulfides. The high polysulfide reactivity not only effectively suppressed the polysulfide mitigation and promoted energy efficiency obviously, but also promised a high discharge capacity and stable cycling performance up to 2000 cycles.
 Fig. 9  (a) Diagram illustrating the surface-mediated reduction route of Li2S from LiPSs on Ti4O7. Top panel: Upon reduction of S8 on a carbon host, LiPSs (Li2Sx) desorbed from the surface and underwent solution-mediated reactions, leading to a broad distribution of Li2S. Bottom panel: Upon reduction of S8 on the metallic polar Ti4O7, LiPSs adsorbed on the surface and were then reduced to Li2S via a surface-mediated reduction route at the interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic illustration of the S8 discharged on sulfur cathodes. Top panel: the polysulfide reduction is rate-controlled and polysulfide diffusion is dominated on a pure carbon/sulfur cathode. Bottom panel: the polysulfide reduction is accelerated and polysulfide diffusion is weakened on a CoS2-incorporated carbon/sulfur cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic drawing and comparison of the different polysulfides’ anchoring–diffusion–conversion processes on bare VN and VO2-VN binary host surfaces, respectively. (d) In situ Raman spectra collected upon the first cycle at 0.2C on the S@3VO2-1VN/G cathode. (e) In situ Raman spectra based on the bare S@G cathode collected upon the first cycle at 0.2C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2018, RSC Publishing. 
Our group first applies the in situ Raman method to investigate the enhanced polysulfide redox at a VN/VO2 hybrid host. The hybrid host combines the merits of ultrafast anchoring (VO2) with electronic conducting (VN) to accomplish the smooth immobilization–diffusion–conversion of polysulfides (Fig. 9c).17Fig. 9d displays the in situ Raman spectra of the electrolyte gathered in the first cycling process at 0.2C, with S@VO2-VN/G serving as the cathode, showing a gradual disappearance of the Li2S8 (∼119, 279 and 396 cm−1) and Li2S6 (∼178, 397 and 458 cm−1) signals during the discharge process and signal regeneration upon the charge process. The in situ Raman spectra of the bare graphene cathode without any host showed pronounced polysulfide signals throughout the whole discharging process (Fig. 9e). This clearly demonstrates that the introduction of the VO2-VN heterostructured hosts enables fast conversion and effective suppression of polysulfide shuttling.17


4.2.3 Suppressing long-chain polysulfide formation and dissolution through molecular engineering. 
To address the issues of high solubility of long-chain lithium polysulfides and their shuttle effect in Li–S batteries efficiently, stabilization of the sulfur cathodes with functional groups or molecules has been widely explored, including the use of alkylene radicals, sulfhydryl-functionalization, thiol-terminated polymeric matrices, etc.13,15,43
We have proposed a new strategy to suppress the shuttle effect for greatly enhanced Li–S battery performance mainly through the formation of short-chain intermediates by the covalent attachment of sulfur to the sulfydryl-functionalized graphene nanosheets during discharging. The as-obtained Li–S batteries showed a high capacity retention of 1022 mA h g−1 with 87% retention after 450 cycles. The excellent coulombic efficiency of ∼99.5% for more than 500 cycles could be obtained even without the addition of LiNO3 in the electrolytes. The in situ UV-vis analysis of the electrolyte during cycling clearly revealed that the short-chain polysulfides (Li2S2 and Li2S3) are detected as main intermediates rather than the long-chain soluble polysulfides (Fig. 10a).15 In this sense, the shuttle effect of the long-chain polysulfides can be greatly suppressed. A detailed density-functional (DFT) computation further verifies that, with the abundant insertion of Li+, the finally formed lithium polysulfides are Li2S, Li2S2, and Li2S3.
 Fig. 10  (a) Top panel: The copolymerization process of S8 with GSH. Bottom panel: The discharge profile and some selected discharge voltages applied for the in situ UV-vis measurements and the corresponding UV-vis first-order derivative spectral curves of the S-GSH electrodes at a current rate of C/3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Top panel: A schematic description of the synthetic procedure of the MIPs. Bottom panel: The in situ UV-vis spectra collected on the S/MIPs electrode when discharged from 2.7 V to 1.7 V. The concentrations of Li2S8 and Li2S6 detected on three different cathodes at different potentials have been also given. Reproduced with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, we proposed another strategy of using molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) as the recognition sites for the polysulfides in the Li–S battery system to trap long-chain polysulfides, which could allow a high capacity retention of over 82.5% after 400 cycles at 1C to be achieved.13 The in situ UV-vis investigation shows the extremely low concentration of Li2S8 in the electrolyte, indicating that the MIPs matrix has excellent ionic-sieving ability towards Li2S8 during the electrochemical cycle (Fig. 10b). Moreover, visual characterization gives direct evidence regarding the affinity and absorbability of MIPs towards Li2S8, which has also been theoretically confirmed by DFT calculations.13
Doping in the sulfur molecule can prevent the formation of dissoluble long-chain polysulfides and then improve the Li–S performances. For instance, we recently showed that the volumetric capacity and coulombic efficiency of Li–S batteries could be improved by adopting novel selenium-doped sulfur cathodes.43In situ UV-vis spectroscopy was carried out to monitor the changes of the intermediates in the electrolyte at different stages during the discharge process. The results displayed that no peaks shifted during the cell discharge process, indicating that no long-chain polysulfide intermediates were formed. The charging process showed the same results, confirming that the production of long-chain lithium polysulfides is restricted during battery cycling. Therefore, a new reaction process has been proposed with this Se-doped cathode, where no long-chain soluble polysulfides are formed, and then a stable cycling performance and high coulombic efficiency could be obtained, including a high gravimetric capacity of 700 mA h g−1, which is close to its theoretical mass capacity, an exceptional volumetric capacity of 2457 mA h cm−3, and an excellent capacity retention of 92% after 400 cycles.43


4.2.4 Capturing soluble polysulfides with multi-functional binders. 
In recent years, growing research efforts have revealed that many important battery characteristics, such as reversible capacity, rate capability, and stability, are critically dependent upon the electrically inactive components, such as functional binders.1,4,7,8 These binders can either provide polar functional groups to capture soluble polysulfides and suppress the shuttle effect or aid in constructing a three-dimensional high-strength and/or high-conductivity skeleton to maintain the structural/electrical integrity of the sulfur cathode during long-term cycling. Very recently, Ling et al. investigated different polymers as grafting agents and binders, including poly(vinyl sulfate) potassium salt (PVS), polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), and carrageenan, which could react with polysulfides through nucleophilic substitution. The substitution reaction has been verified by in situ UV-vis spectra testing (Fig. 11a).22 The in situ time-lapsed UV-vis spectra of PVS, PVDF and carrageenan in 3 M Li polysulfide in a DOL/DME solution and UV-vis absorbance changes of the three polymeric binders with time confirm the strong polysulfide immobilization capability of the PVS and carrageenan.
 Fig. 11  (a) Left panel: The molecular structures of PVS and carrageenan and their reaction equations with polysulfide to form immobilized polysulfides on the polymer backbones. The visual photos of the polysulfide solution exposed to different binders over 24 h have been given. Right panel: The in situ time-lapsed UV-vis spectra of PVS, PVDF and carrageenan in 3 M Li polysulfide in a DOL/DME solution and UV-vis absorbance changes of the three polymer binders with time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. (b) Top panel: The UV-vis spectra of the “standards” and the corresponding first-order derivative curves of different polysulfides (Li2S2, Li2S4, Li2S6 and Li2S8) at a concentration of 20 × 10−3 M, respectively. Bottom panel: The first-order derivative curves obtained with in situ UV-vis spectroscopy measurement during the discharge process on both the S@PVDF and S@AFG electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Time-resolved Raman image of the cathode with PPA and the selected in situ Raman spectra at four different voltages during the discharge process. The red curve is the voltage profile of the cathode wiith PPA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
The reactions between the polymeric binders and the polysulfides could not only immobilize the polysulfide to prevent dissolution, but also crosslink the polymeric binder to potentially provide additional mechanical stability to the conductive network.
We designed a new type of amino functional group (AFG) binder by the polymerization of hexamethylenediisocyanate (HDI) with a polyethyleneimine (PEI) polymer for high-loading sulfur cathodes. A high areal capacity of 7.9 mA h cm−2 and excellent cycling stability were obtained by the modified PEI binder.21 The in situ UV-vis measurement (Fig. 11b) revealed that the unique polar amine functional group AFG binder can absorb polar lithium polysulfides, thus greatly suppressing the shuttling effect of the polysulfides. Meanwhile, this novel binder exhibits excellent elastic and mechanical properties, which can buffer the volume changes during the repeatable charge and discharge process. Consequently, a remarkably improved cycling performance with a capacity retention of 91.3% over 600 cycles at 2C has been achieved with this novel binder in Li–S batteries.21
Similarly, a covalently cross-linked polyacrylamide (c-PAM) hydrogel with outstanding stretchability and ample amide groups has also been designed by us and applied for high-loading sulfur cathodes as a multifunctional binder.8 The c-PAM binder exhibited a strong capability to anchor polysulfides, which has been confirmed by in situ Raman analysis. During the first discharge process, the in situ Raman signals of the polysulfide in the electrolyte of the S-c-PAM cell reduced significantly, compared to those in the S-PVDF cell, which implies that most of the soluble polysulfides have been effectively trapped with the c-PAM binder, leaving only a few in the electrolyte.
Xiong and Yan et al. designed another hyperbranched binder by polymerization of hydrophilic poly(ethylene glycol) diglycidyl ether with polyethyleneimine (PPA), which could strongly anchor with polysulfides, thus enabling high-performance Li–S batteries with an excellent capacity retention of 72% over 400 cycles at 1.5C.34 By means of the specific polar-functional binder, the phenomenon of polysulfide shuttling from the sulfur cathode to the lithium anode has been effectively reduced, as verified clearly by the in situ Raman investigation (Fig. 11c).34
From the above discussion, it is clear that in situ optical spectroscopic techniques, especially Raman and UV-vis, can effectively monitor the concentration change of various soluble polysulfides during the discharge and charge processes, and thus, provide direct evidence for the capability of various binder materials with respect to anchoring polysulfides. In this sense, in situ optical spectroscopic techniques may play a more important role in the screening of novel multifunctional binders for Li–S batteries in the future.


4.2.5 Promoting the formation of short-chain polysulfides with electrolyte additives. 
Electrolyte additives could enhance the capacity retention in Li–S batteries by the formation of additive–short chain polysulfide complexes, which suppress the polysulfide dissolution and alleviate the diffusion of the polysulfide within the batteries. Gewirth and co-workers found that biphenyl-4,4′-dithiol (BPD) could improve the performance of Li–S significantly as the electrolyte additive.44 The in situ Raman study reveals that two new peaks located at 228 cm−1 and 526 cm−1 appear in the spectra of the electrolyte solution with the addition of BPD, which could be assigned to the formation of complexes (BPD)S42− and (BPD)S3−, respectively. The Raman result clearly shows that the BPD-polysulfide species formed at 2.3 V and decomposed into other species again at 1.8 V. Li2S and Li2S2 could be the final products at the end of the discharge process. However, the solid Li2S peak at 375 cm−1 cannot be observed during the in situ Raman testing, which may because the solvent modes obscure the bands associated with the solid Li2S. With the aid of in situ Raman spectroscopy, the formation and disappearance of the short chain polysulfides and BPD-polysulfide species, such as BPDS42−, S42−, S3˙−, and BPDS3−, could be clearly observed during the charge process. Finally, the Raman peak of S8 formed at 2.5 V and reached a maximum at 2.7 V. Moreover, an in situ UV-vis investigation was also performed and confirmed the above-mentioned conclusion found by the Raman analysis.44


4.2.6 Obstructing the migration of long-chain polysulfides with functional conductive interlayers. 
In a practical Li–S battery, Li+ could react with S to form various soluble polysulfides as intermediates during cycling, which could diffuse to and then be accommodated into the separator, due to the high porosity of the separator. The total amount of the polysulfide accommodated in the separator could reach as high as approximately 20% of the total active materials. For example, a separator with 25 mm diameter and 50% porosity can accommodate as high as ∼0.2 mg cm−2 of sulfur during cycling from a sulfur cathode with a sulfur mass loading of 1 mg cm−2.2 In detail, there is an absence of S species in the separator before the battery cycling. During the discharge process, the yielded polysulfides (e.g., Li2S8 and Li2S6) would dissolve into the electrolyte, then diffuse and be accommodated into the separator. When the cell is discharged to 1.7 V, the polysulfides in the separator tend to precipitate back on the top of the cathode as Li2S. After charging the cell from 1.7 V to 2.6 V, polysulfides would diffuse back into the separator, and ultimately precipitate as S8 on top of the cathode. However, there is only a limited conducting surface area for the deposition of the sulfur-related species on the top surface of the cathode. In contrast, the sulfur-related species show extremely poor electrical conductivity, thus only a thin layer of the sulphur-related species can be deposited on the conducting surface, significantly reducing the utilization of the polysulfides which are accommodated in the separator.2 Furthermore, the continuous deposited layer of S-species on top of the cathode surface would block further diffusion of polysulfides from the separator into the deep inside of the cathode. Therefore, a continuous and thick layer of S-species can be obviously observed on the cathode surface after limited cycles.
In order to hinder the migration of polysulfides and guarantee their recycling in the cathode side, building a thin and functional interlayer onto the separator could be a promising and effective strategy.1,5,10,45,46 Generally, an ideal interlayer should fulfil the following criteria: (I) strong ability for trapping polysulfide with specific physical architectures and/or chemical anchors, (II) high conductivity for S-species precipitation and recycling, (III) ability to inhibit the passage of the soluble polysulfides through the separator, (IV) excellent electrolyte wettability.1,4,5,10,45,46 Modified separators based on carbon nanostructures possessing 1D (such as carbon nano-fibres/tubes), 2D (graphene sheets and films) and 3D (carbon aerogel and carbonized eggshell membrane) structures, black phosphorus, MoS2, TiO2–TiN, metal–organic frameworks and covalent organic frameworks have been used as efficient interlayers due to their strongly coupled interfaces for polysulfides or precisely tuneable pore sizes, resulting in significantly improved cycle life of Li–S batteries.46
Cui and co-workers introduced a Li–S battery composed of a novel functional separator by depositing black-phosphorus (BP) nanoflakes onto a Celgard separator, which shows superior polysulfide-capturing properties and excellent capacity retention upon cycling.9 More importantly, the authors designed a subtle cell configuration for the real-time Raman investigations. In situ Raman characterization clearly displays the evolution of the chemical composition on the BP-modified separator surface during cycling (Fig. 12a), which starts from S8 to polysulfides, finally to Li2S and Li2S2 along with the discharge process, and then reverses during charging. The Raman mapping results showed that the BP coating layer can effectively anchor the soluble polysulfides, thus the diffusion of the polysulfides could be greatly confined. Moreover, these sulfur species trapped into the BP layer are electrochemically reactive, as the BP layer is a good electrical conductor (∼300 S m−1), which could also be beneficial for the recycling of the S-species.9
 Fig. 12  (a) Top panel: First galvanostatic discharge–charge curves of the Li–S battery and the corresponding typical Raman spectra of the cathode at five different voltages (A–E). Bottom panel: In situ Raman mapping images of the selected area (red square) at the potentials corresponding to A–E, respectively: collected (A) in the range of 213–227 cm−1; (B) in the range of 390–403 cm−1; (C) in the range of 370–385 cm−1; (D) in the range of 390–403 cm−1; (E) in the range of 213–227 cm−1 (Raman mapping scale bars, 30 μm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) The in situ UV-vis spectra collected on three different Li–S batteries with a bare separator, GO coated separator, and LiF/GO coated separator between λ = 300 and 800 nm during discharge from 2.7 V to 1.7 V. The concentrations of Li2S8 and Li2S6 at different potentials in different cells have been plotted. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Left panel: Schematic drawing of the cell configuration of Li–S batteries with a NHG-decorated separator. Right panel: In situ Raman spectra collected on the NHG separator during the first discharge at 0.2C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, we have shown that lithium fluoride/graphene oxide (LiF/GO) with a high elastic modulus and desirable mechanical strength could be used as a promising coating layer on the separator and could greatly improve the electrochemical performance of Li–S batteries.17 The functions of the LiF/GO coating layer can be attributed to the following two aspects: first, LiF possesses a wide electrochemical stability window and good lithium ion conductivity. Second, the LiF/GO coating layer can effectively block the diffusion of polysulfides and suppress the shuttle effect. In situ UV-vis measurements could provide us more solid evidence of the functions of the LiF/GO hybrids. The in situ UV-vis spectra validated that the concentrations of Li2S8 and Li2S6 in cells with the bare separator and GO coated separator increased rapidly and then decreased to a considerably high value (Fig. 12b).16 In contrast, the concentration of Li2S8 and Li2S6 in the cell with the LiF/GO coated separator remains very small and stationary, revealing the excellent ability of LiF/GO hybrids for trapping soluble polysulfides.
Similarly, in situ Raman was utilized by us to estimate the polysulfide capturing ability of a nepenthes-like N-doped hierarchical graphene (NHG)-based separator.45 The 3D textural porous NHG architectures were obtained by a bio-templating CVD approach with the naturally abundant diatomite as the growth template. The thus-prepared separator can not only immobilize polysulfides effectively, but also guarantee rapid lithium ion transport. This can be attributed to the advantages of the high surface area, inner-channel structure and abundant nitrogen doping of the CVD-derived NHG frameworks. Fig. 12c displays the in situ Raman spectra of the S-species in the electrolyte during the first discharge process in the presence of an NHG separator, which shows gradually reduced Raman signals of the soluble Li2S8 (∼119, 279, and 454 cm−1) and Li2S6 (∼178, 339, and 397 cm−1) species. These results indeed confirm that the NHG-based separator has a strong polysulfide anchoring ability, thus greatly suppressing the shuttling effect of polysulfides in Li–S batteries. Accordingly, the Li–S batteries with the NHG-based separator showed a high reversible capacity of 868 mA h g−1 at 2C and an average capacity decay of only 0.067% per cycle for 800 cycles under the same current rate.45

5. Rational design of advanced in situ optical spectroscopic techniques for Li–S batteries
5.1. The selection and applicability of in situ optical spectroscopies
As discussed above, in situ Raman, FT-IR and UV-vis have been widely adopted in the studies of the redox mechanisms in Li–S batteries. Elemental sulphur and different polysulfide species are formed as reaction intermediates at different stages during discharge/charge cycling, which are strongly Raman active. Therefore, in situ Raman analysis of Li–S batteries is a powerful tool for investigating the battery reaction mechanisms. The light from UV to near infrared could be applied as the excitation source for Raman spectroscopy, offering a high spatial resolution. However, the sensitivity of Raman scattering is intrinsically low, which limits its wide application for the mechanistic investigation in Li–S batteries. Moreover, in many cases, the in situ Raman spectroscopic technique was able to detect the peaks of S8 (150, 220, and 470 cm−1) and long-chain polysulfide dianions, such as S82− and S62− (≈400 cm−1), but failed to capture the short-chain S-species, such as S32− and S22−.5,10 Nevertheless, there are many inconsistencies in the identification and assignment of some peaks for the polysulfides between studies from different groups, due to the fact that the peak positions overlapped with each other, except for the peak position of the S3˙−radical, which normally located at 525–535 cm−1 and is highly consistent with most theoretical and experimental reports.5,10 Therefore, quantification analysis of the different polysulfides produced during the battery cycling is still not available for in situ Raman spectroscopy thus far. In this sense, more sensitive Raman spectroscopic techniques, such as surface enhanced Raman (SERS)18 and Shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SHINERS),47 are highly desirable.

In situ ATR FT-IR can be used to detect individual lithium polysulfide species based on the S–S vibration mode in the narrow range from 470 to 510 cm−1.19,20,36 Meanwhile, in situ UV-vis spectroscopy is capable of determining the soluble polysulfides efficiently, which generally show broad absorption bands in the region of 185 to 1000 nm. Nevertheless, both the in situ ATR FT-IR and UV-vis measurements pose a limit on the concentration of S8 and Li2S owing to their low solubility in the common electrolyte.
From the above discussion, it is clear that normally with only one optical spectroscopic technique, it is difficult to determine the exact redox mechanism during the discharge and charge cycling in Li–S batteries. Combining two or even more of the above-mentioned techniques to study the intermediate discharge products and the charging process would give a high success possibility.
5.2. Reliable qualitative and quantitative analysis
For most of the in situ spectroscopic methods in Li–S batteries, the compound species are qualitatively derived. However, with the help of the “standard” reference samples that are prepared through a chemical reaction of lithium and sulfur with stoichiometric ratios, the relative amounts of each sulfur compound in the cathode and separator could be determined precisely after linear fitting the calibrated spectral curve of the reference compounds. Benefiting from this procedure, in situ UV-vis and FT-IR have been successfully applied to detect the reaction intermediates and products quantitatively in Li–S batteries, and corresponding reaction pathways were also proposed.15,20,28
5.3. Time and spatial resolutions
The redox reactions in Li–S batteries normally occur quite fast. Hence, there is an endless pursuit for higher time resolution to decipher the processes occurring in dynamic systems. Moreover, the spectral signals obtained in Li–S batteries during in situ characterization are usually very weak due to tiny amounts of the discharge/charge products. There are also increasing demands for achieving the nanometre spatial resolution for the in situ spectroscopy characterization on different surfaces, including the cathode, anode, and separator. Specifically, the distribution of polysulfide species on the separator could be easily and clearly observed with the Raman mapping mode. Nevertheless, there has been no attempt yet to investigate the reaction mechanism for Li–S batteries quantitatively with in situ Raman spectroscopy, due to the weak spectral signals and poor spatial resolution. Fortunately, SERS and SHINERS may become two promising spectroscopy methods for in situ Li–S battery research with super high time and spatial resolutions due to the giant signal enhancements. SERS is a technique to enhance the Raman signal by several orders of magnitude (∼106–108). This enhancement was achieved based on the introduction of metal nanoparticles over an analyte surface, which excites the localized surface plasmon, resulting in an enhancement of the electromagnetic field near the surface.18 In contrast, for SHINERS, the SERS-active metallic nanoparticles are isolated inside a nanometre-thick chemically insulating, optically transparent coating of SiO2 or Al2O3. The insulating shell on the SERS-active nanoparticles prevents the direct contact between the core metal nanoparticles and the analysed surface, thus avoiding interferences with the electrochemical reactions. The signal enhancement is in the range of 107–108-fold. 47 Both techniques could and should play a significant role in the mechanistic investigations of Li–S batteries.
5.4. Theoretical calculations
Theoretical calculations are powerful approaches, which have attracted great attention among various science areas, including the Li–S battery. With the combination of theoretical calculations, many experimental phenomena could be explained clearly and thus contribute to understanding the reaction pathways and mechanisms in Li–S batteries. For example, we have proposed a new strategy of using acrylamide as recognition sites for polysuflides in Li–S batteries, which could trap long-chain polysulfides successfully, and then improve the battery performance significantly.13 The strong absorption of Li2S8 by this molecularly imprinted polymer has been confirmed by density functional theory (DFT) calculations, with 0.69 eV for the amino group and 0.98 eV for the carbonyl group, respectively, which guaranteed the formation of binding sites and rebinding of target molecules. The low concentration of Li2S8 in the electrolyte has also been confirmed by in situ UV-vis spectroscopy measurements.13 The Kaghazchi group48,49 observed clear evidence of the Li2S4 → Li2S2 transition by using DFT calculations and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations. The dominant Raman peak at ∼440 cm−1 has been observed and assigned to the S–S stretching mode. Thus, the structural transition to Li2S2 could be clearly identified from the trend in the Raman spectra. By studying the adsorption of Li polysulfides on pristine and defective graphene with DFT calculations, they also found that defect sites cannot considerably increase graphene's ability to adsorb Li polysulfides and for this reason cannot improve the performance of S cathodes in Li–S batteries. The performance of S cathodes could be only improved by introducing suitable dopants, such as N or P, into defective graphene. This conclusion is well in line with Dong's work23, and they also found that the N-doped carbon surface can enhance the adsorption energy of Li2Sn (n = 4–8), which could be further oxidized into S8, as confirmed by the periodic DFT calculations and in operando Raman spectroscopy. For better understanding the reaction process in Li–S batteries, the combination of in situ optical spectroscopic techniques and theoretical calculations is essential and could play a significant role in the investigations and practical applications of Li–S batteries in the future.
6. Summary and outlook
Recent years have witnessed a burgeoning interest in the development and full understanding of high-energy and long-life Li–S batteries with the aid of in situ optical spectroscopic techniques. This is evidenced by the rapidly increasing number of publications on the optimal design of Li–S systems using a variety of in situ spectroscopy methods, especially in the past three years. This progress indeed provides us with a deeper understanding of the real electrochemical reaction routes of Li–S batteries with different internal designs and scientifically promotes further optimization strategies. This tutorial review has discussed the latest research achievements in terms of the application of in situ optical spectroscopic techniques in guiding the optimal design of Li–S systems, including specific electrochemical cell structures, and strategies for preventing long chain polysulfide formation, dissolution and migration, thus alleviating the shuttle effect. The detailed processes have been studied with in situ optical spectroscopic techniques, such as Raman, FT-IR and UV-vis spectroscopies. Important conclusions drawn with several key challenges and prospects in this exciting field are as follows:
(i) The practical electrochemical reaction routes of Li–S batteries are very complicated and rely heavily on different internal designs. The application of in situ optical spectroscopic techniques in Li–S batteries is still in its infancy. Considering the respective limitations of current in situ optical spectroscopy methods, it is difficult to determine the exact redox mechanism in Li–S systems by means of a single spectroscopic technique. Combining two or even more spectroscopic techniques to study the intermediate discharge products and the charging process would give a high possibility of success.
(ii) At the present stage, in situ optical spectroscopic techniques have shown their great potential in analysing the real reaction routes of Li–S systems. The future directions for in situ optical spectroscopic analysis depend upon the well-designed electrochemical cells with high reproducibility and the introduction of the state-of-the-art spectroscopic techniques (e.g., SERS, SHINERS) with high time and spatial resolutions, as well as greatly enhanced signal intensity. This could provide us with more convincing information to recognize the real-time reactions occurring in a Li–S system. As a new emerging technique, the free electron laser (FEL) has attracted great attention due to its advantages, including production of coherent soft and hard X-rays with extremely high brightness, which is nearly ten orders of magnitude higher than that of conventional synchrotron sources. Furthermore, FEL can produce a range of pulses with duration from 500 to <10 fs (10−15 s). With these specific beam characteristics, this light source is capable of revealing the structure and dynamics of matter at atomic size and timescales, which could provide abundant information and help researchers to understand many frontier research studies with prospective insights.50 If the emerging FELs could be adopted as laser sources in optical spectroscopies successfully, abundant atom-level information could be achieved during the Li–S battery operation. This can significantly boost the deep understanding of the reaction mechanism and pathway in Li–S batteries, since FELs have high brightness, femtosecond order pulses, adjustable frequency and the widest frequency range. (iii) The reliable in situ quantitative analysis (e.g., in situ UV-vis) would be rewarding with regard to the accurate monitoring of the electrochemical reaction mechanism of Li–S batteries at a higher level. This could provide us with not only the types of intermediates and products but also their contents and ratios and, therefore, deeper insight into Li–S batteries.
(iv) Considering the practical application of Li–S batteries, only after all the challenges of Li metal anodes have been significantly overcome can viable Li–S batteries with high safety be built. In this sense, the dendrite issue of Li metal is still a critical issue in Li–S systems. So far, considerable research efforts have been devoted to finding viable solutions to suppress the dendritic growth of Li metal anodes during cycling. The following strategies have been proposed. (a) Enhancing the SEI layer by using novel solvents, Li salts and/or additives; (b) mechanically blocking the dendrite growth of the Li metal by coating the Li surface with solid-state ceramic or polymeric electrolytes; (c) introducing ex situ coatings with mechanical and electrochemical stability to separate the SEI layer from dendrite growth towards a uniform Li surface; (d) designing conductive anodes with micro/nanostructure to confine Li metal inside, etc. In situ XRD measurements have been introduced to clarify the effect of polymer coating on the Li metal by Yan et al. for the first time. However, in situ optical spectroscopic techniques have not been utilized thus far despite their strong ability to monitor the change in surface chemistry. Hence, the application of in situ Raman, FT-IR and UV-vis in guiding the Li metal anode optimization is very important to construct stable Li anodes for Li–S batteries in the future.
(v) Replacing the liquid electrolytes with all-solid-state electrolytes has been considered as an ultimate approach to solving the issues of Li–S batteries. More reliable in situ optical spectroscopic analyses targeting all-solid-state Li–S batteries are urgently needed to gain detailed insight into solid–solid interfacial behaviours, aiming to address several interfacial challenges, including high impedance and low stability.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21875155, 51872193, 21673153, 51675275, 51622208 and 21473119). L. Z., T. Q., X. Y. Z., Z. L. H., M. F. W., J. H. T., L. Y. Z., T. J., and C. L. Y. acknowledge the support from Suzhou Key Laboratory for Advanced Carbon Materials and Wearable Energy Technologies, Suzhou, China. C. L. Y. acknowledges the support from the Thousand Youth Talents Plan of China. J. H. T. acknowledges the support from the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province, China (BK20161207), and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2017M611894).
References
Z. W. Seh, Y. M. Sun, Q. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5605 RSC .
H. Yao, K. Yan, W. Li, G. Zheng, D. Kong, Z. W. Seh, V. K. Narasimhan, Z. Liang and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3381 RSC .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang, X. B. Cheng and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700260 CrossRef .
J. Tan, D. N. Liu, X. Xu and L. Q. Mai, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19001 RSC .

          D. Herber and J. Ulam, US Pat., 3043896,  1962 Search PubMed .
J. T. Li, Z. Y. Wu, Y. Q. Lu, Y. Zhou, Q. S. Huang, L. Huang and S. G. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 24, 1701185 Search PubMed .
X. Y. Zhu, F. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Y. Zhang, Y. Z. Song, T. Jiang, S. Sayed, C. Lu, X. G. Wang, J. Y. Sun and Z. F. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705015 CrossRef .
J. Sun, Y. M. Sun, M. Pasta, G. M. Zhou, Y. Z. Li, W. Liu, F. Xiong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Z. W. Zhang, H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700134 CrossRef .
Q. Pang, X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok, J. Kulisch and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601630 CrossRef .
X. J. Liu, N. Xu, T. Qian, J. Liu, X. W. Shen and C. L. Yan, Small, 2017, 13, 1702104 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, T. Qian, M. F. Wang, X. J. Liu, N. Xu, Y. Z. You and C. L. Yan, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, T. Qian, M. F. Wang, J. Q. Zhou, N. Xu and C. L. Yan, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Xu, T. Qian, X. J. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Chen and C. L. Yan, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Ni, T. Qian, X. J. Liu, N. Xu, J. Liu and C. L. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706513 CrossRef .
Y. Z. Song, W. Zhao, L. Kong, L. Zhang, X. Y. Zhu, Y. L. Shao, F. Ding, Q. Zhang, J. Y. Sun and Z. F. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2620 RSC .
Z. Q. Tian and B. Ren, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2004, 55, 197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Saqib, C. J. Silva, C. M. Maupin and J. M. Porter, Appl. Spectrosc., 2017, 71, 1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dillard, A. Singh and V. Kalra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 18195 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, T. Qian, J. Xiong, N. Xu, X. J. Liu, J. Liu, J. Q. Zhou, X. W. Shen, T. Z. Yang, Y. Chen and C. L. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605160 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ling, L. Zhang, T. Zheng, J. Feng, J. H. Guo, L. Q. Mai and G. Liu, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Chen, R. M. Yuan, J. M. Feng, Q. Zhang, J. X. Huang, G. Fu, M. S. Zheng, B. Ren and Q. F. Dong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2048 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hannauer, J. Scheers, J. Fullenwarth, B. Fraisse, L. Stievano and P. Johansson, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 2755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hagen, P. Schiffels, M. Hammer, S. Dorfler, J. Tubke, M. J. Hoffmann, H. Althues and S. Kaskel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1205 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, A. Paolella, C. S. Kim, D. Liu, Z. Feng, C. Gagnon, J. Trottier, A. Vijh, A. Guerfi, A. Mauger, C. M. Julien, M. Armand and K. Zaghib, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 737 RSC .
C. Barchasz, F. Molton, C. Duboc, J. C. Lepretre, S. Patoux and F. Alloin, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 3973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. U. M. Patel and R. Dominko, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. L. Zou and Y. C. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Huang, Y. V. Lim, X. M. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Zheng, D. Z. Kong, M. Ding, S. A. Yang and H. Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 340 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Song, W. Zhao, X. Y. Zhu, L. Zhang, Q. C. Li, F. Ding, Z. F. Liu and J. Y. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 15733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, X. F. Hu, K. Zhang, N. Zhang, Y. X. Hu and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, M. A. Lowe, Y. Kiya and H. D. Abruna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25132 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, T. Y. Lei, T. Qian, W. Q. Lv, W. D. He, C. Y. Wu, X. J. Liu, J. Liu, B. Chen, C. L. Yan and J. Xiong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702889 CrossRef .
J. Wang, S. Cheng, W. F. Li, L. J. Jia, Q. B. Xiao, Y. Hou, Z. Z. Zheng, H. F. Li, S. Zhang, L. S. Zhou, M. N. Liu, H. Z. Liu and Y. G. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 390 CrossRef CAS .
N. Saqib, G. M. Ohlhausen and J. M. Porter, J. Power Sources, 2017, 364, 266 CrossRef CAS .
H. Marceau, C. S. Kim, A. Paolella, S. Ladouceur, M. Lagace, M. Chaker, A. Vijh, A. Guerfi, C. M. Julien, A. Mauger, M. Armand, P. Hovington and K. Zaghib, J. Power Sources, 2016, 319, 247 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, G. Yu, J. J. Cha, H. Wu, M. Vosgueritchian, Y. Yao, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Vinayan, T. Diemant, X. M. Lin, M. A. Cambaz, U. Golla-Schindler, U. Kaiser, R. J. Behm and M. Fichtner, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600372 CrossRef .
X. Y. Zhu, W. Zhao, Y. Z. Song, Q. C. Li, F. Ding, J. Y. Sun, L. Zhang and Z. F. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800201 CrossRef .
Q. Pang, D. Kundu, M. Cuisinier and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yuan, H. J. Peng, T. Z. Hou, J. Q. Huang, C. M. Chen, D. W. Wang, X. B. Cheng, F. Wei and Q. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. Zhou, T. Qian, N. Xu, M. F. Wang, X. Y. Ni, X. J. Liu, X. W. Shen and C. L. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701294 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Wu, M. Shin, Y. M. Liu, K. A. See and A. A. Gewirth, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 50 CrossRef CAS .
Q. C. Li, Y. Z. Song, R. Z. Xu, L. Zhang, J. Gao, Z. Xia, Z. N. Tian, N. Wei, M. H. Rummeli, X. L. Zou, J. Y. Sun and Z. F. Liu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Zhou, W. Lv, J. Li, G. M. Zhou, Y. Zhao, S. X. Fan, B. L. Liu, B. H. Li, F. Y. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1694 RSC .
J. F. Li, Y. F. Huang, Y. Ding, Z. L. Yang, S. B. Li, X. S. Zhou, F. R. Fan, W. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhou, D. Y. Wu, B. Ren, Z. L. Wang and Z. Q. Tian, Nature, 2010, 464, 392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Partovi-Azar, T. D. Kuhne and P. Kaghazchi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 22009 RSC .
S. P. Jand, Y. Chen and P. Kaghazchi, J. Power Sources, 2016, 308, 166 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. J. McNeil and N. R. Thompson, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 814 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Li Zhang
	Prof. Li Zhang received his BS degree in Chemistry (2003) and PhD degree in physical chemistry (2008) from Xiamen University, China. During 2009–2012, he was a research associate in the Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering at the University of Alberta, Canada, and National Institute for Nanotechnology, Canada. He became an associate professor at the College of Energy of Soochow University in 2012 and was promoted to a full professor in 2017. He has published more than 60 peer-reviewed research journal publications. His current research interests are focused on electrochemistry, lithium-ion batteries, flexible/wearable energy storage and solar/chemical energy conversion.

Jing-Hua Tian
	Jing-Hua Tian received his BS degree in chemistry (2003) and PhD degree in physical chemistry (2009) from Xiamen University, China. During 2009–2010, he was a post-doctoral research fellow at Ecole Normal Superieure, Paris, France, and then he moved to the Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, as a research associate (2010–2013). At present, he is a full professor at the College of Energy of Soochow University. He has published more than 30 peer-reviewed research journal publications. His current research interests are focused on electrocatalysis, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, energy storage and conversion systems.

Chenglin Yan
	Chenglin Yan is a Professor and Dean of the College of Energy at Soochow University in Suzhou, China. He received his PhD from Dalian University of Technology in 2008. In 2011, he became a staff scientist and a group leader at the Institute for Integrative Nanoscience at the Leibniz Institute in Dresden (Germany). In 2013, the IFW-Dresden awarded Dr Chenglin Yan the IIN Research Prize 2013 for his outstanding research into in situ characterization techniques of battery materials. He received the Thousand Young Talents Award from the Chinese Thousand Talents Program in 2014. His primary research interests focus on electrochemical energy storage.

Key learning points
(1) The significant latest advancements of optimal design of Li–S batteries with the aid of in situ optical spectroscopic techniques.
(2) The representative strategies for alleviating polysulfide dissolution and suppressing the shuttle effect, which have been characterized and analysed with in situ optical spectroscopic techniques.
(3) The advantages, limitations and feasibility of current in situ optical spectroscopic techniques with respect to Li–S battery research.
(4) Rational design of more advanced in situ optical spectroscopic techniques for Li–S batteries.
(5) Future directions and challenges with respect to in situ optical spectroscopic techniques for Li–S battery research.


 	Fig. 1  (a) A typical two-plateau discharge–discharge voltage profile of Li–S batteries in ether-based organic electrolytes. (b) Schematic drawing of a typical Li–S battery and possible electrochemical/chemical reactions at both the sulfur cathode and lithium metal anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 4. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 


Raman/cm−1	154, 220, 474	340–420 (S62− to S82−)	420–480 (S32− to S52−)	200, 148	535	
5, 10 and 23–26

FT-IR/cm−1	
	504.0	
	495.2	490.6	487.8	
	483.3	479.5	475.8	
	
19 and 20

UV-vis/nm	270–280	350–500 (S22− to S82−)	620	
4, 10 and 27–29


Sensitivity	Ultrahigh sub-monolayer	High, monolayer/few layers
Energetic resolution	Poor 0.01 V	Ultrahigh 10−4 eV (1 cm−1)
Spatial resolution	Poor, 10 μm	Good, 1 μm

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the basic configuration of the in situ electrochemical spectroscopy coupling setups. The in situ electrochemical cells need to be intelligently designed to guarantee the effective excitation input (e.g., light/laser beam from the light sources and voltage/current from the potentiostat) onto the electrode/electrolyte interface (right panel) and signal output back to the spectrometer and potentiostat.	 

 	Fig. 3  Development of an in situ Raman electrochemical cell for Li–S battery investigation. (a) Raman in situ cell. Left panel: Photo on cell window with the electrode stack; right panel: drawing and assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2013, the Electrochemical Society. (b) A simple sealed bottle-type in situ Raman cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. (c) Photograph of the in situ scanning Raman setup. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d and e) Simply-modified coin cell-based in situ Raman cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8 and 34. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Development of the in situ FT-IR electrochemical cell for Li–S battery investigation. (a) Top panel: Schematic representation of the in situ ATR FT-IR spectro-electrochemical cell. Bottom panel: Illustration of the battery's configuration and the diamond window, the IR beam input and that reflected through the ATR crystal, absorbed by the electrolyte in a porous cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. (b) Schematic of the in situ infrared spectro-electrochemical experiment with a Li–S cell on the ATR crystal of the FT-IR spectrometer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A photograph of the in situ UV-vis punch cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic view of each assembly unit of the Li–S cell used in in situ UV-vis spectroscopy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. (c) Simply modified coin cell-based in situ UV-vis cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Proposed sulfur reduction mechanism of a Li–S battery with different intermediates and the corresponding capacity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (b) First discharge/charge curves of the Li–S battery with the corresponding in situ UV/Vis spectra, collected during the first discharge and the first charge (the cycle from the start to the end is displayed with the colour change from black through red to blue). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (c) CV of 2.0 mM S8-1.0 M LiTFSI in DMSO and in situ UV-vis spectra of each reaction step (change in colour from dark to light with the arrow in each panel represents the changes over time). Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) The Raman spectra evolution of the sulfur electrode with 0.5 M LiTFSI-PY13-FSI as the electrolyte cycled at a rate of C/48 (the inset is the enlarged Raman spectra at two different voltages of discharge). The green areas have been zoomed-in and displayed at the top right. The bottom left is the corresponding discharge–discharge curves with specific S-species, and the bottom right is the intensity ratio of different S-species as a function of voltage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2017, RSC Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) In situ UV-vis absorption spectra of the soluble S-species in the polymer electrolyte with an all solid electrolyte during discharge and charge. Major absorption bands are guided with vertical lines. (b) The voltage profile as a function of time. (c) Time evolution of the normalized absorbance of different sulfur species. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Upper left and bottom left: Time sequence of the Raman spectra obtained during discharging–charging processes of the sulfur/super P composite at 0.1C. The background of the Raman spectra in the images has been subtracted for clarity. The red curves are for the voltage profiles for the discharging and charging, respectively. Right upper and lower right: Selected corresponding original Raman spectra without the background subtraction. (b) Top panel: Time sequence of Raman spectra obtained for the sulfur/super P–N composite at 0.1C during the charging process; the contributions from the cell background have been subtracted for clarity. Bottom panel: Two representative original Raman spectra corresponding to the top panel, which were collected at the start and final charging states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) In situ Raman spectra and the corresponding voltage profiles collected during the discharge/charge processes from 1.5 to 2.8 V for the S/NGC cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Left panel: Typical discharge–charge profile of a Li–S battery based on the FeP/rGO/CNTs–S cathode and right panel: in situ Raman spectra collected at the A, B, C, D, E and F points in the left panel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (e) In situ Raman spectra based on G-VS2 hosts obtained during the discharging process at 0.5C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Diagram illustrating the surface-mediated reduction route of Li2S from LiPSs on Ti4O7. Top panel: Upon reduction of S8 on a carbon host, LiPSs (Li2Sx) desorbed from the surface and underwent solution-mediated reactions, leading to a broad distribution of Li2S. Bottom panel: Upon reduction of S8 on the metallic polar Ti4O7, LiPSs adsorbed on the surface and were then reduced to Li2S via a surface-mediated reduction route at the interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic illustration of the S8 discharged on sulfur cathodes. Top panel: the polysulfide reduction is rate-controlled and polysulfide diffusion is dominated on a pure carbon/sulfur cathode. Bottom panel: the polysulfide reduction is accelerated and polysulfide diffusion is weakened on a CoS2-incorporated carbon/sulfur cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic drawing and comparison of the different polysulfides’ anchoring–diffusion–conversion processes on bare VN and VO2-VN binary host surfaces, respectively. (d) In situ Raman spectra collected upon the first cycle at 0.2C on the S@3VO2-1VN/G cathode. (e) In situ Raman spectra based on the bare S@G cathode collected upon the first cycle at 0.2C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2018, RSC Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Top panel: The copolymerization process of S8 with GSH. Bottom panel: The discharge profile and some selected discharge voltages applied for the in situ UV-vis measurements and the corresponding UV-vis first-order derivative spectral curves of the S-GSH electrodes at a current rate of C/3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Top panel: A schematic description of the synthetic procedure of the MIPs. Bottom panel: The in situ UV-vis spectra collected on the S/MIPs electrode when discharged from 2.7 V to 1.7 V. The concentrations of Li2S8 and Li2S6 detected on three different cathodes at different potentials have been also given. Reproduced with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Left panel: The molecular structures of PVS and carrageenan and their reaction equations with polysulfide to form immobilized polysulfides on the polymer backbones. The visual photos of the polysulfide solution exposed to different binders over 24 h have been given. Right panel: The in situ time-lapsed UV-vis spectra of PVS, PVDF and carrageenan in 3 M Li polysulfide in a DOL/DME solution and UV-vis absorbance changes of the three polymer binders with time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. (b) Top panel: The UV-vis spectra of the “standards” and the corresponding first-order derivative curves of different polysulfides (Li2S2, Li2S4, Li2S6 and Li2S8) at a concentration of 20 × 10−3 M, respectively. Bottom panel: The first-order derivative curves obtained with in situ UV-vis spectroscopy measurement during the discharge process on both the S@PVDF and S@AFG electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Time-resolved Raman image of the cathode with PPA and the selected in situ Raman spectra at four different voltages during the discharge process. The red curve is the voltage profile of the cathode wiith PPA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Top panel: First galvanostatic discharge–charge curves of the Li–S battery and the corresponding typical Raman spectra of the cathode at five different voltages (A–E). Bottom panel: In situ Raman mapping images of the selected area (red square) at the potentials corresponding to A–E, respectively: collected (A) in the range of 213–227 cm−1; (B) in the range of 390–403 cm−1; (C) in the range of 370–385 cm−1; (D) in the range of 390–403 cm−1; (E) in the range of 213–227 cm−1 (Raman mapping scale bars, 30 μm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) The in situ UV-vis spectra collected on three different Li–S batteries with a bare separator, GO coated separator, and LiF/GO coated separator between λ = 300 and 800 nm during discharge from 2.7 V to 1.7 V. The concentrations of Li2S8 and Li2S6 at different potentials in different cells have been plotted. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Left panel: Schematic drawing of the cell configuration of Li–S batteries with a NHG-decorated separator. Right panel: In situ Raman spectra collected on the NHG separator during the first discharge at 0.2C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
