Catalytically active sites of MOF-derived electrocatalysts: synthesis, characterization, theoretical calculations, and functional mechanisms  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA02896K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA02896K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 20320-20344Catalytically active sites of MOF-derived electrocatalysts: synthesis, characterization, theoretical calculations, and functional mechanisms

        
          
            Zibo 
            Zhai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Yan
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Dong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuqi 
            Deng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            David P. 
            Wilkinson
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaomin 
            Wang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Zhang
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Jiujun 
            Zhang
          
        
      *ac
aInstitute for Sustainable Energy/College of Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200444, China. E-mail: yveayan@shu.edu.cn; jiujun.zhang@i.shu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemical & Biochemical Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1W5, Canada
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Taiyuan University of Technology, Taiyuan, 030024, China
dEnergy, Mining & Environment, National Research Council of Canada, Vancouver, BC V6T 1W5, Canada
Received 
      7th April 2021
    , Accepted 5th August 2021First published on 9th August 2021AbstractElectrocatalysts play critical roles in electrochemical energy storage and conversion technologies such as fuel cells, metal–air batteries, and H2O/CO2/N2 electrolysis. Recently, metal–organic framework (MOF)-derived electrocatalysts have been extensively explored not only because of their superior electrocatalytic activities but also their well-defined active sites, particularly those of single-atom active sites, which have been recognized as role-model electrocatalysts for fundamental understanding of the catalytic mechanisms at both the molecular and electronic levels. In this paper, we have reviewed the recent progress in MOF-derived electrocatalysts with focus on the characterization of the catalytically active sites, their functional mechanisms and performance validation/optimization of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR), and nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR). Regarding the synthesis of the electrocatalysts with active sites, the alloy and composite formation and the edge-defect/oxygen vacancy engineering are discussed. Regarding the characterization for fundamental understanding, some advanced in situ/ex situ characterization and theoretical calculations using first-principles Density Functional Theory (DFT) are summarized. Some technical challenges are analyzed and the corresponding further research directions for overcoming the challenges are also proposed for future research and development of practicable MOF-derived electrocatalysts.
1. Introduction
Electrochemical energy technologies, including fuel cells, batteries, supercapacitors, water electrolysis to produce hydrogen, carbon dioxide electroreduction to produce low-carbon fuels, and nitrogen electroreduction to produce ammonia, for energy storage and conversion of electricity from clean and sustainable energy sources such as solar, wind, waterfall, geothermal, etc. have been proven to be practical, reliable and efficient options for the sustainable development of human society.1 However, there is still much room for electrochemical energy systems' performance to be improved in terms of their energy efficiencies, energy/power densities, and lifetimes. For example, for low-temperature fuel cells, metal–air batteries, water electrolysis and CO2 electroreduction, the greatest challenges are the sluggish kinetics of electrode reactions, which greatly limit their energy efficiencies and performance. The sluggish electrode reactions mainly include the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR), and nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR). To speed up these reactions, efficient electrocatalysts definitely need to be coated on the corresponding electrodes, which can play a vital role in these reactions by lowering the reaction energy barriers and thus boosting the efficiency and selectivity of the reactions.2 Regarding the electrocatalysts, the most practical electrocatalysts for these important reactions are precious metal-based electrocatalysts (PMEs), such as Pt-, Pd-, Ir-, Ru-, Rh- and Au-based ones. However, the high cost and scarcity of these PMEs have greatly impeded their large-scale implementation in practical applications. Therefore, development of non-precious metal-based electrocatalysts (NPMEs) to replace PMEs is highly desirable. Regarding NPMEs, transition metal-based electrocatalysts (TMEs) exhibit great potential with respect to their low cost and comparable catalytic activities. However, both their catalytic activities and stability are still insufficient when compared to those of PMEs despite numerous efforts having been dedicated to the exploration of NPMEs. In the continuing efforts to further enhance the performances of PMEs and NPMEs, fundamental understanding of the electrocatalytic reaction mechanisms has been achieved using some advanced materials such as the role-model single-atom metal catalysts and single crystal model surfaces with the help of advanced in situ/ex situ characterization techniques and theoretical modeling and simulation.
Among the different types of advanced electrocatalyst, those derived from metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) appear to be promising in catalyzing many reactions such as the ORR, OER, HER, CO2RR, and NRR due to their morphologies and structures inherited from MOFs, including large specific surface area, hierarchical porosity and persistent active sites.3–6 Up to now, there have been various published reports about MOFs and their compounds or derivatives for single-functional, bi-functional and multi-functional catalysis with outstanding performance.7–11 However, the catalytic processes and reaction mechanisms are still intricate because the large variety of organic ligands and metal centers can make the multiple active centers face different chemical environments in the catalyzed reactions.
Due to the vast interest in MOF-based materials, a huge amount of work exists with focus on the synthesis and characterization of MOF-derived electrocatalysts in terms of their tunable morphologies and structures,12–15 material composites,16–20 heteroatom doping21–25 and their impact on electrochemical performance. As identified, the electronic structure-engineered behavior of MOF-based materials can offer exciting opportunities for designing electrocatalysts with superior multi-functionalities. Therefore, it will be meaningful to understand the effects of chemical compositions, electron configurations, and valence states of catalytically active sites in MOF-derived electrocatalysts on electrochemical performance.
As a matter of fact, in the development of new electrocatalysts and performance improvement of the existing ones, fundamental understanding of the electrocatalytic mechanisms at the atomic level is definitely necessary. So far, a number of comprehensions have been based on the formation free energies of the intermediates, which are determined by their binding strengths with the electrocatalytically active center, frequently studied by instrumental characterization and density functional theory (DFT).26–30 These free energies/binding strengths have been used as important descriptors to describe the activities of numerous electrocatalysts. However, for comprehensive and deep understanding of electrocatalytic mechanisms, some role-model electrocatalyst samples such as single-atom electrocatalysts with well-defined active sites are needed, which can provide fundamental information from the atomic level to the electronic level. In this regard, using MOF materials as the precursors, some electrocatalysts including single-atom electrocatalysts can be designed and synthesized.31 Regarding MOF-derived electrocatalysts, metals such as Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu can be located at the nodes of the MOF structures to possess coordinatively unsaturated sites, which can act as electrocatalysts. For example, Zhao et al.32 demonstrated the catalytic OER by a series of Ni–Co bimetal–organic framework nanosheet electrocatalysts with unsaturated metal coordination sites in an alkaline environment. Their results indicated that the metal atoms with unsaturated coordination were the main active centers for catalyzing the OER, and the electron coupling effect of Ni and Co could further improve the electrocatalytic activity. To facilitate the development of MOF-derived electrocatalysts with single-atom structures and understand their active sites with unusual structural configurations and physical/chemical/electronic/catalytic properties, we have comprehensively reviewed the recent progress in characterization of the catalytically active sites, their functional mechanisms and performance validation/optimization with focus on the electrocatalysis of the ORR, OER, HER, CO2RR, and NRR. Regarding the synthesis of the electrocatalysts with active sites, the alloy and composite formation and edge-defect/oxygen vacancy engineering are discussed. Regarding the characterization for fundamental understanding, some advanced in situ/ex situ characterization and theoretical calculations using first-principles DFT are summarized. Some technical challenges are analyzed and the corresponding further research directions for overcoming the challenges are also proposed for future research and development of practicable MOF-derived electrocatalysts.
2. Characterization of catalytically active sites of MOF-based electrocatalysts
The functions of MOF-derived electrocatalysts are closely related to their morphologies, structures, and catalytically active sites, which should be characterized for the fundamental understanding of their catalytic properties. Until now, various advanced characterization techniques, including aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ac-HAADF-STEM), X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS), and Mössbauer spectroscopy, as well as computational methods, have been developed and used for investigating the detailed morphologies, structures, the targeted catalytic sites and the electronic properties of the MOF-derived electrocatalysts from the atomic level to the electronic level. With respect to this, a single technique usually cannot give comprehensive information, thus the complementary results obtained through the use of different tools for better identifying and understanding their comprehensive properties are definitely necessary.
2.1. Characterization of catalytically active site structures

2.1.1. Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM. 
When the electron beam interacts with the tested samples in a scanning electron microscope (SEM), a part of the electrons will pass through the samples and escape from the lower surface, and the intensity of the electron beam will change. The inhomogeneous transmission image of these electron beams on the fluorescent screen is the scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image. STEM can not only significantly improve the contrast of transmission electron microscope (TEM) images, but also generate secondary electron (SE) images, that can obtain the surface morphology information at the same position and the internal structure information. STEM images can be divided into a bright field image (BF) and dark field image (DF). STEM plays an irreplaceable role in the characterization of electrocatalysts due to its unique advantages such as high contrast and low damage to the samples. In particular, HAADF-STEM can be a useful technology to characterize the structural features of nanomaterials and then obtain their structural information related to atomic positions such as vacancies, dislocations, structural distortions, and chemical element distribution.33–36 In one example shown in Fig. 1a, the high-resolution HAADF-STEM image can successfully characterize the uniformly dispersed sub-2 nm PdZn intermetallic species confined in MOFs with the ordered bright Pd and dark Zn atomic arrangement on the [100] plane.37 Besides, the unique fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns and lattice fringes could further confirm the tetragonal intermetallic PdZn phase nature of this electrocatalyst (inserted in Fig. 1a). However, the resolution of STEM is limited by Damascus lens aberration (0.8 nm), which limits the further study of electrocatalysts at the atomic scale. Therefore, under the assistance of aberration correction, the ac-HAADF-STEM images can show direct imaging for local structural information of the individual metal atoms within crystalline nanoporous materials.38–40 Besides, the single/dual-atoms and cluster catalytic sites can also be effortlessly identified from the bright dots at the atomic level based on the different Z values of elements of the active sites and supports.41 Under the optimal defocus amount, the bright dots in the image always represent the atomic sequence, and the brightness is related to the atomic number. HAADF-STEM with spherical aberration-corrected technology plays a pivotal and even irreplaceable role in understanding of the catalytic mechanisms of nano-catalysts in terms of their design, synthesis, and performance optimization. Jiao et al.42 used ac-STEM-HAADF to observe the isolated and high-density bright spots on Fe single-atom implanted N-doped porous carbon, and confirmed the formation of single metal atoms. Zhang et al.43 prepared Pt–Ru dual-metal dimers, which show different contrasts in the ac-HAADF-STEM images as in Fig. 1b and c, demonstrating that ac-HAADF-STEM was a powerful characterization technique for catalytically active sites such as single-atoms and dual-metal dimers. Most recently, one of the latest technologies called the integrated differential phase contrast (iDPC) has been found to possess attractive advantages and has been used in the characterization of light element holding spaces, two-dimensional (2D) materials, molecular sieves, superconductors and other fields. In contrast to HAADF-STEM, iDPC technology can realize high quality simultaneous imaging of light element (C, N, and O) and heavy element atoms. The electron beam sensitive materials can also be imaged with high quality at the atomic scale. Liu et al.44 imaged the volatile organic compound and atomically dispersed Mo in microporous ZSM-5 electrocatalysts based on iDPC-STEM technology (Fig. 1d). Likewise, Liu et al.45 revealed the detailed location of isolated Ir atoms in sinusoidal zeolite channels (Fig. 1e and f). These successful examples indicated the huge potential of iDPC technology for the confirmation of the crystal structure and coordination environment of electrocatalysts, especially atomically dispersed electrocatalysts and polymetallic electrocatalysts. Besides, the detailed nanostructure of porous crystalline materials such as MOFs and COFs could be explored in detail. For further exploring the dynamic electrocatalytic process, in situ STEM technology can be employed and exhibits strong functions. Furthermore, the developed environmental transmission electron microscopy (ETEM) can also provide superior in situ features to track the structural transition process and intermediates with high spatial resolution.
 Fig. 1  (a) High-resolution HAADF-STEM image of PdZn-10/ZIF-8C. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) The ac-HAADF-STEM images of Pt–Ru dimers/NCNTs. (c) The intensity profile obtained on one individual Pt–Ru dimer. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature Limited. (d) A representative iDPC-STEM image of Mo/ZSM-5. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) High-resolution HAADF-STEM image and (f) the corresponding iDPC image of the Ir@MWW-560 air sample. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (g) Co K-edge XANES spectra and (h) magnitude of Fourier transformed Co K-edge EXAFS data of the sample.54 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (i) WT for Co K-edge EXAFS of PCB (left), M-PCBN (middle), and Co foil (right). Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (j) Mössbauer spectra of a PANI–Fe–C electrocatalyst. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 


2.1.2. X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS). 
The X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectrum is based on the synchrotron-radiation light source. When X-rays pass through the sample, the excited photoelectrons are scattered by the surrounding coordinated atoms, causing the X-ray absorption intensity to oscillate with energy. Through exploring these oscillating signals, the local electronic and geometric structures of the detected samples can be obtained.46–48 When the X-ray energy is equal to the ionization energy of an inner electron in the irradiated sample, it will cause resonance absorption and ionize the electrons into photoelectrons. In this case, the X-ray absorption coefficient will exhibit a sudden change, which is called the absorption edge. XAFS including X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) covers the energy range of 30–50 eV for the absorption edge, and the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) covers the energy range of 30–1000 eV or more for the absorption edge area.49 XANES includes the pre-edge, absorbing edge and near-edge areas. The pre-edge is based on the dipole rule; when the inner electron transfers to an empty bound state, the symmetry and orbital hybridization of the system can be calculated through molecular orbital theory, coordination field theory, and energy band theory. The absorption edge is based on the ionization threshold, which reflects the oxidation state of the absorbed atom. The higher the oxidation state of the irradiated atom, the more the absorption edge shifts toward the high energy direction. The near-edge area is based on the multiple scattering resonance theory, which can derive the spatial structure of the adjacent atoms. XANES is sensitive to chemical and physical information such as the valence state, unoccupied electronic states and charge transfer. In addition, the XANES spectrum is weakly dependent on temperature and can be used for in situ high-temperature chemical experiments. EXAFS can also provide local structural parameters.50–52 Through the Fourier transform and wavelet transformation (WT) of the oscillating signal to R space followed by the fitting process for comparative analysis, a variety of coordination structure information of the absorbed atoms can be obtained, including the type of coordination atoms, bond length, coordination number and disorder degree, which reflects the short-range ordered structure around the absorbed atoms in the substance.
XAFS data collection is divided into two basic modes: transmission mode and fluorescence mode. The transmission XAFS spectrum is composed of the XAFS signal of the measured element in the sample and the absorption background signal contributed by other elements. When the content of the measured element in the sample is higher, the collected XAFS spectrum possesses a high signal-to-noise ratio for a stronger XAFS signal. Generally, the content of the measured element in the transmission XAFS experimental sample should be above 10%. In the field of electrocatalysis, the neighboring structural information of trace elements is very important. For such low-concentration samples, the fluorescence mode is often used. In addition to the sub-atomic information, XAFS can be applied to solids, liquids and gases, which can be crystalline or amorphous. Therefore, XAFS has become a crucial analytical tool for catalysis. For example, Sun et al.53 utilized XANES to distinguish a slightly reduced Ni oxidation state in Fe-doped Ni2P nanoparticles embedded in carbon nanotubes (Fe2–Ni2P/C). A slight oxidation of iron atoms was also observed in this electrocatalyst sample, indicated by the loss of partial electrons. They observed that even a small amount of Fe doping could modulate the electronic structure of Ni2P. Zhang et al.54 utilized XAFS (Fig. 1g and h) to study the activated Co sites of an antiperovskite Co3InC0.7N0.3 intermetallic sample. The XANES data in Fig. 1g demonstrated that the Co valence of the antiperovskite is also close to that of Co0 metal, suggesting that antiperovskites are metallic or half-metallic. Besides, different from other MOF-derived materials, the fingerprint of the Co–N4 structure and its pre-edge signal (ca. 7715 eV) were observed to be absent in this Co3InC0.7N0.3, revealing that the Co–N4 was not responsible for the catalysis performance. In the Co K-edge EXAFS spectrum shown in Fig. 1h, the Co–C/N coordination, Co–Co/In interaction and Co–Co* bond of the antiperovskite structure can be observed at 1.42 Å, 2.21 Å, and 3.35 Å, respectively. Although the Co–C and Co–N could not be distinguished, their fitted C/N coordination number (1.94) revealed that Co is coordinated with two adjacent C/N atoms. Zhang et al.55 compared EXAFS data with those of the WT analysis (Fig. 1i) and confirmed the Co–N/O coordination in a MOF material of poly-[Co2(benzimidazole)4] (PCB). Meanwhile, the fitted Co–N coordination number for this PCB and the fitted Co–N/O coordination number for metal-oxide-nanoparticle-embedded PCB (M-PCB) were calculated to be 4.3 ± 0.3 and 3.4 ± 0.5, respectively, indicating that a few of the Co atoms changed their coordination structure and the interfaces between the metal oxide nanoparticles and the MOF matrix were connected by Co atoms. To track the dynamic electronic and local coordination structures of the electrocatalysts during the reaction process, in situ/operando XAS can provide a powerful tool to gain deep insight into the nature of the electrocatalysts and its evolution under real catalytic conditions. Compared with conventional XANES, high-energy-resolution fluorescence detected XANES (HERFD-XANES) can provide sharper spectral features and enable better discrimination of minor spectral changes.


2.1.3. Mössbauer spectroscopy. 
Mössbauer spectroscopy is established on the basis of the Mössbauer effect and has exhibited advantages for investigating hyperfine interactions in solids, benefiting from its high sensitive detection of the changes in the chemical environment around the resonant nucleus. Using Mössbauer spectroscopy, comprehensive information about solid microstructures including oxidation states, spin states, and chemical bond properties of resonant atoms can be obtained.56–58 Not only that, Mössbauer spectroscopy can also be used to determine the phase transition temperature in the solid phase transition process, providing a reliable research foundation for the design and preparation of crystalline electrocatalysts. In addition, Mössbauer spectroscopy can also be used to explore the magnetic structure or spin structure of magnetic materials, especially the relaxation process and magnetic anisotropy of magnetic crystallites.59,60 For example, Kneebone et al.61 demonstrated the application of Mössbauer spectroscopy in investigating Fe sites in a highly active polyaniline–Fe–C (PANI–Fe–C) ORR electrocatalyst (Fig. 1j). As a result, they found that the main changes were the D4 sites. The changes between the reduced and oxidized states resembled the expected behavior of a five-fold FeN4 site that then got coordinated by an oxygen molecule in the sixth position.62,63 Wang et al.64 demonstrated the delocalization and spin-state transition of Co 3d electrons caused by the integration of Fe components of Co–Fe spinel oxide electrocatalysts through Mössbauer spectroscopy. They found that the Co atoms were replaced by Fe atoms situated on the octahedral 16 b sites of Co3O4, resulting in the formation of the FeOct3+–O–FeOct3+ bond that could enhance ORR activity. However, only a limited number of atomic nuclei exhibit the Mössbauer effect, and many of them must be subjected to harsh laboratory conditions, which greatly limit its applications. Although only 57Fe59,60 and 119Sn have been fully applied so far, Mössbauer spectroscopy still plays an important role in investigating the surface atomic vibration and magnetic properties of solid surfaces, interfaces, films and ultrafine particles.

2.2. Density functional theory calculations
The density functional theory (DFT)-based theoretical calculation method can afford new perspectives in examining the electronic configurations of electrocatalysts with different atomic-level catalytic sites. DFT calculations have been routinely used to calculate adsorption energies and to elucidate reaction mechanisms on transition metal surfaces,65–68 which are currently indispensable in the exploration of electrocatalysts through understanding the effects of some key structural factors on the ultimate catalytic performance, including the charge distribution, adsorption energies, electronic structure, or even defect states.69–72 The insight obtained from these calculations can be used to further understand the relationship between the structural modification of a surface and a specific catalytic activity and selectivity. With respect to this, DFT methods can complement experimental results for materials and allow comprehensive structure–activity relationships to be developed. Ao et al.73 studied the core–shell Pt alloy nanoparticles on an Fe–N–C substrate with atomically dispersed single Fe atoms through DFT and demonstrated that the electronic structures and catalytic performance, as well as the adsorption/desorption process could be greatly influenced by the unique structure of the electrocatalyst and interaction between the isolated metal atoms and neighboring atoms. However, the generation of metal sites with systematically tunable coordination modes, and the establishment of a definitive correlation between the catalytic properties and coordination state are still the great challenges for further improving design and construction of unsaturated coordinated metal sites. For example, with the help of theoretical calculations, Huang et al.74 showed that the activity of three-coordinated copper (Cu) sites was much higher than that for the one-, two- and four-coordinated Cu sites for cycloaddition reaction of CO2 and epoxides. This result was due to the fact that the gaps between their highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of three-coordinated Cu sites were smaller than the HOMO–LUMO gaps of the one-, two- and four-coordinated Cu sites, suggesting that the three-coordinated Cu was the favorite for catalyzing the covalent bonding with a soft base. Although DFT can be effective in some cases of calculation, it is still difficult to properly describe the interactions between molecules, especially for van der Waals forces.
3. Catalytically active sites of MOF-based electrocatalysts
3.1. Active sites in ligands
As recognized, organic ligands in MOFs can directly affect their crystal structures and morphologies. Moreover, the poor conductivity of organic ligands and the instability of macromolecular structures are the key factors restricting the application of MOF-based materials.75,76 Currently, most of the investigations on ligands are focused on the utilization of electron-enriched organic ligands to develop novel MOF materials with high conductivity.77–79 However, studies on the modification of ligands are rare, especially on the charge transfer behaviors and catalytic properties of ligands. Jiang et al.80 investigated a series of ZIFs with the same sodalite by different organic ligands for the CO2RR. They found that only for the ZIFs with imidazolates could a stable adsorption structure be formed on the sp2 carbon in the ligands, which served as the active sites for the CO2RR to CO (Fig. 2a). Fig. 2b shows the reaction processes, in which CO2 is reduced to CO via *COOH and *OH intermediates. This work demonstrated that the protonation of CO2 to form *COOH could be identified to be the potential limiting step. Generally, the adsorption of the intermediates on the carbon sites was very weak, and a relatively strong adsorption of *COOH on the carbon sites was supposed to improve the electrocatalytic activity. DFT calculations revealed that the energy barriers of ZIF-67 were higher than those of three other ZIFs, leading to the poor activity of ZIF-67 for the CO2RR. Meanwhile, ZIF-108 presented the highest ΔGH* value, suggesting a low selectivity for the CO2RR, which resulted from the serious blockage of *H. As a result, ZIF-8 exhibited the best CO2RR performance with a CO faradaic efficiency of 81.0% at −1.1 V and current density of 12.8 mA cm−2 at −1.3 V. Therefore, electrochemically activating the organic ligands is supposed to be an alternative and promising method to catalyze the CO2RR.
 Fig. 2  (a) Adsorption of *COOH on the ZIFs with different imidazolate ligands. (b) CO2RR processes on the imidazolate ligands of ZIF-8. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (c) Calculated free energy diagrams of the CO2RR to CO on Co-TCPP and CoCp2/Co-TCPP. (d) Comparison of the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of different catalysts. Reproduced with permission.1 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. 
Liberman et al.81 demonstrated that the electronic properties of Zr6-oxo-based UIO-66 MOFs with anchored Fe–porphyrins (hemins) could be systematically tailored via coordinating 2-methylimidazole (MeIM) and an electron-donating ligand to the metal sites. The coordination of MeIM to the Fe sites could increase the electron density at the Fe sites, and lower the energy barriers for the formation of the catalyst-bound superoxide (O2˙−), thus boosting the overall ORR performance. They reported that the addition of MeIM could enhance catalytic rates (kcat), indicating the direct effect of axial coordination on the intrinsic activity of MOF-installed hemins. They also reported that the catalytic currents of the as-prepared hemin-modified UIO-66 (termed UIO-66@hemin) could be enhanced by ∼290% in the presence of MeIM, and the ORR onset potential (Eonset) was also tuned by the extent of axial coordination to the hemin.
Xin et al.1 designed metallocene (MCp2, M = Fe, Co, or Ni) incorporated metalloporphyrin MOFs for the CO2RR. The incorporation could generate electron transfer channels, which significantly promoted the electron transfer and thus improved the catalytic activity. When CoCp2 was introduced into Co-TCPP (TCPP = tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin), the calculated adsorption energy of CO2 was largely reduced, leading to much improved efficiency and selectivity for the generation of CO (Fig. 2c). As a result, the prepared electrocatalyst presented excellent CO2RR performance with a low Eonset of −0.27 V (Fig. 2d), a large total current density of 56.2 mA cm−2 at −1.1 V and a high CO faradaic efficiency of 97%. Xue et al.82 synthesized a heterogeneous MOF by assembling metals and terephthalic (A) and 2-aminoterephthalic ligands (B) with an optimized molar ratio (A2.7B-MOF-FeCo1.6). As shown in Fig. 3a, the introduction of a second linker can lead to a partial electron delocalization and trigger charge transfer which corresponds to the change in coordination environment of metal centers induced by linker substitution. As a result, the as-prepared A2.7B-MOF-FeCo1.6 electrocatalyst exhibits an excellent OER activity with an ultralow overpotential of 288 mV at 10 mA cm−2, a Tafel slope of 39 mV dec−1 and also a superior stability with only a slight potential increase, as shown in Fig. 3b and c.
 Fig. 3  (a) Calculated density of states (DOS) and (b) LSV curves for the OER of AB-MOF-FeCo with different ligand and metal ratios. (c) Chronopotentiometry response of A2.7B-MOF-FeCo1.6 for the OER. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Calculated strain in Zn–N4 moieties. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) The adsorption of possible intermediates generated in the ORR/OER process on Mn/Fe–HIB-MOF. Calculated free energy diagrams for (f) the OER pathway and (g) ORR pathway on Mn/Fe–HIB-MOF. (h) Discharge curves of Zn–air batteries at different discharging rates. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Strain is one of the most common physical phenomena in solid-state materials, and plays a key role in the reactivity of electrocatalysts. The import of lattice strain in solid-state materials can lead to expansion of the lattice structure, which will result in unanticipated changes occurring on electronic and crystal structures. Thus, the electrocatalytic activity can be optimized. Yang et al.83 tried to induce strain into homogeneous-like metal–ligand active centers on Zn-MOFs (MOFs-inf) for the CO2RR through a vapor phase infiltration (VPI) method. As shown in Fig. 3d, the simulated and optimized geometries demonstrate that the introduced strain can cause a distortion of the Zn–N4 moiety. In the structure consisting of coplanar N atoms and Zn atom, the Zn atom was forced up and down the centroid of the N4 group due to the strain introduced in the MOFs, leaving an empty space between porphyrin rings, which was favorable for the transportation of reactants/products. The strain also led to the deformation of the N4 group, and the N4 group became non-planar. Such internal changes could alter the metal–porphyrin bond distance and eventually improve the catalytic performance. As reported, the MOF-Zn-inf electrocatalyst exhibited a faradaic efficiency of 100% and high durability. Cheng et al.84 synthesized a lattice-strained NiFe-MOF for bifunctional ORR and OER electrocatalysis through an ultraviolet-light treatment. In the preparation of this 2D electrocatalyst, naphthalenedicarboxylate acid was elaborately selected as an organic ligand to link with metal cations. The photoinduction process could lead to the selective dissociation of unreactive and unstable π-conjugated ligands between the two metal oxide layers, which decreased the interlayer interaction between the ligands and metal oxide layers, resulting in the increased interlayer spacing of the metal oxide layers. In EXAFS spectra, the nearest peak of the M–O bond was moved to a low R space, and simultaneously the peak of the M–M bond at ∼3.1 Å was shifted to a high R space when the lattice strain was increased. Furthermore, the electronic structure of Ni active sites possessed a 2p → 3d hybrid orbital transition because of the strong Ni 3d–O 2p hybridization, which was favorable for the binding between the surface oxo species and the neighbouring Ni atoms, thus increasing the catalytic activity towards oxygen-involving reactions. As a result, the obtained NiFe-MOF array exhibited both superior ORR and OER performances.
In another study, Ji et al.85 designed a Ni–Fe MOF with 6% lattice strain which could be used for the OER with ultra-high electrocatalytic activity and lasting durability by replacing some of the MOF's ligands. They reported that the lattice expansion could not change the coordinated environment of Ni. Instead, it caused the local distortion of Fe coordination. Xu et al.86 used an epitaxially compressed growth strategy to realize the generation of lattice strain in MOF-derived CeOx/CoS@L-CeO2 hybrids. They demonstrated that the lattice strain could produce additional S-vacancy, which led to the shift of gap states toward the Fermi level and optimization of the ΔGH* for the OER.
High temperature heat treatment can also induce lattice strain in electrocatalysts. For example, Zhu et al.87 prepared carbon-coated Ni nanoparticles from Ni-MIL under high pyrolysis temperatures (800 and 900 °C). The obtained Ni particles exhibited a greater lattice strain than the Ni nanoparticles pyrolyzed at low temperatures (700 °C). Furthermore, Yao et al.88 found that the lattice strain generated under distorted grains could lower the CO2 activation barrier, which led to a high CO2RR activity. DFT calculations showed that the lattice strain could decrease the metal d-orbital overlap, leading to a relatively narrow bandwidth and the shifting of the d-band center toward the Fermi level. Thus, the catalyst electronic properties could be tuned through changes in the metal surface electronic structure.89,90
Design of electrically conducting MOFs is highly desirable for electrocatalytic reactions. The binding of metal ions with aromatic organic linkers of extended π-conjugated systems with graphene analogs is a promising strategy for bottom-up synthesis of conductive MOFs, and the formed 2D or 3D MOFs can give high electrical conductivity with nonzero bandgaps through delocalization of the charges.91–94 As identified, π–d conjugation can be formed between the d-orbitals of metal ions and the frontier orbitals of conjugated linkers, and the abundant building blocks of organic ligands can bring great diversity to such a conjugation.95–98 Shinde et al.92 formulated quintet-shelled hollow Mn/Fe–hexaminobenzene (HAB) MOF spheres (Mn/Fe–HIB-MOFs) for the ORR/OER with a conjugated system between the d-orbitals of Mn(II)/Fe(II) and the π-orbitals of HAB. Fig. 3e shows the adsorption of the intermediates generated during the OER/ORR processes on the carbon active sites. The active sites were decided by the contribution of elements to the frontier bands around the Fermi level. In the cases of Fe–HIB-MOFs and Mn–HIB-MOFs, Fe and Mn contributed significantly to the frontier bands around the Fermi level, and thus served as the active sites for the catalytic reactions. In the case of Mn/Fe–HIB-MOFs, carbon atoms were identified as the active sites because they had a substantial contribution to the frontier bands. At the same time, compared to Fe–HIB-MOFs and Mn–HIB-MOFs, whose frontier bands could only get contribution from metal atoms, the frontier bands of Mn/Fe–HIB-MOFs could receive much more contribution because the elemental content of carbon was substantially higher in M–HIB-MOFs than that of the metal. Therefore, Mn/Fe–HIB-MOFs (359 S m−1) presented a much larger conductivity than Mn–HIB-MOFs (107.7 S m−1) and Fe–HIB-MOFs (149.2 S m−1), which were favorable for fast ORR/OER kinetics. The increased electronic conductivity and abundant carbon active sites endowed Mn/Fe–HIB-MOFs with enhanced OER/ORR bifunctional catalytic activity. As shown in Fig. 3f and g, the volcano plots of the evaluated overpotentials vs. descriptors of the M–HIB-MOFs reveal that Mn/Fe–HIB-MOF can retain the lowest overpotentials of 0.43 and 0.37 V for the ORR and OER, outperforming Mn–HIB-MOF, Fe–HIB-MOF, and RuO2 + Pt/C. The experimental results also demonstrate the superior catalytic activity of Mn/Fe–HAB-MOFs. The assembled rechargeable liquid (Fig. 3h) and flexible Zn–air batteries based on this Mn/Fe–HIB-MOF cathode electrocatalyst exhibit high energy densities of 1027 and 975 W h kgZn−1, respectively.
With the continuous study of MOFs, a more comprehensive understanding of the electronic structure and catalytic effect of ligands has been achieved. On the one hand, organic ligands can combine with metal nodes to build complex crystal structures and establish atomic arrangements with specific spatial configurations. On the other hand, some suitable electron-rich ligands can contribute a large number of transfer electrons to the reactions, resulting in local charge transfer, which not only induces the charge rearrangement of atomic d-bond orbitals, but also promotes the strong interaction of d–p hybrid orbitals. These factors enhance catalytic performance through promoting rapid electron transfer and thermodynamic stability.
3.2. Metal particle/cluster active sites

3.2.1. Monometallic active sites. 
MOFs possess porous structures as well as numerous metal sites that serve as catalytic centers. However, due to the poor conductivity of MOFs and low accessibility of active centers, only very few metal sites can be used in catalytic reactions. How to realize satisfactory conductivity and abundant active sites at the same time is the crucial issue that needs to be solved. With respect to this, developing conductive 2D MOFs with strong in-plane π-delocalization to substantially improve the conductivity of MOFs and weak out-of-plane π–π stacking to fully expose the catalytic sites is of great significance in electrocatalysis.99–102
Zhong et al.103 prepared a series of 2D conjugated MOFs by using a copper phthalocyanine (PcCu–(OH)8) building block with metal bis(dihydroxy) complexes (M–O4) as linkages (PcCu–O8–M). They compared the ORR catalytic performance of PcCu–O8–M MOFs (e.g. M = Co, Cu, Ni and Fe) with PcCu–(OH)8, and found that PcCu–(OH)8 had the lowest E1/2, indicating that the saturated CuN4 sites were inert for ORR electrocatalysis. Thus, during the ORR process, the MO4 units served as the catalytically active centers instead of CuN4 sites. Notably, the PcCu–O8–Co MOFs with CoO4 units showed the best ORR catalytic performance among all the samples. Such a result could be explained based on the electronic configuration of Co and the magnetic properties of PcCu–O8–Co, which were measured by high-field electron spin resonance (ESR) and static magnetization. In the ESR spectrum (Fig. 4a), the peaks with g-factors of 2.04 and 2.16 correspond to Cu2+, and the less pronounced peaks with g-factors of 2.19 and 2.05 correspond to Co2+. The analysis of static magnetic susceptibility revealed a Curie constant of 1.8 emu Oe−1 mol−1 K, indicating that most of the Co2+ in PcCu–O8–Co was in the low-spin state S = 1/2. It was thus obvious that the one unpaired electron was in the eg orbital of Co (t2g6eg1) for PcCu–O8–Co, which could accelerate ORR kinetics. In situ Raman spectra of PcCu–O8–Co/CNT in the tested frequency range had almost no variation after the ORR testing (Fig. 4b), revealing the excellent stability of the electrocatalyst. When the PcCu–O8–Co/CNT electrode was immersed in 0.1 M KOH, new peaks at 384 and 517 cm−1 emerged, which were attributed to the adsorption of OH species on the Co centers to generate Co–OH species. The intensities of the two new peaks decreased with increasing applied overpotential, probably originating from the interaction between the oxygen intermediates and the Co centers under turnover potentials (−0.2 to −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl). In addition, with increasing overpotential, the peak at 451 cm−1 attributed to Co2+–O gradually disappeared, while a peak corresponding to the Co3+–O oxygen intermediates began to emerge at 691 cm−1, suggesting the conversion of Co2+ to Co3+ species during the ORR process. At the same time, the intensity of the Co3+–O peak increased with increasing overpotential, suggesting the greater generation of oxygen intermediates under the higher overpotential. The DFT calculations and the in situ Raman spectral results both revealed that the Co–O centers in PcCu–O8–Co were the real active sites for ORR catalysis. A proposed ORR mechanism based on the derived data is shown in Fig. 4c. Benefiting from the advanced in situ technologies, it is possible to accurately probe the intermediates in the electrocatalysis process for better understanding of the catalytic mechanisms. For example, Lin et al.104 employed in situ diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy to investigate the electrocatalytic process of CO2 methanation at different temperatures for the MOF derived Ni@C electrocatalyst. They revealed that it was the CO2− not CO32− and HCO3− species that played the role of active intermediates. During the CO2RR, the adsorbed CO2− active intermediate was reduced to C–O(H) by H atoms, and no carbonyl or CO was observed, indicating that the CO2 methanation was by hydrogenation of CO2 instead of a CO intermediate.
 Fig. 4  (a) ESR spectra at different temperatures for PcCu–O8–Co. (b) In situ Raman analysis of the ORR process. (c) Possible reaction steps in the ORR process. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) O 1s XPS spectra for Co–Fe PBAs calcined at different temperatures. (e) Possible OER steps in Co–Fe PBAs-250. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (f) Perspective view of Ni3(HITP)2. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature Limited. (g) The cycling performance of Zn–air batteries assembled with different cathode catalysts. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Defects are also an important factor that cannot be ignored in the catalytic process because their electronic structure can directly affect the intrinsic activity and stability of electrocatalysts, which can be regulated by defect engineering.105–108 For example, Hu et al.109 prepared Co–Fe oxide cubes with high surface area by pyrolysis of Co–Fe Prussian blue analogs (PBAs) under controllable temperature for OER catalysis. As shown in Fig. 4d, the products obtained at 250 °C (PBAs-250) not only retain the confined effect of CN− to metal cations, but also contain more oxygen vacancies bonded to Co species than that of the sample calcined at 400 °C (PBAs-400). Fig. 4e shows the possible OER catalytic mechanism for PBAs-250, and a five-step process can be seen. In the fifth step, to produce dioxygen, two separate oxygen atoms are coupled at one Co site. However, on PBAs-400, owing to the lack of oxygen vacancy defects, only one OH− is involved in the transformation of Co3+/Co4+, an extra step to adsorb another OH− is needed to complete the OER process, and a relatively high overpotential is needed to drive the adsorption. Therefore, the as-prepared PBAs-250 electrocatalyst displayed an excellent OER catalytic activity with a low overpotential of 237 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and low Tafel slope of 59.7 mV dec−1. Although the catalytic performance of MOFs can be improved by thermal treatment, the pyrolysis reaction is a complex conversion process and usually brings huge challenges for component control and degeneration of catalytic sites. However, pyrolysis is still an attractive strategy to develop MOF-based catalysts with admirable catalytic activity and robust durability.110–112
Metal–Nx (M–Nx) structures were first reported by Jasinski,113 where Co–phthalocyanine complexes mixed with acetylene black were found to be active for ORR electrocatalysis. From then on, M–Nx moieties are recognized as popular structures which can be found in electrocatalysts. For ORR electrocatalysis, the ability of M–Nx moieties to chemisorb oxygen without degrading the materials inspired extensive research on M–Nx containing electrocatalysts. For example, Miner et al.114 introduced the conductive 2D layered Ni3(HITP)2 (HITP = 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaiminotriphenylene) MOFs to mediate ORR catalysis (Fig. 4f). The high conductivity (σ = 40 S cm−1) and the well-defined tunable M–Nx sites made this Ni3(HITP)2 MOF achieve superior ORR performance with a high Eonset of 0.82 V at a current density of −50 μA cm−2 and an 88% retention of initial current density after 8 hours of potentiostatic measurement. This MOF could also be used as a precursor to produce other M–Nx (M = Fe, Co, or Ni) catalytic units through thermal treatments for ORR catalysis.
As demonstrated, MOFs have been identified as promising precursors for M–N–C electrocatalysts due to their rational composition of metal ions and multi-element organic ligands, in which various heteroatoms can be doped as required. Zhou et al.115 utilized ZIF-67 as a precursor to prepare a highly efficient and durable ORR/OER bifunctional electrocatalyst with Co nanoparticles confined in hollow N-doped carbon nanotubes (Co@hNCTs). The Zn–air battery with this Co@hNCT cathode material exhibited a high maximum power density of 149 mW cm−2 and long-term durability in a 500 hour cycling test. Douka et al.116 prepared a ZIF-67 derived macroporous carbon (ZOMC) with an interconnected architecture for a bifunctional electrocatalyst. The abundant Co–N–C units were beneficial for the catalytic performance due to the transfer of positive charges from N atoms to neighboring C/Co atoms, which was favorable for the breaking and forming of OO bonds in the ORR and OER processes. As a result, the assembled Zn–air battery exhibited a high power density of 221.1 mW cm−2 and an excellent stability over 160 hours of discharging/charging, as shown in Fig. 4g. Generally, ZIF-67 was inert for OER catalysis probably because the Co ions in the bulk ZIF-67 were coordinated by four strong imidazole ligands, and there was no site available for adsorption of the reactants. In this regard, removing some of the ligands to create coordinatively unsaturated metal sites (CUMSs) should be an efficient strategy to improve the OER performance.
Despite the fact that MOF-derived electrocatalysts exhibit excellent electrocatalytic performance, the influences of different metal sites and ligands on the resultant M–N–C electrocatalysts are unclear because of the complexity of MOF structures. Recently, Zhang et al.117 developed a suitable platform using several benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate (BTC)-MOFs to study the effects of different MOF units on the ORR activity (Fig. 6a), i.e. to figure out the roles that ligands and metals played in the catalytically active sites. The DFT calculations revealed that on the Ni–Ngraphite–C surfaces, all the reaction steps were downhill except the OH* formation step which was 1.41 eV uphill, indicating that the OH* formation step was the rate-determining step (RDS). However, when Ni was replaced by Co, the OH* formation step turned from uphill to downhill, while the last OH* desorption step was 1.89 eV uphill. Therefore, the M–Ngraphite–C surface was not favorable for the 4e− ORR mechanism. On the Ni–Npyrid–C surface, the RDS during the overall ORR process was the generation of HOO* from O2*. Ni–Npyrid–C possessed four kinds of configurations, and their corresponding free energies for the RDS were all smaller than the free energy for the RDS on the Ni–Ngraphite–C structure, suggesting that Ni–Npyrid–C was more favorable for the ORR than Ni–Ngraphite–C. But the RDSs of all the Ni–Npyrid–C configurations were still uphill. Interestingly, for the Co–Npyrid3–C and Co–Npyrid4–C configurations, all the steps were downhill even including the RDS, indicating a thermodynamically favorable 4e− ORR mechanism. However, the Co–Npyrid1–C and Co–Npyrid2–C configurations showed an uphill OH* desorption step, which was unfavorable for the ORR. On the Ni–Npyrro–C surface, all ORR steps were downhill except for the OH* desorption step. And among three Ni–Npyrro–C configurations, the free energy for the RDS on the Ni–Npyrro1–C surface was the lowest, indicating that the Ni–Npyrro1–C could be the most promising active site for the 4e− ORR process. However, Ni–Npyrro2–C and Ni–Npyrro3–C configurations presented an unfavorable four-electron ORR activity due to the uphill HOO* formation step. When the Ni was replaced by Co, the ORR steps only on the Co–Npyrro2–C surface were all downhill, which were favorable for the 4e− ORR mechanism. Therefore, the active sites of Co–Npyrid3–C, Co–Npyrid4–C and Co–Npyrro2–C could be the primary catalytically active sites for the ORR in Co–N–C catalysts. Thus, Co-BTC-bipy with high pyridinic N (2.2 at%) and pyrrolic N (1.4 at%) content possessed excellent bifunctional ORR and OER performance. Therefore, the home-made Zn–air battery assembled by this Co-BTC-bipy cathode electrocatalyst exhibited a high specific energy density of 1009.8 W h kg−1 at 3 mA cm−2.
Liu et al.118 synthesized an echinops-like MOF architecture incorporated with Co3S4 species (Co3S4/EC-MOFs) for efficient water splitting. The d-orbital electrons of Co, which could significantly contribute to the H bonding, played a vital role in the binding strength of the H bond. As shown in Fig. 5b, owing to the relatively high electronegativity of the N atom, the two Co atoms in the Co–Co bridge sites of Co3S4/EC-MOF could lose more electrons than pristine Co3S4, and the Co atoms directly binding with the N from EC-MOFs also lost more electrons than the pristine Co3S4, implying the electron transfer from Co3S4 to EC-MOFs, which could lead to the decreased Co d-orbital electron density and consequently weakened H binding and a more optimized free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH*, Fig. 5c). As a result, this Co3S4/EC-MOF electrocatalyst exhibited high HER performance and superior OER catalytic activity (Fig. 5d). In addition, a two-electrode system assembled with Co3S4/EC-MOFs as both cathode and anode materials showed a low cell voltage of 1.55 V and nearly 100% faradaic efficiency for overall water splitting. Gao et al.25 fabricated an N-doped carbon covered by Fe3O4 (NC@Fe3O4) for ORR catalysis by pyrolysis of PANI-coated MIL-101-Fe (MIL-101-Fe@PANI). This NC@Fe3O4 electrocatalyst achieved an ORR E1/2 positive to that of Pt/C. In addition, the electrocatalyst exhibited a long-term cycling stability in alkaline media. Sim et al.119 utilized a ZIF to alter the d-band electronic structure of a Pt/Au bimetallic electrocatalyst to improve NRR performance. The H adsorption could be weakened through the direct chemical/electronic interactions between the Pt/Au electrocatalyst and ZIF layer, which lowered the d-band of Pt/Au. As observed, the charges were transferred from Pt to ZIFs through Pt–NZIF coordination bond interactions, creating electron-deficient sites on the Pt surface, which showed high affinity to N2 and led to a significant improvement in NRR activity. As a result, a faradaic efficiency (FE) of >44% with a high ammonia yield rate of >161 μg mgcat−1 h−1 was obtained.
 Fig. 5  (a) Calculated free energy diagrams for the ORR on different M–N–C structures. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (b) The top view of the Co3S4/EC-MOF hybrid. 1 and 2 represent the Co1 and Co2 atoms in the Co–Co bridge site. (c) Calculated ΔGH* on different catalysts. (d) Tafel plots of different samples for the HER. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 


3.2.2. Bimetallic active sites. 
Compared with the monometallic electrocatalysts, MOF derived bimetallic electrocatalysts can also exhibit preferable performance and have been widely used in electrocatalysis. For example, Liu et al.120 prepared a composite of the well-organized micro-/nano-structured Ni2P/Ni hybridized with a carbon coating (Ni2P/Ni@C). As shown in Fig. 6a, the Ni2P/Ni@C hybrid structure possesses a lower ΔGH* (−0.12 eV) than that of Ni2P (−0.23 eV) and Ni (−0.30 eV), indicating that the accelerated proton reduction rate as well as the easy desorption of hydrogen could result in the optimum HER activity with a relatively low reaction barrier. Moreover, DOS calculation results could demonstrate a difference from the pure Ni2P and Ni: the Ni2P/Ni@C structure was in the metallic state, and hence possessed an increased carrier density near the Fermi level (Fig. 6b). Because of this advantage, the as-prepared Ni2P/Ni@C displayed an enhanced HER catalytic activity with a low overpotential of 149 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a low Tafel slope of 61.2 mV dec−1 (Fig. 6c). Also, this electrocatalyst presented excellent durability and only lost 11% of its initial current density even after 8 hours of cycling.
 Fig. 6  (a) Calculated ΔGH* and (b) calculated DOS profiles for Ni2P, Ni, and the Ni2P/Ni hybrid. (c) Tafel plots of the different samples for the HER in acidic medium at 10 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) Calculated DOS curves for FeP and Co–Fe-P. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (e) PDOS of a Ni atom in Ni–N2 and Ni–N4 moieties of Ni3(Ni3·HAHATN)2. (f) Calculated free energy diagram for the HER on the active moieties of different M23(M13·HAHATN)2. (g) The adsorption of H* on the Ni–N2 and Ni–N4 moieties in Ni3(Ni3·HAHATN)2. (h) Tafel plots for the HER on different M23(M13·HAHATN)2. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Incorporating one or more other metal atoms is a favorable strategy to alter the electronic configuration of the electrocatalyst and optimize the ΔGH* on the electrocatalyst surface, which in turn improves the intrinsic activity through a synergetic effect. For example, Chen et al.121 designed an electrocatalyst of Co-incorporated FeP (Co–Fe-P) nanotubes from MOFs with an improved catalytic HER performance. They reported that this electrocatalyst presented low overpotentials of 86, 138, and 66 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH, 1 M phosphate buffer solution, and 0.5 M H2SO4, respectively. The admirable HER catalytic activity could be attributed to the Co doping, which increased the total carrier density around the Fermi level and favored fast charge transfer (Fig. 6d). Ling et al.122 presented a complex (Pt@PMOFs(Fe)) of Pt nanoparticles (Pt NPs) decorated on metalloporphyrinic MOFs (PMOFs(Fe)) as an ORR electrocatalyst. They reported that Pt NPs could replenish electrons to Fe4+ and prevented Fe from leaching. This Pt@PMOFs(Fe) electrocatalyst exhibited a higher ORR catalytic activity than PMOFs(Fe), which was due to the fact that the synergistic effect between PMOFs(Fe) and Pt NPs could result in a significant increment in the electrochemically active sites and surface area for the ORR.
Huang et al.123 designed MOFs using a novel ligand of hexaiminohexaazatrinaphthalene (HAHATN). HAHATN is a N-containing tris(bidentate) polyheterocyclic ligand with an electron-deficient conjugated planar structure. The bidentate tertamine in HAHATN could coordinate with abundant metal ions to form M3·HAHATN, and thus M23(M13·HAHATN)2 (M1 = Co or Cu, and M2 = Ni or Cu) MOFs were obtained, which contained both M1–N2 moieties in in-plane mesopores and M2–N4 linkages. DFT calculations revealed that the single-layered M23(M13·HAHATN)2 sheets all presented very narrow band-gaps with almost no difference, as shown in Fig. 6e. The single-layered Ni3(Ni3·HAHATN)2 sheets exhibited a band-gap of ca. 0.19 eV, demonstrating the excellent conductivity (2 S cm−2) for rapid electron transfer during the electrocatalytic reaction. Generally, only an unsaturated site can bind with a proton to achieve electron transfer. In the M23(M13·HAHATN)2 MOFs, the M1–N2 moieties possessed a higher unsaturation degree than the M2–N4 linkages. The PDOS results of Ni3(Ni3·HAHATN)2 sheets indicated that the electronic orbitals (s and p-orbitals) of Ni atoms in Ni–N2 moieties were located near the Fermi level, while the electronic orbitals of Ni atoms in Ni–N4 linkages were far away. Also, the d-orbital of Ni atoms in Ni–N2 moieties was much closer to the Femi level than that of Ni atoms in Ni–N4 linkages, indicating that the Ni–N2 moieties had a higher affinity for protons than the Ni–N4 linkages. According to both thermodynamics and kinetics, the optimum ΔGH* was thermoneutral 0 eV. However, the Ni atoms in the Ni–N4 linkage had a high exothermic ΔGH* of +0.49 eV, suggesting the difficulty for Ni–N4 linkages to combine with protons. As shown in Fig. 6f, the ΔGH* for Ni atoms in Ni–N2 moieties is −0.12 eV, which is close to 0 eV, indicating that the Ni–N2 moieties can easily bond with protons and break the Ni–H bond to complete the HER process. Meanwhile, the length of the N–H bond in Ni–N2 is smaller than that in Ni–N4 linkages, suggesting that the adsorption of protons on the Ni atoms of Ni–N2 moieties is easier than that on the Ni atoms of Ni–N4 linkages (Fig. 6g). In addition, H adsorption on Ni–N4 linkages could induce the bending of Ni3(Ni3·HAHATN)2 frameworks, leading to the breakdown of the rigid 2D structure. Therefore, the Ni–N2 moieties in Ni3(Ni3·HAHATN)2 showed a higher HER catalytic activity than the Ni–N4 linkages. As a result, the Ni3(Ni3·HAHATN)2 MOFs presented outstanding HER performance in 0.1 M KOH solution with a low overpotential of 115 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slope of 45.6 mV dec−1 (Fig. 6h). Hai et al.124 reported the preparation of 2D NiFe bimetallic MOF ultra-thin nanosheets (NiFe-UMNs) through an ultrasonic oscillation method for OER catalysis. The DFT calculation results revealed that the Ni sites in these NiFe-UMNs were more active than the Fe sites for the adsorption of OH−, while the Fe sites were more active than the Ni sites for electron transfer. Thus, the combination of Ni and Fe was able to significantly lower the energy barrier and give a better activity. According to the XPS images, the Ni2+ peaks were shifted to higher binding energy, and conversely, Fe2+ peaks were shifted to lower binding energy, indicating that partial electrons were transferred from Ni2+ to Fe2+. As a result, NiFe-UMNs exhibited excellent OER catalytic performance in alkaline medium with a low overpotential of 260 mV at 10 mA cm−2. This electrocatalyst also displayed superior durability and lost only 4.8% of the initial current even after a cycling test at a constant overpotential of 280 mV for 10000 s.
Although there are many successful examples of MOFs with well-defined active sites and crystalline structures in electrocatalysis, the delicate frameworks and inferior electrochemical conductivity can still limit their widespread applications in electrocatalysis. By adjusting metal ligands, improving bonding strength, and using supporting strategies, the flexibility and conductivity of MOFs should be able to be greatly improved. For example, Li et al.125 reported a 3D oriented Co–Ni bimetallic MOF nanosheet array by a liquid-phase epitaxial method. As shown by the DFT calculation results in Fig. 7a and b, the Ni sites are much easier to be activated at the beginning of the OER process, while the Co sites have a much higher activity for the charge transfer and the intermediates desorption processes. Consequently, the as-prepared Co–Ni MOFs (Co:Ni = 1:1) exhibit admirable OER activity with a low overpotential of 260 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and also excellent stability. Although MOF-derived electrocatalysts have displayed huge application potential for the OER, their irrepressible crystal phase transition occurring during the OER process can set up barriers for the mechanism research. Raja et al.126 explored the detailed electrocatalytic OER kinetics based on a typical Ni–Fe MOF. They reported that the Ni2+ sites exhibited more activity than Fe3+. During the OER process, Ni2+ was first transferred to the NiOOH phase, and then O2 molecules were generated through the decomposition of NiOOH. In another study, Cheng et al.127 studied the OER process of bi-metallic NiMn-MOFs and the phase transition process was also discussed. They reported that the Ni site possessed lower adsorption energy for OH− than the Mn site, while the Mn site possessed lower adsorption energy for H2O than the Ni site. During the OER process, the phase transition of Ni2+ to NiOOH was detected. These results disclosed that although the Ni site played the role of active site for OER catalysis, the Mn site could provide a synergistic effect. It should be noted that some other oxide intermediates were also detected in other work. Hou et al.128 reported that their prepared Co4Fe6-MOFs exhibited a four-step OER process with the production of OH-MOF, O-MOF and OOH-MOF intermediates because of the phase transition during the OER process. Mu et al.129 observed similar OH-MOF, O-MOF and OOH-MOF transformed phases during the OER process.
 Fig. 7  (a) The intermediates and the adsorption sites for the OER process in Co/Ni(BDC)2TED. (b) Calculated free energy diagrams for the OER on different M2(BDC)2TED MOFs. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Pt 4f XPS spectra for Pt/C and PtCo@NCs obtained at different temperatures. (d) Free energy diagrams for the MOR on Pt and different PtCo nanostructures. (e) Mass and specific activities of Pt/C and PtCo@NCs obtained at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (f) The structure of multi-metallic MOFs constructed from SBUs and H2hfipbb. (g) The electron transfer number (n) and (h) current density of Zn–Mn–Co spinels toward the ORR. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, the OER process can cause a structural collapse. Such a collapse can not only result in poor cycling performance, but also hinder the exposure of reaction active sites. Therefore, developing a suitable strategy to enhance the robustness and durability of MOF materials is a great challenge. The collapse of the MOF structure during electrocatalysis can be attributed to several factors, including the electrolyte environment, the types of metal ion and organic ligand, the strength of the metal–ligand bond, and so on.130 For example, Wang et al.131 utilized a series of characterization techniques to investigate the structural collapse of MOFs in an electrocatalytic cycling process based on a Co-BTC-IMI MOF. They reported that after cycling, the MOF crystals lost their long-range ordering but still contained short-range ordering fragments caused by the dissolution of Co2+ and structural collapse. As a result, the ORR/OER bifunctional electrocatalytic activities and cycling performance of this electrocatalyst were decreased. Lv et al.132 investigated the influence of ligands on the stability of MOFs through the rational design of Zr-MOFs constructed from Zr6O4(OH4)(CO2)n (n = 8 or 12). They reported that the 12 designed Zr-MOFs showed distinct structural stability in a liquid phase environment. Combining MOFs with substrate materials is another possible strategy to improve the stability of MOFs. For example, Zheng et al.133 prepared 2D/1D FeNi LDH-MOF nanoarrays on carbon cloth through in situ growth. In another study, an optimized 2D FeNi MOF grown on nickel foam with a high surface area and porous structure was reported by Wang et al.134 These MOF electrocatalysts showed excellent stability under harsh conditions due to the strong interactions between the MOFs and substrate.
Many researchers have found that bi-metallic alloys showed better electrocatalytic performance than monometallic electrocatalysts because the valence states of the two metals can be allocated by their unique intrinsic electronic structures,135–140 which is necessary for the electrocatalyst to achieve high catalytic activity for oxygen-involving reactions. For example, Zhou et al.141 designed Co–Ni nanoalloy-MOFs (Co–Ni NOFs) for the ORR, which showed enhanced catalytic performance due to the redistribution of the Co–Ni 3d electronic configuration originating from the electron transfer from the 3d orbital of Ni2+ to that of Co3+. Due to the optimized 3d electronic configurations, the as-prepared Co–Ni NOFs exhibited an excellent ORR catalytic activity with high E1/2 of 0.88 V and a large kinetic current density of 162.9 mA cm−2 at 0.80 V. This electrocatalyst also exhibited robust durability by negligible variation of the E1/2 after 5000 potential scanning cycles.
Hu et al.142 developed different Pt–Co nanostructure patterns such as monometallic islets, PtCo heterodimers, and PtCo alloys embedded in porous N-doped carbon (PtCo@NCs) through pyrolysis of the ZnCo-MOF precursor at different temperatures as well as acid etching. Among all the nanostructures, PtCo@NCs had the shortest atomic active site distance. As shown by XPS spectra in Fig. 7c, these Pt–Co nanostructures exhibit increasingly negative shifts and gradual positive shifts of Pt 4f and Co 2p spectra, respectively, suggesting that the synergistic effect between Pt and Co can lead to the electron redistribution around the Pt/Co metal sites. The negative shifts in the binding energy of Pt 4f indicated that the core level of Pt was shifted downward with reference to the Fermi level, which lowered the d-band center of Pt because of the interaction with the Co sites. As a result, the charge redistribution around the Pt/Co metal sites facilitated the adsorption of methanol and OH− species on Pt and Co, respectively. The DFT calculation results disclosed the mechanism of Pt, PtCo heterodimers, and PtCo alloys toward the catalytic methanol oxidation reaction (MOR). Fig. 7d shows that on Pt, methanol prefers to break the C–H bond to yield CH2OH* because the energy barrier is calculated to be 0.99 eV, which is lower than the energy barrier needed to break the O–H bond to yield CH3O* (1.07 eV). On PtCo heterodimers and alloys, however, it was much easier for methanol to break the O–H bond (energy barriers: 0.94 eV for the PtCo heterodimer and 0.90 eV for the PtCo alloy) than to break the C–H bond (energy barrier: 0.99 eV). So, for CO* formation, the initial activation of methanol was found to be the rate-determining step because of the remarkably higher decomposition barrier than that of the other elementary steps. In the subsequent CO* oxidation process, O* was formed and coupled with O* to finally produce CO2. The coupling barriers on Pt, PtCo heterodimers and PtCo alloys were calculated to be 0.85 eV, 0.75 eV and 0.48 eV, respectively. The authors also found that the synergistic effect was decided by the distance between the two metals. As a result, PtCo@NCs displayed the highest mass activity (2.30 A mgPt−1) and specific activity (5.14 mA cm−2) toward the MOR as well as the best stability (Fig. 7e), implying that the synergistic effect between Co and Pt played an important role in MOR catalysis.
Castillo-Blas et al.143 demonstrated a strong influence of different element ratios on the catalytic performance by encoding metal-cation arrangements in MOFs. They constructed a kind of multi-metallic MOF which was constructed by combining different metal cations (e.g. Zn2+, Co2+, Mn2+, and Ca2+) to generate a helical inorganic secondary building unit (SBU) using organic linker 4,4′-(hexafluoroisopropylidene)bis(benzoic acid) (H2hfipbb). As shown in Fig. 7f, the helically shaped inorganic SBUs can be formed by alternative tetrahedra and octahedra. Zn atoms are only located in the tetrahedral coordination environment, and Mn is only located in the octahedral coordination environment, while Co can be found in both tetrahedral and octahedral coordination environments. SBUs with different metal cation arrangements could be produced by taking advantage of the differences in the preferable coordination environments for the metal ions. The authors found that the MOFs containing Zn, Mn and Co atoms exhibited excellent ORR catalytic activity through a 4e− transfer mechanism with large current densities (Fig. 7g and h). In particular, the as-prepared electrocatalyst with an optimized atomic ratio showed robust stability with more than 92% current density retention after 5000 cycles.
A “Janus” nanostructure was integrated with different species with discrepant characteristics into one composite system, and also deeply discussed for MOF-derived electrocatalysts because of its distinctive nanostructure and special differential functionalization.144 “Janus” is an ancient god with two faces looking in different directions in Roman legend. Pierre-Gilles de Gennes proposed the concept of “Janus particles” as anisotropic nanomaterials in 1991.144 Compared with other nanostructures, “Janus” provides an asymmetric structure which can realize the integration of opposite but mutually exclusive characteristics together.145 For example, Jiang et al.146 designed a Co/Co3O4 “Janus” nanostructure with a porous graphene coating. The prepared electrocatalysts delivered a high electrocatalytic activity that could be employed for both ORR and OER applications with lasting endurance that could be used for high-performance Zn–air batteries.
As mentioned above, MOF-based electrocatalysts with bimetallic active sites generally possess a better catalytic performance that can be attributed to the following reasons: (1) the introduction of one or more foreign metal atoms can regulate the electronic configurations of electrocatalysts and optimize the chemisorption free energies on the electrocatalyst surface, which in turn enhance the intrinsic activity through causing a synergetic effect; (2) the enhanced carrier density around the Fermi level suggests that the metallic state of the bimetallic electrocatalyst has improved electrochemical conductivity and electron transfer capability; (3) the orbital shift occurring on the bimetallic electrocatalyst indicates a strong electron intercalation resulting in a major alteration of the charge distribution around the metal centers; (4) the significant charge redistribution around the metal centers can promote the adsorption/desorption on the electrocatalyst surface, leading to an improved activity; and (5) the heterogeneous elements with different functions can fill the gap of the monometallic electrocatalyst and maximize the strengths of both parties.

3.3. Single-atom active sites
Single-atom electrocatalysts (SACs) have attracted great attention around the world due to their remarkable catalytic activities, which originated from the high ratio of unsaturated coordinated and possible maximum utilized atoms.147–150 SACs exhibit unique tunability due to the homogeneous-like ability in controlling the frontier orbital geometry and energy of the active sites, which is distinct from the tuning properties of metallic nanoparticles through the d-band.151–154 Furthermore, the single metal atoms in SACs are partially confined by the supports, which act as rigid and bulky ligands to coordinate with these metal atoms.155–158 These features endow SACs with unique reactivity patterns and hence enable their potential use in a range of energy-related scenarios. For example, Tao et al.159 treated ZIF-67 with dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) plasma and created CUMs in ZIF-67. Compared to bulk ZIF-67, which contains 6.55% unsaturated Co atoms in Co–Nx (x < 4), the content of unsaturated Co atoms in this CUMs-ZIF-67 electrocatalyst reached 13.45%, revealing that the plasma treatment could remove some N ligands from the Co–N4 geometry, leading to the exposure of unsaturated Co sites. The free energy diagrams of the ZIF-67-Nx structure revealed that the second electron transfer was the rate-limiting step in the elementary reaction process for Co–N4, while the third electron transfer was the rate-limiting step for Co–Nx (x = 2–3). They found that the saturated structure possessed the highest overpotential, and the removal of ligands could substantially change the overpotential with a volcano relationship. They also demonstrated that the coordination environments of metal atoms were altered by the removal of ligands, leading to charge redistribution on the active sites. The ZIF-67 presented a highly positive charge (+0.8e) on Co and a highly negative charge (−1.3e) on N, and the C atoms bonded to N atoms were also positively charged (+0.3e to +1.3e). However, in Co–N3 and Co–N2, the charges on Co were 0.73e and 0.33e, respectively. The positive charges could interact with the oxygen species generated in the OER process such as O2, O, OH, and OOH, and facilitated the electron transfer in the OER. As a result, this CUMS-ZIF-67 electrocatalyst possessed a comparable catalytic performance to commercial RuO2.
Xiong et al.160 showed that the N-doped carbon polyhedron with anchored single Rh atoms (SA-Rh/CN) could provide unexpected catalytic activity for the formic acid oxidation reaction (FOR). This electrocatalyst exhibited an excellent mass activity of 16.1 A mg−1 and a high catalytic stability with 89% activity retention after 66.7 hours of testing because of the excellent CO tolerance and the sintering resistance. In order to investigate the mechanism for the excellent CO tolerance, the binding of formic acid and CO on the electrocatalyst was analyzed and compared with that on Rh nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 8a. Formic acid could adsorb on Rh(111) through the carbonyl oxygen atoms with a binding energy of −0.85 eV, while it could only weakly adsorb on the SA-Rh sites with a binding energy of −0.25 eV. The relatively low binding energy between the formic acid and the SA-Rh sites was ascribed to the downward shift of the d orbital below the Fermi level and the DOS at the Fermi level being less than that on Rh(111). Most importantly, the activation barrier for the decomposition of formic acid to generate CO on Rh(111) was only 0.52 eV, while the activation barrier for formic acid decomposition on the SA-Rh site was 1.68 eV, implying that it was relatively difficult for CO to produce SA-Rh sites. In the meantime, the binding energy of CO on Rh(111) was much higher than that on SA-Rh sites, suggesting that once CO was generated, it could be easily removed from the SA-Rh sites. As a result, this electrocatalyst displayed a superior FOR catalytic activity, and its mass activity was 28, 67 and 805 times greater than the mass activities of Pd/C, Pt/C and Rh/C, respectively (Fig. 8b). Besides, a direct formic acid fuel cell (DFAFC) assembled using the SA-Rh/CN anode electrocatalyst showed maximum power densities as high as 1241.9 mW mg−1 at 80 °C (Fig. 8c).
 Fig. 8  (a) Calculated potential energy diagrams (top), and the corresponding intermediates as well as the adsorption sites for the decomposition process from formic acid to CO on the SA-Rh site and Rh(111) surface. (b) Comparison of the peak mass activities of the different catalysts. (c) Polarization and power density of the assembled DFAFC with SA-Rh/CN as the electrode catalyst at 30, 60 and 80 °C. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature Limited. 
Carbon materials embedded with single atomic Fe coordinated with four planar N atoms (Fe–N–C) are another type of promising non-precious electrocatalyst for the ORR in fuel cells due to their low cost and excellent catalytic activity. Experimental studies have identified that the active sites of Fe–N–C are the Fe–N4 moieties, which have three planar configurations, Fe–N4–C10 (D1), Fe–N4–C12 (D2), and Fe–N4–C8 (D3), and two other edge configurations, armchair (AM edge) and zigzag (ZZ edge).161–163 Among all the Fe–N–C configurations, D1 and D3 are identified to be more active.164–166 Although theoretical calculations predicted that the ORR activity of Fe–N4 moieties was comparable or even inferior to that of metal-free N-doped carbon, the experimental results found that the Fe sites played a vital role in ORR catalysis. Recently, several groups reported that a nonplanar D3 configuration was induced by the fifth axial ligands (e.g. N) bound to Fe centers, while no fifth axial ligands could be adsorbed on the Fe centers in D1 and D2 configurations.167,168 This fifth ligand could lead to high ORR activity of the Fe–N–C electrocatalyst. But the nature and the origin of this axial ligand and the resulting ORR relevant Fe–N–C configurations are still controversial and need to be clarified. Recently, Yang et al.169 proved the existence of the fifth ligands and identified that the ligand was an *OH group, which was formed on specific Fe–N4–C configurations (e.g. D1, D3, and edge sites) under specific electrode potentials. The adsorption free energy of the *OH ligands on the Fe centers was related to the Fe–N4–C configurations and the pH value of the electrolyte. After the fifth ligands were introduced, the bonding strength between the Fe centers and the ORR intermediates was significantly reduced, and the ORR catalytic activity of Fe–N4 moieties was greatly improved because the ORR activity of Fe–N4 moieties was mainly decided by the desorption of *OH species from the Fe centers (except D2). The ORR activities of the five Fe–N4–C structures were compared, and the results suggested that the ORR activity decreased in the order of D2 > AM-edge > D1 > ZZ-edge > D3, which was in contrast to previous findings that the D1 and D3 configurations were the most active and the D2 configuration was the most inactive. The authors considered the over-strong adsorption of *OH on Fe centers, and concluded that the Fe–N4(OH)–C could be the realistic active site structures within D1, D3 and the edge-hosted Fe–N4 structures. The Fe centers provided one side for the adsorption of *OH ligands, while offering the other side for the active sites of ORR catalysis. Except for D2, all the other Fe–N–C configurations could improve ORR activities after adsorption of the *OH ligands. As shown in Fig. 9a, the sequence of ORR activities was D1 > AM-edge > D3 > ZZ-edge > D2, which is in good agreement with the experimental results. Besides, the pH-dependent poisoning kinetics of the Fe–N4–C electrocatalyst was also studied. As shown in Fig. 9b, the *OH ligands formed on the specific Fe–N4–C configurations can contribute to the pH-dependent ORR activity of the electrocatalyst. It was the competitive adsorption between the *OH ligands and poisoning anions that led to the pH-dependent poisoning kinetics of the Fe–N4–C electrocatalyst.
 Fig. 9  (a) Calculated ORR overpotentials for different Fe–N4(OH)–C moieties. (b) Possible ORR steps on Fe–N4(OH) moieties in acidic and alkaline media. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) WT of the Co K-edge for Co1–N4−xCx and Co1–N4. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. Calculated free energy diagrams for the ORR process under different overpotentials on (d) Cu–N4 and (e) Cu–N3. (f) Comparison of the polarization and power density curves of Zn–air batteries assembled with Cu SAs/NC-900 and Pt/C as the cathode catalysts. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. Plane-averaged electron densities of (g) Co–N/C and (h) CoxNi–N/C. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. 
As identified, the coordination environment is one of the most important factors for the regulation of catalytic activity and selectivity of a single atom electrocatalyst. Geng et al.170 demonstrated the effect of coordination environment on the catalytic activity of a single atom electrocatalyst. They prepared Co single atom electrocatalysts for the CO2RR with four-coordinated N (Co1–N4) active centers or four-coordinated N/C (Co1–N4−xCx) active centers through pyrolysis of MOFs under different temperatures. As shown in Fig. 9c, EXAFS WT analysis illustrates that the contour maximum for Co1–N4−xCx is 4.0 Å−1 while that of Co1–N4 is 4.3 Å−1. The relatively small contour maximum for Co1–N4−xCx arose from the shorter Co–C path, which was formed under high pyrolysis temperature and partial replacement of Co–N coordination in Co1–N4−xCx centers. The prepared Co1–N4 electrocatalyst displayed a faradaic efficiency of 82% and a current density of 15.8 mA cm−2 for CO production in the CO2RR. Ma et al.171 demonstrated the regulation of the coordination environment for active sites in a Cu single-atom electrocatalyst (Cu SAs/NC) through an ionic exchange method. It was found that the coordination structure of Cu sites could be regulated at the atomic level by pyrolysis temperature. High temperature would lead to an unsaturated Cu–N structure with an asymmetric charge distribution. They observed that the O2 adsorption upslope for Cu–N3 (0.17 eV) was much lower than that of Cu–N4 (0.87 eV) (Fig. 9d and e), highlighting that the high ORR activity of the as-prepared Cu SAs/NC electrocatalyst originated from the unsaturated Cu–N structure. This Cu–N electrocatalyst exhibited a high E1/2 of 0.87 V and a low Tafel slope of 79 mV dec−1, and the Zn–air battery assembled by using Cu SAs/NC as the anode electrocatalyst could offer a specific capacity of 712 mA h g−1 at a discharge current density of 50 mA cm−2 and also a maximum power density of 242 mW cm−2 (Fig. 9f).
Recently, multi-metallic M–N–C (e.g. M = Fe, Co or Ni) electrocatalysts have been fabricated by using core–shell structured MOF composites as precursors to enhance the synergistic effects between M–M and M–N species.108 For example, Li et al.172 developed a Janus-like electrocatalyst (CoxNi–N/C) with Co/Ni dual sites for bifunctional ORR and OER catalysis. They found that, owing to the incorporation of Ni atoms into the carbon matrix, the N atoms in the CoxNi–N/C electrocatalyst could gain more electrons and therefore become more negative. As shown in Fig. 9g and h, the charges are redistributed between Co and Ni atoms and some electrons are transferred from Co–N/C to Ni atoms, which can explain why the CoxNi–NC is more negative than Co–N/C. As a result, the electrocatalyst presented both excellent ORR and OER catalytic performances in alkaline solution with an Eonset of 0.93 V and E1/2 of 0.84 V for the ORR and Eonset of 1.59 V for the OER (the potential at which a current density of 10 mA cm−2 is achieved). At the same time, in acidic medium, the electrocatalyst also displayed excellent ORR catalytic activity, giving an Eonset of 0.86 V and E1/2 of 0.73 V. Chen et al.173 demonstrated the synergistic effect between Fe and Co single atoms for the enhanced ORR catalysis. They reported the preparation of N-doped carbon polyhedrons embedded with isolated Fe and Co atoms (FeCo-IA/NC) by ZIF-8. Compared to the N-doped carbon polyhedrons embedded with only Fe atoms or only Co atoms (Fe-IA/NC or Co-IA/NC), FeCo-IA/NC showed an enhanced ORR catalysis with a higher Eonset, indicating that the Fe in FeCo-IA/NC had a superior ORR activity to the Fe in Fe–N4 of Fe-IA/NC and the Co in Co–N4 of Co-IA/NC, which could be ascribed to the synergistic effect between Fe and Co in the electrocatalyst. The FeCo-IA/NC electrocatalyst also exhibited a high durability. A Zn–air battery was assembled by using this electrocatalyst as the air electrode material, and the battery could deliver a maximum peak power density of 725.6 W h kgZn−1.
Although SACs exhibit outstanding advantages for electrocatalysis and attract the attention of researchers for various electrocatalysts, some serious limitations make their practical application difficult. Firstly, the preparation of SACs generally needs a complicated synthetic process that is difficult to apply to commercial production at the mass-production level, and many superior SACs are based on precious metal atoms, limiting their further large-scale commercial applications.174 Secondly, the synthesis of SAC electrocatalysts with high metal loading in supports is still a great challenge despite there being some related reports about high mass loaded SAC materials.108 Besides, the support materials play an important role in SACs that can affect their activity, selectivity and stability in electrocatalysis. Because of the robust bond effect between single metal atoms and the surface of the support material, the single metal atoms can be strongly confined on the surface of the support. Therefore, appropriate support materials with the corresponding properties are very critical for the preparation of advanced SACs. In general, suitable supports should possess high surface area and a porous structure with more anchoring sites to stabilize and capture more single metal atoms and provide protection. Not only that, the support materials can also provide additional active sites to participate in electrocatalytic reactions and influence the conductivity of SACs.175
4. Summary and discussion
The state of the art of MOF-based electrocatalysts has shown attractive catalytic activity and stability toward the HER, OER, ORR, CO2RR, NRR and other reactions for electrochemical energy technologies. In order to achieve high and practical performance of the catalysts, some innovative structural design and synthesis with accurate morphology control and optimization are necessary. With respect to this, strategies such as heteroatomic doping, compositing, defect/oxygen vacancy generation, alloying, etc. to induce local electron redistribution and transfer for decreasing the reaction energy barriers seem more important. One of the important strategies is to fabricate single-atom electrocatalysts derived from MOFs to obtain well-defined electrocatalyst active sites for fundamental understanding of electrocatalyst mechanisms, which will greatly benefit the new electrocatalyst material design and synthesis. In order to contribute a useful guideline for the preparation of high-performance materials, the catalytic mechanisms for MOF-derived electrocatalysts on both molecular and electronic levels are reviewed and analyzed in this paper. For comparison, Table 1 summarizes all possible electrocatalysts derived from MOFs, their catalytically active sites, and targeted reactions/electrochemical energy devices.
Table 1 Electrocatalysts derived from MOFs and the obtained catalytically active sites and the targeted reactions/electrochemical energy devices




MOFs
Electrocatalysts
Catalytically active sites
Targeted reactions
Energy devices
References




UIO-66
UIO-66@hemin
Hemin-based
ORR
—/—

81



PcCu–O8–M
PcCu–O8–Co/CNT
Co (t2g6eg1)
ORR
—/—

103



MIL-101-Fe
NC@Fe3O4
Fe3O4
ORR
—/—

25



ZIF-8
PtA@FeSA–N–C
Pt3M (M:Fe and Zn)
ORR
H2–O2 fuel cells

73



Fe–N4


ZIF-8
CNT@CNP
Fe–Nx
ORR
Zn–air batteries

167



ZIF-8
FeCo-IA/NC
Fe–N4, Co–N4
ORR
Zn–air batteries

173



ZIF-8
20 Mn-NC-second
MnN4
ORR
PEMFCs

70



ZIF-8
Co–N–C@F127
CoN4
ORR
H2–O2 fuel cells

8



PCN-222
FeSA–N–C
FeSA–N–C
ORR
H2–O2 PEMFCs

42



CoNi MOFs
Ni1Co3@N-CNTs
Ni1Co3
ORR/OER
Zn–air batteries

11



NiFe MOF
NiFe MOF
Ni4+
ORR/OER
—/—

84



M-HIB-MOFs
Mn/Fe–HIB-MOFs
C4 site for the ORR/OER, graphitic N and metal-coordinated N for the ORR, and pyridinic N and oxidized N for the OER
ORR/OER
Zn–air batteries

92



NiFe-UMNs
NiFe-UMNs
Ni2+, Fe2+
OER
—/—

124



NiCo-UMOFNs
NiCo-UMOFNs
Ni site
OER
—/—

32



M2(BDC)2TED
Co/Ni(BDC)2TED@CF
Ni2+, Co2+
OER
—/—

125



Co–Fe PBAs
Co–Fe PBAs-250
Co-oxides
OER
—/—

109



poly[Co2(benzimidazole)4]
M-PCBN
High-valent Co atoms
OER
—/—

55



MIL-88B-Fe
A2.7B-MOF-FeCo1.6
Fe3+, Co2+
OER
—/—

82



Co-MOF
Co-MOF
CoOOH
OER
—/—

101



ZIF-67
CUMSs-ZIF-67
Unsaturated Co sites
OER
—/—

159



ZIFs
Co-NC@Mo2C
Co, Mo2C
HER/OER
Water splitting

9



Ni(BDC) MOF
NF@Fe2–Ni2P/C
Fe-doped Ni2P for the HER, γ-NiOOH for the OER
HER/OER
Water splitting

53



Ni-MOF
D-Ni-MOF
Ni–O(OH)
HER/OER
Water splitting

176



FeNi MOFs
FeNi(BDC)(DMF, F)/NF
MO6 (M = Fe, Ni)
HER/OER
Water splitting

177



Ni-ZIF
Ni-ZIF/Ni-B
Ni-B
HER/OER
Water splitting

178



ZIF-67/ZIF-8
Co3S4/EC-MOF
Co–Co bridge
HER
Water splitting

118



Ni-MOF
Ni-MOF/Ni2P@EG
High valence state Ni
HER
Water splitting, Zn–H2O cells

179



Co MOFs
CTGU-5
Co
HER
—/—

19



Ni-MOF
Ni2P/Ni@C
Ni2P/Ni
HER
—/—

120



PCN-222(Fe)
Pt/CNW@PCN-222
Pt
HER
—/—

180



Cu-THQ
Cu-THQ
Cu2+–O2−
CO2RR
—/—

181



ZIF-8
ZIF-A-LD
Sp2 C
CO2RR
—/—

24



ZIF-8
Co1–N4
Co
CO2RR
—/—

170



ZIF-67/ZIF-8
ZIF-8, ZIF-108, ZIF-7, SIM-1
Sp2 C
CO2RR
—/—

80



Bi-MOF
BiSAs/NC
Bi–N4
CO2RR
—/—

4



Al2(OH)2TCPP-H2
MOF-Zn-inf
Zn–N2
CO2RR
—/—

83



MOF-545
MCp2@MOF-545-Co
Co–N4
CO2RR
—/—

1



ZIF-8
Ni(OH)2-NC-2
Oxygen vacancy
CO2RR
—/—

182



MPc-Cu-X (M = Co, Ni, X = NH, O)
MPc-Cu-X (M = Co, Ni, X = NH, O)
Cu bis(diimine) and Cu bis(dioxolene) units
CO2RR
—/—

183



Zr-fcu-MOFs
Ag/Zr-fcu-MOFs
Pore site
CO2RR
—/—

184



TPY-MOLs
MOL-Co-N3
Co–N3
CO2RR
—/—

185



ZIF-71
Pt/Au@ZIF
Electron deficient on Pt
NRR
—/—

119



Ni-MOF
Ti3C2-QD/Ni-MOF
Ni
NRR
—/—

186



ZIF-8
VC
Vacancy
NRR
—/—

187



NixZn(1−x)BMOF
Ni–Nx–C
Ni–N3
NRR
—/—

188



PCN-222(Fe)
Fe1–N–C
Fe–N4
NRR
—/—

189



Bi-MOF
Bi NPs
Bi0
NRR
—/—

190



MIL-100(Fe)
Fe1.89Mo4.11O7/FeS2@C
Mo
NRR
—/—

191



Cu-MOF
Cu–N–C
Cu–Nx
NO3RR
—/—

192



ZIF-8
SA-Rh/CN
Rh–N4
FOR
—/—

160





Active sites in MOF-based electrocatalysts have demonstrated outstanding performance for catalysis, benefiting from their open structure and operated components. In the past decade, although significant progress in the development of MOF-derived electrocatalysts has been made, there are still several challenges in their practical applications.
(1) Indefinite confirmation of the active sites of the MOF-derived electrocatalysts. Electrocatalytic reactions are rapid electrochemical processes that occur on the surface of electrocatalysts. Therefore, associating the catalytic reaction to specific active sites plays a decisive role in further understanding and perfecting the electrocatalytic reaction mechanism. However, the complex composition and the diverse crystal structures set a higher threshold for this subject. A variety of MOF-based electrocatalysts including doped carbon, alloys, sulfides/phosphates, single-atoms and others are still in continuous research and development, but not enough progress has been made yet; exploring these specific reaction active sites is still an important topic, and not only requires a solid theoretical foundation, but also advanced in situ characterization techniques.
(2) Uncertain electron structures induced by the interaction between different components of the MOF-derived electrocatalysts. The performance of electrocatalysts is determined by the electronic structures of the active sites. However, the electronic structure of the active site can be affected by many factors, such as the structure and composition of the MOF precursor, crystal structure and coordination environment. Not only can the top site affect the adsorption/desorption process; the same effect can also be produced in the hollow site. Even doping will have a huge impact on the Gibbs free energy. Otherwise, the effects of these factors on the electronic structure and the results of their interactions are still in a state of superficial research.
(3) Insufficient understanding of the relationship between the reaction intermediate products and the catalytically active sites of the MOF-derived electrocatalysts. The explorers' cognition about electrocatalytic processes for the ORR, OER, HER and other electrocatalysis processes is kept at an overall level. However, there is still insufficient fundamental understanding of the dynamic chemical reactions that occur in a specific step. Based on advanced in situ characterization technologies, some detailed reaction barriers and Gibbs free energies of intermediate steps and the corresponding products can be explored comprehensively, but it is still not universal and requires constant optimization and improvement.
Regarding MOF-based electrocatalysts, they still face some challenges in meeting the requirements of practical catalytic activity, stability and selectivity. Several possible research directions for overcoming the challenges are proposed as follows: (1) further exploring new MOF precursors and developing innovative methods to synthesize more active, stable and selective electrocatalysts; (2) further developing ex situ/in situ characterization technologies for understanding the active site structures, their correlation with their MOF precursor structures, and the relationship between the reaction intermediate products and their catalytically active sites; and (3) further investigating reaction mechanisms through both molecular/electronic level theoretical calculations and in situ experimental validation to optimize the electrocatalyst performance for practical application.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2020YFB1505802) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. U1710256 and U1810115).
References
Z. Xin, Y.-R. Wang, Y. Chen, W.-L. Li, L.-Z. Dong and Y.-Q. Lan, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, K. Jiang, H. Wang and X. Yao, Chem, 2019, 5, 1371–1397 CAS .
Q. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2019, 120, 1438–1511 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Zhang, T. Wang, K. Yu, J. Liu, W. Chen, A. Li, H. Rong, R. Lin, S. Ji, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, C. Chen, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16569–16573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, S. Zhao, Y. Zhang and Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800702 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ding, R. W. Flaig, H. L. Jiang and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2783–2828 RSC .
Z. Liang, C. Qu, D. Xia, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9604–9633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, S. Hwang, D. A. Cullen, M. A. Uddin, L. Langhorst, B. Li, S. Karakalos, A. J. Kropf, E. C. Wegener, J. Sokolowski, M. Chen, D. Myers, D. Su, K. L. More, G. Wang, S. Litster and G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 250–260 RSC .
Q. Liang, H. Jin, Z. Wang, Y. Xiong, S. Yuan, X. Zeng, D. He and S. Mu, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 746–752 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, D. Yang, H. Liu, X. Sun, C. Chen, J. Bi, J. Liu, H. Wu and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8896–8901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lai, X. Liu, Y. Wang, C. Cao, Y. Yin, B. Wu, X. Liu, S. Yang and T. Liang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 472, 228470 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang and Y. Yamauchi, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 638–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ju, S. Yan and D. Yuan, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2000–2010 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pei, Z. Qi, X. Li, R. V. Maligal-Ganesh, T. W. Goh, C. Xiao, T. Wang and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6186–6192 RSC .
D. Sun, Y. Tang, D. Ye, J. Yan, H. Zhou and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5254–5262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen and Q. Xu, Matter, 2019, 1, 57–89 CrossRef .
F. Meng, S. Zhang, L. Ma, W. Zhang, M. Li, T. Wu, H. Li, T. Zhang, X. Lu, F. Huo and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803263 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xue, S. Zheng, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7301–7327 RSC .
Y. P. Wu, W. Zhou, J. Zhao, W. W. Dong, Y. Q. Lan, D. S. Li, C. Sun and X. Bu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13001–13005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cai, Y. Li, Q. Liu, Z. Xue, H. Wang, Y. Fan, K. Zhu, Z. Ke, C. Y. Su and G. Li, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802365 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Niu, Y.-P. Wang, J.-Z. He, W.-W. Liu, M.-C. Liu, D. Shan, L. Lee and Y.-L. Chueh, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103788 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, X. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Zhang and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34269–34278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, S. Jang, S.-J. Yim, L. Ye and D.-P. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707110 CrossRef .
S. Dou, J. Song, S. Xi, Y. Du, J. Wang, Z. F. Huang, Z. J. Xu and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4041–4045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, B. Fan, R. Feng, C. Ye, X. Wei, J. Liu and X. Bu, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 462–470 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, T. Thomas, S. A. Rasaki, A. Saad, C. Hu, J. Wang and M. Yang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 252–276 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Campos-Roldán and N. Alonso-Vante, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 312–331 CrossRef .
P. Lindgren, G. Kastlunger and A. A. Peterson, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 121–128 CrossRef .
K. Ye, Z. Zhou, J. Shao, L. Lin, D. Gao, N. Ta, R. Si, G. Wang and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4814–4821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, H. b. Yang, X. Huang, S.-F. Hung, W. Cai, C. Jia, S. Miao, H. M. Chen, X. Yang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Chem, 2020, 6, 658–674 CAS .
X. Zhang, A. Chen, M. Zhong, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Zhou and X.-H. Bu, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 2, 29–104 CrossRef .
S. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Dong, C.-T. He, H. Yin, P. An, K. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Gao, L. Zhang, J. Lv, J. Wang, J. Zhang, A. M. Khattak, N. A. Khan, Z. Wei, J. Zhang, S. Liu, H. Zhao and Z. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16184 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2207–2221 RSC .
A. Skorikov, W. Albrecht, E. Bladt, X. Xie, J. E. S. van der Hoeven, A. van Blaaderen, S. Van Aert and S. Bals, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13421–13429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. Lyu, Z. Chen, M. Xie, M. Chi, W. Jin and Y. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5867–5875 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Toth, M. Velicky, M. A. Bissett, T. J. Slater, N. Savjani, A. K. Rabiu, A. M. Rakowski, J. R. Brent, S. J. Haigh, P. O'Brien and R. A. Dryfe, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8256–8264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hu, S. Zhao, S. Liu, C. Chen, W. Chen, W. Zhu, C. Liang, W. C. Cheong, Y. Wang, Y. Yu, Q. Peng, K. Zhou, J. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801878 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, Q. Sun and J. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803966 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Rasouli, D. Myers, N. Kariuki, K. Higashida, N. Nakashima and P. Ferreira, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 46–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, X. Cui, L. Zeng, L. Su, Y. Song and J. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6285–6293 RSC .
L. Jiao and H.-L. Jiang, Chem, 2019, 5, 786–804 CAS .
L. Jiao, R. Zhang, G. Wan, W. Yang, X. Wan, H. Zhou, J. Shui, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, R. Si, H. Liu, N. Chen, Q. Wang, K. Adair, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Song, J. Li, M. N. Banis, R. Li, T. K. Sham, M. Gu, L. M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4936 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, N. Wang, C. Zhu, X. Liu, Y. Zhu, P. Guo, L. Alfilfil, X. Dong, D. Zhang and Y. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 819–825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, M. Lopez-Haro, D. M. Meira, P. Concepcion, J. J. Calvino and A. Corma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15695–15702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Liu, T. Zhang, Y. Luo, Z. Lan, K. Zhang, J. Zuo, L. Jiang and R. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1626–1636 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kunze, P. Grosse, M. T. Bernal Lopez, I. Sinev, I. Zegkinoglou, H. Mistry, J. Timoshenko, M. Y. Hu, J. Zhao, E. E. Alp, S. W. Chee and B. Roldan Cuenya, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 7, 22667–22674 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3748–3779 RSC .
C.-C. Hou, H.-F. Wang, C. Li and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1658–1693 RSC .
H. Fei, J. Dong, D. Chen, T. Hu, X. Duan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5207–5241 RSC .
H. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Shi and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef .
T. Asset and P. Atanassov, Joule, 2020, 4, 33–44 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, Y. Min, W. Yang, Y. Lian, L. Lin, K. Feng, Z. Deng, M. Chen, J. Zhong, L. Xu and Y. Peng, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8882–8892 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, W. Xia, H. Shen, W. Guo, Z. Liang, K. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Zhu and R. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1871–1877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Zheng, R. Li, Y. Tang, B. Li, C. Zhu, L. You, M. R. Gao, Z. Liu, S. H. Yu and K. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1971–1981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, J. Zhu, L. Ma, Z. Jin, J. Ge, X. Deng, Y. Hou, Q. He, J. Li, Q. Jia, S. Mukerjee, R. Yang, Z. Jiang, D. Su, C. Liu and W. Xing, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2824–2832 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mineva, I. Matanovic, P. Atanassov, M.-T. Sougrati, L. Stievano, M. Clémancey, A. Kochem, J.-M. Latour and F. Jaouen, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9359–9371 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, R. Gao, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, G. I. N. Waterhouse, R. Shi, J. Zhao, M. Zhang, L. Shang, G. Sheng, X. Zhang, X. Wen, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704663 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wang, W. Chen, F.-K. Chiang, A. I. Dugulan, Y. Song, R. Pestman, K. Zhang, J. Yao, B. Feng, P. Miao, W. Xu and E. J. M. Hensen, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 2947 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Sun, F. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9038–9043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Kneebone, S. L. Daifuku, J. A. Kehl, G. Wu, H. T. Chung, M. Y. Hu, E. E. Alp, K. L. More, P. Zelenay, E. F. Holby and M. L. Neidig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 16283–16290 CrossRef CAS .
U. I. Kramm, L. Ni and S. Wagner, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805623 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, Z. Yang, P. Tian, Y. Sheng, J. Xu and Y.-F. Han, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Wang, T. Ouyang, L. Wang, J. H. Zhong, T. Ma and Z. Q. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13291–13296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Qu, T. Yuan, W. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 1486–1511 CAS .
Y. Pan, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Chen and Y. Li, Matter, 2020, 2, 78–110 CrossRef .
J. Hu, C. Zhang, L. Jiang, H. Lin, Y. An, D. Zhou, M. K. H. Leung and S. Yang, Joule, 2017, 1, 383–393 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. Sharma, X. Liu, Y.-T. Pan, J. S. Spendelow, M. Chi, Y. Jia, P. Zhang, D. A. Cullen, Z. Xi, H. Lin, Z. Yin, B. Shen, M. Muzzio, C. Yu, Y. S. Kim, A. A. Peterson, K. L. More, H. Zhu and S. Sun, Joule, 2019, 3, 124–135 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang and H. Wang, Chem, 2018, 4, 194–195 CAS .
J. Li, M. Chen, D. A. Cullen, S. Hwang, M. Wang, B. Li, K. Liu, S. Karakalos, M. Lucero, H. Zhang, C. Lei, H. Xu, G. E. Sterbinsky, Z. Feng, D. Su, K. L. More, G. Wang, Z. Wang and G. Wu, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 935–945 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, L. Zhuang, H. Liu, X. Yan, X. Wang, J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Zheng, Z. Xiao, E. Taran, J. Chen, D. Yang, Z. Zhu, S. Wang, L. Dai and X. Yao, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 688–695 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, G. Gao, X. Yan, N. Chen, J. Chen, M. T. Soo, B. Wood, D. Yang, A. Du and X. Yao, Chem, 2018, 4, 285–297 CAS .
X. Ao, W. Zhang, B. Zhao, Y. Ding, G. Nam, L. Soule, A. Abdelhafiz, C. Wang and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3032–3040 RSC .
C. Huang, J. Dong, W. Sun, Z. Xue, J. Ma, L. Zheng, C. Liu, X. Li, K. Zhou, X. Qiao, Q. Song, W. Ma, L. Zhang, Z. Lin and T. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2779 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Senthil Raja, C.-L. Huang, Y.-A. Chen, Y. Choi and S.-Y. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 279, 119375 CrossRef CAS .
D.-D. Ma and Q.-L. Zhu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 422, 213483 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sanati, R. Abazari, J. Albero, A. Morsali, H. Garcia, Z. Liang and R. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 202, 133, 11148–11167 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Y. Qiu, Z. Chen, B. Guan, X. Hao, A. I. Rykov, Y. Sun, L. Liu, Y. Zou, J. Sun, W. Xu and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20873–20878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ding, X. Cai and H. L. Jiang, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 10209–10230 RSC .
X. Jiang, H. Li, J. Xiao, D. Gao, R. Si, F. Yang, Y. Li, G. Wang and X. Bao, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 345–350 CrossRef CAS .
I. Liberman, R. Shimoni, R. Ifraemov, I. Rozenberg, C. Singh and I. Hod, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1933–1940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xue, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Geng, B. Jia, J. Tang, S. Bao, H.-P. Wang, Y. Fan, Z.-w. Wei, Z. Zhang, Z. Ke, G. Li and C.-Y. Su, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801564 CrossRef .
F. Yang, W. Hu, C. Yang, M. Patrick, A. L. Cooksy, J. Zhang, J. A. Aguiar, C. Fang, Y. Zhou, Y. S. Meng, J. Huang and J. Gu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4572–4580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cheng, X. Zhao, H. Su, F. Tang, W. Che, H. Zhang and Q. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ji, Y. Kong, C. Wang, H. Tan, H. Duan, W. Hu, G. Li, Y. Lu, N. Li, Y. Wang, J. Tian, Z. Qi, Z. Sun, F. Hu and W. Yan, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5691–5697 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, Y. Yang, X. Yang, J. Cao, W. Liu and Y. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8284–8291 RSC .
K. Zhu, C. Chen, S. Lu, X. Zhang, A. Alsaedi and T. Hayat, Carbon, 2019, 148, 52–63 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yao, Y. Xia, J. Li, N. Wang, J. Han, C. Gao, M. Han, G. Shen, Y. Liu, A. Seifitokaldani, X. Sun and H. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11117–11123 RSC .
S. Maiti, K. Maiti, M. T. Curnan, K. Kim, K.-J. Noh and J. W. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3717–3756 RSC .
S. Li, Y. Gao, N. Li, L. Ge, X. Bu and P. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1897–1927 RSC .
R. Dong, Z. Zhang, D. C. Tranca, S. Zhou, M. Wang, P. Adler, Z. Liao, F. Liu, Y. Sun, W. Shi, Z. Zhang, E. Zschech, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, C. Felser and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2637 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Shinde, C. H. Lee, J.-Y. Jung, N. K. Wagh, S.-H. Kim, D.-H. Kim, C. Lin, S. U. Lee and J.-H. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 727–738 RSC .
R. Dong, P. Han, H. Arora, M. Ballabio, M. Karakus, Z. Zhang, C. Shekhar, P. Adler, P. S. Petkov, A. Erbe, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, C. Felser, T. Heine, M. Bonn, X. Feng and E. Canovas, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1027–1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, D. Adekoya, X. Huang, M. J. Kiefel, J. Xie, W. Xu, Q. Zhang, D. Zhu and S. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 12016–12026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cai, P. Cui, W. Shi, S. Morris, S. N. Lou, J. Chen, J.-H. Ciou, V. K. Paidi, K.-S. Lee, S. Li and P. S. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, X. F. Cheng, X. Cao, J. H. He, W. Guo, D. S. Li, Z. J. Xu, Y. Huang, J. M. Lu and Q. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1903188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Garcia-Valdivia, F. J. Romero, J. Cepeda, D. P. Morales, N. Casati, A. J. Mota, L. A. Zotti, J. J. Palacios, D. Choquesillo-Lazarte, J. F. Salmerón, A. Rivadeneyra and A. Rodríguez-Diéguez, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 9473–9476 RSC .
L. S. Xie, G. Skorupskii and M. Dinca, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8536–8580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Campbell, S. F. Liu, T. M. Swager and M. Dinca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13780–13783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhao, Y. Wang, Q. Ma, Y. Huang, X. Zhang, J. Ping, Z. Zhang, Q. Lu, Y. Yu, H. Xu, Y. Zhao and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7372–7378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Wang, H. Y. Liu, G. Bian, X. Gao, S. Zhao, Y. Kang, J. Zhu and X. H. Bu, Small, 2019, 15, 1906086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rui, G. Zhao, M. Lao, P. Cui, X. Zheng, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, W. Huang, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 8447–8453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, K. H. Ly, M. Wang, Y. Krupskaya, X. Han, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, V. Kataev, B. Buchner, I. M. Weidinger, S. Kaskel, P. Liu, M. Chen, R. Dong and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10677–10682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, S. Wang, W. Tu, Z. Hu, Z. Ding, Y. Hou, R. Xu and W. Dai, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 731–738 RSC .
H. Feng, Z. Xu, L. Ren, C. Liu, J. Zhuang, Z. Hu, X. Xu, J. Chen, J. Wang, W. Hao, Y. Du and S. X. Dou, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4288–4293 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Y. Niu, X. Wu, F. Wu, T. Li and W. Hu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 4658–4666 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, L. Zhao, H. Xu, Q. Huang, Y. Wang, C. Hou, Y. Hou, J. Wang, F. Dang and J. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 27, 2001415 CrossRef .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, X. Huang, Z. Wang, G. Li, Z. Han, H. Yang, P. Liao, X. Ren, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, Small, 2020, 16, 2002210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, Q. Dai, H. Zheng, M. Chen and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705431 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, D. Zhu, C. Guo, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700518 CrossRef .
H. Chen, K. Shen, Q. Mao, J. Chen and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1417–1426 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jasinski, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1965, 112, 526 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Miner, T. Fukushima, D. Sheberla, L. Sun, Y. Surendranath and M. Dinca, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhou, Z. Zhang, J. Cai, B. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Gong, X. Sui, A. Yu, L. Zhao, Z. Wang and Z. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104592 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Douka, Y. Xu, H. Yang, S. Zaman, Y. Yan, H. Liu, M. A. Salam and B. Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Luo, H.-F. Lin, P. Tang, J. R. Morante, J. Arbiol, K. Wan, B.-W. Mao, L.-M. Liu and J. Fransaer, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 17, 46–61 CrossRef .
T. Liu, P. Li, N. Yao, T. Kong, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806672 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. F. Sim, J. R. T. Chen, C. S. L. Koh, H. K. Lee, X. Han, G. C. Phan-Quang, J. Y. Pang, C. L. Lay, S. Pedireddy, I. Y. Phang, E. K. L. Yeow and X. Y. Ling, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16997–17003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Li, X. Zhao, Y. Liu, C. W. Nan and L. Z. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901510 CrossRef .
J. Chen, J. Liu, J.-Q. Xie, H. Ye, X.-Z. Fu, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 225–233 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ling, S. Cheng, N. Chen, C. Qian and F. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 17185–17192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Bai, F. Li, Y. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hai, X. Jia, K. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Wu and G. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 345–352 CrossRef CAS .
D.-J. Li, Q.-H. Li, Z.-G. Gu and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18519–18528 RSC .
D. Senthil Raja, H.-W. Lin and S.-Y. Lu, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cheng, X. F. Lu, D. Luan and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18234–18239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, Z. Han, X. Xu, D. Sarker, J. Zhou, M. Wu, Z. Liu, M. Huang and H. Jiang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 418, 129330 CrossRef CAS .
X. Mu, H. Yuan, H. Jing, F. Xia, J. Wu, X. Gu, C. Chen, J. Bao, S. Liu and S. Mu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 296, 120095 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, L. Feng, K. Wang, J. Pang, M. Bosch, C. Lollar, Y. Sun, J. Qin, X. Yang, P. Zhang, Q. Wang, L. Zou, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Fang, J. Li and H. C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704303 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Zhang, F. Yin, W. Chu and B. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 22111–22123 RSC .
X. L. Lv, S. Yuan, L. H. Xie, H. F. Darke, Y. Chen, T. He, C. Dong, B. Wang, Y. Z. Zhang, J. R. Li and H. C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10283–10293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zheng, W. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang and W. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2103318 CrossRef .
C.-P. Wang, Y. Feng, H. Sun, Y. Wang, J. Yin, Z. Yao, X.-H. Bu and J. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 7132–7143 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, Y. Guo, Y. Xie, X. Cao, S. Li, L. Zhang, W. Wang and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 5942–5952 RSC .
J. Wang, G. Wu, W. Wang, W. Xuan, J. Jiang, J. Wang, L. Li, W.-F. Lin, W. Ding and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19786–19792 RSC .
S. L. Zhang, B. Y. Guan and X. W. D. Lou, Small, 2019, 15, 1805324 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nadeem, G. Yasin, M. H. Bhatti, M. Mehmood, M. Arif and L. Dai, J. Power Sources, 2018, 402, 34–42 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Wang, S. Hwang, Y. T. Pan, K. Chen, Y. He, S. Karakalos, H. Zhang, J. S. Spendelow, D. Su and G. Wu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4163–4171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, H. Shan, Y. Li, H. Bao, T. Hu, L. Zhang, S. Liu and F. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10337–10345 RSC .
W. Zhou, H. Su, S. Shen, Y. Li, H. Zhang, M. Liu, X. Zhao, W. Cheng, P. Yao and Q. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 6898–6904 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hu, L. Shang, T. Sheng, Y. Chen and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002281 CrossRef CAS .
C. Castillo-Blas, N. Lopez-Salas, M. C. Gutierrez, I. Puente-Orench, E. Gutierrez-Puebla, M. L. Ferrer, M. A. Monge and F. Gandara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1766–1774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Q. Fu, H. Duan, J. Song and H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 6147–6191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Legrand, Z. Wang, J. Troyano and S. Furukawa, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 18–33 RSC .
Y. Jiang, Y.-P. Deng, J. Fu, D. U. Lee, R. Liang, Z. P. Cano, Y. Liu, Z. Bai, S. Hwang, L. Yang, D. Su, W. Chu and Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702900 CrossRef .
A. Beniya and S. Higashi, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 590–602 CrossRef .
D. Liu, X. Li, S. Chen, H. Yan, C. Wang, C. Wu, Y. A. Haleem, S. Duan, J. Lu, B. Ge, P. M. Ajayan, Y. Luo, J. Jiang and L. Song, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jung, H. Shin, B. H. Lee, V. Efremov, S. Lee, H. S. Lee, J. Kim, W. Hooch Antink, S. Park, K. S. Lee, S. P. Cho, J. S. Yoo, Y. E. Sung and T. Hyeon, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 436–442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, D. Liu, J. H. Lee, Y. Liu, Z. Xie, S. Hwang, S. Kattel, L. Song and J. G. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3033–3037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ding, M. J. Hülsey, J. Pérez-Ramírez and N. Yan, Joule, 2019, 3, 2897–2929 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Yang, L. Wang, Z. Mu, H. Zhu, X. Zhu, H. Xing, H. Xia, B. Huang, J. Li, S. Guo and E. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Garcia-Muelas and N. Lopez, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4687 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Cheng, S. Han, K. Mao, C. Chen, L. Yang, Z. Zou, M. Gu, Z. Hu and H. Yang, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 485–493 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, W. M. Huang, J. Li, Y. Zhou, Z. Q. Li, Y. C. Yin and X. H. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, H. Xue, H. Gong, M. Bai, D. Tang, R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–32 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, S. M. Xu, Y. Xu, L. Tan, X. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Duan and Y. F. Song, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 378–384 RSC .
M. M. J. Li, C. Chen, T. Ayvalı, H. Suo, J. Zheng, I. F. Teixeira, L. Ye, H. Zou, D. O'Hare and S. C. E. Tsang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4390–4401 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tao, C.-Y. Lin, S. Dou, S. Feng, D. Chen, D. Liu, J. Huo, Z. Xia and S. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 417–425 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, J. Dong, Z. Q. Huang, P. Xin, W. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Jin, W. Xing, Z. Zhuang, J. Ye, X. Wei, R. Cao, L. Gu, S. Sun, L. Zhuang, X. Chen, H. Yang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, C. R. Chang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 390–397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jia, N. Ramaswamy, H. Hafiz, U. Tylus, K. Strickland, G. Wu, B. Barbiellini, A. Bansil, E. F. Holby, P. Zelenay and S. Mukerjee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12496–12505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lu, Q. Liu and S. Chen, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 7584–7618 CrossRef CAS .
U. I. Kramm, M. Lefevre, N. Larouche, D. Schmeisser and J. P. Dodelet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 978–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Ghoshal, W. Liang, M.-T. Sougrati, F. Jaouen, B. Halevi, S. McKinney, G. McCool, C. Ma, X. Yuan, Z.-F. Ma, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2418–2432 RSC .
U. I. Kramm, I. Herrmann-Geppert, J. Behrends, K. Lips, S. Fiechter and P. Bogdanoff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 635–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zitolo, V. Goellner, V. Armel, M. T. Sougrati, T. Mineva, L. Stievano, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 937–942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bai, J. Liu, C. Jin, J. Zhang and F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18767–18777 RSC .
J. Li, H. Zhang, W. Samarakoon, W. Shan, D. A. Cullen, S. Karakalos, M. Chen, D. Gu, K. L. More, G. Wang, Z. Feng, Z. Wang and G. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18971–18980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, D. Xia, Y. Kang, H. Du, F. Kang, L. Gan and J. Li, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Geng, Y. Cao, W. Chen, X. Kong, Y. Liu, T. Yao and Y. Lin, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, Z. Han, K. Leng, X. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Qu and J. Bai, Small, 2020, 16, 2001384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, H. He, H. Cao, S. Sun, W. Diao, D. Gao, P. Lu, S. Zhang, Z. Guo, M. Li, R. Liu, D. Ren, C. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Jiang and G. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 112–121 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Zhang, L. Dong, W. Yang, X. Liu, L. Long, C. Liu, S. Dong and J. Jia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4369–4375 RSC .
C. Gao, J. Low, R. Long, T. Kong, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12175–12216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cheng, L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis and X. Sun, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 539–573 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, Y. Dou, X. Q. Wu, A. Zhou, L. Shu and J. R. Li, Small, 2020, 16, 1906564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Lin, D. Senthil Raja, X.-F. Chuah, C.-T. Hsieh, Y.-A. Chen and S.-Y. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 118023 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, B. Fei, G. Cai, Y. Ha, J. Liu, H. Jia, J. Zhang, M. Liu and R. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902714 CrossRef .
F. Cheng, L. Wang, H. Wang, C. Lei, B. Yang, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Lei, S. Wang and Y. Hou, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104621 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Xiao, W. Tian, S. Jin, Z. G. Gu and J. Zhang, Small, 2020, 16, 2005111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Majidi, A. Ahmadiparidari, N. Shan, S. N. Misal, K. Kumar, Z. Huang, S. Rastegar, Z. Hemmat, X. Zou, P. Zapol, J. Cabana, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2004393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, Z. Song, W. Zhu, Q. Mu, X. Yuan, Y. Lian, H. Cheng, Z. Deng, M. Chen, W. Yin and Y. Peng, ACS Catal., 2020, 11, 345–354 CrossRef .
Z. Meng, J. Luo, W. Li and K. A. Mirica, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 21656–21669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Nam, O. Shekhah, G. Lee, A. Mallick, H. Jiang, F. Li, B. Chen, J. Wicks, M. Eddaoudi and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 21513–21521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, Y. Wang, Y. Shen, Z. Cai, Z. Li, J. Liu, J. Chen, C. Xiao, H. Liu, W. Lin and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 21493–21501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qin, B. Liu, K.-H. Lam, S. Song, X. Li and X. Hu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 17791–17799 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, D. Wang, Y. Wan, R. Lv, S. Li, B. Li, X. Zou and S. Yang, Mater. Today, 2020, 40, 18–25 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee, X. Yang, W. Shan, W. Samarakoon, S. Karakalos, D. A. Cullen, K. More, M. Wang, Z. Feng, G. Wang and G. Wu, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900821 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, L. Jiao, W. Yang, G. Wan and H.-L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26371–26377 RSC .
D. Yao, C. Tang, L. Li, B. Xia, A. Vasileff, H. Jin, Y. Zhang and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001289 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Feng, B. Xiao, J. Zhao, H. Ma, Y. Tian, H. Pang and L. Tan, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 6157–6169 RSC .
T. Zhu, Q. Chen, P. Liao, W. Duan, S. Liang, Z. Yan and C. Feng, Small, 2020, 16, 2004526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) High-resolution HAADF-STEM image of PdZn-10/ZIF-8C. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) The ac-HAADF-STEM images of Pt–Ru dimers/NCNTs. (c) The intensity profile obtained on one individual Pt–Ru dimer. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature Limited. (d) A representative iDPC-STEM image of Mo/ZSM-5. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) High-resolution HAADF-STEM image and (f) the corresponding iDPC image of the Ir@MWW-560 air sample. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (g) Co K-edge XANES spectra and (h) magnitude of Fourier transformed Co K-edge EXAFS data of the sample.54 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (i) WT for Co K-edge EXAFS of PCB (left), M-PCBN (middle), and Co foil (right). Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (j) Mössbauer spectra of a PANI–Fe–C electrocatalyst. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Adsorption of *COOH on the ZIFs with different imidazolate ligands. (b) CO2RR processes on the imidazolate ligands of ZIF-8. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (c) Calculated free energy diagrams of the CO2RR to CO on Co-TCPP and CoCp2/Co-TCPP. (d) Comparison of the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of different catalysts. Reproduced with permission.1 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Calculated density of states (DOS) and (b) LSV curves for the OER of AB-MOF-FeCo with different ligand and metal ratios. (c) Chronopotentiometry response of A2.7B-MOF-FeCo1.6 for the OER. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Calculated strain in Zn–N4 moieties. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) The adsorption of possible intermediates generated in the ORR/OER process on Mn/Fe–HIB-MOF. Calculated free energy diagrams for (f) the OER pathway and (g) ORR pathway on Mn/Fe–HIB-MOF. (h) Discharge curves of Zn–air batteries at different discharging rates. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) ESR spectra at different temperatures for PcCu–O8–Co. (b) In situ Raman analysis of the ORR process. (c) Possible reaction steps in the ORR process. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) O 1s XPS spectra for Co–Fe PBAs calcined at different temperatures. (e) Possible OER steps in Co–Fe PBAs-250. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (f) Perspective view of Ni3(HITP)2. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature Limited. (g) The cycling performance of Zn–air batteries assembled with different cathode catalysts. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Calculated free energy diagrams for the ORR on different M–N–C structures. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (b) The top view of the Co3S4/EC-MOF hybrid. 1 and 2 represent the Co1 and Co2 atoms in the Co–Co bridge site. (c) Calculated ΔGH* on different catalysts. (d) Tafel plots of different samples for the HER. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Calculated ΔGH* and (b) calculated DOS profiles for Ni2P, Ni, and the Ni2P/Ni hybrid. (c) Tafel plots of the different samples for the HER in acidic medium at 10 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) Calculated DOS curves for FeP and Co–Fe-P. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (e) PDOS of a Ni atom in Ni–N2 and Ni–N4 moieties of Ni3(Ni3·HAHATN)2. (f) Calculated free energy diagram for the HER on the active moieties of different M23(M13·HAHATN)2. (g) The adsorption of H* on the Ni–N2 and Ni–N4 moieties in Ni3(Ni3·HAHATN)2. (h) Tafel plots for the HER on different M23(M13·HAHATN)2. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The intermediates and the adsorption sites for the OER process in Co/Ni(BDC)2TED. (b) Calculated free energy diagrams for the OER on different M2(BDC)2TED MOFs. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Pt 4f XPS spectra for Pt/C and PtCo@NCs obtained at different temperatures. (d) Free energy diagrams for the MOR on Pt and different PtCo nanostructures. (e) Mass and specific activities of Pt/C and PtCo@NCs obtained at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (f) The structure of multi-metallic MOFs constructed from SBUs and H2hfipbb. (g) The electron transfer number (n) and (h) current density of Zn–Mn–Co spinels toward the ORR. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Calculated potential energy diagrams (top), and the corresponding intermediates as well as the adsorption sites for the decomposition process from formic acid to CO on the SA-Rh site and Rh(111) surface. (b) Comparison of the peak mass activities of the different catalysts. (c) Polarization and power density of the assembled DFAFC with SA-Rh/CN as the electrode catalyst at 30, 60 and 80 °C. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature Limited.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Calculated ORR overpotentials for different Fe–N4(OH)–C moieties. (b) Possible ORR steps on Fe–N4(OH) moieties in acidic and alkaline media. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) WT of the Co K-edge for Co1–N4−xCx and Co1–N4. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. Calculated free energy diagrams for the ORR process under different overpotentials on (d) Cu–N4 and (e) Cu–N3. (f) Comparison of the polarization and power density curves of Zn–air batteries assembled with Cu SAs/NC-900 and Pt/C as the cathode catalysts. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. Plane-averaged electron densities of (g) Co–N/C and (h) CoxNi–N/C. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V.	 

UIO-66	UIO-66@hemin	Hemin-based	ORR	—/—	
81

PcCu–O8–M	PcCu–O8–Co/CNT	Co (t2g6eg1)	ORR	—/—	
103

MIL-101-Fe	NC@Fe3O4	Fe3O4	ORR	—/—	
25

ZIF-8	PtA@FeSA–N–C	Pt3M (M:Fe and Zn)	ORR	H2–O2 fuel cells	
73

Fe–N4
ZIF-8	CNT@CNP	Fe–Nx	ORR	Zn–air batteries	
167

ZIF-8	FeCo-IA/NC	Fe–N4, Co–N4	ORR	Zn–air batteries	
173

ZIF-8	20 Mn-NC-second	MnN4	ORR	PEMFCs	
70

ZIF-8	Co–N–C@F127	CoN4	ORR	H2–O2 fuel cells	
8

PCN-222	FeSA–N–C	FeSA–N–C	ORR	H2–O2 PEMFCs	
42

CoNi MOFs	Ni1Co3@N-CNTs	Ni1Co3	ORR/OER	Zn–air batteries	
11

NiFe MOF	NiFe MOF	Ni4+	ORR/OER	—/—	
84

M-HIB-MOFs	Mn/Fe–HIB-MOFs	C4 site for the ORR/OER, graphitic N and metal-coordinated N for the ORR, and pyridinic N and oxidized N for the OER	ORR/OER	Zn–air batteries	
92

NiFe-UMNs	NiFe-UMNs	Ni2+, Fe2+	OER	—/—	
124

NiCo-UMOFNs	NiCo-UMOFNs	Ni site	OER	—/—	
32

M2(BDC)2TED	Co/Ni(BDC)2TED@CF	Ni2+, Co2+	OER	—/—	
125

Co–Fe PBAs	Co–Fe PBAs-250	Co-oxides	OER	—/—	
109

poly[Co2(benzimidazole)4]	M-PCBN	High-valent Co atoms	OER	—/—	
55

MIL-88B-Fe	A2.7B-MOF-FeCo1.6	Fe3+, Co2+	OER	—/—	
82

Co-MOF	Co-MOF	CoOOH	OER	—/—	
101

ZIF-67	CUMSs-ZIF-67	Unsaturated Co sites	OER	—/—	
159

ZIFs	Co-NC@Mo2C	Co, Mo2C	HER/OER	Water splitting	
9

Ni(BDC) MOF	NF@Fe2–Ni2P/C	Fe-doped Ni2P for the HER, γ-NiOOH for the OER	HER/OER	Water splitting	
53

Ni-MOF	D-Ni-MOF	Ni–O(OH)	HER/OER	Water splitting	
176

FeNi MOFs	FeNi(BDC)(DMF, F)/NF	MO6 (M = Fe, Ni)	HER/OER	Water splitting	
177

Ni-ZIF	Ni-ZIF/Ni-B	Ni-B	HER/OER	Water splitting	
178

ZIF-67/ZIF-8	Co3S4/EC-MOF	Co–Co bridge	HER	Water splitting	
118

Ni-MOF	Ni-MOF/Ni2P@EG	High valence state Ni	HER	Water splitting, Zn–H2O cells	
179

Co MOFs	CTGU-5	Co	HER	—/—	
19

Ni-MOF	Ni2P/Ni@C	Ni2P/Ni	HER	—/—	
120

PCN-222(Fe)	Pt/CNW@PCN-222	Pt	HER	—/—	
180

Cu-THQ	Cu-THQ	Cu2+–O2−	CO2RR	—/—	
181

ZIF-8	ZIF-A-LD	Sp2 C	CO2RR	—/—	
24

ZIF-8	Co1–N4	Co	CO2RR	—/—	
170

ZIF-67/ZIF-8	ZIF-8, ZIF-108, ZIF-7, SIM-1	Sp2 C	CO2RR	—/—	
80

Bi-MOF	BiSAs/NC	Bi–N4	CO2RR	—/—	
4

Al2(OH)2TCPP-H2	MOF-Zn-inf	Zn–N2	CO2RR	—/—	
83

MOF-545	MCp2@MOF-545-Co	Co–N4	CO2RR	—/—	
1

ZIF-8	Ni(OH)2-NC-2	Oxygen vacancy	CO2RR	—/—	
182

MPc-Cu-X (M = Co, Ni, X = NH, O)	MPc-Cu-X (M = Co, Ni, X = NH, O)	Cu bis(diimine) and Cu bis(dioxolene) units	CO2RR	—/—	
183

Zr-fcu-MOFs	Ag/Zr-fcu-MOFs	Pore site	CO2RR	—/—	
184

TPY-MOLs	MOL-Co-N3	Co–N3	CO2RR	—/—	
185

ZIF-71	Pt/Au@ZIF	Electron deficient on Pt	NRR	—/—	
119

Ni-MOF	Ti3C2-QD/Ni-MOF	Ni	NRR	—/—	
186

ZIF-8	VC	Vacancy	NRR	—/—	
187

NixZn(1−x)BMOF	Ni–Nx–C	Ni–N3	NRR	—/—	
188

PCN-222(Fe)	Fe1–N–C	Fe–N4	NRR	—/—	
189

Bi-MOF	Bi NPs	Bi0	NRR	—/—	
190

MIL-100(Fe)	Fe1.89Mo4.11O7/FeS2@C	Mo	NRR	—/—	
191

Cu-MOF	Cu–N–C	Cu–Nx	NO3RR	—/—	
192

ZIF-8	SA-Rh/CN	Rh–N4	FOR	—/—	
160


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
