Actual partial pressure of Se vapor in a closed selenization system: quantitative estimation and impact on solution-processed chalcogenide thin-film s ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA00145A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA00145A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6319-6331Actual partial pressure of Se vapor in a closed selenization system: quantitative estimation and impact on solution-processed chalcogenide thin-film solar cells†

        
          
            Jeong Hyeob 
            Han
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shanza 
            Rehan
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Dong Gwon 
            Moon
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Ara 
            Cho
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jihye 
            Gwak
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kyung Hoon 
            Yoon
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Seung Kyu 
            Ahn
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jae Ho 
            Yun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Young Joo 
            Eo
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            SeJin 
            Ahn
          
        
      *ab
aPhotovoltaic Laboratory, Korea Institute of Energy Research, Daejeon 305-343, Korea. E-mail: yjeo@kier.re.kr; swisstel@kier.re.kr
bDepartment of Renewable Energy Engineering, Korea University of Science & Technology (UST), Daejeon 305-350, Korea
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Korea
Received 
      6th January 2016
    , Accepted 26th February 2016First published on 1st March 2016AbstractOne of the most important experimental factors in selenization, in which a precursor material is annealed at high temperature with Se vapor or gas to form chalcogenide light-absorbing layers, is the partial pressure of the Se vapor or gas (PSe). Although it is generally believed that the PSe should be sufficient to induce enhanced grain growth in the final film, the quantitative estimation of PSe has rarely been reported, and a detailed physical understanding of how the characteristics of absorber films and corresponding devices are affected by PSe is still far from clear. We performed a systematic study to address these PSe-related issues on solution processed CISe2 (CISe) thin films and solar cells. Based on a gas pressure equilibration model, we quantitatively estimated the actual PSe value and used this model to gain insight into how the initial experimental conditions of the Se level or background pressure influenced the actual PSe. It was found that the actual PSe varied significantly differently in an unexpected way: PSe did not vary linearly with the initial amount of Se and the trend of variation was significantly affected by the background pressure. The device parameter of the solution processed CISe solar cells that was primarily affected by PSe was the shunting, which is interpreted by the morphological differences of the absorber films grown under different PSe conditions.
Introduction
Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe) is a promising absorber material for thin-film photovoltaics because of several advantages, including its direct bandgap nature, light absorption coefficient higher than 104 cm−1, and tunable bandgap (1.04 to 2.4 eV) by varying the ratios of In/Ga and S/Se.1 CIGSe solar cells demonstrate stable performance for both terrestrial and space applications.2
The highest efficiency of CIGSe solar cells of up to 21.7% was achieved using a multi-stage co-evaporation technique, which is the highest amongst all of the thin film photovoltaics.3 However, the three-stage co-evaporation requires complicated processing steps that may increase total production costs and suffer from compositional non-uniformity in large-scale deposition. In contrast, a two-step process consisting of the deposition of a precursor followed by high-temperature selenization has attracted much attention as an alternative deposition process for absorber formation due to its potential for high conversion efficiency at low cost and high productivity.4,5 The potential to achieve high efficiency via the two-step process has been recently proven by Solar Frontier, reporting an efficiency of 17.5% for an 808 cm2 Cu(In,Ga)(SeS)2 (CIGSSe) sub-module in which a sputtering method was used to form the metallic precursor films.6 Furthermore, if non-vacuum, solution-based processes are employed to form the precursor layer, the whole fabrication route certainly maximizes cost-effectiveness.7,8 In this regard, various combinations of non-vacuum deposition methods and precursor materials to form CIGSe-type thin films have been extensively investigated.9–13
Obviously, one of the most important experimental factors in selenization, the second step of the two-step process, is the “actual” partial pressure of Se supplied to the precursor material. Historically, it has generally been agreed that the Se partial pressure (PSe) should be maintained at a “sufficient” level during selenization for the following reasons: (1) high PSe induces facile growth of CIGSe grains or particles either by liquid Cu–Se14,15 or liquid–Se16,17 flux-assisted sintering, (2) high PSe is required to maintain the composition and phase purity of CIGSe18 by suppressing the loss of In as volatile In2Se19 and (3) improved device efficiencies under higher PSe conditions have been observed.20,21 The other boundary condition for PSe is that it should be “less” than the value that induces the formation of overly thick MoSe2 at the CIGSe/Mo interface. Unnecessarily thick MoSe2 reportedly induces delamination of the CIGSe absorber layer from the substrate16 and increases the series resistance of the final device22 presumably due to its high resistivity.16,23 Therefore, between these two extreme conditions, PSe has been empirically optimized, heavily relying on many trial-and-error-based experiments.
Although several studies focusing on the effects of PSe on film/device properties have been reported, PSe was, in most cases, treated only qualitatively, with imprecise expressions of “high” or “low” PSe. Furthermore, most researchers use selenization equipment that is constructed in-house and significantly different in terms of how the Se vapor or gas is supplied/transported and how the sample is loaded (for example, an open-chamber system with a continuous flow/supply of Se vapor vs. a closed-chamber system with a limited Se source), making a direct comparison of PSe between different studies practically impossible. Another related issue is the experimental controllability of the “actual” PSe supplied to the sample. In particular, when one uses a closed selenization system typically with a graphite container as the sample holder, which is frequently used by many researchers,17,24–26 the “actual” PSe in the graphite container is determined by a rather complicated multi-step vapor flow process: (i) an increase in the internal Se vapor pressure within the graphite container, (ii) flow of some fraction of the inner (excess) Se vapor in the graphite container out to the external space of the chamber and (iii) equilibration between the internal and external gas pressure.27,28 In this case, the typical means of controlling the PSe adopted by researchers are changing the initial amount of Se shots in the graphite container or adjusting the initial background chamber pressure by injecting nitrogen or argon gas. Controlling the thickness of the Se layer deposited on the precursor film prior to selenization is a modification of the former approach. Due to the complicated multi-step vapor flow processes described above, the “actual” PSe value or its variation can significantly deviate from the expected or desired value. For example, in most cases, one may expect the change in PSe to be linearly proportional to the initial amount of Se supplied in the graphite container. However, the change in “actual” PSe in this case is significantly different from the expected linear variation, and this may lead to misinterpretation of the experimental results, which will be clearly exemplified later in this paper. Therefore, the quantitative estimation of the actual PSe is essential to ensuring better controllability and understanding of the selenization process.
Moreover, a detailed physical understanding of how and why the absorber film and device characteristics are influenced by varying PSe values is still far from clear, even though high or sufficient PSe is reportedly required to obtain better device efficiency.20,21
Thus, in this study, we systematically address the above two issues for solution-processed CuInSe2 (CISe) thin films and solar cells. (1) The “actual” PSe in a closed selenization system was quantified based on a simple gas pressure equilibration model in which multi-step vapor flow processes were considered. In particular, how the actual PSe is influenced by the variation of the initial Se amount or the initial background chamber pressure was demonstrated to provide further insight into the practical controllability of PSe. (2) We investigated the impacts of the actual PSe on the film/device properties to obtain a firm physical understanding of the phenomena.
Gas pressure equilibration model for estimating Se partial pressure
The model used in this study to estimate the actual PSe in the closed selenization system is a modified version of the existing model, originally developed by J. J. Scragg.27 The core of the original model can be summarized as follows.
(1) The reaction chamber is a closed system in which a graphite container with a lid is placed inside as shown in Fig. 1(a). A background pressure at room temperature (PN,RT) is defined as the partial pressure of nitrogen gas introduced into the chamber prior to selenization. Solid Se is loaded into a graphite container near the precursor sample.
 Fig. 1  Stages of selenization. (a) The reaction chamber is a closed system in which a graphite container with a lid is placed inside. Injected nitrogen gas fills the inside and outside of the container, and solid Se is loaded into a graphite container near the sample. (b) Se evaporates, resulting in a very high Se partial pressure (PSe,B) in the graphite container at the maximum growth temperature. (c) High Se partial pressure uplifts the lid, and some fraction (F) of the Se vapor inside the graphite container flows to the outside chamber. (d) Pressure equilibrium is established between the inside of the container and the outer chamber space. 
(2) As selenization proceeds, Se will evaporate, resulting in a very high Se partial pressure (PSe,B) in the graphite container at the maximum growth temperature (approximately at 600 °C in this study) (Fig. 1(b)).
(3) This high Se partial pressure induces uplift of the lid, and some fraction (F) of the Se vapor inside the graphite container flows out to the outside chamber to establish a pressure equilibrium between the inside and outside of the graphite container (PB = PC) (Fig. 1(c) and (d)). (PL and C shown in Fig. 1(c) and (d) are related to the authors' modification of the model, which will be described later. Readers can ignore them here.)
(4) After the equilibration process finishes, the actual Se partial pressure inside the graphite container (PSe,eqm) is determined by the following equation: (1)where ,  = the background pressure of nitrogen at selenization temperature (T), VB = the volume of the inside of the graphite container and VC = the volume of the outside chamber. Note that all the pressures mentioned in this study, except PN,RT, correspond to the pressure values measured (or calculated) at the selenization temperature of 600 °C.
The authors modified the model, focusing on the following two points. First, the original model did not consider the pressure exerted by the lid of the graphite container, which will definitely suppress the escape of the internal Se vapor (expressed as blue arrows in Fig. 1(c) and (d)). Thus, the original equilibration equation, i.e., PB = PC, should be modified to PB = PC + PL, where PL is the pressure originating from the weight of the lid. The second issue is that, in reality, some of the Se vapor condenses on the wall of the outside chamber because the wall is water-cooled during the whole selenization process due to safety concerns. This will decrease PC. Indeed, the authors observed a non-negligible quantity of solid Se condensed on the cold chamber wall after the selenization process. This is treated numerically by introducing an additional constant for the condensation ratio (C) that determines the portion of the gas molecules in the outside chamber that are re-condensed at the cold wall, which is present as a thick red solid line at the chamber wall in Fig. 1(c) and (d). By considering these two factors, which were not considered in the original model, the final equation for estimating the actual Se partial pressure inside the graphite container was modified to (2)
Detailed derivation procedures of this equation are presented in the ESI, S1.†
Before proceeding to the results and discussion part in which the comparative study between the calculated and experimentally measured PSe is performed, it is worthy to mention the uncertainties in the estimated PSe originated from the basic assumptions taken in the derivation procedure of the equations:
(1) The model assumes that the pressure equilibrium (including evaporation of all the Se sources, gas flow out to the outer chamber space and condensation of Se vapor at the cold chamber wall) is reached instantaneously. In reality, Se partial pressure will evolve over a certain time period. However, from the experimental observation that all the Se shots evaporated quickly during the heating-up stage of selenization and the measured outside chamber pressure, PC, showed no noticeable change at 600 °C during selenization, it was verified that selenization was carried out under “equilibrated pressure conditions”. This suggests the validity of the PSe values extracted according to our model.
(2) The partial pressure and reactivity of Se vapor should depend on the composition of the Se vapor, i.e., Se2, Se3 and Se8. For simplicity, it is assumed that all the generated Se vapors have a composition of Se2.
(3) We only consider the convective processes for estimating PSe in which gas transport occurs only due to the pressure difference. However, after the initial pressure equilibrium is established some diffusion process can also occur because some fraction of Se vapor in the graphite container will be consumed to convert the precursor film to the selenide film. This can affect the actual PSe in the container to some extent but it is neglected in this estimation. This is based on the fact that the number of Se2 molecules required for the phase conversion reaction is less than 1/10 of that originally provided in the graphite container, reflecting that the consumption of Se vapor during selenization has negligible effect on the actual PSe.
Results and discussion
Estimation of the actual Se partial pressure using a gas pressure equilibration model

Optimization of the model using experimental data. 
The first step is optimizing the model derived in the previous section with respect to experimental data to extract the actual PSe inside the graphite container after equilibration (PSe,eqm). Because the only unknown parameter in eqn (2) is C and all others are input parameters determined by the authors, C was used as a fitting variable for optimization of the model. Moreover, because PSe,eqm cannot be directly measured experimentally, PC (the pressure of the reaction chamber outside the graphite container after equilibration) was measured and used for fitting.

Fig. 2(a) shows the calculated PC using different C values (black solid line) as a function of the background pressure at room temperature (PN,RT). Experimentally measured PC values are also presented as red circles in Fig. 2(a). In this calculation and measurement, the initial Se amount was fixed at 0.2 g, and the selenization temperature was 600 °C. (The saturation pressure of Se vapor at this temperature was reported to be approximately 228 torr.29) It is clear that a C value of 0.37 provides the best fit, reflecting that the non-negligible fraction of heated vapor in the outside chamber is condensed at the cold wall. This C value then enabled us to extract PSe,eqm, as exemplified in Fig. 2(b) in which a plot of PSe,eqmvs. PN,RT is presented. The actual PSe,eqm is much lower than the PC (which is frequently reported as the “selenization pressure” or “chamber pressure”), and the dependency of PSe,eqm on PN,RT is significantly different from that of PC on PN,RT, clearly demonstrating the importance of a quantitative estimation of the actual PSe,eqm in the closed selenization system.
 Fig. 2  (a) Calculated (solid lines) and measured PC (red circles) values as a function of PN,RT at various C values. (b) PC and PSe,eqm as a function of PN,RT at C = 0.37. 
A comparison between the pressure values estimated from the original model and the modified model was additionally performed (ESI, S2†). Again, the initial Se amount was fixed at 0.2 g, and the selenization temperature was 600 °C. The general feature is that the original model resulted in the overestimation of PC and PSe,eqm (note also that the estimated PC from the original model is significantly higher than the experimentally measured PC). This overestimation should be attributed to the fact that the original model did not consider the influence of the pressure exerted by the lid and the condensation of Se vapor at the cold chamber wall. If we consider that the lid pressure induces the decrease of PC and the increase of PSe,eqm (by suppressing the escape of the inner Se vapor) while the condensation at the cold wall decreases both PC and PSe,eqm (decrease of PC by condensation followed by additional escape of the inner Se vapor), Fig. S2† suggests that the condensation has more significant influence on the actual PC and PSe,eqm than the lid pressure does.


Comparison of the different methods for controlling the Se partial pressure. 
As mentioned previously, the experimental variables typically adopted for controlling the PSe in a closed selenization system are the initial amount of Se added in the graphite container and the background pressure at room temperature (PN,RT) which is usually adjusted by nitrogen or argon gas injection. The optimized model enabled us to explore how the PSe,eqm varies depending on these two variables, focusing on whether the change in PSe,eqm corresponds to one's original intention or expectation.
The amount of initial Se shots was first chosen as a variable, and its effect on PSe,eqm was estimated. The amount of Se was varied from 0.05 to 0.20 g (4-fold variation), and a plot of PSe,eqmvs. the amount of Se over wide ranges of PN,RT is presented in Fig. 3(a). Detailed values of extracted PSe,eqm are summarized in Table S3 in the ESI.† The general trend in Fig. 3(a) is a gradual increase in PSe,eqm with an increasing amount of Se, as expected. However, closer investigation reveals that the increase in PSe,eqm is not linearly proportional to the increase in the amount of Se, and the degree of variation in PSe,eqm is significantly dependent on PN,RT. The non-linear variation of PSe,eqm with the amount of Se is more clearly visualized in Fig. 3(b) using the slope of the curves in Fig. 3(a), , which is normalized to the values at Se = 0.05 g. While the case of the two lowest PN,RT conditions (PN,RT = 4 × 10−3 and 0.4 torr) shows a linear dependency of PSe,eqm on the amount of Se, all other cases demonstrate a significant non-linearity in which as the amount of Se increases the slope decreases. Furthermore, the degree of the non-linearity is largely affected by PN,RT in which it increases as PN,RT increases up to 10 torr and then decreases at higher PN,RT values. Apart from the linearity between the PSe,eqm and the amount of Se, another important issue is the degree of variation in PSe,eqm originated from the change in the Se level. To make this point clearer, the magnitude of variation in PSe,eqm induced by the increase in the amount of Se from 0.05 to 0.2 g, expressed as PSe,eqm(0.2 g)/PSe,eqm(0.05 g), was plotted as a function of PN,RT in Fig. 3(c). PSe,eqm varies to the smallest extent at PN,RT = 4 torr, and its variation becomes larger as PN,RT increases or decreases from this value. An additional important finding is that the degree of variation in PSe,eqm is significantly smaller than expected within the range of PN,RT values investigated. For example, at PN,RT = 4 torr, PSe,eqm increased by only 1.3 times in spite of the 4-fold increase in the initial Se amount. Even the largest increase in PSe,eqm observed at PN,RT = 400 torr was only 3.4 times greater, which is still smaller than expected. Based on this result, the assumption of a linear variation of PSe with the amount of Se is not always correct; the variation of PSe is affected significantly by the initial background pressure at the same time because the PSe,eqm in a closed selenization system is influenced not only by the amount of Se initially provided but also by the fraction of Se gas molecules that was originally inside the graphite container but flowed to the outer space of the chamber during the pressure equilibration, which is mainly dominated by the background pressure. Thus, we claim that one should be very cautious in interpreting experimental data as a function of PSe, especially when using the amount of Se as the main experimental variable.
 Fig. 3  (a) Pse,eqm as a function of the initial Se amount at various PN,RT values. (b) The slopes of the curves in (a), , which is normalized to the values at 0.05 g. (c) The degree of variation in PSe,eqm induced by the 4-fold increase in the amount of Se from 0.05 to 0.2 g, which is expressed in terms of Pse,eqm(0.2 g)/Pse,eqm(0.5 g), as a function of PN,RT. 
Another means of controlling the PSe is adjusting the PN,RT, and its effects on actual PSe,eqm were thus also investigated. Input values of PN,RT varied from 4 × 10−3 to 400 torr and, for better comparison, plots of logPSe,eqmvs. logPN,RT were generated for different amounts of Se: 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 g (Fig. 4). Detailed extracted parameters are summarized in Table S4 in the ESI.† Apparently, PSe,eqm increases with PN,RT, exhibiting an S-like shape in the logPSe,eqmvs. logPN,RT plots regardless of the initial Se amount. In the authors' opinion, such an S-shaped variation of PSe,eqm is hardly intuitive, further clearly demonstrating the importance of the quantitative estimation of the actual PSe,eqm.
 Fig. 4  
P
Se,eqm as a function of PN,RT at various initial Se amounts. 
In principle, a desired PSe,eqm value can be achieved by any combination of the initial Se level and PN,RT. However, from a practical point of view, it is thought that controlling PN,RT as an experimental variable is more efficient than controlling the initial amount of Se because we can reduce the amount of Se loaded in the container. It can provide better and easier maintenance of the chamber and reduce material usage due to less condensed (wasted) Se at the cold wall of the outside chamber.

Effects of Se partial pressure on the characteristics of selenized CISe films and devices
In the previous section, we quantitatively estimated the PSe,eqm in a closed selenization system, focusing on how the actual PSe,eqm was influenced by the experimental variables of the initial Se amount and the background pressure. The next issue to be explored by the authors is obtaining a physical understanding of the role of PSe in determining the properties of the solution-processed CISe films and the characteristics of the devices built with these films. To this end, the authors performed detailed morphological and structural analyses of the selenized CISe films and characterized the completed devices based on theoretical I–V equations. To link the quantitative estimation performed in the previous section with the following film/device analysis data, this section is divided into two sub-sections based on the different methods for controlling PSe.

Control of the amount of Se. 

Fig. 5 shows cross-sectional and plane-view SEM images of the films selenized with different amounts of initial Se (0.05–0.2 g). For this set of experiments, PN,RT was fixed at 40 torr for all samples. According to Fig. 3(c) and Table S3 in the ESI,† the actual PSe,eqm is expected to range from 28.01 to 53.78 torr, showing a 1.92-fold variation that is much smaller than the 4-fold variation in the initial Se amount. In the following discussion, the estimated PSe,eqm value corresponding to each Se amount will be shown together because PSe,eqm has greater practical importance than the amount of Se. For structural information, XRD patterns of the films were obtained and are presented in Fig. S5 in the ESI.† All of the films shown in Fig. 5 have a double-layered structure consisting of a highly crystalline top CISe layer formed over a bottom porous, carbon-containing residue layer, which is commonly reported for CIGSe-type films prepared by non-hydrazine solution-based processes.30–32 The phase purity of the top CISe layers for all cases was confirmed by their XRD patterns (Fig. S5(a) in the ESI†), in which only CISe-related peaks are detectable; there is no evidence of the existence of any secondary binary-phases. The Cu/In ratio of the films are nearly the same at approximately 0.8. A MoSe2 layer formed between the bottom residue layer and the Mo substrate was also detected in the XRD patterns (Fig. S5(a) in the ESI†) but is not prominently visible in the cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. 5). In general, this 4-fold increase in the initial Se amount had little effect on the morphologies (the thickness of each layer of the top CISe/bottom residue/MoSe2 and the grain size/compactness of the top CISe layer) or structural properties (phase-purity, crystallinity and preferred orientation) (Fig. S5(a) and (b) in the ESI†) of the selenized films. This little difference in the properties of the selenized films should be attributed to the small variation in the actual PSe,eqm mentioned above (only a 1.92-fold increase in PSe,eqm from a 4-fold increase in the initial Se amount), which is not enough to induce any detectable change in the microscopic film properties.
 Fig. 5  Cross-sectional and plane-view SEM images of the films selenized with Se amounts of (a) 0.05, (b) 0.1, (c) 0.15 and (d) 0.2 g. PN,RT was 40 torr in all cases. 
Next, the authors investigated the effects of the 4-fold increase in the initial Se amount on the performance of devices built with the same selenized films. Fig. 6 shows light-illuminated I–V curves of the devices, and detailed solar cell parameters are presented in Table 1. Device performances were also not apparently influenced by the 4-fold increase in the initial Se amount, as evidenced by similar efficiencies (4.73–5.13%) along with no significant differences in other parameters for all of the devices. This result confirms that the 1.92-fold increase in PSe,eqm (induced by the 4-fold increase in the initial Se amount) was too small to induce changes in macroscopic device performance or microscopic film properties.
 Fig. 6  Light-illuminated I–V curves of devices built with the selenized films shown in Fig. 5. 
Table 1 Device parameters obtained from Fig. 6






Amount of Se/g (PSe,eqm/torr)


0.05 (28.01)
0.1 (41.01)
0.15 (48.65)
0.2 (53.78)





V
OC/V
0.35
0.34
0.34
0.34



J
SC/mA cm−2
31.28
30.52
30.53
31.24


FF
46.91
46.16
46.10
48.24



E
ff/%
5.10
4.78
4.73
5.13




Before we proceed to the detailed device characterization, it is interesting to address the validity of the estimated PSe,eqm in a different way. It is based on a question that if the morphology of the selenized film and the device performance are indeed determined by the calculated PSe,eqm, then a similar PSe,eqm but from a different combination of the amount of Se and PN,RT should result in similar film and device properties. In this regard, we compared the two different cases, in which quite different values of the amount of Se and PN,RT provide similar PSe,eqm, and the results are presented in Fig. S6 in the ESI.† Clearly, these two conditions resulted in similar film morphologies and device performance, confirming again the validity of the quantitative estimation of PSe,eqm performed in this work.
Returning to the case of the 4-fold increase in the amount of initial Se, to gain further insight into device characteristics, detailed diode parameters were extracted together with parasitic resistances. Because the traditional I–V model that treats shunt resistance as a single constant value cannot explain the non-ohmic current flow at reverse biases, a model including both ohmic and non-ohmic shunt paths was used to fit the experimental I–V curves. In describing the non-ohmic shunting, an SCLC (space-charge limited current) model was adopted.33 Individual equations accounting for each current pathway can be expressed as follows: (3) (4) Jnon-ohmic shunt = KVm(5)where J0 = reverse saturation current density, q = charge of an electron, V = applied bias, k = boltzmann constant, T = absolute temperature, A = diode ideality factor, RSH = ohmic shunt resistance, K = coefficient of the SCLC component (related to the length and conductivity of the current path) and m = power factor of SCLC.34 Combining these equations with a series resistance (RS) gives a full expression for the dark I–V as34 (6)
The parameters extracted from the dark I–V curves of the devices using eqn (6) are listed in Table S7 in the ESI,† and their dependency on PSe,eqm induced by changes in the initial Se amount is visualized in Fig. 7. We could not find any systematic dependency of the parameters on PSe,eqm, and because the macroscopic device characteristics were not practically affected by the 4-fold increase in the amount of Se (Fig. 6), it is reasonable to consider that the dispersion of parameters shown in Fig. 7 is so small that it does not induce any measurable change in device performance. Rather, the range of dispersion of parameters shown in Fig. 7 can be used as a rough guide, indicating that if the parameter variation (induced by the change of any experimental variables) is within this range, it may not practically influence the device performance. In this regard, maximum and minimum values of each parameter are marked with colored rectangles in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Dependence of the diode parameters and parasitic resistances on the PSe,eqm variation induced by the change in the initial amount of Se. 


Control of background pressure. 
In this section, the effect of PN,RT on the properties of CISe films and device performances is investigated and presented. PN,RT was varied from 10 to 200 torr while the Se amount was fixed at 0.2 g. In this case, the actual PSe,eqm is expected to range from 19.4 to 119.4 torr (Fig. 4). SEM images and XRD patterns of the selenized films are presented in Fig. 8 and S8 in the ESI,† respectively. The films again exhibit double-layered structures, but their detailed morphological properties were significantly affected by the relatively large variation in PSe,eqm. In concrete, the thickness of the top CISe film gradually increases until the PSe,eqm increases up to 90.94 torr (PN,RT = 100 torr), after which it is saturated. Along with the increase in CISe thickness, the thickness of the bottom residue layer decreased, revealing that the bottom layer is used as a material reservoir for the formation of the top CISe layer. PSe,eqm values exceeding 90.94 torr (PN,RT = 100 torr) did not induce further increases in CISe thickness, but the thickness of the MoSe2 layer still increased, reaching approximately 1.4 μm at PSe,eqm = 119.4 torr (PN,RT = 200 torr). The phase purity of all of the CISe films shown in Fig. 8 was confirmed by the XRD pattern in Fig. S8(a) in the ESI,† in which no binary selenide-related peaks were detected. The increase in the intensity of the MoSe2 peaks with the increase in PSe,eqm is consistent with the SEM analysis. The preferred orientation of the films was not notably affected by PSe,eqm variation (Fig. S8(b) in the ESI†).
 Fig. 8  Cross-Sectional and plane-view SEM images of films selenized under PN,RT values of (a) 10, (b) 40, (c) 100 and (d) 200 torr. CISe-free regions are marked with yellow circles in the plane-view images. All cases used 0.2 g of Se. 
Light-illuminated I–V curves of the devices built with these CISe films are presented in Fig. 9, and the dependence of detailed solar cell parameters on PSe,eqm is visualized in Fig. 10. The device performance was significantly affected by PSe,eqm, as was expected from the relatively large variation in film properties. In general, the efficiency gradually increased until PSe,eqm reached 90.94 torr (PN,RT = 100 torr) and then decreased again at higher PSe,eqm. Regarding the solar cell parameters, the open circuit potential (VOC) did not change with PSe,eqm, and the short circuit current (JSC) gradually increased with increase in PSe,eqm, which can be easily understood based on an improved light absorption from the increase in CISe thickness with PSe,eqm. The fill factor (FF) varied in a rather complicated way with a maximum at PSe,eqm = 90.94 torr (PN,RT = 100 torr). Interestingly, the trends of variation in the FF are very close to those of the device efficiency, reflecting the fact that the FF, which in turn determines the final device efficiency, is the device parameter most significantly influenced by the change in PSe. Thus, these results can be summarized as follows. PSe,eqm plays a significant role in determining the performance of solution-processed solar cells by primarily affecting the FF and secondarily affecting the JSC. Because the improvement in the JSC with the increase in PSe,eqm can be easily interpreted as mentioned above, the following sections are devoted to the elucidation of why FF is so strongly influenced by PSe,eqm.
 Fig. 9  Light illuminated I–V curves of devices built with the films selenized under different PN,RT conditions. For a clearer comparison, I–V curves obtained at PN,RT values from 10 to 100 torr are presented in (a), and those obtained at PN,RT values from 100 to 200 are separately shown in (b). 
 Fig. 10  Dependence of device parameters obtained from Fig. 9 on the variation of PSe,eqm induced by PN,RT changes from 10 to 200 torr. 
Dark I–V curves of the devices were fitted to the I–V model (eqn (6)) to extract fundamental diode parameters and parasitic resistances. The fitting results are summarized and visualized in Table S9 in the ESI† and Fig. 11, respectively. As a guide for the approximation of the range of parameters not significantly affecting macroscopic device performance, the maximum and minimum values of each parameter determined from Fig. 7 are also marked as colored rectangles in Fig. 11. Among the parameters, RSH and K displayed a dependency on PSe,eqm similar to that of FF. To clarify this point, FF (1/FF) vs. PSe,eqm curves are presented together with RSH (K) vs. PSe,eqm curves, confirming the close relationship between shunts and the FF. J0 and A are considered to be reasonably within the range marked by the colored rectangle, and the trend of the change in RS is not consistent with the variation in the FF. Thus, it is unlikely that these three parameters (J0, A and RS) are the origin of the FF changes. From these device characterization studies, it was concluded that the main reason for the FF changes induced by PSe,eqm variation is shunting, which was further confirmed by plotting the total shunt current density measured at −1 V in dark I–V curves as a function of PSe,eqm and comparing this plot with the 1/FF vs. PSe,eqm plot as shown in Fig. S10 in the ESI.† A perfect match between the two curves is visible.
 Fig. 11  Dependence of the diode parameters and parasitic resistances on the PSe,eqm variation induced by PN,RT changes. Colored rectangles represent the range of dispersion of the parameters determined in Fig. 7. 
Because RSH and K are most significantly affected by PSe,eqm, resulting in a large variation in the FF, the authors explored this point further to understand the physical reason behind these phenomena. Shunts in CIGSe solar cells can originate from various sources, such as inappropriate absorber film properties, i.e., morphological defects (pinhole or void), inclusion of conductive secondary phases and defective grain boundaries, and imperfect deposition/coverage of the buffer layer on the absorber film. Among these, the most probable explanation for the PSe,eqm dependency of the shunts (RSH and K) observed in this study is the morphological properties of the top CISe layers. Fig. 8(a) already revealed that the film selenized at a low PSe,eqm of 19.40 torr (PN,RT = 10 torr) had a very thin top CISe film on a relatively thick bottom layer. In addition, the grain size of the CISe film was small and, more importantly, many CISe-free sites were visible on the top-view of the film. These findings suggest that a PSe,eqm of 19.40 torr was not sufficient to extract an appropriate amount of metal ions from the underlying precursor layer, resulting in the incomplete formation of the top CISe film. Large numbers of CISe-free regions and pinholes between the grains definitely caused the large shunt currents in the device. The intermediate PSe,eqm of 90.94 torr (PN,RT = 100 torr) induced large grain growth on the top CISe film (Fig. 8(c)), with well-connected grains resulting in a high density of the top CISe film, which is consistent with the minimum shunt currents in this device. A PSe,eqm higher than 90.94 torr deteriorated the morphology of the CISe film such that the grain size was not uniform; very large grains co-existed randomly with small ones, and large voids were visible between grains. This is also consistent with the large shunt currents measured from the corresponding device. Thus, the variation in shunt current with PSe,eqm shown in Fig. 11 is believed to have originated from the PSe,eqm-affected morphological properties of the CISe film. This finding leads to the final fundamental question of why the morphology of the CISe film is influenced by PSe,eqm in this way.
The reason for the defective morphology obtained at a low PSe,eqm of 19.4 torr is straightforward because, in this case, the Se partial pressure is too small to extract enough metal ions to the top surface, resulting in a low-density CISe film that does not completely cover the precursor layer (Fig. 8(a)). Increasing PSe,eqm to 90.94 torr is thought to induce the completion of the CISe formation reaction, resulting in a much thicker CISe film with a thinner bottom residue layer. Furthermore, enhanced grain growth and densification enabled almost perfect coverage of the underlying un-reacted layer (Fig. 8(c)). However, further increase in PSe,eqm resulted in a deteriorated morphology with lower density, even though PSe,eqm was already sufficient to complete the formation reaction of the CISe film (Fig. 8(d)); this was evidenced by the same thickness of the top CISe/bottom residue layers as that of the film selenized at a PSe,eqm of 90.94 torr (Fig. 8(c)). We attribute this defective morphology of the CISe film selenized at a high PSe,eqm exceeding 90.94 torr to the overly rapid formation of the Cu–Se liquid phase at the initial stage of film formation. Additional Raman and SEM analyses performed on the films, which were removed at different steps of selenization (Fig. 12), demonstrate that the general reaction pathway of CISe formation in this work is as follows: (i) initial formation of the Cu–Se phase at the surface of the precursor film by diffusion of Cu ions to the top surface that was faster than In ions, (ii) diffusion of In ions to the previously formed Cu–Se phase to form the CISe phase and (iii) cessation of this diffusion and film formation reaction to leave an un-reacted residue layer beneath the top CISe film. The initially formed Cu–Se phase is highly likely to exist in liquid form because its melting temperature (523 °C) is lower than the selenization temperature employed in this study (600 °C). The liquid phase Cu–Se significantly affects the final morphology of the CI(G)Se film fabricated from co-evaporation35 and the nanoparticle-based route.15 According to these authors, the liquid Cu–Se phase, whose formation is significantly affected by the Se partial pressure, might induce long-range and rapid diffusion, leading to a facile but excessively rapid growth of the grains. These authors also claimed that the rapid grain growth was the main reason for the pit and pore formation and the abnormal growth of the particles.15,35 Based on this understanding, it is reasonable to infer that the high PSe,eqm in this study induced an overly rapid or excessive formation of the Cu–Se liquid phase at the initial stage of film formation, resulting in the formation of a low-density CISe film with a large number of voids or pinholes as shown in Fig. 8(d). From these experimental results, the effects of Se partial pressure on the film morphology and the device performance can be concluded as follows. A PSe that is too low causes an incomplete film formation reaction, and a value that is too high induces an unnecessarily high amount or overly rapid Cu–Se liquid phase formation, both resulting in morphologically defective CISe films that, in turn, cause large shunt currents of the corresponding devices.
 Fig. 12  (a) Thermal history of selenization, showing the points where the process was interrupted and the samples were removed for analysis. SEM images and Raman data of the samples are presented in (b) and (c), respectively. 
The final issue that the authors wish to mention is the electrical impact of a thick MoSe2 layer on device characteristics. All RS values from the devices shown in Fig. 11 are lower than the lower limit of the colored rectangle. In other words, the devices built from the selenized films with very thick MoSe2 layers (the films shown in Fig. 8(c) and (d)) had lower RS values than those with very thin MoSe2 layers (the films shown in Fig. 5). This means that, apart from the reason for this lower RS even with a thicker MoSe2 layer, the RS in our samples was not solely determined by the thickness of MoSe2, which is different from the general belief that MoSe2 is highly resistive and thus its thickness is a determining factor in the total series resistance of the device. In fact, even though it is widely accepted that overly thick MoSe2 is detrimental to “device performance”, it is not yet clear whether this phenomenon is related only to the RS of the device. There is a report stating that extended selenization of Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) nanocrystals resulted in the formation of thicker MoSe2 and the systematic increase in the RS of the devices;22 however, in another paper, the thickness of MoSe2 in a Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) film prepared by sputter/selenization was apparently not correlated with RS.36 An interesting result was reported by Lee et al.; the resistivity of the MoSe2 layer is strongly influenced by its preferred orientation and morphology,37 in which a randomly oriented MoSe2 was found to be more resistive (more than 10 times) than a vertically oriented MoSe2 layer. Thus, it can be inferred from these reports that the thickness of MoSe2 is not the sole factor determining its electrical properties. It is worthy to mention again that the main efficiency-limiting factor of the device built from our CISe film selenized at a high PSe,eqm = 119.42 torr was the shunt currents rather than RS, even with the significantly thick MoSe2 layer (∼1500 nm). Thus, based on this investigation, we claim that great caution should be taken when interpreting device results, especially when thick MoSe2 forms. In our case, “thick” MoSe2 maybe merely an effect, e.g., induced by high PSe, and not a cause of low device efficiency.

Experimental
Materials
CuI (99.999%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. InI3 (99.999%), pyridine (99.9%), methanol (99.6%), Na2S (99.8%), copper(II) acetate monohydrate (99.99%), indium(III) acetate (99.99%), 2-methoxyethanol (99.8%) and monoethanolamine (99.0%) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, and elemental Se (99.999%, 3 mm shot) was purchased from Cerac.
Preparation of inks
A hybrid ink consisting of Cu–In–S nanoparticles and Cu-, In-ion containing solution was used to form precursor films. Here, the nanoparticles play the role of basic building blocks of the final film, and the Cu-, In-solution enhances the binding of the nanoparticles by efficiently filling the pores between nanoparticles.32 Amorphous Cu–In–S nanoparticles were synthesized according to the low-temperature colloidal process reported by Kim et al.,30 in which a mixture of CuI (0.343 g) and InI3 (0.991 g) in pyridine (90 ml) was reacted with Na2S (0.31 g) in methanol (21 ml) at 0 °C in an ice bath for 1 min under a nitrogen atmosphere by mechanical stirring. During the chemical treatment, the NaI by-product was removed from the product mixture, with the remaining Cu–In–S nanoparticles forming a stable methanol colloid. In parallel, a precursor solution was also prepared by dissolving Cu(II) acetate monohydrate (3.6 mmol) and In(III) acetate (4.2 mmol) into 13 ml of 2-methoxyethanol with 2 ml of monoethanolamine followed by mechanical stirring for 1 h, resulting in a deep-blue-colored solution. The final hybrid ink was prepared by mixing 1.2 g of the synthesized Cu–In–S nanoparticles and 5 ml of the precursor solution and sonicating the mixture for 1 h.
Thin-film deposition
The hybrid ink was spin-coated onto a Mo (1 μm)-coated soda-lime glass (SLG) substrate and then dried in air on a hot plate at 100 °C for 3 min and at 270 °C for 5 min to evaporate the solvents and partially decompose the metal-monoethanolamine complexes. This process was repeated until the required thickness of the precursor film was achieved.
Selenization
Selenization was carried out in a heat treatment chamber with a graphite container inside. The chamber was equipped with a temperature and pressure controller. The precursor samples were placed inside the graphite container. Solid Se shots were provided inside the graphite container near the samples as the Se source. After loading the samples and Se shots in this way, the chamber was initially evacuated to a base pressure of 10−6 torr using a turbo molecular pump, and the background pressure (PN,RT) was then adjusted by injection of nitrogen gas. In this study, the initial Se amount (0.05 to 0.2 g) and the PN,RT (10 to 200 torr) were chosen as main experimental variables to control the Se partial pressure inside the graphite container. For all cases, selenization was performed at 600 °C for 30 min.
Device fabrication
Solar cells were fabricated according to the conventional Mo/CISe/CdS/i-ZnO/n-ZnO/Al configuration. A 50 nm-thick CdS buffer layer was deposited onto the selenized films via chemical bath deposition (CBD), and i-ZnO (50 nm)/Al-doped n-ZnO (500 nm) were deposited onto the CdS layer using radio-frequency (rf) magnetron sputtering. A 500 nm-thick Al grid was deposited as a front metal electrode using thermal evaporation. The active area of the device was defined as 0.44 cm2. Anti-reflection coating was not employed in this work.
Characterization
The morphology and composition of the selenized films were investigated using high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (HRSEM, XL30SFEG Phillips Co., Holland at 10 kV) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, EDAX Genesis apex, acceleration voltage: 30 kV, collection time: 100 s with a standard-less method), respectively. Crystalline structures were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a CuKα radiation source (λ = 1.5406 Å) and Raman scattering spectra were taken in the quasiback-scattering geometry by using the 514.5 nm line of an Ar-ion laser as the excitation source. The scattered light was filtered with a holographic edge filter, dispersed by using a Spex 0.55 m spectrometer, and detected with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled back-illuminated charge-coupled-device (CCD) detector array. Dark- and light-illuminated J–V characteristics of the devices were obtained using a Keithley I–V measurement 236 source meter and a class AAA solar simulator (WXS-155S-L2, WACOM, Japan), respectively. All of the device characterizations were performed in a special measurement laboratory where high-precision primary reference solar cell calibration is possible.38
Conclusions
We performed a systematic study of the (1) quantification of the “actual” Se partial pressure (PSe) in a closed selenization system considering multi-step vapor generation/flow processes and (2) investigation of the influence of the “actual” PSe on the film/device properties to obtain a firm physical understanding of the phenomena. Using the gas pressure equilibration model suggested in this study, insight was obtained on how the experimental variables of the initial Se amount and the background pressure influence the actual PSe inside the graphite container. When the initial Se amount was chosen as a control variable, in which a linear relationship between the amount of Se and PSe is usually assumed, the resultant PSe varied in an unexpectedly significantly different way and was more affected by the background pressure. Conversely, setting the background pressure as a main variable provided more effective control of PSe over a wide range. The device efficiency was largely affected by PSe such that there is an optimum value of PSe; a value that was too low or too high resulted in inferior device performance. Detailed device analysis revealed that this PSe-dependent efficiency is mainly dominated by shunting, including both ohmic and non-ohmic origins, which was interpreted as different film morphologies determined by PSe-affected Cu–Se liquid formation at the initial stage of film growth.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the New & Renewable Energy Core Technology Program of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) funded by the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy, Republic of Korea (No. 20143030011950). This work was also conducted partly under the framework of the Research and Development Program of the Korea Institute of Energy Research (KIER) (B6-2419) and “Development of 25% Efficiency Grade Tandem CIGS Thin Film Solar Cell Core Technology” of MSIP (Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning) and ISTK (Korea Research Council for Industrial Science and Technology) of Republic of Korea.
References
W. Devaney and R. Mickelsen, Sol. Cells, 1988, 24, 19–26 CrossRef CAS .
A. Romeo, M. Terheggen, D. Abou-Ras, D. Batzner, F. Haug, M. Kalin, D. Rudmann and A. Tiwari, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2004, 12, 93–112 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 9, 28–31 CrossRef .
D. G. Moon, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, S. Ahn, A. Cho, K. Shin, K. Yoon and S. Ahn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9914–9921 CAS .
G. Li, W. Liu, Y. Liu, S. Lin, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Q. He and Y. Sun, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 139, 108–114 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2015, 23, 1–9 CrossRef .
C. J. Hibberd, E. Chassaing, W. Liu, D. B. Mitzi, D. Lincot and A. N. Tiwari, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2010, 18, 434–452 CrossRef CAS .
P. Luo, Z. Liu, Y. Ding and J. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 22–28 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahn, T. H. Son, A. Cho, J. Gwak, J. H. Yun, K. Shin, S. K. Ahn, S. H. Park and K. H. Yoon, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1773–1777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Ahn, Y. J. Choi, K. Kim, Y. J. Eo, A. Cho, J. Gwak, J. H. Yun, K. Shin, S. K. Ahn and K. Yoon, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1282–1287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. McLeod, C. J. Hages, N. J. Carter and R. Agrawal, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2015, 23, 1550–1556 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee and K. Yong, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2013, 30, 1347–1358 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Chen, Y.-J. Chen, W. T. Chen, Y.-T. Yen, T. S. Kao, T.-Y. Chuang, Y.-K. Liao, K.-H. Wu, A. Yabushita and T.-P. Hsieh, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9341–9348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Schulz, C. J. Curtis, R. A. Flitton, H. Wiesner, J. Keane, R. J. Matson, K. M. Jones, P. A. Parilla, R. Noufi and D. S. Ginley, J. Electron. Mater., 1998, 27, 433–437 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahn, K. Kim, A. Cho, J. Gwak, J. H. Yun, K. Shin, S. Ahn and K. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1530–1536 CAS .
S. Ahn, K. H. Kim, J. H. Yun and K. H. Yoon, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 113533 CrossRef .
A. R. Uhl, P. Fuchs, A. Rieger, F. Pianezzi, C. M. Sutter-Fella, L. Kranz, D. Keller, H. Hagendorfer, Y. E. Romanyuk and F. LaMattina, Prog.
Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2015, 23, 1110–1119 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wada, Y. Matsuo, S. Nomura, Y. Nakamura, A. Miyamura, Y. Chiba, A. Yamada and M. Konagai, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2006, 203, 2593–2597 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahn, C. Kim, J. Yun, J. Lee and K. Yoon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1836–1841 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Guillemoles, P. Cowache, A. Lusson, K. Fezzaa, F. Boisivon, J. Vedel and D. Lincot, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 7293–7302 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, S.-Y. Han, S.-J. Sung, D.-H. Kim and C.-H. Chang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11154–11159 RSC .
Y. Hwang, B.-I. Park, B.-S. Lee, J. Y. Kim, J.-H. Jeong, H. Kim, M. J. Ko, B. Kim, H. J. Son, S. Y. Lee, J. S. Lee, J. K. Park, S. H. Cho and D. K. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 27657–27663 CAS .
J. Pouzet and J. Bernede, Rev. Phys. Appl., 1990, 25, 807–815 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Ford, Q. Guo, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 520, 523–528 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2013, 21, 64–71 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Zaghi, M. Buffière, G. Brammertz, N. Lenaers, M. Meuris, J. Poortmans and J. Vleugels, Thin Solid Films, 2015, 582, 18–22 CrossRef CAS .

          J. J. Scragg, Studies of Cu2ZnSnS4 films prepared by sulfurisation of electrodeposited precursors, Ph.D. thesis, University of Bath, Department of Chemistry, Bath,  2010 .
D. G. Moon, A. Cho, J. H. Park, S. Ahn, H. Kwon, Y. S. Cho and S. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17779–17786 CAS .
E. H. Baker, J. Chem. Soc. A, 1968, 1089–1092 RSC .
K. Kim, Y.-J. Eo, A. Cho, J. Gwak, J. H. Yun, K. Shin, S. K. Ahn, S. H. Park, K. Yoon and S. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8444 RSC .
S. Ahn, C. W. Kim, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, S. Jeong, B. H. Ryu and K. H. Yoon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8108–8113 CAS .
A. Cho, S. Ahn, J. H. Yun, Y.-J. Eo, H. Song and K. Yoon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 110, 126–132 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dongaonkar, J. D. Servaites, G. M. Ford, S. Loser, J. Moore, R. M. Gelfand, H. Mohseni, H. W. Hillhouse, R. Agrawal, M. A. Ratner, T. J. Marks, M. S. Lundstrom and M. A. Alam, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 124509 CrossRef .
B. L. Williams, S. Smit, B. J. Kniknie, K. J. Bakker, W. Keuning, W. Kessels, R. E. Schropp and M. Creatore, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2015, 23, 1516–1525 CrossRef .
K. H. Kim, K. H. Yoon, J. H. Yun and B. T. Ahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A382 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shin, Y. Zhu, N. A. Bojarczuk, S. Jay Chey and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 053903 CrossRef .
S. Lee, J. Koo, S. Kim, S.-H. Kim, T. Cheon, J. S. Oh, S. J. Kim and W. K. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 535, 206–213 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahn, S. Ahn, J. H. Yun, D.-H. Lee, S. Winter, S. Igari and K. Yoon, Metrologia, 2014, 51, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta00145aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Stages of selenization. (a) The reaction chamber is a closed system in which a graphite container with a lid is placed inside. Injected nitrogen gas fills the inside and outside of the container, and solid Se is loaded into a graphite container near the sample. (b) Se evaporates, resulting in a very high Se partial pressure (PSe,B) in the graphite container at the maximum growth temperature. (c) High Se partial pressure uplifts the lid, and some fraction (F) of the Se vapor inside the graphite container flows to the outside chamber. (d) Pressure equilibrium is established between the inside of the container and the outer chamber space.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Calculated (solid lines) and measured PC (red circles) values as a function of PN,RT at various C values. (b) PC and PSe,eqm as a function of PN,RT at C = 0.37.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Pse,eqm as a function of the initial Se amount at various PN,RT values. (b) The slopes of the curves in (a), , which is normalized to the values at 0.05 g. (c) The degree of variation in PSe,eqm induced by the 4-fold increase in the amount of Se from 0.05 to 0.2 g, which is expressed in terms of Pse,eqm(0.2 g)/Pse,eqm(0.5 g), as a function of PN,RT.	 

 	Fig. 4  
P
Se,eqm as a function of PN,RT at various initial Se amounts.	 

 	Fig. 5  Cross-sectional and plane-view SEM images of the films selenized with Se amounts of (a) 0.05, (b) 0.1, (c) 0.15 and (d) 0.2 g. PN,RT was 40 torr in all cases.	 

 	Fig. 6  Light-illuminated I–V curves of devices built with the selenized films shown in Fig. 5.	 



V
OC/V	0.35	0.34	0.34	0.34

J
SC/mA cm−2	31.28	30.52	30.53	31.24
FF	46.91	46.16	46.10	48.24

E
ff/%	5.10	4.78	4.73	5.13
	(3)
	(4)
Jnon-ohmic shunt = KVm	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 7  Dependence of the diode parameters and parasitic resistances on the PSe,eqm variation induced by the change in the initial amount of Se.	 

 	Fig. 8  Cross-Sectional and plane-view SEM images of films selenized under PN,RT values of (a) 10, (b) 40, (c) 100 and (d) 200 torr. CISe-free regions are marked with yellow circles in the plane-view images. All cases used 0.2 g of Se.	 

 	Fig. 9  Light illuminated I–V curves of devices built with the films selenized under different PN,RT conditions. For a clearer comparison, I–V curves obtained at PN,RT values from 10 to 100 torr are presented in (a), and those obtained at PN,RT values from 100 to 200 are separately shown in (b).	 

 	Fig. 10  Dependence of device parameters obtained from Fig. 9 on the variation of PSe,eqm induced by PN,RT changes from 10 to 200 torr.	 

 	Fig. 11  Dependence of the diode parameters and parasitic resistances on the PSe,eqm variation induced by PN,RT changes. Colored rectangles represent the range of dispersion of the parameters determined in Fig. 7.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Thermal history of selenization, showing the points where the process was interrupted and the samples were removed for analysis. SEM images and Raman data of the samples are presented in (b) and (c), respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta00145a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
