Conversion cathodes for rechargeable lithium and lithium-ion batteries   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE02326F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE02326F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 435-459Conversion cathodes for rechargeable lithium and lithium-ion batteries†

        
          
            Feixiang 
            Wu
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Gleb 
            Yushin
          
          
        
      *
      School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA. E-mail: yushin@gatech.edu
Received 
      10th August 2016
    , Accepted 9th November 2016First published on 17th November 2016AbstractCommercial lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries built with Ni- and Co-based intercalation-type cathodes suffer from low specific energy, high toxicity and high cost. A further increase in the energy storage characteristics of such cells is challenging because capacities of such intercalation compounds approach their theoretical values and a further increase in their maximum voltage induces serious safety concerns. The growing market for portable energy storage is undergoing a rapid expansion as new applications demand lighter, smaller, safer and lower cost batteries to enable broader use of plug-in hybrid and pure-electric vehicles (PHEVs and EVs), drones and renewable energy sources, such as solar and wind. Conversion-type cathode materials are some of the key candidates for the next-generation of rechargeable Li and Li-ion batteries. Continuous rapid progress in performance improvements of such cathodes is essential to utilize them in future applications. In this review we consider price, abundance and safety of the elements in the periodic table for their use in conversion cathodes. We further compare specific and volumetric capacities of a broad range of conversion materials. By offering a model for practically achievable volumetric energy density and specific energy of Li cells with graphite, silicon (Si) and lithium (Li) anodes, we observe the impact of cathode chemistry directly. This allows us to estimate potentials of different conversion cathodes for exceeding the energy characteristics of cells built with state of the art intercalation compounds. We additionally review the key challenges faced when using conversion-type active materials in cells and general strategies to overcome them. Finally, we discuss future trends and perspectives for cost reduction and performance enhancement.
Feixiang Wu
Dr. Feixiang Wu received his BS in Metallurgical Engineering in 2009 and PhD in Metallurgical Physics and Chemistry in 2014 from Central South University. During his PhD from 2012 to 2014, he was a visiting scholar in Prof. Yushin’s laboratory in School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He is currently a postdoctoral research associate at the Georgia Institute of Technology. His research interests include rechargeable Li metal batteries, aqueous Li-ion batteries and Li batteries with solid electrolytes.
Gleb Yushin
Prof. Gleb Yushin received his PhD in materials science from North Carolina State University and MS in physics from Saint-Petersburg Polytechnic Institute. He is a Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He also serves as an Editor-in-Chief for Materials Today. Current research in his laboratory is focused on nanostructured and nanocomposite materials for use in energy storage, structural and multifunctional applications.

Broader context
Commercial lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries built with nickel- and cobalt-based intercalation-type cathodes suffer from low specific energy, high toxicity and high cost. A further increase in the energy storage characteristics of such cells is challenging because capacities of such intercalation compounds approach their theoretical values and a further increase in their maximum voltage induces serious safety concerns. Conversion-type cathode materials are some of the key candidates for the next-generation of rechargeable Li and Li-ion batteries. Continuous rapid progress in various performance improvements of such cathodes is essential for their use in future applications. In this review we consider price, abundance of elements, safety, specific and volumetric capacities of a broad range of conversion materials. By offering a model for practically achievable volumetric energy density and specific energy of Li cells with graphite, silicon and Li anodes, we observe the impact of cathode chemistry. This allows us to estimate the potential of different conversion cathodes for exceeding the energy characteristics of cells built with state of the art intercalation compounds. Comparison between “true conversion” and “chemical transformation” cathode chemistries explains the origins of the apparent differences in their performance and describes different approaches for overcoming the current limitations.

1. Introduction
As the development of the global economy and improvement of lifestyle continue, the demands of energy, mineral resources and preservation of the natural environment are growing dramatically. However, environmental destruction and the price (or shortage) of metals are increasing with the spending boom of energy (mostly fossil fuels) and natural minerals. Burning of fossil fuels has been playing one of the most important roles in our society since the nineteenth century and its negative impacts on the environment are visible. For example, air pollution coming from vehicle exhausts and coal combustion in the atmosphere of Beijing, China results in health problems for Beijing residents.1,2 Global warming largely related to the combustion of coal and oil has demonstrated multiple negative impacts on our environment. Sea level rise is caused primarily by two factors, both related to global warming: the added water from melting land ice and the expansion of sea water as it warms.3 From the latest reports, the sea level is increasing by ∼3.1 mm per year, which would bring us a disastrous consequence in the future: some island countries may disappear.4,5 Still, major human activities such as electricity generation, operation of factories, construction and transportation are mostly operating and relying on the consumption of fossil fuels.
To mitigate these issues and reduce our dependence on fossil fuels, alternative environmentally friendly (green) energy technologies need to be developed and adopted to utilize naturally renewable sources with high efficiency and quality. Rechargeable battery systems are needed for the storage of energy harvested from inexhaustible wind, solar, and geo-thermal sources, which are typically intermittent. Currently, lead–acid, nickel–iron, nickel metal hydride and Li-ion batteries are mostly utilized as electrochemical energy storage technologies. Li chemistry, in particular, offers unique advantages: Li is the third lightest element, it offers one of the lowest reduction potentials and one of the fastest ion mobilities in solids. Such properties allow Li-ion batteries to offer the highest gravimetric and volumetric energy densities and the highest rate when compared to alternative battery chemistries. The high energy density and reasonable cost of Li-ion cells made them the technology of choice for broad applications in smart watches, laptops, cell phones, digital cameras, electric tools, industrial equipment, energy-efficient hybrid ships, planes, drones, plug-in hybrid and pure-electric vehicles (PHEVs and EVs). The authors believe that EVs may be able to replace the majority of gasoline powered ground transportation by 2040 and thus significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions and environmental pollution.
Commercial Li-ion batteries (LIBs) utilize intercalation-type cathode materials, mostly olivine LiFePO4 (LFP), layered LiCoO2 (LCO), spinel LiMn2O4 (LMO), layered LiNixMnyCozO2 (NMC) of different stoichiometries and layered LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 (NCA), showing specific capacities of up to ∼200 mA h g−1.6–8 Recently, several types of “lithium-rich” intercalation cathodes with higher charge–discharge capacities, such as Li2MnO3, Li[Li0.2Mn0.534Ni0.133Co0.133]O2, Li1.2Mn0.525Ni0.175Co0.1O2, and others have received substantial attention.9–12 The opportunity to achieve long-term stability in such cathodes is a subject of scientific debates.13 While tuning the composition of intercalation cathodes, formation of the protective surface coatings and optimization of electrolytes are ongoing to improve their rate capability and cycle life,7,14–19 the capacities of such intercalation compounds approach their theoretical values, thus limiting the energy densities and specific energies of practical cells. Novel cathode materials are needed for the development of lighter, smaller, safer and lower cost batteries. Because increasing cathode potentials to above around 4.5 V vs. Li/Li+ creates safety concerns, ultra-high capacities and lower voltages offered by conversion-type cathode materials make them one of the key candidates for use in the next-generation of Li and Li-ion batteries.
2. Chemistry of conversion-type cathodes
To offer a holistic view of the possible cathode compositions let us consider the cost, availability and safety of elements that may comprise them. Fig. 1 shows the abundance of relevant elements in the Earth's crust, their wholesale price and toxicity. Although the electrodes are not fabricated from pure metal ingots, the differences in prices among the elemental substances correlate well with the relative cost of materials made from these elements. Among the commonly used transition metals, Co is among the least abundant and the most expensive. In addition, to store 1 Li ion one typically needs 1.5–2 Co atoms in LCO. Ni is approximately 50% less expensive and 3 times more abundant than Co. However, increasing use of Ni in cathodes and other applications may increase its price in the future. Both bulk Co and Ni are labeled as “danger” according to the global harmonized system (GHS) of classification and labelling of chemicals, emphasizing their potentially negative impact on the natural environment and humans.
 Fig. 1  Selected properties of elements possibly used in conversion cathodes: availability, average price and toxicity to environment. Color coding: green color represent elements mainly used in intercalation; blue color represent elements mainly used in conversion electrodes; orange color represent elements mainly used in both types of cathodes; value coding: 1st row represent the name of element; 2nd row represent the abundance of the element in the earths’ crust; 3rd row represent the average price of the metal or elementary substance in last 5 years (pricing data came from InfoMine-Mining Intelligence and Technology, MetalPrices.com, USGS, Minerals Information, Metal Bulletin: Global Metal News, and Metal Prices & Analysis); 4th and 5th row represent the effect of this element to the environment and human. 
In contrast, conversion-type cathode materials may comprise less expensive and more abundant elements, such as O, S, Fe, Cu and others, which are additionally safer and friendlier to the environment. While halogens (which may be part of the conversion cathodes) are clearly dangerous in a pure form, they typically become stable and environmentally benign as components of salts. In contrast to intercalation cathodes, typically 2–3 Li ions may be stored per just 1 atom of chalcogenide (e.g. O, S, etc.) or transition metal (e.g. Fe or Cu) in conversion-type cathodes. The environmental friendliness of oxygen in combination with high capacity lithium oxides or hydroxides (Li2O2, Li2O, LiOH) triggered particularly strong interest in oxygen cathode chemistries.20–25 When compared to other solid-state conversion cathodes, oxygen cathodes have fundamentally different technological barriers because of the conversion reactions between gas and solid as well as catalyst requirements.20–25 As such, and also because multiple review articles already covered Li–O batteries,20–25 we will not discuss this chemistry in detail apart from comparing their energy density and specific energy. For estimating the energy densities achievable in rechargeable Li and Li-ion cells, one needs to know the cathode potential and the amount of charge stored per unit weight and volume of the cathode material. Fig. 2 shows theoretical specific (gravimetric) and volumetric capacities and theoretical potentials of the main classes of conversion-type cathode materials. Since volume changes during Li insertion should be considered in the batteries’ fabrication, all the volumetric capacities were calculated considering fully expanded (lithiated) states of materials. Among chalcogenides, O cathodes (such as Li2O2 or LiOH) exhibit particularly high specific and volumetric capacities of up to 1670 mA h g−1 and 2699 mA h cm−3, respectively (for Li2O2), and a high theoretical potential (2.96 V for the reaction of 2Li + O2 = Li2O2). Beyond O cathodes, S and Li2S are likely the most promising candidates, offering the highest theoretical voltage and the highest gravimetric and volumetric capacities (1675/1166 mA h g−1 and 1937 mA h cm−3). Among halogens and metal halides, metal fluorides are the most promising for maximizing the cell energy storage by offering a combination of higher theoretical potentials (3.55 V vs. Li/Li+ for CuF2) and high gravimetric and volumetric capacities (713 mA h g−1 and 2196 mA h cm−3 for FeF3). While no cathodes (apart from Li2O2 and LiOH) beat the specific capacity of S and Li2S, many metal fluorides (e.g., FeF3, MnF3, CuF2, FeF2, CoF2, NiF2) exhibit both higher theoretical discharge potential and higher volumetric capacity than S/Li2S cathodes.
 Fig. 2  Theoretical gravimetric and volumetric capacities and theoretical potential of selected conversion cathode materials: (a and b) chalcogens and chalcogenides; (c and d) halogens and metal halides. 
In contrast to intercalation cathodes, conversion materials break and create new chemical bonds during insertion and extraction of Li. Two types of conversion reactions could be distinguished for Li chemistries:7 Type A (true conversion): M′Xz + yLi ↔ M + zLi(y/z)X(1) Type B (chemical transformation): yLi + X′ ↔ LiyX,(2)where M′ = cation, M = reduced cation material, X′ = anion.
For the type A cathodes, M′ are typically transition metal ions, such as Fe3+, Fe2+, Ni2+, Cu2+, Co2+, Mn3+etc., while X′ are typically halogen ions (such as F−, Cl−, Br− and I−) or chalcogenide ions (such as S2−, Se2−, etc.). X may also be O2−, but the reaction potential typically becomes too low for a cathode material. Since transition metal bromides and iodides have low capacities and have not been studied, we will omit them from our review too. The reduction of metal halides to a metallic state typically involves more than one Li ion per metal atom through a conversion reaction, leading to much higher theoretical capacities (Fig. 2). Type A cathode particles typically convert into nanocomposite particles comprising (interconnected) metal M nanoparticles dispersed in a Li(y/z)X matrix during lithiation, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 3a with FeF2 as an example. The morphology and spatial correlation of the new phases may be controlled by diffusion coefficients of cations and anions, by electronic and ionic conductivity of new phases as well as by interfacial energies. For example, in the case of lithiation of FeF2, metallic Fe might nucleate and stay in the same place of the initial atomic sites in the phase, while the nucleated LiF tends to occupy the voids around the metallic Fe nanoparticles, likely due to smaller mobility of Fe2+ than that of Li+ and F−.26 The ideal formation of an interconnected metal nano-network, which can be the conductive bridge for electron transport and provide massive interface among nanoparticles, may be preferred for reversibility of conversion reactions.
 Fig. 3  Two types of conversion reactions using lithiation of S and FeF2 as examples: (a) true conversion with the formation of two new phases; (b) chemical transformation with a single new phase formation. Note that each type of cathodes could be produced in both fully lithiated and Li-free states. 
Lithiation of S, Se, Te, Br and I represents the type B conversion reaction, which may also be called “a chemical transformation reaction” as it transforms one single phase into another single phase (Fig. 3b). During the charge and discharge, the structures are changed between unlithiated and lithiated states (such as S and Li2S, Se and Li2Se, Te and Li2Te, Br2 and LiBr, I2 and LiI, etc.) and also exhibit very high theoretical capacities (Fig. 2).
3. Practically achievable energy densities and specific energies
Many scientific publications (and often even government agency announcements) erroneously assign energy density and specific energy to a cathode based on its capacity and potential vs. Li/Li+. This is technically incorrect and may lead to wrong conclusions. It is, therefore, important to estimate practically attainable energy densities of cells with different types of cathodes and anodes for evaluations in specific applications.
Because the weight and volume of packaging as well as the inactive edge of a cell depend on its dimensions and configuration, we consider not the whole cell, but an elementary building block or a unit of a Li-ion battery comprising a cathode coating (one sided), a thin separator, an anode coating (one sided) and half-thicknesses of cathode (Al) and anode (Cu) current collectors (Fig. 4a). We used the thicknesses of inactive components found in commercial state of the art high energy cells for estimation purposes. In the future, it may be possible to reduce the thicknesses of the separator and current collectors further. The thickest (limiting) electrode (either the anode or the cathode, depending on a particular chemistry) was aggressively considered to be 100 μm per one side, while the thickness of the other electrode was calculated based on the areal capacity matching. Thicknesses significantly larger than 100 μm were not considered to be practical for most applications due to increasing ionic resistance for rather densely packed active particles in an electrode. The volume fraction of the active material in each electrode is considered to be 70 vol% in the case of intercalation materials and 60 vol% in the case of conversion-type cathodes, Si and Li anodes. The rest of the volume was devoted to electrolytes, binders, conductive additives and other inactive components (such as coatings, etc.) having an average density of 1.6 g cm−3. In the case of oxygen cathodes, we assume 50 vol% of active materials in order to budget additional volume for the catalyst, O transport and extra volume needed to prevent pore plugging during cell discharge. While even higher packing densities are possible, these assumptions are quite reasonable considering a rather large electrode thickness. Theoretical densities of active materials were used in calculations when experimental data were not available (e.g., for conversion cathodes) (Table S1, ESI†). The material properties in the fully expanded (lithiated) state were used for calculating the volumetric capacities and inactive volume within each electrode (Table S1, ESI†). Formation losses on the anode as well as slightly higher areal anode capacity typical in practical cells have not been considered because such losses may, in principle, be compensated and matching could ultimately be improved. For average cell voltage estimations we considered experimental curves of intercalation cathodes and average potentials of conversion-type cathodes being 0.20–0.25 V lower than theoretical ones (the 0.20–0.25 V value was selected based on many experimental studies27–29 conducted on Li–S and Li–Se cells) (Table S1, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  Estimation of the volumetric energy densities of unit stacks (calculating units) in rechargeable Li batteries achievable with graphite, silicon and lithium anodes, commercial intercalation-type cathodes (with practically demonstrated reversible gravimetric capacities) and selected conversion-type cathodes (with theoretical capacities). A unit stack (the smallest cell unit) comprises 1/2 of the metal current collector foil thicknesses (4.5 μm), 9 μm separator and one sided electrodes. The thickest (limiting) electrode (either the anode or the cathode, depending on a particular chemistry) is 100 μm in thickness, while the thickness of the other electrode is calculated based on the capacity matching. The volume fraction of the active material in each electrode is considered to be 70 vol% in the case of intercalation materials, 50 vol% in the case of oxygen cathodes and 60 vol% in the case of conversion-type cathodes, Si and Li anodes. Material properties in the fully expanded (lithiated) state were used for calculating the volumetric capacities and inactive volume within each electrode. Areal capacities of anodes and cathodes were matched 1:1 and no extra capacity was considered for the formation losses. 

Fig. 4b–d compare energy densities (volumetric energy characteristics) of building blocks (units) of cells based on intercalation-type LFP and Ni-, Co-based cathodes with that of the key conversion-type cathodes when paired with graphite, Si and Li metal anodes, respectively. For cells with graphite anodes, only the CuF2 cathode may ultimately beat LCO, NCM and NCA-based cells. The ultimate energy density of cells with LFP, Li2S and Li2Se is the lowest due to low potentials of these cathodes (particularly Li2S and Li2Se, see Fig. 2), low capacity of LFP and relatively low volumetric capacity of graphite anodes. Replacing graphite with Si or Li anodes makes FeF2 and FeF3 competitive too. The highest estimated energy density is seen in a CuF2–Li unit cell due to a combination of very high volumetric capacity of both the Li anode and the CuF2/Cu–2LiF cathode with a moderately high theoretical potential of CuF2 (Fig. 2). CuF2–Li and Cu–2LiF–Si cells offer 1843 and 1721 W h L−1 energy densities, respectively, which exceed that of identical cells based on conventional intercalation materials by 2–3 times, and even those based on O cathodes (Li2O2 or LiOH).
While energy density is a more critical cell parameter than specific (gravimetric) energy for electronic devices and even EV applications, the aerospace and many specialized applications are primarily motivated to achieve higher specific energy. In this regard, conversion type cathodes may offer even better potential for improvements. Fig. 5 compares specific energies of the building blocks of the same cells as used in Fig. 4. The estimated weight of conductive additives, electrolytes, binders and other inactive coatings was taken into consideration (except for Li anodes since these could be made into dense films). Since conversion cathodes have smaller densities than that of LCO, NCA and NCM cathodes they allow a substantial reduction in the specific energy. The lightest cells could be produced with CuF2, FeF2, FeF3 and Li2S cathodes matched with Si or Li anodes. The champion CuF2–Li cell offers an estimated specific energy of up to 936 W h kg−1, which is 3–4 times higher than specific energy achievable in identical cells based on the conventional intercalation materials. However, when matched with graphite the same cathode yields less than half of this energy density because the cell becomes severely anode limited.
 Fig. 5  Estimation of the specific energies of unit stacks of rechargeable Li batteries with graphite, silicon and lithium anodes, commercial intercalation-type and selected conversion-type cathodes (using same calculating unit as Fig. 4) by considering the mass of all the inactives (including the mass of electrolyte, binder and carbon additives within each electrode). Cells with Li anodes are assumed to have no inactives within the anode. 
We would like to clarify that our estimations of the energy characteristics of the cell building blocks (Fig. 4 and 5) are provided only to serve as guidelines for a direct comparison of opportunities offered by different chemistries when compared to the state-of-the art intercalation materials. Development of stable cells comprising rather thick and dense conversion-type cathodes, Si or Li anodes and operating at acceptably high charge and discharge rates (particularly at low temperatures) is a significant challenge and may take over a decade or even more before the technology matures to the level acceptable for broad industry adoption. Yet, these challenging but ultimately achievable (in the authors’ view) values may help industry and academia to rationally devote their R&D resources for a particular chemistry to satisfy the needs of the desired applications.
4. Challenges of conversion-type chemistries
As well acknowledged, conversion cathode materials face substantial challenges that need to be resolved before achieving the desired performance characteristics. In addition to low conductivity (that may lead to low capacity utilization, poor kinetics, and poor reversibility of conversion reactions) and voltage hysteresis (that may lead to low energy efficiency), conversion cathode materials typically suffer from substantial volume changes during operation and multiple unfavorable interactions between active materials and electrolytes, all of which may lead to poor cycling performance and poor coulombic efficiency, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 6. These may include dissolution of the active materials or their components, leading to capacity losses, shuttle of soluble species and uncontrolled re-precipitation, blocking ionic pathways and increasing cell resistance (Fig. 6a). The dissolved species may additionally precipitate on the anode, thus increasing its ionic resistance and possibly harming the stability and properties of its SEI, leading to irreversible Li losses and resistance growth (Fig. 6b). In addition, some of the electrolyte decomposition reactions catalyzed by the conversion materials may also result in gas evolution and undesirable resistance growth (Fig. 6c). Finally, the volume changes may lead to structural damage in the electrodes (Fig. 6d). Fig. 7 shows examples of some of the irreversible changes and degradation mechanisms experimentally observed in cells with conversion-type cathodes: excessive growth of Li dendrites induced by Li2Se/Se cathode dissolution during cycling, which creates a safety hazard (Fig. 7a, right), dissolution and re-precipitation of polysulfides on Li2S/S cathodes, which reduce cell capacity and rate performance (Fig. 7b, right), damage and uncontrolled growth of Li SEI induced by Co species produced upon partial CoF2 cathode dissolution, which leads to irreversible Li losses (Fig. 7c, right), and cracks in C–FeF2 composites and excessive cathode SEI in the C–FeF3 composite, which similarly induce capacity fading (Fig. 7d).30–34 If we compare “true conversion” and “chemical transformation” chemistries, the transition metal halides are currently facing more serious issues, such as larger voltage hysteresis, poorer reversibility of “true conversion” reactions, poorer coulombic efficiency, and poorer kinetics. These challenges are currently hindering commercialization of conversion cathodes in Li and Li-ion batteries.
 Fig. 6  Challenges attaining cycle stability in cells comprising volume- and composition-changing conversion-type cathode materials: (a and b) dissolution of active cathode material or active material components at some state of charge and discharge affecting capacity and impedance of both cathode and anode; (c) undesirable electrolyte decomposition reactions affecting cathode reversibility and rate performance; (d) volume changes during charge and discharge inducing various mechanical degradation phenomena. 
 Fig. 7  Examples of unfavorable changes in cells with conversion-type cathodes: (a) excessive Li dendrite formation on a Li anode that may be triggered if Li2Se cathodes are not protected from dissolution during cycling [reproduced from ref. 30, Copyright 2016 Elsevier]; (b) polysulfide’s re-precipitation that may take place if S/Li2S cathodes partially dissolve during cycling [reproduced from ref. 31, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim]; (c) severe damage and uncontrolled growth of Li SEI that may be induced by Co dissolution from the CoF2 cathode during cycling if electrolyte composition is not optimized [reproduced from ref. 32, 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim]; (d) formation of cracks and thick SEI films induced in FeF2,3 comprising composites during cycling [reproduced from ref. 33 and 34, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society, Copyright 2012 Elsevier]. 
4.1. Low conductivity
Electrode materials with high ionic and electronic conductivities are ideally desired for achieving high rate performance with a minimum content of conductive additives and with a large average particle size, which are preferred for minimizing side reactions and maximizing electrode volume utilization. Table 1 shows the selected properties of common conversion-type cathode materials, highlighting some of the challenges associated with using them in cells. For example, all the metal fluorides, metal chlorides, S, Li2S, I2, Br2, LiI and LiBr are naturally insulators with poor electronic conductivity (only Se and Te are semiconductors with moderately high conductivities).26,28,32,35–40 The poor electronic conductivity of halides is due to the large band gap induced by the highly ionic character of the metal-halogen bonding.39 However their open structures may support good ionic conduction.35 In addition, upon Li insertion into MF a highly conductive metal phase is formed (Fig. 3a), which may mitigate some of the low conductivity problems if the phase separation distances are minimal and if conductive metal phase regions are electrically connected. While elemental S and Li2S are insulators, the intermediate phases may exhibit high electronic conductivities,41 leading to higher reversibility of the corresponding conversion reactions, and good reaction kinetics with a visible and long voltage plateau. In contrast, the conductivities of metal and lithium halides are low at all stages of charge and discharge, which may lead to inferior reversibility, coulombic efficiency, rate capability, energy efficiency and kinetics for “true conversion” cathodes compared to “chemical transformation” cathodes.
Table 1 Challenges including conductivity, volume expansion, voltage hysteresis and cathode dissolution of conversion cathodes




Materials
Electronic conductivity (S m−1)
Theoretical potential (V)
Theoretical volume expansion (%)
Experimentally observed voltage hysteresis (V vs. Li)
Qualitative solubility in typical organic electrolytes




FeF2
Insulator35,39
2.66
16.7
0.5–1.034,88–90
Cation dissolution88,89


FeF3
Insulator35,39
2.74
25.6
0.8–2.048–51
Cation dissolution


CoF2
Poor32,39
2.80
21
0.8–2.032,45
Cation dissolution32


CuF2
Poor39,40
3.55
11.6
0.8–1.040,46,90
Cation dissolution40,90


NiF2
Insulator35,39
2.96
28.3
1.0–2.052,53
Cation dissolution


BiF3
Insulator35,39
3.18
1.76
0.4–1.547,74
Cation dissolution74


LiF
Insulator26,39
—
—
—
Partially soluble


FeCl3
Poor
2.83
22.6
—
Soluble54


FeCl2
Poor
2.41
19.9
1.0–1.555
Soluble54


CoCl2
Poor
2.59
23
1.056
Soluble54


NiCl2
Poor
2.64
30.3
—
Soluble54


CuCl2
Poor
3.17
21.1
1.0–1.554
Soluble54


AgCl
Poor
2.93
19.4
∼0.354
Insoluble54


LiCl
Poor
—
—
—
Soluble54


S
Insulator 5 × 10−2828
2.28
79
0.1–0.429,44,57
Soluble intermediates79


Li2S
Insulator,37 1 × 10−1338
2.28
−45
0.1–0.331,58,59
Soluble intermediates78


Se
Semiconductor 1 × 10−328
2.07
98.0
0.1–0.428,60–63
Soluble intermediates60,83


Li2Se
Poor
2.07
−50
0.1–0.430
Soluble intermediates30


Te
Semiconductor 2 × 10236
1.86
104.7
0.2–0.536,64,84
Soluble intermediates84


Li2Te
Poor
1.86
−52
—
Soluble intermediates


I2
1 × 10−7
2.82
49.3
0.243,65
Soluble43


LiI
Poor
2.82
−33
—
Soluble43


Br2
1 × 10−10
3.63
—
—
Soluble93


LiBr
Poor
3.63
2.7
∼0.1108
Soluble93




4.2. Voltage hysteresis
Hysteresis between charge and discharge potentials leads to reduced energy efficiency and accessible energy. Such a hysteresis typically has both thermodynamic (rate-independent) and kinetic (rate-dependent) components.42 The experimentally observed values of the voltage hysteresis in conversion cathodes are undesirably large (Table 1 and Fig. 8)28,29,31,32,34,36,40,43–65 and are typically linked to poor electronic resistance of the materials, rapid cell degradations (Fig. 6) including high ionic resistance of the SEI on cathodes and anodes, changes in surface/interfacial energies during the reactions (particularly important for typically high surface area of conversion material particles), energy losses associated with plastic deformations accompanying phase transformations and activation energies required for breaking chemical bonds, to name a few. Thick SEI induced on both cathodes and anodes (Fig. 7c and d), in particular, may provide a significant contribution to a voltage hysteresis.32,33 A high voltage hysteresis at acceptable (for a given application) rates may reduce capacity utilization and average discharge potential, thus reducing accessible energy of a cell.66 If a larger voltage window is used for charge and discharge to partially compensate for high polarization, it may lead to more undesirable interactions between active materials and electrolytes and possibly to unwanted electrolyte decomposition.
 Fig. 8  Typical charge–discharge profiles of selected conversion type cathodes. Part (a) reproduced from ref. 58, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; part (b) reproduced from ref. 43, with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry; part (c) reproduced from ref. 40, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society; part (d) reproduced from ref. 54, Copyright 2012 Elsevier. 
The discharge (lithiation) of conversion materials involves breaking chemical bonds and results in the formation of lower free-energy lithium containing compounds. The discharge products such as LiF, LiCl, Li2S, Li2Se, LiI and Li2Te are thermodynamically stable. The reverse reaction (charge) requires decomposition of these compounds and also breaking of the corresponding chemical bonds, which are now stronger. The chemical bonding energies of Li–F, Li–Cl, Li–I and Li–S are 577, 469, 345 and 312 kJ mol−1,67 respectively, which are high and related to large electronegativity difference of 3, 2.16, 1.66, 1.58 and 1.48 in Li–F, Li–Cl, Li–I, Li–S and Li–Se compounds, respectively. This leads to the formation of an activation energy barrier (particularly for LiF and LiCl), which contributes to an over-potential (large voltage hysteresis) and poor kinetics. The metal fluorides and chlorides indeed typically show higher voltage hysteresis than S, Li2S, Se and I-based cathode materials (Fig. 8), which might be related to different activation energies associated with pathways for the corresponding reactions.68,69 This high activation barrier even led to the initial belief that conversion reactions of metal halides (MF, in particular) are mostly irreversible and can only be used in primary batteries such as Li/CuF2, Li/NiF2, Li/(CFx)n battery systems.70,71
4.3. Undesirable interactions with electrolytes
The unfavorable interactions between electrodes and organic electrolytes, such as (i) active materials’ dissolution and the resulting shuttle and re-precipitation of the soluble species on both electrodes (reducing both capacity and rate performance of corresponding cells, Fig. 6a, b, 7b and c), (ii) gas evolution and formation of solid products (Fig. 7d) blocking conversion reaction pathways upon electrolyte decomposition (affecting rate performance, increasing voltage hysteresis, reducing coulombic efficiency and inducing safety hazard, Fig. 6c), (iii) corrosion of current collectors as well as metallic components of reduced metal halides (Fig. 7c), (iv) swelling of polymer binders (and the resulting reduction of its mechanical properties, which may lead to mechanical failure in the cathode due to the noticeable volume changes in conversion materials during cycling) and (v) reduced stability of the cathode SEI (partially due to continuous volume changes and the resulting damage in inelastic cathode SEI layers34,72,73 and partially due to high reactivity of some of the conversion cathodes' surfaces74) remain troublesome challenges.
Dissolution of active materials is one of the primary factors for capacity losses in traditional LIBs, particularly those built with high voltage intercalation-type cathodes.75–77 For example, LCO, LFP and LMO cathodes demonstrated dissolutions of 0.8, 0.5, and 3.2% after 7 days in electrolytes at 55 °C, respectively, as recently measured using atomic absorption spectroscopy.75 For conversion type cathode materials, these kinds of unfavorable interactions in organic electrolytes may be significantly more challenging. The chalcogenides (S, Li2S, Se, Li2Se, etc.) are notoriously known for dissolution of intermediate reaction products (polychalcogenides) in electrolytes and the resulting capacity fading, shuttle and precipitation of insulating layers (Fig. 7b)31 of chalcogenides on both electrodes (thus blocking diffusion of Li ions and increasing cell resistance).60,62,74–80 In addition, many chalcogenides are believed to be incompatible with commonly used carbonate solvents such as ethylene carbonate (EC) and diethyl carbonate (DEC) due to the irreversible side reactions with polysulfides.82,85–87 Finally, some of the recent studies suggested that the Li plating morphology may be significantly worsen by the dissolution and shuttle of polyselenides in electrolytes (Fig. 7a).30
The latest studies on various halides also reveal significant challenges associated with metal and halide dissolution during electrochemical conversion reactions.32,40,54,74,88–90 In fact, nearly all conversion type cathode materials (either in the initial or reduced states) are somewhat soluble in polar organic solvents (Table 1). The dissolution of Cu (produced upon reduction of CuF2) at above around 3.5 V vs. Li+/Li has been studied most extensively.40 The Cu(I) species (formed during charging of the CuF2 cathode) get oxidized to an octahedrally coordinated Cu(II) complex anion which dissolves in electrolytes and consumes LiF, thereby hindering reversibility of Cu to CuF2 transformation.40 The dissolutions of metal chlorides are much more significant than metal fluorides, which limited the attempts to develop reversible chloride cathodes in spite of their smaller charge–discharge voltage hysteresis. The discharge product of metal chlorides, LiCl, exhibits a high solubility in the majority of organic solvents, while solvated Cl− anions are known to induce severe corrosion of the Al current collectors.91,92 Similarly, iodine, lithium iodide, bromine and lithium bromide and their intermediate products are highly soluble in most organic solvents.43,93 As a result, such materials are mostly studied for use in lithium-flow batteries.94,95
In terms of the thermodynamic stability of electrolytes, one may think that the use of conversion type cathodes should be advantageous because their electrochemical potentials (1.2–3.8 V vs. Li/Li+) are noticeably lower than those of the high voltage intercalation materials, such as LCO, NCM, NCA and others.7,72,77 Therefore, not only carbonates, but also ethers, esters and other electrolyte solvents that may suffer from oxidation on high voltage cathodes should, in principle, remain thermodynamically stable in contact with conversion cathodes (Fig. 9).31,72,77,89,96,97 However, the presence of various salt anions (particularly in concentrated electrolytes) as well as certain cathode chemistries may reduce electrolyte oxidation stability (Fig. 10a).31 Furthermore, electrolytes may undergo reduction on the cathode surface because conversion cathodes are often discharged to some relatively low potentials (down to ∼1.2 V vs. Li/Li+). Various species formed upon electrolyte reduction may be more susceptible to oxidation at moderate cathode potentials than pristine electrolytes (Fig. 10b).89,96 A high salt concentration may further enhance reduction kinetics (Fig. 10c).89 Furthermore, reduction may also be catalyzed by some of the conversion cathode species. For example, cyclic carbonates were recently found to be susceptible to nanometal catalyzed reduction during cell discharge to 1.2–2.0 V vs. Li/Li+, forming lithium carbonate species, which worsen the cycling stability of metal fluorides (Fig. 10d).74 Commercial cells comprising intercalation cathodes often comprise electrolyte additives that enhance the stability of the cathode SEI and prevent continuous electrolyte oxidation.97–99 The continuous volume changes in conversion-type cathodes may undesirably prevent stabilization of the cathode SEI due to its poor elasticity. On a positive note, formation of stable (and possibly thick and well cross-linked) cathode SEI may also help to stabilize the conversion cathodes by preventing undesirable reactions between the liquid electrolyte and cathodes (such as cathode dissolution, Fig. 10a–c).
 Fig. 9  Comparison between HOMO/LUMO levels of typical electrolyte solvents and electron energy levels associated with conversion cathode reduction–oxidation reactions. 
 Fig. 10  Examples of opportunities and challenge related to the reaction(s) between electrolytes and conversion-type cathodes: (a) oxidation of DME by LiI additives at around 3.0 V vs. Li/Li+ may assist in the formation of protective SEI that reduces cathode dissolution [reproduced from ref. 31, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim]; (b) reduction of LiFSI similarly leads to the formation of protective SEI that was demonstrated to successfully reduce the dissolution of S-based and FeF2-based cathodes [reproduced from ref. 89 and 96, Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim]; (c) high LiFSI salt concentration may further enhance reduction kinetics resulting in large volume of the protective SEI, which enhances cell stability but may reduce rate performance [reproduced from ref. 89, Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim]; (d) undesirable side reactions between metal halides and electrolytes: nanometal catalyzed reduction of carbonates may lead to poor performance of metal halide cathodes [reproduced from ref. 74, with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
4.4. Volume change
Swelling and mechanical disintegration of electrodes, separation of electrodes from the current collectors,100–102 pulverization of the active electrode particles,101 formation of cracks and defects of the protective outer shells and cathode solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layers (and their delamination from particles’ cores)34,103–105 may all be induced by internal stresses (Fig. 6d) resulting from volume changes during lithiation and de-lithiation (Table 1). Such undesirable effects typically shorten the cycle stability, induce resistance growth, increase voltage hysteresis (and thus reduce cell energy and energy efficiency) and further aggravate the undesirable interactions with electrolytes of LIBs with conversion-type cathodes.106,107 Elemental S, Se, Te and their associated metal chalcogenides suffer most from very large volume expansions (up to ∼120 vol%, Table 1) during lithiation. If the chalcogen-based cathodes start from fully lithiated states (e.g., as in Li2S, Li2Se and Li2Te), the relative volume shrinkages during de-lithiation are smaller, but still significant (∼45–52 vol%, Table 1). Metal halides show smaller volume expansions upon lithiation compared to chalcogenides (2–50 vol%, Table 1), but they still might be sufficient to deteriorate the mechanical and electrochemical stabilities of the corresponding cathodes.34 For example, FeF2 exhibiting moderate volume expansion of ∼17% induced visible cracks in the reported carbon nanotube-confined FeF2 nanocomposite (Fig. 8d).34 The active material’s expansion induces the growth of the electrode thickness, which may have both reversible and irreversible components,101,102 both of which are clearly undesirable and may induce irreparable damage to electrodes and lead to an unacceptable level of cell swelling, poor reversibility or poor coulombic efficiency. Repetitive volume change may also induce excessive continuous formation of the SEI (Fig. 7d) and lead to low coulombic efficiency, poor cycle stability and large voltage hysteresis.33,34
5. Strategies to overcome conversion materials’ limitations
To overcome the above discussed challenges (Fig. 6) and enable the application of transformative conversion-type cathode materials with higher specific and volumetric energies (Fig. 2, 4 and 5), several general strategies may be utilized (Fig. 11). We broadly categorize these methodologies into: (i) advancing the architecture (or design) of active particles and their composites (Fig. 11a); (ii) optimization and development of electrolytes more suitable for conversion-type cathodes (Fig. 11b) and (iii) optimization of the use and the architecture (design) of the cell and its components (Fig. 11c) to mitigate or overcome conversion materials’ limitations.
 Fig. 11  General strategies for enhancement of the performance of cells comprising conversion-type cathode materials: (a) optimization of the architecture, microstructure, size and composition of active particles to achieve enhanced rate performance and stability, while minimizing undesirable interactions with electrolytes; (b) optimization of the electrolyte composition in order to prevent or mitigate cathode dissolution and minimize formation of undesirable species upon electrolyte decomposition; (d) specification of safe battery operation regimes and optimization of the cell construction, such as the tuning properties of electrodes to achieve the desired ionic and electronic conductivities as well as mechanical stability at the electrode level and introduction of additional functional elements (such as use of interlayer or separator barrier coatings or neutralizing species, etc.) that mitigate negative impacts of undesirable reactions. 
5.1. Particle morphology, size, composition and architecture
Optimization of the particle architecture (Fig. 11a) may arguably be the most straightforward way to implement new materials as drop-in-replacements in conventional cell designs, thereby reducing the barrier for entrance into the battery market. This is because the same electrode and cell fabrication techniques (already optimized after decades of LIB production developments) and the same traditional equipment (already tuned for speed, reliability and precision) could be used. As a result, relatively risky and expensive investments in the new (likely initially not nearly as reliable as currently used) battery manufacturing facilities could be avoided and the billions of dollars already invested into the existing facilities would not be wasted.
Formation and use of nano-sized or nano-structured materials may shorten the pathways for the electrons and Li+ transport to electrochemical reaction sites, which can ameliorate the naturally low electronic and ionic conductivities of many conversion-type cathode materials and thus enhance their power performance, improve their energy efficiency and reduce voltage hysteresis.7,109 The high external surface area of such materials may also reduce the charge transfer resistance.7,58 For example, for metal halides (Fig. 2c and d), the reversibility of the lithium conversion reactions (Fig. 3a) is often ascribed to the formation of an interconnected nanosized mixture of metallic and lithium halide clusters.26 Both a faster lithiation rate and smaller cluster size are obtained if nanoparticles of metal halides are used.26,110 To achieve particle size reduction, high energy mechanical ball-milling is often employed on such materials.37,39,54,111 However, thus produced particles do not show uniformly sized particles.37,54,103 Various ionic liquid-assisted, solvothermal and solvent exchange methods have been employed for the synthesis of mesoporous/microporous FeF3·xH2O,112,113 FeF3 nano-flowers,114 amorphous FeF3 nanosheets115 and uniform FeF3 nanoparticles116 with greatly improved control of particles’ morphologies and initial discharge capacity approaching theoretical values. Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) has been successfully utilized for the formation of thin films of CuF2 consisting of nanosized grains.46 Similarly, a simple solution-based method has recently been employed for the formation of nanoporous Li2S117 and Li2Se30 from their solutions in selected alcohols or by lithiation of their Li-free counterparts.107
On the other hand, the high surface area of nanosized active particles in contact with electrolytes may also increase the rate of undesirable side reactions, which may further lead to self-discharge or faster cell degradation.118 Gradual separation of metal and lithium halide phases during cycling of metal halides may lead to cell polarization growth and capacity fading.26 In addition, separation of conductive additives from volume-changing conversion cathodes may similarly contribute to decay in cell performance.26,102 To address some of these challenges, the formation of various hybrid nano-composites comprising conversion cathode materials in combination with some functional media that enhance electrical conductivity, mechanical stability and other performance metrics (e.g., reduced dissolution) has been explored.29,49,119–128 Conductive carbons, including carbon blacks, graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), carbon fibers, carbon cloth, various microporous and mesoporous carbons, have been explored in such composite syntheses and showed visible performance improvements.32,34,48,62,63,88,111,117,129–134 In the case of low melting point materials (such as S, I2, Se and Te) they can be easily infiltrated into various porous carbon or porous oxide hosts.36,43,135,136 Other materials with higher melting points (such as Li2S, Li2Se, FeF2, FeF3, to name a few most commonly explored) may require development of more elaborate composite synthesis methodologies,58,88,137–139 such as the use of precursors, solution or gas-phase infiltrations, solution or gas-phase synthesis and various conversion and thermal decomposition reactions. For example, uniform nanostructured C–Li2S composite nanopowder has recently been prepared by carbonization of bottom-up assembled polymer-coated smaller Li2S nanoparticles.58 In another example, precursor salts have been first infiltrated into porous carbons and then converted into the final metal fluoride form via a thermal treatment in a controlled environment.88 Besides conductive carbons, conducting polymers, metal organic frameworks and various metal oxides (MoO2, Ti4O7, SiO2, MnO2, etc.) have also been used to improve the conductivities of S-based and metal fluoride-based cathodes and reduce their dissolution during cycling.49,57,120,121,123,140,141
In order to further reduce or prevent the undesirable interactions with electrolytes, protective coatings may be applied to the surface of active materials or active material comprising composites.27,59,107,140,142–144 Both solution-based and vapor-based deposition methods (including atomic layer deposition (ALD), chemical vapor deposition (CVD), various plasma-enhanced deposition techniques, etc.) have been explored for shell formation.59,106,107,142,145,146 However, deposition parameters should be carefully selected for each chemistry because many conversion materials react with the precursor gases or compounds employed for shell deposition and because many conversion materials (e.g., S, Se, etc.) suffer from a relatively low melting point. Polymers, metal oxides, metal hydroxides and carbon shells have been reported to enhance the performance of various conversion type cathodes.27,106,107,140,142 For example, polyaniline (PANI),147 poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP)148 and TiO2149 shells formed around the porous S particles by chemical precipitation were shown to stabilize Li–S cells. Capacity decays as small as 0.033–0.046% per cycle during 1000 cycles were reported.148,149 In order to minimize stresses and the resulting damage in the shells during expansion of S upon lithiation, excessive internal pore space should typically be provided in the S core of such core–shell particles.148,149 If not, shells lose their mechanical integrity and eventually fail, as was demonstrated with ALD deposited Al2O3 shells.106 In order to enhance mechanical stability of the shells, they may be composed of several layers. For example, S encapsulated into double-shelled hollow carbon spheres were reported to improve the stability of the core–shell particle designs.150
The use of lithiated conversion materials in the core may be employed to achieve enhanced stability compared to their Li-free counterparts.37,51,59,107,142 Indeed, lithiated compounds are already fully expanded. In addition, lithiated compounds may offer a significantly better thermal stability (compare S having a melting point of 115 °C with Li2S having a melting point of 938 °C), which provides an additional degree of freedom for the use of shell deposition methods. A few recent studies on the Li2S particles coated by carbon or metal sulfide shells showed enhanced capacity and cycle stability in 200–400 cycles.107,151,152 However, their noticeable fading rate may suggest formation of defects and cracks in their shells during contraction of the core particles upon Li extraction, which lead to cell degradation and eventual failure. The use of composites instead of pure active materials may be effectively utilized to further reduce the volume changes of the conversion material core and thus enhance the stability of shells of the core–shell particles.59 For example, several recent reports describe the formation of hierarchical C–Li2S–C and graphene–Li2S–carbon nanocomposites with a core–shell particle architecture (see Fig. 12).59,142 The carbon matrix noticeably reduces stresses within the outer shell and thus improves particles’ mechanical durability to the level when virtually no visible degradation takes place during 600–700 cycles against Li.59,142 By using a similar core–shell particle design on the Li2Se cathode to overcome the dissolution of polyselenides, the Li plating morphology on the Li metal anode could be significantly improved (Fig. 7a).30 The use of core–shell particles with a Li-free composite core (e.g., C–S core comprised of S, Se or FeF2 infiltrated into the porous carbons62,80,88 or carbon nanotubes34) similarly showed very promising performance improvements.
 Fig. 12  Example of an impact of conversion materials comprising composite particle architecture on stresses within protective coatings and electrochemical stability: (a) higher stresses within a carbon shell upon Li extraction from Li2S in the case of simple core–shell particles in comparison with hierarchical composite core–shell particles; (b) improved electrochemical stability of hierarchical composite core–shell C–Li2S–C particles in comparison with simple Li2S–TiS2 and Li2S–C core shell particles. Part (a) reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The use of doping has been explored extensively in intercalation-type materials’ research.7,153 For conversion-type materials such an approach may also provide noticeable benefits improving performance through introduction of homogenous/heterogeneous metal (nonmetal) ions or vacancies to enhance materials’ electronic and ionic conductivities. In addition, the authors hypothesize about the possibility to reduce the size of clusters forming in “true” conversion materials upon lithiation (Fig. 3a) due to the modification of the ion mobility and reduction in the interfacial energy of the clusters. This, in turn, may enhance cycle stability and energy efficiency of such cells because the tendency of the gradual separation of the clusters could be mitigated and the charge–discharge voltage hysteresis could be reduced by minimizing the mass transport paths. In several recent reports, S was doped (mixed) with Se to improve the electronic conductivity and thus achieve higher capacity utilization of S.154 Metal-doped Li2S also showed enhanced conductivity and rate performance.155 For metal halides, Cu-doped FeF2, O-doped FeF2, Co-doped FeF3, Ni-doped CoF2 forming solid solution compounds of CuxFe1−xO2 (Fig. 13), FeOxF2−x, CoxNi1−xO2, respectively, showed higher capacity utilization and lower voltage hysteresis.49,52,53,90,140,156–158 Partial substitution of F with O in FeF3 substantially enhanced the reaction kinetics, reduced the potential hysteresis, and showed a good (for this chemistry) cycle life of over 100 cycles. Thus, both mixed-cation and mixed-anion true conversion cathode materials have shown great promise. In addition to doping of active materials, the recently demonstrated N-, S- or B-doping of porous carbon, carbon nanotubes or graphene components of the composites may offer a complementary approach for performance enhancement.159–165 For example, such doped carbons in C–S composites showed suppressed shuttle of polysulfides (PS) and better cycle stability in Li–S cells.
 Fig. 13  Example of an impact of particle composition on electrochemical performance: (a) schematic illustration of the asymmetric reaction pathway in Cu0.5Fe0.5F2 and (b) comparison of the charge and discharge hysteresis in FeF2 and Cu0.5Fe0.5F2 electrodes, showing reduced voltage hysteresis in the later. Part (a and b) reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
Overall, the results reported so far show great potential for the optimization of composition and architecture of conversion cathode particles to improve their rate, energy efficiency and cycle stability. However, further developments in novel synthesis technologies capable of precisely controlling the nano-size features and the overall morphology of the conversion-type active materials are needed for optimizing the performance of different conversion cathode chemistries to the level acceptable for a broad range of commercial applications.
5.2. Electrolyte composition
Electrolyte composition governs its interactions with active cathode and anode materials in the range of potentials the electrodes are exposed to during the cell operation. The potentials of conversion cathodes (typically within 2–3.6 V vs. Li/Li+ for most promising candidates, Fig. 4 and Table 1) are visibly smaller than that of the majority of conventional intercalation cathodes (3.6–4.6 vs. Li/Li+), which may reduce some concerns about the need for their oxidative stability and allow the use of a broader range of suitable solvents, including ethers.82,89 On the other hand, typically higher surface area, fresh interfaces that may be formed during conversion reactions (Fig. 3), overall higher reactivity of the conversion materials and the often observed solubility of conversion cathodes at least in some state of lithiation or delithiation (Table 1) often make electrolyte selection for conversion cathodes a challenging task.32,40,54,88,166 Electrolyte composition also defines the properties of all the solid electrolyte interphases (we will broadly refer to them as cathode SEI and anode SEI) formed between the electrolyte and the electrodes due to the electrolyte reduction and oxidation and determines Li ion conductivity.31,72,88,89,96,167,168 Therefore, it controls the dynamics of Li ions propagating in the bulk electrolyte, their de-solvation and transport through the SEIs.31,96,169,170 Overall, electrolyte composition may exert a major influence on the rate, capacity, cycle life and safety of the cells with conversion cathodes. As such, electrolyte modifications and optimizations are important approaches needed to remedy the challenges of conversion-type active materials, complementary to particle-level design.
We previously discussed that electrolyte decomposition may reduce cell performance. However, the formation of a stable cathode SEI may also offer protection against cathode dissolution. For example, several recent publications utilized such an in situ formed protective cathode SEI layer for both the S/Li2S cathodes31,96 and Fe2F cathodes (Fig. 10a–c).88,89 Such an approach is simpler, cheaper, often more reliable and less susceptible to defects than the use of ex situ surface coating techniques (such as chemical vapor deposition, atomic layer deposition, sol–gel, etc.). The use of quantum chemical (QC) studies may help identify electrolyte compositions suitable for the formation of stable protective cathode SEI.31,72,89,96
In the case of liquid electrolytes, modifications in the composition of organic solvents,86,171 composition of lithium salts,89,96 salt concentration,80,172 organic88,173 and inorganic31,167,168,174 electrolyte additives have been attempted to mitigate or overcome limitations of conversion cathodes. Classic organic solvents including the carbonate esters such as propylene carbonate (PC), ethylene carbonate (EC), ethylmethyl carbonate (EMC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) are commonly used in batteries with intercalation (Ni-, Mn- and Co-based) cathodes and graphite anodes. However, the carbonate solvents may induce some undesirable reactions with at least some of the conversion cathodes. For example, many carbonates are believed to be chemically incompatible with the Li-chalcogenide (e.g., Li–S) chemistries,86,87 and linear and cyclic ethers so far seem to be a much better choice as solvents in these batteries.82,166,175 Among common ethers, 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) offers higher PS solubility and ability to stabilize PS in electrolytes, whereas 1,3-dioxolane (DOL) has lower PS solubility and is superior for forming a stable SEI on the metallic Li anode to better protect it from corrosion and resistive Li2S precipitations. Therefore, DME and DOL make the most popular solvent system for Li–S battery electrolytes,166 and the electrolytes based on their mixture are often employed as the baseline for the evaluation of new electrolytes.82,176 Ethers additionally offer lower polarization and reduced dendrite formation of Li anodes compared to carbonates.177 Ether-based solvents with different chain lengths have different solvation ability. For example, compared to DME, diethylene glycol dibutyl ether (DEGDME) and polyethylene glycol dimethyl ether (PEGDME) have a longer chain length and show higher viscosity and lower species mobility resulting in lower Li ion conductivity. On the other hand, when working as co-solvent(s) in electrolytes, both of them can reduce the PS-shuttle reaction and over-charge resulting in a better cycling performance.178 Compared with conventional ethers, the fluorinated ethers have superior properties which can reduce dissolution and diffusion of polysulfides into electrolytes, and form passivation layers on the Li anode due to the thermodynamic instability with the Li metal surface forming a conjugated CC bond and LiF.179 In typical examples, the addition of long chain fluoro-ethers (such as 1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl-2,2,3,3-tetrafluoropropyl ether, TTE) to electrolyte compositions reduced the parasitic reactions with the Li anode, mitigated the shuttle effect, eliminated the self-discharge, modified favorable Li SEI, and enhanced charging efficiency.180 Using fluorinated ether HFE instead of DME, the cells also showed higher coulombic efficiency, discharge capacity and cycling performance.181 The dissolution of PS into electrolytes increases the electrolyte viscosity and reduces its Li ion conductivity, which, in turn, reduces Li–S cell power capability.182 Addition of another co-solvent, such as toluene, may reduce the solution’s viscosity, enhance Li ion conductivity and mitigate this problem.183 Dimethyl disulfide (DMDS) was also reported as a functional co-solvent for Li–S electrolytes, which showed a much higher capacity and more stable cycling performance.184 In the case of metal fluoride cathodes, various carbonates (such EC, DMC, DEC, and more recently EMC and fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC)),34,40,74,90,140,185 ethers (such as DME),89 sulfones (such as sulfolane)186 and nitriles (such as adiponitrile, ADN)74,187 have been utilized. Among carbonates, EC, DMC and DEC solvents, in particular, may lead to severe dissolution of cathodes, as demonstrated in the case of CoF2,32 FeF288,89 and BiF3.74,187 The dissolved metal-comprising ions may induce severe degradation of the Li anode SEI and roughening of the Li anodes.32 The use of ADN–FEC solvent mix,187 nitrile74,187 and ethers88,89 typically shows improved performance. Acyclic organic carbonate solvents have been found to be more compatible with nanometals compared to carbonates and thus showed better cycling performance with metal fluoride cathodes.74
Lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) and lithium bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide (LiTFSI) are mostly used in the Li-metal fluorides and Li-chalcogenides' cells, respectively. LiPF6 is practically the only salt used in commercial rechargeable LIBs due to its high ionic conductivity, chemical inertness, compatibility with graphite anode and its ability to passivate aluminum (Al) current collectors and prevent their corrosion at above around 3.3–3.5 V vs. Li/Li+, which is also important for high voltage fluoride chemistries. LiTFSI, on the other hand, offers high thermal stability, very low sensitivity towards hydrolysis, sufficiently high ionic conductivity, high solubility and good compatibility with ether solvents and chalcogenides, which make it attractive for low-potential S, Se and Te cathodes. Interestingly, a rather unstable but highly conductive lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI) salt has demonstrated rather remarkable performances when used in high concentration in combination with ether-based solvents, greatly improving stability of both metal fluoride89 and S-based cathodes.96,188 In addition to offering lower solubility of PSs (when compared to LiTFSI-based electrolytes) LiFSI salt may induce in situ formation of a Li-permeable passivating layer containing LiF on the electrode surface at 1.6–2.3 V versus Li/Li+ within the S cathode operation potential at elevated temperatures (60 °C) due to the reduction of LiFSI in the DME electrolyte.96 Such a protective (a-la SEI) layer prevents the direct interaction of active materials with electrolyte solvents and prevents dissolution of conversion cathodes during cycling. For example, the S cathode was protected against PS dissolution even at temperatures as high as 60 °C, where Li–S cells showed average coulombic efficiency (CE) approaching 100.0% and capacity retention of 77% for 1000 cycles (≈10% degradation for cycles 100–1000) without using any electrolyte additives.96 Similarly, the reduced LiFSI–DME electrolyte-induced protective surface layer on the C–FeF2 cathode minimized unwanted side reactions between the cathode and the liquid electrolyte and demonstrated a similar level of capacity retention after 1000 cycles.89
The use of high concentration electrolytes minimizes unwanted reactions between the solvent molecules and active materials, particularly when no “free” solvent molecules are left in the electrolyte solution80,172,189,190 and when solvation energy for Li salts is significantly higher than that of the cathode-induced dissolution products.80,172 Such an approach has demonstrated great promise when used in Li–S, Li–Se and Li–FeF2 batteries,62,89,172,189,191 where it demonstrated inhibition of the dissolution of polysulfides, polyselenides and metal halides, greatly reduced shuttling of the dissolved species and significantly improved anode stability. In addition, the high salt concentration electrolytes may reduce formation of Li dendrites due to higher Li surface energy in such electrolytes and faster surface mobility of Li atoms.80,172
The use of electrolyte additives is yet another approach to induce formation of a favorable protective SEI on the surface of both electrodes,31,173,174 increase the ionic conductivity31 or stabilize electrolytes against some surface reactions.31 For example, CsNO3,192 LiNO3,167,174 P2S5,168 PSs,58 ionic liquids (ILs)167 and LiI31,193 have been shown to improve the performance of Li–S cells. The use of LiNO3 additives174 induces the formation of a LiNxOy-comprising SEI on the Li anode and effectively prevents the reduction of polysulfides on the Li metal surface. The use of P2S5168 alleviates capacity losses by increasing the solubility of Li2S and forming more ionic conductive SEI composed of Li3PS4. The addition of Li PS reduces initial dissolution of the S cathode and increases electrolyte conductivity,58 although at the expense of forming the non-conductive Li2S or Li2S2 layer on the Li metal anode. The addition of ILs may stabilize PS molecules.167 LiI was found to reduce 1st charge over-potential and induce in situ formation of Li ion permeable protective films on both the cathode and anode sides of the cell by equilibrating LiI with radical former iodine (I˙) at oxidation potentials around 3.0 V vs. Li/Li+ followed by electrolyte degradation and DME polymerization, which improved the cycle stability of Li2S//Li cells (see Fig. 7b and 14a).31,193 FEC was also shown to enhance the stability of S-, Se-, and metal fluoride based cathodes if the potential of such cathodes is reduced to a sufficiently low level to induce in situ reduction of FEC and form protective SEI in addition to the known positive impact of FEC on the Li SEI stability (see smooth SEI on the Li anode with no Fe and Co in CoF2//Li cells, Fig. 7c, left).32,173,187,194–196
Alternatively, gel polymer electrolytes197–200 and ceramic solid-state electrolytes201–204 may be used to minimize the undesirable side interactions between conversion cathodes and electrolyte solvents (Fig. 14b). In addition, the polymer and solid-state electrolytes may, in principle, minimize or even prevent Li dendrite formation.168,205,206 The majority of such research has been focused on Li–S batteries, including gel electrolytes based on poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO),207–212 poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF)213,214 and poly(vinylidene fluoride)–hexafluoropropylene (PVDF–HFP)215,216 with different Li salts, occasionally additionally filled with different inorganic ceramic particles207,208,211,212,215,217 to increase the elastic modulus to prevent Li dendrite growth or enhance conductivity. Studied ceramic electrolytes include thio-LISICON218–220 and Li2S/P2S5-based electrolytes38,205,221 (Fig. 14b)221 (including those doped with Ge-, Sn- and Si). The key challenges include accommodation of the volume changes (and overall mechanical stability) of solid cells during cycling and still poor at room temperature. In addition, in our studies we found sulfide-based electrolytes too reactive for use with non-S cathodes (e.g., metal halides).
 Fig. 14  Examples of impacts of electrolyte modifications on electrochemical stability of S-based cathodes: (a) impact of the lithium iodide additive on the stability of the Li2S cathode; (b) the use of Li3PS4 as a solid-state electrolyte for Li–S batteries. Part (a) reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Part (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
5.3. Battery architecture
Modification in the cell design and architecture may provide complementary routes to achieve desired characteristics in cells with conversion cathodes (Fig. 11c). Since many such cells benefit greatly when paired with the Li metal anodes (Fig. 4 and 5), modifications of the Li metal foils may be particularly attractive. Several approaches have been tested. For example, the Li–Al alloy layer formed on the surface of Li was found to mitigate the reaction between the diffused polysulfides and the Li anode and improve the cycle performance.222 However, the overall improvements were rather moderate.222,223 In other approaches, lithium foil was coated with an amorphous carbon film layer224 or a graphene layer,225 facilitating the formation of a more stable anode SEI and reducing dendrite growth due to the high elastic modulus of carbon and its minimal volume changes upon Li insertion.224,225 However, the danger of Li plating on the top carbon surface (e.g., at low temperatures and under faster charging rates) may limit the attractiveness of such or similar approaches. Attempts to deposit a thin Al2O3 ALD layer on the Li metal foil suppressed undesirable dendrite growth only during the initial cycles,226,227 after which it stopped being effective. Formation of a thicker ceramic solid electrolyte layer on Li is a noticeably more expensive solution, but is nonetheless currently being explored by several companies.205
Depositing porous carbon (carbon paper, CNT paper and biomass-derived carbon)228–235 or a graphene–TiO2236 interlayer (Fig. 15a) between the separator and the cathode as a PS-diffusion inhibitor in Li–S batteries has also been explored and showed noticeable improvements in Li–S cell stability. In addition, layers of V2O5,237 Al2O3,238 MnO,239 polymer240 and CNT/GO241–244 directly covering the separator similarly enhanced the Li–S cell performance, but did not permanently prevent the PS dissolution. Some portion of polysulfide species shuttled between the cathode and the interlayer and precipitated on both the cathode side and the interlayer, forming an insulative Li2S/Li2S2 layer, which reduced the rate performance.232 In addition, when the interlayer was porous the dissolved PSs could still reach the anode side.245 Oxygen plasma modification of a conventional polymer separator by forming functional –COOH and –OH groups on its surface enhances electrolyte wetting and cell ionic conductivity, also leading to improved cycling performance of Li–S batteries.246
 Fig. 15  Examples of the modified electrode level architecture: (a) an additional protective layer on the cathode surface in Li–S batteries and (b) the use of a bifunctional binder of gum arabic in Li–S batteries; part (a) reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Part (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 248. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Conventional binders used in commercial LIBs are not capable of reducing the shuttle of soluble species and, in some cases, have not been designed to work well with volume-changing conversion cathodes. Similar to the significant improvements observed in alloying-type anodes,100,247 a search for more suitable binders optimized for each cathode type is a viable route for cathode improvements. For example, the use of a gum arabic binder (see Fig. 15b) (a natural mixture of glycoproteins and polysaccharides) in the S-based electrode showed enhanced cycling stability,248 presumably due to its ability to buffer the volume changes as well as the presence of functional groups capable of chemically and physically confining polysulfides. In another example, a carbonyl-β-cyclodextrin binder similarly showed improved capacity and cycle stability of Li–S cells.249 In yet another example, PVP250 as well as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO):PVP mixed binders251 also improved the stability of Li–S cells. The CO groups in PVP have high binding energies with Li2S and Li–S˙ species, which may explain PVP benefits for the observed cycle stability improvements.250 A poly(acrylamide-co-diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (AMAC) binder, with predictably beneficial CO groups, also showed promising performance in spite of high-S-loading (80 wt%) in the cathodes.252 We expect that the other binder composition may show even better performance and we hope that future modeling efforts may help to rationalize the binder selection processes.
In addition to cell construction, the management of a battery is also very important way to address challenges for conversion type cathodes. For example, the control of operating voltage window/capacities in Li–S batteries is an effective way to improve the cycle stability.253 To suppress the dissolution and shuttle of polysulfides, decreasing the charge voltage limit may reduce or avoid the polysulfide dissolution, increasing the discharge voltage limit may reduce the shuttle of polysulfides and the thickness of SEI. In addition, test cells at elevated temperatures resulted in higher capacity utilization and better rate capability.26,59,81 In many reports, the elevated temperatures can also assist the favorable SEI formation in functional electrolytes.96
6. Group VI elements
6.1. Sulfur and lithium sulfide
Elemental sulfur with the highest theoretical specific capacity but a relatively low potential vs. Li/Li+ around 2.2 V (Fig. 2) is a low-cost, lightweight, environmentally friendly, stable in air and abundant in the Earth's crust material, and has been used as a positive electrode in dry cells and storage batteries by Herbet and Ulam in 1962.254 No significant progress in S-based cathodes took place in the following ∼40 years. However, starting in 2000 S-based cathodes have received renewed interest due to their promise to achieve higher specific energy, lower cost and enhanced safety compared to commercial intercalation cathodes. S cathode chemistry has now become one of the most studied, with over 3300 papers published on the topic by April 2016, according to the Web of Science™ database. Multiple approaches and technologies have been explored for overcoming the challenges of S-based cathodes and significant progress has been achieved in increasing the stability at high electrode capacity loadings, overcoming volume expansion after lithiation, reducing cell resistance and minimizing dissolution of polysulfides.7,79,171,255–259 Several methods have been explored for protection of Li metal anodes (commonly used for pairing with the S-based cathodes).205,259,260 Compared to elemental S, the fully-lithiated Li2S does not expand any more since Li is already incorporated into its structure. In addition, Li2S does not evaporate during drying (in contrast to S), may be combined with Li-free anodes (such as comprising Sn and Si) and thus may potentially offer a technologically better solution.59,78 In spite of significant progress in the field, both S and Li2S cathodes have not yet received widespread use and multiple challenges with these materials still need to be overcome by using scalable and low-cost fabrication techniques.
6.2. Selenium and lithium selenide
Elemental selenium (Se) shows much higher electrical conductivity (1 × 10−3 S m−1)28 than S, and thus may offer higher capacity utilization and better rate capability.83 However, it is significantly more expensive, less abundant and more toxic than S. Similar to S, Se-based cathodes also experience large volume expansion ∼98% and the dissolution/shuttle of high-order polyselenides,62,173 resulting in low coulombic efficiency, mechanical failure and fast capacity fading. Its carbon, graphene-, CNT- and polymer-composites including SeSx-based cathodes have been explored to overcome such challenges.61–63,136,154,173,261–271 Similar to previously discussed Li2S studies, fully expanded Li2Se may serve as a promising alternative to Li–Se batteries. Unfortunately, in contrast to Li2S, Li2Se is not commercially available. Recently, a versatile solution-based method was reported for the first time to prepare Li2Se nanoparticles and their carbon(C)–Li2Se composites.30
6.3. Tellurium and lithium telluride
Tellurium (Te) offers the highest electronic conductivity among all non-metallic materials (2 × 102 S m−1), which leads to high capacity utilization and good rate capability and additionally allows its use in the carbon-free and binder-free form in electrodes.84 However, Te has a lower Li insertion potential and lower capacity than S (Fig. 2), which limits attainable specific energy. Similar to S and Se, Te-based cathodes suffer from large volume expansion during the lithiation and from dissolution during charge and discharge. As reported, Te with a low melting point of ∼450 °C was infiltrated into various porous carbon hosts to improve their performance.36,84 Recently, a simple mechanical reduction method of transforming TeO2/C into nanocrystalline Te/C using a high-energy mechanical milling technique at ambient temperature leads to the Te-based cathode with excellent cyclability and fast rate capability.272 Studies on Li2Te have not been reported yet.
7. Group VII elements
7.1. Metal fluorides
Metal fluorides offer high specific and the highest volumetric capacities as well as the highest Li insertion potential among conversion materials (Fig. 2), which makes them very attractive candidates for achieving the greatest energy densities (Fig. 4 and 5).7,8,273,274 However, they suffer from poor conductivity,35,39 noticeable volume expansion, unwanted side reactions, difficult-to-control morphological changes and dissolution during cycling. In addition, most of the investigated metal fluoride cathodes, including those comprising BiF3,187 FeF3,138 FeF2,88 CoF2,32 NiF253 and CuF240 showed very high voltage hysteresis, poor reversibility of “true conversion” (poor cycling stability) and poor kinetics. Similar to chalcogens and chalcogenides, metal fluorides may additionally exhibit unwanted interactions with organic liquid electrolytes, which remains a serious challenge to overcome, particularly at elevated temperatures.
7.2. Metal chlorides
Most of the metal chlorides have lower gravimetric and volumetric capacities than fluorides (Fig. 2), which makes them less attractive for high energy density applications. Among chlorides CuCl2, NiCl2, CoCl2, FeCl3 and AgCl offer the highest theoretical energy densities. High hygroscopicity, poor conductivity, volume expansion, high solubility of chlorides in electrolytes and corrosion of metal current collectors by Cl− remain significant challenges for their applications. While experimental studies of chlorides have been rather limited, some showed promising early results. For example, CoCl2 was directly used as a conversion cathode and was cycled 50 times.56 Ball-milled AgCl/C and ordered mesoporous carbon CMK-3 encapsulated CuCl2 nanocomposites showed about 25–75% degradation after 15–20 cycles.54 The CuCl2–polyether composite showed promising stability for over 200 cycles.275 The FeCl2–graphite sandwich nanocomposite showed a low average potential, but a good stability for over 1000 cycles in a broad voltage range of 0.01–3 V, where SEI formation takes place and may stabilize the cathode against the undesirable dissolution.55
7.3. Bromine and lithium bromide
Bromine and lithium bromide cathodes offer moderately high theoretical capacities and display a high lithiation potential of ∼3.5 V vs. Li/Li+ (Fig. 2), which result in higher gravimetric energy density and similar volumetric energy density when compared to conventional batteries with intercalation cathodes (Fig. 4 and 5). Li–Br batteries have been mostly studied with solid (e.g., polymer-based) electrolytes for use in heart pacemaker applications,276 because high solubility of both Br2 and LiBr in carbonate- and ether-based solvents results in dissolution of active materials in cells with liquid organic electrolytes. Since bromine is a liquid at room temperature, fabrication of bromine cathodes becomes a challenge. The solid LiBr nanoconfined in porous carbon was studied and showed very promising performance.108 Recently, the use of aqueous cathodes containing Br3−/Br− or LiBr/Br2 in aqueous lithium–bromine batteries has been explored.93,277,278
7.4. Iodine and lithium iodide
Environmentally friendly, stable in air and highly abundant in the ocean, iodine offers a moderate capacity (211 mA h g−1) and a lithiation potential of ∼2.8 V vs. Li/Li+. Due to its reasonable price and a self-limiting reaction upon a direct contact with Li (with the formation of electrically insulative LiI) iodine may be a viable solution for rechargeable Li batteries with enhanced safety.43,65 Some of the batteries in implantable cardiac pacemakers comprise a Li anode, an I2 cathode and LiI as a solid electrolyte (10−7 S m−1). Such cells offer a low self-discharge rate, high reliability and a long cycle life.279 The cathodic I2 is first reduced into the tri-iodide ion (I3−) and then into the iodide ion (I−) during discharge. For use in standard Li-ion batteries, however, this cathode chemistry is problematic because iodine, triiodide, and lithium iodide are all soluble in organic electrolytes.43 This leads to a self-discharge, low coulombic efficiency and a loss of active material.43 Due to high solubility of LiI in organic solvents, iodine ions have been considered for use in lithium-flow batteries instead.94 Besides, an aqueous cathode involving the triiodide/iodide redox reaction has been demonstrated for the aqueous Li–I batteries.95,280 Most recently, iodine was infiltrated into the pores of porous carbon and showed a high discharge voltage plateau, good cycle performance, and a high rate capability in organic electrolytes, which was attributed to the enhanced electronic conductivity and suppressed dissolution.43 In a recent work on Li/S cells, LiI addition was shown to induce organic electrolyte polymerization and formation of a protective layer on both the cathode and Li anode (Fig. 7b and 14a), which may also have contributed to enhanced stability of the Li–I cells. Free-standing carbon cloth infiltrated with I similarly showed a negligible self-discharge reaction, a high rate and a long cycling performance with the help of the LiNO3 additive in ether-based electrolytes.65 The studies on the lithiated (LiI) cathode have not been reported yet.
8. Perspectives
Selected conversion-type cathode materials may offer significant advantages to rechargeable Li batteries as well as Li-ion batteries with high capacity (e.g., Si-based) anodes. In addition to reduced cost and likely enhanced safety, these cathodes may offer up to ∼2 times higher cell-level specific energy and up to ∼50% higher volumetric energy density than intercalation cathodes matched with identical anodes. For applications where energy density is the most critical factor, only CuF2 and FeF3 cathode chemistry may successfully compete with NCA, Ni-rich NCM and high-voltage LCO intercalation-type cathodes. However, when a battery weight becomes more important (e.g., in wearables, military, aerospace and space applications), S/Li2S, Se/Li2Se, Br2/LiBr, FeF2/Fe–2LiF, FeF3/Fe–3LiF, FeCl3/Fe–3LiCl, CuF2/Cu–2LiF, CuCl2/Cu–2LiCl, and other conversion cathodes become attractive candidates.
In order to become relevant for broad industrial adoption, conversion-type cathodes need to overcome multiple scientific and technical challenges, such as volume change-induced mechanical degradation of the electrodes, irreversible structural changes, unfavorable interactions with electrolytes, active material dissolution during cycling, low electrical conductivity, and large voltage hysteresis, among others. Three broad categories of complementary approaches have been explored and showed promise for addressing such challenges – (i) formation of nanocomposites and core–shell particles comprising high volumetric and gravimetric fractions of (doped) active materials, (ii) optimization or development of novel electrolytes, and (iii) innovative cell components’ solutions. It is likely that multiple approaches have to be combined in order to achieve attractive cell-level performance characteristics. The authors expect that the growing applications of multiple modeling efforts at different scales will assist and guide material and cell development efforts.
A vast majority of the experimental approaches have been explored for the most-studied S/Li2S cathodes, which have already been used in some niche aerospace applications. For this cathode chemistry several studies demonstrated minimal cell-level degradation (below 20%) for 500–1000 cycles or more, small (down to ∼0.1 V at near-room temperatures) voltage hysteresis, moderately high (>5 mA h cm−2) capacity loadings, acceptable rate performance (>80% of capacity at 1C rate), high (>80%) fraction of active materials in the composites and other promising attributes. Unfortunately, all these important parameters have not been achieved in a single material/cell. In addition, many of the explored approaches have not proved to be scalable and inexpensive. For example, the use of vapor deposition techniques (e.g., ALD and CVD) on powders has been successfully applied in research, but not yet on a large industrial scale. If such techniques are to be adopted, many engineering innovations are still needed for the development of low-cost industrial vapor deposition tools capable of handling large volumes of powders. Similarly, many supportive materials (e.g., graphene, other 2D materials, selected binders, etc.) that proved to be useful in conversion-type cathodes require significant scale-up and/or cost reduction efforts.
The authors expect that it may realistically take 4–8 years before Li2S/S cathodes receive broader industrial adoption. Potentially more promising halide chemistries (such as FeF3/Fe–3LiF and CuF2/Cu–2LiF and others) may take additional 2–4 years or more of R&D and scale-up efforts due to the earlier stage of their developments and larger technical barriers that need to be overcome. Furthermore, nearly all the positive attributes of conversion cathodes only become relevant if graphite anodes are replaced with noticeably higher capacity chemistries. In the opinion of the authors, it may take at least 4–6 years before high capacity anodes start taking a significant (>10%, by capacity) portion of the anode market. As such, it is likely that intercalation cathodes will dominate the market for the next decade. At the same time, the use of high capacity anodes and cathodes may prove to be synergistic. For example, because conversion-type cathodes typically do not require charging to high potentials, they are compatible with solvents (e.g., ethers) or salts (e.g., imides) that are known to improve performance of high capacity anodes (e.g., Si and Li). Matching volumetric capacities of anodes and cathodes is also beneficial for full-cell optimization.
Because of the expected dramatic expansion of the energy storage market fueled by strong demands for environmentally friendlier transportation and energy-sustainable housing and farming, the authors believe that research efforts into conversion-type cathode chemistries will likely expand further over time. In spite of multiple challenges, these chemistries may enable highly-needed lighter, smaller, cheaper and safer batteries. Therefore, in spite of the present scientific and technical risks, the societal and market demands justify significantly increased investments in relevant research, development and scale-up activities. New scientific findings in combination with novel experimental and modeling methodologies should help overcome barriers in the developments of conversion-type electrode technologies.
Acknowledgements
Different aspects of this work were supported by the Army Research Office (ARO grant W911NF-12-1-0259), Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR grant FA9550-13-1-0054) and NASA Minority University Research and Education Project (MUREP) (NASA grant NNX15AP44A).
Notes and references
Y. Li, D. Zhang, X. Jin, L. Yang, X. Du and Y. Yang, Sci. China: Technol. Sci., 2016, 59, 468–475 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, Z. Wang, O. Wild, W. Xu, C. Chen, P. Fu, W. Du, L. Zhou, Q. Zhang, T. Han, Q. Wang, X. Pan, H. Zheng, J. Li, X. Guo, J. Liu and D. R. Worsnop, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Carson, A. Köhl, D. Stammer, A. B. A. Slangen, C. A. Katsman, R. S. W. van de Wal, J. Church and N. White, Clim. Change, 2015, 134, 269–281 CrossRef .
J.-E. Yusuf, K. Neill, B. S. John, I. K. Ash and K. Mahar, Environ. Plann. C: Gov. Policy, 2016, 34, 228–243 CrossRef .
M. Mengel, A. Levermann, K. Frieler, A. Robinson, B. Marzeion and R. Winkelmann, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 2597–2602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
D. Andre, S.-J. Kim, P. Lamp, S. F. Lux, F. Maglia, O. Paschos and B. Stiaszny, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6709–6732 CAS .
S. K. Martha, J. Nanda, G. M. Veith and N. J. Dudney, J. Power Sources, 2012, 216, 179–186 CrossRef CAS .
S. Taminato, M. Hirayama, K. Suzuki, N. L. Yamada, M. Yonemura, J. Y. Son and R. Kanno, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1673–1676 RSC .
C. Cao, L. Xi, K. L. Leung, M. Wang, Y. Liu, R. Ma, S. Yang, Z. Lu and C. Y. Chung, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 30507–30513 RSC .
L. Sun, X. Yi, X. Ren, P. Zhang and J. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A766–A772 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sathiya, G. Rousse, K. Ramesha, C. P. Laisa, H. Vezin, M. T. Sougrati, M. L. Doublet, D. Foix, D. Gonbeau, W. Walker, A. S. Prakash, M. Ben Hassine, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 827–835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Omenya, B. Wen, J. Fang, R. Zhang, Q. Wang, N. A. Chernova, J. Schneider-Haefner, F. Cosandey and M. S. Whittingham, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401204 CrossRef .
S. Upreti, N. A. Chernova, J. Xiao, J. K. Miller, O. V. Yakubovich, J. Cabana, C. P. Grey, V. L. Chevrier, G. Ceder, J. L. Musfeldt and M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 166–173 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ban, Z. li, Z. Wu, M. J. Kirkham, L. Chen, Y. S. Jung, E. A. Payzant, Y. Yan, M. S. Whittingham and A. C. Dillon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 58–62 CrossRef CAS .
G. Peng, X. Yao, H. Wan, B. Huang, J. Yin, F. Ding and X. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 724–730 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, F. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Ye, Y. Huang, F. Wu and L. Li, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 70–77 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Waller, P. D. Brooke, B. H. Rainwater, S. Y. Lai, R. Hu, Y. Ding, F. M. Alamgir, K. H. Sandhage and M. L. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 162–170 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, J.-S. Yu and B. Sundén, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 352–369 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Li and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 443–467 CrossRef CAS .
R. Black, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 801–815 CrossRef CAS .
P. He, T. Zhang, J. Jiang and H. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1267–1280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, H. Kitaura and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2302–2311 CAS .
L. Grande, E. Paillard, J. Hassoun, J. B. Park, Y. J. Lee, Y. K. Sun, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 784–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, R. Robert, N. A. Chernova, N. Pereira, F. Omenya, F. Badway, X. Hua, M. Ruotolo, R. Zhang, L. Wu, V. Volkov, D. Su, B. Key, M. S. Whittingham, C. P. Grey, G. G. Amatucci, Y. Zhu and J. Graetz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18828–18836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, J. Zhu, W. Ai, X. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Zou, W. Huang and T. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, L. Yuan, Z. Yi, Y. Liu and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 229–236 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, A. Garsuch and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3907–3911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, J. T. Lee, Y. Xiao and G. Yushin, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 238–246 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, J. T. Lee, N. Nitta, H. Kim, O. Borodin and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 101–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Gu, J. T. Lee, N. Nitta, J. Benson, A. Magasinski, M. W. Schauer and G. Yushin, Small, 2015, 11, 5164–5173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Shi, M.-F. Shen, S.-D. Xu, Q.-C. Zhuang, L. Jiang and Y.-H. Qiang, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 222–223, 23–30 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, D. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Song and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21223–21229 CAS .
F. Badway, N. Pereira, F. Cosandey and G. G. Amatucci, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1209–A1208 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, D. Bigio and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12201–12207 CAS .
Y. Yang, G. Zheng, S. Misra, J. Nelson, M. F. Toney and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15387–15394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, Z. Liu, N. J. Dudney and C. Liang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2829–2833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Badway, F. Cosandey, N. Pereira and G. G. Amatucci, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1318–A1327 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hua, R. Robert, L.-S. Du, K. M. Wiaderek, M. Leskes, K. W. Chapman, P. J. Chupas and C. P. Grey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15169–15184 CAS .
H. Kim, J. T. Lee, A. Magasinski, K. Zhao, Y. Liu and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501306 CrossRef .
H. C. Yu, C. Ling, J. Bhattacharya, J. C. Thomas, K. Thornton and A. Van der Ven, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1760–1768 CAS .
Y. L. Wang, Q. L. Sun, Q. Q. Zhao, J. S. Cao and S. H. Ye, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3947–3950 CAS .
B. Li, S. Li, J. Liu, B. Wang and S. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3073–3079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tan, L. Liu, S. Guo, H. Hu, Z. Yan, Q. Zhou, Z. Huang, H. Shu, X. Yang and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 168, 225–233 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Cui, M.-Z. Xue, Y.-N. Zhou, S.-M. Peng, X.-L. Wang and Z.-W. Fu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2328–2335 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Wei, Y. Song, H. Shu and X. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 218, 204–211 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, Z. Lu, C. Wang, H. E. Wang, S. Yang, L. Xi and J. C. Chung, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6338–6343 RSC .
H. Zhou, R. E. Ruther, J. Adcock, W. Zhou, S. Dai and J. Nanda, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2530–2539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, M. Ma, R. G. Mendes, M. Zeng, Q. Zhang, Y. Xue, T. Zhang, M. H. Rummeli and L. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23930–23935 CAS .
X. Fan, Y. Zhu, C. Luo, T. Gao, L. Suo, S.-C. Liou, K. Xu and C. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 435–442 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Teng, F. Wei and R. Yazami, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 653, 434–443 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Lee, K. J. Carroll, S. Calvin, S. Jin and Y. S. Meng, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 59, 213–221 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, Z. X. Chen, Y. L. Cao, X. P. Ai and H. X. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 68, 202–205 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, C. Guo, Y. Zhu, J. Zhou, L. Fan and Y. Qian, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14174–14179 RSC .
J.-L. Liu, W.-J. Cui, C.-X. Wang and Y.-Y. Xia, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 269–271 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qu, T. Gao, H. Zheng, Y. Wang, X. Li, X. Li, J. Chen, Y. Han, J. Shao and H. Zheng, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500048 CrossRef .
F. Wu, H. Kim, A. Magasinski, J. T. Lee, H.-T. Lin and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400196 CrossRef .
F. Wu, J. T. Lee, F. Fan, N. Nitta, H. Kim, T. Zhu and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5579–5586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, A. Abouimrane, J. Lu, T. Bolin, Y. Ren, W. Weng, C. Sun, V. A. Maroni, S. M. Heald and K. Amine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8047–8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zeng, W. Zeng, Y. Jiang, X. Wei, W. Li, C. Yang, Y. Zhu and Y. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401377 CrossRef .
J. T. Lee, H. Kim, M. Oschatz, D.-C. Lee, F. Wu, H.-T. Lin, B. Zdyrko, W. I. Cho, S. Kaskel and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400981 CrossRef .
K. Han, Z. Liu, J. Shen, Y. Lin, F. Dai and H. Ye, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 455–463 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y.-X. Yin, Y. You, Y. Yan and Y.-G. Guo, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 757–762 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, Y. Lu, Z. Zhu, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5982–5987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, R. Jacobs, P. Gao, L. Gan, F. Wang, D. Morgan and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2838–2848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. R. Luo, Comprehensive Handbook of Chemical Bond Energies, CRC Press,  2007 Search PubMed .
J. K. Ko, K. M. Wiaderek, N. Pereira, T. L. Kinnibrugh, J. R. Kim, P. J. Chupas, K. W. Chapman and G. G. Amatucci, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10858–10869 CAS .
H.-C. Yu, F. Wang, G. G. Amatucci and K. Thornton, J. Phase Equilib. Diffus., 2016, 37, 86–99 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nagasubramanian and B. Sanchez, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 630–634 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Sarakonsri and R. V. Kumar, High Energy Density Lithium Batteries, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2010, pp. 27–52 Search PubMed .
M. Gauthier, T. J. Carney, A. Grimaud, L. Giordano, N. Pour, H.-H. Chang, D. P. Fenning, S. F. Lux, O. Paschos, C. Bauer, F. Maglia, S. Lupart, P. Lamp and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4653–4672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16071 CrossRef .
A. J. Gmitter, F. Badway, S. Rangan, R. A. Bartynski, A. Halajko, N. Pereira and G. G. Amatucci, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4149–4161 RSC .
W. Choi and A. Manthiram, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1760–A1764 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. W. Pieczonka, Z. Liu, P. Lu, K. L. Olson, J. Moote, B. R. Powell and J.-H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15947–15957 CAS .
R. A. Quinlan, Y.-C. Lu, Y. Shao-Horn and A. N. Mansour, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A669–A677 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Son, J.-S. Lee, Y. Son, J.-H. Jang and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500110 CrossRef .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S. H. Chung, C. Zu and Y. S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Lee, Y. Zhao, S. Thieme, H. Kim, M. Oschatz, L. Borchardt, A. Magasinski, W.-I. Cho, S. Kaskel and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4573–4579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 256–265 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, K. Ueno, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500117 CrossRef .
C.-P. Yang, Y.-X. Yin and Y.-G. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 256–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ding, S.-F. Chen, D.-S. Geng, S.-W. Chien, T. An, T. S. A. Hor, Z.-L. Liu, S.-H. Yu and Y. Zong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401999 CrossRef .
S. Zheng, P. Han, Z. Han, H. Zhang, Z. Tang and J. Yang, Scientific reports, 2014, 4, 4842 Search PubMed .
J. Gao, M. A. Lowe, Y. Kiya and H. D. Abruña, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25132–25137 CAS .
T. Yim, M.-S. Park, J.-S. Yu, K. J. Kim, K. Y. Im, J.-H. Kim, G. Jeong, Y. N. Jo, S.-G. Woo, K. S. Kang, I. Lee and Y.-J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 454–460 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gu, A. Magasinski, B. Zdyrko and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401148 Search PubMed .
W. Gu, O. Borodin, B. Zdyrko, H.-T. Lin, H. Kim, N. Nitta, J. Huang, A. Magasinski, Z. Milicev, G. Berdichevsky and G. Yushin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1507–1516 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, S.-W. Kim, D.-H. Seo, K. Kang, L. Wang, D. Su, J. J. Vajo, J. Wang and J. Graetz, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abouimrane, J. Ding and I. J. Davidson, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 693–696 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Quinlan, Y.-C. Lu, D. Kwabi, Y. Shao-Horn and A. N. Mansour, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A300–A308 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Ding, J. Song, L. Peng, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1990–1995 CAS .
Y. Zhao and H. R. Byon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1630–1635 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, L. Wang and H. R. Byon, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1896 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kim, F. Wu, J. T. Lee, N. Nitta, H.-T. Lin, M. Oschatz, W. I. Cho, S. Kaskel, O. Borodin and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401792 CrossRef .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503–11618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Zhang, P. Zhao, Y. Shang, L. Wang, X. He and J. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 158, 202–208 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, T. Han, K. Y. Cho, M.-H. Ryou and Y. M. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21366–21372 CAS .
A. Magasinski, B. Zdyrko, I. Kovalenko, B. Hertzberg, R. Burtovyy, C. F. Huebner, T. F. Fuller, I. Luzinov and G. Yushin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3004–3010 CAS .
M. Ebner, F. Marone, M. Stampanoni and V. Wood, Science, 2013, 342, 716–720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, J. Ren, L. Wang, W. Pu, C. Jiang and C. Wan, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 154–156 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tokranov, B. W. Sheldon, C. Li, S. Minne and X. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6672–6686 CAS .
K. Van Havenbergh, S. Turner, K. Driesen, J.-S. Bridel and G. Van Tendeloo, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 699–708 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, G. Chan, J. W. Choi, I. Ryu, Y. Yao, M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, A. Jackson, Y. Yang, L. Hu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nano, 2012, 7, 310–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. T. Lee, D.-C. Lee, A. Magasinski, W.-I. Cho and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1308–1315 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nan, Z. Lin, H. Liao, M.-K. Song, Y. Li and E. J. Cairns, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4659–4663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Wang, X. Wang, L. Y. Tian, Y. Y. Sun and S.-H. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1879–1883 CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Li, P. He, E. Hosono and H. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1294–1305 RSC .
F. Wang, H.-C. Yu, M.-H. Chen, L. Wu, N. Pereira, K. Thornton, A. Van der Ven, Y. Zhu, G. G. Amatucci and J. Graetz, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1201 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Cai, M.-K. Song, E. J. Cairns and Y. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6474–6479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, L. Gu, J. Tong, S. Tsukimoto and J. Maier, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1391–1397 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, C. Yin, L. Gu, R. E. Dinnebier, X. Mu, P. A. van Aken and J. Maier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11425–11428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, Z. Cheng, N. Zhang and K. Sun, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 7–13 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Mu, P. A. van Aken and J. Maier, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, L. Li, Y. L. Cao, X. P. Ai and H. X. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3190–3195 CAS .
F. Wu, A. Magasinski and G. Yushin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6064–6070 CAS .
J. Geder, H. E. Hoster, A. Jossen, J. Garche and D. Y. W. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 286–292 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. Hu, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Scientific reports, 2014, 4, 6467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, S. Evers, R. Black and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 325 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liang, C. Hart, Q. Pang, A. Garsuch, T. Weiss and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5682 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zheng, J. Tian, D. Wu, M. Gu, W. Xu, C. Wang, F. Gao, M. H. Engelhard, J. G. Zhang, J. Liu and J. Xiao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2345–2352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tao, J. Wang, Z. Ying, Q. Cai, G. Zheng, Y. Gan, H. Huang, Y. Xia, C. Liang, W. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5288–5294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, M. Rao, H. Zheng, L. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Duan, J. Guo, E. J. Cairns and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18522–18525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, J. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12886–12890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Ding, P. Kopold, K. Hahn, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1112–1119 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, L. Ma, H. Yue and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24769–24775 RSC .
S. Wei, L. Ma, K. E. Hendrickson, Z. Tu and L. A. Archer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12143–12152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zheng, Y. Chen, Y. Xu, F. Yi, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, J. Yang and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10995–11003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, J. T. Lee, A. Magasinski, H. Kim and G. Yushin, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 639–644 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. T. Zhang, Y. M. Chen, J. Li and X. W. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Swiderska-Mocek and E. Rudnicka, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 162–167 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, A. Kushima, J. Chen, Y. Huang and J. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1796–1802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, S. Pei, L. Li, D.-W. Wang, S. Wang, K. Huang, L.-C. Yin, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 625–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Luo, Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, S. Zheng, Y. Liu, A. Langrock and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8003–8010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, D. J. Comstock, T. T. Fister and J. W. Elam, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10963–10972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chu, Z. Xing, J. Tian, X. Ren, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi, K. A. Alamry and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2013, 236, 188–191 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Guo, S. K. Das, Y. Yu, Z. Zhou, H. D. Abruna and L. A. Archer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1433–1440 CAS .
X. Fan, C. Luo, J. Lamb, Y. Zhu, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7650–7656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Li, X. Ge, J. Ma, Z. Zhang, Q. Li, C. Wang and L. Yin, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, J. T. Lee, E. Zhao, B. Zhang and G. Yushin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1333–1340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-C. Li, G.-R. Li, S.-H. Ye and X.-P. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1238–1245 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, H. Cheng, Z. Liu, G. Li, Q. Zhu and Y. Yu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5116–5123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang and G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1889–1904 CAS .
F. Wu, E. Zhao, D. Gordon, Y. Xiao, C. Hu and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6365–6371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, Y. Yu, H. Chen, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruña, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16736–16743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, G. Zheng, Y. Yang, Z. W. Seh, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 7148–7153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, W. Li, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell, P.-C. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1331 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. B. Wu, C. Yuan, Z. Guo and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9592–9595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. H. Yu, W. Li, P.-C. Hsu, H. Wang, Y. Sun, H. Yao, Q. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, C. Nan, Y. Ye, J. Guo, J. Zhu and E. J. Cairns, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 408–416 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, X. Wang, Y. Fu, L. Wang, S. Cai, M. Liu, B. Lu, G. Wang, D. Wang, Q. Ren and X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4941–4951 CAS .
C. Luo, Y. Zhu, Y. Wen, J. Wang and C. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4082–4089 CrossRef CAS .
G. Luo, J. Zhao and B. Wang, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2012, 4, 063128 CrossRef .
L. Liu, M. Zhou, L. Yi, H. Guo, J. Tan, H. Shu, X. Yang, Z. Yang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17539–17550 RSC .
Y.-N. Zhou, M. Sina, N. Pereira, X. Yu, G. G. Amatucci, X.-Q. Yang, F. Cosandey and K.-W. Nam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 696–703 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sina, K. W. Nam, D. Su, N. Pereira, X. Q. Yang, G. G. Amatucci and F. Cosandey, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11629–11640 CAS .
J. Song, Z. Yu, M. L. Gordin and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 864–870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, M. L. Gordin, T. Xu, S. Chen, Z. Yu, H. Sohn, J. Lu, Y. Ren, Y. Duan and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4325–4329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, T. Xu, M. L. Gordin, P. Zhu, D. Lv, Y.-B. Jiang, Y. Chen, Y. Duan and D. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1243–1250 CrossRef CAS .
C.-P. Yang, Y.-X. Yin, H. Ye, K.-C. Jiang, J. Zhang and Y.-G. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8789–8795 CAS .
Y. Xie, Z. Meng, T. Cai and W.-Q. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25202–25210 CAS .
G. Zhou, E. Paek, G. S. Hwang and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501355 CrossRef .
Q. Pang, J. Tang, H. Huang, X. Liang, C. Hart, K. C. Tam and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6021–6028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 231, 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barghamadi, A. S. Best, A. I. Bhatt, A. F. Hollenkamp, P. J. Mahon, M. Musameh and T. Rüther, J. Power Sources, 2015, 295, 212–220 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, Z. Liu, W. Fu, N. J. Dudney and C. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1064–1069 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian, W. A. Henderson, W. Xu, P. Bhattacharya, M. Engelhard, O. Borodin and J.-G. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Soto, Y. Ma, J. M. Martinez de la Hoz, J. M. Seminario and P. B. Balbuena, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7990–8000 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barghamadi, A. S. Best, A. I. Bhatt, A. F. Hollenkamp, M. Musameh, R. J. Rees and T. Ruther, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3902–3920 CAS .
L. Suo, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, M. Armand and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1481 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Lee, H. Kim, N. Nitta, K.-s. Eom, D.-C. Lee, F. Wu, H.-T. Lin, B. Zdyrko, W. I. Cho and G. Yushin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18898–18905 CAS .
S. Xiong, K. Xie, Y. Diao and X. Hong, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 83, 78–86 CrossRef CAS .
J. Scheers, S. Fantini and P. Johansson, J. Power Sources, 2014, 255, 204–218 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Choi, J.-K. Kim, G. Cheruvally, J.-H. Ahn, H.-J. Ahn and K.-W. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2075–2082 CrossRef CAS .
R. Miao, J. Yang, Z. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Nuli and L. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Carbone, M. Gobet, J. Peng, M. Devany, B. Scrosati, S. Greenbaum and J. Hassoun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13859–13865 CAS .
N. Azimi, W. Weng, C. Takoudis and Z. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 37, 96–99 CrossRef CAS .
N. Azimi, Z. Xue, I. Bloom, M. L. Gordin, D. Wang, T. Daniel, C. Takoudis and Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9169–9177 CAS .
W. Weng, V. G. Pol and K. Amine, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1608–1615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-R. Chang, S.-H. Lee, S.-W. Kim and H.-T. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 452–460 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Choi, G. Cheruvally, D.-S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, K.-W. Kim and H.-J. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 441–445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, F. Dai, M. L. Gordin, Z. Yu, Y. Gao, J. Song and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4231–4235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Song, H. Cui and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22377–22384 CAS .
W. K. Behl and J. A. Read, ECS Trans., 2012, 41, 97–106 CAS .
A. J. Gmitter, J. Gural and G. G. Amatucci, J. Power Sources, 2012, 217, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Hu, G. K. Long, S. Liu, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14647–14650 RSC .
E. S. Shin, K. Kim, S. H. Oh and W. I. Cho, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2004–2006 RSC .
J. T. Lee, Y. Zhao, H. Kim, W. I. Cho and G. Yushin, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 752–761 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, W. Zhao, L. Liu and L. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 54293–54300 RSC .
J.-S. Kim, D.-J. Yoo, J. Min, R. A. Shakoor, R. Kahraman and J. W. Choi, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 240–245 CrossRef CAS .
S. Meini, R. Elazari, A. Rosenman, A. Garsuch and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 915–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Song, J.-T. Yeon, J.-Y. Jang, J.-G. Han, S.-M. Lee and N.-S. Choi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A873–A881 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Lee, K. Eom, F. Wu, H. Kim, D. C. Lee, B. Zdyrko and G. Yushin, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 373–379 CrossRef CAS .
E. Markevich, G. Salitra, A. Rosenman, Y. Talyosef, F. Chesneau and D. Aurbach, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 60, 42–46 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, D. Zhou, Y.-B. He, Y. Fu, X. Qin, C. Miao, H. Du, B. Li, Q.-H. Yang, Z. Lin, T. S. Zhao and F. Kang, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 278–289 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, D. Gosselink, T. N. L. Doan, M. Sadhu, H.-J. Cheang and P. Chen, Membranes, 2012, 2, 553–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Zhang and D. T. Tran, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 114, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agostini and J. Hassoun, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Z. Wen, J. Jin, J. Guo, X. Huang, J. Yang and C. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1637–1640 RSC .
N. Angulakshmi and A. M. Stephan, Front. Energy Res., 2015, 3, 17 Search PubMed .
Z. Lin and C. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 936–958 CAS .
J. C. Bachman, S. Muy, A. Grimaud, H.-H. Chang, N. Pour, S. F. Lux, O. Paschos, F. Maglia, S. Lupart, P. Lamp, L. Giordano and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 140–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. McCloskey, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4581–4588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, J. Wang, F. Ding, X. Chen, E. Nasybulin, Y. Zhang and J.-G. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 513–537 CAS .
J. H. Shin, K. W. Kim, H. J. Ahn and J. H. Ahn, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2002, 95, 148–156 CrossRef .
X. Liang, Z. Wen, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, L. Huang and J. Jin, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3655–3658 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Jeong, Y. T. Lim, Y. J. Choi, G. B. Cho, K. W. Kim, H. J. Ahn and K. K. Cho, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 745–750 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, D. Gosselink and P. Chen, Ionics, 2014, 21, 381–385 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, Z. Wen, Z. Gu and Z. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2005, 139, 269–273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 343–348 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Ryu, H.-J. Ahn, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn and J.-Y. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 360–364 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wang, J. Yang, J. Y. Xie, N. X. Xu and Y. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 499–502 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rao, X. Li, Y. Liao, X. Li and W. Li, Ionics, 2015, 21, 1937–1943 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, G. Li, Y. Lai, D. Zeng and H. Cheng, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hassoun and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5198–5201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kobayashi, Y. Imade, D. Shishihara, K. Homma, M. Nagao, R. Watanabe, T. Yokoi, A. Yamada, R. Kanno and T. Tatsumi, J. Power Sources, 2008, 182, 621–625 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1551–1558 CAS .
M. Nagao, Y. Imade, H. Narisawa, T. Kobayashi, R. Watanabe, T. Yokoi, T. Tatsumi and R. Kanno, J. Power Sources, 2013, 222, 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, Z. Liu, W. Fu, N. J. Dudney and C. Liang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7460–7463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. T. Lee, D.-C. Lee, M. Oschatz, W. I. Cho, S. Kaskel and G. Yushin, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 36, 38–41 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Wang, A. Wang, Y. Huang, K. Yuan, Z. Yu, J. Qiu and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11660–11665 CAS .
G. Zheng, S. W. Lee, Z. Liang, H.-W. Lee, K. Yan, H. Yao, H. Wang, W. Li, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nano, 2014, 9, 618–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lin, Y. Liu, Z. Liang, H.-W. Lee, J. Sun, H. Wang, K. Yan, J. Xie and Y. Cui, Nat. Nano, 2016, 11, 626–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Kozen, C.-F. Lin, A. J. Pearse, M. A. Schroeder, X. Han, L. Hu, S.-B. Lee, G. W. Rubloff and M. Noked, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5884–5892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kazyak, K. N. Wood and N. P. Dasgupta, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6457–6462 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, Q. Li, L. Zhang, J. Fang, J. Li, F. Qin, Z. Zhang and Y. Lai, Mater. Lett., 2014, 121, 198–201 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, F. Qin, J. Li, K. Zhang, W. Liu, M. Wang, F. Yu and L. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 297, 265–270 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, F. Qin, L. Zhang, K. Zhang, Q. Li, Y. Lai, Z. Zhang and J. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13916–13922 CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Wang, B. Peng, W. Yu, H. Wang, T. Wang, B. Deng, L. Chai, K. Zhang and J. Wang, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3926–3934 RSC .
H. M. Kim, J.-Y. Hwang, A. Manthiram and Y.-K. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 983–987 CAS .
Y.-S. Su and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1166 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Wang and L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2013, 242, 65–69 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chai, J. Wang, H. Wang, L. Zhang, W. Yu and L. Mai, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 224–232 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Z. Yang, L. Wang, H. Nie, M. E. Zhong, Q. Lai, X. Xu, L. Zhang and S. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2891–2898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, J. Hicks-Garner, J. Wang, J. Liu, A. F. Gross, E. Sherman, J. Graetz, J. J. Vajo and P. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3403–3410 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Lai, Z. Zhang, K. Zhang and J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 129, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, L. Jin, D. Zhao, X. Yang, S. Wang, X. Shen, D. Rao, S. Yao, Y. Zhou and X. Xi, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 192, 346–356 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, Y. Ye, R. Chen, J. Qian, T. Zhao, L. Li and W. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7431–7439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Chung, P. Han and A. Manthiram, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4709–4717 CAS .
Z. Yunbo, M. Lixiao, N. Jing, X. Zhichang, H. Long, W. Bin and Z. Linjie, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 024013 CrossRef .
S.-H. Chung and A. Manthiram, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1978–1983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chang, S.-H. Chung and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18829–18834 CAS .
J. Zhu, Y. Ge, D. Kim, Y. Lu, C. Chen, M. Jiang and X. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 176–184 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Q. Jiang, Z. Ma, Q. Liu, Z. Wu and S. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 79473–79478 RSC .
I. Kovalenko, B. Zdyrko, A. Magasinski, B. Hertzberg, Z. Milicev, R. Burtovyy, I. Luzinov and G. Yushin, Science, 2011, 334, 75–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, M. Ling, Y. Ye, Z. Li, J. Guo, Y. Yao, J. Zhu, Z. Lin and S. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500878 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Z. Yao, C. W. Monroe, J. Yang and Y. Nuli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1194–1201 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, Q. Zhang, W. Li, G. Zheng, H. Yao and Y. Cui, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 3673–3677 RSC .
M. J. Lacey, F. Jeschull, K. Edström and D. Brandell, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1226–A1229 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Su, Y. Fu, T. Cochell and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2985 Search PubMed .

          H. Danuta and U. Juliusz, US Pat., 3043896,  1962 Search PubMed .
S. Urbonaite, T. Poux and P. Novák, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500118 CrossRef .
G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307–1338 CAS .
M. Wild, L. O'Neill, T. Zhang, R. Purkayastha, G. Minton, M. Marinescu and G. J. Offer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3477–3494 CAS .
M. A. Pope and I. A. Aksay, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500124 CrossRef .
X. Fang and H. Peng, Small, 2015, 11, 1488–1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cao, W. Xu, D. Lv, J. Xiao and J.-G. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402273 CrossRef .
D. Huang, S. Li, Y. Luo, X. Xiao, L. Gao, M. Wang and Y. Shen, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 258–263 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Si, Y. Du, X. Zhou, Z. Dai and J. Bao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 27316–27321 CAS .
H. Zhang, F. Yu, W. Kang and Q. Shen, Carbon, 2015, 95, 354–363 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Liang, Z. Hou, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5229–5238 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. Jiang, Y. Lai, J. Li, J. Song and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 284, 95–102 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Xu, L. Fan, Y. Zhu, J. Liang and Y. Qian, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 592–600 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Liang, K. Zhang, Z. Hou, W. Zhang, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3181–3186 CAS .
M. Jia, C. Mao, Y. Niu, J. Hou, S. Liu, S. Bao, J. Jiang, M. Xu and Z. Lu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 96146–96150 RSC .
K. Han, Z. Liu, H. Ye and F. Dai, J. Power Sources, 2014, 263, 85–89 CrossRef CAS .
C.-P. Yang, S. Xin, Y.-X. Yin, H. Ye, J. Zhang and Y.-G. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8363–8367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abouimrane, D. Dambournet, K. W. Chapman, P. J. Chupas, W. Weng and K. Amine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4505–4508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-U. Seo, G.-K. Seong and C.-M. Park, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-P. Gao and H.-X. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 174–189 CAS .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170–E192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jaffe and H. I. Karunadasa, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 6494–6496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lühder, L. Schmidt, A. Schnittke and H. Füllbier, J. Power Sources, 1992, 40, 257–263 CrossRef .
Z. Chang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Gao, M. Li, L. Liu and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19444–19450 CAS .
K. Takemoto and H. Yamada, J. Power Sources, 2015, 281, 334–340 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Owen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1997, 26, 259–267 RSC .
Y. Zhao, M. Hong, N. Bonnet Mercier, G. Yu, H. C. Choi and H. R. Byon, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1085–1092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee02326fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Feixiang Wu
	Dr. Feixiang Wu received his BS in Metallurgical Engineering in 2009 and PhD in Metallurgical Physics and Chemistry in 2014 from Central South University. During his PhD from 2012 to 2014, he was a visiting scholar in Prof. Yushin’s laboratory in School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He is currently a postdoctoral research associate at the Georgia Institute of Technology. His research interests include rechargeable Li metal batteries, aqueous Li-ion batteries and Li batteries with solid electrolytes.

Gleb Yushin
	Prof. Gleb Yushin received his PhD in materials science from North Carolina State University and MS in physics from Saint-Petersburg Polytechnic Institute. He is a Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He also serves as an Editor-in-Chief for Materials Today. Current research in his laboratory is focused on nanostructured and nanocomposite materials for use in energy storage, structural and multifunctional applications.

Broader context
Commercial lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries built with nickel- and cobalt-based intercalation-type cathodes suffer from low specific energy, high toxicity and high cost. A further increase in the energy storage characteristics of such cells is challenging because capacities of such intercalation compounds approach their theoretical values and a further increase in their maximum voltage induces serious safety concerns. Conversion-type cathode materials are some of the key candidates for the next-generation of rechargeable Li and Li-ion batteries. Continuous rapid progress in various performance improvements of such cathodes is essential for their use in future applications. In this review we consider price, abundance of elements, safety, specific and volumetric capacities of a broad range of conversion materials. By offering a model for practically achievable volumetric energy density and specific energy of Li cells with graphite, silicon and Li anodes, we observe the impact of cathode chemistry. This allows us to estimate the potential of different conversion cathodes for exceeding the energy characteristics of cells built with state of the art intercalation compounds. Comparison between “true conversion” and “chemical transformation” cathode chemistries explains the origins of the apparent differences in their performance and describes different approaches for overcoming the current limitations.


 	Fig. 1  Selected properties of elements possibly used in conversion cathodes: availability, average price and toxicity to environment. Color coding: green color represent elements mainly used in intercalation; blue color represent elements mainly used in conversion electrodes; orange color represent elements mainly used in both types of cathodes; value coding: 1st row represent the name of element; 2nd row represent the abundance of the element in the earths’ crust; 3rd row represent the average price of the metal or elementary substance in last 5 years (pricing data came from InfoMine-Mining Intelligence and Technology, MetalPrices.com, USGS, Minerals Information, Metal Bulletin: Global Metal News, and Metal Prices & Analysis); 4th and 5th row represent the effect of this element to the environment and human.	 

 	Fig. 2  Theoretical gravimetric and volumetric capacities and theoretical potential of selected conversion cathode materials: (a and b) chalcogens and chalcogenides; (c and d) halogens and metal halides.	 
Type A (true conversion): M′Xz + yLi ↔ M + zLi(y/z)X	(1)
Type B (chemical transformation): yLi + X′ ↔ LiyX,	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Two types of conversion reactions using lithiation of S and FeF2 as examples: (a) true conversion with the formation of two new phases; (b) chemical transformation with a single new phase formation. Note that each type of cathodes could be produced in both fully lithiated and Li-free states.	 

 	Fig. 4  Estimation of the volumetric energy densities of unit stacks (calculating units) in rechargeable Li batteries achievable with graphite, silicon and lithium anodes, commercial intercalation-type cathodes (with practically demonstrated reversible gravimetric capacities) and selected conversion-type cathodes (with theoretical capacities). A unit stack (the smallest cell unit) comprises 1/2 of the metal current collector foil thicknesses (4.5 μm), 9 μm separator and one sided electrodes. The thickest (limiting) electrode (either the anode or the cathode, depending on a particular chemistry) is 100 μm in thickness, while the thickness of the other electrode is calculated based on the capacity matching. The volume fraction of the active material in each electrode is considered to be 70 vol% in the case of intercalation materials, 50 vol% in the case of oxygen cathodes and 60 vol% in the case of conversion-type cathodes, Si and Li anodes. Material properties in the fully expanded (lithiated) state were used for calculating the volumetric capacities and inactive volume within each electrode. Areal capacities of anodes and cathodes were matched 1:1 and no extra capacity was considered for the formation losses.	 

 	Fig. 5  Estimation of the specific energies of unit stacks of rechargeable Li batteries with graphite, silicon and lithium anodes, commercial intercalation-type and selected conversion-type cathodes (using same calculating unit as Fig. 4) by considering the mass of all the inactives (including the mass of electrolyte, binder and carbon additives within each electrode). Cells with Li anodes are assumed to have no inactives within the anode.	 

 	Fig. 6  Challenges attaining cycle stability in cells comprising volume- and composition-changing conversion-type cathode materials: (a and b) dissolution of active cathode material or active material components at some state of charge and discharge affecting capacity and impedance of both cathode and anode; (c) undesirable electrolyte decomposition reactions affecting cathode reversibility and rate performance; (d) volume changes during charge and discharge inducing various mechanical degradation phenomena.	 

 	Fig. 7  Examples of unfavorable changes in cells with conversion-type cathodes: (a) excessive Li dendrite formation on a Li anode that may be triggered if Li2Se cathodes are not protected from dissolution during cycling [reproduced from ref. 30, Copyright 2016 Elsevier]; (b) polysulfide’s re-precipitation that may take place if S/Li2S cathodes partially dissolve during cycling [reproduced from ref. 31, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim]; (c) severe damage and uncontrolled growth of Li SEI that may be induced by Co dissolution from the CoF2 cathode during cycling if electrolyte composition is not optimized [reproduced from ref. 32, 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim]; (d) formation of cracks and thick SEI films induced in FeF2,3 comprising composites during cycling [reproduced from ref. 33 and 34, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society, Copyright 2012 Elsevier].	 

FeF2	Insulator35,39	2.66	16.7	0.5–1.034,88–90	Cation dissolution88,89
FeF3	Insulator35,39	2.74	25.6	0.8–2.048–51	Cation dissolution
CoF2	Poor32,39	2.80	21	0.8–2.032,45	Cation dissolution32
CuF2	Poor39,40	3.55	11.6	0.8–1.040,46,90	Cation dissolution40,90
NiF2	Insulator35,39	2.96	28.3	1.0–2.052,53	Cation dissolution
BiF3	Insulator35,39	3.18	1.76	0.4–1.547,74	Cation dissolution74
LiF	Insulator26,39	—	—	—	Partially soluble
FeCl3	Poor	2.83	22.6	—	Soluble54
FeCl2	Poor	2.41	19.9	1.0–1.555	Soluble54
CoCl2	Poor	2.59	23	1.056	Soluble54
NiCl2	Poor	2.64	30.3	—	Soluble54
CuCl2	Poor	3.17	21.1	1.0–1.554	Soluble54
AgCl	Poor	2.93	19.4	∼0.354	Insoluble54
LiCl	Poor	—	—	—	Soluble54
S	Insulator 5 × 10−2828	2.28	79	0.1–0.429,44,57	Soluble intermediates79
Li2S	Insulator,37 1 × 10−1338	2.28	−45	0.1–0.331,58,59	Soluble intermediates78
Se	Semiconductor 1 × 10−328	2.07	98.0	0.1–0.428,60–63	Soluble intermediates60,83
Li2Se	Poor	2.07	−50	0.1–0.430	Soluble intermediates30
Te	Semiconductor 2 × 10236	1.86	104.7	0.2–0.536,64,84	Soluble intermediates84
Li2Te	Poor	1.86	−52	—	Soluble intermediates
I2	1 × 10−7	2.82	49.3	0.243,65	Soluble43
LiI	Poor	2.82	−33	—	Soluble43
Br2	1 × 10−10	3.63	—	—	Soluble93
LiBr	Poor	3.63	2.7	∼0.1108	Soluble93

 	Fig. 8  Typical charge–discharge profiles of selected conversion type cathodes. Part (a) reproduced from ref. 58, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; part (b) reproduced from ref. 43, with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry; part (c) reproduced from ref. 40, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society; part (d) reproduced from ref. 54, Copyright 2012 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Comparison between HOMO/LUMO levels of typical electrolyte solvents and electron energy levels associated with conversion cathode reduction–oxidation reactions.	 

 	Fig. 10  Examples of opportunities and challenge related to the reaction(s) between electrolytes and conversion-type cathodes: (a) oxidation of DME by LiI additives at around 3.0 V vs. Li/Li+ may assist in the formation of protective SEI that reduces cathode dissolution [reproduced from ref. 31, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim]; (b) reduction of LiFSI similarly leads to the formation of protective SEI that was demonstrated to successfully reduce the dissolution of S-based and FeF2-based cathodes [reproduced from ref. 89 and 96, Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim]; (c) high LiFSI salt concentration may further enhance reduction kinetics resulting in large volume of the protective SEI, which enhances cell stability but may reduce rate performance [reproduced from ref. 89, Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim]; (d) undesirable side reactions between metal halides and electrolytes: nanometal catalyzed reduction of carbonates may lead to poor performance of metal halide cathodes [reproduced from ref. 74, with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 11  General strategies for enhancement of the performance of cells comprising conversion-type cathode materials: (a) optimization of the architecture, microstructure, size and composition of active particles to achieve enhanced rate performance and stability, while minimizing undesirable interactions with electrolytes; (b) optimization of the electrolyte composition in order to prevent or mitigate cathode dissolution and minimize formation of undesirable species upon electrolyte decomposition; (d) specification of safe battery operation regimes and optimization of the cell construction, such as the tuning properties of electrodes to achieve the desired ionic and electronic conductivities as well as mechanical stability at the electrode level and introduction of additional functional elements (such as use of interlayer or separator barrier coatings or neutralizing species, etc.) that mitigate negative impacts of undesirable reactions.	 

 	Fig. 12  Example of an impact of conversion materials comprising composite particle architecture on stresses within protective coatings and electrochemical stability: (a) higher stresses within a carbon shell upon Li extraction from Li2S in the case of simple core–shell particles in comparison with hierarchical composite core–shell particles; (b) improved electrochemical stability of hierarchical composite core–shell C–Li2S–C particles in comparison with simple Li2S–TiS2 and Li2S–C core shell particles. Part (a) reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 13  Example of an impact of particle composition on electrochemical performance: (a) schematic illustration of the asymmetric reaction pathway in Cu0.5Fe0.5F2 and (b) comparison of the charge and discharge hysteresis in FeF2 and Cu0.5Fe0.5F2 electrodes, showing reduced voltage hysteresis in the later. Part (a and b) reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  Examples of impacts of electrolyte modifications on electrochemical stability of S-based cathodes: (a) impact of the lithium iodide additive on the stability of the Li2S cathode; (b) the use of Li3PS4 as a solid-state electrolyte for Li–S batteries. Part (a) reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Part (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 15  Examples of the modified electrode level architecture: (a) an additional protective layer on the cathode surface in Li–S batteries and (b) the use of a bifunctional binder of gum arabic in Li–S batteries; part (a) reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Part (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 248. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee02326f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
