Microfluidic photoelectrocatalytic reactors for water purification with an integrated visible-light source   - Lab on a Chip (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2LC40428A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2LC40428A
(Paper)
Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 3983-3990Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMicrofluidic photoelectrocatalytic reactors for water purification with an integrated visible-light source†

        
          
            Ning 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xuming 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Bolei 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wuzhou 
            Song
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ngai Yui 
            Chan
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Helen L. W. 
            Chan
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Applied Physics and Materials Research Center, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, People's Republic of China. E-mail: xuming.zhang@inet.polyu.edu.hk;  Fax: 852 23337629;   Tel: 852 34003258
bOptics Laboratory (LO), Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
Received 
      28th April 2012
    , Accepted 24th July 2012First published on 27th July 2012AbstractThis paper reports experimental studies using the photoelectrocatalytic effect to eliminate a fundamental limit of photocatalysis – the recombination of photo-excited electrons and holes. The fabricated reactor has a planar reaction chamber (10 × 10 × 0.1 mm3), formed by a blank indium tin oxide glass slide, an epoxy spacer and a BiVO4-coated indium tin oxide glass substrate. A blue light-emitting diode panel (emission area 10 × 10 mm2) is mounted on the cover for uniform illumination of the reaction chamber. In the experiment, positive and negative bias potentials were applied across the reaction chamber to suppress the electron/hole recombination and to select either the hole-driven or electron-driven oxidation pathway. The negative bias always exhibits higher performance. It is observed that under −1.8 V the degradation rate is independent of the residence time, showing that the accompanying electrolysis can solve the oxygen deficiency problem. The synergistic effect of photocatalysis and electrocatalysis is observed to reach its maximum under the bias potential of ± 1.5 V. The photoelectrocatalytic microreactor shows high stability and may be scaled up for high-performance water purification.
1. Introduction
Photocatalytic water purification has attracted intensive research but suffers from limited photoreaction efficiency.1–3 In the previous studies,4–6 we have found that microfluidics (and its new sub-area, optofluidics) helps solve two fundamental problems of photocatalytic water purification – the mass transfer limit and the photon transfer limit.7–11 This is because microfluidic reactors have intrinsic merits such as fine flow control, large surface area-to-volume ratio and direct delivery of light to the reaction surface. For instance, the surface area-to-volume ratio in the microreactors is typically in the range of 10000–30000 m2 m−3,10–14 as compared <600 m2 m−3 usually found in the bulky reactors.15–17 For these reasons, the reaction rate constant of the microfluidic reactors can be 100 times larger than that in the bulky reactors4,12 and significant degradation of the contaminants can be achieved within a few seconds in contrast to typically several hours in bulky reactors.15–17
Even in the microreactors, the apparent photonic efficiency (defined as the ratio of the number of photons that participate in photodegradation to the number of total incoming photons) is still quite low, e.g., <25% for TiO2 under UV light,4 ∼3% for BiVO4 under blue light.6 One of the fundamental reasons is the recombination of the photo-excited electrons and holes. To solve this problem, a direct approach is to introduce an external bias electric field to force the separation of the electrons and holes, which leads to photoelectrocatalysis (PEC).18
This work will present the working principle of microfluidic PEC and will study the major physical mechanisms. A microfluidic PEC reactor will be fabricated and characterized in detail so as to verify the physical explanations and to examine the influence of different operational conditions.
2. Working principle
The physical principles of microfluidic PEC are represented by the illustrations in Fig. 1, which show the major processes in the reaction chamber of the microreactors. Fig. 1(a) shows the traditional PC process, which has no external bias. The top layer is transparent (e.g., ITO glass), and the substrate is immobilized with a layer of n-type photocatalyst (e.g., P25 TiO2, BiVO4). The electrolyte containing the contaminant organic molecules is in the middle. To initiate the photoreaction, the excited electrons and holes inside the photocatalyst need to migrate to the same electrolyte/photocatalyst interface by a random-walk diffusion process, causing severe recombination problems and low photonic efficiency. This is the fundamental limit of the traditional PC systems.
 Fig. 1  Photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis in the microfluidic reactors. (a) Photocatalysis in the absence of any external potential bias. The photo-excited electrons and holes need to migrate to the electrolyte/catalyst interface and have plenty of chances to recombine in the course of diffusion and on the interface, causing low photodegradation efficiency. Additionally, both of the electrons and the holes can participate the reactions. Here TCO stands for transparent conductive oxide and D for donor. (b) Photoelectrocatalysis in the positive bias state. The induced electric field E forces the photo-excited electrons and holes to separate. The holes are pushed towards the interface and become the dominant sources of oxidation. For an n-type photocatalyst in the positive bias state, its circuit can be represented by a reverse-biased Schottky diode. (c) Photoelectrocatalysis in the negative bias state. The electrons are forced towards the interface and dominate the oxidation. The circuit looks like a forward-biased Schottky diode. (d) When the bias potential is >1.23 V, the electrolysis of O2 can occur and may provide more O2 to capture the electrons, eliminating the O2 deficiency problem. 
The use of a biased electric field could significantly alleviate the recombination problem and thus enhance the photocatalytic efficiency.19,20 There are generally two options: positive bias and negative bias. When a positive bias potential is applied to the reactor (here “positive” means the photocatalyst is connected to the positive side of the external biased potential), it generates an electric field inside the photocatalyst layer and forces the photo-excited electrons and holes to separate (see Fig. 1(b)). In fact, the contact of the electrolyte and the n-type photocatalyst layer forms a Schottky-like diode and builds up an internal field pointing from the photocatalyst to the electrolyte.19,20 From the circuit point of view, the diode is reversely biased. The external and the internal electric field join force to push the holes toward the interface, at which the contaminants can be degraded by the hole-driven pathway, e.g., D + h+ → D+, here D stands for the electron donor.
When a negative bias potential is applied (see Fig. 1(c)), the diode is forward biased and the electrons are driven toward the interface. They can be captured by the dissolved O2 through O2 + e− → O−2, which undergoes further reactions to produce highly oxidative H2O2 and OH* radicals to degrade the contaminants.21 This shows that selective control of oxidation pathways can be obtained by changing the polarity of the bias potential. For decomposing of organic molecules, the electron and O2 oxidation is generally more efficient than the hole-driven oxidation.22 Whereas for the degradation of heavy metal ions (e.g., Hg2+, Cr3+), reduction through electrons is more practical.23
In the PEC process, both PC and EC contribute to the degradation of the organic contaminants. However, the degradation efficiency of PEC is generally larger than the summation of the efficiencies of the PC and the EC. This can be attributed to the synergistic effect of the PC and EC.24,25 At a low bias potential, the synergistic effect is mainly due to the enhanced electron/hole separation. When the bias potential is larger than 1.23 V, the synergistic effect may have an additional contribution from O2 evolution (see Fig. 1(d)). On the ITO anode, O2 can be electrolyzed from water by 2H2O(aq) + 4h+ → O2 + 4H+, here aq means the aqueous phase. In the microreactors, these O2 molecules do not exit as a gas due to the small amount. Instead, they can be diffused onto the photocatalyst surface to participate the PC. The diffusion is efficient because the distance between the ITO anode and the photocatalyst surface is only 100 μm. This feature helps to solve the oxygen deficiency problem in microfluidic PC. Commonly the dissolution of oxygen is low in water and poses a limit to the maximum amount of contaminants that can be degraded. In our previous study, the average degradation rate (i.e., degraded percentage of contaminants divided by the whole reaction time) decreased significantly when the reaction time increased (e.g., from 8% s−1 for the 5s reaction time to 2.5% s−1 for the 36s case).4 The common method to avoid this problem is to add H2O2, or blow in O2 or air. Negatively biased PEC provides an alternative but very efficient method to solve the oxygen deficiency by water electrolysis.
3. Device design
The microfluidic photoelectrocatalytic reactor is shown in Fig. 2. The reactor structure consists of mainly three layers: ITO glass as the cover layer, another ITO glass coating as the substrate and an NOA 81 adhesive layer as the spacer and sealant. A monoclinic BiVO4 (BVO) thin film is deposited on the ITO substrate and acts as the visible-light photocatalyst. To avoid a short circuit, a SiO2 insulation layer is deposited on the ITO substrate, part of which is exposed to allow direct contact of the BVO layer with the ITO substrate for electrical connection. The external bias potential can be applied through the two ITO glass layers. The water sample is pumped in from the inlet, through the reaction chamber and to the outlet. Tree-branch shaped microchannel arrays (see Fig. 2(a)) are used to lead the flow in and out the reaction chamber. This ensures a uniform flow of the water sample and a maximum contact of the contaminants with the BVO film. Methylene blue (MB) is added into the solution (concentration 3 × 10−5 mol l−1) and is used as the model chemical for characterizing the photoreactivity. MB was chosen as it is a common residual in wastewater from the textile industry, it is widely used as the model chemical for the PC4–6,26,27 and it does not absorb the blue LED light used in this experiment. To improve the conductivity of the water sample, NaCl is added to form the electrolyte (0.001–0.3 mol l−1). A blue-light LED panel is mounted on top of the ITO cover. The use of the blue LED panel has in several merits. For instance, its emission peak is at 402 nm and lies in the high absorption band of the BVO film (absorption edge 500 nm); its flat surface facilitates direct mounting on the microreactor; and its light-emitting area (10 mm × 10 mm) matches the area of the reaction chamber. Compared with the other bulky light sources such as Xenon and mercury lamps, the LED panel has higher electrical efficiency and generates less heat; more importantly, it enables direct and uniform illumination of the reaction chamber, ensuring optimal delivery of photons to the reaction sites. More details of the device fabrication, the test methods and the LED performance are given in the Experimental section.
 Fig. 2  Schematics of the microfluidic photoelectrocatalytic reactor. (a) Three-dimensional diagram; and (b) cross-sectional view of the reaction chamber. The reactor consists of a blank ITO glass layer as the cover, a BVO-coated ITO glass layer as the substrate and an NOA81 adhesive layer as the spacer. A blue LED panel is mounted on top of the cover for uniform irradiation of the photocatalytic BVO film. A potential is applied across the two ITO layers to force the separation of photo-excited electrons and holes and to help degrade the contaminants by the electrocatalytic effect. 
The photo of the fabricated microreactor before mounting the LED panel is shown in Fig. 3. The overall footprint is 4 cm × 2.5 cm (not including the full lengths of the tubes and the wires). The reaction chamber is 10 mm × 10 mm × 100 μm (chamber volume 10 μl). Two syringe needles are used as the inlet and outlet. The yellow region is the BVO4 film and the light brown regions on the ITO glass slides are Au pads deposited to extract the electrodes conveniently. The tree-branch shaped microchannels can be visualized from Fig. 3 as well.
 Fig. 3  Photo of the photoelectrocatalytic microreactor. The BiVO4 film is at the bottom of the reaction chamber, and the tree branch-shaped microchannels connect the inlet and the outlet to the reaction chamber and ensure the solution flows uniformly. 
4. Results and discussions
4.1 Effect of external bias potential
For the degradation of MB, the oxidizing reactions in the degradation process play the dominant role. Fig. 4 plots the MB degradation as a function of the bias potential. In the first order, MB concentration C can be expressed as C = C0exp(−kt), that is, ln(C0/C) = kt, here ln is the logarithm of natural base, k is the reaction rate constant, t is the effective reaction time (equivalent to the residence time in the microreactor), and C0 represents the initial MB concentration. For this reason, the vertical axis of Fig. 4 uses the degradation exponent ln (C0/C). The upper panel of Fig. 4 shows photos of the degraded MB samples under different potentials. The insets of Fig. 4 show the test configurations.
 Fig. 4  Degradation of methylene blue as a function of the positive and the negative bias potentials. The square dots represent the data points measured in dark environment, the degradation is purely due to the electrocatalytic effect. The round dots represent those with blue light irradiation, the degradation is due to the combination of photocatalysis and electrocatalysis. The photos on the top panel show the raw samples of methylene blue solutions and the degraded samples under different bias potentials. The insets in the bottom panel illustrate the test configurations. 
In the experiment, the bias potential is changed from −2.2 to 0 V (the negative bias state) and then from 0 to 2.2 V (the positive bias state). The power density is maintained at 80 mW cm−2 (driven at 10 V). At this level, the LED panel does not heat up significantly (temperature increase <5 °C) and avoids the influence of heat on the photocatalytic efficiency. The flow rate is set to 75 μl min−1, corresponding to the flow velocity of 1.25 mm s−1 and a residence time of 8 s. For comparison, MB degradation for both the dark environment and blue light irradiation are measured. In the dark environment, MB degradation is purely due to EC. With blue light, the degradation at 0 V is purely due to PC. For the other bias potentials, the degradation is due to PEC. The data points and the error bars in Fig. 4 represent the averaged values and the standard deviations of four measurements, respectively.
To read the curves in Fig. 4 properly, one may recall that the degradation exponent ln(C0/C) is equivalent to k when t is fixed. In the two curves for the dark environment, the degradation exponent stays at nearly 0 when the magnitude of the bias potential is smaller than 0.8 V and then increases exponentially. This can be understood from the Butler-Volmer formulation,28 k = k0exp[A(V − Veq)](1)
where k0 is the standard rate constant, A is related to the transfer coefficient, and V and Veq represent the electrode potential and the equilibrium potential, respectively. Here Veq = 0.8 V is the electrochemical potential of hydrogen evolution from water by the reaction 2H2O + 2 e− + 0.8 V(SHE) → H2(g) + 2OH−, where g means the gaseous phase and V(SHE) means the potential relative to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE).
By comparing the two curves of the dark environment, one can see that the negative bias state presents a faster degradation than the positive bias state. This is because the negative bias state corresponds to a forward biasing of the electrolyte/BVO Schottky diode and has a larger current for the EC (see Fig. 1(b) and (c)).
For the two curves with the blue light in Fig. 4, the degradation exponent increases rapidly when the magnitude of the bias potential is increased from 0 to 2.2 V. However, a kink is observed at 1.5 V, beyond which the increase of degradation exponent is lowered. Under the blue light, the negative bias state has higher degradation than the positive bias state too. One of the reasons is that EC in the negative bias state is higher, similar to that in the dark environment. Another reason is that the electron and O2 oxidation in the negative bias state is generally more efficient than the hole-driven oxidation in the positive bias state, as already discussed above. One more contribution might come from the chloride ions in the electrolyte. It has been found that the chloride ions reduce the photocatalytic efficiency by competing for the surface active sites and by scavenging holes to form weaker oxidative chloride radicals.29,30 Under the positive bias, the chloride ions are attracted to the photocatalyst surface and scavenge the holes, deteriorating the photodegradation of MB. In contrast, the negative bias potential pushes the chloride ions away from the photocatalyst surface and circumvents such problems.
It is noted that PEC studies in the literature mostly utilized the positive bias (also called “anodic bias” in literature) to go for the hole-driven oxidation and they often chose a low bias voltage so as to avoid the electrochemical oxidation of the targeted organics and the influence of other complicated electrochemical reactions.31–34 A few recent studies on high-voltage PEC systems utilized slurry or slurry-like reactors, which in principle have no performance difference under positive or negative bias.24,25 For these reasons, negative bias is not very popular. On the other hand, the contribution of electrolyzed O2 requires a short diffusion length (<100 μm). This is not effective in the conventional bulky reactors and works only in the planar microreactors. From this point of view, the negative bias is meaningful only in PEC microreactors and the accompanying O2 generation is a unique feature of PEC microreactors.
4.2 Effect of the synergistic effect
The synergistic effect of EC and PC is worth further study and is plotted in Fig. 5. It can be defined by removing the electrocatalytic and photocatalytic effects from the whole photoelectrocatalytic effect, (2)
 Fig. 5  Synergistic effect of photocatalysis and electrocatalysis under positive and negative bias potentials. 
It can be observed from Fig. 5 that both the positive and the negative bias state exhibit maximum synergistic effect when the magnitude of bias potential reaches 1.5 V.
For the synergistic effect, though it has been reported in literature,24,25 its physical origin is still not very clear. An and his co-workers studied the PEC degradation of MB using TiO2 under UV irradiation and attributed the synergistic effect to the conversion of H2O2 to the ˙OH radical.26 Based on that and our further experimental study, we attempt to explain the synergistic effect in our PEC microreactor. On the anode side, there are H2O − 2e− → 2˙OH + 2H+ and MB + ˙OH → product. These account for the EC oxidation through the ˙OH radical. On the cathode side, there are O2 + e− → O−2and O−2 + e− + 2H+ → 2H2O2, and then H2O2 can oxidize MB. The electrons could come from the photo-excitation or from an external bias with sufficient potential difference (>0.7 V), or even the photo-excited electrons could be affected by the bias. In this way, the external bias could affect the PC. This might be one of the origins of the synergistic effect. In addition, the external bias could affect the conversion of H2O2 to other oxidative species, for instance, H2O2 → 2˙OH and H2O2 → HO˙2 + H+ + e−. This might be another origin of the synergistic effect.
The reasons for the occurrence of maximum synergistic effect at the specific potential of 1.5 V might be attributed to two reasons. One is that at 1.5 V the photo-excited electrons and holes are fully separated and the enhancement effect is maximised. The resistance of the 0.1 mol l−1 electrolyte is about 100 Ω and the resistance of the reaction chamber (including both the electrolyte and the BVO film) is about 1 MΩ. Therefore, most of the potential drop occurs on the BVO film. By estimation, the electric field reaches as high as 10 kV cm−1 when 1.5 V is applied across the 1.5 μm BVO layer. This is pretty strong for separating the electrons and holes. This effect has been often adopted to explain the maximum synergistic effect in slurry reactors.25
The other reason might be the start of H2O2 conversion to HO2˙ by the reaction H2O2(aq) + 1.51 V(SHE) → HO2˙ + H+ + e−. This is merely our speculation. Little supporting information can be found in literature,24,25 maybe because of the low bias condition of most of the previous PEC studies and the complication of various electrochemical reactions under the high bias potential. We have conducted cyclic voltammetric measurements of our microreactor in a dark environment and have observed the external current peaks at about ± 1.5 V. This indicates there is some strong electrochemical reaction at 1.5 V. Since H2O2 surely exists in the PEC and the value of 1.5 V is very close to the electrochemical potential 1.51 V of the H2O2 decomposition, it looks reasonable to attribute the electrochemical reaction at about 1.5 V to H2O2 decomposition.
4.3 Effect of flow rate
In the microreactor system, the flow rate is one of the major factors that affects the degradation efficiency. The flow rate is related to the effective residence time (i.e., the reaction time) of the MB solution in the reaction chamber by the relationship (3)
To investigate the effect of the flow rate, the solutions are pumped at 75, 100, 125, 150, 200 μl min−1, respectively. The corresponding effective residence time (i.e., the reaction time) is 8, 6, 4.8, 4 and 3 s, respectively. The blue-light LED maintains a power density of 80 mW cm−2, the magnitude of the bias potential is fixed at 1.8 V and the NaCl concentration is 0.1 mol l−1.
The degradation percentage (1−C0/C) is plotted in Fig. 6 as a function of the residence time. It is seen that the negative bias state (the blue solid line) always has a higher degradation than the positive bias state (the black dashed line). Another important feature is that the degradation percentage increases linearly with the residence time. The slope represents the degradation rate (i.e., the change of degraded percentage in 1 s). It is 5.2% s−1 for the negative bias state and 4.7% s−1 for the positive bias state. One of the preconditions for such linearity in the negative bias state is the sufficiency of O2. This verifies our prediction that the electrolysis of water can solve the O2 deficiency problem (here the applied 1.8 V is sufficiently high to electrolyse O2 from water). Such linear dependence is a signature of the PEC.
 Fig. 6  Degradation of the methylene blue as a function of the residence time. This shows the influence of the flow rate. The linear dependence of the degradation on the residence time is a distinctive feature of microfluidic photoelectrocatalysis. 
It is worth noting that the degradation rate 5.2% s−1 is not the upper limit. It is measured at a relative weak power density 80 mW cm−2 (the LED driving voltage 10 V). When the LED is driven at 11 V and emits 140 mW cm−2, the degradation rate is increased by more than 2 times. Part of the increase comes from the increased power density. A more significant contribution comes from the increased temperature. At 10 V, the temperature of the LED is almost the room temperature; whereas at 11 V, the LED heats up by more than 30 °C.
The reaction rate constant can be derived from the slope of the curve ln(C0/C) vs. t, here t is the residence time. Approximate calculation using the data in Fig. 6 shows that the negative bias state has reaction rate constant k = 0.102 s−1 while the positive bias has k = 0.064 s−1. Under the same residence time, k of the negative bias is about 1.6 times of that of the positive bias.
4.4 Effect of NaCl concentration
In the above experiments, the concentration of NaCl CNaCl is fixed at 0.1 mol l−1. To investigate the influence of CNaCl, the degradation exponent ln(C0/C) is measured for CNaCl = 0.001 to 0.3 mol l−1. The flow rate is maintained at 75 μl min−1 and the power density at 80 mW cm−2. It is found that ln(C0/C) rises up quickly at low concentration and tends to saturate after 0.02 mol l−1. This trend is reasonable. At low concentrations, charge transport in the electrolyte is the limiting factor of the EC. At high concentrations, the charge transport is sufficient to maximize the EC and the overall reaction rate constant goes to saturation.
4.5 Stability, test speed and process volume
The microreactor exhibits amazing stability over the repeated testing. For instance, to generate the data points only for Fig. 4, the test needs to be repeated for more than 100 times, and the microreactor remains at almost similar performance. This is really impressive as compared to many bulky reactors, in which the performance can be maintained only for a few cycles.27 Such high stability might be attributed to the self-refreshing property of the microreactor. In the experiment, the solution flows quickly over the BVO film, flushes away the reaction products and refreshes the reaction sites. These would significantly reduce the poisoning of the BVO film. Such high stability is another very useful merit of the microreactor.
The testing speed using the microreactor is pretty fast. It can be seen from Fig. 6 that significant degradation can be obtained within a few seconds. Assuming the flow rate is 200 μl min−1 and the UV-vis spectroscopic measurement requires a sample volume of 1 ml, it takes only 5 min to conduct one run of the test. This is very fast as compared to the typical testing time of a few hours using the bulky reactors.15–17 From this point of view, the microreactors can be used for rapid characterization of photocatalysts and for study of the reaction kinetics/pathways.
The limited process volume of the microreactors is a big concern for practical applications. For instance, the PEC reactor has a reaction chamber volume of only 10 μl. If the solution is pumped at 200 μl min−1, the process volume is only 0.12 l h−1. However, the dimensions of the microreactor can be scaled up without affecting the mass transfer. Assuming the reaction chamber has a surface area S and a height H, the flow rate is Q=SH/t. To maintain the same level of mass transfer, H/t is kept constant. As a result, Q scales up with S. Assume the PEC microreactor is scaled up by 100 times to have a surface area of 1 m × 1 m, the process volume is scaled up by 10000 times to 1.2 m3 h−1. This would be sufficient for many small-scale applications like domestic uses and field water supplies. And, an array of such reactors could further increase the overall process volume.
Conclusions
In this work, we have demonstrated that photoelectrocatalytic microreactors could solve a fundamental problem of the photocatalytic water purification—the recombination of photo-excited electrons and holes. Moreover, they enable the selective control of reaction pathways and the synergistic effect of PC and EC. And, the problem of oxygen deficiency can be eliminated by the accompanying water electrolysis under the bias potential. The great advantages of the microfluidics for photocatalytic water purification may encourage the studies of microfluidics for other photocatalytic processes such as photoreduction of CO2 and heavy metal ions, photosynthesis, water splitting and air purification.
Experimental
1. Material and instruments
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O (AR, >99.9%) and NH4VO3 (AR, >99.9%) were purchased from Shanghai Chemical Reagent Co. Polydimethysiloxane (PDMS, DC184) was purchased from Dow Corning Co. The optical adhesive (NOA81) was purchased from Norland Products. Other chemicals including methylene blue (MB) reagent, polyethylene glycol (PEG 20000), detergent (Triton X-100) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. MB solutions with different concentrations were prepared by dissolving the reagent in deionized water. The blue-light LED panel was purchased from Shenzhen Getian Co.
Standard UV lithography was used to fabricate the PDMS mold and the UV lamp to cure the NOA 81 adhesive. Characterization of the synthesized BVO nanoparticles was conducted using field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) (Bruker, D8 Advanced), X-ray diffraction (XRD) (JEOL, JSM-633F) and UV-vis spectrophotometer (UV-2550, Shimadzu). To examine the concentration change between the original and the degraded MB solution, the absorption spectra were analyzed by the same UV-vis spectrophotometer.
2. Fabrication of BiVO4 nanoparticles and thin film
Nanosized BVO particles were synthesized by a solid-phase precipitation preparation method assisted with ultrasonic agitation. First, aqueous solutions of Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and NH4VO3 in 1:1 molar ratio were mixed. The pH value of the final suspension was adjusted to about 7 by adding NH3·H2O. Then, the mixture was stirred for 1 h at room temperature. Afterward, the mixture was subject to ultrasonic agitation (100 W) at room temperature in the open air for several hours. Next, the yellow precipitates were centrifuged, washed by de-ionized water and absolute ethanol, and then dried at 60 °C in air for 10 h. The obtained powders were subsequently calcined at 450 °C for 2 h to produce crystalline products, and then ground up for preparation of the BVO film.
The fabrication and assembly of the microfluidic photocatalytic reactor is more complicated than that of previous microreactors4,6 because of the necessity to provide proper electrical connection and insulation. Before making BVO thin film, a SiO2 layer (200 nm) was deposited on an ITO substrate by magnetron sputtering. A window of 9 mm × 9 mm is opened at the center of the SiO2 film. To fabricate the BVO thin film, the ground BVO powders (6 g) were slowly dispersed in deionized water (60 ml) containing acetylacetone (0.2 ml) to prevent reaggregation of the particles. Then, Triton X-100 (0.1 ml) was added to spread the colloid on the substrate. Next, PEG 20000 (0.6 g) was added into the aqueous solution under ultrasonic agitation for about 2 h. As a result, the catalyst colloid was formed. Following the manual painting method in ref. 4 the BVO colloid was painted onto the SiO2 open window of the ITO glass and then dried at 80 °C. Finally, the BVO thin film (10 mm × 10 mm) was annealed under 500 °C for 2 h in air. The SiO2 window ensured the electrical connection of the ITO cover and the ITO substrate in the reaction chamber region and avoided the short circuit of the ITO layers through the electrolyte in the other regions, e.g., the tree-branch microchannels. To obtain a microreactor, the NOA 81 spacer was fabricated and then assembled with the BVO-coated substrate and the ITO cover. The procedures were similar to those reported in our previous work.4,6
3. Characterization of the BiVO4 thin film
The phase and composition of the BVO sample were characterized by XRD. The diffraction peaks agreed well with those of the pure monoclinic BVO according to JCPDS No. 14-0688. Therefore, the synthesized nanosized BVO was in pure monoclinic phase that possessed high photoreactivity.
UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectrum (DRS) of the synthesized nanosized BVO samples showed that the BVO had strong absorption in the visible light region (<500 nm) and in the UV light region. The absorbance at 402 nm was 86% of the peak absorbance at 284 nm. This implied that the blue-light LED panel (emission at 402 nm) could be used as the photocatalytic light source.
The morphology and microstructure of the BVO samples were investigated by scanning electron microscopy. It was composed of porous structure and nanosized particles with an average size of about 80–100 nm. The thickness was about 1.5 μm, which was chosen for high photoreactivity. Through experimental studies, we found that the photoreactivity increased with the BVO film thickness and tended to saturate for the thickness >600 nm. This is reasonable since the photocatalytic reaction only occurred on the photocatalyst surface. The thickness of 1.5 μm was sufficient to ensure the BVO film worked at its best performance.
4. Power density of LED panel
The LED panel was driven by a DC power supplier and its optical properties were characterized. The light intensity of the LED was measured by a Reference Solar Cell and Meter (91150 V, Newport) and the emission wavelength was measured by an integrating sphere (Labsphere). The emission power density P increased linearly with the driving voltage V, following the relationship P = 65.7(V − 8.8), where P is in the unit of mW cm−2, V in volts. In the emission spectrum of the LED, a single peak appears at 402 nm with a linewidth of 20 nm. The stability of the LED panel was also tested and the result showed a decrease of the power density by <2% in about 2 h.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by The Research Grants Council (RGC) of Hong Kong through the General Research Fund (project no. PolyU B-Q26F). The authors would like to acknowledge The Hong Kong Polytechnic University for the grants 1-ZV5K, A-PM21 and A-PL16.
References
M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis and B. J. Mariňas, Nature, 2008, 452, 301–310 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Gogate and A. B. Pandit, Adv. Environ. Res., 2004, 8, 501–551 CrossRef CAS .

          D. F. Ollis and H. Al-Ekabi (ed.), Photocatalytic Purification and Treatment of Water and Air, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1993 Search PubMed .
L. Lei, N. Wang, X. M. Zhang, Q. D. Tai, D. P. Tsai and L.W. C. Helen, Biomicrofluidics, 2010, 4, 043004 CrossRef .
N. Wang, L. Lei, X. M. Zhang, Y. H. Tsang, Y. Chen and H. L.W. Chan, Microelectron. Eng., 2011, 88, 2797–2799 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Y. P. Zhang, H. L. W. Chan and X. M. Zhang, Photocatalytic microreactor using monochromatic visible light, Adv. Mater. Res., 2011, 254, 219–222 CrossRef CAS .

          D. F. Ollis and H. Al-Ekabi (ed.), Photocatalytic Purification and Treatment of Water and Air, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1993 Search PubMed .
K. Mehrotra, G. S. Yablonsky and A. K. Ray, Chemosphere, 2005, 60, 1427–1436 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, F. Li and A. K. Ray, AIChE J., 2000, 46, 1034–1045 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gorges, S. Meyer and G. Kreisel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 167, 95–99 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lindstrom, R. Wootton and A. Iles, AIChE J., 2007, 53, 695–702 CrossRef CAS .
G. Takei, T. Kitamori and H. B. Kim, Catal. Commun., 2005, 6, 357–360 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, M. A. Schmidt and K. F. Jensen, Lab Chip, 2001, 1, 22–28 RSC .
R. C. R. Wootton, R. Fortt and A. J. de Mello, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2002, 6, 187–189 CrossRef CAS .
T. Oyama, A. Aoshima, S. Horikoshi, H. Hidaka, J. Zhao and N. Serpone, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 525–532 CrossRef CAS .
D. Robert and S. Malato, Sci. Total Environ., 2002, 291, 85–97 CrossRef CAS .
S. Malato, J. Blanco, A. Vidal, D. Alarcón, M. I. Maldonado, J. Cáceres and W. Gernjak, Sol. Energy, 2003, 75, 329–336 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. Chen and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5089–5121 RSC .
D. Wei and G. Amaratunga, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2007, 2, 897–912 Search PubMed .
H. S. Hilal and J. A. Turner, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 6487–6497 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chandrasekharan and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 104, 2228–2258 Search PubMed .
J. C. Colmenares, R. Luque, J. M. Campelo, F. Colmenares, Z. Karpiński and A. A. Romero, Materials, 2009, 2, 2228–2258 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hegyi and O. Horváth, Progress Colloid Polymer Sci., 2004, 125, 10–16 CAS .
T. C. An, X. H. Zhu, Y. Xiong and S. J. Jiang, Chem. J. Internet, 2001, 3, 42–46 Search PubMed .
T. C. An, Y. Xiong, G. Y. Li, C. H. Zha and X. H. Zhu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 152, 155–165 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. An, X. H. Zhu and Y. Xiong, Chemosphere, 2002, 46, 897–903 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhou, X. Zhao, H. J. Liu, J. H. Qu and C. P. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 99, 214–223 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods – Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, New York, USA,  1980 Search PubMed .
T. C. An, W. B. Zhang, X. M. Xiao, G. Y. Sheng, J. M. Fu and X. H. Zhu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 161, 233–242 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Burns, J. C. Crittenden, D. W. Hand, V. H. Selzer, L. L. Sutter and S. R. Salman, J. Environ. Eng., 1999, 125, 77–85 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Candal, W. A. Zeltner and M. A. Anderson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 3443–3451 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pelegrini, P. Perqlta-Zamora, A. R. de Andrade, J. Reyes and N. Durán, Appl. Catal., B, 1999, 22, 83–90 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Leng, Z. Zhang and J. Q. Zhang, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 206, 239–252 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Qin, Q. P. Wu, Z. Sun, Y. Wang, J. Z. Luo and S. Xue, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 199–200, 226–232 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Published as part of a themed issue dedicated to Emerging InvestigatorsThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis in the microfluidic reactors. (a) Photocatalysis in the absence of any external potential bias. The photo-excited electrons and holes need to migrate to the electrolyte/catalyst interface and have plenty of chances to recombine in the course of diffusion and on the interface, causing low photodegradation efficiency. Additionally, both of the electrons and the holes can participate the reactions. Here TCO stands for transparent conductive oxide and D for donor. (b) Photoelectrocatalysis in the positive bias state. The induced electric field E forces the photo-excited electrons and holes to separate. The holes are pushed towards the interface and become the dominant sources of oxidation. For an n-type photocatalyst in the positive bias state, its circuit can be represented by a reverse-biased Schottky diode. (c) Photoelectrocatalysis in the negative bias state. The electrons are forced towards the interface and dominate the oxidation. The circuit looks like a forward-biased Schottky diode. (d) When the bias potential is >1.23 V, the electrolysis of O2 can occur and may provide more O2 to capture the electrons, eliminating the O2 deficiency problem.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematics of the microfluidic photoelectrocatalytic reactor. (a) Three-dimensional diagram; and (b) cross-sectional view of the reaction chamber. The reactor consists of a blank ITO glass layer as the cover, a BVO-coated ITO glass layer as the substrate and an NOA81 adhesive layer as the spacer. A blue LED panel is mounted on top of the cover for uniform irradiation of the photocatalytic BVO film. A potential is applied across the two ITO layers to force the separation of photo-excited electrons and holes and to help degrade the contaminants by the electrocatalytic effect.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photo of the photoelectrocatalytic microreactor. The BiVO4 film is at the bottom of the reaction chamber, and the tree branch-shaped microchannels connect the inlet and the outlet to the reaction chamber and ensure the solution flows uniformly.	 

 	Fig. 4  Degradation of methylene blue as a function of the positive and the negative bias potentials. The square dots represent the data points measured in dark environment, the degradation is purely due to the electrocatalytic effect. The round dots represent those with blue light irradiation, the degradation is due to the combination of photocatalysis and electrocatalysis. The photos on the top panel show the raw samples of methylene blue solutions and the degraded samples under different bias potentials. The insets in the bottom panel illustrate the test configurations.	 
k = k0exp[A(V − Veq)]	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 5  Synergistic effect of photocatalysis and electrocatalysis under positive and negative bias potentials.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 6  Degradation of the methylene blue as a function of the residence time. This shows the influence of the flow rate. The linear dependence of the degradation on the residence time is a distinctive feature of microfluidic photoelectrocatalysis.	 
Footnote
† Published as part of a themed issue dedicated to Emerging Investigators

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
