Mechanical-load and temperature-engendered degradation of α-CsPbI 3 : reactive molecular dynamics simulation   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC02298B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02298B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 12091-12105Mechanical-load and temperature-engendered degradation of α-CsPbI3: reactive molecular dynamics simulation†

        
          
            Sunil 
            Kumar
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Trilochan 
            Mishra
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ranjan K. 
            Sahu
          
        
      *
      CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 831007, Jharkhand, India. E-mail: sunil@nmlindia.org; rksahu@nmlindia.org
Received 
      2nd June 2022
    , Accepted 28th July 2022First published on 29th July 2022AbstractInorganic halide perovskite materials are widely used to make efficient solar cells; however, they have a number of stability issues. Furthermore, due to the inadequate spatiotemporal resolution in experimental tests, the impact of mechanical-load and temperature-induced stresses on the degradation mechanism of halide perovskite materials is poorly understood. Here, we investigate the effect of mechanical and temperature-induced stresses on the degradation of the cubic (α) perovskite CsPbI3 using reactive molecular dynamics. As per the detailed investigation, major structural degradation of α-CsPbI3 was observed at around a temperature of T = 850 K. As a result, we evaluated the structural stability and subsequent relaxation over a wide range of temperatures (T = 300 K to 800 K) and external loads (Fz = 0.007 pN to 35 pN) applied along the z-axis. The number of dissociating bonds (ξ) in the structure is calculated to be in the following order at Fz = 1.74 pN and T = 300 K: ξ(Pb—I,Pb–Pb) > ξ(Cs–Cs,I–I,Cs–Pb) > ξ(Cs–I). Furthermore, the ξ value of these bonds is found to be in inverse order with temperature. Moreover, it shows a saw-tooth or stick-slip pattern during bond dissociation at T = 300 K and low pulling force (<0.07 pN). It is also observed that the impact of applied force along the z-axis differs from that along the x-axis. We also investigated the bond dissociation and formation of all connected bonds over a wide range of applied forces and temperatures, as well as the subsequent relaxation process, to better understand the feasibility of restoring the perovskite structure of degraded products. The data show that, during the relaxation of the applied force and at high temperatures, the dissociated atoms of the structure aggregate and the degraded products are unable to reform the perovskite structure. We anticipate that our findings will help researchers better grasp the stability of perovskite materials under external-load and temperature-driven stresses.
1. Introduction
Inorganic halide perovskite materials of the general formula AMX3 (where A is a monovalent cation, M is a bivalent cation and X is a monovalent anion) are considered to be efficient materials for the fabrication of next generation photovoltaic cells owing to their long-carrier diffusion length (>1.5 μm) and high carrier mobility (270 ± 44 cm2 V−1 s−1).1–7 The power efficiency of these perovskite based cells has reached a value of 23.3%. Among inorganic perovskite materials, α-CsPbI3 has received considerable attention because of its (a) acceptable band gap (1.73 eV) for tandem solar cells, (b) potential optoelectronic features, and (c) high absorption coefficient.8 However, the structure of α-CsPbI3 fails to withstand external loads and temperatures due to the following underlying factors: low tolerance factor (0.81), vaporization-induced defect formation, transformation of the corner-sharing configuration of [PbI6]4− octahedra to face-sharing configuration, modification in mixing contribution of constituted orbitals in chemical bond formation, low shear modulus (7.9 GPa) and low Young's modulus (20.1 GPa).9 As a result, the material becomes more fragile when subjected to external mechanical and thermal loads, lowering the efficiency and life of α-CsPbI3 based solar cells significantly. Understanding the impact of these stresses on the associated chemical bonds of α-CsPbI3 is therefore critical for improving its stability and developing stress-tolerant solar cells.
In an actual device, the perovskite layer is placed between the transport and window layers. It is reported that the thermal expansion coefficient of the perovskite material (CTE ∼ 50 × 10−6 K−1) is nearly five times higher than those of the other device layers and glass substrate (CTE ∼ 10 × 10−6 K−1).10 Hence, stress is inevitably generated during processing of the device caused by mismatch of the thermal expansion coefficient of layered materials and defect formation. Furthermore, when a solar cell is placed on a flexible substrate and bent, it causes stress.11–15 In addition, solar cells are exposed to inclement outdoor conditions where thermo-mechanical stress drives the degradation of the material.16–19 Some theoretical and experimental studies have been conducted in the past to better understand the chemical stability of the structure against degradation under mechanical and temperature stresses. Jong et al.20 used first-principles thermodynamics to investigate the pressure- and temperature-driven chemical instability of α-CsPbI3. They showed that the structure is stable in the external load range of 0–4 GPa and the temperature range of 0–600 K based on Gibbs free energy data. Rolston et al.21 studied the effect of tensile strain on the thermal and moisture stability of halide perovskites. They observed that tensile strain accelerates the deterioration of perovskite films by generating PbI2, but compressive strain preserves their performance. According to Liang et al.,22 applied pressure transforms the ideal cubic structure of CsPbI3 into a distorted structure, and the bond ruptures when the external energy exceeds the bond energy. In a high-temperature study of α-CsPbI3, Marronnier et al.23 observed that anharmonic intermolecular forces play a key role in structural stability. As a result, chemical bonding behaviour under stress is critical for structural stability and the generation of degradation products. Furthermore, Pols et al. found that the temperature-driven phase transformation in α-CsPbI3 occurs due to the combined influence of lattice anharmonicity and thermal entropy.24 They also proposed that the conversion of a perovskite to a non-perovskite occurs as a result of the Cs cation being shifted from its preferential occupied position due to its smaller size than the metal halide framework. In fact, few reports discussed that the degraded products can be reverted to the perovskite phase at moderate temperatures.25 Since bond dissociation and formation of new bonds are the key components for the formation of degradation products, the bond deformation resistance of associated atoms in the structure plays a decisive role in the stability of the material under external forces. However, because Cs and I atoms are linked through ionic bonding, while Pb and I atoms are connected through iono-covalent bonding, the bonding strength of the related atoms of the unit cells in the structure of α-CsPbI3 is not uniform. Therefore, the influence on connected bonds of Pb and Cs atoms under tensile force and temperature-induced stresses is expected to be different due to the heterogeneity in the local chemical bonding of α-CsPbI3. However, no such study has been undertaken in the context of α-CsPbI3 stability by stress-controlled bond rupture. These flaws encourage us to investigate the bond deformation resistance qualities of all the structure's related chemical bonds, as well as the degradation mechanism, under external loads and temperature-driven stresses.
To solve the current challenges relevant to the stress-induced degradation mechanism of α-CsPbI3 at the atomic level, an effective and realistic computational method is required. Among all, the reactive force field (ReaxFF) molecular dynamics simulation method enables us to describe the precise chemical reaction mechanism of several hundreds of atoms based on bond order formalism.26–28 Indeed, Pols et al.24 used the ReaxFF method to study the phase instability and defect-induced degradation of α-CsPbI3 at various temperatures. However, the effect of mechanical pulling forces at different temperatures on the context of bond dissociation has not yet been investigated. Furthermore, it is also unknown how the dissociated atoms are positioned in the structure after the material has degraded under mechanical and temperature-induced stresses. As a result, we aim to use the ReaxFF methodology, both with and without relaxation, to evaluate the deformation resistance of all associated bonds in the structure along the z- and x-axes under mechanical loads and temperatures. To better understand the feasibility of restoring the perovskite structure of degraded products, we also investigated the bond dissociation and formation of all associated bonds under a wide range of applied mechanical loads and temperatures, as well as in the relaxing process. The analysis of α-CsPbI3 interatomic potential data yields a very clear picture of the external-load and thermally-induced degradation mechanism.
2. Reactive molecular dynamics (MD) simulations
Reactive MD simulations are based on the reactive force field (ReaxFF) which can be used to simulate the thermal and mechanical degradation of α-CsPbI3.26–28 It provides exclusive features like the bond-order dependent connectivity (bonds) between the atoms. Moreover, ReaxFF consists of various energy components such as bond energy (EBond), overcoordination energy (Eover), undercoordination energy (Eunder), valence energy (Eval), penalty energy (Epen), torsion energy (Etors), conjugation energy (Econj), van der Waals energy (EvdW) and Coulomb energy (ECoul) as given in eqn (1): Esystem = EBond + Eover + Eunder + Eval + Epen + Etors + Econj + EvdW + ECoul(1)
The parameters for the reactive force field of α-CsPbI3 are obtained from M. Pols et al.24 The governing equation of MD simulations is Newton's equation of motion29–31 as given by eqn (2). The motion of each atom of α-CsPbI3 arises from the sum of the all energy components, and E can be written as given in eqn (2): (2)where m and Fi represent the mass and force on the ith atom. The equation of motion is integrated conferring to the velocity Verlet algorithm32 with a time step of 0.1 fs as shown in eqn (3) and (4): ri(t + Δt) = ri(t) + νi(t)Δt + ½ (Δt)2ai(t + Δt)(3) νi(t + Δt) = νi(t) + ½Δt [ai(t) + ai (t + Δt)](4)Here, ri, vi and ai denote the position, velocity, and acceleration of the ith atom. t and Δt represent the time and time-step during molecular dynamics simulations. The Nose–Hoover thermostat33,34 has been used to maintain the appropriate temperature of the system. LAMMPS,35 OVITO,36 and VMD37 software packages have been used for MD simulations, picturing, and analysis of output data.
The simulation system for the thermal and mechanical degradation of α-CsPbI3 is prepared by multiple replications of an ideal cubic unit of α-CsPbI3 as shown in Fig. 1(a and b). The cif file of the ideal cubic structure is obtained from the database,38 which is freely available online. The simulation system has a total of 8640 atoms, including 1728 Cs, 1728 Pb, and 5184 I atoms. We selected two layered regions parallel to the x–y plane with a thickness of 10 Å after preparing an ideal cubic CsPbI3 simulation system. These layered regions are fixed as the simulation system's top and bottom. We performed reactive MD simulations in three steps after preparing the simulation system. In the first step, we investigated the thermal stability of the cubic structure of CsPbI3 by gradually heating the simulation system from T = 200 K to 1000 K. The bottom layer was fixed and all atoms in it were immovable. However, the top layer was not fixed and all atoms could be moved. In the second step, both the top and bottom layers were rigid, and an external load (or force) was applied to the top layer along the z-axis and x-axis to study the unidirectional deformation of α-CsPbI3. The bottom layer was fixed and all atoms associated with it were immovable. In the third step, we performed reactive MD simulations of the relaxation process in the absence of external load. Every atom in the top layers could be moved. In our previous work,39–41 we used a similar simulation system to investigate the detachment behaviour of polymer chains from graphene substrates.
 Fig. 1  (a) α-CsPbI3 cubic unit cell, (b) α-CsPbI3 top and side views, and (c) radial distribution function, g(r), plot of each pair element of α-CsPbI3. Cs, Pb, and I atoms are indicated in blue, yellow, and purple colors, respectively. 
Data from reactive molecular dynamics simulations under external loads, temperatures, and relaxation steps have been characterized by extracting various components of energy, mean square displacement, radial distribution functions, bond length calculations (separation between the 1st nearest neighbor atoms), etc. The compute msd command of the LAMMPS simulation package was used to obtain data on mean square displacement. However, the OVITO package was used to obtain data on the radial distribution function. The radial distribution function g(r) for each element of the ideal cubic structure of α-CsPbI3 is plotted in Fig. 1(c). The first peek of g(r) vs. r depicts the atoms’ first nearest neighbor. The distances between the first nearest neighbors of Cs–Cs, Pb–Pb, I–I, Cs–Pb, Cs–I, and Pb–I are found to be rCs—Cs = 6.43 Å, rPb—Pb = 6.43 Å, rI—I = 4.54 Å, rCs—Pb = 5.58 Å, rCs—I = 4.54 Å, and rPb—I = 3.21 Å, respectively. These values of the 1st nearest neighbor of the ideal cubic structure of α-CsPbI3 are referred to as the distance between the paired atoms, and they are well consistent with the online reported Materials Project database [https://www.materialsproject.org/]. In our case, we used remarkably similar criteria to define the distance between the paired atoms in α-CsPbI3 under external load, temperature, and relaxation steps of reactive molecular dynamics. For the calculation of the number of bonds in α-CsPbI3, we used a cut-off separation between the atoms (χ), which is less than or equal to the 1st nearest neighbor. The cut-off separation between atoms for calculating the number of paired atoms (or bonds) is fixed for Cs–Cs (χCs—Cs ≤ 6.43 Å), Pb–Pb (χPb—Pb ≤ 6.43 Å), I–I (χI—I = 4.54 Å), Cs–Pb (χCs—Pb ≤ 5.58 Å), Cs–I (χCs—I ≤ 4.54 Å), and Pb–I (χPb—I ≤ 3.21 Å). These cutoff values have been directly used in the OVITO package to create bond modifiers for the calculation of the number of bonds (nb). Further, we have calculated the percentage change in the number of bonds as , where nb is the number of the specific bond to be calculated and t is referred to as time. So nb (t = 0) and nb (t = t) represent the number of that specific bond in the structure before simulation and that at t = t. As a result, comparing the ξ(t) values at different times determines whether the bond has formed or dissociated. The increase in ξ(t) over ξ(0) indicates that the bond has dissociated. A decrease in ξ(t) between two different times, on the other hand, indicates bond formation.
3. Results
We investigated the thermal stability of α-CsPbI3 by increasing the simulation temperature from T = 200 K to 1000 K during reactive molecular dynamics simulations. Fig. 2 shows snapshots of the temperature response over α-CsPbI3. The cubic structure of α-CsPbI3 is stable at low to moderate temperatures (T = 200 K to 500 K), as shown in the snapshots. However, as the temperature rises above T = 500 K, the structure of α-CsPbI3 starts to dissolve into a random aggregation of atoms over the edges and corners of the simulation system. Atoms are more thermally mobile around the edge and corner because of their higher energies. The cubic lattice of the perovskite phase of α-CsPbI3 breaks when the simulated temperature rises due to the increase in the energy of these atoms. At high temperatures (T = 850 K to 1000 K), the structure of α-CsPbI3 transformed into a random aggregation of atoms. Based on these snapshots, we can estimate that the thermal stability of the α-CsPbI3 structure is up to T = 850 K.
 Fig. 2  Snapshots of the α-CsPbI3 simulation system at various temperatures during gradual heating from T = 200 K to T = 1000 K using reactive molecular dynamics simulations. The bottom layer of the α-CsPbI3 simulation system is yellow, and all atoms within it are immobile throughout the simulation. Cs, Pb, and I atoms are represented by blue, yellow, and purple colors, respectively. The simulation progress is indicated by blue color arrows. 

Fig. 3(a–c) depicts the calculated radial distribution function g(r) of each paired atom as a function of r at T = 300, 600, and 1000 K. It is observed that the 1st and 2nd nearest neighbours between Cs–Cs, Pb–Pb, I–I, Cs–Pb, and Pb–I are clearly evident at T = 300 and 600 K, which indicates that the perovskite phase of α-CsPbI3 is stable with both short- and long-range structural stability. However, at T = 1000 K, the peaks for the 2nd N. N. and 3rd N. N. atoms become unrecognizable, indicating that the long-range positional arrangement is inconclusive due to large thermal swinging of the atoms. We also extracted the total radial distribution function g(r), mean square displacement (MSD), and total energy (TE) during the gradual heating process of α-CsPbI3 as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). Mean square displacement is nearly constant as the temperature rises from T = 200 K to T = 850 K (Fig. S1(b), ESI†), indicating that the cubic structure of CsPbI3 is preserved up to T = 850 K despite the large thermal swinging of atoms. However, the structural change from cubic to random aggregation of atoms in α-CsPbI3 causes mean square displacement to increase sharply above T = 850 K. In addition, we calculated the total energy (TE) of the system during gradual heating. The increase in the kinetic and potential energy of α-CsPbI3 causes an increase in TE during the entire heating process.
 Fig. 3  Variation in the radial density distribution function of α-CsPbI3 at (a) T = 300 K, (b) T = 600 K and (c) T = 1000 K. 
We observed that the structure of α-CsPbI3 is stable up to T = 850 K when heated gradually. As a result, we used reactive molecular dynamics simulations to explore the mechanical response of α-CsPbI3 over a wide range of temperatures (T = 300 K, 400 K, 500 K, 600 K, 700 K, and 800 K) and magnitudes of external pulling force (Fz = 0.007 pN, 0.07 pN, 0.7 pN, 1.74 pN, 7 pN, and 35 pN). We created a rigid top and bottom layer along the x–y plane in the α-CsPbI3 simulation system for the application of external pulling force, as indicated by the yellow colour strip in Fig. 4. The top layer experiences an external pulling force (Fz = 1.74 pN) along the z-axis, while the bottom layer remains stationary. The response of α-CsPbI3 to the external pulling force is captured at regular times during tensile deformation, as shown by the snapshots in Fig. 4. We can see the atoms shifting and the bonds stretching in the direction of pulling forces from the snapshots. As the deformation simulation progresses, the bond continues to stretch, and after 15 ps, a crack appears and the α-CsPbI3 material fails to sustain the pulling force. During the deformation process, we calculated the percentage change in the number of bonds, ξ, in α-CsPbI3 under the pulling force Fz = 1.74 pN at T = 300 K. Fig. 5 depicts the three stages of bond variation observed during tensile deformation of α-CsPbI3. The percentage change in the number of bonds, ξ, increases in stage 1, indicating the bond dissociates in α-CsPbI3. The order of bond dissociation is found to be Pb–I > Pb–Pb > (Cs–Cs, I–I, Cs–Pb) > Cs–I. The ξ value gradually decreases in stage 2 due to bond formation. However, at this stage, the value of ξ never reached zero. This suggests that some elements are unable to recover the fully bonded structure of α-CsPbI3 and endure minor structural damage. As the simulation continues under the pulling force (stage 3), a minor structural damage in stage 2 causes complete failure of α-CsPbI3. As a result, the value of ξ increases significantly at this stage. The bond dissociation order is found to be (Pb–I, Pb–Pb) > (Cs–Cs, I–I, Cs–Pb) > Cs–I. Furthermore, in the following simulation step, we removed the externally applied pulling force and allowed the atoms of the top rigid layer to move. The bottom layer, on the other hand, is rigid and fixed, and all atoms associated with it are immobile. Fig. S2 (ESI†) depicts snapshots of α-CsPbI3 at various points during the relaxation process. We can see from the snapshots that atoms near the damaged part of the system gradually aggregated and formed bonds to heal the materials. However, newly paired atoms are unable to reform the perovskite structure of α-CsPbI3, as shown in the snapshot. Fig. 6 depicts the percentage change in the number of bonds, ξ, in α-CsPbI3 during the relaxation process. ξ(0) is the number of that specific bond in the structure prior to relaxation. Bond dissociation is represented by a positive value of ξ, whereas bond formation is represented by a negative value of ξ. As the relaxation step of the reactive molecular dynamics simulation continues, the values of ξ for the paired atoms, namely Cs–Pb, Cs–Cs, and Cs–I, gradually increase. In contrast, the values of ξ for I–I, Pb–I, and Pb–Pb decrease during the relaxation step. The results indicate that the formation of new paired atoms such as I–I, Pb–I, and Pb–Pb is favourable and helps to minimise energy during step relaxation.
 Fig. 4  Snapshots of the α-CsPbI3 simulation system at various times during tensile deformation under a pulling force (Fz = 1.74 pN). Cs, Pb, and I atoms are represented by blue, yellow, and purple colors, respectively. The red and blue color arrows represent the direction of the pulling force and the progress of simulation, respectively. 
 Fig. 5  Variation of the percentage change in the number of bonds, , in α-CsPbI3 during deformation at Fz = 1.74 pN and T = 300 K. 
 Fig. 6  Variation of the percentage change in the number of bonds, , in α-CsPbI3 during the relaxation process. 
3.1. Effect of variation in the magnitude of pulling force Fz
The effect of external pulling force magnitude was investigated using reactive molecular dynamics simulations at a fixed temperature (T = 300 K). Fig. S3 (ESI†) depicts snapshots of the bond deformation of α-CsPbI3 at fixed temperature T = 300 K and pulling forces Fz = 0.07 pN, 0.7 pN, 7 pN, and 35 pN. In the case of relatively low Fz values (0.07 pN and 0.7 pN), the cubic structure of α-CsPbI3 is gradually stretched along the applied pulling forces as the simulation proceeds. The bonds of α-CsPbI3 are stretched slightly along the direction of applied pulling forces prior to the formation of cracks or voids in the materials for energy compensation, which is similar to an earlier observation for the transformation of a cubic to a tetragonal structure with increasing potential energy.42,43 It is also observed that the magnitude of the pulling force influences the initiation of cracking in the material. Crack initiation occurs nearly 20 times faster at high Fz values (7 pN and 35 pN) than at low Fz values (0.007 pN and 0.07 pN). Fig. 7(a–f) show the percentage change in the number of paired atoms (or bonds), ξ, associated in α-CsPbI3 at Fz = 0.007 pN, 0.07 pN, 0.7 pN, 1.74 pN, 7 pN, and 35 pN and at fixed temperature T = 300 K. We have seen a subsequent increase and decrease in the value of ξ for the cases of Fz = 0.007 pN and 0.07 pN. This indicates that bond dissociation and formation occur prior to the initiation of cracks or failure of bonds. The ξ vs. time profile is found to be similar to the saw-tooth44 or stick-slip45 profiles, as shown in the inset of Fig. 7(a). These patterns indicate that, during the deformation process, bonds are broken and then formed. However, in the case of Fz = 0.7 pN to 35 pN, the value of ξ increased rapidly without a stick-slip or saw-tooth profile. This demonstrates that the energy associated with an applied bond pulling force of 0.7 pN is higher than the bond deformation energy. It is also observed that temperature-induced fluctuations in equilibrium bond length have a major impact on observing a stick-slip or saw-tooth pattern. When the equilibrium bond length ±10% is used as the cut-off, this pattern is observed to be weakened. One possible explanation is as follows: temperature fluctuations reduce the kinetic friction force by varying the equilibrium bond length. As a result, the stick state easily overcomes the potential barrier and moves to the stage of continuous sliding motion.46 Therefore, only the bond deterioration caused by the applied force is detected at ±10% extended equilibrium bond length as shown in Fig. S4–S6 (ESI†) over a wide range of applied forces and temperatures.
 Fig. 7  The percentage change in the number of bonds in α-CsPbI3 during deformation under pulling forces: (a) Cs–Cs, (b) Pb–Pb, (c) I–I, (d) Cs–Pb, (e) Cs–I, and (f) Pb–I. 
3.2. Effect of temperature and pulling force Fz
Fig. S7(a–c) (ESI†) show snapshots of α-CsPbI3 during bond deformation at temperatures T = 800 K, 600 K, and 400 K under an external pulling force of magnitude Fz = 1.74 pN. For T = 800 K and 600 K, the structure of α-CsPbI3 is transformed into random aggregation of atoms prior to nucleation or cracks. However, the images show that the structure has fewer cracks around 800 K than those at lower temperatures. The percentage change in the value of ξ represents bond formation and dissociation over time during applied pulling forces and at different temperatures (shown in Fig. 8). From these plots, we found that the value of ξ is clearly dependent on the simulation system's temperature. However, the quantitative behaviour of ξ is determined by the type of element and its bonds. It is observed that the value of ξ for the Pb–Pb and Pb–I bonds varies significantly with temperature. The bond dissociation of Pb–Pb and Pb–I has been detected up to 10% in stage 1 of the deformation process. As the simulation progresses, the amount of bond dissociation between these atoms increases to up to 25% (in stage 3). At a pulling force Fz = 1.74 pN, the ξ values are inversely proportional to the temperature of the simulation system, i.e. ξ300K > ξ400K >500K > ξ600K > ξ700K > ξ800K. In the next step of simulation, we have carried out the relaxation step without using pulling force during reactive molecular dynamics simulations. Fig. S8 (ESI†) depicts snapshots of the α-CsPbI3 simulation system during reactive molecular dynamics simulations at T = 800 K, 600 K, and 300 K. It was observed that cracks or voids formed during tensile deformation, causing structural damage to the α-CsPbI3 material as the simulation continued in the relaxation step. In comparison to lower temperatures, structural damage propagates rapidly and completely transforms into random atom arrangements at T = 800 K. The percentage change in the ξ value of α-CsPbI3 during the relaxation process at various temperatures is shown in Fig. 9(a–f). The values of ξ increase for Cs–Cs, Cs–Pb, and Cs–I, indicating that their bonds are dissociating and atoms are free to form new compounds during the relaxation process. The value of ξ, on the other hand, decreases for the Pb–Pb and Pb–I bonds, leading to the formation of these bonds during the thermal relaxation process.
 Fig. 8  Change in the number of bonds in α-CsPbI3 during the relaxation process at different temperatures: (a) Cs–Cs, (b) Pb–Pb, (c) I–I, (d) Cs–Pb, (e) Cs–I, and (f) Pb–I. 
 Fig. 9  Variation in the number of bonds in α-CsPbI3 during the relaxation process at different temperatures: (a) Cs–Cs, (b) Pb–Pb, (c) I–I, (d) Cs–Pb, (e) Cs–I, and (f) Pb–I. 
We performed additional simulations with different applied forces along the x-axis. The impact of applied force along the x-axis across the structure of α-CsPbI3 is captured at regular intervals during deformation, as shown in Fig. 10. It is observed that an external force pushes the top layer along the x-axis, while the bottom layer remains fixed. The images also show atoms migrating and causing damage in the perovskite phase as a result of the applied stresses. Furthermore, the magnitude of the applied force influences the deformation process. Using the applied forces Fx = 7, 1.74, and 0.7 pN, we estimated the percentage change in the number of paired atoms, ξ, in α-CsPbI3 during the deformation process as shown in Fig. 11(a–c). It has been found that the effect of force applied in the x-direction versus that in the z-direction on bond dissociation is different. The force acting along the x-axis is analogous to a pushing force, whereas the force acting along the z-axis is similar to a pulling force, which is the source of the different stress-induced degradation. It is widely known that, when a body is pushed, one component of the force adds to the body's weight, increasing resistance. But there is less resistance when the body is pulled. As a result, when the force is applied along the x-direction rather than the z-direction, the bonds take longer to dissociate.
 Fig. 10  Snapshots of α-CsPbI3 at different times during deformation by a pulling force of magnitude Fx = 0.7 pN, 1.74 pN, and 7 pN. Cs, Pb, and I are represented by blue, yellow, and purple colors, respectively. The direction of the pulling force and the progress of simulation are represented by red and blue color arrows, respectively. 
 Fig. 11  Variation of the percentage change in the number of bonds in α-CsPbI3 during deformation along the x-direction at (a) Fx = 7 pN, (b) Fx = 1.74 and (c) Fx = 0.7 pN. 
4. Discussion
Several models have been proposed to explain the external stimuli-induced degradation products of α-CsPbI3. The majority of reports stated that the structure is unable to withstand external stresses due to the low tolerance factor (0.8) of α-CsPbI3 caused by smaller Cs ions. As a result, the [PbI6]4− octahedra of the perovskite structure tilt because the Cs ion does not fully occupy the available volume of the unit cell. Furthermore, as the temperature rises, these octahedral rotations reduce the size of the cubo-octahedral gap of the I sublattice, and the minimum energy configuration determines whether the tilting is in-phase or anti-phase. Furthermore, when stressed by applied force or high temperatures, the tilted structure transforms into a severely distorted structure.47 Moreover, Liu et al. observed that the potential energy of the Pb–I bond is highly anharmonic.48 Again, the large amplitude of I atom vibrations causes strong lattice deformation at higher temperatures. As a result, heterogeneity in the intrinsic potential energy of the α-CsPbI3 lattice is responsible for the system degradation under stresses. Consequently, the structure collapses and the chemical bonds dissociate. We observed that the preferred bond dissociation order is Pb–I, Pb–Pb > Cs–Cs, I–I, Cs–Pb > Cs–I (Fig. 5), implying that the Pb–I bond is weaker than the Cs–I bond. The stronger Cs–I bond in the structure compared to the Pb–I bond could be attributed to the increase of the contact between Cs and I by the stresses caused by rattling of the Cs cation in the coordination polyhedron.
To understand the plausible mechanism for the degradation of α-CsPbI3 under the magnitude and duration of tensile force and temperature-induced stresses, we first discuss the structure's various associated bonds and its resistance capability to external stimuli via the hybridization effect. Cs and Pb atoms occupy the center and corner of the α-CsPbI3 perovskite structure, respectively, and each Pb atom is connected by an I atom through iono-covalent bonding. α-CsPbI3 has a tolerance factor of 0.8, indicating a highly distorted structure. Increased thermal energy under temperature results in phonon-driven lattice displacement. Lattice fluctuations also lead to a range of additional distorted structures. Furthermore, when mechanical force is applied, the equilibrium connection elongates. These additional stresses are expected to reduce the hybridization between Pb and I atoms throughout the lattice as the overlapping of atomic orbitals changes due to changes in interatomic distance.49 The extent to which the distance between paired atoms increases depends on both the magnitude of the applied force and the exposure duration. So the effect of pulling force on deformation and dissociation of chemical bonds along the z-axis can be divided into three categories: (a) low pulling force, where the applied force is less than or equal to the bond energy, (b) slightly higher than the bond energy, and (c) very high pulling force. The structure will have slight additional distortion if the pulling force is low (<0.07 pN), and the absorbed energy is capable of reviving the structure. When the applied pulling force is 0.07 pN, the structure is most likely well within the elastic limit. As a result, the atoms are rearranged in order to minimize potential energy and form a stable structure with a low pulling force. This is evidenced by the observed stick-slip pattern (Fig. 7). The bonds, however, do not resist and dissociate when the applied load exceeds 0.07 pN. It is also observed that, at low pulling force, the bond takes longer to dissociate. As the applied force increases, the bond dissociation time decreases. It is observed that the structure fails to resist higher pulling forces because the hybridization of Pb and I atoms is drastically reduced. The electrostatic force between Pb and I atoms is also lost at higher pulling forces. According to the results, the pulling force has the greatest impact on the Pb–I and Pb–Pb bonds. Furthermore, when temperature and load are applied simultaneously, the degradation of the structure is accelerated due to the combined stresses. Moreover, when the pulling force is removed, these degraded products have no tendency to form the perovskite structure again due to the different bond dissociation behavior of Pb and Cs atoms under relaxation. In addition, even at high temperatures, we do not observe reformation of the perovskite structure of degraded products after relaxation of the pulling force. This means that the degraded products do not meet the necessary conditions for the formation of a perovskite structure. Temperature, on the other hand, induces atom aggregation. According to Pols et al., iodine vacancy generation takes place in the perovskite structure at high temperatures.24 The Pb atoms near the iodine vacancy were also observed to shift away from their positions in the lattice and form a face-sharing PbxIy complex. Such face-sharing compounds serve as catalysts for the perovskite structure to dissolve, which then grow to form a bigger Pb/I cluster. So the dissociated atoms form a cluster during the relaxation of the pulling force and at high temperatures, and the degraded products are unable to reform the perovskite structure, according to the data shown above. This is because of the diverging behaviour of Cs and Pb related bonds, the low tolerance factor of α-CsPbI3, and the lack of the required formation energy for the perovskite structure.
5. Conclusion
Reactive molecular dynamics simulations were used to investigate the thermal and mechanical stability of α-CsPbI3. Our major findings from the extensive data analysis are as follows:
• The structure of α-CsPbI3 is extremely temperature sensitive. Its structure was found to be unstable at temperatures higher than T = 850 K.
• The magnitude and duration of the applied pulling force influence the structural stability of α-CsPbI3. It exhibits a saw-tooth or stick-slip pattern during bond dissociation at low pulling force (<0.07 pN). At higher pulling force, bond dissociation occurs in the following order: Pb–I > Pb–Pb > (Cs–Cs, I–I, Cs–Pb) > Cs–I. Furthermore, the bond dissociation is found to be in inverse order with temperature. It also demonstrates that the impact of applied force along the z-axis differs from that along the x-axis.
• During the relaxation of the pulling force and at high temperatures, the dissociated atoms of the structure aggregate and the degraded products are unable to reform the perovskite structure. This is largely due to the divergent behaviour of Cs and Pb related bonds, low tolerance factor of α-CsPbI3 and a lack of the essential formation energy for the perovskite structure.
The major outcomes of our reactive molecular dynamics simulation are very similar to the published experimental results. We believe that our findings on the thermal and mechanical stability of the perovskite phase of α-CsPbI3 will help researchers better understand the mechanism of degradation, which will be useful in the fabrication of high-tolerance solar cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
H. Kim, J. S. Han, J. Choi, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Halide perovskites for applications beyond photovoltaics, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700310 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, X. Wang and A. Pan, Properties of excitons and photogenerated charge carriers in metal halide perovskites, Adv. Mat., 2019, 31(47), 1806671 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Wu, T. Liu and R. Zhu, Patterned perovskites for optoelectronic applications, Small Methods, 2018, 2(10), 1800110 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, T. Yang, H. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Guo, Z. Yang, S. Lu and W. Qin, Morphological and chemical tuning of lead halide perovskite mesocrystals as long-life anode materials in lithium-ion batteries, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21(6), 10481059 Search PubMed .
D. K. Sharma, S. Hirata and M. Vacha, Single-particle electroluminescence of CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals reveals particle-selective recombination and blinking as key efficiency factors, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
D.-N. Jeong, J.-M. Yang and N.-G. Park, Roadmap on halide perovskite and related devices, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31(15), 152001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. García-Batlle, J. M. Guillén, M. Chapran, O. Baussens, J. Zaccaro, J.-M. Verilhac, E. Gros-Daillon, A. Guerrero, O. Almora and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Coupling between ion drift and kinetics of electronic current transients in MAPbBr3 Single Crystals, ACS Ene. Lett., 2022, 7(3), 946–951 CrossRef .
S. Arya, P. Mahajan, R. Gupta, R. Srivastava, N. K. Tailor, S. Satapathi, R. Radhakrishnan Sumathi, R. Datt and V. Gupta, A comprehensive review on synthesis and applications of single crystal perovskite halides, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2020, 60, 100286 CrossRef CAS .
T. Duong, Y. L. Wu, H. Shen, J. Peng, X. Fu, D. Jacobs and E.-C. Wang, 
            et al., Rubidium multication perovskite with optimized bandgap for perovskite-silicon tandem with over 26% efficiency, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(14), 1700228 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, G. M. Paternò, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli and H. J. Snaith, Inorganic caesium lead iodide perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(39), 19688–19695 RSC .
S. P. Singh and O. Nagarjuna, Organometal halide perovskites as useful materials in sensitized solar cells, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43(14), 5247–5251 RSC .
C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, The renaissance of halide perovskites and their evolution as emerging semiconductors, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48(10), 2791–2802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, Z. Shao, C. Li, S. Pang, Y. Yan and G. Cui, Structural properties and stability of inorganic cspbi3 perovskites, Small Struct., 2021, 2, 2000089 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, Understanding degradation mechanisms and improving stability of perovskite photovoltaics, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119(5), 3418–3451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hoffmann, Mirrors of bonding in metal halide perovskites, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(40), 12996–13010 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Rakita, S. R. Cohen, N. Klein Kedem, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Mechanical properties of APbX3 (A = Cs or CH3NH3; X = I or Br) perovskite single crystals, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 623–629 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Trots and S. V. Myagkota, High-temperature structural evolution of cesium and rubidium triiodoplumbates, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 2520–2526 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, S. Liu, Z. Li, S. Wang, D. Xue, Y. Lin and J. Hu, Strain in perovskite solar cells: origins, impacts and regulation, Nat. Sci. Rev, 2021, 8, 8 Search PubMed .
C. Ramirez, S. K. Yadavalli, H. F. Garces, Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, Thermo-mechanical behavior of organic–inorganic halide perovskites for solar cells, Scr. Mater., 2018, 150, 36–41 CrossRef CAS .
U. Jong, C. Yu, Y. Kye, Y. Kim, C. Kim and S. Ri, A first-principles study on the chemical stability of inorganic perovskite solid solutions Cs1−xRbxPbI3 at finite temperature and pressure, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17994–18002 RSC .
N. Rolston, K. A. Bush, A. D. Printz, A. Gold-Parker, Y. Ding, M. F. Toney, M. D. McGehee and R. H. Dauskardt, Engineering stress in perovskite solar cells to improve stability, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802139 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, X. Huang, Y. Huang, X. Wang, F. Li, Y. W. F. Tian, B. Liu, Z. Z. X. Shen and T. Cui, New metallic ordered phase of perovskite CsPbI3 under pressure, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900399 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Marronnier, H. Lee, B. Geffroy, J. Even, Y. Bonnassieux and G. Roma, Structural instabilities related to highly anharmonic phonons in halide perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2659 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pols, J. M. Vicent-Luna, I. Filot, A. C. T. van Duin and S. Tao, Atomistic insights into the degradation of inorganic halide perovskite cspbi3: a reactive force field molecular dynamics study, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12(23), 5519–5525 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, Y. Ma, C. Zhang, C. Liu, W. Li, R. E. Schropp and Y. Mai, Thermodynamically self-healing 1D–3D hybrid perovskite solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(16), 1703421 CrossRef .
A. C. T. Van Duin, S. Dasgupta, F. Lorant and W. A. Goddard, ReaxFF: a reactive force field for hydrocarbons, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105(41), 9396–9409 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chenoweth, A. C. T. Van Duin and W. A. Goddard, ReaxFF reactive force field for molecular dynamics simulations of hydrocarbon oxidation, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112(5), 1040–1053 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Senftle, S. Hong, M. M. Islam, S. B. Kylasa, Y. Zheng, Y. K. Shin and C. Junkermeier, 
            et al., The ReaxFF reactive force-field: development, applications and future directions, npj Comput. Mater., 2016, 2(1), 1–14 CrossRef .

          D. C. Rapaport, The art of molecular dynamics simulation, Cambridge University Press,  2004 Search PubMed .
D. C. Rapaport, Large-scale molecular dynamics simulation using vector and parallel computers, Comp. Phy. Rep., 1988, 9(1), 1–53 CrossRef CAS .

          M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer simulation of liquids, Oxford University Press,  2017 Search PubMed .
L. Verlet, Computer “experiments” on classical fluids. I. Thermodynamical properties of Lennard-Jones molecules, Phys. Rev., 1967, 159(1), 98 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Martyna, D. J. Tobias and M. L. Klein, Constant pressure molecular dynamics algorithms, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101(5), 4177–4189 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Martyna, M. E. Tuckerman, D. J. Tobias and M. L. Klein, Explicit reversible integrators for extended systems dynamics, Mol. Phys., 1996, 87(5), 1117–1157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Plimpton, Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics, J. Comput. Phys., 1995, 117(1), 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stukowski, Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation data with OVITO–the Open Visualization Tool, Mod. Sim. Mat. Sci. Engg., 2009, 18(1), 015012 CrossRef .
W. Humphrey, A. Dalke and K. Schulten, VMD: visual molecular dynamics, J. Mol. Graphics, 1996, 14(1), 33–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bradlyn, L. Elcoro, J. Cano, M. G. Vergniory, Z. Wang, C. Felser, M. I. Aroyo and B. A. Bernevig, Topological quantum chemistry, Nature, 2017, 547(7663), 298–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, S. K. Pattanayek, G. G. Pereira and S. Mohanty, Effect of uniformly applied force and molecular characteristics of a polymer chain on its adhesion to graphene substrates, Langmuir, 2016, 32(11), 2750–2760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar and S. K. Pattanayek, Force induced removal of an encapsulated semi-flexible polymer from single walled carbon nanotube, Chem. Phys., 2019, 516, 22–27 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, Effect of applied force and atomic organization of copper on its adhesion to a graphene substrate, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(40), 25118–25131 RSC .
H. Bae and K. T. Lee, Effect of tetragonal to cubic phase transition on the upconversion luminescence properties of A/B site erbium-doped perovskite BaTiO3, RSC Adv., 2019, 9(5), 2451–2457 RSC .
M. D. Hoque, N. Ferdous, N. Islam, Z. Li, G. Ren, K. Zhu and Z. Fan., Ionic and optical properties of methylammonium lead iodide perovskite across the tetragonal–cubic structural phase transition, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9(18), 2692–2698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiao, J. He and Z. Zhang, Nanoscale deicing by molecular dynamics simulation, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(30), 14625–14632 RSC .
D. Mulliah, S. D. Kenny and R. Smith, Modeling of stick-slip phenomena using molecular dynamics, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69(20), 205407 CrossRef .
Y. Senda, Computational investigation of the effect of atomic thermal fluctuations on the stick-slip motion in friction force microscopy, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2022, 91, 014602 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, O. Bykanova, R. Akhmadeev, S. Baghaie, M. Hekmatifar, A. Arefpour, R. Sabetvand and V. Borisov, The numerical study of pressure and temperature effects on mechanical properties of baghdadite-based nanostructure: molecular dynamics simulation, Sci. Rep., 2022, 12, 7522 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, A. E. Phillips, D. A. Keen and M. T. Dove, Thermal disorder and bond anharmonicity in Cesium Lead Iodide studied by neutron total scattering and the reverse Monte Carlo method, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 14934 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krapp, F. M. Bickelhaupt and G. Frenking, Orbital overlap and chemical bonding, Chem. – Eur. J., 2006, 12, 9196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc02298bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Esystem = EBond + Eover + Eunder + Eval + Epen + Etors + Econj + EvdW + ECoul	(1)
	(2)
ri(t + Δt) = ri(t) + νi(t)Δt + ½ (Δt)2ai(t + Δt)	(3)
νi(t + Δt) = νi(t) + ½Δt [ai(t) + ai (t + Δt)]	(4)

 	Fig. 1  (a) α-CsPbI3 cubic unit cell, (b) α-CsPbI3 top and side views, and (c) radial distribution function, g(r), plot of each pair element of α-CsPbI3. Cs, Pb, and I atoms are indicated in blue, yellow, and purple colors, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Snapshots of the α-CsPbI3 simulation system at various temperatures during gradual heating from T = 200 K to T = 1000 K using reactive molecular dynamics simulations. The bottom layer of the α-CsPbI3 simulation system is yellow, and all atoms within it are immobile throughout the simulation. Cs, Pb, and I atoms are represented by blue, yellow, and purple colors, respectively. The simulation progress is indicated by blue color arrows.	 

 	Fig. 3  Variation in the radial density distribution function of α-CsPbI3 at (a) T = 300 K, (b) T = 600 K and (c) T = 1000 K.	 

 	Fig. 4  Snapshots of the α-CsPbI3 simulation system at various times during tensile deformation under a pulling force (Fz = 1.74 pN). Cs, Pb, and I atoms are represented by blue, yellow, and purple colors, respectively. The red and blue color arrows represent the direction of the pulling force and the progress of simulation, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Variation of the percentage change in the number of bonds, , in α-CsPbI3 during deformation at Fz = 1.74 pN and T = 300 K.	 

 	Fig. 6  Variation of the percentage change in the number of bonds, , in α-CsPbI3 during the relaxation process.	 

 	Fig. 7  The percentage change in the number of bonds in α-CsPbI3 during deformation under pulling forces: (a) Cs–Cs, (b) Pb–Pb, (c) I–I, (d) Cs–Pb, (e) Cs–I, and (f) Pb–I.	 

 	Fig. 8  Change in the number of bonds in α-CsPbI3 during the relaxation process at different temperatures: (a) Cs–Cs, (b) Pb–Pb, (c) I–I, (d) Cs–Pb, (e) Cs–I, and (f) Pb–I.	 

 	Fig. 9  Variation in the number of bonds in α-CsPbI3 during the relaxation process at different temperatures: (a) Cs–Cs, (b) Pb–Pb, (c) I–I, (d) Cs–Pb, (e) Cs–I, and (f) Pb–I.	 

 	Fig. 10  Snapshots of α-CsPbI3 at different times during deformation by a pulling force of magnitude Fx = 0.7 pN, 1.74 pN, and 7 pN. Cs, Pb, and I are represented by blue, yellow, and purple colors, respectively. The direction of the pulling force and the progress of simulation are represented by red and blue color arrows, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 11  Variation of the percentage change in the number of bonds in α-CsPbI3 during deformation along the x-direction at (a) Fx = 7 pN, (b) Fx = 1.74 and (c) Fx = 0.7 pN.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc02298b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
