Atomic spectrometry update. Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materials  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B615313P View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B615313P
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21, 1431-1471Atomic spectrometry update. Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materialsBrian Charltona, Andy S. Fisher*b, Phill S. Goodallc, Michael W. Hindsd, Steve Lancastera and Malcolm SalisburyeaHull Research & Technology Centre, BP, Saltend, East Yorkshire, UK HU12 8DSbSchool of Earth, Ocean and Environmental Sciences, University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth, UK PL4 8AAcBNFL Sellafield, Seascale, Cumbria, UK CA20 1PGdRoyal Canadian Mint, 320 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Canada K1A 0G8eShell Research and Technology Centre, Thornton, P.O. Box 1, Chester, UK CH1 3SHReceived 20th October 2006First published on 13th November 2006Contents1 Metals1.1 Ferrous metals and alloys1.2 Non-ferrous metals and alloysChemicals2.1 Petroleum and petroleum products2.2 Organic chemicals and solvents2.3 Inorganic chemicals and acids2.4 Nuclear materialsAdvance materials3.1 Polymeric materials and composites3.2 Semiconductors and conducting materials3.3 Glasses3.4 Ceramics3.5 Catalysts4 Glossary of termsReferencesAbstractThis is the latest in the annual reviews under the name “Atomic spectrometry update, Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materials”, that follows on from last year’s review1 and is part of a series that covers all aspects of analytical atomic spectrometry.2–6 This year has presented a number of changes to the writing team, with Brian Charlton, Steve Lancaster and Ian Salisbury all being welcomed and Denise Penny stepping down. Our thanks go to her for her many contributions over the years.1 MetalsFor all types of metals and alloys, the most interesting developments continue to centre on solid sample analysis methods. Laser induced break down spectrometry (LIBS), in particular, continues to be of interest. For example, LIBS was the focus of 20 out of 29 atomic emission spectrometry abstracts, for ferrous metals, during this review period. Although the abstracts noted in this review are applied, there were a number of fundamental LIBS papers published in the same time period. The reader is directed to the ASU Reviews on the various atomic spectrometric techniques.1.1 Ferrous metals and alloysNoll and co-workers7 reviewed the performance of a LIBS-based inspection system for parts made from high alloy steel over a five year period. In this time, more than 1.5 million products have been successfully inspected. Using 100 laser pulses over a measurement time of 2 s (30 laser pulses to ablate surface contamination and 70 laser pulses for which spectra were collected), the authors were able to determine the signals of 12 elemental lines. This enabled distinction between 30 different high alloy steel grades. In general, the intensity of an iron line from a pure iron sample degraded with time due to degradation of laser components. The authors recommend future industrial LIBS have the means to: (1) monitor the laser energy close to the interaction region, (2) automate sample positioning, and (3) measure reference samples at set intervals to monitor the intensities of different line emissions.Lopez-Moreno and colleagues discussed the measurement of samples at high temperature by LIBS in two papers. One paper8 discussed calibration at low temperature while measuring steel slag samples at temperatures up to 850 °C. Correlation coefficients of 0.991 and 0.989 were reported for Si/Ca and Mg/Ca ratios, respectively. LIBS results correlated well with results obtained by XRF. The second paper9 discussed determination of Cr, Mn and Ni in stainless steel at 1000 °C using a LIBS system that was a distance away from the high temperature environment. In both papers, calibration was achieved at room temperature and adapted using a linear transformation to measure samples at high temperatures.There were two reports of miniaturized LIBS employing microchip lasers and miniature spectrometers. One device, which was constructed using commercial components, had a Limit of Detection (LOD) of 400 ppm for a C/Fe ratio and a precision of 4.3% RSD for C/Fe ratios of 0.001 to 0.01.10 These values were larger than conventional systems because of the use of an ungated detector and the spatial variability of the emission plume. A similar device developed by Lopez-Moreno et al. achieved 0.98–0.99 linear regression coefficients for the calibration curves of Cr, Mn, Mo, Ni and Si in low-alloy steel.11 The LOD was below 100 ppm, in most cases. The instrument utilized a Powerchip laser and a non-intensified, non-gated detector; and offered good beam quality and high repetition rate whilst causing minimal sample damage.High speed scanning LIBS at a repetition rate of 1000 Hz and with a spatial resolution of <20 μm was reported by Bette et al.12 No elaborate sample preparation was needed with only a simple surface grinding being found to be sufficient. Surface areas of 110 mm × 45 mm of the steel samples could be analyzed for C, N, O, P and S (as non-metallic inclusions). The authors concluded that this LIBS method could be used as a complementary technique to scanning electron microscopy (SEM), EDXRF electron probe micro-analysis and capillary-RF for such analyses. A related paper by Kuss and colleagues13 investigated the statistical algorithms needed to distinguish between emission peaks from non-metallic inclusions and low intensity peaks arising from the same elements dissolved in the metal matrix.On-line coating thickness measurements by a LIBS system were reported for Zn on galvanized sheet steel.14 The thickness resolution was estimated to be 400 nm and the method had a range of 3.2 to 11.2 μm. Methods for the determination of coating composition and coating thickness were discussed. Depth-profiling was achieved by adjusting the laser shot energy and interrogating a different position on the sheet for each data point. The technique proved successful, but a query must be made over its usefulness for a non-uniformly coated sample. A LIBS technique was also used by Caneve and co-workers as a diagnostic tool for thin films in the range of 200–550 nm.15A review of arc/spark optical emission spectrometry (arc/spark OES) was written by Zhou et al.16 The review contained 95 references and dealt with principles and instrumentation as well as emphasising new applications. In another paper, a modified spark induced optical emission spectrometer was used to determine inclusions in steel samples taken during ladle treatment in an ASEA-SKF ladle furnace.17 The results agreed with the determinations from conventional analysis and were obtained in less time.Chandrasekaran and colleagues18 studied the wear interactions between stainless steel and cemented carbide tools using laser ablation ICP-time of flight mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-ToF-MS). They reported that using this instrumentation, it was possible to identify inclusion products from work material at the tool-chip contact. It was concluded that LA-ICP-ToF-MS gave new possibilities to study wear layers associated with friction pairs and metal cutting operations.Minor elements (As, Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni and Sn) in flue dust from steelmaking were determined by LA-ICP-MS from pressed pellets as described by Coedo et al.19 The pellets were made with a binder of cellulose and paraffin with Rh added as an internal standard. Calibration standards were made with a synthetic matrix of equal parts ZnO and Fe2O3. Results were in agreement with the element values for flue dust reference materials. Another report from the same group20 used LA-ICP-MS for depth profile analysis of Cu on steel. The best results were obtained with moderate laser energy (2 mJ per pulse) and by focusing the laser approximately 2000 μm below the surface. The ablation rate was estimated to be about 1 μm per pulse. Their method was validated by the analysis of samples with certified Cu coating thickness.A new LA system consisting of a high frequency Q-switched laser and 2 scanning mirrors was used to analyze iron samples by LA-ICP-MS.21 It was claimed that repetitive laser scanning of the sample area at 0.6 W power, removed the effect of element fractionation and gave a signal intensity and stability comparable with that generated by aspiration of a 500 μg mL−1 solution of steel solution. Detection limits of 10 ppb for most elements were reported.Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) has been used by several research groups to estimate the age of iron artefacts by carbon-14 dating. In one paper, Fujio22 examined Japanese ironware to study the history of the iron in the Japanese Islands. In another paper, Scharf et al.23 stated one of the problems associated with such measurement as being the small concentration of C in iron which requires an unfeasibly large sample to be analyzed. They then discussed two approaches to radiocarbon dating used at the Erlangen AMS-facility. One method utilized the direct sputtering of the iron artefact in the ion source and the other involved the complete extraction of carbon from the iron sample then dating the carbonaceous residue.Although there have not been any published reports, vendors have indicated that hand-held X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer sales have picked up considerably over the past couple of years. Hand held XRF instruments have been very useful in metal and alloy identification for operators with minimal training. A report by Ida and Kawai24 concluded that using a hand-held XRF spectrometer, the composition of steel and brass samples, encased in packaging material, can be estimated (with better than 30% error) by ratioing the analyte intensity at the fluorescent lines to the Compton scattering of the incident X-rays. The fluorescence intensity of each element decreased with the thickness of the shielding or packaging and the thickness could be calculated from the intensity ratio Fe Kβ/Fe Kα or by using the intensity of the Compton scattering of the incident X-rays. Han and co-workers used a fundamental parameter method with wavelength dispersive XRF (WD-XRF) to give relatively accurate results for the analysis of low-alloy steel and other types of reference materials using only a few type standards and pure element standards for calibration.25 The fundamental parameter method successfully corrected for any matrix effects and therefore enabled a relatively accurate analysis to be performed even when the calibrants were not matrix matched with the sample.An overview article by McPhail26 reviewed the applications of secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) in material sciences. A wide variety of SIMS experiments were discussed in relation to many types of materials including stainless steel, museum artefacts and aerospace alloys. The distribution of B, boron nitride and O in steel doped with B and/or N was measured using SIMS after heat treatments.27 Differences were observed for B intensity where B doping alone was done in contrast to where both B and N were doped into the steel. Krecar et al.28 used two- and three-dimensional SIMS to investigate the distribution of P (a sintering activator) in sintered steels. Impact energy and hardness of steels with different concentrations of P were also measured to understand the influence of P on the mechanical properties of sintered steels. Oswald and co-workers determined O in Nd–Fe–B alloys by SIMS with calibration against oxygen-implanted single crystals.29 SIMS measurements proved that the O in the Nd2Fe14B phase was lower than the total oxygen in the Nd–Fe–B alloy.Trace levels of Ag in steels were determined by heated quartz tube atomization AAS with continuous flow gas phase sample introduction.30 Gaseous silver hydride was evolved into a quartz atomizer from solution samples introduced into a mixture of tartaric acid and hydrochloric acid as reaction media with potassium tetrahydroborate as a reductant. The limit of detection was 0.4 ppb and 4.0% RSD was reported for 50 ppb Ag (10 replicates). An interference study of concomitant elements was also performed during this research. The results obtained using this method were in good agreement with values for certified samples.The following section discusses investigations using multiple techniques to investigate ferrous metals. Depth profiling of Zn-based coatings on iron sheets by LA-ICP-MS and laser ablation inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (LA-ICP-OES) using different lasers was evaluated by Hrdlicka et al.31 A Nd:YAG laser was coupled to ICP-OES and an excimer ArF laser with a beam homogenizer was used with ICP-MS. Both systems gave depth profiling results similar to glow discharge optical emission spectrometry (GD-OES) and XRF. However, tailing was observed with both systems that erroneously enlarged the coating-substrate layer. The ArF laser was found to reduce this effect, but not eliminate it completely. In a paper by King and colleagues, GD-OES, optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) were used to characterize the surface of different tool steels treated by the reactive diffusion of nitrogen and carbon.32 The treatment process, termed nitrocarburizing, was performed using different C loaded gases, e.g. carbon dioxide and natural gas and using different tool steel types. The authors discussed the results in detail.Righter et al.33 investigated the diffusion of 11 trace elements in FeNi metal using LA-ICP-MS and electron microprobe analysis (EMPA) to measure the diffusion profiles. Saita and Maenosono34 synthesized FePt nano-particles of 4.5 nm mean diameter using iron(II) ethoxide and platinum(II) acetylacetonate as precursors and then used transmission electron microscopy with energy dispersive XRF (TEM-EDX), ICP-OES, and XRD to characterize the particles. TEM-EDX measurements indicated that the nano-particles contained little oxygen or other impurities. The recycling of galvanized steel using chlorination was studied by Tee and Fray.35 Numerous techniques, including thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), SEM, AAS and XRD were used to examine the reaction products. It was demonstrated that it was possible to remove zinc from iron at 800 °C using an air–chlorine mixture (at a flow rate of 400 : 40 mL min−1) which produced volatile zinc chloride. The authors concluded that the methodology described was a novel and cheap way of recycling galvanised steel scrap.1.2 Non-ferrous metals and alloysGalbacs and co-workers36 reported on a portable LIBS instrument, built with a microscope using a Q-switched laser. It was observed that 7 multiple pulses separated by 25 ms, improved precision and enhanced emission from targets made of Al, Cu, Si, and Zn compared with single pulse experiments by factors of between 2.5 and 129. These improvements were attributed to reheating of the plasma by the multiple laser pulses. A microchip laser and a handheld spectrometer with an ungated CCD array were used to construct a miniature LIBS instrument, which was then used to analyze 30 reference aluminium alloys.37 The laser emitted low energy pulses (4–15 μJ) with high repetition rates (1–10 kHz) at 1064 nm. LODs ranged from 0.05 to 0.14 wt% and measurement errors varied from 0.06–0.18% for the analytes Fe, Mg, Mn, Ni, Si and Zn. A calibration-free model for LIBS has been proposed by Yaroshchyk et al. whereby a database of emission lines was employed to create a theoretical spectrum based on the defined plasma parameters.38 Elemental compositions were calculated from the observed and theoretical spectra at different plasma conditions. The major elements of brass, bauxite and mineral samples were determined to be within 25% of certified values, in most cases.There were many published accounts of LIBS being used to analyze the composition of archaeological and fine art pieces. The LIBS technique is useful for these samples because the technique is minimally destructive because of the small laser spot size. LIBS was used to uncover the original composition of the bust of St. Gregory the Armenian which was covered by layers of matter from pollution.39 The analysis showed that the bust was covered in layers rich in calcium and revealed that the hair section was silver and the stole of the bust was copper with a decorative coating of gold. Ancient copper artefacts (2500–2000 BC) were analyzed by LIBS and then principal component analysis (PCA) was used to classify the artefacts from their elemental composition.40 In a paper by Fortes and co-workers, archaeological bronze objects from the Bronze and Iron Ages were analyzed for the analytes As, Cu, Fe, Pb and Sn by LIBS.41 The As content has previously been found to be a key indicator in distinguishing between metal artefacts made in the two time periods. The report indicated that sorting by LIBS data was in agreement with the normal archaeological dating criteria. Lazic and colleagues42 used LIBS with a Nd:YAG laser operated at 1064 nm in dual pulse mode to analyze metals (iron, copper based alloys, precious metals etc.) and other materials (e.g. marble and wood) immersed in seawater. Quantitative determinations were possible (for all materials except wood) from calibration curves made from the spectra of similar materials also immersed in seawater.Bian et al.43 found that near IR femtosecond LA-ICP-OES with laser fluence above 5 J cm−2 gave linear, matrix independent calibration curves for calibrants including brass, aluminium and silicate glass. It was reported that accurate analyses were possible with non-matrix matched standards with medium and high laser fluences. The same group also used the same laser system and the same calibrant materials in conjunction with ICP-MS determination.44 It was found that Zn/Cu ratios for brass and aluminium samples were found to be proportional to certified ratios independent of the laser fluence applied. The ion ratios were dependent on the sample cone position in the plasma.A new electrolytic dissolution system that was constructed from a modified syringe barrel which can accommodate aluminium alloy grains and turnings has been reported by Grigoletto and co-workers.45 A platinum disk was fitted to the syringe plunger to maintain electrical contact with the samples in the syringe. Previous apparatus could only be used with solid blocks or plates. The final solution was analyzed by ICP-OES. The authors report that accurate determinations were observed for elements (Cr, Cu, Fe, Mg, Ni, Ti and Zn) above 0.1% and RSDs were at or better than 10% for all elements except Pb.Izmer et al. used LA-ICP-MS to study the elemental diffusion at the interface of NiCrAlY-based coatings on high temperature alloys.46 Both the “linescan” and “single point” modes were used at laser energies of 2 mJ and 4 mJ, respectively, to examine cross sections of the alloyed sample. Quantitative determinations were made from comparison with related reference materials. It was observed that Al diffused from the coating into the alloy and alloying elements (Co, Mo, Ta and W) diffused into the coating at a temperature of 980 °C.Isotopic abundances and atomic weight of neodymium were determined by both multi-channel ICP-MS (MC-ICP-MS) and thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS).47 The results from these techniques were essentially identical. There were several reports where MC-ICP-MS was used to determine the isotopic abundance of samarium,48 lead isotope analysis of archaeological metals,49 and lead isotope analysis of bullets and primers for forensic investigations.50 A simple peak height ratio of Pb 206/Pb 207 from ICP-MS measurements of Pb in copper smelting residues was all that was needed to distinguish material from one ore body in Namibia from other deposits in the area.51Gold colloids in water were analyzed by ICP-MS in single particle mode at 197+ mass to charge ratio.52 Peak distributions were analyzed as a function of the colloid size for five monodisperse colloids (80–250 nm). The size detection limit was estimated to be 25 nm. Another approach to size characterization of gold nano-particles was described by Helfrich, Bruchert, and Bettmer,53 who coupled a liquid chromotograph and a gel electrophoresis to ICP-MS. Liquid chromatography ICP-MS showed size dependent retention and good reproducibility (RSD 1%). Results were comparable to dynamic light scattering and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Gel electrophoresis ICP-MS showed distinct peak tailing which was found to be related to the chemical structure of nano-particles.Despite the widespread use of XRF in the metals industry, few publications occurred during this review period. Jurado-Lopez et al.54 discussed the advantages and limitations of analysing gold and silver jewellery samples by energy dispersive XRF. The authors claim energy dispersive (ED) XRF was comparable to the fire assay cupellation method (Au and Ag) and potentiometric titration (Ag) for a number of samples. Matsuda et al.55 used an EDXRF equipped with 3 dimensional polarization optics to determine toxic metals in brass. Lower limits of detection were estimated to be: 3.3 ppm Cd, 29 ppm Pb, and 6.6 ppm Cr. The application was adapted for the analysis of shaped brass samples using Rayleigh scatter collection. The formation of surface layers on Ti-6Al-4V titanium alloys by laser alloying was examined by an electron microscope equipped with a EDXRF spectrometer.56 The melted zone was analyzed by the EDXRF for composition and phases were identified by XRD with CuKα radiation.Kurmaev57 wrote a review article on the analysis of novel materials by soft X-ray fluorescence spectrometry using synchrotron radiation and related instrumentation. Materials discussed cover a wide range including: nano-particles, alloys, superconductors, half-metallic ferromagnets, and semiconductors. In another article, spatially resolved synchrotron XRF (SR-XRF) was used to analyze rare Rembrandt silverpoint drawings.58 The sensitivity of the technique, spatial resolution, and non-destructive nature of the technique were important considerations in using SR-XRF for the analysis of rare artwork. Small particles of gold foil from indoor decorations were analyzed by SR-XRF in a forensic investigation.59 It was found that particles could be discriminated on the basis of the intensity ratios of AgKα/AuLα lines.Guerra et al.60 determined Pt in ancient gold objects to gain information on the material using two non-destructive methods. A proton induced X-ray emission (PIXE) method was developed using a Cu or Zn filter of 75 μm and a primary As target which had an LOD of 1000 ppm Pt in gold. An XRF method with synchrotron radiation was also developed which employed a Si(Li) detector and a copper filter. The Pt concentration was calculated from Monte Carlo simulations and subtraction of the Au spectra from the samples. The LOD was estimated to be 20 ppm using certified standards. PIXE was utilized to non-destructively analyze metals of historical significance such as: Roman coins61 and Roman military equipment made of metal.62 Ojeda and Rojas63 reviewed the utility of rhodium and its determination by atomic absorption spectrometry in a wide variety of samples including metallurgical materials.A number of analysts employ multiple techniques in addressing metal related problems. Adriaens64 wrote an overview article about the non-destructive testing methods for museum objects which included metals. LA-ICP-MS and electron microprobe analysis (EMPA) were used to quantitatively map elements (Ti, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) in multi-phase magnesium alloys.65 The mapping areas were 350 μm2 with 32 μm spatial resolution and LOD’s of low ppm range with LA-ICP-MS. Buytaert et al.66 examined the near surface of hot- and cold-rolled AlMg0.5 alloy with GD-OES, cross-sectional TEM, and SEM/EDS. In another report,67 the same instrumentation was used along with XRD to investigate composition inhomogeneity of the surface and substrate microstructures in thin-walled AZ91D plate. Higher concentrations of some elements were found on the surface than in the interior.The analysis of ultra high purity materials was discussed in a number of papers. Balaram68 wrote an overview of atomic spectrometric techniques used for analysing high purity tellurium, copper, and other materials. ICP-MS and high resolution-ICP-MS were deemed to be powerful analytical tools because of high sensitivity, limited interferences, element coverage, and sample throughput. Matschat et al.,69 also discussed the different analytical methods used to determine trace elements in high purity copper, iron, and molybdenum.Lim and Isshiki70 determined H, C, N, and O in copper films by GD-MS and SIMS. A gradient composite LiNi0.8Co0.2O2 was characterized using a number of techniques: SEM/EDS, X-ray proton spectrometry (XPS), XRD, and ICP-OES.71 SIMS and XPS were applied to characterize Ni–B amorphous alloys72 and to investigate the surface of aluminium–magnesium alloys after laser cleaning.73Griesser et al.74 investigated brown spot corrosion on historic gold coins and medals using SEM and SIMS. It was determined that the brown spots were inclusions of silver and/or silver and copper particles introduced during the coin minting. The authors concluded that sulfur in the atmosphere (from either air pollution or released from nearby materials) reacted with the particles to form the corrosion spots. To establish better handling procedures for gold coins, the same group used SIMS to investigate the corrosion of gold artefacts.75 Due to the destructive nature of SIMS and the intrinsic value of the pieces, tests were conducted on manufactured coins containing the same level of impurities as the original pieces. The pieces were placed in a potassium sulfide solution to accelerate corrosion. SIMS mass spectra, depth profiles, and images were taken of sites with no corrosion, slight discolouration, and corrosion sites with high levels of sulfur and chlorine.The diffusion of O in nickel at 1000 °C was measured with SIMS.76 The O concentrations were almost the same before and after treatment and were lower than predicted from theory.Chemicals2.1 Petroleum and petroleum productsWith coal providing over 24% of global primary energy needs and generating 40% of the world’s electricity it should come as no surprise that there is significant interest in the analysis and geochemistry of coal. There is additional interest in elemental analysis of emissions and residues (fly ash) related to coal combustion. The elemental composition of particulate material, whether generated from the burning of coal or biomass, also continues to be of interest during the 2006 review period. Methods for the determination of low-level S in fuel and speciation appear to have matured following implementation of directives e.g. EN for gasoline and diesel. However, there is developing interest in measuring elemental composition of alternative alcohol based fuels. In particular, the use of gasohol in Brazil has led to dual fuel ‘flexi-fuel’ vehicles now making up >70% of the current vehicle market in that country. The determination of wear metals in lubricating oils continues to be of interest with new method developments and new techniques such as LIBS being investigated. Factorial design has also appeared in a number of papers covering widely different analyses.There have also been a number of papers examining either products used as alternative fuel sources or for waste incineration. This review will try to report novel aspects of the analysis, which include the various analytical techniques or the sample collection or pre-treatment routes.2.1.1 Petroleum products—gasoline, diesels, gasohol, exhaust particulates. A general overview of the problems posed by trace metals in the petroleum industry is given in a paper by Lienemann that contained 55 references.77 The three main techniques available for trace metals determination were presented and their recent developments discussed. Different introduction modes, used for GFAAS, ICP-OES and ICP-MS were discussed and compared in terms of detection limits. Applications were various and applied to all kinds of petroleum products, from bioethanol to the more common gasoline and diesel, and also to heavier products such as bitumen. A review of the main chromatographic techniques coupled with ICP spectrometry demonstrated the promise of such techniques for the future in terms of speciation of trace metals in petroleum products.Low level determination of S in fuel appears to be well established following the implementation of new specifications in recent years. A paper on this subject by Boulyga et al.78 described an LA-ICP-ID-MS method for direct determination of S in petroleum products. Comparison of LA-ICP-ID-MS results with the certified values of the gas oil reference materials and with results obtained from ICP-ID-MS analyses with wet sample digestion demonstrated the accuracy of the new LA-ICP-ID-MS method. The protocol was capable of determining S in the concentration range of 9.2 μg g−1 (‘sulfur-free’ premium gasoline) to 10.4 mg g−1 (gas oil reference material BCR 107). The detection limit for S by LA-ICP-ID-MS was found to be 0.04 μg g−1 and, since the analysis time was only about 10 min, the method may be used for accurate determinations of low S contents in petroleum products on a routine basis.There is developing interest in measuring the elemental composition of alternative alcohol-based fuels. The development of a method for the determination of trace elements (Ag, Cd, Cu, Pb and Tl) in fuel alcohol by ETV-ICP-MS using ID calibration has been described by Saint’Pierre and co-workers.79 For the analysis, the analytes were split into two groups: Ag and Cu were determined without a modifier and Cd, Pb and Tl were determined with the use of Pd as a chemical modifier. The ETV operational conditions included a pyrolysis temperature of 800 °C for Cd, Pb and Tl and of 900 °C for Ag and Cu and a vaporization temperature of 2400 °C for both groups. Seven common fuels as well as one with additive and one anhydrous fuel ethanol samples were analyzed. The spiked and reference isotopes were, respectively, Ag-109 and Ag-107, Cd-112 and Cd-111, Cu-63 and Cu-65, Pb-206 and Pb-208 and Tl-203 and Tl-205. The added amounts of the enriched isotope material were the same for all samples: 4.6 ng of Ag-109, 5 ng of Cd-112, 21.1 ng of Cu-63, 9 ng of Pb-206 and 0.21 ng of Tl-203. The blank was bi-distilled ethanol, acidified with 0.3% v/v nitric acid. The LODs were calculated as three times the standard deviation of the concentrations in the blank (n = 10) and were: Ag = 0.02, for Cd = 0.08, for Cu = 0.1, for Pb = 0.05 and for Tl = 0.001 μg L−1. The concentrations obtained for the samples were, according to the paired t-test, in agreement with those obtained by external calibration. The ID method was shown to be a robust, fast and simple calibration technique for the analysis of fuel ethanol. In another study Teixeira and colleagues80 developed an on-line system for the preconcentration and determination of Cu, Fe, Ni and Zn at the μg L−1 level using FAAS detection. Amberlite XAD-4 functionalized with 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid packed in a mini-column was used as metal sorbent. The retained analytes were eluted rapidly from the mini-column using hydrochloric acid, with the eluent stream passing directly to the sample introduction system of the FAAS instrument. Analytical parameters were evaluated and the results demonstrated that all the analytes studied could be determined once the sample pH had been adjusted to 8.0 using borate buffer. The procedure was described as being simple and rapid yielding LODs 2.3, 5.0, 7.8, and 0.1 μg L−1 for Cu, Fe, Ni and Zn, respectively. Using a preconcentration time of 60 s and a sample flow rate of 5.5 mL min−1, enrichment factors of 22, 15, 12 and 54 were achieved with precisions of 3.5, 4.4, 4.4 and 3.2% RSD for Cu, Fe, Ni and Zn, respectively. The system presented an analytical throughput of 10 samples per hour and was successfully applied to the determination of metals in ethanol fuel. The development of a method for the determination of trace elements in fuel alcohol by ETV-ICP-MS using external calibration has also been described.81 As a method of sample introduction, ETV avoids the loading of the plasma with organic solvents, allowing the analysis of fuel ethanol by ICP-MS with good accuracy and reasonable precision.Other areas of interest during this review period included hydrodesulfurization of gas oil and the effect of nitrogen on the processing of diesel fuels. A paper by Iwamoto et al.82 described special precautions for evaluating ultra-deep gas oil hydrodesulfurization catalysts in the pilot plant. Analysis using GC-AED and GC-MS showed free S was formed in the hydrodesulfurized product gas oil, if H2S dissolved in the product oil came into contact with air. Although the precise mechanism of free S formation was not clear, direct oxidation of H2S, Claus reaction or the oxidation of ammonium polysulfide were considered as possible routes. Once free S formed in the product gas oil, it was difficult to remove by stripping with nitrogen gas. To prevent the formation of free S completely, H2S should be separated before contacting air in a pilot plant or in a sampling chamber scaled with nitrogen gas. On the other hand, no free S was observed in commercial gas oil, as no contact with air occurs before H2S stripping.A second paper, by Sterry,83 investigated “the influence of pressure and nitrogen compounds on the deep hydrodesulfurization of diesel fuels”. The total content of S in gas oil was determined using XRF spectrometry. Quantitative determination of individual S compounds was obtained using a gas chromatographic analysis and quantitative determination of aromatics was obtained using a liquid chromatographic analysis (HPLC). The increase in pressure led to a greater increase in nitrogen compounds conversion than in desulfurization, whereas the aromatics hydrogenation was also favoured. The increase of nitrogen compounds concentration in gas oil led to a decrease in S compounds conversion. It was also noted that the conversion of 4-methyldibenzothiophene (4-MDBT) was more affected than 4,6-dimethyldibenzothiophene (4,6-DMDBT).Stabilization of gasoline and diesel samples as micro-emulsions has been investigated in two studies. In one by Reyes and Campos the ETAAS determination of Ni and Pb in diesel and gasoline samples stabilized as a micro-emulsion was developed.84 The formation of the micro-emulsion was necessary because it had been seen that in the absence of these emulsions, analyte losses occurred immediately after sampling. Excellent long-term sample stabilization was observed by mixing different organic solvents with propan-1-ol and 50% v/v nitric acid at a 3.3 : 6.5 : 1 volume ratio. The same sensitivity was attained in all organic media stabilized as micro-emulsion investigated in this study. A Pd–Mg modifier or an Ir permanent modifier stabilized the analytes thermally during the ETAAS cycle. Calibration was against standards prepared as hexane micro-emulsions. The LODs were 4.5 and 3.6 μg L−1 for Ni and Pb, which was described as being well below the concentrations found in the samples. The determination of Hg in gasoline by CV-AAS, after direct aqueous NaBH4 reduction in a three-component (micro-emulsion) medium, was investigated.85 Gasoline was mixed with propanol and 50% nitric acid in a ratio of 20 : 15 : 1. Once the Hg vapour had been formed it was collected in a dichromate–sulfuric acid trap. A second reduction step was then undertaken and the Hg vapour collected on a gold–platinum trap. The analyte was then released thermally for measurement. The purpose of the first trap was to ensure that the second was not poisoned by any gasoline vapours. The results obtained with the proposed procedure in the analysis of commercial gasoline samples were in agreement with those obtained by a comparative procedure.2.1.2 Fuels—coal, fly ash, particulates/emissions. The main areas of interest for coal remain in the elemental analysis for geochemical/mineralogy and for environmental/occupational hygiene purposes. For geochemical/mineralogy studies the analyses tend to have focused on either specific elements, e.g. Eskenazy86 investigated the Be content of 3000 samples from 16 Bulgarian coal deposits by atomic emission spectrography; or a broad range of elements, e.g. the concentration and distribution of sixty-one elements in coal samples from DPR Korea were determined by Hu and co-workers.87 In this latter application, several multi-element and element-specific techniques, including ICP-AES, ICP-MS, ion chromatography (IC), CV-AAS and HGAAS were used. A comparison with crustal abundances (Clarke values) showed that some potentially hazardous elements e.g. Ag, As, B, Cd, Cl, Hg, Li, Pb, S, Sb, Se, Sn, Te, W and Zn, were highly enriched in these coal samples; whereas others were only moderately enriched, e.g. Bi, Ce, Cs, Dy, La, Mo, Th, Tl, Tm and U. A comparison between concentration ranges and means of elemental concentrations indicated that the DPR Korea, Chinese and world coals shows the ranges of most elements in coals from Korea were similar. The determination of radioactive elements in paleozoic coals of Siberia was performed by Arbuzov and colleagues.88 Quantitative analytical techniques (INAA, delayed neutron analysis, and XRF) were used to study 2600 samples of coals and their host rocks. The average U and Th concentrations in the coals were 2 and 3 mg kg−1, respectively. The authors determined that elevated U and Th concentrations in coals were often related to rock blocks enriched in radioactive elements in the surroundings of the basins or are correlated with volcanic activity during coal accumulation. It was also found that high concentrations of these elements in coal seams are restricted to zones near the tops of the seams and the soil zones, the boundaries of partings, or to beds enriched in pyroclastic material.On the environmental front, several papers feature on the analysis of particulate emissions. For example, in one paper Goodarzi89 investigated the elemental content of milled coal, combustion residues, and stack emitted materials from a Canadian pulverized coal-fired power plant. Two monitoring studies were performed at four-year intervals on a power plant that used western Canadian sub-bituminous coal and generated approximately 800 MW h−1 of electricity. Several analytes were chosen including some of environmental concern (As, Cd, Hg, Ni and Pb) and others of environmental interest (B, Ba, Be, Cl, Co, Cr, Cu, Mn, Mo, Se, Th, U, V and Zn). Analysis was performed using a variety of techniques including neutron activation analysis (NAA), ICP-OES, ICP-MS, ETAAS (for Pb), and CV-AAS (for Hg). The author calculated that the rates of input of the elements of environmental concern (As, Cd, Hg, Ni and Pb) for this station were 23.65, 1.24, 0.54, 95.2 and 98.2 kg per day, respectively. However, of this, only 0.20, 0.02, 0.31, 0.48 and 0.36 kg per day were emitted from the stack, indicating that the vast majority was trapped within the ash material. The total emission of elements of environmental concern was 1.37 kg per day, which is low compared with their ambient concentrations in either rural or urban air.In a paper by Poole et al.90 a mobile continuous emissions monitoring laboratory, based on ICP-OES technology, was used to study temporal variations in metal concentrations in the flue gas of a waste-to-energy plant. The concentrations of over 30 elements were monitored prior to flue gas clean-up. Despite the adverse conditions experienced; i.e. high particulate loading, variable gas matrix and high concentrations of numerous elements, the authors succeeded in obtaining semi-quantitative measurements. Realistic detection limits were in the range 0.007–0.06 mg m−3, depending on the analyte. For many volatile metals, significant variations in concentration were observed; e.g. 4–18 mg m−3 for Na and 0–0.18 mg m−3 for Cd. These variations were linked to the properties of the metal in question, to the incinerator operating conditions and to variations in the waste feed charge. The authors concluded that emissions could be diminished by better segregation of the waste material used as the fuel.A review of the application of atomic and mass spectrometric techniques for the determination of metals and metalloids in atmospheric aerosols was provided by Smichowski and co-workers.91 The application of many analytical techniques (FAAS, ETAAS, AFS, TXRF and plasma-based techniques such as ICP-OES and ICP-MS) were included in the review. In addition, the use of these analytical techniques for fractionation studies based on the use of chemical sequential extractions for metal partitioning in airborne particulate matter and fly ashes were also discussed. This review, which contained 156 references, covered much of the literature published over the last decade. The analysis of fly ash features in a number of papers including one by Bingol and Akcay92 in which trace elements in fly ash samples collected from the Kangal power plant were determined by FAAS after applying different digestion procedures. The analytes were leached from the samples using appropriate solvents under suitable conditions. The leaching method is known as an effective technique for hard to dissolve substances and refractory materials and is usually used for leaching of analytes from soil and sediment samples. The fly ashes mainly consist of glassy alumino-silicates. The major components of the samples are SiO2, Al2O3, CaO and Fe2O3. Therefore, decomposition of the silicate lattice of the fly ash was required for liberation of trace elements. The leaching reagents used were hydrochloric acid, nitric acid, perchloric acid and a mixture of nitric and perchloric acids; all of which were used in conjunction with some hydrofluoric acid. It was noted that the maximum concentration of analytes leached from the samples occurred after an attack using hydrofluoric acid and hydrochloric acid. The optimum leaching method was determined based on the confidence of analytical results and on the analyte recovery rates.Since coal fly ash due is light-weight and has good mobility, it is a significant solid pollutant. Dutta and Das have modified the well known Tessier sequential extraction procedure by utilizing microwave assisted extraction in an attempt to determine the environmental mobility of the analytes As, Cu, Mn and Zn.93 The elemental analyses of the individual leachates was performed using FAAS and by HG-AAS. A drastic reduction in sample preparation time from 68 h in the original Tessier method to <3.5 h using the microwave-assisted method was reported. Summation of the concentrations found in the individual leachate solutions gave between 88 and 99% of the total concentration of the analytes except for Zn, where a high value of 117% was obtained for a non-certified NIST fly ash sample.2.1.3 Oils—crude oil, lubricants. The main area of interest in the oils section was to provide a better understanding of the composition of wear metals in lubricating oils. The articles fall into two camps, the development of new methods/sample handling and those comparing specific analytical techniques.For example an article by Fischer and Krusberski94 investigated the emulsification of used lubricating oil as a method of sample preparation, prior to the determination of wear-metals in the oil using ICP-OES. The results obtained using this methodology were compared with those obtained using the traditional preparatory methods of ashing and dilution. The oil samples were treated with acid and emulsified in water (1% w/w) using tetralin as a solvent and Triton X-100 as a surfactant. The performance characteristics for each of the sample preparation methods were compared. The calibration for the emulsion method compared favourably with those in the traditional methods of sample preparation. LODs obtained using the emulsion method were lower, in certain cases, than those for ashing and dilution and the precision was on average approximately better than 2% RSD, except where the sample’s concentration value was close to the detection limit.The use of factorial design for optimization of microwave-assisted digestion of lubricating oil was described in a paper by Costa and co-workers,95 who studied experimental parameters such as sample amount, concentrated acid volumes, microwave radiation applied power and digestion time. The residual carbon content and the acidity were determined in all digests after microwave-assisted digestion as response of the factorial design. Two microwave systems were compared; i.e. a cavity- and a focussed-oven and, after digestion, the analytes Ca, Cu, Mg, P, S and Zn were determined in oil digests. The accuracy of the procedure was checked by using NIST SRM 1848-Lubricating Oil Additive Package. Use of analysis of variance (ANOVA) indicated that the digestion time, microwave applied power, sample mass and the interaction between these variables were the significant parameters. Factorial design was also discussed in a paper by de Souza and colleagues96 where two sample emulsification procedures (with and without the detergent Triton X-100) were discussed for the determination of Cr, Mo, Ti and V in diesel and fuel oil by ICP-OES. The variables studied in this paper were the sample amount (between 5 and 25%), the presence of nitric acid and the introduction of oxygen to the auxiliary gas flow of the ICP. Optimal conditions were found to be a sample amount of 10%, the presence of 0.5 mL of nitric acid and an oxygen content of 0.047 L min−1, which was found to minimize both spectral interferences and the build up of carbon deposits on the injector tip.A comparison of ICP-OES and FAAS was discussed in a paper by Vahaoja et al.97 who used a kerosene dilution method for the determination of wear metals in lubricating oils. It was concluded that metal determinations using FAAS were sufficiently accurate for quantitative work in machine condition diagnostics and waste oil characterization, when compared with those data obtained using ICP-OES. The authors Khuhawar and Arain98 used AAS as a comparison technique during an investigation that involved the liquid chromatographic determination of vanadium in petroleum oils and mineral ore samples using 2-acetylpyridne-4-phenyl-3-thiosemicarbazone as derivatizing reagent. The proposed chromatographic method obtained linear calibration curves between 1 and 12.5 μg ml−1 vanadiumV, yielding a LOD of 8 ng for a 20 μL injection. A number of metal ions tested did not affect the determination of V and the results correlated well with reported values and with those obtained using AAS.New analytical approaches were covered in two articles which examined LIBS for the quantitative analysis of used lubricants. One paper, by Yaroshchyk and co-workers, compared the sensitivity of LIBS in laminar liquid jets and at the surface of a static liquid.99 The LODs for the analytes Ag, Al, Ba, Ca, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mg, Mn, Mo, Na, Ni, Ti,V and Zn were determined under similar conditions using both experimental arrangements. The LODs in liquid jets were found to be four times lower, on average, compared with those at static surfaces. It was also noted that data acquisition rates were higher in the jets too. This was attributed to the problems of sample splashing being less in this sample type. A good correlation was obtained between the LIBS results and those obtained using an ICP-OES analysis. In a second paper by the same research group100 a comparison between single- and double-pulse LIBS for the quantitative elemental analysis of used engine oils was performed using paper substrates. Interestingly, this was shown to provide better LODs, no splashing and easier sample handling compared with the previously reported experiments using laminar liquid jets and static liquid surfaces. Single-pulse LIBS analysis of oil on paper substrates yielded LODs, on average, two-fold better than those obtained using flowing liquid jets, while double-pulse LIBS showed a four-fold improvement. The single-pulse LIBS system was preferable for the analysis, since the use of an additional laser in double-pulse LIBS yielded only a minor improvement while adding substantially to the complexity and cost of the system.2.1.4 Alternative fuels. There are a number of papers worthy of further comment that focussed on either alternative fuel sources or waste incineration. For example, Miller and colleagues101 investigated the fate of trace elements during the co-combustion of wood-bark with agricultural waste, pulp sludge and waste under simulated fluidized bed combustion conditions. A novel suspension-firing reactor has been used to achieve these conditions, with operation at 800 and at 900 °C, with an air/fuel ratio of 121 throughout. Experimental results were interpreted using a thermodynamic equilibrium model. The behavior of seven trace elements (Cd, Cr, Mn, Ni, Pb, Se and Zn) was studied using ICP-MS as a means of detection. In addition, an AAS-based technique was used to study the behavior of Hg. The experimental data indicated significant emissions of all the elements except Ni and Se, which were present in the fuels at a concentration below the lower limit of quantification. The authors said that the majority of fuel Hg is likely to be emitted from the combustor, irrespective of fuel blend employed, and that the level of emissions of Cd, Cr and Mn may be affected significantly by the addition of auxiliary fuel.Biomass burning in a small Swedish city was studied using EDXRF in a paper by Lindgren et al.102 Biomass is increasingly used in energy plants of different size and sophistication in Sweden because of the country’s large forest-covered areas. Incineration of biomass in an environmentally friendly manner is one of the key issues in Swedish policy for sustainable development. Hence there is ongoing research on the effects of biomass burning on the air quality in Swedish cities. Airborne particulate matter (PM 2.5 and PM 2.5–10 fractions) collected from the centre of the small city Vaxjo were analyzed using EDXRF. In order to identify typical indicators for biomass burning, principle component analysis was performed on data on elemental contents and black carbon. Analysis suggested that the K/Zn ratio will be useful as an indicator for biomass incineration.Accurate knowledge of the concentrations of K and other elements is critical for evaluating the effects of straw and other high-fouling biomass fuels in combustion boilers and other thermal systems. Development of accurate and precise analytical procedures is therefore essential for utilization of biomass fuels in energy production and high-temperature applications. By comparing the results of XRF analyses with similar analyses performed using INAA, Thy and co-workers observed that 20–25% of the original K2O content of straw ashes and slag was lost during sample preparation for analysis.103 The loss occurred during heating of the ashes to determine loss on ignition probably as a result of the breakdown of sylvite (KCl). This loss can be significantly reduced, but not completely eliminated, if the analyses are performed on ashes that have not previously been heat-treated. The study posed the cautionary note that similar losses may occur during XRF analyses of other agricultural and soil samples containing high amounts of alkali metal halides.2.2 Organic chemicals and solventsThere are several interesting developments in sample introduction, speciation and preconcentration for the analysis of organic chemicals in this review period. The common themes are the need for speciation, and ever decreasing detection limits in pharmaceutical and environmental analysis. Additionally, preparation of solid samples for atomic analysis is an area where useful work has been carried out and a review on this subject is included. This review by Sneddon et al. included several recent applications of digestions including soils, sediments, foods, cosmetics, oils and coal.104 Volatile halogenated compounds are important materials in the environment. A review by Dewulf and colleagues of the analysis of volatile halogenated compounds (HVOCs) has been prepared.105 This paper surveyed recent literature on the analysis of HVOCs and included new sorbent materials such as multi-walled carbon nanotubes and solid phase micro-extraction based preconcentration techniques for the enrichment and thermal desorption of HVOCs in air and water samples. Important developments in separation include two-dimensional gas chromatography whilst atomic emission detection, ICP-MS and isotope ratio MS were seen as important techniques in HVOC identification and quantitation. One paper described the use of surfactants of varying types and chain lengths to improve sensitivity by increasing nebulization efficiency in FAAS analysis of aqueous solutions of chromiumIII and chromiumVI.106 Solid-phase microextraction (SPME) was reported frequently and a paper by Darrouzes and co-workers described the use of SPME for improved quantitation of butyl- and phenyltin compounds.107 Here the Sn species were ethylated prior to concentration by head space SPME. Partition coefficients were estimated by using quantitative structure–activity relationships. Stirring and reduced pressure resulted in higher efficiency with up to an eight-fold improvement in detection limits. The phenomenon of the cloud point is widely utilized in separations and preconcentrations. The cloud point is observed when non-ionic surfactants at concentrations above the critical micelle concentration undergo a phase separation when the temperature is increased. This results in a micelle rich phase in which hydrophobic analytes or derivatives can be concentrated. A procedure based on cloud point extraction and GFAAS analysis has been reported for the determination of trace Sn in water samples.108 This procedure involved the chelation of Sn with 8-hydroxyquinoline and with Triton X-114 being added as the surfactant. The parameters affecting the extraction efficiency were optimized and a preconcentration factor of almost 100 was achieved for a 20 mL water sample. Detection limits as low as 0.012 ng mL−1 were achieved and recoveries of 85–112% reported. Both SbIII and SbV have been speciated by selective separation/preconcentration by cloud point extraction in a paper by Fan.109 This procedure utilized the complexation of SbIII with n-benzoyl-N-phenylhydroxylamine (BPHA), which can enter the micelle rich phase, whereas SbV does not. The micelle rich phase was then analyzed by FAAS and SbV determined by subtraction from the total Sb. This procedure was applied to the speciation of Sb in sea water and detection limits in the low ng mL−1 range were achieved. Organophosphorus pesticides in spiked river water samples have been determined by SPME coupled to GC-EI-MS and GC-ICP-MS.110 Experimental conditions including type of fiber, extraction mode, time, temperature, salt additives and pH were optimized and the optimum extraction procedure was evaluated by means of GC-MS using electron impact ionization and GC-ICP-MS. It was found that the addition of small percentages of nitrogen to the argon carrier gas enhanced the sensitivity of the ICP-MS detection. Detection limits were approximately an order of magnitude lower by GC-ICP-MS than for GC-MS. Ghiasvand et al.111 described a simple and efficient method for the selective preconcentration of Ag+ using a homogeneous liquid–liquid extraction procedure. Tetraspirocyclohexylcalix{4}pyrrole (TSCC4P) was synthesized and investigated as a ligand for the selective complexation of Ag+. Optimal conditions were established, including the concentration of a phase-separator agent. The maximum concentration factor was 300-fold and the detection limit by ETAAS was 5 ng L−1 in a range of water samples. Quantitation of dissolved metal species in natural waters has been optimized through the development of a multi-element extraction procedure based on the cloud point phenomenon.112 Here six metal species were extracted from water samples as their pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate complexes and isolated from the aqueous matrix in the micelles of a non-ionic surfactant. The experimental conditions were presented in detail and the procedure was applied to the survey of two ecosystems in Greece. Cloud point extraction for the preconcentration of Cd in physiological, environmental and tobacco samples has been employed by Coelho and Arruda113 and FAAS detection limits as low as 0.9 μg L−1 were reported. In the field of metal–protein interaction analysis Chamoun and Hagege114 have enhanced the sensitivity of CE-ICP-MS by employing a preconcentration step by large volume stacking with polarity switching. The interface was modified to allow delivery of either the buffer when performing preconcentration, or the make up solution when separation occurs. The procedure was evaluated on a mixture of proteins and injection volumes were increased 10 times with no loss in resolution giving a 6 fold sensitivity improvement. The process was applied to studies of the interactions of Cd with a mixture of test proteins. This demonstrated the ability of CE-ICP-MS for fast screening of weak metal–protein interactions and interactions of Cd2+ with several proteins can be revealed in less than 35 min. One paper has reported a miniaturized atomic emission detector with picolitre sample introduction by an inkjet microchip.115 The finger-sized atomic emission detector used a helium RF plasma and the performance of this detector was evaluated for Cl determination using 1,1,1-trichloro-2-methyl-2-propanol dissolved in isopropanol. The ejection volume of one droplet from the inkjet microchip was calculated as 463 pl, (5100 droplets were 2.36 ± 0.04 μl (n = 5)). A linear response between the number of droplets and Cl amount was achieved and the repeatability of the emission intensity was 7.1% RSD (n = 6) for a 2.5 mg mL−1 sample solution. The limit of detection limit of chloretone was 184 pg (3σ) and the detectable concentration was estimated to be 85 μg mL−1 by the injection of four droplets of the sample solution.Speciation analysis is becoming increasingly important in environmental investigations for risk assessments and ultimately, legislation. Snell and Quetel116 described the calculation of uncertainty by the combination of all uncertainties associated with each parameter of the traceability chain. The paper showed how a methylmercury measurement was made by GC-ICP-MS and how understanding of the measurement process could make the result reliable and comparable to results made between laboratories. The largest sources of uncertainty were from the degree to which the sample plus spike equilibration could be proved, the certified methylmercury content of the spike material and sample homogeneity. Parallel ICP-MS and EI-MS detection after GC separation is a unique tool for simultaneous identification and quantitation of volatile heteroatomic organic compounds.117 This technique combined the quantitative benefits of the element specific ICP-MS with the structural identification capabilities of the EI-MS. As proof of concept, parallel detection of four iodo-alkanes (iodomethane, iodoethane, 1-iodopropane, 2-iodopropane) with EI-MS and ICP-MS after GC separation was demonstrated. Bio-fuels are becoming increasingly important and rapid on line quantitation of metals in ethanol is required for the production of bio-fuels. Several papers report on the use of immobilised resins for the on-line preconcentration of analytes. One paper reported the use of ammonium morpholinedithiocarbamate immobilized on Amberlyst A-26 resin to preconcentrate Co as its chelate.118 Again, detection limits were in the low ppb range. One paper employed physical enhancement of the ionization process for extra sensitivity in ICP-MS analysis. It is well documented that an increased population of carbon ions or carbon-containing ions in the plasma facilitates a more complete ionization of analytes lower in ionization energy than carbon itself, and this effect has been used in ICP-MS to enhance the sensitivity of As and Se. A paper by Kovacevic and Goessler has reported the use of direct introduction of volatile carbon compounds into the spray chamber of an ICP-MS system.119 The volatile compounds investigated included acetone, methanol and acetic acid. The signals for As and Se were enhanced by a factor of 4 and the procedure was applied successfully to the determination of Se in natural water samples, urine and bovine liver reference materials.Bio-analysis is very important and this is reflected in the number of papers published in the field. The biosynthesis of a Se containing protein to produce a standard has been reported by Ballihaut et al.120 This procedure consisted of the expression of calmodulin in an Escherichia coli culture in the presence of selenomethionine. This allowed the replacement of all methionine residues by selenomethionine. The resulting 17 kDa protein containing 8 selenomethionine residues was purified by hydrophobic interaction chromatography. The selenomethionyl calmodulin was then used to develop a method for the characterization of Se-containing proteins separated by gel electrophoresis and detected by LA-ICP-MS. Peptide mapping by capillary HPLC-ICP-MS was then carried out. The sensitivity of this procedure was reported to be at least 5 times that of capillary LC-electrospray MS/MS. Reversed-phase nano-HPLC has been interfaced with ICP-MS for the I.D. analysis and accurate quantitation of Se-containing peptides in tryptic digests of proteins.121 This allowed the stable introduction of a mobile phase containing up to 90% acetonitrile into the plasma at flow rates of less than 500 nL min−1. On-line post-column addition of an isotopically enriched spike at flow rates of less than 4 mL min−1 enabled isotope dilution quantitation of heteroatom containing analytes with very low consumption of the labelled species. This procedure was applied to the accurate determination of selenopeptides in nanolitre volumes of a tryptic digest of selenomethionyl calmodulin (17002 Da). Following separation by reversed phase nano-HPLC, detection was by ICP-collision cell MS for the simultaneous determination of 80Se and the 76Se spike. A detection limit of 40 fg 80Se was reported. The percentage of acetonitrile in the mobile phase did not affect sensitivity and Se recovery was 103 ± 4%. One approach for the minimization of solvent effects in HPLC-ICP-OES and HPLC-ICP-MS detection of heteroatom containing species in pharmaceutical analysis is the use of ultrasonic nebulization coupled with membrane desolvation.122,123 This has greatly enhanced detection limits in the determination of P containing pharmaceutical molecules with the solvent and buffer concentrations only moderately affecting the signal response. Speciation is of critical importance and Bresson et al.124 described a procedure for Co speciation in the cobalt–cysteine system by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry and anion exchange chromatography-ICP-OES. ESI-MS allowed the identification and the characterization of the analytes and anion exchange-ICP-OES provided elemental information on the separated species. For the first time a direct experimental speciation diagram of Co species was established. One paper has reported the use of micro-XRF as an elemental imaging technique for the determination of the distribution of pharmaceutical materials in tablet formulations.125 A new approach to the qualitative and quantitative determination of nucleic acids has been reported by Brewer et al.126 Particle beam hollow cathode optical emission spectrometry (PB/HC-OES) has been applied to the determination of five nucleotides (AMP, ADP, dATP, dCTP and dGTP) by monitoring P at 219.9 nm and C at 193.0 nm. A high correlation was found between the P emission and the degree of phosphorylation, demonstrating the techniques ability to yield quantitative information for specific nucleotides, with detection limits at the single ng level for P and pg level for C. A stoichiometric response was achieved allowing identification of nucleotides based on the amount of phosphate present. The potential for the use of this technique as an element specific detector for liquid chromatography was demonstrated. Laser ablation-ICP-MS has been applied by Muller and co-workers to the determination of protein bound Au in gels and gel blots.127 As any structural information available is lost in the plasma, direct characterization of proteins is not possible; however a novel LA-ICP-MS procedure was described which detected proteins by the use of antibodies conjugated to a gold cluster. Separation is by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transfer to a blotting membrane. The protein was then marked using a primary antibody which was covalently coupled to a Au cluster. This Au cluster was then detected by LA-ICP-MS. Excellent linearity and a 0.2 amol detection limit was achieved and the procedure allowed simultaneous multi-element determination of protein-bound metals. This paper applied the procedure to the analysis of the Mre11 protein which is an essential protein involved in DNA repair in mammalian cells. Isotopically enriched metalloproteins have been employed in species specific isotope dilution analysis of proteins by HPLC-ICP-MS.128 An isotopically enriched metalloprotein was prepared for use as a calibrant. A model system involving the copper protein rusticyanin from Acidothiobacillus ferroxidans was used to demonstrate the analytical conditions that could be employed for metalloproteins by HPLC-ID-ICP-MS. Rusticyanin was chosen as it is a well characterized protein with an established amino acid sequence and is easily produced using the above bacterial recombinant system. Optimum conditions for the conformational stability of the protein were established using electrospray mass spectrometry and then HPLC-ICP-MS was used to verify the stability of the Cu centre by analysis of mixtures of different isotopic solutions. No exchange of the enriched Cu isotope from rusticyanin with an added naturally abundant Cu cation was observed under a neutral pH environment, indicating that species specific ID-MS analysis of metalloproteins is possible. Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS), traditionally used for radiocarbon dating has revolutionized high sensitivity isotope detection in pharmacology and toxicolgy. The sensitivity of this technique is enabling the acquisition of pharmacokinetic data in humans using ultra-low levels of radiolabels and isotopes including 14C and 3H which are detectable down to atto-molar levels. A paper by Brown et al. described the use of AMS for the determination of 14C labelled potential carcinogens in proteins or DNA in tissues and the relationship between low level exposure and covalent binding of genotoxic chemicals has been compared in rodents and humans.129 Such compounds included heterocyclic amines, benzene and tamoxifen. Laser secondary neutral mass spectrometry (laser-SNMS) and time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) are capable of highly sensitive detection with spatial resolution of up to 80 nm. Kriegeskotte et al.130 investigated the ability of laser-SNMS to study transportation processes in animals of B containing compounds used for neutron capture therapy. They presented data which showed that laser-SNMS could successfully measure the distribution of these compounds in tissues with sub-cellular resolution.Pharmaceutical distribution within a tablet formulation is critical to product performance and process control. Molecular techniques including Raman, near-IR and fluorescence imaging are commonly used for spatial and compositional analysis. Elemental species are also an important aspect of pharmaceutical formulation and a paper has reported the use of micro-XRF imaging for monitoring elemental composition and heterogeneity.125 Several significant advances in instrumentation have been reported during this review period. Laser excited atomic fluorescence (LEAFS) and laser enhanced ionization (LEI) are very sensitive methods for elemental analysis. Butcher131 discussed the transitions involved in these techniques and reviewed the instrumentation employed. Several recent developments in LEAFS and LEI were reviewed including the determination of Al, Cr, Hg, Pb and Tm using various graphite furnace atomizers. The use of LEAFS and LEI as detectors for GC for the determination of volatile Sn compounds and the determination of several elements by LEI within a flame were also discussed. An Okamoto-cavity MIP with a nitrogen–oxygen gas mixture was employed as an atomization and excitation source for emission analysis of directly aspirated organic solvents.132 The authors demonstrated good linearity for elements in both IBMK and water.A number of papers reported developments in the analysis of Chinese medicines, especially for the determination of potentially toxic impurities in medicinal products and herbs. A newly designed electrochemical hydride generator has been reported by Zhang and colleagues that was capable of the simultaneous determination of As and Sb in Chinese medicine samples.133 The hydride generator was a tubular electrolytic cell consisting of a graphite tube cathode and a platinum anode. Gaseous hydrides of As and Sb were generated at the cathode and transported through a gas–liquid separator by an argon flow to the atomizer. Detection was by atomic fluorescence. Speciation of inorganic As in human hair, also by an electrochemical hydride generation procedure but with detection by FAAS has been reported by Li et al.134 Glassy carbon was the cathode within a flow cell in this case. Both AsIII and AsV were speciated by employing different cathodic currents and the concentrations of AsV and AsIII were calculated according to the equations of absorbance additivity obtained at the two selected currents. The procedure was validated by the analysis of a human hair CRM. It was also applied to the speciation of inorganic As in Chinese medicine. The quantitative determination of Hg in traditional Chinese medicines by on line thermolysis followed by detection of the Hg by atomic absorption has been reported.135 This technique had the advantage of requiring no sample pretreatment and was capable of determinations from the ng g−1 to mg g−1 range with precision of 2.1 to 8.2% being achieved. Mercury concentrations in several traditional Chinese medicines were investigated and found to differ widely depending on the manufacturer. This suggested that contamination and the presence of Hg in raw herbal materials were the main sources of Hg in the finished products.Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) has been evaluated for its potential as a process analytical tool for the rapid determination of magnesium stearate within and between tablets as well as between batches in a manufacturing run.136 Pulsed Nd:YAG laser radiation at 1064 nm was used and the intensity of the Mg spectral lines at 517.27 nm and 518.36 nm were measured depending on the product tested, to quantify the analyte at the 0.5% level expected in the product. For eight batches of one product, using 10 tablets from each batch, the intra-tablet, intra-batch and inter-batch magnesium stearate precisions were found to be 13.8%, 5.4% and 7.4%, respectively. Further studies showed different depth distributions of the analyte associated with roller compacted or direct compressed tablets. Determination of macro- and trace elements in multi-vitamin preparations by ICP-OES with slurry sample introduction has been reported by Krejcova and colleagues.137 The authors determined a range of elements in 0.1–0.2% slurries prepared in 6% nitric acid. Good precision for the macro-elements together with satisfactory agreement of the concentrations with those found by independent laboratories was obtained. The authors proposed that this was a good technique for routine quality control of multi-vitamin preparations. Ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) has been coupled to ICP-MS for the fast determination (2.7 min) of three Br containing preservatives in a commercially available cosmetic formulation, monitoring the two Br isotopes simultaneously.138 A highly efficient packing column material of 1.7 μm particle diameter gave excellent resolution and rapid analysis time with a detection limit of 20 μg l−1 being reported. Jia and co-workers139 presented the determination of Ru in pharmaceutical compounds by ETAAS. Samples were dissolved or diluted in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and the analyte was found to be stable in these samples for at least five days. Spike recoveries ranged from 81 to 100% and the same set of samples analyzed by ICP-MS with a different sample preparation showed an excellent agreement.Poykio et al.140 presented a study on the leachability of metals in fly ash from a pulp and paper mill and environmental risk characterization for utilization as a fertilizer. The fly ash from the mill was enriched in Ca, K, Mg and P and could therefore be used as a soil amendment for liming purposes. The possible environmental risk associated with the use of the fly ash as fertilizer, especially the Cd load, was estimated. A wide range of metals found in fly ash (As, Ba, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, K, Ni, Pb, Ti, V and Zn) were determined using a sequential leaching procedure. Graphite furnace AAS was used to measure the metals’ content and the efficiency of the leaching procedure was tested using the reference material SRM 1633b (coal fly ash). Wuilloud et al.141 have reported the use of ICP-MS detection for capillary electrophoretic separation of organophosphorus pesticides (OPPs). Element specific detection of 31P was used for the detection of the three common OPPs glyphosphate, glufosinate and aminoethylphosphonic acid. Different CE conditions were studied to optimize the separation which was achieved in 10 min using the optimized system. Much lower detection limits were achieved than were previously achieved with flame photometric detection and the methodology was applied to the determination of OPPs in natural river water samples. Richardson et al.142 employed reversed phase ion pair HPLC-ICP-MS for the determination of organophosphorus chemical warfare agent degradation products. Ethylmethylphosphonic acid (EMPA, the major hydrolysis product of VX), isopropyl methylphosphonic acid (IMPA, the major hydrolysis product of Sarin) and methylphosphonic acid (MPA, the final hydrolysis product of both) were separated by the above chromatographic procedure (the conditions were described in the paper) and detected by ICP-MS equipped with collision/reaction cell technology. Historically ICP-MS detection of P has been limited because of its high first ionisation potential and the presence of several severe polyatomic interferences. However, the use of the octopole reaction cell with helium as the cell gas removed the polyatomic interferences and detection limits for EMPA, IMPA and MPA were 263, 183 and 139 pg mL−1, respectively, with separation in less than 15 min. A high throughput procedure for screening combinatorial libraries using micro-XRF has been developed.143 This work was carried out as a response to the increasing threat of the use of chemical warfare agents in military campaigns and against civilians. The technique has been used to screen materials at the mesoscale level (tens to hundreds of microns) for elemental composition and this work described the use of a commercial instrument coupled with the inherent heteroatom elements within target molecules of the combinatorial reaction to provide rapid and specific identification of lead species. This was demonstrated by screening an oligopeptide library for selective binding of the degradation products of the nerve agent VX. The identified oligopeptides could be used as selective molecular receptors for sensor development. The micro-XRF screening method was non-destructive, required minimal sample preparation or special tags for analysis and the screening time depended on the desired sensitivity. A range of chlorophenol compounds in water and soil samples were determined using capillary GC-AED by Campillo et al.144 Here, a purge and trap preconcentration system coupled to a GC with a MIP-AED was used to determine 2-chlorophenol (2-CP), 2,4-dichlorophenol (2,4-DCP), and 2,4,6-trichlorophenol (2,4,6-TCP). The analytes were previously leached (with the assistance of an ultrasonic probe) from solid matrices into a 5% (w/v) sodium carbonate solution. The phenols were acetylated to enhance their partition into the headspace, prior to purging them from the aqueous medium. Detection limits of 23 to 150 ng L−1 were achieved for chlorophenols in water. For soil samples the detection limits ranged from 80 to 540 pg g−1.Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) is an analytical technique with potential for rapid and sensitive chemical analysis of a wide range of materials. Its main advantages rely on the capability for direct analysis of solid, liquid and gaseous samples with little or no sample preparation. Analysis is simultaneous and multi-elemental. These attributes show promise in the detection and identification of hazardous materials and in situ analysis in hazardous areas and the large number of publications in this review period reflect these potential advantages. A series of experiments has been performed highlighting the potential of LIBS as a means of detecting terrorist threats.145 LIBS was used in a series of laboratory experiments to interrogate a variety of different target samples including explosives, chemical warfare simulants, biological agent simulants and landmine casings. The acquired spectra were used to demonstrate discrimination between different chemical warfare simulants, including those on soil backgrounds. A portable LIBS was developed as a collaborative effort between the US Army Research Laboratory and Ocean Optics, Inc. Remote detection of explosive residues on solid surfaces at distances of up to 45 m using LIBS has been demonstrated in the UK by Lopez-Moreno et al.146 A field portable open path LIBS instrument working under coaxial configuration was used. Carbon Swan bands and H, O and N emission intensity ratios were the parameters required to categorise the sample as either an organic explosive, organic non-explosive or a non-organic sample. A field test with known samples and a blind test were run at a distance of 30 m from the sample. Many conventional techniques employed measure the nitro- group in the vapour phase in explosive materials. Significant disadvantages of these techniques however are false positives from nitrogen containing polymers such as melamine and polyamides, and the fact that they are limited to organic compounds with significant vapour pressures. The LIBS system gave correct identification of energetic compounds under such conditions in 19 out of 21 samples. LIBS has also been used for the quantitation of Cl and F in pharmaceuticals, air and organic chemicals used in chemical weapons.147 The determination and statistical classification of a number of biological warfare agents including bacterial spores, moulds, pollens and nerve agents has been carried out.148 Various spectral averaging and weighting schemes were investigated to improve the sample differentiation.A very significant research area concerns the analysis of historical artefacts including paintings, pigments and fragments of various historical objects. By necessity, many analytical techniques are non-destructive and XRF, including micro-XRF are commonly employed. An interesting micro-technique described by Paternoster et al.149 involved XRF and micro-Raman stratigraphic microanalyses of fragments of some Roman mural paintings belonging to the archaeological site of Oplonti (Napoli) and the Vigna Barberini site in the Palatino (Rome). The emitted X-ray fluorescence was collimated using a polycapillary conic collimator (PCC) in front of the detector and this arrangement was sufficiently compact to be portable. The nature of the pigments, the compositional elements and the thickness were studied and information on the preparation techniques was established. The authentication of paintings is a subjective process, but modern techniques may provide the means to provenance artist’s pigments based on elemental composition.Smith et al.150 reported on a prototype device designed to reduce damage and allow for insitu sampling of art works. This study applied LA-ICP-MS to the analysis of paints from different manufacturers and identified variation between the elemental association patterns of these paints whilst causing minimal damage to the painting. Lead isotope abundance ratios were employed to authenticate paintings.151 Paintings by various artists including Rubens and van Dyck were studied. An interdisciplinary approach, using analytical methods, art technological and historical knowledge was employed. Minute samples were taken from selected art collections and investigated using a range of analytical techniques including mass spectrometry, SEM and EDXRF. High precision Pb isotope abundance ratios were determined by multi-collector ICP-MS. Scatter plots of abundance ratios for pigments from Rubens, van Dyck and others exhibited a very narrow distribution forming a cluster. Comparisons of this data to Italian sample pigments from the same period revealed a clear distinction which is explainable by the distinct origin of raw materials for the pigments. An unexpected conclusion was that local ores were not used for the pigment production, but were from British or German sources.Bitossi et al.152 presented a review of spectroscopic techniques in cultural heritage conservation. Easel paintings, paper and ink artefacts, stone monuments, wall paintings and archaeological ceramics were all considered in this review and a range of spectroscopic techniques including XRF, PIXE and Mossbauer spectroscopy were considered. A range of pigments in 17th century icons found in Albania have been identified to establish whether the same pigments were used on all the icons, and whether this information could be utilized in future restoration projects.153 TXRF and Raman microscopy were employed to identify the pigments, and this combination of techniques minimized the number and amount of samples taken from each icon. Keune and Boon applied imaging SIMS for the first time to paint cross sections with degraded vermillion (red mercury sulfide) paint in a study of the well known problem of light induced darkening.154 The static SIMS data were combined with light and electron microscopy, and EDXRF to identify and localize the various reaction products. The spatial distribution of atomic and molecular species in the paint cross sections has led to the development of a new hypothesis on the reaction mechanism of the photodegradation of vermillion where two black and white reaction products are formed sequentially. Here it is proposed that the Hg0 is deposited on the surface of the remaining HgS as elementary mercury nano-particles, which turns the vermillion black. An interesting piece of work elucidating the origin of colour in archaeological Egyptian blue and green pigments by XAFS at the Cu K-edge has been reported by Pages-Camagna et al.155 Previous work had found different Cu-bearing amorphous and crystalline phases in both pigments but the exact colouring mechanism could not be elucidated by SEM-EDX, TEM, XRD, micro-Raman and UV-visible spectroscopies. These phases were believed to be the origin of the blue and turquoise colours. Due to the precision of Cu speciation, XAFS data at the copper K-edge gave new insight into the origin of the colour in both pigments. In Egyption blue it was found that CuII was mainly allocated in a square-planar site in a crystalline cuprorivaite phase, whereas in Egyptian green, the CuII was allocated in a elongated octahedral site in an amorphous phase. Identification of inks and the order in which the ink layers are applied on a paper substrate are important factors in authentication of contemporary prints. LIBS has been used to determine the chemical composition and structural distribution of the constituent materials on prints.156 Acquisition of several spectra at the same location enabled identification of the order in which the inks were applied. Depth profile analysis by means of LIBS has been used by Pouli and colleagues to investigate the thickness of different types of thin organic films used as protective coatings on historical and archaeological metal objects.157 For acrylic varnish and microcrystalline wax, the output from a nanosecond ArF excimer laser at 193 nm was found to be appropriate for performing a reliable profiling of the coating films. Determination of the thickness of the coating was based on the number of laser pulses required to penetrate the coating and on the ablation etch rate of the corresponding coating material under the same irradiation conditions. Although nanosecond pulses at 248 nm proved to be inadequate to profile the coatings because of their weak absorption at the laser wavelength, femtosecond pulses yielded well resolved profiles. Proton induced X-ray emission (PIXE) has been employed as a non destructive analytical method for the identification of inks, pigments, dyes, surface layers and inorganic impurities in historic objects made of organic materials.158 The measurement of elemental concentrations in these materials provides a sound basis for investigation of their composition and degradation processes. PIXE has been found to be a useful technique in evaluating the viability of a range of potential conservation procedures by measuring the elemental changes before and after the process has been carried out. It does however have several limitations but its major advantages are that it is sensitive, non-destructive and has good accuracy in determining composition and concentration distribution over a wide range of elements. Characterization of iron gall inks in historic hand written documents has been reported by Budnar and co-workers, utilising the non-destructive capabilities of PIXE.159 Here, the errors arising from the non-uniform ink deposit, proton penetration depth and diameter of the proton beam compared with the width of the ink strata as well as the PIXE geometry were discussed. It was concluded that the main errors were attributable to the fact that PIXE is a surface technique and that analysis is confined to a small area of the sample while ink deposits are usually not of uniform depth. Despite the uncertainties arising from these features of the technique the authors reported good correlation between determinations obtained by PIXE and AAS on model samples. Micro-XRF techniques have also been used by Hahn et al. for the qualitative and quantitative determination of Fe in gall inks, pencils and coloured crayons.160 The capabilities of LA-ICP-MS for depth profiling analysis of car paints have been explored and the use of the signal profiles for the forensic identification of vehicles involved in hit and run incidents was evaluated.161 Depth-profiling of paint samples gave detailed information on the elemental composition of the individual layers (clear coat, base coat, primer surfacer and first primer). It was found that when using a quadrupole ICP-MS instrument the complexity of the matrix composition of some of the layers resulted in specific interferences, and significantly affected the signal profiles obtained especially for transition metals. The deviation of experimentally determined isotope ratios from the theoretical values was assessed as a useful indicator of spectral overlap. The use of a sector field instrument operated at medium resolution (R = 4000) permitted most interfering ions to be identified and documented on the basis of their accurate mass to charge ratios. The signal profiles thus obtained enabled car paints of the same colour to be discriminated from one another on the basis of elemental composition of the individual layers.Catarino et al.162 have reported a method useful for the routine ETAAS measurement of Cu in red and white wines at a concentration of 1 to 50 μg L−1 by using a conventional thermal programme, although better results were obtained when using matrix modifiers (palladium and magnesium nitrates). The method involved reduced risk of sample contamination by eliminating prior treatment other than a one in five dilution. White and red wines with several Cu concentration ranges were used for method validation. Comparable values of concentrations were obtained by both ETAAS and ICP-MS. “Cork taint”, a musty-mouldy off-odour, represents one of the most serious problems in the wine industry. The compound 2,4,6-trichloroanisole (TCA), along with other compounds, is known to be responsible for this effect. Gomez-Ariza et al.163 reported a new method that they applied to red and white Spanish wines based on headspace solid-phase micro-extraction (HS-SPME) followed by GC separation and a two dimensional detection by coupling an electron capture detector (ECD) to an ICP-MS instrument. The in-series use of ECD and ICP-MS detectors combine halogen sensitivity from the ECD with the selectivity of ICP-MS to confirm these compounds in complex matrices. A multivariate optimization approach was employed and the optimized method HS-SPME-GC-ECD-ICP-MS showed good detection limits for all the analytes as well as high precision and sample throughput. Continuous flow HG-AFS has been used for the determination and speciation of As in wine.164L-cysteine was used as a reagent for pre-reduction and complexation of arsenite, arsenate, monomethylarsenate and dimethylarsenate. The optimized procedure enabled the determination of these species at the low μg L−1 level. The authors also reported the determination of As species by anion exchange chromatography with HG-AFS detection. Korenovska and Suhaj165 proposed a model for traceability of Slovakian wines to different regions and differentiation from imported wines using elemental markers determined by AAS. Principal component analysis (PCA) and factoring (PCF) were used for elements variability determination and visualization of data. For the regional segregation of Slovakian wines according to the vineyard production areas, the Ba, Ca, Co, Cr, Li, Mg, Rb, Sr and V markers resulted in a very efficient differentiation of Slovakian wines from many European ones. European wines differ in content mainly of Ca, Mg, Rb and Sr. The discrimination worked best for Portuguese, Italian, Spanish and partially for French wines. For geographical authentication, factor analysis of multi-element composition data was a more effective tool than PCA statistics. Multi-element ICP-MS and multivariate analysis of the data has been used to classify wines according to their geographical area.166 Forty wines from three regions, Stellenbosch, Robertson and Swartland in the Western Cape, were analyzed to determine 40 elements. In this wine provenance study, classification of the wines into one of the groups was 100% successful. Sperkova and Suchanek167 used ICP-OES and ICP-MS to analyze 53 samples of wines and found best results for identification of sample origin were achieved when determining the following elements: Al, Ba, Ca, Co, K, Li, Mg, Mn, Mo, Rb, Sr and V and element ratios Sr/Ba, Sr/Ca, and Sr/Mg. Correct classification of 97.4% of white wines and 100% of red wines was achieved using these parameters.A novel procedure for the determination of S in wine has been reported by Huang et al.168 This procedure was based on the measurement of the molecular absorption of carbon monosulfide (CS) in an ordinary air–acetylene flame by using high resolution continuum-source AAS including a novel high-intensity short arc xenon lamp. A novel reagent-free procedure for the determination of Hg in alcoholic beverages has been reported by Li and co-workers.169 This procedure utilized photo-induced Hg vapour generation and used the sample matrix as the reducing agent, with AFS detection. In the presence of UV radiation the matrix, predominantly ethanol, reduced the mercury compounds or ions to atomic Hg which was swept into an atomic fluorescence spectrometer. Under the optimised conditions the Hg detection limit was 70 pg mL−1. A standard addition procedure was used for real sample analysis. The analysis of tobacco for heavy metals has been reported in several papers during this review period. In one paper the authors described a novel electrochemical hydride generator for the determination of As and Sb in tobacco by AFS.170 The hydride generator was constructed from a flowing electrolytic cell with a tungsten cathode. Detection limits as low as 0.1 μg L−1 with precisions of 1.3% RSD were reported.2.3 Inorganic chemicals and acidsAn overview of the recent developments in analytical techniques used for the characterization of ultra-trace materials used for the preparation of integrated circuit devices has been prepared by Balaram.68 Techniques such as ICP-MS, GD-MS and HR-ICP-MS were discussed in detail because of their advantages of high sensitivity, limited interferences, element coverage and speed. In addition, the usefulness of other analytical techniques, such as FAAS, GFAAS, XRF, ICP-OES and INAA was also discussed. The relative merits of glow discharge spectrometry for the direct analysis of thin and ultra-thin solid films have been described by Pisonero and co-workers.171 These authors conceded that, at present, the technique has not been explored fully and has therefore not been accepted completely by the surface analysis community, but argued that GD-OES and GD-MS have an important niche of applications. A variety of examples of depth-profiling analysis were given.In accordance with the trend over recent years, the technique of LIBS has continued to become more popular. Several applications to inorganic materials have been described including the determination of Pb in automotive scrap residue,172 the determination of S in concrete,173 the analysis of preservative treated wood174 and the analysis of asbestos.175 In the first of these applications, Mosier-Boss and Lieberman used a fibre-optic LIBS sensor probe to perform an in situ, real time depth-profiling of a canyon that had been filled with construction debris and automotive scrap residue.172 Working from historical records, the authors identified the part of the site that supposedly contained the scrap residue and then used the LIBS probe to confirm the presence of Pb, Sr and Ti at depths of 7–8 m. In another example, Martin et al. used LIBS spectra in conjunction with multivariate statistical analysis (principle component analysis (PCA)) to discriminate between wood products that had been treated with different types of preservative, e.g. chromated copper arsenate, ammoniacal copper zinc, etc.174 As an alternative technique, the wood samples were also analyzed using a traditional digestion procedure and AAS detection. Correlation coefficients between the LIBS and the AAS data were generally better than 0.9. Caneve and co-workers used LIBS to analyse both serpentine and amphibole forms of asbestos.175 The concentrations of characteristic elements were ratioed so that the different types of asbestos could be recognised. The results from the LIBS analyses were compared with those obtained by using SEM-EDX, with a good correlation being obtained for Mg/Si and Fe/Si. It was found that the LIBS data could be used to discriminate between the asbestos samples and cements.The subject of permanent matrix modifiers for ETAAS analyses is still receiving attention from several different research groups. Acar compared molybdenum, molybdenum–iridium and molybdenum–ruthenium for the determination of Cd and Pb in sediments.176 It was found that 280 μg of molybdenum, 200 μg of iridium, 200 μg of ruthenium, 280 μg of molybdenum + 200 μg of ruthenium placed on a platform to be inserted into pyrolytic carbon tubes offered the same thermal stabilization efficiency as 5 μg palladium + 3 μg of magnesium nitrate introduced simultaneously with the sample. The author also compared pyrolysis and atomization temperatures, analyte and background signal shapes, characteristic masses and LOD for the analytes using each of the modifiers. Analysis of certified and standard reference materials indicated that the most accurate results were obtained using a mixture of either molybdenum + iridium or molybdenum + ruthenium. The same author has published a very similar paper, this time evaluating vanadium, iridium, ruthenium, vanadium + iridium, vanadium + ruthenium and vanadium + tungsten as permanent modifiers during the determination of Cd, Pb and Zn in slurries of biological and botanical samples.177 Mixtures of either vanadium + iridium, vanadium + ruthenium and vanadium + tungsten allowed thermal stabilization for between 250 and 300 firings and had the added advantage of increasing the tube lifetime by between 50 and 95%. Pedro and co-workers evaluated a number of noble metals as permanent modifiers for the determination of Te in sulfur.178 Of the modifiers tested, iridium was found to offer the best performance in the high concentrations of nitric and hydrochloric acids used for sample dissolution, with the analyte being stabilized to a temperature of 1400 °C. The authors also speculated on the mechanism of the thermal stabilization. The last paper in this area discussed the use of iridium, ruthenium and tungsten as permanent modifiers during the determination of As, Bi, Pb, Sb and Se in natural waters.179 These authors found that the thermal stabilization efficiency increased in the order tungsten < ruthenium < iridium for the analytes As and Bi, but that for the analytes Pb, Sb and Se, the order was tungsten < ruthenium and iridium. Accuracy was checked by the analysis of five CRMs. Ruthenium was judged to be the optimal modifier since it gave a tube lifetime of approximately 650 firings. Precision was found to be better than 6% and recoveries of spikes added to tap water ranged from 79 to 109%.There are three other papers that utilized ETAAS that are worth mentioning in this part of the review. Krivan and Janickova used solid sampling ETAAS for the direct determination of analytes (Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Li, Mn, Ni and Zn) in zirconium oxide.180 After careful optimization of the temperature programme, the analytes were determined successfully without the need for a matrix modifier. Being extremely refractory, there was considerable sample residue left on the platform which could simply be tipped out. The residue from one sample was however used to spike aqueous standards onto to enable calibration. By using sample weights of between 0.5 and 40 mg, LODs of between 0.06 (Cd) and 2.3 (Fe) ng g−1 were obtained. The accuracy of the procedure was measured by comparison with data obtained using radiochemical neutron activation analysis and from ETAAS using both digested samples and from slurries. A common theme amongst many of the papers in section 2.3 is the use of assorted materials that enable preconcentration of the analytes whilst simultaneously separating the potential interferences arising from the sample matrix. Hashemi and Rahmani published a paper that exemplified this by chemically linking homocystine to a highly cross-linked agarose support.181 The resulting chelating adsorbent (0.25 g) was packed into a small column and then used to retain Ni from table salt and baking soda at pH 5.5–6.5. After matrix separation, the analyte was eluted with 5 mL of 1 M hydrochloric acid prior to off-line detection using FAAS. A factorial design was used to optimize the chelation process in terms of flow rate, column length, pH and sample volume. Under optimal conditions, the adsorbent could tolerate salt concentrations of up to 0.5 mol L−1 and volumes of 500 mL. Since elution was with 5 mL of acid, a preconcentration factor of 100 was established, yielding an LOD of 0.49 μg L−1. Table salt was also the matrix analyzed by Tamer et al.182 These authors used electro-synthesized over-oxidized sulfonated polypyrrole film which was capable of retaining Cd and Ni by solid phase micro-extraction (SPME). By coating a platinum wire with this film, immersing it in sample solution and then applying a positive potential, the analytes were extracted from the sample. Desorption was achieved by immersing in a smaller volume of water and applying a negative potential. This aliquot could then be analyzed using ETAAS. The method was validated by the successful analysis of reference materials.Assorted methods of preconcentration and matrix elimination have been applied to ICP-OES determinations. Pohl and Prusisz used Duolite GT-73 chelating resin that contains thiol functional groups to retain AuIII and PdII from different hydrochloric acid-containing samples.183 A suite of other metals were also retained (e.g. transition metals, Al, Ca, Cd, Mg, Pb and Zn). These were eluted from the resin by 4 M nitric acid. The Au and Pd were eluted using 0.5 M thiourea. A preconcentration factor of 50 was obtained yielding LODs of 0.085 μg L−1 for Au and 0.28 μg L−1 for Pd. As a comparison, the retrieval of the analytes from the resin was also achieved by a digestion using sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide. The procedure devised was applied to the determination of Au and Pd in spiked electrolytic bath samples. The same research group has also reported the use of Metalfix Chelamine chelating resin of two different mesh sizes for the retention of noble metals (Au, Ir, Pd, Pt, Rh and Ru) from solutions of nitric acid, hydrochloric acid and a mixture of the two.184 It was found that for a resin mesh of 150–300 μm and for a sample of 0.5 M aqua regia, quantitative retention of Au, Ir, Pd and Pt was established, but that retention of Rh and Ru was less than 50%. A comparison of different eluents was made in which nitric acid, hydrochloric acid, potassium cyanide, potassium iodide, potassium thiocyanate and thiourea were all tested. The authors then applied their procedure to the determination of Au, Ir, Pd and Pt in an anodic sludge sample. A variety of analytes (11) were determined in chromium matrices by Venkateswarlu and co-workers185 who used the oxalate form of Amberlite IRA 93 for the matrix elimination. The slow reaction kinetics meant that the chromium passed through the column whilst the analytes formed a strong complex and hence were retained over the pH range 2–6. Matrix elimination was found to have an efficiency of 99.9%. Using 2 M nitric acid as eluent, the analytes were detected using ICP-OES and were found to have recoveries of between 88 and 101%. Precision was acceptable (5–6% RSD) at the 10 μg g−1 level, but was found to degrade substantially below 1 μg g−1 (15% RSD). Lu and co-workers reported the determination of Ce, Dy, Gd, Pr and Sm in 99.99% pure erbium oxide by extracting the analytes using P-507 resin.186 Recovery of the analytes was between 88 and 105% and the precision was better than 10% RSD at a concentration of 5 μg g−1. Again, detection was by ICP-OES.Other applications using ICP-OES as a means of detection that have not utilized a matrix elimination have also been published. Among the more interesting of these was a study by Kasamatsu and colleagues who used elemental analysis for the forensic discrimination of match heads.187 After dissolution of the match head in nitric acid, the analytes Al, Ba, Ca, Fe, Mg and Zn were determined using simple aqueous calibrants. Discrimination was possible between a total of 13 match types (eight wood and five paper stick types) both before and after combustion. The authors concluded that the procedure could potentially be useful for resolving arson cases. Among the more routine applications, Anil et al. described the determination of Al, Ca, Cu, Fe, Mg, Ni, Pb and Zn in high purity nitric and hydrochloric acids.188 One litre of the sub-boiled acids was preconcentrated to a volume of 25 mL and this was then analyzed by ICP-OES. Recovery of the analytes was 98–101%. The procedure was successful when performed in a clean room environment, but if performed in a general laboratory, contamination with Ca, Fe and Zn was problematic. An interesting application has been described by Yu and colleagues who reported a disagreement between gravimetric and the spectrometric value for a batch of As calibration standards that contained a mixture of AsIII and AsV.189 It was found that the AsV species yielded an increase in sensitivity of approximately 8% during the ICP-OES determination compared with the trivalent state. The authors then studied the reaction between As and nitric acid and the results were used to develop a procedure that produced only single species pentavalent As standards. This new process was found to eliminate the As speciation state as a source of measurement bias.Zhang and co-workers developed a method in which REEs were determined in nitric acid digests of high purity (99.99–99.9999% erbium oxide by adjusting the resolution of the ICP-MS instrument from 0.7 to 0.3 mass units.190 This method enabled the spectral overlap interferences to be overcome and the use of an internal standard help ameliorate matrix suppression effects. The LODs for the REEs were in the range 0.009–0.025 μg g−1, recoveries of spiked analytes were 90.3–107% and precision was 2.5–6.7%. The results compared well with those obtained using a high resolution ICP-MS instrument. Another group of Chinese scientists have determined REEs in high purity (99.99–99.999%) lanthanum oxide.191 These authors used micro-sampling ETV-ICP-MS in conjunction with a PTFE matrix modifier. When 1 μg of sample was analyzed, absolute LODs were in the range 5–75 fg. The results were compared with those obtained using conventional nebulization ICP-MS and ETV-ICP-OES. The authors reported that some differences were observed; however, the ETV-ICP-MS results obtained using external calibration and the standard addition method were in good agreement with recommended values. Rege and co-workers tested several different lasers, numerous sources of synthetic carbon-based multi-element standards and a range of instrumental conditions during the analysis of diamond by LA-ICP-MS.192 It was found that a 266 nm UV laser operating at 10 Hz provided the best sensitivity, whilst synthetic oil and doped cellulose proved to be the most suitable external calibration standards and C-13 was used as the internal standard. The concentration of 41 analytes were determined yielding LODs of 5–20 ppb for REEs, less than 500 ppb for transition metals and 2–3 ppm for Fe and Na. Precision depended largely on the concentration of the analyte, but was typically about 10% RSD for the concentration range 1–100 ppm, ∼15% RSD for 0.1–1 ppm and was as poor as ∼30% for lower concentrations. The authors speculated that the technique could be used to identify the source locality of the diamond and, if so, could have an important application to forensic science. Another interesting study has been reported by Huang and Beauchemin, who applied ion-chromatography with ICP-MS detection to the determination of conditional stability constants of Co- and Zn-EDTA complexes.193 Using a guard column of Dionex AG-7 and a mobile phase of 0.1 M ammonium nitrate at pH 2 for Zn and at pH 2.5 for Co, the free metals and the metal complexes could be separated. By analysing different concentrations of metal and EDTA and then plotting log (peak area of complex/peak area of free metal) against log (total free EDTA concentration), a straight line relationship was obtained in which the slope was equivalent to the chelation number and the intercept was log (conditional stability constant). Values of 3.1 ± 0.42 for Zn-EDTA at pH 2 and 4.4 ± 0.24 for Co-EDTA at pH 2.5 were obtained which were in agreement with expected values. The authors reported that this method of calculation offered some advantages over other techniques. Some analysts have also applied XRF to the determination of analytes in inorganic materials. Suzuki and co-workers used synchrotron radiation XRF as well as ICP-OES for the determination of Bi, Sb and Sn in 13 samples of arsenous acid of known origin.194 The results from both methods were compared and were found to be in agreement; especially when As was used as an internal standard during the XRF measurements. Impurities in potassium dihydrogen phosphate were determined using EDXRF by Belikov et al.195 Sample was diluted in water, 8-hydroxyquinoline added and the metal–8-hydroxyquinoline complexes formed were retained on activated carbon, separated onto a Nuclepore filter and then the impurities determined using EDXRF. To fix the activated carbon to the filter, 1-hexadecanol was added to the sample solution during the preconcentration procedure. Analytes determined included Bi, Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Ti and Zn. Preconcentration factors as high as 100 were achieved yielding LODs of 0.01 μg g−1. Precision at the 0.2 μg g−1 level was 6–17%. The authors described their preconcentration procedure as being both fast and simple. Konishi et al. described the use of high resolution XRF for the determination of Mn valence state in battery cathode materials.196 Plots of valence number versus the peak width at half maximum yielded a curve, but when plotted against the chemical shift of the K-alpha spectra, a linear relationship was obtained. The correlation coefficient for the plot was 0.995 and this linear relationship enabled the authors to determine the oxidation number of Mn in a nickel ion doped material.One final application of note was provided by Mahoney and colleagues who used ToF-SIMS to characterize gunpowder samples so that they could be differentiated for forensic purposes.197 Three different smokeless powders and six black powder samples were analyzed for both inorganic and organic additives. Once obtained, the results were processed using PCA and a successful differentiation between the samples was achieved. In addition, SIMS imaging was also used to characterize the samples’ 2-dimensional structure. This too was found to differ between sample types.2.4 Nuclear materialsThis has been a relatively busy area of research in this review period. A review (containing 136 references) by Hou and co-workers has described the uses of analytical atomic spectrometry for nuclear forensic purposes.198 The authors state that there are now millions of radioactive sources throughout the world and that they are susceptible to loss or theft. The new field of nuclear forensic work employs standard techniques such as RIMS, SIMS, thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS), AMS, GD-MS, ICP-MS, LA-ICP-MS etc. that enables such materials to be tracked. This review gives an overview of the work and discusses some of the more recent applications.There has been a number of papers reporting the results of inter-laboratory comparisons or the development of certified reference materials. Two papers have reported inter-laboratory comparisons for data from the analysis of urine for U.199,200 In the first of these, Ough et al. reported the results for natural and depleted U as well as 238U/235U ratios at concentrations of 0.02 μg kg−1 from five testing laboratories. The host laboratory prepared six identical sets of samples containing total U in the range 25–770 ng kg−1 and with isotopic ratios of between 138 and 215. The other laboratories then analyzed the samples using techniques such as SF-ICP-MS, quadrupole ICP-MS, TIMS and instrumental/delayed NAA. In the other paper,200 Parrish and colleagues reported the results of a similar test in which urine samples spiked with U at a level of 1–5 ng L−1 and with depleted U were dispatched to three different laboratories for measurement using SF-ICP-MS and multiple collector (MC)-ICP-MS. All of the methods tested were capable of determining 238U/235U accurately (with precisions between 0.5 and 4%), but only selected MC-ICP-MS methods were capable of consistently determining 236U/238U with reasonable precision. Merchel and Bremser have prepared a paper that described the first international Al-26 inter-laboratory comparison.201 This paper is actually an extension of previous work, but because the results were produced by seven radionuclide counting laboratories, it is still worth mentioning The meteorite sample was analyzed by all the participating laboratories and the results produced showed good overall agreement, although after detailed statistical analysis including some multivariate approaches, there was some evidence of inter-laboratory bias. Richter and co-workers have produced two papers discussing the preparation and certification of synthetic U isotope mixtures202 and the re-certification of a series of U isotope reference materials.203 In the first of these applications, synthetic U isotope mixtures containing 236U/238U ratios of 10−6, 10−7 and 10−8 were prepared by mixing a natural U starting material with different portions of IRMM 187, a material highly enriched in 235U. The 236U/238U ratios were measured in each sample by TIMS using a secondary electron multiplier operated in ion counting mode for the U-236 ion beam. In the second of the two papers, the authors re-certified reference materials IRMM-183 to IRMM-187. The new data, obtained using a new TIMS instrument, had far less uncertainty than that obtained previously for the isotope ratios 234U/238U and 236U/238U.Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) has been used for several applications in this review period. The research group based in Munich have produced two papers relevant to this part of the review. In the first of these,204 Reithmeier and colleagues described the use of a new ToF system for AMS measurement of I-129. This instrument had a ToF resolution of 440 ps and an energy resolution of about 2% and was reportedly capable of determining 129I/127I to a sensitivity of 10−14. This new instrument was applied to the determination of 129I in rain water samples from the time period between July 2003 and October 2004. Overall, a decrease both in 129I and in 129I/127I was observed in these rain water samples when compared with those from 1988, 1989 and 1995. This was attributed to a decrease in 129I emission from French reprocessing facilities. In the second paper, Huber and co-workers determined the long-lived radioisotope 36Cl in granite samples exposed to the A-bomb neutrons at various distances from the Hiroshima hypocenter.205 It was found that very close to the hypocenter, the 36Cl/Cl ratio was 1.6 × 10−10, but that this decreased to approximately 2 × 10−13 further away (1200 m) and then stayed approximately constant. It was concluded that the 36Cl had been produced by the neutron capture by stable 35Cl. It was noted though that at distances further from the hypocenter, confounding processes arising from cosmic rays or neutrons from the decay of uranium and thorium may influence the results. Further study using both experimentation and calculation was to be performed to confirm this. The Vienna environmental research accelerator (VERA) is a 3 MV tandem accelerator. A paper by Steier and colleagues explored, using both modelling and by experimentation, the limitations arising from terminal voltage of this system.206 They found that if no isobars exist, e.g. for U-236 and for Pu-244, then the instrument yielded similar LODs to those obtained using larger instruments. However, when isobar separation is required, the limiting factor was the achievable energy. By using a ToF detector and by pushing the tandem voltage up to 3.6 MV, it was possible to separate S-36 from Cl-36. A paper by many of the same authors described the determination of Pu in environmental samples from nuclear test sites in the South pacific by using AMS and alpha spectrometry.207 The analyte was separated from the matrix using anion exchange and then prepared for alpha spectrometry by micro-precipitation with neodymium trifluoride. After alpha spectrometric analysis, the sample was re-processed for AMS analysis. This involved co-precipitation using iron(III) hydroxide. Pu-142 was used as an internal standard for both AMS and alpha spectrometry. The alpha spectrometry was capable of determining Pu-238 plus a mixture of Pu-239 and Pu-240, whereas the AMS was capable of separating and determining all the isotopes. It was noted though that, in general, the data obtained from the two techniques agreed to within 10%. Santos et al. determined 129I/127I in aerosol samples from Seville, Spain using the ETH facility in Zurich.208 It was possible to make the measurements on a two day basis with sensitivity in the order of 104 to 105 atoms of 129I per cubic meter and with a ratio of 10−8 to 10−9. The ETH facility has also been used by Wacker and co-workers in two papers. In one paper,209 the upgrades to the 600 kV facility were described that enabled it to perform studies of Be-10, C-14, Al-26, Ca-41, I-129, U-236 and Pu. The most significant improvement in performance was attributed to a new gas ionisation chamber of much better energy resolution. The second paper described the use of such compact instrumentation for the determination of actinides at the femtogram level and included measurement of 236U/238U in natural uranium ore.210Two relevant papers have been published using multi-collector ICP-MS instrumentation. Potter et al. used such an instrument equipped with a high precision Faraday collector to measure Th isotope ratios (230Th/229Th) for dating carbonate materials.211 Increased precision originated from the detector and some additional electronics, which together overcame problems such as beam intensity limitations, drift in multiplier gain and non-linearities in electron multiplier response associated with ion beam counting devices. This detector and electronic modifications enabled a precision for 230Th/229Th of 0.3 parts per thousand to be obtained, which is a factor of two better than even the best TIMS determinations and a factor of 10 better than in most applications. This in turn enabled an improvement in the precision of the dating technique. A paper by Santamaria-Fernandez and co-workers used a MC-ICP-MS instrument to determine 129I using a double isotope dilution technique in a number of complex CRMs, including BCR 063, NIST 1846 and NIST 1549.212 Sample was digested prior to analysis by a procedure that mixed sample (0.5 g) with TMAH (5%) and a spike of 129I and then heated it at 100 °C for two hours. The analytical procedure yielded extremely accurate results, even after using only early approximates. It was therefore concluded to be applicable to accurate one-off measurements where an iterative matching of samples and standards was not necessary.Sector field (SF)-ICP-MS methods have been used to determine 234U/238U isotope ratios in groundwater from Nevada,213 Np and Pu in Swedish/Danish waters of the North Atlantic214 and Pu isotopes in sediment cores from the North-West Pacific.215 In the first of these applications, alpha counting was used as a comparative technique. The SF-ICP-MS method had the advantages of being faster, using far less sample and producing no waste. Results indicated that the waters contained between 0.17 and 9.87 ppb U, with a mean of 2.9 ppb. Lindahl et al. determined Np and U in seaweed and seawater using both ICP-MS and alpha spectrometry, finding Np in the seaweed Fucus vesiculosus in the range 0.16–1.02 mBq kg−1 and in seawater within the range 0.65–1.69 mBq m−3.214 The 240Pu/239Pu ratio in the seaweed had an average value of 0.17 ± 0.03. The third paper, by Zheng and Yamada, determined Pu and Pu isotope ratios in sediment cores.215 After sample digestion, anion exchange chromatography was used off-line for matrix separation. The LOD was 0.35 fg and the mass discrimination effect was evaluated by use if the certified material NBS-947 (certified for 240Pu/239Pu ratio). The overall performance of the procedure was validated by the successful analysis of the CRM IAEA-368, an ocean sediment.Simple quadrupole-based ICP-MS instrumentation has also found usage for the analysis of environmental samples. Zheng and Yamada used a two stage cleanup procedure involving anion exchange chromatography and TEVA extraction chromatography during the sample preparation that enabled accurate 235U/238U and 234U/238U ratios in sediments to be determined.216 Parameters such as detector dead time, dwell time and abundance sensitivity that may affect the accuracy and precision of the ratio analysis were all evaluated and corrected for. Method validation was again achieved using an ocean sediment reference material. The procedure was applied to sediments from a brackish lake in the vicinity of a nuclear facility in Japan. Another paper used the UTEVA resin for the on-line rapid ID-ICP-MS determination of Pu in environmental samples.217 Sample containing Pu was injected onto the column in 3 M nitric acid. Then, using 3 M nitric acid containing 0.01 M ascorbic acid to reduce the Pu to the Pu(III) state, the analyte was eluted from the column directly to the nebulizer system of the ICP-MS instrument. A total of 40 min was required for the analysis, and that included the time required for the re-generation of the column. The authors reported that recovery of Pu from the column was 70% and that LODs were 9.2, 4.3 and 7.5 fg for 239Pu, 240Pu and 242Pu, respectively. The method was validated by the successful analysis of five international standard materials.An analytical method for the estimation of U concentration, 235U/238U and 236U/238U isotope ratios and the burn-up of irradiated reactor U in contaminated soils was described by Mironov and co-workers.218 A total of 12 sampling sites from distances between 4 and 53 km from Chernobyl were used. It was found that the top 10 cm of soil contained between 2.1 ng g−1 to 2 μg g−1, depending on the distance from Chernobyl. Norisuye et al. described a method of determining Pu isotope ratios in seawaters.219 By taking an extremely large volume of water (4700–10800 L), and performing a solid phase extraction using manganese dioxide impregnated fibres the collected Pu could be eluted with 3 M hydrochloric acid. After elution, all Pu present was converted to the PuIV state by using sodium nitrite, purified by solvent extraction using thenoyltrifluoroacetone-benzene and then concentrated in 5 mL of 0.2 M nitrous acid. The Pu in the final 5 mL solution was determined by both ICP-MS and by alpha spectrometry. The extraction/preconcentration yielded Pu data at the pg level, which was sufficient for quantification. Recovery of different oxidation state species was found to be 96 ± 3%. The measurement process was not interfered with by the presence of high concentrations of Mn or of U which, although present at a concentration of 3.3 μg L−1 in the seawater, was effectively removed by the extraction procedure (a decontamination factor of 1.7 × 107 was achieved). The accuracy of the method was verified by the analysis of seawater and soil reference materials. Bienvenu and colleagues described the determination of 129I in environmental samples using quadrupole-based ICP-MS.220 They did however experience problems associated with the high concentration of 127I in the samples, which they attributed to the formation of IH2 and also to substantial matrix effects. These problems were reportedly overcome by diluting the samples and by using Cs as an internal standard. The detection limit for the 129I was 10−11 g g−1. Results obtained using this technique were compared with those obtained using X-ray spectrometry.A paper by Ambard and co-workers attempted to obtain some speciation data for Pu by coupling together capillary electrophoresis (CE) with ICP-MS detection.221 The interface was made from two stainless steel T-pieces connected to an ICP-MS PFA-50 nebulizer. Separations were reported to be quick, i.e. <15 min per run. The protocol was capable of separating and detecting three (PuIII, PuV and PuVI) of the four oxidation states possible in aqueous solution, thereby enabling the monitoring of redox processes. The LODs were of the order of 5 × 10−10 mol L−1 (or 9 × 10−18 mol). Mas and co-workers developed a method that used a compromise between a large mass of solid sample (>100 g) to ensure best sensitivity and a limitation of the concomitant interfering species for the determination of Tc.222 They applied their method to several samples. Isnard and co-workers determined 90Sr/238U isotope ratios in spent nuclear fuel samples.223 The isobaric overlap of 90Sr and 90Zr was overcome by use of a hexapole collision cell containing oxygen that converted the Zr present to ZrO, whereas the Sr was unreactive. A double isotope dilution method was then performed that enabled the successful determination of the analytes. Uncertainty and reproducibility values as well as the results from the analysis of uranium oxide fuels and mixed oxide fuels were presented. The alternative technique of TIMS was used for method validation.Thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) was used by Elliot and colleagues to determine 239Pu and 240Pu in bioassay (artificial urine) samples.224 Samples spiked with known amounts of 239Pu (2.5–50 fg) were used for method validation. It was noted that a slight positive bias of between 1.7 and 2.7% was obtained throughout. A precision of 2.2% at the 50 fg range was obtained which increased to 2.7% when the amount of 239Pu decreased to between 5 and 25 fg. The LOD was 0.53 fg, whilst the instrumental LOD was as low as 0.1 fg. The method, which was described as being “relatively free from interferences”, was applied to both an inter-laboratory comparison sample and to the Pu-242 SRM 4334E (NIST), which was found to contain 99.99967% 242Pu. The other application of TIMS relevant to this part of the review was produced by de Oliveira et al. who determined 235U/238U isotope ratios in a set of uranium samples that had been enriched with 235U to a final content of between 0.5 and 20%.225 Uncertainty measurements were made according to ISO recommendations and were then compared with the IAEA international target values set for safe-guarding nuclear materials.Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) has been used by numerous research groups in the nuclear industry. Three papers have used SIMS for the analysis of JT-60U graphite tiles. In one, by Yoshikawa and co-workers, the H retention properties and depth profile in the tiles were measured using SIMS.226 Two tiles from different regions were analyzed. One was from the inner divertor area that was covered with re-deposited layers of 70 μm thickness whereas the other tile was near the outer divertor striking point and had a re-deposited layer of only 1–2 μm thickness. It was found that in the first of the tiles, H distribution in the re-deposited layer was uniform, with a H/C ratio of 0.03. The other tile showed a marked increase in H/C ratio, but this was found to diminish sharply to 1.3 × 10−4 in the bulk of the tile. Another paper discussed the depth profiling of deuterium in the tiles.227 Orbit following Monte Carlo simulation together with the SIMS results and SEM analysis enabled the research team to conclude that the deuterium accumulated through three processes: deuterium–carbon co-deposition, the implantation of energetic deuterons and deuterium diffusion into the bulk. Another paper by the same research group determined hydrogen isotope distributions and retentions in the inner divertor tile of JT-60U.228 Using both SIMS and thermal desorption spectroscopy, the differences in retention behaviour of H and deuterium were discussed. Most of the H/deuterium was found to be retained in the deposited layers. It was also found that tritium retention was strongly influenced by the history of the discharge and the temperature; with higher temperatures reducing tritium retention on the tiles and re-deposition layers significantly.The subject of depleted uranium (DU) has been less prominent in this year’s review than it has in recent ones. However, there are still some papers that describe its determination. Of these, two have been health-based applications. Squibb and McDiarmid determined the health effects associated with exposure to DU by Gulf War veterans that had been victims of “friendly fire”.229 Using ICP-MS as a means of detection, it was found that those soldiers who had fragments of DU still embedded in them continued to excrete elevated levels of U in their urine. Biennial health surveillance of these individuals has, thus far, found no evidence of any unexpected U-related effects. However, subtle changes in the renal function of those individuals that contained a U concentration of greater than 0.1 μg g−1 creatinine indicated that there may still potentially be problems to come. Durakovic determined the concentrations and the precise isotope compositions of the U isotopes 234U, 235U, 236U and 238U in the urine of civilians from eastern Afghanistan.230 These individuals, that came complaining of fatigue, fever, respiratory impairment, headaches and neurological alterations, had their urine collected and analyzed for the four isotopes using MC-ICP-MS. It was found that the mean U concentration for these civilians was 275 ± 137.8 ng L−1 as opposed to the control samples that had a concentration in the range 1–20 ng L−1. However, both the 234U/235U and the 234U/238U ratios indicated that they had been exposed to natural U rather than DU. The 236U, which is also usually associated with DU, was found to be below the LOD. Schimmack and co-workers undertook leaching experiments of DU in columns of soil.231 Two soil types that are common in Europe (a sandy-loamy cambisol and a silty-loamy luvisol) were used to fill a total of 16 columns, such that 3.3 kg of dry soil was added to each. Fragments from projectiles of DU, weighing between 145 and 294 g were placed in the columns. Effluents from the columns were collected weekly for a period of a year, giving a total of 648 samples for analysis by ICP-MS. Leaching from natural U was found to be at a rate of 0.01 μg week−1 or less, whilst the leaching rate from DU was found to be far greater, at values of up to 100 μg week−1. From these results, the authors concluded that leaching of 238U from the munitions would continue for several thousand years.There has also been a number of applications described in this review period. Isnard and co-workers described a TIMS and a MC-ICP-MS method for the determination of Gd and Sm isotopes in spent nuclear fuels, ensuring that the mass bias phenomena associated with MC-ICP-MS was accounted for.232 This mass bias correction was achieved using an external standard bracketing approach and an exponential law fractionation correction. Unfortunately, there is a lack of isotope reference materials for these analytes, so the authors had to use a SPEX natural solution that is commonly used or ICP-MS determinations. Using the associated correction techniques and this natural solution for isotope calibration, the authors obtained a reproducibility of better than 0.1%. In the actual fuel samples, the Gd and Sm isotope ratios had a relative standard deviation of 0.2%. There have been two papers that have analyzed waste repository materials. This is obviously of great importance if the safe storage of radioactive materials is to be assured. In one of these papers, synchrotron-based X-ray microprobes were used to elucidate the spatial distribution and the speciation of radionuclides in a highly heterogeneous repository material.233 The authors presented a case study of the uptake process of Co into the cementitious engineered barrier materials that had been exposed to microbial degeneration. In the other paper, Wilson et al. tested the stability of the montmorillonite clay surrounding of the steel container when it was in contact with native iron, magnetite and aqueous solutions under hydrothermal conditions.234 Two series of experiments were conducted. In one series, sodium montmorillonite was mixed with magnetite, native iron, calcite and sodium chloride solutions and reacted at 250 °C for between 93 and 114 days. In the second series of experiments, the montmorillonite was mixed with native iron, and solutions of iron(II) chloride and then reacted at temperatures of 80, 150 and 250 °C for 90–92 days. The products were analyzed using techniques such as ICP-OES, ICP-MS, TEM, XRD and FT-IR. In the first series of experiments, the native iron was oxidized to form magnetite and the sodium montmorillonite was transformed into iron-rich smectite, but only when the iron was added as the metal rather than as the magnesite. The iron-rich smectite was initially rich in Fe(II), but this was oxidized in air to Fe(III). The material was found to have less expansion compared with the montmorillonite when exposed to ethylene glycol. In the second series of experiments, smectite was produced only at 250 °C. Overall, the experiments indicated that although bentonite (of which montmorillonite is the main constituent) is still a desirable choice of backfill material for high level nuclear waste repositories, it may lose some of its expandability if the clay is altered to an iron rich smectite. This, of course, is a possibility when the clay is the surround of a steel canister.Advance materials3.1 Polymeric materials and compositesThis has been a relatively quiet area of research in this review period. However, several papers of interest have been published that are deserving of comment. Some papers have simply analyzed polymers for trace analytes. These have been split into two broad categories; those that used a conventional wet chemical decomposition and those that used a variety of solid sampling procedures. In the former category, Minami and co-workers have decomposed polyethylene resin using a mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids in an open system.235 The paper is in Japanese, but described the digestion of the material using the acid mixture and then the uptake of the lead sulfate formed with 20–25% ammonium acetate–acetic acid. The analytes Cd, Cr and Pb were determined using ICP-OES. The method was validated by the analysis of the CRMs BCR 680 and BCR 681, with the results obtained being in good agreement with the certified or reference values. Another paper that used a wet digestion technique has been prepared by Sakurai et al.236 These authors used a domestic microwave oven to aid the decomposition of polyethylene or polyvinyl chloride. Sample (20–60 mg) was weighed into a PTFE bomb and either nitric acid or a mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids used as decomposition reagents. The time required for the digestion in the microwave oven ranged from 5 min (for 20 mg) to 25 min (for 60 mg of sample). After evaporating most of the acid media, the sample digest was diluted, filtered if necessary and analyzed by ICP-OES for its Cd, Cr and Pb content. Again, the CRM BCR 680 polyethylene was used to validate the procedure. Sun and Ko described the combination of ETV with ICP-MS for the analysis of liquid photoresist samples.237 Although the samples were already liquid, they were too viscous to be introduced via an autosampler and so were diluted with propylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate. Tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) was used as an ashing aid during the analysis and this, combined with a palladium matrix modifier, were introduced to the ETV device along with the diluted sample by an autosampler. The extent of matrix removal was sufficient for the successful determination of Cu, Mn, Pb and Zn. It was noteworthy though that the calibration method of standard additions was necessary for accurate results to be obtained. The results were comparable to those obtained using a conventional wet digestion protocol. Detection limits ranged from 0.76 to 7.1 ng mL−1.The difficulty in bringing some plastics into solution is reflected by the number of applications that use some sort of solid sampling procedure, whereby the plastic may be analyzed directly without recourse to strong acids, chemicals or heat sources that may lead to contamination or analyte loss. Resano and co-workers reported the use of LA-ICP-MS for the fast analysis of polymers.238 These workers analyzed a range or real world samples e.g. polypropylene shopping bags, an acrylonitrile butadiene styrene material and various plastic bricks, as well as several reference materials. Calibration was achieved using the polyethylene materials ERM- EC-680 and 681. A range of analytes was chosen but especial attention was given to the determination of Cr. The polymeric materials could conceivably interfere with the determination of this analyte via the formation of argon carbide. Use of ammonia as the gas in a dynamic reaction cell alleviated this problem whilst causing only minor problems for the other analytes. The most affected of these other analytes was As, but even this could be determined when the instrument was in venting mode; i.e. when the reaction gas had been removed from the cell. This obviously had adverse ramifications for the speed of the analysis though. Accurate results were obtained during the analysis, but the authors did emphasise that the use of an internal standard was required when samples that are different from the calibration materials are to be analyzed. As usual, precision was dependent on the concentration level found, but was typically 5–10% for analytes at a concentration range of ≥10 μg g−1. Bichinho et al. determined residues from Ziegler–Natta, Philips and metallocene catalysts in commercial polyethylenes.239 These workers used XRF and synthetic standards using a wax matrix for calibration. Several analytes (Cr, Mg, Ti, V and Zr) were determined, yielding LODs in the range 0.8 mg kg−1 (Ti) to 12 mg kg−1 (Mg). An interesting application of LIBS has been described by DeLucia and co-workers.145 They described the use of a new portable instrument that enabled real-time analysis and high sensitivity to be obtained whilst requiring no sample preparation. It also had the ability to detect all elements (as well as some hazardous materials) in situ. The device was used to interrogate a variety of samples including explosives, chemical warfare simulants and landmine casings. The instrument was reportedly capable of differentiating between warfare simulants, even on soil backgrounds and also between anthrax and other bio-materials such as moulds and pollen. Similarly, LIBS was used to distinguish between landmine casings and other plastic materials. It was concluded that such a device showed enormous potential as a versatile detector of terrorist threats.Ozeroglu and Ozduganci described a method of synthesizing water soluble polyacrylamides from acrylamide monomer at low temperature using either 3-mercaptopropionic acid–ceriumIV sulpfate or 3-mercaptopropionic acid–potassium permanganate redox systems.240 The effects of parameters such as polymerization time, temperature and the mole ratio of acrylamide to the initiator (3-mercaptopropionic acid–oxidant) on the molecular weight of the product were determined. It was found that an increase in temperature from 20 to 70 °C decreased the yield, but had no effect on the molecular weight. However, a decrease in the acrylamide/CeIV mole ratio resulted in an increase in yield but a decrease in molecular weight. The Ce contaminants in the polymers were determined using UV-Vis spectrophotometry and fluorescence whilst the Mn contaminants were determined using ETAAS.The analytical technique of SIMS has found several uses for the analysis of polymers in this review period. This is especially true for depth-profiling/implantation/migration studies. Harton and co-workers described the use of SIMS for the depth-profiling of amorphous polymer multi-layers.241 The model polymer bilayer systems of polystyrene with polymethylmethacrylate, polystyrene with poly(2-vinylpyridine) and polymethylmethacrylate with polycyclohexylmethacrylate were bombarded with oxygen and caesium ions using an instrument equipped with a magnetic sector device. This instrumentation enabled a depth resolution of 10 nm to be achieved. Deuterium labelled polystyrene at a concentration range of 5–20% was used as a tracer polymer. High signal to noise ratios and high sensitivity were achieved whilst matrix effects and sample charging were minimized. Schrank and co-workers used SIMS for the study of copper coatings on carbon substrates.242,243 These copper-coated carbon composites have potential use as heat sinks for new high speed chip generations. In the first of these papers, a molybdenum intermediate layer was deposited, so that even after thermal treatment at 800 °C, no de-wetting occurred. It was also reported that the adhesion of the Cu–C films was dependent upon the thickness of molybdenum layer but, in general, it was found to be stronger after the annealing step than in the “as-deposited” state. The SIMS analysis indicated the formation of molybdenum carbides during the heat treatment. The second paper was extremely similar.243 On this occasion, 400 nm Cu layers and 100 nm Mo layers were sputter deposited and then the products analyzed using SIMS both before and after heat treatment. Again, the SIMS analysis demonstrated the diffusion of C into the Mo layer. Ion irradiation of polymers causes a change in the physical and chemical properties. These changes are attributed to the breaking down of some of the polymer’s original bonds and the formation of others. A study by Lee et al. used a range of fluences to irradiate polymers and then used a number of techniques, e.g. XRD, SIMS, UV-Vis, FTIR, XPS and electrical conductivity to compare the polymers before and after irradiation.244 It was found that electrical conductivity increased with increased ion energy and dose, but that the most important factor was the linear energy transfer for the ionization; i.e. how efficiently the energy was transferred to the polymer.Several other papers have reported the application of atomic spectrometric techniques for the simple characterization of polymers or composites that have been manufactured. Ozdilek et al. described the use of titanate modified Boehmite particles in making polyamide-6 nanocomposites.245 A range of techniques including TEM, AAS, TGA, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and dynamical mechanical analysis were used to characterize the products. Maria and co-workers reported the preparation and characterization of polymer–metal composite microspheres.246 The magnetic microspheres were obtained by suspension polymerization of styrene, 2-hydroxyethylacrylate and methylmethacrylate and divinylbenzene with iron. The Fe content was determined using AAS and was found to be 17% w/w. The morphology of the beads was studied using SEM and was found to be dependent on the polymerization conditions. However, all beads showed both agglomerated and dispersed Fe on their surface and internally. Wang and colleagues described the synthesis of layered double hydroxides polymethylmethacrylate by the solution polymerization of methylmethacrylate in the presence of aminobenzoate organically modified layered double hydroxides.247 The materials obtained were characterized using FTIR, elemental analysis, ICP-OES, XRD, UV-Vis and TEM.3.2 Semiconductors and conducting materialsBalaram has produced an overview of techniques used to analyze high purity substances used in modern electronic components.68 Since there is a need to reach ever higher purity, there is also a requirement to be able to determine much lower concentrations, e.g. at the ng g−1 and pg g−1 level. This overview briefly described the methods used for such analyses, concentrating mainly on ICP-MS, HR-ICP-MS and GD-MS, but also commented on complementary techniques such as FAAS, ETAAS, XRF, ICP-OES and INAA. The advantages of ICP-MS and HR-ICP-MS, i.e. the high sensitivity, limited interferences and elemental coverage would, according to the author, make them powerful tools for the analysis of materials such as tellurium, high purity quartz, high purity copper, water and mineral acids.There have been several analytical techniques used for the analysis of semiconductors/electronic materials. Of these, many have made use of the advantages offered by direct solid sampling analysis. X-Ray techniques are among those capable of such analyses. There have been two overview/review papers published in this review period. Kurmaev reviewed the use of XRF for the analysis of the electronic structure and composition of thin films, semiconductors, superconductors, half metallic ferromagnets and alloys.57 Also included in the review, which had 136 references, were the basic principles of XRF using synchrotron radiation and the instrumentation requirements. A second review of synchrotron-based techniques (34 references) has been prepared by Buonassisi et al.248 who focussed particularly on those techniques used to measure the diffusion length and chemical character of metal clusters in multi-crystalline silicon solar cells. Several techniques were discussed including X-ray fluorescence microscopy (which determines the spatial distribution, elemental nature, size morphology and depth of particles as small as 30 nm in diameter), X-ray absorption microspectrocopy (which determines the chemical state of these particulates), X-ray beam induced current (XBIC, that maps the minority carrier recombination activity) and spatially resolved XBIC (maps the minority carrier diffusion length). The authors discussed the sensitivity and synchrotron characteristics of the techniques as well as producing experimental flow charts. Also discussed was the way that these techniques have elucidated the nature and effects of metal rich particles in multi-crystalline silicon and the physical mechanisms limiting metal gettering from it. There have been a number of applications based papers using XRF spectroscopy. One of the most interesting of these was by Lutzenkirchen-Hecht and colleagues who described a miniaturized cell that may be used for XRF as well as grazing incidence XRF and XRD analysis of thin films and their growth processes.249 The construction of the cell was described in detail. Since it was of compact design and low weight, it could be used with conventional instrumentation. The authors presented the first results of its use and discussed how experiments that previously would have been restricted to synchrotron instrumentation, could now be performed with even basic equipment. Araki et al. used micro-XRF to determine the presence or absence of Pb in micrometer sized areas such as copper contacts in electrical components that had been coated with tin–lead solder.250 Even after changing the calculation method (i.e. to start using the fundamental parameters method), the authors succeeded only in achieving a LOD of 0.04% w/w and this was still dependent on the thickness of the solder layer. Results were validated by the independent methods of SEM and ICP-MS. Despite its drawbacks, the method was still fit for purpose. Hung and co-workers described the in-line use of XRF and X-ray reflectometry (XRR) to monitor the deposition of atomic layers on high-kappa dielectric films.251 The XRR monitors the deposition rate of the thickness and identifies the transition from the three-dimensional to the two-dimensional growth regime. The XRF was used to monitor the atomic deposition rate. The conventional approach would be to use Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy (RBS) and TEM. These however cannot be achieved in-line. The proposed approach therefore enabled a real-time analysis, hence avoiding excess growth of the high-kappa interface or degradation of the film during measurement. In addition, it is non-invasive, requires no sample preparation and does not expose the sample to non-production environments. The authors’ in-line method was validated by the independent techniques of Auger electron spectroscopy and TEM.Total reflection XRF (TXRF) has continued to be an area of interest in terms of analysis methods for electronic materials. Hellin and co-workers have been great exponents of this technique and have published a series of papers.252–254 In the first of these, the authors discussed how silicon dioxide will be replaced by other materials with a higher dielectric constant, e.g. hafnium dioxide. They then went on to demonstrate how thin layers of this material are formed by atomic layer deposition using hafnium tetrachloride and water, and also comment that the properties of the material will be affected by residual ligands present as contaminants. The techniques of TXRF and grazing incidence XRF (GI-XRF) were used first to determine the Hf coverage in the nm thick layer and compared these results with those obtained by RBS. They also studied the selection of the most appropriate X-ray excitation source for the determination of impurities such as Cl in the layers. In the second of the applications by Hellin and co-workers,253 the choice of excitation source was discussed in more detail. It was concluded that for optimal sensitivity, a combination of sources was required that can cover the entire range of analytes. For low z analytes a low energy excitation was required (e.g. 5 keV produced by tungsten M alpha or chromium K alpha), whereas transition metals required a moderate energy excitation source, e.g. 10–20 keV produced by tungsten L beta or molybdenum K alpha. Analytes such as Mo, Pd, Ru and Zr required high energy excitation (25–35 keV), such as that produced by the tungsten continuum. The materials analyzed during this study included silicon and germanium substrates, high kappa dielectric contaminants and silicon wafers contaminated with elements from metal gates and copper interconnects. Using the optimized excitation sources, the authors obtained LODs of 1010–1011 atoms cm−2. Also discussed in this paper was the preconcentration technique of vapour phase decomposition–droplet collection (VPD-DC-TXRF), which can improve detection limits by two or even three orders of magnitude, depending on wafer size and the chemical collection efficiency. The use of this technique was demonstrated for noble metals in germanium substrates. The third paper discussed VPD-DC further.254 This preconcentration method as well as others such as droplet sandwich etch (DSE) can sometimes lead to TXRF saturation effects during the analysis of the micro-droplet residues. This was identified to be caused by a mass absorption effect of primary X-rays. This paper studied different approaches to overcoming these problems. Correction factors led to an over-estimation of the effect by 20%, whereas internal standardization approaches also failed because the internal standard was separated from the analytes during the drying step. The authors suggested an alternative method that employed the intensity of scattered primary X-rays. Using a DSE preconcentration on spin coated germanium wafers and the proposed correction method, an efficiency of 100% was achieved compared with only 40% without matrix removal. Von Bohlen and Klockenkamper have used TXRF for depth profiling studies of silicon wafers, quartz glass and vacuum-metallized multi-layers on silicon wafers.255 The samples were first bombarded with low energy ions from a broad beam Kaufman-type ion source which sputtered ions from the surface layer. By using the TXRF as a means of detection, multi-analyte analysis was achieved. Repeated use of the sputtering technique enabled a depth profile to be made with a depth resolution of 3 nm. Unfortunately, the technique suffered the drawback of contamination. This arose because of ion implantation from the ion etching process. This implantation was confirmed by XPS analysis. Grazing exit (GE-XRF) is a new method of instrumental analysis that enables the determination of thin film compositions as well as providing information on depth distribution and intensities. Xu and co-workers, who described GE-XRF as the opposite principle of TXRF256 applied the technique to metal thin films on silicon substrates and mirror polished gallium arsenide. The XRF intensity was measured as a function of the exit angle for nearly normal X-ray incidence. The angular dependence of the grazing exit XRF intensity showed a sharp increase at the critical angle of K alpha, K beta radiation. Mori et al. have proposed a method they have called sweeping TXRF.257 This is a non-destructive technique for the entire surface characterization of metal contaminants on semiconductor wafers. There was a very short data acquisition time for each individual shot so that the overall analysis time was not excessive. Dedicated software was developed and the entire system tested. Results were reported as being “quite promising for routine contamination characterization”.A number of relatively straightforward applications have been reported. Many of these are, however, fairly interesting and warrant some discussion. Dash et al. described the determination of 11 analytes in high purity di-boron trioxide.258 By using a mixture of glycerol and methanol the sample matrix was boiled off as trimethylborate, leaving the analytes to be determined in a matrix free environment. This process was called multiplex vapour phase matrix extraction (MVPME). After MVPME had been performed, a fast ETAAS programme (i.e. no ash stage and using no modifier) was used for the analysis, with calibration being against simple aqueous standards. The performance of this method was compared with a traditional digestion using hydrofluoric acid (the matrix being removed as boron trifluoride on a hotplate) and a matrix elimination step using hydrofluoric acid that was incorporated into the ETAAS programme. The MVPME method yielded exceptionally low LODs which ranged from 0.5 ng g−1 (Ni) to 2.9 ng g−1 (Al). These low LODs were reported to be a function of decreased blank contamination. Matrix elimination has also been achieved by Mitsumata and Mori who determined 10 analytes in the natural oxide layer of a silicon wafer using ETV-ICP-MS.259 By adding hydrofluoric acid, the silica was boiled off at only 150 °C, hence removing the polyatomic interferences potentially arising from 28Si2 on 56Fe and 28Si16O2 on 60Ni. The use of palladium modifier (25 ng) also extended linearity of the calibration curves, leading to the possibility of determining the 10 analytes in the concentration range 20–10 000 pg mL−1. Spike/recovery experiments indicated that between 95 and 105% of the analytes added were detected, leading the authors to conclude that the protocol produced accurate results. The LODs ranged from 106 atoms cm−2 (Pb) to 108 atoms cm−2 (Na). A similar approach has been taken by Wan and colleagues who prepared slurries of photoresist samples and silica particles in a mixture of hydrofluoric acid : nitric acid (1 : 9).260 After microwave heating, matrix elimination was found to be 99.7% and 99.9% efficient for the photoresist and the silica particles, respectively. The residue was analyzed by high resolution ICP-MS. Spiking experiments led to recoveries of the 15 analytes of between 96 and 108% for the photoresist and between 95 and 105% for the silica. The sample decomposition was described as being contamination free, hence leading to very low blank levels. Bleiner and co-workers have used LA-ICP-MS along with Monte Carlo simulations to perform depth-profile analysis.261 A laser ablation induced plasma was used as a composition controlled source for the ion implantation and then LA-ICP-MS was used as the means of detection. A depth resolution of 10 nm was calculated to be necessary to define the shape of the implantation profiles, whilst a resolution of 100 nm was necessary to determine the total implanted dose. The authors concluded that the technique had great potential for depth profiling studies, even though it suffered from problems associated with pulse mixing and tailing of the transient signals arising from the aerosol transport. The authors tackled this problem using a series of algorithms to try and compensate.Glow discharge has again found limited use in this subject area, although of the four papers published, two were either reviews or overviews. An example is a paper by Pisonero and co-workers171 who discussed the role of GD spectrometry for the direct analysis of thin and ultra-thin solid films. This paper was discussed in more detail in Section 2.3. Nelis and Pallosi produced a review that focused on the analytical capabilities of GD-OES and GD-MS for depth profiling studies.262 The authors gave accounts of the properties of the Grimm-type GD and of the processes that occur during the sputtering. Several examples from recent literature were cited that discussed GD for depth profiling in samples as diverse as computer hard disks and mono-layers on copper substrates. Included in this discussion were the conditions required for obtaining nm or even atomic layer depth resolution. Also presented was a series of applications undertaken in the authors’ own laboratories, together with a discussion of some of the technique’s limitations and known problems. Another paper by Nelis et al. described the characterization of a pulsed RF, Grimm-type GD and its potential use for GD-OES analyses.263 The effect of pulsing the power supply on the sputtering was investigated and the effects on emission yields for both resonant and non-resonant lines evaluated. It was found that pulsing the RF power enhanced the emission yield and that this was attributable to a temporal reduction of self-absorption. The technique was demonstrated during the analysis of several heat-sensitive, non-conductive materials and layers. The authors claimed that this work opened several avenues for further research. Audet and Cossette described the GD-MS analysis of ultra-pure cadmium telluride ingots prepared by the travelling heater method.264 The presence of contaminants, even at ultra-low levels, in such samples can severely limit their performance. Hence, analytical techniques should be capable of determining as many analytes as possible at very low concentrations. In this paper, GD-MS determined that the total impurities content was 100 ppb of which Zn was the largest single component at 40 ppb. Unfortunately, this concentration of “total impurities” did not include C, N or O.Depth profiling is a subject area that, as always, has had intense research activity. Many of the applications published have been very straightforward and have not really contributed to increased knowledge of atomic spectroscopy. Instead, they simply use the atomic spectroscopy as a tool to aid in the development of a product or to investigate mechanistic aspects of a particular process. Many of these papers will therefore not be discussed in this review. It is clear that in modern technology, thin films are becoming ever more thin, with layers just a few nm thick being commonplace. This is therefore stretching the capabilities of many of the traditional analysis techniques. One of the techniques most commonly used for depth-profiling is SIMS. This is because of its high sensitivity and good depth resolution. A lengthy overview of SIMS containing 59 references has been prepared by McPhail.26 The SIMS process was described, the fundamental equations derived and the main terminology defined. Also included in this review was a description of the different types of SIMS analysis; e.g. static SIMS, imaging SIMS, depth-profiling SIMS and three dimensional SIMS. In addition, specialized analysis strategies such as the imaging of shallow bevels and cross sections and reverse side analysis were also discussed. A range of analytical examples in sample types as diverse as semiconductors, glass, stainless steel, micro-meteoroids, museum artefacts, aerospace alloys and biomaterials were discussed. The author also suggested some possible future directions and strategies for introducing SIMS to undergraduate education. As with all analytical techniques, SIMS analyses still require validation. Kim and co-workers have described the development of two B-doped silicon multiple delta layers as CRMs for SIMS depth-profiling analysis.265 The two samples, with different delta layer spacing, were grown by ion beam sputter deposition. The sample for shallow junction analysis had a nominal spacing of 10 nm whereas the one for high energy SIMS had a spacing of 50 nm. These samples could be used to evaluate SIMS depth resolution and to calibrate the depth scale. The crater depths measured by a stylus profilometer showed a good relationship with the thickness measured from SIMS profiling using the calibrated film thickness for depth scale calibration. The sputtering rates of the two CRMs were found to be the same as that of the crystalline silicon substrate. Consequently, it was concluded that they may be used to validate the real analysis of crystalline silicon samples. Although an extremely advanced technique, SIMS is not invulnerable to interferences or other problems. Some of these have been highlighted in four papers published in this review period. Fearn and McPhail noted that as dopant profiles become shallower, much of the implant profile lies in the pre-equilibrium or transient region of a SIMS depth profile.266 In this region sputter yield and ionization rate can vary, which makes accurate quantification of the implant profile very difficult. The problems may be reduced by use of a much lower energy beam or by oxygen flooding of the sample. The authors note however, that many SIMS instruments do not have these capabilities. They therefore suggested an alternative method that is applicable to existing instrumentation. Fabrication of bevels with a very small slope angle on a shallow B implanted silicon sample followed by SIMS analysis of the exposed surface enables the depth profile to be obtained, especially when used in conjunction with an accurate measurement of the bevel morphology. The authors found that this ‘bevel-image’ profile compared well with the profile obtained using a 1 keV oxygen beam. They noted though that to obtain a good dynamic range it was necessary to clean the bevel using a hydrofluoric acid etch. A paper by Yang and co-workers described how primary beam ion mixing can be a major source of error, leading to over-estimation of junction depths during SIMS analyses.267 The paper systematically studied the correlation between the implant profile trailing edge, the junction depth and the primary ion beam energy for low energy As and B implants. The authors found that use of a mathematical deconvolution model consistently improved the accuracy of the junction depth measurements. Janssens and co-workers experienced some problems during a SIMS study of dopant re-distribution during the silicidation process in partially nickel silicided plates.268 This was because the ionization probabilities of As and B have a strong dependence on the nickel content. Also, the nickel and silicon intensities, which are required so that any variation in matrix composition may be monitored, were influenced by the SIMS conditions. Use of a caesium beam induced a serious broadening of the nickel profile, whereas an oxygen beam, when used at a low impact angle, pushed the nickel signal forward. In an attempt to circumvent these problems, the analysis was performed from both the front and the back side. Back side SIMS analysis was found to yield accurate results. Mayerhofer and colleagues have pointed out that despite ion implantations of common dopants in silicon being well characterized over the last 10 years, much of the data has been based on a few measurements or even extrapolations.269 Also, experimental results have indicated that a 20% error can be obtained for Er implantation in silicon and silica when compared with simulations using SRIM, T2D and the authors’ own programme, IMSIL. Equal doses of Er were implanted in SIMOX wafers at energies of 100, 200, 300, 400, 500 and 600 keV and the profiles in the resulting samples analyzed using SIMS. Relative sensitivity factors were calculated and the silicon–silica interface at exactly 217.7 nm was used to calibrate the depth scale and the interface position. These more precise experiments confirmed the authors’ previous results.A large number of simple applications of SIMS has also been reported. As stated previously, these will not be discussed in any detail. Examples include a SIMS investigation of gettering centres (zones where impurities collect), produced by MeV phosphorus implantation;270 the diffusion properties of the chalcogens S, Se and Te into pure silica271 and the use of low energy SIMS to characterize N distribution in a thin hafnium dioxide film.272 In this last paper, the authors bombarded the sample with a primary beam of oxygen ions at an angle of 60° and detected the secondary ions O2− and NO− at m/z 32 and 30, respectively. It was reported that under the conditions used, SIMS was capable of profiling N in the hafnium dioxide film with minimal matrix effects across the hafnium–silicon interface. This latter property was of particular use because the low yield of silicon-based secondary ions ensured that there was minimal mass interference from 30Si− on 14N16O−.The technique of ToF-SIMS has also received some attention in this review period. Olshove et al., for example, claimed to be the first group to have used ToF-SIMS as a diagnostic tool for the surface analysis of mercury cadmium telluride (Hg1−xCdxTe) samples.273 The technique offered unprecedented analysis capabilities such as 0.5 μm spot size analysis, high mass resolution, elemental and molecular composition analysis, its applicability to insulators and its high sensitivity. The authors used the technique to describe the surface chemistry geometry effects and photoresist re-deposition arising from common processing steps such as photolithography, bromine etching and photoresist stripping. The behaviour of low energy (5, 10 and 30 keV) ion implanted P at fluences between 1 × 1014 and 5 × 1015 cm−2 in silicon followed by rapid thermal annealing between 600 and 1000 °C has been studied by Ruffell and colleagues.274 Depth profiles obtained using ToF-SIMS demonstrated that at the lowest implant energy and at a fluence of 1 × 1015 cm−2, P was found to preferentially diffuse towards the surface of the sample. Conversely, at all implant energies the P was found to diffuse inwards when higher fluence, higher anneal temperature and longer anneal times were used. The recent achievements in the development of a three-dimensional thin film micro-battery on silicon and on multi-channel plates have been described by Golodnitsky and co-workers.275 The sandwich-like structure of such micro-batteries, including the electrolyte, the electrodes and current collectors, was deposited on all available surfaces, thereby utilizing even the dead volume in the substrate. In this study, thin film molybdenum oxysulfide and iron sulfide cathodes were deposited galvanostatically and then characterized using a range of techniques including XPS, XRD and ToF-SIMS. Results indicated that sub-micron thick layers of molybdenum oxysulfide were produced, the stoichiometry of which varied with depth. Electro-deposited iron sulfide films were found to have a porous structure with nano-size particles.The last section of this part of the review concerns some of the applications of atomic spectrometry for the characterization of samples. Often, a whole arsenal of techniques is used, so experimental detail is often somewhat limited. However, some of the more interesting applications have been chosen to be discussed here. Multi-layer ceramic capacitors are electronic components that temporarily store electrical charges. They are primarily composed of inter-leaved layers of dielectric material (often modified barium titanate), internal electrodes (often nickel, palladium or an alloy of palladium–silver) and external electrodes. Kim and co-workers investigated a nano-coating process that produced a magnesium oxide layer onto barium titanate core powder.276 Several deposition routes were explored, the best being the use of a magnesium nitrate–urea system which, according to XRD data, produced a layer of Mg5(CO3)4(OH)2·4H2O. On calcination at 600 °C, this layer broke down into magnesium oxide. The outer shell was then characterized further by ICP-OES and XRF. Accurate determination of the composition of a superconductor (of the YBa2Cu3Ox type) using the techniques of spectrophotometry, gravimetry and FAAS has been reported by Bruneel et al.277 After dissolution of the superconductor, Y was determined spectrophotometrically as the arsenazo-III complex, Cu was also determined spectrophotometrically but as the nitroso-R salt complex and the Ba was determined gravimetrically as the chromate and by FAAS. Results for the analyses were accurate (better than 0.7% error) and precise, with precision being typically better than 1.2% RSD. For the analysis of thin films of the material, FAAS was recommended as the analysis technique for Ba since the results produced were more reliable. Duggan and colleagues have compared several techniques for the determination of 11B+ in silicon.278 Amongst the techniques compared were SIMS, elastic recoil detection (ERD), an ion beam based technique that is useful for quantitative determination of very light ions, that is non-invasive and, on a macro-scale, is not sample destructive; and nuclear reaction analysis (NRA). The accuracy and potential drawbacks of each of the techniques were discussed. Samples from several sources that had 11B+ implanted over a wide range of fluence (4 × 1013–3 × 1016 cm−2) and energies (30 eV–10 keV) were evaluated during the study. A paper by Novak et al. also used ERD and NRA as comparison methods for SIMS.279 They noted that the NRA data from two laboratories for a sample differed by up to 15%. They also noted that use of an oxygen leak during the SIMS analyse may lead to segregation of the B. The ERD was, according to the authors, one of the few techniques that could be used instead of SIMS for near-surface profiles of B.3.3 GlassesTwo reviews covering various aspects of glass analysis have been published during the period of this report. The application of SIMS in materials science, including glasses, considered the fundamental SIMS process, issues of quantification and the various modes of analysis, e.g., static, imaging, depth-profiling and three dimensional.26 Case studies included glass and museum artefacts. Similarly, the application of a variety of analytical techniques to cultural heritage materials, including glasses, was illustrated via a number of case studies in a review by Adriaens.64 Advances in analytical science, especially in portable instrumentation to perform field measurements, were noted.An analytical procedure based upon ICP-OES analysis following microwave assisted digestion of glasses was optimized for major and trace analytes in terms of accuracy, precision and sensitivity.280 In this paper by Zachariadis and co-workers, thirteen different acid mixtures, two different microwave programs and the ICP-OES parameters were examined and the resultant matrices of data interrogated via. chemomentric procedures. The optimum method was applied successfully to the analysis of a number of ancient glasses. Method validation was by analysis of CRMs.The effect of four different sample dissolution procedures on the redox state of As in glasses was studied by do Nascimento.281 These procedures were; alkaline fusion, dissolution in aqueous NaOH, HF and HF with microwave assisted heating. These procedures were tested using a variety of simulated samples ranging from single As species to mixtures of AsV and AsIII with glass matrix elements. Losses of the analytes of interest were associated with both the alkaline fusion and microwave assisted HF treatments whilst the NaOH procedure did not result in complete digestion of “real” samples. Digestion of glass with HF was shown to conserve the speciation of As and was applied to a range of glasses with As content in the range 0.003–0.16% m/m. The analysis suggested that As(III) comprised 40% and 50% of the total As in clear and coloured glasses, respectively.Forensic discrimination of glasses continues to provide significant and fascinating analytical challenges. The use of LA-ICP-MS was considered to offer significant advantages in terms of simplicity, rapidity and the elimination of problems associated with dissolution and contamination.282–284 For example, in the paper by Bajic and co-workers, glasses that could not be distinguished by simple physical or optical methods were successfully resolved using a PCA of the complete mass spectrum.282 This multi-variate approach avoided calibration issues, the time-consuming pair-wise comparison and any requirement for a prior knowledge of the elements present in the sample. This approach also allowed discrimination of glasses with similar densities and refractive indices at the 99% confidence interval. Sampling strategies for the analysis of glass fragments by LA-ICP-MS were investigated in detail in terms of micro-homogeneity283 and sample size and shape284 in a pair of papers by Trejos and Almirall. The sample set consisted of fragments from 56 glass containers, 28 auto-windshields and 20 architectural glasses. For each sample set, the external and internal mean and precision derived from 10 replicates were estimated. The observed variations within a sample set could then be assigned to either the limitations of the analysis or to significant differences within the sample sets. The effect on the quantitative analysis of different size and shape fragments due to laser : surface interactions and heat dissipation were investigated.284 Fragments from two standard materials, ranging from 6–0.2 mm in length were analyzed and no significant differences observed. These studies illustrate many of the problems that are inherent in direct solids analysis but also how these problems can be understood, characterized and resolved. The use of non-destructive analysis approaches in forensic analysis has obvious advantages and although LA-ICP-MS is often considered as providing pseudo-non-destructive analysis, XRF can be considered as a truly non-destructive technique. Suzuki et al. applied synchrotron-based XRF, in conjunction with refractive index measurements, to the discrimination of sheet glass fragments.285 The XRF spectrum suggested that 6 elements (Ba, Ca, Ce, Fe, Sr and Zr) provided useful discriminators. Cluster analysis of 33 data sets obtained by triplicate analysis of fragments from 11 different sheet glasses indicated that, within 528 pairs, the indistinguishable pairs were reduced from 36 to 4. This improvement in discrimination, over that obtained purely from refractive index (RI), combined with the non-destructive nature of the analysis demonstrates the applicability of SR-XRF to forensic analysis of glasses.The use of LIBS for the characterization of uncorroded and weathered glass was an interesting demonstration of the capabilities of this technique for bulk analysis and depth-profiling.286 The major and chromophore species were readily detectable and the different corrosion layers could be discerned by applying successive laser shots to the same spot. The advantages of this technique were compared with “conventional” techniques such as SEM/EDAX, XRF and UV-Vis spectroscopy. A growth area for LIBS is in process analysis and it was described by Lal and colleagues as an almost ideal technique for the monitoring of the composition of a glass batch before introduction to a melting furnace.287 The application of LIBS to two different glass feeds was investigated and calibration curves were prepared for the major element content. A comparison of detection techniques between a Czerny–Turner spectrometer with a diode array detector and an echelle spectrometer with a CCD was also made.3.4 CeramicsMatschat and colleagues have reported the production of two CRMs, one for silicon nitride and the other for silicon carbide.69 The latter material was used to validate a solid sampling ETAAS method for determining trace analytes in ultra-pure silicon carbide. The same paper also discussed the production and analysis of other high purity material CRMs e.g. copper, iron and molybdenum. An overview of the chemistry of silicates and aluminosilicates that summarized the most exciting current trends has been produced by Pinkas.288 The author admitted that the review was not exhaustive, but said that it did illustrate current achievements and possible future directions of research into silicon compounds. Also included in this overview was a discussion of improved characterization techniques, e.g. SIMS and NMR. The references cover the author’s idea of the most pertinent reports since 1993.Reports covering the development or analysis of bioceramics have been relatively sparse in this review period. However, one such publication, by Reid et al.,289 described the synthesis and characterization of single-phase silicon substituted alpha-tricalcium phosphate. The products with a Ca/(P + Si) ratio of up to 1.5 and a Si content of up to 2.16% were prepared using a wet chemical method. Sintering of the samples at 1250 °C for two hours yielded products that had a Si content of between 0.59 and 1.14%. These sintered powders were characterized by several techniques including XRF, XRD, attenuated total reflection infra-red (ATR-IR) spectroscopy and TEM. It was found that when the Si content was less than 0.59%, a mixture of the products Si-alpha tricalcium phosphate, Si-beta tricalcium phosphate and hydroxyapatite was obtained. However, compositions containing greater than 1.14% Si produced the products silicon alpha tricalcium phosphate and hydroxyapatite only. Donadel and co-workers have also synthesized hydroxyapatites, but using two different wet chemical methods.290 The products were characterized using XRD, EDXRF, IR, TGA, SEM and ICP-OES. The presence of carbonate was indicated by IR analysis but, using IR and TGA, the carbonate was shown to be removed by a sintering process. Mixing of the products made by the two techniques produced a bioceramic that after sintering at 900 °C for an hour, had a compressive strength of between 26 and 30 MPa. An interfacial study of sol–gel-derived fluoridated hydroxyapatite coatings has been made by Cheng et al.291 Calcium nitrate, phosphorus pentoxide and hexafluorophosphoric acid were used to prepare the coatings by a sol–gel-dip coating method. The authors reported that the fluoridated hydroxyapatites were less soluble but equally as bioactive as conventional hydroxyapatites. The interface between the coating and the substrate (TiAl1.4V) was studied by high resolution TEM, SIMS and XPS. A rutile (titanium dioxide) rich layer was found at the interface and the F content fluctuated ‘in sync’ with the O content. The authors ascribed this to the formation of Ti(O2−xF2x). The amount of rutile was found to be dependent on the amounts of hexafluorophosphoric acid in the dipping sol. The method of preparation of wollastonite glass-ceramic materials on the in vitro bioactivity has been evaluated by Alemany and co-workers.292 A glass was ceramized using a powder technology route and by a sol–gel method. The products were composed of the same crystalline phases, but were found to differ in microstructure. Both ceramics were soaked in simulated body fluid for up to four weeks. Although both showed formation of hydroxyapatites, the rate of formation was greater in the sol–gel prepared sample. This was attributed to it having smaller, more easily dissolved crystalline grains and to it forming silanol groups (a reaction considered to be a pre-requisite for hydroxyapatite formation) more readily. The products were characterized using SEM, TEM and ICP-OES.As always, there has been considerable interest in the analysis of archaeological ceramics and porcelains. Since these samples are valuable from a cultural perspective, they are usually analyzed using methods that are as least sample-destructive as possible. An overview of five years work designed to achieve better preservation and conservation of archaeological objects has been presented by Adriaens.64 The author emphasized the non-destructive nature of the analyses and described the use of portable instrumentation for in situ analysis. Materials analyzed included painted works of art, ceramics, glasses, glazes and metals. A second overview of spectroscopic analysis of objects of cultural heritage has been presented by Bitossi and co-workers.152 This paper also discussed the state of the art in the field and included techniques such as FTIR, PIXE, XRF, Raman and Mossbauer spectroscopy and also UV-Vis spectrosocopy. Again, the sample types included in the review were paintings, ink artefacts, monuments and archaeological ceramics. Several papers have discussed the use of LIBS for the analysis of archaeological ceramics or clays. Anzano and colleagues used LIBS to determine Al and other analytes in archaeological clays because it is a direct method (i.e. does not require a sample dissolution), is rapid and is non-sample destructive.293 During this study the authors determined the matrix effects experienced. Calibration was achieved from the analysis of different salts of the metals. Results were compared with those obtained from LA-ICP-MS. A similar paper has been prepared by Lopez et al.294 These workers used LIBS to analyze Roman pottery from the first to the fifth centuries AD from two different production centres in Spain. Depth-profiling studies for analytes such as Ca and Fe and the presence of Al and Si enabled the authors to discriminate between regions and between different time periods. Verification of the LIBS data was achieved using the complimentary technique of SEM-EDX.Another technique that may be used for the direct and non-sample destructive analysis of historical ceramics is XRF. There have been several examples of such analyses published in this review period. Barone and co-workers used XRF with chemometric analysis of the data (cluster analysis) for the characterization of 79 fragments of ancient pottery.295 By determining concentrations of both major and trace analytes and then ratioing them against the silica concentration and using cluster analysis on this data, the authors managed to differentiate between the pottery from the regions of Catania, Lentini and Siracusa. Conversely, pottery from Messina was found to fall into two distinct groups. The authors used FTIR in an attempt to identify differences between these two groups. Padilla and co-workers highlighted the problems of XRF analysis of poor sensitivity towards some analytes (Cr, REEs etc.), poor precision and the inability to analyze some samples in the absence of suitable CRMs for calibration.296 They attempted to overcome the sensitivity problem by combining two EDXRF methods, namely energy dispersive polarized excitation using secondary targets (EDPXRF) and radio-isotope XRF using an americium-241 source. They applied their technique to the analysis of Cuban aborigine pottery and compared the results with those obtained during a previous INAA study. Portable XRF instrumentation has been used to analyze archaeological pottery in three publications.297–299 In the first of these applications, a portable beam stability-controlled instrument developed in-house in Catania, Italy, was used to determine Nb, Rb, Sr, Y and Zr in 50 sherds of fine pottery from the San Francesco deposit by using a multi-linear regression method. As a test to determine the homogeneity of the samples, few examples were powdered and analyzed, also by a multi-linear regression method. A discussion of the results obtained using both methods was given. As a comparison, the powdered samples also underwent chemical analysis. The second of these papers298 reported the use of a portable EDXRF instrument for the analysis of pottery sherds at the El Hibeh archaeological site in Egypt. After determining the concentrations of Fe, Rb and Sr and plotting the data on a triangular scattergram, clear temporal and spatial separation of ceramic types could be observed. The authors discussed the geochemical behaviour of these analytes in relation to the geological source materials utilized for the pottery manufacture. Papadopoulou and co-workers reported the development and optimization of a portable micro XRF instrument with a mono-capillary lens for the in situ multi-element analysis of ancient ceramics.299 These authors gave a brief discussion of the advantages of non-destructive, in situ analyses and then performed a series of experiments designed to optimize their instrument’s performance. These experiments included the effects of beam spot size, the geometry effect and the determination of LODs. A series of CRMs was used for these studies including SARM 69 (ceramic), SRM 620 (soda-lime), NCS DC 73332 and the reference materials AWZ-1 and PRI-1. Once optimized, the instrument was used for the quantitative analysis of ancient ceramics from Abdera, Northern Greece.Several other analytical techniques have been used for the analysis of archaeological ceramics. Cochrane and Neff used LA-ICP-MS for the provenance analysis of 260 Fijian sherds.300 Their data demonstrated three compositional groups over a 2700 year sequence and suggested that accepted theories of interaction in the south West Pacific would have to be re-evaluated. Li et al. used ICP-MS to obtain trace metal and Sr isotope ratio data for the provenance and characterization studies of Chinese ceramic stonewares.301 The trace element data were sufficient for identifying samples from Jizhou because they had very restricted variation. Unfortunately, trace element data alone were insufficient for characterizing samples from Yaozhou because they had much greater variability. However, the Sr-87/Sr-86 ratio had a very small variability and the ratio for the Yaozhou samples was much lower than that of the Jizhou samples which, as well as having a much higher ratio, also had a much larger variability. The authors concluded that the Sr isotope ratio analyses have a great potential for characterizing ceramics of low Rb/Sr ratio, e.g. kaolin clays, but are of limited use in high Rb/Sr materials such as porcelain stone. A similar paper by the same research group used ICP-MS to determine trace metals (>40) as well as TIMS for determining Sr-87/Sr-86 and Nd-143/Nd-144 isotope ratios.302 Samples from Gongxian showed a small range of concentration for the trace analytes i.e. there was limited variability), but this was much greater for the samples from Yaozhou. The Sr and Nd isotope ratios were, however, very small for samples from both places. The methodology could distinguish between samples from the two sites and was also capable of identifying modern fakes. Xiang and co-workers reported an ETV-ICP-MS method that was capable of analyzing slurried samples of ancient porcelain.303 A PTFE modifier was found to remove the silicon matrix at 1200 °C effectively, whilst leaving the analytes un-volatilized and ready for determination. The particle size was found to be an important factor, with particles of less than 57 μm being required for complete volatilization. Similarly the concentration of the slurry was found to be important, with concentrations of greater than 0.8 g L−1 causing matrix interferences. Under the optimized conditions, REEs could be determined accurately giving LODs of between 0.7 ng g−1 (Eu) and 33.3 ng g−1 (Nd), with precision of between 4.1% for Yb and 10% for La (at a concentration of 1 μg g−1, n = 9). The method was used to analyze samples from the Sui, Ming and Qing dynasties.Several other papers have described the solid sampling of ceramics via ETV. A very similar paper to the last one described has been published by Chen et al.304 These workers used ETV-ICP-OES and a modifier of PTFE for matrix removal during the determination of REEs in zirconium dioxide powders. The zirconium matrix was volatilized away as the tetrafluoride species leaving the analytes to be vaporized from an interference free matrix. Absolute LODs ranged from 0.04 ng (Yb) to 0.5 ng (Pr) and the precision was reported as being better than 5% RSD. Results from this procedure were compared with those obtained using pneumatic nebulization of samples that had previously had the matrix eliminated by a solvent extraction method. Good agreement was found. Peschel and co-workers described an ETV-sector field-ICP-MS system that was equipped with an array detector.305 The instrument was being tested to see how it coped with the detection of a large number of transient signals. Detection limits for Co, Cu, Fe, Ga, Mn, Ni and Zn were in the range 4–60 pg μL−1 for aqueous solutions but were found to degrade to the low μg g−1 range for a 10 mg mL−1 slurry of alumina. The dynamic range covered 3–5 orders of magnitude for many of the analytes, but was found to be limited by the ETV device. Trace amounts of Cu, Fe and Ga were determined in the alumina powders directly at the 2–270 ng g−1 level without the need for a modifier for matrix removal. Results were found to be in agreement with literature values for the Cu and Fe, but the Ga was found to deviate substantially (by 50%). Krivan and Janickova described a solid sampling ETAAS system for the direct determination of Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Li, Mn, Ni and Zn in zirconium dioxide samples.180 These workers also managed to separate the matrix from the analytes without recourse to a matrix modifier. The analytes were found to volatilize efficiently whilst the refractory matrix could simply be tipped off the platform after the analysis. Calibration was achieved by pipetting aqueous standards onto the matrix residue of a previous sample. Although this is of somewhat dubious scientific validity because the analyte will not soak into the matrix and hence will volatilize more easily than those present naturally in the sample, the results still proved to be accurate. The accuracy was proved by comparison of the results obtained with those obtained using radiochemical NAA and by ETAAS using liquid sampling of digested samples and slurries. Detection limits for the nine analytes ranged between 0.06 ng g−1 (Cd) and 2.3 ng g−1 (Fe). Two other papers have described novel methods for the direct analysis of solid ceramic samples. The development and characterization of a new, relatively inexpensive, computer-controlled particle sample introduction system to an ICP-OES instrument has been described by Greib and Karanassios.306 The device was designed to introduce non-hygroscopic particles of ng range weight (or samples that can be ground to form such particles) at a delivery rate that is controlled by a programme. The system was tested in three modes. The first was where sample diluted with graphite powder was introduced continuously for 5–10 s producing a steady state signal akin to a nebulizer. The second mode used a “puff” of sample, i.e. sufficient sample to form a transient peak was introduced. The third mode was similar to the second, but used a much smaller “puff”. In this mode, puffs with a frequency in the kHz range could be introduced enabling individual particles to be analyzed. Assuming plasma over-load was avoided, all three modes of operation produced linear calibrations. Precision was dependent on sample type, with Ni being determined in a homogeneous CRM yielding a precision between 3.1 and 4.2% RSD, but in a heterogeneous soil sample, the precision degraded to 50% RSD. The authors applied the device to the determination of W in powdered tungsten carbide ceramics. The analysis was assisted by the introduction of sulfur hexafluoride to the ICP. The authors concluded that their sample introduction device offered several advantages over other particle introduction devices reported in the literature. The other paper, by Peschel and co-workers, described the direct analysis of alumina powders by TXRF.307 The ceramic powders were analyzed as slurries containing 1–10 mg mL−1 of sample. The effects of different particle size and different slurry concentration were determined. In addition, different modes of internal standardization were also tested. The first mode used the signal from Al, a matrix component, the second mode measured Fe, a trace element within the sample and the third mode added Co at a concentration of 200 μg g−1. Results indicated that only the Al internal standardization method produced reliable results and that a particle size of less than 10 μm produced no systematic influence on the accuracy. The analytes Ca, Cr, Cu, Fe, Ga, Mn, Ni, V and Zn were determined, yielding LODs in the range 0.7–7 μg g−1. These LODs were found to increase slightly with increasing particle size.There have been a few papers that have described the preparation of new ceramics or a new preparation procedure for existing ceramics and then used atomic spectrometry for characterization purposes. Spolnik et al. used electron probe microanalysis to characterize a new family of ceramics of general formula (Na1−xBix)(MnyNb1−y)O3−.308 Since such a compound contains both low and high z elements, this can be problematic to analyze. The authors used Monte Carlo simulations combined with iterative approximation to facilitate the analysis. The preparation of leucite powders with a controlled particle size distribution has been reported by Novotna and colleagues.309 Since these ceramics have a high fracture toughness and suitable thermal expansion, they represent a promising material for dental applications. The overall aim of the project was to replace the present method of manufacture that is based on crystallization from a melt, with a procedure that prepares the leucite by ion exchange of analcime (hydrated sodium aluminium silicate). The extent of the ion exchange was determined by XRD and XRF. The properties of the analcime as well as the process parameters on the particle size, shape and structure of the product were all studied. Nakao and Nogami synthesized silica pillared clays with large interlayer distance by the simultaneous intercalation of 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane and polyvinyl alcohol.310 The products were characterized using a number of techniques including XRD, XRF and nitrogen adsorption–desorption. It was found that the distance between the layers was 1.3 nm in the presence of polyvinyl alcohol, almost twice that in its absence.As usual, there has been a selection of papers that have used SIMS for depth-profiling and for ion diffusion studies. Many of the publications in this area have been produced by the same research group in Clauthal, Germany. Examples include two papers that studied the diffusion of 14 lanthanides and Y311 and O312 in alpha alumina. In one of these papers,311 Legros and co-workers used samples that were either single crystals with a known orientation, poly-crystals with various grain-sizes doped with Y at a concentration 100 or 1000 ppm or from pure alumina powder. The authors heated the samples at 1200 or 1300 °C and then after this pre-treatment, they added a few drops of analyte solution to the surface and allowed it to undergo diffusion at either 1200 °C for 48 h or 1300 °C for 21 h. It was found that the diffusion profiles were very similar for all the lanthanides. In the last of these papers, Lesage et al. studied O diffusion through scandium doped (via a nitrate route) or titanium doped (isopropoxide route) alpha alumina grains.312 The dopants are often segregated or precipitated in grain boundaries. Therefore the rate of O diffusion in these boundaries will depend on the dopant concentration. The authors studied O diffusion at two concentrations of the dopants (again 100 and 1000 ppm) and through various grain sizes (varied by changing the sintering conditions). Samples were first heat-treated in a pure O-16 atmosphere and then, at a temperature of either 1000 or 1200 °C, O-18 introduced and allowed to diffuse through the sample via an O-16/O-18 exchange process. Data indicated that different O diffusion was observed in the scandium and titanium doped samples. Other papers by the same research group measured N diffusion in polycrystalline silicon nitrate films313 and H diffusion through the same material.314 In the former of these two applications, SIMS was used as well as Secondary Neutral Mass Spectrometry (SNMS) and Nuclear Resonant Reaction Analysis (NRRA) to obtain depth-profile data. The results from the three different methods yielded data that, given certain error, were comparable. One final paper by this research group used the long-lived radio-isotope Al-26 as a pseudo-stable isotope for Al depth distribution studies.315 As an example sample for this approach, the authors used mullite, a material with low thermal expansion, low thermal conductivity and excellent creep resistance. Again, SIMS was used for the study. It was concluded that the method was universally applicable to the huge family of Al-containing oxides. The last paper of note that discussed SIMS measurement of diffusion was published by Nakagawa et al.316 These authors prepared yttrium doped zirconia bi-crystals {001} symmetric tilt Sigma 5 grain boundaries and then measured O-18 diffusion behaviour across those grain boundaries. It was found that a significant decrease in diffusion occurred around the boundary plane indicating that the presence of the Sigma 5 grain boundary blocked the diffusion. From high resolution TEM and EDXRF analysis, neither amorphous layers nor Si impurities were found at the grain boundaries indicating that the blocking feature must originate from its core structure and the yttrium solute.3.5 CatalystsThe preparation and characterization of catalysts has been an area of much research activity. Many of the papers in this review period deal mainly with the synthesis of the catalysts and the investigation of their catalytic properties, with the characterization by atomic (and other) spectroscopic techniques being described in brief. This review will therefore concentrate on the broader field of catalyst preparation and characterization.Zeolites continue to be very widely researched catalyst materials, with ZSM-5 being the most frequently modified zeolite. Zhang and co-workers studied the performance of nanocrystallite HZSM-5 catalysts for transformation of n-C8 hydrocarbons.317 Nano-HZSM-5 catalysts were prepared and characterized by XRF, TEM and other techniques. Both the influence of reaction conditions on selectivity and the reaction mechanism were investigated. Results showed that nano-HZSM-5 exhibited higher catalytic activity and better durability than micro-HZSM-5. This was attributed to its small crystal size, greater number of acidic centres at both porthole and external surfaces and shorter micro-pores, which increased the diffusion rate of large molecules and decreased the influence of coking on aromatization, alkylation and isomerization. Under specified conditions the total yield of iso-paraffins and aromatics were 88% and 93% when n-octane and 1-octene were the reactants. Ti-ZSM-5 zeolites have been prepared via a gas solid procedure while B-ZSN-5 zeolites have been prepared by a modified hydrothermal procedure as a precursor in a paper reported by Liu and co-workers.318 These catalysts were then characterized by XRD, FT-IR, UV-Vis, XRF, SEM, ICP-OES and Magic Angle Spinning (MAS) NMR. Their catalytic performance for the hydroxylation of phenol was investigated. The results showed that crystallization at lower temperature during the B-ZSM-5 was advantageous to get smaller crystal size, and the Ti-ZSM-5 samples prepared using the B-ZSM-5 with the smaller crystal size showing better catalytic performance for hydroxylation of phenol. Under specified reaction conditions phenol conversion was over 20%. Iron-ZSM-5 catalysts have also been studied for the benzylation of benzene by benzyl chloride.319 Adsorption properties of the catalysts for reactants and products were studied by inverse GC. In another paper, a number of instrumental techniques including ICP-OES, XRD, SEM, Al-27 MAS-NMR, nitrogen and ammonia desorption, FTIR of adsorbed pyridine, HR-TEM, UV/Vis and EPR were applied to the characterization of catalysts.320 The morphology of the structure, porosity, acidity and the forms of Al and Fe in Fe-beta and Fe-ZSM-5 prepared by hydrothermal synthesis and in their products of activation by calcination and steam treatment was characterized. The compositions of the zeolite matrices were very similar, with nominal Si/Al and Si/Fe ratios of 36 and 152, respectively. Removal of the template by calcination led to extensive de-alumination in Fe-beta, while having no influence on the state of Al in Fe-ZSM-5. Steam treatment was required to massively create extra-framework Al species in the latter sample. In contrast, the sensitivity of framework Fe to migration into non-framework positions during post-synthesis treatments and the nature and distribution of the resulting Fe species were remarkably analogous in the two zeolite structures. Catalytic tests with direct N2O decomposition and N2O reduction with CO over the steamed iron zeolites confirmed that the microporous matrix intrinsically did not play a decisive role on the activity in these reactions providing that the resulting forms of Fe were similar. The thermal stability and acid resistance of various cationic forms of CXN natural zeolite have been studied by Zhong and colleagues.321 Ultra-stable high silica H-STI-I and H-STI-II zeolites were prepared by various procedures and several cationic forms of the M-STI-I and M-STI-II series (M = Ag, Ca, K, Li or Na) under stage-temperature programmed calcinations were investigated by measuring the crystallinity by powder XRD. The composition and structural properties were characterized by XRF and Si-29 and Al-27 MAS NMR. The results showed that the zeolite remained stable in hot hydrochloric acid solution at concentrations of lower than 2 M. Varying degrees of crystallinity were observed depending on the cation. Several factors affected the thermal stability, including the framework Si/Al ratio, structural defects and cation forms.Other papers reported on the use of isomerization catalysts. Kumar et al.322 investigated Pt-H-mordenite and H-mordenite catalysts isomerization of n-butane to iso-butane. Aluminium sulfate, sodium aluminate, aluminium oxide and pseudo-boehmite were used as sources of Al during the synthesis of SAPO-5. The samples were characterized by XRD, SEM, XRF, FTIR and nitrogen adsorption. The morphology, surface area and catalytic properties were influenced by the source of Al used in the preparation, and the sample prepared from pseudo-boehmite showed most phase pure silicoaluminophosphate, whereas the use of aluminium phosphate or sodium aluminate formed only quartz and berlinite. FTIR spectra showed the presence of Brønsted and Lewis acid sites in the Pt-SAPO-5, SAPO-5, Pt-H-mordenite and H-mordenite catalysts. Modification of SAPO-5 and mordenite by Pt impregnation did not influence the structure of these catalyst materials. The Pt-H-mordenite and H-mordenite catalysts with stronger Brønsted acidity exhibited higher conversion of n-butane to iso-butane than Pt-SAPO-5 and SAPO-5 catalysts that had weak acid sites. Introduction of Pt in SAPO-5 and mordenite played a positive role in the isomerization of n-butane to iso-butane. Several zeolites, including NaX, CaA and ZSM-5, in both their parent and protonated forms have been evaluated for the catalytic combustion of hexane and benzene.323 Chemical composition was investigated by ICP-MS whilst the Si/Al ratio was varied between 1 and 11.38. Parent and protonated forms were characterized by XRD, nitrogen physisorption, ammonia-temperature programmed desorption (TPD) and inverse gas chromatography (IGC). Reactivity was correlated with surface acidity (strength and acid site concentration), morphology and adsorption properties. ZSM-5 and X zeolites gave the best catalytic performance for the oxidation of benzene and n-hexane. Results showed that the catalytic activity for n-hexane oxidation was strongly dependent on the strength of the interaction between the organic molecule and the catalyst whereas for benzene, the adsorption capacity played a key role in the catalytic activity.One area which is worthy of note is the synthesis of catalysts for the hydrogenation of nitrates in water.324 Bimetallic Pd/Cu supported on alumina promote the liquid phase hydrogenation of nitrates. These were synthesized by reduction and impregnation and were characterized by TEM, EDX, XRD and AAS. The Cu was thought to be stabilized in a low oxidation state because of its close proximity to Pd. Dried sewage sludge has been mixed with waste paper (with paper to sludge ratios ranging from 1 : 4 to 3 : 1).325 This material was found to catalyze gas phase de-sulfurization. The addition of calcium hydroxide to the mixtures increased the catalytic activity. The precursors were carbonised at 950 °C. The performance of these materials as hydrogen sulfide adsorbents/oxidation catalysts was assessed. Characterization of the materials before and after adsorption was by nitrogen adsorption, potentiometric titration, thermal analysis, XRF and SEM. The capacity of these catalysts was comparable to those of the best activated carbons available. A ferric oxide catalyst prepared by a dipping/calcinations method on gamma Al2O3 as carrier was developed for the microwave induced catalytic oxidation process for treatment of phenol in water.326 The effects of operating conditions on activity, catalyst life and reaction kinetics were investigated. Results showed that for alpha Fe2O3 loaded onto the surface of gamma Al2O3 with an alpha Fe2O3 content of 3.7%, under defined reaction conditions treatment of a 100 mg L−1 phenol solution resulted in 97.9% removal within 5 min. Ma et al.327 have investigated the use of ultra-fine Ca–Fe composite oxides for the de-chlorination of hexachlorobenzene. This paper outlined the preparation of various composite oxides and showed that hexachlorobenzene was destroyed by a hydro-de-chlorination mechanism which was almost 100% efficient after 2 h reaction time. Li et al.328 have described an efficient heterogeneous photo-catalytic material based on a polyoxotungstate–anatase/TiO2 composite. The preparation and characterization (using assorted techniques including ICP-OES) of this material were described, and it was shown to be an efficient material for the visible light photo-catalytic degradation of an aqueous organophosphorus pesticide. An added bonus was that there was minimal catalyst degradation over 5 cycles.Mesoporous catalytic materials (MCM) are widely reported. Shah et al.329 reported incorporating varying amounts of Sn into mesoporous silica SBA-15 molecular sieves, by repeated post grafting techniques using two different metal precursors (tin acetate and tin chloride). Characterization was achieved by XRF, powder XRD, nitrogen adsorption, TEM, FTIR, Sn-110 MAS NMR and Sn-Mossbauer spectroscopy. The inclusion of varying amounts of Sn into the structure was discussed, and was found not to affect the original pore structure of the parent SBA-15. It was suggested that the silanol groups on the internal walls of the SBA-15 were the sites for Sn incorporation. Sn-119 MAS NMR showed an isotropic chemical shift at delta = −604 ppm indicating the presence of Sn in an octahedral environment and Mossbauer studies revealed that Sn2+ may form upon reductive treatments and is probably stabilized within the pore wall, whilst Sn4+ was stabilised as larger entities. Mesoporous catalytic materials have been used to improve the performance of the cathode in a direct methanol fuel cell.330 Black Pearls (BP-2000) and Vulcan XC-72 carbon blacks were chosen as supports to prepare 40 wt% Pt/C catalysts by a modified polyol process. The carbon blacks were characterized by FTIR and nitrogen adsorption, whilst the prepared catalysts were characterized by ICP-OES, TEM, SEM, and in situ cyclic voltammetry. On Pt-2000 the Pt nano-particles were larger and more unevenly distributed than on XC-72. The BP-2000 supported catalyst gave better single cell performance at high current densities. The results suggested that the performance improvement was due to enhanced oxygen diffusion and water removal capability when BP-2000 was used as the cathode catalyst support. Ravishankar and colleagues have reported the use of MCM-22 molecular sieves as novel supports for cobalt catalysts in Fischer-Tropsch syntheses.331 The catalytic properties were investigated for a range of supports and MCM-22 exhibited the highest selectivity to long chain (>C5) hydrocarbons. Characterization of the Co-impregnated MCM-22 was achieved using a variety of techniques including XRF, XRD, SEM, TEM and NMR. Oxidation of o-xylene is a commercial route to phthalic anhydride. A paper by Selvaraj and Lee described a novel route to phthalic anhydride by o-xylene oxidation over a mesoporous V-Mo-MCM-41 molecular sieve.332 The synthesis of this catalyst was described and characterization was by various techniques including ICP-OES, XRD, nitrogen adsorption, FTIR, TGA/DTA, V-51 and Si-29 MAS NMR, SEM and TEM. A series of copper-Schiff base materials anchored onto MCM-41 have been synthesized by post-synthetic grafting.333 The structures of these materials were studied by XPS and nitrogen adsorption, and the distribution of the Cu–Schiff base complexes elucidated. Additional physico-chemical properties of the functionalized materials were established using powder XRD, AAS, CHN microanalysis, FTIR and Si-29 and C-13 CP MAS NMR. Argon etching of the surface to a depth of 45 Å showed that the copper–Schiff base complex was distributed both on the external surface and within the pores of the Si-MCM-41 material. The amount of complex located within the pores was around one third of the amount detected on the external surface.Several developments in instrumental analysis of catalysts have been published during this review period. Grams et al.334 reported the application of ToF-SIMS to the surface analysis of a Co–Al2O3 catalyst. In addition, the presence of interactions between metal oxide and the support was confirmed, as was the degree of Co reduction. TOF-SIMS surface images also gave evidence of the Co dispersion improvement after sample reduction. A paper by Yoon et al. studied the applicability of XRF spectroscopy for the quantification of platinum group metals, when the sample matrix is not exactly the same as the standard materials.335 Here, XRF was used to determine the Pd, Pt and Rh content in spent automotive catalyst and in two used auto-catalyst NIST standard reference materials. The XRF technique was proved to be a fast and accurate method for determining not only these platinum group metals but also other solid materials that were less soluble by wet digestion. The detection limits by XRF were better than those of ICP-MS which usually required significant dilution to avoid high dissolved solid concentration. The XRF technique did however suffer from strong matrix dependence. Gas-to-liquids (GTL) technology is an important pathway to synthesize clean fuels from natural gas and advances in this technology have led several companies to invest in the Fischer–Tropsch route to synthesize clean hydrocarbon fuels. Heterogeneous catalyst assemblies are typically utilised in the GTL conversion reactions and an in-depth characterization of catalyst materials would facilitate the design of the next generation of catalysts. Jones et al.336 demonstrated the use of computed microtomography (CMT) and micro-XRF techniques to map the catalyst constituents. This paper described the experimental equipment and gave examples of these techniques during the characterization of various catalysts. The potential for using CMT and micro-XRF for monitoring changes in the catalyst composition during Fischer–Tropsh syntheses were discussed. The catalytic performance of Fe-based Fischer–Tropsch catalysts, prepared using ammonia or sodium carbonate as precipitating agents were investigated by Wu and colleagues.337 These catalysts were characterized by AAS, nitrogen adsorption, XRD, XPS and Mossbauer spectroscopy. The ammonia precipitated catalyst had the higher surface area and larger pore volume.Direct analysis of solid samples is always an important challenge in elemental analysis as the digestion step for solution analysis is time-consuming, often hazardous and risks the introduction of contaminants. The determination of In, Pt and Sn in alumina based catalysts was evaluated using LA-ICP-OES.338 The LA system was a high energy Lina-Spark atomizer based on a Nd:YAG laser operated at 1064 nm. Samples were pellitised with no binder and placed on a Teflon support. Ablation repeatability was <4% RSD when the powder particles were <100 μm in diameter. The signal was normalised to aluminium.One paper339 has reported the deposition of iron oxide layers onto silica supported gold films or gold nano-particles, by pulsed laser techniques. These samples were characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM), XPS and TOF-SIMS. CO oxidation activity was measured before and after deposition. The initial activity of iron oxide–gold nano-particles on silica was the highest, followed by samples containing sandwiched gold film. XPS analysis showed some reaction induced changes in the composition of the iron oxide layer (FeOx, which could be regarded as a mixture of Fe2O3, FeO and FeOOH according to the XPS analysis of the Fe 2p and 1s core levels). No Au segregation at the surface was detected by ToF-SIMS. The XPS Au 4f spectra indicated that the Au atoms might be injected and trapped in this layer. The catalytic activity of the FeO–Au–silica samples was attributed to the active sites located on the iron oxide overlayer promoted by the gold beneath. As gold nano-particles and gold films caused promotion, it was inferred that, in both cases, an electronic effect was operating due to the presence of an FeO–Au interface. The promotion was stronger for the gold nano-particles and so the hypothesis of a particle size-dependent electronic effect was advanced. When thicker iron oxide layers were used, (40–80 nm) no gold promotion was found. A particle size-dependent electronic effect in gold supported ceria–alumina catalysts for CO oxidation was also reported by Centeno et al.340 The structures of hydrated vanadia catalysts in titanium dioxide–anatase surfaces have been investigated using the semi-empirical molecular orbital method MSINDO.341 Various adsorption structures were considered and their stabilities at 300 K and 600 K were tested by constant temperature Born–Oppenheimer molecular dynamic simulations in the framework of MSINDO. Structural features of the vanadia–titania catalysts found using XAFS, SIMS, IR, Raman and NMR spectroscopy as well as conductivity experiments were explained by the calculations. A nano-phase and micrometer sized Fe2O3 Fischer–Tropsch catalyst has been characterized by micro-XRF and CMT using a synchrotron radiation source.342 Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS), XPS and ICP-OES have been used for the determination of grafted metal content on a series of supported hybrid catalysts based on zirconocene and tri(pyrazolyl)borate titanium derivatives.343 All the catalysts were shown to be active in ethylene polymerization and catalyst activity was governed by the zirconocene species. The polymers produced were characterized by DSC and GPC. Tu et al.344 described the use of HPLC-ICP-MS and HPLC-ESI-MS for the determination of Rh species involved in the ligand exchange process leading to the formation of dirhodium(II) tetrakis{methyl-2-oxopyrrolidin-5(S)-carboxylate}. ICP-MS was used as an element specific detector following species separation by HPLC. Electrospray mass spectrometry was used for species identification and confirmation. A novel interface between the HPLC column and the ICP-MS instrument consisting of an eluent splitter, a desolvation unit and the ICP-MS peristaltic pump enabled reversed phase HPLC with gradient elution with up to 100% organic component to be used, with no organic loading in the plasma. A variety of reaction intermediates were identified and quantified along the pathway to the formation of the desired product, including isomeric di-, tri- and tetra- substituted species previously believed to be absent. Flow injection on-line ETAAS has been applied to the determination of Rh in the certified catalysts sample SRM 2557 and other materials.345 Here the flow injection manifold incorporated a micro-column filled with a chelating resin made in-house for preconcentration of Rh. A detection limit of 1 ng mL−1 was achieved.Composition and phase properties are critical parameters in exploring the catalytic properties of bimetallic nano-particles. Results from a study aimed at determining these properties for carbon supported gold-palladium catalysts with different bimetallic compositions have been presented by Luo et al.346 The bimetallic nano-particle catalysts were prepared by a two-phase synthesis employing organic monolayer encapsulation on bimetallic Au–Pt cores. The size-controlled nano-particles were assembled on carbon black support materials with controllable metal loadings and dispersion and further treated by calcination. The core composition of the bimetallic nano-particles was determined by DCP-AES and structural characterization was carried out by XRD. The bimetallic nano-particles were shown to display alloy properties in contrast to the bimetallic miscibility gap known for the bulk counterpart of the bimetallic metals. This demonstrated the difference in physical and chemical properties of nano-scale materials from the bulk crystalline state, revealing important details of the phase properties of the bimetallic nano-particle catalysts and new information for the correlation between the composition and phase properties at the nano-scale. Carbon supported PtMo catalysts have been prepared and their use in anodes for proton-exchange membrane fuel cells investigated.347 These catalysts were also analyzed using ICP-OES and XPS, but also had their electrochemical behaviour characterized using cyclic voltammetry.Gold nano-particles containing iron, cobalt, manganese and cerium have been prepared using precipitation–deposition/co-precipitation methods.348 These catalysts were characterized by the usual suite of analytical techniques including ICP-MS, TGA, TEM, XRD, BET, Mossbauer and XAS. Additionally, gold L-3-edge X-ray absorption measurements were carried out over a series of transition and rare earth elements containing gold nano-particles. XRD analysis showed high phase purity and crystallinity of the support materials. Mossbauer spectroscopy yielded valuable information on the electronic and crystallographic structure of the gold nano-particles. X-Ray absorption fine structure yielded critical information about atomic distances, bonding and neighbouring environments for the gold atoms in the various support metals. XAFS and in situ high temperature XRD were used to investigate the influence of high temperature treatment on the gold nano-particles inside the metal oxides. The results obtained from XAFS, XANES, XRD and Mossbauer techniques confirmed the characteristics and structure of the gold nano-particles in these materials. X-Ray absorption fine structure combined with XRF has been applied to various vanadium–titanium oxide hybrid samples.349 Vanadium K alpha (1) fluorescence was selectively counted using a high energy resolution spectrometer equipped with a Ge(331) crystal. Two advantages of this were the extremely high signal to background ratio and the compatibility of measurements in the atmosphere of reaction gas. Structure transformation of the V sites was followed spectroscopically. In situ structure changes of the V sites on TiO2 were reported by means of XAFS for the first time. Gold nano-particles in different high surface area mesoporous and microporous materials were prepared using sol–gel and hydrothermal crystallization methods.350 Au-Al-MCM-41, Au-ZSM-5 and Au-LSX were prepared with different framework compositions and concentrations of Au particles. These were characterized by using BET, FTIR, ICP-MS, XAS, XPS, TEM and XRD. The XPS measurements indicated the presence of Au species in different oxidation states and the concentration of Au metal species varied over the surfaces of the as-synthesized and calcined gold containing meso- and microporous materials. The size of the Au nano-particles varied over the range 2–6 nm. The dispersion and size of the nano-particles were different in materials with MCM-41, ZSM-5 and LSX structures. The interaction of NO–CO with the Au under different reaction conditions was studied by FTIR. In situ high temperature XRD measurements were performed in order to establish the fate of the gold nano-particles and phase transformations at high temperatures (303–1873 K). High surface area (>300 m2 g−1) nano-structured TiO2 was used as a CoMo hydrosulfurization catalyst support.351 Cylindrical extrudates were impregnated with Mo and Co and characterization was by nitrogen physisorption, XRD, AAS and Raman spectroscopy. Sulfided catalysts were studied by XPS. XRD showed that the nano-structure was well preserved upon sulfidation at 400 °C. XPS analysis also showed that CO and Mo dispersion over the titanium support was much higher than for alumina and a very high surface S concentration suggested that nano-structured TiO2 was sulfided during catalyst activation. Dibenzothiophene hydrosulfurization activity under defined conditions for CoMo/nano-structured titania was twice that of an alumina supported commercial CoMo catalyst. No important differences in selectivity over the catalysts supported on alumina or nano-structured TiO2 were observed, where direct desulfurization to biphenyl was favoured. Both Mo dispersion and sulfidability were enhanced on the nano-structured TiO2 support where Mo4+ was increased compared with that on alumina.In catalyst preparation techniques the ability to control the size and composition of the metal nano-particles is essential. Luo et al.352 describe an investigation of a core-shell synthesis protocol for the preparation of monolayer capped ternary platinum–vanadium–iron (PtVFe) nano-particles. This approach involved the use of metal precursors, capping agents and reducing agents in defined ratios for the reaction in a single organic phase. By manipulating the ratios of the metal precursors and capping agents, the authors synthesized the core-shell type nano-particles in which the nano-crystal PtVFe cores were encapsulated within a shell of mixed amine/acid monolayer. The chemical compositions were determined using TEM, DCP-AES, XRD, FTIR and TGA and the potential for use of the nano-particles as fuel cell catalysts was discussed. Nano-sized spinel ferrite catalysts for the selective oxidation of styrene were prepared by Guin et al.353 A bottom up approach for the synthesis was employed and thermal analysis, powder XRD, TEM and ICP-OES were used to characterize the materials. They proved to be good catalysts for the oxidation of styrene to benzaldehyde in the presence of hydrogen peroxide. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) supported PtRu catalysts for proton exchange membrane fuel cells have been prepared and characterized by Liang et al.354 The preparation procedures were described and the effects of solvents and surface composition of the MWCNTs on the deposition and dispersion of metal particles investigated. These materials were then evaluated as proton exchange membrane fuel cell anode catalysts for oxidation of 50 ppm CO contaminated hydrogen. The ability to tailor the size and composition of metal particles at the nanoscale could lead to improved or new catalytic properties. Luo et al.355 described the results of an investigation into the preparation and characterization of PtNiFe ternary alloy nano-particles. The synthesis of these particles was described and the average diameters of the nanocrystalline cores were well controlled between 1.4 and 1.8 nm with high monodispersity. The catalysts were characterized using TEM, DCP-AES, FTIR, TGA and XRD and were examined for their intrinsic kinetic activities for the electrochemical reduction of oxygen. It was shown that the ternary catalysts were highly active towards molecular oxygen electrocatalytic reduction. The implications of this work for the exploration of new nano-structured catalyst materials for fuel cell applications was discussed. Sivakumar et al. investigated acoustic cavitation as a means of synthesising nano CuO-ZrO2 catalysts with a mesoporous distribution.356 Precipitation methodologies for the preparation of these catalysts were described and the effect of ultrasonic intensity on surface area was determined. A surface area of 349.2 m2 g−1 was achieved by means of the ultrasonic method. Catalyst activity was higher when higher ultrasonic intensity was used during the preparation.An interesting development has been the use of supported ionic liquids in which to provide a new reaction environment for catalytic transformations.357 Here, catalytic hydrogenation of citral was studied on an active carbon cloth catalyst, with a palladium in ionic liquid on ACC. This was compared with a commercial platinum on active carbon powder catalyst. The metal was supported on active carbon either by direct impregnation or utilising the ionic liquid as the intermediate phase on the carbon. The influence on selectivity and activity of the most important experimental variables including temperature and pressure was investigated in a batch reactor. Four consecutive experiments were carried out with each catalyst and the aim was to assess eventual catalyst deactivation. In the case of the traditionally impregnated catalysts, the decrease in activity was very notable, whereas the novel SSIL-TM (structured support ionic liquid-transition metal) in ionic liquid on active carbon maintained its activity in the four consecutive batches. The catalysts were characterized by SEM, nitrogen desorption and ICP-MS. With platinum on the active carbon fibre catalyst, 80%–100% selectivity of carbonyl group hydrogenation was achieved with a 15% conversion efficiency, whereas the palladium in ionic liquid on ACC catalyst displayed an impressive metal efficiency (citral to Pd ratio of 156 mol : mol), selectivity of 45% and 92% conversion efficiency in 140 min as well as tolerance to deactivation.Qi et al.358 described the combination of partial oxidation and steam reforming reactions on the same catalyst. Here, autothermal reforming (ATR) of n-octane was carried out on a non-pyrophoric catalyst based on Ru on alumina. Parallel steam reforming and reverse water gas shift took place on the same catalyst. A sophisticated reaction thread was deduced. MgO-clay nano-composites have been prepared from a synthetic smectite clay, using different non-ionic surfactants.359 The resulting clay nano-composites were impregnated with Ni for use in the methane reforming reaction. A NUTS catalyst was also prepared for comparison. Dhar et al.360 described the use of microchannel technology in reformers to produce hydrogen for use in fuel cells. This technology requires the catalyst to be dispersed throughout a porous support and the support must adhere firmly to the substrate. The catalyst support precursors were deposited using plasma enhanced vapour deposition onto an iron–chromium alloy substrate in alternate layers of plasma polymerised platinum acetylacetonate and zirconium acetylacetonate. Non-equilibrium inductively-coupled plasma was generated by applying RF fields to a vapour plume emanating from a heated sublimator crucible. After calcining the composite organic film to volatilise the organic constituents, catalytically active platinum agglomerates remained supported by a zirconia matrix. The intermediate organic composite film and the final synthesized platinum loaded support adhering to the iron–chromium alloy were evaluated with profilometry, SEM, EDXRF, XRD and ICP-MS. The material catalysed the water gas shift reaction at 400–500 °C. The effects of cerium doping on the properties of Pt on zirconia catalysts in the water gas shift reaction were investigated by Querino et al.361 Cerium was found to stabilise the microcrystalline structure and increased the surface area and activity of the catalyst. Nano-structured ceria doped with other REEs is a good oxygen ion conductor which gives rise to various catalytic applications including the construction of membranes for syngas production by partial oxidation of methane.362 This paper, by Borchert and colleagues, focused on Gd doped ceria which can be modified with Pt or Pd. Detailed studies were made on a series of samples using XRD, TEM, ethane TPR, SIMS and FTIR of adsorbed carbon monoxide.Solventless synthetic procedures are reported and Ramin et al.363 described the synthesis of various homogeneous chromium–salen complexes as catalysts for the synthesis of propylene carbonate from carbon dioxide and propylene oxide. The most active complexes were then immobilized onto silica and tested on the same reaction. Various immobilization techniques were described and high rates and selectivities were achieved without the use of any additional solvent or co-catalysts. Co-ordinately bound complexes were not as stable or resistant to deactivation as the corresponding covalently bound complexes. These catalysts were characterized by the usual suite of techniques and diffuse reflectance IR spectroscopy (DRIFTS).4 Glossary of termsAASAtomic absorption spectrometryAMSAccelerator mass spectrometryANOVAAnalysis of VarianceANSIAmerican National Standards InstituteAPDCAmmonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamateBCRBureau of Community ReferenceCFPCirculating fluidized bedCMOSComplementary metal oxide semiconductorCRMCertified reference materialDCPDirect current plasmaDPTDiphenyl tinDRIFTSDiffuse reflectance infra-red Fourier transform spectroscopyDRSDiffuse reflectance spectroscopyDTADifferential thermal analysisDTPADiethylenetriaminepentaacetic acidEDXEnergy dispersive X-ray analysisEDXRFEnergy dispersive X-ray fluorescenceEPMAElectron probe microanalysisERDAElastic recoil detection analysisESPElectrostatic precipitatorESRElectron spin resonanceETAASElectrothermal atomic absorption spectrometryETVElectrothermal vaporisationFFFast flowFIFlow injectionFIBFocused ion beamFTAFission track analysisFT-IRFourier transform-infra redGCGas chromatographyGDGlow dischargeGFAASGraphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopyGI-XRFGrazing incident XRFHPLCHigh performance liquid chromatographyIBMKIsobutylmethyl ketoneICPInductively coupled plasmaIDIsotope dilutionINAAInstrumental neutron activation analysisLALaser ablationLDALinear discriminant analysisLEDLight emitting diodeLEISLow energy ion scatteringLIBSLaser induced breakdown spectroscopyLIPSLaser induced plasma spectroscopyLODLimit of detectionLOQLimit of quantitationMC-ICP-MSMultiple collector ICP-MSMIMMetal insulator metalMOCVDMetal organic chemical vapour depositionMPTMonophenyl tinMSMass spectrometryNd:YAGNeodymium:yttrium aluminium garnetNEXAFSNear edge X-ray absorption fine structureNISTNational Institute of Standards and TechnologyNMRNuclear magnetic resonanceNRRANuclear resonant reaction analysisOESOptical emission spectrometryOSLOptical stimulated luminescencePB/HC-OESParticle beam/hollow cathode optical emission spectometryPCAPrinciple component analysisPETPolyethyleneterephthalatePGMPlatinum group metalsPIXEParticle induced X-ray emissionPVDPhysical vapour depositionRBSRutherford backscattering spectrometryREEsRare earth elementsRFRadio frequencyRIRfractive indexRMMRelative molecular massRSDRelative standard deviationSEMScanning electron microscopySFSector fieldSIMCASoft independent modelling of class analogySIMSSecondary ion mass spectrometrySNMSSecondary neutral mass spectrometrySPMScanning probe microscopySPMESolid phase micro-extractionSRMStandard reference materialSRXRFSynchrotron radiation induced X-ray fluorescenceTEMTransmission electron microscopyTGAThermogravimetric analysisTIMSThermal ionization mass spectrometryTMAHTetramethyl ammonium hydroxideTMPPTris(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl) phosphonium propylamineToFTime of flightTPTTriphenyl tinTSLThermally stimulated luminescenceTRXPSTotal reflection X-ray photoelectric spectroscopyTXRFTotal reflection X-ray fluorescence spectrometryUSNUltrasonic nebuliserUVUltra violetVPD-DCVapour phase decomposition-droplet collectionVUVVacuum ultra violetWDXRFWavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescenceXANESX-ray absorption near edge spectrometryXPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopyXRDX-ray diffractionXRFX-ray fluorescenceXRRX-ray reflectometryReferencesA. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds and D. M. Penny, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1398–1424 RSC .A. Taylor, S. Branch, M. P. Day, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(4), 439–491 RSC .O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill, J. Rieuwerts and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 217–243 RSC .P. J. Potts, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof, M. West and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1124–1154 RSC .J. R. Bacon, K. L. Linge and L. Van Vaeck, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 763–802 RSC .E. H. Evans, J. A. Day, C. D. Palmer, W. J. Price, C. M. M. Smith and J. F. Tyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(6), 562–590 RSC .R. Noll, I. Monch, O. Klein and A. Lamott, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1070–1075 CrossRef .C. Lopez-Moreno, S. Palanco and J. J. Laserna, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1034–1039 CrossRef .C. Lopez-Moreno, S. Palanco and J. J. Laserna, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1275–1279 RSC .J. Wormhoudt, F. J. Iannarilli, S. Jones, K. D. Annen and A. Freedman, Appl. Spectrosc., 2005, 59(9), 1098–1102 CrossRef CAS .C. Lopez-Moreno, K. Amponsah-Manager, B. W. Smith, I. B. Gornushkin, N. Omenetto, S. Palanco, J. J. Laserna and J. D. Winefordner, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(6), 552–556 RSC .H. Bette, R. Noll, G. Muller, H. W. Jansen, C. Nazikkol and H. Mittelstadt, J. Laser Appl., 2005, 17(3), 183–190 Search PubMed .H. M. Kuss, H. Mittelstaedt and G. Mueller, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 730–735 RSC .H. Balzer, M. Hoehne, V. Sturm and R. Noll, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1172–1178 CrossRef .L. Caneve, F. Colao, F. Sarto, V. Spizzichino and M. Vadrucci, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1098–1102 CrossRef .Z. D. Zhou, K. Z. Zhou, X. D. Hou and H. Luo, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2005, 40(2), 165–185 CrossRef CAS .M. Almcrantz, M. A. T. Andersson and P. G. Jonsson, Steel Res. Int., 2005, 76(9), 624–634 Search PubMed .H. Chandrasekaran, A. Granfors and R. M’Saoubi, Wear, 2006, 260(3), 319–325 CrossRef CAS .A. G. Coedo, I. Padilla and M. T. Dorado, Talanta, 2005, 67(1), 136–143 CrossRef CAS .A. G. Coedo, T. Dorado, I. Padilla and J. C. Farinas, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(7), 612–620 RSC .T. Ishida, T. Akiyoshi, A. Sakashita, S. Kinoshiro, K. Fujimoto and A. Chino, Bunseki Kagaku, 2006, 55(4), 229–236 CrossRef CAS .S. Fujio, Tetsu to Hagane, 2005, 91(1), 11–15 Search PubMed .A. Scharf, W. Kretschmer, T. Uhl, K. Kritzler, K. Hunger and E. Pernicka, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 240(1–2), 478–482 Search PubMed .H. Ida and J. Kawai, Forensic Sci. Int., 2005, 151(2–3), 267–272 CrossRef CAS .X. Y. Han, S. J. Zhuo, R. X. Shen, P. L. Wang and A. Ji, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2006, 97(1), 68–74 CrossRef CAS .D. S. McPhail, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41(3), 873–903 CrossRef CAS .E. Wakai, M. Sato, N. Okubo, T. Sawai, K. Shiba and S. Jitsukawa, J. Jpn Inst. Met., 2005, 69(6), 460–464 Search PubMed .D. Krecar, J. Zwanziger, V. Vassileva, H. Danninger and H. Hutter, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 282–285 CrossRef CAS .S. Oswald, I. Mazilu, S. Fahler, W. Gruner, R. Hermann, W. Loser, O. Filip, H. Wendrock, L. Schultz, B. Schmidt and W. Rodewald, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2005, 290, 1240–1242 CrossRef .A. Matsumoto and T. Nakahara, Tetsu to Hagane, 2005, 91(5), 69–73 Search PubMed .A. Hrdlicka, V. Otruba, K. Novotny, D. Gunther and V. Kanicky, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(3), 307–318 CrossRef .P. C. King, R. W. Reynoldson, A. Brownrigg and J. M. Long, Surf. Eng., 2005, 21(2), 86–98 Search PubMed .K. Righter, A. J. Campbell and M. Humayun, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(12), 3145–3158 CrossRef CAS .S. Saita and S. Maenosono, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(14), 3705–3710 CrossRef CAS .J. K. S. Tee and D. J. Fray, Ironmaking Steelmaking, 2005, 32(6), 509–514 Search PubMed .G. Galbacs, V. Budavari and Z. Geretovszky, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 974–980 RSC .A. Freedman, F. J. Iannarilli and J. C. Wormhoudt, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1076–1082 CrossRef .P. Yaroshchyk, D. Body, R. J. S. Morrison and B. L. Chadwick, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(2), 200–209 CrossRef .S. Acquaviva, M. L. De Giorgi, C. Marini and R. Poso, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 248(1–4), 218–223 CrossRef CAS .M. Corsi, G. Cristoforetti, M. Giuffrida, M. Hidalgo, S. Legnaioli, L. Masotti, V. Palleschi, A. Salvetti, E. Tognoni, C. Vallebona and A. Zanini, Microchim. Acta, 2005, 152(1–2), 105–111 CrossRef CAS .F. J. Fortes, M. Cortes, M. D. Simon, L. M. Cabalin and J. J. Laserna, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 554(1–2), 136–143 CAS .V. Lazic, F. Colao, R. Fantoni and V. Spizzicchino, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1014–1024 CrossRef .Q. Z. Bian, J. Koch, H. Lindner, H. Berndt, R. Hergenroder and K. Niemax, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 736–740 RSC .Q. Z. Bian, C. C. Garcia, J. Koch and K. Niemax, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 187–191 RSC .T. Grigoletto, E. de Oliveira and L. G. R. Gutz, Talanta, 2005, 67(4), 791–797 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Izmer, M. V. Zoriy, C. Pickhardt, W. Quadakkers, V. Shemet, L. Singheiser and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 918–923 RSC .M. T. Zhao, T. Zhou, J. Wang, H. Lu and F. Xiang, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 245(1–3), 36–40 CrossRef CAS .Z. Tao, M. T. Zhao, J. Y. Li, J. Wang, Y. G. Zhao, J. L. Zhang, L. Hai and X. Fang, Fenxi Huxue, 2005, 33(9), 1272–1274 Search PubMed .J. Baker, S. Stos and T. Waight, Archaeometry, 2006, 48, 45–56 CrossRef CAS .A. Zeichner, S. Ehrlich, E. Shoshani and L. Halicz, Forensic Sci. Int., 2006, 158(1), 52–64 CrossRef .D. E. Miller, S. M. M. Young, W. A. Green, N. J. van der Merwe and B. Sandelowsky, S. Afr. J. Sci., 2005, 101(7–8), 344–346 Search PubMed .C. Degueldre, P. Y. Favarger and S. Wold, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 555(2), 263–268 CrossRef CAS .A. Helfrich, W. Bruchert and J. Bettmer, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(4), 431–434 RSC .A. Jurado-Lopez, M. D. L. de Castro and R. Perez-Morales, Gold Bull., 2006, 39(1), 16–21 CAS .K. Matsuda, M. Mizuhira and N. Yamamoto, J. Jpn. Inst. Met., 2006, 70(2), 107–109 Search PubMed .R. Filip, J. Sieniawski and E. Pleszakov, Surf. Eng., 2006, 22(1), 53–57 Search PubMed .E. Z. Kurmaev, Inorg. Mater., 2005, 41(S1–S23) Search PubMed .I. Reiche, M. Radtke, A. Berger, W. Gorner, S. Merchel, H. Riesemeier and H. Bevers, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2006, 83(2), 169–173 CrossRef CAS .M. Kasamatsu, Y. Suzuki, T. Nakanishi, O. Shimoda, Y. Nishiwaki, N. Miyamoto and S. Suzuki, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 785–787 CrossRef CAS .M. F. Guerra, T. Calligaro, M. Radtke, I. Reiche and H. Riesemeier, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 240(1–2), 505–511 Search PubMed .B. Constantinescu, R. Bugoi, V. Cojocaru, D. Voiculescu, D. Grambole, F. Herrmann and D. Ceccato, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 231, 541–545 Search PubMed .Z. Smit, P. Pelicon, J. Simcic and J. Istenic, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 239(1–2), 27–34 Search PubMed .C. B. Ojeda and F. S. Rojas, Talanta, 2006, 68(5), 1407–1420 CrossRef CAS .A. Adriaens, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(12), 1503–1516 CrossRef .C. Latkoczy, Y. Muller, P. Schmutz and D. Gunther, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 127–132 CrossRef CAS .G. Buytaert, H. Terryn, S. Van Gils, B. Kernig, B. Grzemba and M. Mertens, Surf. Interface Anal., 2005, 37(6), 534–543 CrossRef CAS .C. Y. Cho, J. Y. Uan and H. J. Lin, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2005, 402(1–2), 193–202 CrossRef .V. Balaram, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2005, 28(4), 345–348 Search PubMed .R. Matschat, H. J. Heinrich, M. Czerwensky, S. Kuxenko and H. Kipphardt, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2005, 28(4), 361–366 Search PubMed .J. W. Lim and M. Isshiki, Met. Mater. Int., 2005, 11(4), 273–278 Search PubMed .X. Y. Liu, D. G. Xia and Y. J. Zhao, Chin. J. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 22(2), 321–325 CAS .S. Diplas, J. Lehrmann, S. Jorgensen, T. Valand, J. F. Watts and J. Tafto, Surf. Interface Anal., 2005, 37(5), 459–465 CrossRef CAS .T. Dimogerontakis, R. Oltra and O. Heintz, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2005, 81(6), 1173–1179 CrossRef CAS .M. Griesser, R. Traum, K. E. Mayerhofer, K. Piplits, R. Denk and H. Winter, Surf. Eng., 2005, 21(5–6), 385–392 Search PubMed .K. E. Mayerhofer, K. Piplits, R. Traum, M. Griesser and H. Hutter, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 133–138 CrossRef CAS .S. Perusin, D. Monceau and E. Andrieu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152(12), E390–E397 CrossRef CAS .C. P. Lienemann, Oil Gas Sci. Technol., 2005, 60(6), 951–965 Search PubMed .S. F. Boulyga, J. Heilmann and K. G. Heumann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(8), 1808–1814 CrossRef CAS .T. D. Saint’Pierre, V. L. A. Frescura and A. J. Curtius, Talanta, 2006, 68(3), 957–962 CrossRef CAS .L. S. G. Teixeira, M. D. Bezerra, V. A. Lemos, H. C. dos Santos, D. S. de Jesus and A. C. S. Costa, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2005, 40(12), 2555–2565 CrossRef CAS .T. D. Saint’Pierre, T. D. Maranhao, V. L. A. Frescura and A. J. Curtius, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(5), 605–613 CrossRef .R. Iwamoto, H. Koshika, N. Takahashi and K. Inamura, J. Jpn. Pet. Inst., 2005, 48(5), 319–323 Search PubMed .A. Sterry, Rev. Chim., 2005, 56(4), 425–428 Search PubMed .M. N. M. Reyes and R. C. Campos, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(5), 615–624 CrossRef .G. P. Brandao, R. C. de Campos and A. S. Luna, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(5), 625–631 CrossRef .G. M. Eskenazy, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2006, 66(4), 305–315 CrossRef CAS .J. Hu, B. S. Zheng, R. B. Finkelman, B. B. Wang, M. S. Wang, S. H. Li and D. S. Wu, Fuel, 2006, 85(5–6), 679–688 CrossRef CAS .S. I. Arbuzov, L. P. Rikhvanov, A. V. Volostnov and V. A. Varlachev, Geochem. Int., 2005, 43(5), 478–492 Search PubMed .F. Goodarzi, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2006, 65(1–2), 17–25 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Poole, V. N. Sharifi, J. Swithenbank and D. Ardelt, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 932–938 RSC .P. Smichowski, D. Gomez and G. Polla, Curr. Anal. Chem., 2005, 1(3), 373–394 Search PubMed .D. Bingol and M. Akcay, Talanta, 2005, 66(3), 600–604 CrossRef .M. Dutta and A. K. Das, J. Indian Chem. Soc., 2005, 82(5), 433–436 CAS .J. L. Fischer and N. B. Krusberski, S. Afr. J. Chem., 2005, 58, 131–137 CAS .L. M. Costa, S. L. C. Ferreira, A. R. A. Nogueira and J. A. Nobrega, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2005, 16(6A), 1269–1274 CAS .R. M. de Souza, B. M. Mathias, I. S. Scarminio, C. L. P. da Silveira and R. Q. Aucelio, Microchim. Acta, 2006, 153(3–4), 219–225 CrossRef CAS .P. Vahaoja, I. Valimaki, K. Heino, P. Peramaki and T. Kuokkanen, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(11), 1365–1369 CrossRef CAS .M. Y. Khuhawar and G. M. Arain, Talanta, 2006, 68(3), 535–541 CrossRef CAS .P. Yaroshchyk, R. J. S. Morrison, D. Body and B. L. Chadwick, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 986–992 CrossRef .P. Yaroshchyk, R. J. S. Morrison, D. Body and B. L. Chadwick, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(11), 1482–1485 CrossRef .B. Miller, D. Dugwell and R. Kandiyoti, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20(2), 520–531 CrossRef CAS .E. S. Lindgren, D. Henriksson, M. Lundin, P. Therning, J. Laursen and N. Pind, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(1), 19–26 CrossRef CAS .P. Thy, S. Grundvig, B. M. Jenkins, R. Shiraki and C. E. Lesher, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19(6), 2571–2575 CrossRef CAS .J. Sneddon, C. Hardaway, K. Bobbadi and A. Reddy, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2006, 41(1), 1–14 CrossRef CAS .J. Dewulf, T. Huybrechts and H. Van Langenhove, Trends Anal. Chem., 2006, 25(4), 300–309 CrossRef CAS .R. Tayeb, L. Gzara and M. Dhahbi, J. Anal. Chem., 2005, 60(10), 930–936 CrossRef CAS .J. Darrouzes, M. Bueno, C. Pecheyran, M. Holeman and M. Potin-Gautier, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1072(1), 19–27 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Yuan, G. B. Jiang, B. He and J. F. Liu, Microchim. Acta, 2005, 150(3–4), 329–334 CrossRef CAS .Z. F. Fan, Microchim. Acta, 2005, 152(1–2), 29–33 CrossRef CAS .N. Fidalgo-Used, M. Montes-Bayon, E. Blanco-Gonzalez and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 876–882 RSC .A. R. Ghiasvand, F. Moradi, H. Sharghi and A. R. Hasaninejad, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(4), 387–390 CrossRef CAS .D. L. Giokas, E. K. Paleologos and M. I. Karayannis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 537(1–2), 249–257 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Coelho and M. A. Z. Arruda, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(5), 743–748 CrossRef .J. Chamoun and A. Hagege, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1030–1034 RSC .H. Eguchi, K. Nakamura, F. Endo, T. Nishiyama, T. Nakagama, N. Seino, M. Sinoda and K. Uchiyama, Bunseki Kagaku, 2005, 54(9), 869–875 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Snell and C. R. Quetel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(5), 447–454 RSC .J. Kosters, J. Hippler, R. A. Diaz-Bone and A. V. Hirner, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 996–999 RSC .S. Cadore, R. D. Goi and N. Baccan, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2005, 16(5), 957–962 CAS .M. Kovacevic and W. Goessler, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(9–10), 1357–1362 CrossRef .G. Ballihaut, L. Tastet, C. Pecheyran, B. Bouyssiere, O. Donard, R. Grimaud and R. Lobinski, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(6), 493–499 RSC .P. Giusti, D. Schaumloffel, J. R. Encinar and J. Szpunar, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1101–1107 RSC .J. E. Carr, K. Kwok, G. K. Webster and J. W. Carnahan, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2006, 40(1), 42–50 CrossRef CAS .K. Kwok, J. E. Carr, G. K. Webster and J. W. Carnahan, Appl. Spectrosc., 2006, 60(1), 80–85 CrossRef CAS .C. Bresson, C. Colin, F. Chartier and C. Moulin, Appl. Spectrosc., 2005, 59(5), 696–705 CrossRef CAS .T. C. Miller and G. J. Havrilla, Powder Diffr., 2005, 20(2), 153–157 CrossRef CAS .T. M. Brewer, B. Fernandez and R. K. Marcus, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 924–931 RSC .S. D. Muller, R. A. Diaz-Bobe, J. Felix and W. Goedecke, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 907–911 RSC .C. F. Harrington, D. S. Vidler, M. J. Watts and J. F. Hall, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(13), 4034–4041 CrossRef CAS .K. Brown, E. M. Tompkins and I. N. H. White, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 2006, 25(1), 127–145 CrossRef .C. Kriegeskotte, J. Moller, D. Lipinsky, A. Wittig, W. Sauerwein, J. Haier and H. F. Arlinghaus, Surf. Interface Anal., 2006, 38(3), 121–125 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Butcher, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2005, 40(2), 147–164 CrossRef CAS .T. Maeda and K. Wagatsuma, Tetsu to Hagane, 2005, 91(5), 35–41 Search PubMed .W. B. Zhang, W. E. Gan and X. Q. Lin, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 539(1–2), 335–340 CrossRef CAS .X. Li, J. Jia and Z. H. Wang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 560(1–2), 153–158 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Huang, Z. X. Zhuang, Y. Tai, R. F. Huang, X. R. Wang and F. S. C. Lee, Talanta, 2006, 68(3), 728–734 CrossRef CAS .L. St-Onge, J. F. Archambault, E. Kwong, M. Sabsabi and E. B. Vadas, J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci., 2005, 8(2), 272–288 CAS .A. Krejcova, D. Kahoun, T. Cernohorsky and M. Pouzar, Food Chem., 2006, 98(1), 171–178 CrossRef CAS .L. Bendahl, S. H. Hansen, B. Gammelgaard, S. Sturup and C. Nielsen, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2006, 40(3), 648–652 CrossRef CAS .X. J. Jia, T. B. Wang, X. D. Bu, Q. A. Tu and S. Spencer, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2006, 41(1), 43–47 CrossRef CAS .R. Poykio, H. Nurmesniemi, P. Peramaki, T. Kuokkanen and I. Valimaki, Chem. Speciation Bioavailability, 2005, 17(1), 1–9 Search PubMed .R. G. Wuilloud, M. Shah, S. S. Kannamkumarath and J. C. Altamirano, Electrophoresis, 2005, 26(7–8), 1598–1605 CrossRef CAS .D. D. Richardson, B. B. M. Sadi and J. A. Caruso, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(4), 396–403 RSC .G. J. Havrilla and T. C. Miller, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76(6), 062201 CrossRef .N. Campillo, N. Aguinaga, P. Vinas, I. Lopez-Garcia and M. Hernandez-Cordoba, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 552(1–2), 182–189 CrossRef CAS .F. C. DeLucia, A. C. Samuels, R. S. Harmon, R. A. Walters, K. L. McNesby, A. LaPointe, R. J. Winkel and A. W. Miziolek, IEEE Sens. J., 2005, 5(4), 681–689 Search PubMed .C. Lopez-Moreno, S. Palanco, J. J. Laserna, F. DeLucia, A. W. Miziolek, J. Rose, R. A. Walters and A. I. Whitehouse, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(1), 55–60 RSC .G. Asimellis, S. Hamilton, A. Giannoudakos and M. Kompitsas, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1132–1139 CrossRef .C. A. Munson, F. C. De Lucia, T. Piehler, K. L. McNesby and A. W. Miziolek, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1217–1224 CrossRef .G. Paternoster, R. Rinzivillo, F. Nunziata, E. M. Castellucci, C. Lofrumento, A. Zoppi, A. C. Felici, G. Fronterotta, C. Nicolais, M. Piacentini, S. Sciuti and M. Vendittelli, J. Cult. Heritage, 2005, 6(1), 21–28 Search PubMed .K. Smith, K. Horton, R. J. Watling and N. Scoullar, Talanta, 2005, 67(2), 402–413 CrossRef CAS .G. Fortunato, A. Ritter and D. Fabian, Analyst, 2005, 130(6), 898–906 RSC .G. Bitossi, R. Giorgi, M. Mauro, B. Salvadori and L. Dei, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2005, 40(3), 187–228 CrossRef CAS .N. Civici, O. Demko and R. J. H. Clark, J. Cult. Heritage, 2005, 6(2), 157–164 Search PubMed .K. Keune and J. J. Boon, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(15), 4742–4750 CrossRef CAS .S. Pages-Camagna, I. Reiche, C. Brouder, D. Cabaret, S. Rossano, B. Kanngiesser and A. Erko, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(2), 141–145 CrossRef CAS .M. Oujja, A. Vila, E. Rebollar, J. F. Garcia and M. Castillejo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1140–1148 CrossRef .P. Pouli, K. Melessanaki, A. Giakoumaki, V. Argyropoulos and D. Anglos, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1163–1171 CrossRef .J. Vodopivec, M. Budnar and P. Pelicon, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 239(1–2), 85–93 Search PubMed .M. Budnar, M. Ursic, J. Simcic, P. Pelicon, J. Kolar, V. S. Selih and M. Strlic, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2006, 243(2), 407–416 Search PubMed .O. Hahn, B. Kanngiesser and W. Malzer, Stud. Conserv., 2005, 50(1), 23–32 Search PubMed .I. Deconinck, C. Latkoczy, D. Gunther, F. Govaert and F. Vanhaecke, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(3), 279–287 RSC .S. Catarino, I. Pimentel and A. S. Curvelo-Garcia, At. Spectrosc., 2005, 26(2), 73–78 CAS .J. L. Gomez-Ariza, T. Garcia-Barrera and F. Lorenzo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 883–888 RSC .I. B. Karadjova, L. Lampugnani, M. Onor, A. D’Ulivo and D. L. Tsalev, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(6), 816–823 CrossRef .M. Korenovska and M. Suhaj, Eur. Food Res. Technol., 2005, 221(3–4), 550–558 Search PubMed .P. P. Coetzee, F. E. Steffens, R. J. Eiselen, O. P. Augustyn, L. Balcaen and F. Vanhaecke, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2005, 53(13), 5060–5066 CrossRef CAS .J. Sperkova and M. Suchanek, Food Chem., 2005, 93(4), 659–663 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Huang, H. Becker-Ross, S. Florek, U. Heitmann and M. Okruss, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(8), 1877–1881 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, C. B. Zheng, Q. Ma, L. Wu, C. W. Hu and X. D. Hou, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(1), 82–85 RSC .W. B. Zhang, W. E. Gan and X. Q. Lin, Talanta, 2006, 68(4), 1316–1321 CrossRef CAS .J. Pisonero, B. Fernandez, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, Trends Anal. Chem., 2006, 25(1), 11–18 CrossRef CAS .P. A. Mosier-Boss and S. H. Lieberman, Appl. Spectrosc., 2005, 59(12), 1445–1456 CrossRef CAS .F. Weritz, S. Ryahi, D. Schaurich, A. Taffe and G. Wilsch, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1121–1131 CrossRef .M. Z. Martin, N. Labbe, T. G. Rials and S. D. Wullschleger, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1179–1185 CrossRef .L. Caneve, F. Colao, F. Fabbri, R. Fantoni, V. Spizzichino and J. Striber, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1115–1120 CrossRef .O. Acar, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 542(2), 280–286 CrossRef CAS .O. Acar, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 545(2), 244–251 CrossRef CAS .J. Pedro, J. Stripekis, A. Bonivardi and M. Tudino, Talanta, 2006, 69(1), 199–203 CrossRef CAS .G. P. G. Freschi, C. D. Freschi and J. A. G. Neto, At. Spectrosc., 2006, 27(1), 1–6 CAS .V. Krivan and P. Janickova, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(8), 1949–1957 CrossRef CAS .P. Hashemi and Z. Rahmani, Talanta, 2006, 68(5), 1677–1682 CrossRef CAS .U. Tamer, N. Ertas, Y. A. Udum, Y. Sahin, K. Pekmez and A. Yildiz, Talanta, 2005, 67(1), 245–251 CrossRef CAS .P. Pohl and B. Prusisz, Microchim. Acta, 2005, 150(2), 159–165 CrossRef CAS .P. Pohl, B. Prusisz and W. Zyrnicki, Talanta, 2005, 67(1), 155–161 CrossRef CAS .G. Venkateswarlu, A. C. Sahayam, S. C. Chaurasia and T. Mukherjee, Talanta, 2006, 68(3), 748–752 CrossRef CAS .Y. Q. Lu, Y. Q. Cao, L. H. Wang and R. X. Xin, Rare Met., 2005, 24(3), 216–220 Search PubMed .M. Kasamatsu, Y. Suzuki, R. Sugita and S. Suzuki, J. Forensic Sci., 2005, 50(4), 883–886 CAS .G. Anil, M. R. P. Reddy, C. Sudheer, N. R. Munirathnam and T. L. Prakash, At. Spectrosc., 2006, 27(1), 26–29 CAS .L. L. Yu, T. A. Butler and G. C. Turk, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(5), 1651–1656 CrossRef CAS .X. Q. Zhang, Y. Yi, Y. L. Liu, X. Li, J. L. Liu, Y. M. Jiang and Y. Q. Su, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 555(1), 57–62 CrossRef CAS .J. Yin, B. Hu, M. He and Z. C. Jiang, At. Spectrosc., 2005, 26(5), 197–202 CAS .S. Rege, S. Jackson, W. L. Griffin, R. M. Davies, N. J. Pearson and S. Y. O’Reilly, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(7), 601–611 RSC .C. Y. Huang and D. Beauchemin, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(3), 317–320 RSC .S. Suzuki, Y. Suzuki, H. Ohta, M. Kasamatsu and T. Nakanishi, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 775–778 CrossRef CAS .K. N. Belikov, L. I. Mikhailova, Z. M. Spolnik and R. Van Grieken, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(2), 112–115 CrossRef CAS .T. Konishi, T. Tsubata, M. Oku, Y. M. Todorov and M. Yoshio, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 861–864 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Mahoney, G. Gillen and A. J. Fahey, Forensic Sci. Int., 2006, 158(1), 39–51 CrossRef CAS .X. D. Hou, W. Chen, Y. H. He and B. T. Jones, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2005, 40(3), 245–267 CrossRef CAS .E. A. Ough, B. J. Lewis, W. S. Andrews, L. G. I. Bennett, R. G. V. Hancock and P. A. D’Agastino, Health Phys., 2006, 90(5), 494–499 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Parrish, M. F. Thirlwall, C. Pickford, M. Horstwood, A. Gerdes, J. Anderson and D. Coggon, Health Phys., 2006, 90(2), 127–138 CrossRef CAS .S. Merchel and W. Bremser, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 239(3), 217–226 Search PubMed .S. Richter, A. Alonso, W. De Bolle, H. Kuhn, A. Verbruggen, R. Wellum and P. D. P. Taylor, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1381–1385 RSC .S. Richter, A. Alonso, W. De Bolle, H. Kuhn, A. Verbruggen, R. Wellum and P. D. P. Taylor, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 247(1–3), 37–39 CAS .H. Reithmeier, V. Lazarev, F. Kubo, W. Ruhm and E. Nolte, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 239(3), 273–280 Search PubMed .T. Huber, W. Ruhm, K. Kato, S. D. Egbert, F. Kubo, V. Lazarev and E. Nolte, Radiat. Environ. Biophys., 2005, 44(2), 75–86 Search PubMed .P. Steier, R. Golser, V. Liechtenstein, W. Kutschera, A. Priller, C. Vockenhuber and A. Wallner, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 240(1–2), 445–451 Search PubMed .E. Hrnecek, P. Steier and A. Wallner, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2005, 63(5–6), 633–638 CrossRef CAS .F. J. Santos, J. M. Lopez-Gutierrez, M. Garcia-Leon, M. Suter and H. A. Synal, J. Environ. Radioact., 2005, 84(1), 103–109 CrossRef CAS .M. Stocker, M. Dobeli, M. Grajcar, M. Suter, H. A. Synal and L. Wacker, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 240(1–2), 483–489 Search PubMed .L. Wacker, E. Chamizo, L. K. Fifield, M. Stocker, A. Suter and H. A. Synal, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 240(1–2), 452–457 Search PubMed .E. K. Potter, C. H. Stirling, M. B. Andersen and A. N. Halliday, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 247(1–3), 10–17 CrossRef CAS .R. Santamaria-Fernandez, P. Evans, C. S. J. Wolff-Briche and R. Hearn, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(4), 413–421 RSC .J. Cizdziel, D. Farmer, V. Hodge, K. Lindley and K. Stetzenbach, Sci. Total Environ., 2005, 350(1–3), 248–260 CrossRef CAS .P. Lindahl, P. Roos, E. Holm and H. Dahlgaard, J. Environ. Radioact., 2005, 82(3), 285–301 CrossRef CAS .J. Zheng and M. Yamada, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 267(1), 73–83 CrossRef .J. Zheng and M. Yamada, Talanta, 2006, 68(3), 932–939 CrossRef .Y. Ohtsuka, Y. Takaku, J. Kimura, S. Hisamatsu and J. Inaba, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(3), 205–208 CrossRef CAS .V. P. Mironov, J. L. Matusevich, V. P. Kudrjashov, P. I. Ananich, V. V. Zhuravkov, S. F. Boulyga and J. S. Becker, Radiochim. Acta, 2005, 93(12), 781–784 CrossRef CAS .K. Norisuye, K. Okamura, Y. Sohrin, H. Hasegawa and T. Nakanishi, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 267(1), 183–193 CrossRef .P. Bienvenu, E. Brochard, E. Excoffier and M. Piccione, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2004, 49(6), 423–428 CAS .C. Ambard, A. Delorme, N. Baglan, J. Aupiais, F. Pointurier and C. Madic, Radiochim. Acta, 2005, 93(11), 665–673 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Mas, M. Garcia-Leon and J. P. Bolivar, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2006, 64(4), 502–507 CrossRef CAS .H. Isnard, M. Aubert, P. Blanchet, R. Brennetot, F. Chartier, V. Geertsen and F. Manuguerra, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(2), 150–156 CrossRef .N. L. Elliot, G. A. Bickel, S. H. Linauskas and L. M. Paterson, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2006, 267(3), 637–650 CrossRef CAS .O. P. de Oliveira, W. De Bolle, S. Richter, A. Alonso, H. Kuhn, J. E. S. Sarkis and R. Wellum, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 246(1–3), 35–42 CrossRef .A. Yoshikawa, Y. Hirohata, Y. Oya, T. Shibahara, M. Oyaidzu, T. Arai, Y. Gotoh, K. Masaki, N. Miya, K. Okuno and T. Tanabe, Fusion Eng. Des., 2006, 81(1–7), 289–294 CrossRef CAS .T. Hayashi, K. Ochiai, K. Masaki, Y. Gotoh, C. Kutsukake, T. Arai, T. Nishitani and N. Miya, J. Nucl. Mater., 2006, 349(1–2), 6–16 CrossRef CAS .Y. Oya, Y. Hirohata, T. Tanabe, T. Shibahara, H. Kimura, M. Oyaidzu, T. Arai, K. Masaki, Y. Gotoh, K. Okuno, N. Miya, T. Hino and S. Tanaka, Fusion Eng. Des., 2005, 75(9), 945–949 CrossRef .K. S. Squibb and M. A. McDiarmid, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B: Biol. Sci., 2006, 361(1468), 639–648 Search PubMed .A. Durakovic, Mil. Med., 2005, 170(4), 277–284 Search PubMed .W. Schimmack, U. Gerstmann, U. Oeh, W. Schultz and P. Schramel, Radiat. Environ. Biophys., 2005, 44(3), 183–191 Search PubMed .H. Isnard, R. Brennetot, C. Caussignac, N. Caussignac and F. Chartier, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 246(1–3), 66–73 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Scheidegger, D. Grolimund, C. R. Cheeseman and R. D. Rogers, J. Geochem. Explor., 2006, 88(1–3), 59–63 CrossRef CAS .J. Wilson, G. Cressey, B. Cressey, J. Cuadros, K. V. Ragnarsdottir, D. Savage and M. Shibata, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2006, 70(2), 323–336 CrossRef CAS .H. Minami, S. Nishiuchi, J. Kadono and T. Nakahara, Bunseki Kagaku, 2005, 54(11), 1107–1111 CrossRef CAS .H. Sakurai, J. Noro, A. Kawase, M. Fujinami and K. Oguma, Anal. Sci., 2006, 22(2), 225–228 CrossRef CAS .Y. C. Sun and C. J. Ko, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(3), 311–316 RSC .M. Resano, E. Garcia-Ruiz and F. Vanhaecke, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(11), 1472–1481 CrossRef .K. M. Bichinho, G. P. Pires, F. C. Stedile, J. H. Z. dos Santos and C. R. Wolf, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(5), 599–604 CrossRef .C. Ozeroglu and C. Ozduganci, Polym.-Plast. Technol. Eng., 2006, 45(4), 549–554 CrossRef .S. E. Harton, F. A. Stevie and H. Ade, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2006, 24(2), 362–368 CrossRef CAS .C. Schrank, B. Schwarz, C. Eisenmenger-Sittrier, K. Mayerhofer and E. Neubauer, Vacuum, 2005, 80(1–3), 122–127 CrossRef CAS .K. E. Mayerhofer, C. Schrank, C. Eisenmenger-Sittner and H. Hutter, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 266–270 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Lee, B. Y. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2005, 47(1), 79–83 Search PubMed .C. Ozdilek, K. Kazimierczak and S. J. Picken, Polymer, 2005, 46(16), 6025–6034 CrossRef .L. C. S. Maria, M. A. S. Costa, F. A. M. Santo, S. H. Wang and M. R. Silva, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60(2), 270–273 CrossRef .G. A. Wang, C. C. Wang and C. Y. Chen, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2005, 15(2), 239–251 CrossRef CAS .T. Buonassisi, A. A. Istratov, M. A. Marcus, M. Heuer, M. D. Pickett, B. Lai, Z. Cai, S. M. Heald and E. R. Weber, in Gettering and Defect Engineering in Semiconductor Technology Xi, Trans Tech Publications Ltd, Zurich-Uetikon,  2005, vol. 108–109, pp. 577–584 Search PubMed .D. Lutzenkirchen-Hecht, K. Bruder, U. Haake, P. Keil, C. Markert, C. Ringpfeil and R. Frahm, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76(7), 073905 CrossRef .W. Araki, K. Mizoroki, M. Oki and M. Takenaka, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 869–872 CrossRef CAS .P. Y. Hung, C. Gondran, A. Ghatak-Roy, S. Terada, B. Bunday, H. Yeung and A. Diebold, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2005, 23(5), 2244–2248 CrossRef CAS .D. Hellin, A. Delabie, R. L. Puurunen, P. Beaven, T. Conard, B. Brijs, S. De Gendt and C. Vinckier, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 845–850 CrossRef CAS .D. Hellin, S. De Gendt, J. Rip and C. Vinckier, IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Reliab., 2005, 5(4), 639–651 Search PubMed .D. Hellin, J. Rip, V. Geens, T. Delande, T. Conard, S. De Gendt and C. Vinckier, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(7), 652–658 RSC .A. Von Bohlen and R. Klockenkamper, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(8), 1975–1980 CrossRef CAS .Q. Xu, X. J. Wei, Y. Y. Huang and W. He, High Energy Phys. Nucl. Phys.: Chin. Ed., 2005, 29, 80–83 Search PubMed .Y. Mori, K. Uemura, H. Kohno, M. Yamagami and Y. Iizuka, IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf., 2005, 18(4), 569–574 CrossRef .K. Dash, S. Thangavel, S. M. Dhavile, S. V. Rao, S. C. Chaurasia and J. Arunachalam, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 546(2), 229–235 CrossRef CAS .H. Mitsumata and T. Mori, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2006, 114(1326), 210–213 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Wan, S. J. Jiang, M. T. You and A. C. Sahayam, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1290–1292 RSC .D. Bleiner, F. Belloni, D. Doria, A. Lorusso and V. Nassisi, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1337–1343 RSC .T. Nelis and J. Pallosi, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2006, 41(3), 227–258 CrossRef CAS .T. Nelis, M. Aeberhard, M. Hohl, L. Rohr and J. Michler, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 112–125 RSC .N. Audet and M. Cossette, J. Electron. Mater., 2005, 34(6), 683–686 Search PubMed .K. J. Kim, D. W. Moon, P. Chi and D. Simons, Surf. Interface Anal., 2005, 37(10), 802–808 CrossRef CAS .S. Fearn and D. S. McPhail, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(4), 893–904 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Yang, G. Mount and I. Mowat, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2006, 24(1), 428–432 CrossRef CAS .T. Janssens, M. A. Pawlak, J. A. Kittl, M. Fouchier, A. Lauwers, A. Kottantharayil and W. Vandervorst, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2006, 24(1), 399–403 CrossRef CAS .K. Mayerhofer, H. Foisner, K. Piplits, G. Hobler, L. Palmetshofer and H. Hutter, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 271–277 CrossRef CAS .D. Krecar, M. Fuchs, R. Kogler and H. Hutter, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 278–281 CrossRef CAS .R. E. de Lamaestre, F. Jomard, J. Majimel and H. Bernas, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2005, 35(37–39), 3031–3036 .Z. X. Jiang, K. Kim, J. Lerma, D. Sieloff, T. Y. Luo, J. Y. Yang, D. Triyoso, H. Tseng, P. Tobin and N. Ramani, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2005, 23(4), 589–592 CrossRef CAS .R. Olshove, G. Garwood, I. Mowat, J. Bangs and M. Liguori, J. Electron. Mater., 2005, 34(6), 851–858 Search PubMed .S. Ruffell, I. V. Mitchell and P. J. Simpson, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97(12), 123518 CrossRef .D. Golodnitsky, V. Yufit, M. Nathan, I. Shechtman, T. Ripenbein, E. Strauss, S. Menkin and E. Peled, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153(2), 281–287 CrossRef CAS .J. N. Kim, T. S. Byun, C. S. Kim, Y. J. Kim and G. J. Choi, J. Chem. Eng. Jpn., 2005, 38(8), 553–557 Search PubMed .E. Bruneel, D. Verbauwhede, D. Van de Vyver, J. Schaubroeck, S. Hoste and I. Van Driessche, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 18(6), 907–911 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Duggan, F. Naab, K. Hossain, O. W. Holland, F. D. McDaniel, J. J. Xu, Z. Y. Zhao, B. N. Guo, J. Liu, K. H. Shim and U. Jeong, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2006, 243(1), 205–210 Search PubMed .S. W. Novak, C. W. Magee and T. Buyuklimanli, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 241(1–4), 321–325 Search PubMed .G. Zachariadis, E. Dimitrakoudi, A. Anthemidis and J. Stratis, Talanta, 2006, 68(5), 1448–1456 CrossRef CAS .P. C. do Nascimento, D. Bohrer, E. Becker and L. M. de Carvalho, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2005, 351(14–15), 1312–1316 .S. J. Bajic, D. B. Aeschliman, N. J. Saetveit, D. P. Baldwin and R. S. Houk, J. Forensic Sci., 2005, 50(5), 1123–1127 CAS .T. Trejos and J. R. Almirall, Talanta, 2005, 67(2), 388–395 CrossRef CAS .T. Trejos and J. R. Almirall, Talanta, 2005, 67(2), 396–401 CrossRef CAS .Y. Suzuki, M. Kasamatsu, S. Suzuki, T. Nakanishi, M. Takatsu, S. Muratsu, O. Shimoda, S. Watanabe, Y. Nishiwaki and N. Miyamoto, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 855–859 CrossRef CAS .N. Carmona, M. Oujja, E. Rebollar, H. Romich and M. Castillejo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1155–1162 CrossRef .B. S. Lal, F. Y. Yueh and J. P. Singh, Appl. Opt., 2005, 44(18), 3668–3674 CrossRef CAS .J. Pinkas, Ceram.-Silik., 2005, 49(4), 287–298 Search PubMed .J. W. Reid, L. Tuck, M. Sayer, K. Fargo and J. A. Hendry, Biomaterials, 2006, 27(15), 2916–2925 CrossRef CAS .K. Donadel, M. C. M. Laranjeira, V. L. Goncalves, V. T. Favere, J. C. de Lima and L. H. M. Prates, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88(8), 2230–2235 CAS .K. Cheng, S. Zhang, W. J. Weng and X. T. Zeng, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2005, 198(1–3), 242–246 CrossRef CAS .M. I. Alemany, P. Velasquez, M. A. de la Casa-Lillo and P. N. De Aza, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2005, 351(19–20), 1716–1726 CrossRef CAS .J. Anzano, J. Gutierrez and M. Villoria, Anal. Lett., 2005, 38(12), 1957–1965 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Lopez, G. Nicolas, M. P. Mateo, V. Pinon, M. J. Tobar and A. Ramil, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1149–1154 CrossRef .G. Barone, A. Lo Giudice, P. Mazzoleni, A. Pezzino, D. Barilaro, V. Crupi and M. Triscari, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 745–762 CrossRef CAS .R. Padilla, P. Van Espen and P. P. G. Torres, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 558(1–2), 283–289 CrossRef CAS .F. P. Romano, G. Pappalardo, L. Pappalardo, S. Garraffo, R. Gigli and A. Pautasso, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(1), 1–7 CrossRef CAS .M. Morgenstein and C. A. Redmount, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2005, 32(11), 1613–1623 Search PubMed .D. N. Papadopoulou, G. A. Zachariadis, A. N. Anthemidis, N. C. Tsirliganis and J. A. Stratis, Talanta, 2006, 68(5), 1692–1699 CrossRef CAS .E. E. Cochrane and H. Neff, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2006, 33(3), 378–390 Search PubMed .B. P. Li, J. X. Zhao, A. Greig, K. D. Collerson, Z. X. Zhuo and Y. X. Feng, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 240(3), 726–732 Search PubMed .B. P. Li, J. X. Zhao, A. Greig, K. D. Collerson, Y. X. Feng, X. M. Sun, M. S. Guo and Z. X. Zhuo, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2006, 33(1), 56–62 Search PubMed .G. Q. Xiang, Z. C. Jiang, M. He and B. Hu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(9–10), 1342–1348 CrossRef .S. Chen, D. Lu, Z. Hu and B. Wu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(4), 537–541 CrossRef .B. U. Peschel, F. Andrade, W. C. Wetzel, G. D. Schilling, G. M. Hieftje, J. A. C. Broekaert, R. Sperline, M. B. Denton, C. J. Baninaga and D. W. Koppenaal, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(1), 42–49 CrossRef .L. Greib and V. Karanassios, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(2), 164–180 CrossRef .B. U. Peschel, U. E. A. Fittschen, G. Pepponi, C. Jokubonis, C. Streli, P. Wobrauschek, G. Falkenberg and J. A. C. Broekaert, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(8), 1958–1964 CrossRef CAS .Z. Spolnik, J. Osan, M. Klepka, K. Lawniczak-Jablonska, R. Van Grieken, A. Molak and J. H. Potgieter, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(4), 525–530 CrossRef .M. Novotna, A. Klouzkova, J. Maixner and V. Satava, Ceram.-Silik., 2005, 49(4), 252–258 Search PubMed .T. Nakao and M. Nogami, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2005, 113(1318), 435–438 CrossRef CAS .C. Legros, B. Lesage, G. Borchardt, M. Kilo and F. Jomard, in Diffusion in Materials: Dimat 2004, Pt 1 and 2, Trans Tech Publications Ltd, Zurich-Uetikon,  2005, vol. 237–240, pp. 432–437 Search PubMed .B. Lesage, C. Legros, G. Borchardt, G. Strehl, M. Kilo and F. Jomard, in Diffusion in Materials: Dimat 2004, Pt 1 and 2,  2005, vol. 237–240, pp. 317–321 Search PubMed .H. Schmidt, G. Borchardt, M. Rudolphi, H. Baumann, M. Bruns, S. Weber and H. Scherrer, in Diffusion in Materials: Dimat 2004, Pt 1 and 2,  2005, vol. 237–240, pp. 512–517 Search PubMed .H. Schmidt and G. Borchardt, in Diffusion in Materials Dimat 2004 Pt 1 and 2,  2005, vol. 237–240, pp. 566–571 Search PubMed .P. Fielitz, G. Borchardt, M. Schmucker and H. Schneider, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177(5–6), 493–496 CrossRef .T. Nakagawa, I. Sakaguchi, N. Shibata, K. Matsunaga, T. Yamamoto, H. Haneda and Y. Ikuhara, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40(12), 3185–3190 CrossRef CAS .P. Q. Zhang, J. G. Xu, X. S. Wang and H. C. Guo, Chin. J. Catal., 2005, 26(3), 216–222 Search PubMed .M. Liu, X. W. Guo, J. Gao, X. S. Wang, X. M. Liu, X. W. Han and X. H. Bao, Chin. J. Catal., 2005, 26(8), 660–664 Search PubMed .E. Diaz, S. Ordonez, A. Vega, A. Auroux and J. Coca, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 295(2), 106–115 CrossRef CAS .J. Perez-Ramirez, J. C. Groen, A. Bruckner, M. S. Kumar, U. Bentrup, M. N. Debbagh and L. A. Villaescusa, J. Catal., 2005, 232(2), 318–334 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhong, X. W. Cheng, J. Wang, Q. Huang and Y. C. Long, Acta Chim. Sin., 2005, 63(11), 955–960 Search PubMed .N. Kumar, J. I. Villegas, T. Salmi, D. Y. Murzin and T. Heikkila, Catal. Today, 2005, 100(3–4), 355–361 CrossRef CAS .E. Diaz, S. Ordonez, A. Vega and J. Coca, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 83(1–3), 292–300 CrossRef CAS .J. Sa and H. Vinek, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 57(4), 247–256 CrossRef CAS .A. Ansari and T. J. Bandosz, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(16), 6217–6224 CrossRef CAS .G. Y. Zhang, P. Wang, Y. Shi, H. J. Ma and G. Hong, Chin. J. Catal., 2005, 26(7), 597–601 Search PubMed .X. D. Ma, M. H. Zheng, W. B. Liu, Y. Qian, B. Zhang and W. X. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2005, 127(1–3), 156–162 CrossRef CAS .L. Li, Q. Y. Wu, Y. H. Guo and C. W. Hu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 87(1), 1–9 CrossRef CAS .P. Shah, A. V. Ramaswamy, R. Pasricha, K. Lazar and V. Ramaswamy, in Recent Advances in the Science and Technology of Zeolites and Related Materials, Pts A–C, Elsevier Science BV, Amsterdam,  2004, vol. 154, pp. 870–877 Search PubMed .G. X. Wang, G. Q. Sun, Z. H. Zhou, J. G. Liu, Q. Wang, S. L. Wang, J. S. Guo, S. H. Yang, Q. Xin and B. L. Yi, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8(1), A12–A16 CrossRef CAS .R. Ravishankar, M. M. Li and A. Borgna, Catal. Today, 2005, 106(1–4), 149–153 CrossRef CAS .M. Selvaraj and T. G. Lee, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 85(1–2), 39–51 CrossRef CAS .U. G. Singh, R. T. Williams, K. R. Hallam and G. C. Allen, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178(11), 3405–3413 CrossRef CAS .J. Grams, J. Rogowski, M. I. Szynkowska, E. Lesniewska and T. Paryjczak, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 2005, 84(2), 237–245 CrossRef CAS .H. Yoon, C. S. Park, C. Yoon, J. Hong, N. S. Kim and K. N. Han, Miner. Metall. Process., 2005, 22(2), 101–106 Search PubMed .K. W. Jones, H. Feng, A. Lanzirotti and D. Mahajan, Top. Catal., 2005, 32(3–4), 263–272 CrossRef CAS .B. S. Wu, L. Bai, Z. X. Zhang, H. W. Xiang, Y. W. Li, F. Yi and B. F. Xu, Chin. J. Catal., 2005, 26(5), 371–376 Search PubMed .C. Dubois, N. Gilon, C. P. Lienemann, S. Morin and J. M. Mermet, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 950–953 RSC .L. Guczi, K. Frey, A. Beck, B. Peto, C. S. Daroczi, N. Kruse and S. Chenakin, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 291(1–2), 116–125 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Centeno, C. Portales, I. Carrizosa and J. A. Odriozola, Catal. Lett., 2005, 102(3–4), 289–297 CrossRef CAS .N. N. Nair, T. Bredow and K. Jug, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(24), 12115–12123 CrossRef CAS .K. W. Jones, H. Feng, A. Lanzirotti and D. Mahajan, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. At., 2005, 241(1–4), 331–334 Search PubMed .G. P. Pires, M. P. Gil, J. A. Rohrman, F. C. Stedile, O. L. Casagrande, J. H. Z. dos Santos and T. Sano, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2006, 99(5), 2002–2009 CrossRef CAS .Q. Tu, T. B. Wang, C. J. Welch, P. Wang, X. J. Jia, C. Raab, X. D. Bu, D. Bykowski, B. Hohenstaufen and M. P. Doyle, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(4), 1282–1289 CrossRef CAS .F. S. Rojas, C. B. Ojeda and J. M. C. Pavon, Ann. Chim., 2005, 95(6), 437–445 CrossRef .J. Luo, M. M. Maye, V. Petkov, N. N. Kariuki, L. Y. Wang, P. Njoki, D. Mott, Y. Lln and C. J. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(12), 3086–3091 CrossRef CAS .N. P. Lebedeva and G. J. M. Janssen, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 51(1), 29–40 CrossRef CAS .D. B. Akolekar, S. K. Bhargava, G. Foran and M. Takahashi, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 238(1–2), 78–87 CrossRef CAS .Y. Izumi, F. Kiyotaki, N. Yagi, A. M. Vlaicu, A. Nisawa, S. Fukushima, H. Yoshitake and Y. Iwasawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(31), 14884–14891 CrossRef CAS .D. B. Akolekar and S. K. Bhargava, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 236(1–2), 77–86 CrossRef CAS .J. Escobar, J. A. Toledo, M. A. Cortes, M. L. Mosqueira, V. Perez, G. Ferrat, E. Lopez-Salinas and E. Torres-Garcia, Catal. Today, 2005, 106(1–4), 222–226 CrossRef CAS .J. Luo, L. Han, N. N. Kariuki, L. Y. Wang, D. Mott, C. J. Zhong and T. He, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(21), 5282–5290 CrossRef CAS .D. Guin, B. Baruwati and S. V. Manorama, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 242(1–2), 26–31 CrossRef CAS .Y. M. Liang, H. M. Zhang, B. L. Yi, Z. H. Zhang and Z. C. Tan, Carbon, 2005, 43(15), 3144–3152 CrossRef CAS .J. Luo, L. Y. Wang, D. Mott, P. N. Njoki, N. Kariuki, C. J. Zhong and T. He, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16(17), 1665–1673 RSC .M. Sivakumar, A. Gedanken, Z. Y. Zhong and L. W. Chen, New J. Chem., 2006, 30(1), 102–107 RSC .J. Aumo, S. Oksanen, J. P. Mikkola, T. Salmi and D. Y. Murzin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44(14), 5285–5290 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Qi, S. D. Wang, G. Z. Fu and D. Y. Wu, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 293, 71–82 CrossRef CAS .A. Moronta, N. Iwasa, S. I. Fujita, M. Shimokawabe and M. Arai, Clays Clay Miner., 2005, 53(6), 622–630 CrossRef CAS .R. Dhar, P. D. Pedrow, K. C. Liddell, T. M. Moeller and M. A. Osman, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2005, 33(6), 2035–2045 CrossRef .P. S. Querino, J. R. C. Bispo and M. D. Rangel, Catal. Today, 2005, 107–08, 920–925 CrossRef .H. Borchert, Y. Borchert, V. V. Kaichev, I. P. Prosvirin, G. M. Alikina, A. I. Lukashevich, V. I. Zaikovskii, E. M. Moroz, E. A. Paukshtis, V. I. Bukhtiyarov and V. A. Sadykov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(43), 20077–20086 CrossRef CAS .M. Ramin, F. Jutz, J. D. Grunwaldt and A. Baiker, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 242(1–2), 32–39 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
Table Content:
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AMS	Accelerator mass spectrometry
ANOVA	Analysis of Variance
ANSI	American National Standards Institute
APDC	Ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
BCR	Bureau of Community Reference
CFP	Circulating fluidized bed
CMOS	Complementary metal oxide semiconductor
CRM	Certified reference material
DCP	Direct current plasma
DPT	Diphenyl tin
DRIFTS	Diffuse reflectance infra-red Fourier transform spectroscopy
DRS	Diffuse reflectance spectroscopy
DTA	Differential thermal analysis
DTPA	Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
EDX	Energy dispersive X-ray analysis
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EPMA	Electron probe microanalysis
ERDA	Elastic recoil detection analysis
ESP	Electrostatic precipitator
ESR	Electron spin resonance
ETAAS	Electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
ETV	Electrothermal vaporisation
FF	Fast flow
FI	Flow injection
FIB	Focused ion beam
FTA	Fission track analysis
FT-IR	Fourier transform-infra red
GC	Gas chromatography
GD	Glow discharge
GFAAS	Graphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy
GI-XRF	Grazing incident XRF
HPLC	High performance liquid chromatography
IBMK	Isobutylmethyl ketone
ICP	Inductively coupled plasma
ID	Isotope dilution
INAA	Instrumental neutron activation analysis
LA	Laser ablation
LDA	Linear discriminant analysis
LED	Light emitting diode
LEIS	Low energy ion scattering
LIBS	Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy
LIPS	Laser induced plasma spectroscopy
LOD	Limit of detection
LOQ	Limit of quantitation
MC-ICP-MS	Multiple collector ICP-MS
MIM	Metal insulator metal
MOCVD	Metal organic chemical vapour deposition
MPT	Monophenyl tin
MS	Mass spectrometry
Nd:YAG	Neodymium:yttrium aluminium garnet
NEXAFS	Near edge X-ray absorption fine structure
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
NRRA	Nuclear resonant reaction analysis
OES	Optical emission spectrometry
OSL	Optical stimulated luminescence
PB/HC-OES	Particle beam/hollow cathode optical emission spectometry
PCA	Principle component analysis
PET	Polyethyleneterephthalate
PGM	Platinum group metals
PIXE	Particle induced X-ray emission
PVD	Physical vapour deposition
RBS	Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
REEs	Rare earth elements
RF	Radio frequency
RI	Rfractive index
RMM	Relative molecular mass
RSD	Relative standard deviation
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SF	Sector field
SIMCA	Soft independent modelling of class analogy
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
SNMS	Secondary neutral mass spectrometry
SPM	Scanning probe microscopy
SPME	Solid phase micro-extraction
SRM	Standard reference material
SRXRF	Synchrotron radiation induced X-ray fluorescence
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TIMS	Thermal ionization mass spectrometry
TMAH	Tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide
TMPP	Tris(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl) phosphonium propylamine
ToF	Time of flight
TPT	Triphenyl tin
TSL	Thermally stimulated luminescence
TRXPS	Total reflection X-ray photoelectric spectroscopy
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence spectrometry
USN	Ultrasonic nebuliser
UV	Ultra violet
VPD-DC	Vapour phase decomposition-droplet collection
VUV	Vacuum ultra violet
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge spectrometry
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence
XRR	X-ray reflectometry

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
