Two-dimensional-related catalytic materials for solar-driven conversion of CO x into valuable chemical feedstocks  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00607E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00607E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1972-2010Two-dimensional-related catalytic materials for solar-driven conversion of COx into valuable chemical feedstocks

        
          
            Yufei 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Geoffrey I. N. 
            Waterhouse
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Guangbo 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xuyang 
            Xiong
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Li-Zhu 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chen-Ho 
            Tung
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Tierui 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *ad
aKey Laboratory of Photochemical Conversion and Optoelectronic Materials, Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: tierui@mail.ipc.ac.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, P. R. China
cSchool of Chemical Sciences, The University of Auckland, Auckland 1142, New Zealand
dUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
Received 
      29th July 2018
    First published on 24th October 2018AbstractThe discovery of improved chemical processes for CO and CO2 hydrogenation to valuable hydrocarbon fuels and alcohols is of paramount importance for the chemical industry. Such technologies have the potential to reduce anthropogenic CO2 emissions by adding value to a waste stream, whilst also reducing our consumption of fossil fuels. Current thermal catalytic technologies available for CO and CO2 hydrogenation are demanding in terms of energy input. Various alternative technologies are now being developed for COx hydrogenation, with solar-driven processes over two-dimensional (2D) and 2D-related composite materials being particularly attractive due to the abundance of solar energy on Earth and also the high selectivity of defect-engineered 2D materials towards specific valuable products under very mild reaction conditions. This review showcases recent advances in the solar-driven COx reduction to hydrocarbons over 2D-based materials. Optimization of 2D catalyst performance demands interdisciplinary research that embraces catalyst electronic structure manipulation and morphology control, surface/interface engineering, reactor engineering and density functional theory modelling studies. Through improved understanding of the structure–performance relationships in 2D-related catalysts which is achievable through the application of modern in situ characterization techniques, practical photo/photothermal/photoelectrochemical technologies for CO and CO2 reduction to high-valuable products such as olefins could be realized in the not-too-distant future.
Yufei Zhao
Dr Yufei Zhao obtained dual BS degrees in Applied Chemistry and Computer Science and Technology at Shanxi University (2007), and his PhD degree in Applied Chemistry at Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2013 under the supervision of Prof. Xue Duan. During 2011–2012, he visited Prof. Dermot O’Hare's laboratory (Oxford University), and subsequently joined the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry (TIPC), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in the lab of Prof. Tierui Zhang. In 2018, he became a Professor at State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His research focuses on layered double hydroxide nanostructured catalysts.
Geoffrey I. N. Waterhouse
Prof. Geoffrey I. N. Waterhouse completed a PhD in Chemistry at the University of Auckland in 2003. He is a Fellow of the New Zealand Institute of Chemistry, a Principal Investigator in the MacDiarmid Institute (a New Zealand CoRE) and a Chair Professor of both the South China University of Technology and Shandong Agricultural University. His research interests include solar energy capture technologies, photocatalysis, photonic band gap materials, and biosensors.
Guangbo Chen
Guangbo Chen received his BS degree (2013) and master degree (2016) in Chemistry from Northwest University. During 2014–2016, he studied as a joint master student under the supervision of Prof. Tierui Zhang at TIPC, CAS. He is currently pursuing his PhD at Department of Chemistry and Food Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany. His research interest mainly focuses on the development of 2D nanomaterials for energy conversion applications.
Tierui Zhang
Prof. Tierui Zhang is a full professor at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He obtained his PhD degree in Chemistry in 2003 at Jilin University, China. He then worked as a postdoctoral researcher in the labs of Prof. Markus Antonietti, Prof. Charl F. J. Faul, Prof. Hicham Fenniri, Prof. Z. Ryan Tian, Prof. Yadong Yin, and Prof. Yushan Yan. His current scientific interests focus on catalyst nanomaterials for energy conversion.
1. Introduction
The chemical reduction of COx to hydrocarbons is a key process in the Earth's carbon cycle and holds great promise as a future technology for solar energy capture and storage.1 Taking inspiration from photosynthesis which transforms CO2 into carbohydrates and sustains almost all life on Earth, researchers have attempted to develop photosynthetic mimetic systems for CO2 reduction to fuels and valuable chemical feedstocks.2,3 However, reducing CO2 using conventional 3D semiconductor photocatalysts such as TiO2 is generally ineffective due to low conversion efficiencies under solar irradiation and poor selectivities to high value products (most conventional photocatalysts yield CO or CH4 as the main reduction products).4,5 Catalytic hydrogenation of COx is a far more viable approach for producing high value fuels and commodity chemicals on an industrial scale.6 For example, the synthesis of olefins and paraffins from syngas (CO and H2) via the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) is a mature industrial technology.7,8 Hydrogenation of CO can also deliver alcohols (methanol, ethanol) and benzene in yields and scales sufficient to justify industry investment.9
In comparison with conventional three-dimensional (3D) thermal catalysts and photocatalysts, solar-driven 2D and 2D-related catalysts offer enormous potential for the transformation of abundant solar energy into sustainably sourced fuels and high value chemical feedstocks. The enhanced functionality of 2D systems is due to their highly accessible active sites,10 as well as modified chemical composition and electronic structures.11,12 This review aims to summarize recent advances in applied and fundamental research relating to 2D and 2D-related catalysts for solar-driven catalytic CO and CO2 reduction into high-value products. Various 2D and 2D-related structures including hydroxides (layered double hydroxides), layered oxides, layered sulfides, single-metal-supported layered structures, metal-free C/N/B structures, some ultrathin nanosheets with a nonlayered structure as well as a quasi-layered structure, and layered double hydroxides-derived structures (mixed metal oxides, supported metal structure) with 2D morphologies will be introduced (Fig. 1), and then discussed in relation to COx reduction. Furthermore, 2D nanosheet-based heterostructures (including supported nanoparticles/clusters/single atom catalysts) engineered to provide a high surface area, abundant interfaces, and strong component interactions to enhance COx reduction will also be examined. The rapid development of density-functional theory (DFT) allows understanding of 2D catalyst properties such as band gap edges, surface electronic structure, defects, adsorption ability and even the reaction mechanism to be probed. In some cases, DFT calculations even allow prediction of the relative activities of certain families of catalysts, which is discussed herein. A particular emphasis of this review is exploration of structure–property correlations in 2D-related systems for the efficient solar-driven CO/CO2 reduction to hydrocarbons and alcohols, using advanced catalyst characterization techniques to probe 2D electronic structures, structural defects, heterojunctions, and catalyst coupling. The authors hope that this review will focus more attention towards 2D-related catalysts for solar-driven COx conversion and encourage wider research in this new and exciting area.
 Fig. 1  Design and development of 2D-related nanostructured catalysts for solar-driven CO or CO2 reduction to high value products. 
2. Catalytic CO2 and CO reduction
2.1 CO2 reduction by H2O or H2 for the synthesis of CO and hydrocarbons
CO2 reduction by H2O (i.e. photosynthesis) and CO2 reduction by H2 (i.e. the reverse water gas shift reaction) are key processes in Earth's carbon cycle and the chemical industry, respectively. In the last decade, photocatalytic CO2 reduction with H2 or H2O as the reducing agent has been extensively explored as an alternative approach for the synthesis of CO and hydrocarbons, as summarized below.

2.1.1 CO2 reduction by H2O. 

Table 1 lists possible products of CO2 reduction in water via photocatalytic or electrocatalytic processes. Products include CO, HCOOH, CH3OH, and CH4 and C–C coupling products like C2H6 and C2H5OH.13 The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is a competitive process with these CO2 reduction reactions. Taking photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CH4 over Pt/g-C3N4 nanosheets as a representative example,14 the reduction half equation leading to CH4 can be written as:CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2OCH4 formation occurs through eight elementary steps, with the other possible byproducts being HCOOH and CH3OH:CO2 + H+ + e− → HCOO*HCOO* + H+ + e− → HCOOH*HCOOH* + H+ + e− → HCO* + H2O*HCO* + H+ + e− → CH2O*CH2O* + H+ + e− → CH2OH*CH2OH* + H+ + e− → CH2* + H2O*CH2* + H+ + e− → CH3*CH3* + H+ + e− → CH4*The formation of the byproducts HCOOH and CH3OH can be described as follows:CO2 + H+ + e− → HCOO*HCOO* + H+ + e− → HCOOH*HCOOH* + H+ + e− → HCO* + H2O*HCO* + H+ + e− → CH2O*CH2O* + H+ + e− → CH2OH*CH2OH* + H+ + e− → CH3OH*
Table 1 Possible products of CO2 and water reduction along with the corresponding reduction potentials (versus normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) at pH 7 in aqueous solution)




Product
Reaction

E
0 (V vs. NHE)
Equation




Hydrogen
2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2
−0.41
(1)


Carbon monoxide
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O
−0.51
(2)


Formic acid
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH
−0.58
(3)


Oxalic acid
2CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2C2O4
−0.87
(4)


Methanol
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O
−0.39
(5)


Methane
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
−0.24
(6)


Ethanol
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O
−0.33
(7)


Ethane
2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 + 4H2O
−0.27
(8)




The reduction half equations leading to HCOOH and CH3OH are thus CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH and CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O, respectively.
By studying the reaction barriers for each reduction step using DFT calculations, product selectivities to particular products can be rationalized. For example, the main product of CO2 photoreduction over Pd/g-C3N4 nanosheets is HCOOH whereas Pt/g-C3N4 yields mainly CH4.14 In both cases, the g-C3N4 photocatalyst acted mainly as the H2 evolution site due to its weak CO2 activation capacity. Single atom (Pd or Pt) sites were instead responsible for the activation of CO2. CO2 adsorbed strongly on Pt sites, with the intermediates formed via hydrogenation also being adsorbed very strongly. As a result, the hydrogenation proceeded to completion yielding CH4 as the dominant product for the Pt/g-C3N4 system. For Pd/g-C3N4, the formic acid intermediate HCOOH is able to easily desorb from the Pd/g-C3N4 catalyst due to a low desorption energy of only 0.46 eV. Accordingly, the major product for CO2 reduction on Pd/g-C3N4 is HCOOH, rather than CH4 or CH3OH. Computational mechanistic studies thus provide valuable insights regarding the product distributions of CO2 photoreduction.
It should be noted that although considerable research effort has been devoted to CO2 reduction with water, conversion rates remain too low (on the order of a few μmol g−1 h−1 at best) to warrant practical interest.15 The rate limiting step for CO2 reduction is the water splitting reaction which liberates electrons and protons needed for hydrocarbon formation. In order to improve the solar-to-fuel efficiency for CO2 conversion with H2O, photoelectrochemical/photovoltaic/photothermal systems are now being developed, which is discussed further below.16–19


2.1.2 CO2 reduction by H2. 
By using H2 as the CO2 reducing agent, rates can be increased by several orders of magnitude to a few mmol g−1 h−1 or higher under thermal or photothermal reaction control. Fig. 2 maps pathways for CO2 hydrogenation to CO (via the reverse water gas shift reaction), to CH4, to syngas (CO and H2), as well as CH3OH and hydrocarbons. Amongst these, the methanation of CO2 to CH4,20 also called as Sabatier reaction, is particularly important in industry for the storage of renewable energy.6,21 Recently, methanol synthesis via CO2 hydrogenation over In2O3 containing surface oxygen vacancies (VO) was reported by Ge and co-workers. DFT calculations revealed the process CO2 + H → HCOO was both thermodynamically and kinetically favorable.22 Further, a supported In2O3/ZrO2 powder catalyst afforded stable CO2 hydrogenation performance over 1000 h of testing under industrially relevant conditions, opening up new avenues for CO2 hydrogenation beyond just methanol synthesis over Cu/ZnO–Al2O3 powder catalysts.23 Defect-rich oxide-based catalysts and photocatalysts are attracting increasing attention for commodity chemical synthesis.24,25
 Fig. 2  CO2 reduction map for large-scale chemical syntheses. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 

2.2 CO reduction to hydrocarbons
In terms of product value, CO2 hydrogenation to CH4 is of limited usefulness due to the high chemical stability of methane which largely prohibits its use in C–C coupling reactions to form more valuable C+2 hydrocarbons. Accordingly, CO2 reduction to CO is currently attracting attention due to the high chemical activation ability of CO which allows further industrial use. For example, CO is used in industry for the generation of H2via the water–gas shift (WGS) reaction, forming CO2 as byproduct.26 Since the WGS reaction is endothermic, temperatures ∼623 K are needed to achieve complete CO conversion. The reaction typically uses Cu-based catalysts and proceeds by the dissociation of H2O on the catalyst surface to form H and OH species, with the adsorbed OH then immediately reacting with CO to yield CO2 and H (Fig. 3A), followed by H–H bond formation and the desorption of H2.27 In a recent breakthrough, Ma's group reported that Au clusters on α-MoC (powder) could catalyse the ultra-low-temperature WGS reaction (below 423 K),27 highlighting the potential for catalyst development even in existing industrial processes.
 Fig. 3  (A) The energy profile of the WGS reaction on an α-MoC(111) surface. (B) UV-driven photocatalytic WGS and (C) visible-light driven plasmonic WGS reaction, showing (i) photon absorption, (ii) electron migration, (iii) interfacial migration, (iv) water splitting to give hydrogen and (v) CO oxidation to CO2. Reproduced with permission ref. 27, copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science and ref. 28, copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Photocatalysts promote thermodynamically uphill reactions and provide an alternative approach for driving conventional thermal catalytic reactions. The production of H2 from photocatalytic WGS under sunlight or visible light without additional energy inputs is a particularly promising future technology. For example, the Garcia group reported photocatalytic WGS by Au nanoparticles loaded P25 TiO2 powder under 450 nm LED monochromatic light (Fig. 3B and C), with a H2 production rate of 7695 μmol g−1 and CO conversion of 41% in 22 h.28 Results suggest that photocatalytic WGS has the potential to offer a greener pathway for H2 production.
In industry, H2 is combined with CO in different ratios to form syngas (typically with molar CO:H2 ratios between 1:1 to 1:3) for the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis of hydrocarbons (olefins or long chain hydrocarbons) and alcohols (Fig. 4).29,30 Using Fe, Co and Ru-based powder catalysts, the main products are hydrocarbons (gasoline, diesel, waxes),31 whereas Cu/Rh-containing catalysts yield mainly methanol and ethanol.32 Methanol is then used as a building block for the synthesis of a wide range of commodity chemicals, including ether, acetic acid, formaldehyde, olefins and gasoline, amongst others. Full scale industrial processes have been developed for the transformation of syngas to gasoline (production scale of 4000 kT per year) and methanol to olefins (production scale of 6460 kT per year).
 Fig. 4  The CO map for the catalytic conversion of syngas to fuels and chemicals: (WGS: water-gas shift; MTG: methanol-to-gasoline; MTO: methanol-to-olefin; DME: dimethyl ether; HPA: heteropoly acid). Reproduced with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
In traditional Fischer–Tropsch syntheses, reaction conditions are selected which allow meaningful rates of CO activation, whilst product distributions are controlled by competition between C–C coupling reactions and hydrogenation reactions. Controlling the extent of hydrogenation is the key to achieving the desired product selectivity in FTS reactions. Fig. 5 depicts typical surface reactions during FTS.30 CO and H2 dissociate on the catalyst surface, yielding water, a small amount of CO2via WGS, and adsorbed C and H atoms. The adsorbed C atoms are then hydrogenated by surface H to yield CHx intermediates. The surface CHx species then undergo C–C coupling reactions leading to the synthesis of olefins, or in cases where there is fast hydrogenation kinetics, the products are paraffins. Ni-Based FT catalysts generally result in CH4 formation due to the very strong hydrogenation ability of metallic Ni.33,34 During the FT process, the product distributions are strongly impacted by the electronic structure of the catalysts. Until recently, almost all mechanistic studies of FTS focused on thermal-driven pathways.
 Fig. 5  Simplified reaction mechanism for Fischer–Tropsch syntheses. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Mechanistic studies of FTS reactions driven by other approaches, such as electrochemical35 or photocatalytic,36,37 and photothermal38 routes, using catalysts with mild hydrogenation abilities based on Ni/Fe/Co-containing catalysts, are gaining increasing attention in the scientific literature.
In addition to hydrocarbons, FTS can be tuned to deliver oxygenates such as methanol, ethanol, or longer chain alcohols, as liquid fuels or commodity chemicals. By controlling the catalysts used (Cu, Rh, etc.), the selectivity to target products can be manipulated and optimized. Typically, methanol is the main product from the reaction of syngas over copper-containing catalysts32 or indium-containing catalysts. The main reaction pathway for the synthesis of methanol over CuZn-based catalysts is as follows:39 the first step in the synthesis is the stepwise hydrogenation of adsorbed CO to intermediates such as HCO*, H2CO* and H3CO*, followed by final hydrogenation to methanol (Fig. 6A and B). For Cu, the stepped (211) surface offers the lowest adsorption energies for each of the aforementioned intermediates. The presence of Zn located at the terrace edges of the (211) surfaces strengthens the binding of the intermediates (Fig. 6B red line) and thus increases the activity, explaining the typical catalyst formulation used in industrial methanol synthesis. In addition to methanol, a number of other alcohols such as ethanol can be obtained from CO hydrogenation. Rh-containing catalysts give good selectivity for ethanol synthesis from syngas.29 Similar to the FT reaction, intermediate CHx species are formed, which then react with adsorbed CO to form a CHx–CO* intermediate, which yields ethanol following further hydrogenation (Fig. 6C). Although the thermal-driven conversion of syngas to alcohols is used in industry, the exact mechanisms of CO activation, C–C coupling and CO insertion are still unclear. Solar-driven photocatalytic or photothermal CO hydrogenation to hydrocarbons/alcohols is still very much in its infancy and mechanistically even less well understood than thermal catalysis regarding CO conversion to alcohols.
 Fig. 6  (A) Structural models of Cu(111), Cu(211), and CuZn(211) facets; (B) Gibbs free energy diagram obtained from DFT calculations for CO hydrogenation to methanol on close-packed (black), stepped (blue) and Zn substituted steps (red); and (C) the proposed mechanism for the conversion of syngas to ethanol over Rh-containing catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39, copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science and ref. 29, copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
3. Classification of 2D and 2D-related catalysts
Recently, ultrathin 2D nanosheet catalysts have attracted a lot of attention for solar-driven chemical transformations owing to their tuneable electronic properties, highly accessible active sites and excellent charge separation properties. These properties are particularly important for kinetically limited processes such as COx reduction, where abundant surface defects realized in 2D materials can greatly enhance CO, CO2 and H2O adsorption, thus allowing the COx reduction to occur at meaningful rates.

Fig. 7 provides an overview of some different types of 2D and 2D-related catalysts that have emerged in the past 5–10 years for catalytic applications. Transition metal hydroxides (such as Mg(OH)2 and Ni(OH)2) or layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are inorganic lamellar compounds. LDHs have the general formula [M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2]q+(An−)q/n·yH2O, where typically M2+ = Mg2+, Ca2+, Mn2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Cu2+ or Zn2+; M3+ = Cr3+, Al3+, Ga3+, Fe3+; and An− are charge-balancing anions. Calcination or hydrogen reduction of LDHs nanosheets can lead to the topological transformation to mixed metal oxides (MMO) or metal supported catalysts (like Fe, Co, Ni-supported catalysts) with 2D morphologies,32,40 offering huge potential for photocatalyst development for solar-driven hydrogenation of COx.41–43 On account of their layered structure, wide compositional flexibility, controllable particle size sizes (from several micrometer to 2–3 nm, with thicknesses of several hundred layers to monolayer),44,45 low cost and easy production scale up, LDHs and LDH-related catalysts offer a robust platform for the development of novel photocatalytic and photothermal catalysts for COx conversion.46–48 Take NiTi-LDH as an example, using a reverse microemulsion method, the lateral size of NiTi-LDH can be tuned from several micrometres to 30 nm, with a concomitant decrease in the thickness from 700 nm to 2 nm. The LDH nanosheets obtained by this approach contain abundant VO, resulting in the formation of surface Ti3+ defects which serve as adsorption sites, extend the light absorption ability in the visible and facilitate photoinduced carriers separation. The net result is an 8-fold improvement in water splitting activity compared to the bulk NiTi-LDH counterpart.49 Similar improvements were seen for ZnAl-LDH nanosheets for CO2 reduction50 and CuCr-LDH nanosheets for N2 fixation51 compared with their bulk counterparts.
 Fig. 7  Crystal structures of some typical 2D materials, including layered double hydroxides (LDHs), layered metal oxides, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), g-C3N4, black phosphorus and various carbon-based materials (graphene, graphene oxide (GO), and reduced GO). 
Single layer or ultrathin Ti, Zr, Nb, Ta, V, W oxides and sulfides,52 double metal oxide spinels (e.g. ZnGa2O4), various d10 oxides (In, Ga, Sn), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), layered materials like bismuth oxythalides (BiOCl/Br/I) and perovskite oxides have been studied for CO2 reduction using H2O or H2, with the aim of taking advantage of structural defects associated with thin layered materials. Recently, defective ultrathin K4Nb6O17 nanosheets were reported to be 20 times more active for water splitting compared with defect-free bulk K4Nb6O17, which is mainly due to the abundance of surface VO.53 Similar strategies were used to synthesize ultrathin WO354 and BiOCl,55 with the defects contained therein greatly improving solar conversion efficiencies, as been reviewed by other groups.10,11
Some non-layered oxides can be fabricated in the form of thin nanosheets, such as Co3O4, FeOx and NiO, and similarly show promise for solar-driven CO and CO2 hydrogenation.56,57 In addition, some single-layered metallic nanosheets have been reported, such as one atom thick Rh nanosheets. The Rh nanosheets exhibited excellent thermo-catalytic activity for hydrogenation of phenol and hydroformylation of 1-octene, owning to the high surface exposure of metal atoms. It is expected that these single layered metal sheets will allow plasmonic CO/CO2 hydrogenation.58 Since the discovery that single atom Pt/FeOx was active for thermal catalysis,59,60 single metal atom catalysts based on CeO2, FeOx, Al2O3, g-C3N4 nanosheets and MoS2 nanosheets have been applied in various reactions, including the WGS reaction and others.61,62 Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and covalent-organic frameworks (COFs), as a versatile family of porous materials, serve as a useful platform for the development of single-site metal catalysts by taking advantage of the coordination interaction between the framework and metal complex.63 Metal-free catalysts, such as doped graphene nanosheets,64 graphitic carbon nitride, boron nitride and black phosphorus65,66 also demand attention for COx reduction and water splitting.
4. Strategies for efficient solar-driven catalyst design
Semiconductor photocatalyst performance for COx reduction is generally discussed in terms of the following: (1) semiconductor photoabsorption ability;67 (2) photoinduced charge separation and migration from the bulk to surface whilst avoiding recombination;68 (3) surface adsorption and redox reactions; and (4) catalyst stability during illumination.69 In order to develop meaningful structure–activity relationships and thereby increase photocatalytic efficiencies and quantum yields, understanding of multiscale phenomena and principles relating photocatalyst composition and electronic structure, photoinduced charge diffusion and transfer, surface and interface reactions, catalyst coupling to form semiconductor heterojunctions, and reactor design all need to be understood to a reasonable level and thus synergistically optimized.
4.1 Band gap engineering
Band gap energies and band edge positions for various 2D-related semiconductor photocatalysts (oxides, spinel, TMDs,70 LDHs71,72) are summarized in Fig. 8. Compared with proton-assisted CO2 activation, direct CO2 reduction by a one electron pathway is unfavourable with an overpotential of about 1.85 eV (Fig. 8A). However, in the presence of protons the energy requirement is much more modest, thereby allowing CO2 reduction when the semiconductor conduction band gap is sufficiently negative (i.e. more negative versus NHE than the CO2/product redox couple of interest). Ideally the band gap energy should not be too large, but sufficient to also allow water reduction i.e. the VB more positive versus NHE than the O2/H2O couple (−0.41 V at pH 7). Therefore, two kinds of band engineering strategies are typically adopted to satisfy these requirements. First, element doping in the photocatalysts (like BiOBr/I) can dramatically alter band structures. Taking LDHs as a representative example, trivalent metals in the brucite layer with completely filled 3d orbitals (Ga, In) generally have large band gaps (>2.2 eV) with the actual size of the bandgap depending on the divalent cations (like Mg, Zn, Ni, Co, etc.). Incorporating transition metals with unfilled 3d orbitals (such as Ti4+, Cr3+, Fe3+) in the LDH layers offers a further d–d excitation pathway during light irradiation, thus leading to narrower band gaps (e.g. 1.34 eV for NiFe-LDH, and 1.64 eV for CuCr-LDH, Fig. 8C). As a result, the band gap (<3 eV) and CB minimum of these 2D nanomaterials can readily be tuned for efficient solar-driven CO2 reduction.73 The second point of interest is the dimensionality of photocatalysts (i.e. on lowering the dimensionality from 3D to 2D). This can dramatically alter the electronic structure of the semiconductor due to the prevalence of defect states such as VO and coordinatively unsaturated metal cations. Defect states typically red shift the electronic absorption edge (thereby allowing improved solar energy capture), whilst also improving the separation/migration of photo-induced charges to the photocatalyst surface. Accordingly, bandgap engineering is usually a key first step in the development of efficient photocatalysts for COx reduction.
 Fig. 8  Conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) potentials of some common 2D materials versus NHE at pH 7. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH and ref. 71 and 72, copyright 2015, 2017, American Chemical Society. 
4.2 Surface engineering
Surface engineering underpins the unique electronic structures and properties of many 2D-related catalysts. Through engineering of surface states, the bandgap, solar absorption characteristics, photoinduced charge transfer and separation in 2D materials can be controlled and manipulated to enhance catalytic reactions. Common engineering strategies include doping,74 intercalation,75 preferential exposure of active facets,76 morphology control,77 defect engineering,49 and heterostructured junction formation.43,78,79 Optimizing the electronic structure and band gap is critical for solar-driven energy conversion and storage (Fig. 9). Recent advances in the synthesis of ultrathin 2D nanosheets offer a new paradigm in solid state chemistry and solar-driven catalysis.11 For example by allowing exploration of differences in reactivity between sheet edges and basal planes, and also different exposed facets, additional insights about the true nature of catalytically active sites can be obtained. Selective photo-deposition on facet-exposed semiconductor surfaces allowed the redox/oxidation capacity of various crystal planes to be probed. For BiVO4 nanosheets, electrons tended to migrate to (010) facets whilst holes preferred move to the (110) facets, thereby allowing efficient charge separation.76 Similarly, for other layer materials like BiOCl nanosheets, (001) faceted BiOCl is much more photocatalytically active than (110) planes.80 The atom arrangements of the different BiOCl facets determined the distribution of relative density of states (DOS) of each plane, thereby controlling electrons and hole transfer separation efficiency and ultimately photocatalytic performance. The regulation of the electronic structure through atom doping, defect/morphology control, the fabrication of heterostructures, allow performance tweaking and optimisation. For instance, P-doping g-C3N4 nanosheets enhances the separation of electron–hole pairs, since the doping strategy creates inter-band states in such well-organized 2D structures.81 Similar, BiOBr nanosheets containing VO or multi-atom-defect clusters show enhanced N2/O2 activation ability compared with un-doped BiOBr, translating to superior activity.82,83 Heterojunction fabrication is one of the most direct methods for tuning the surface properties of 2D materials, allowing the advantages of each component to be utilized in a synergistic manner. For example, decoration of BiOCl nanosheets with Pd/Ag nanoparticles resulted in the almost complete suppression of electron–hole pair recombination, greatly enhancing photocatalytic water splitting performance.84 Surface engineering strategies for 2D-related materials developing rapidly, either during synthesis of the 2D materials or as a post-synthetic modification. Thus, it is expected that in the near future that surface engineering at the atomic level will be routine as a strategy for photocatalyst design and activity optimization.
 Fig. 9  Surface engineering of 2D-related catalysts for efficient photocatalysis. 
4.3 Strain engineering
Elastic strain is an important physical property of solid materials and is of fundamental importance in understanding the enhanced catalytic properties of low dimensional materials. Elastic strain is typically expressed as (lf − li)/li, where li is the initial bond length and lf is the final bond length, and can be divided into compressive strain or tensile strain.85 Through external-forces, such bending, stretching, intercalating/extracting ions or architecture control, strain can be introduced into surfaces. The synthesis of nanomaterials with specific morphologies (exposing well-defined surfaces), particular compositions and architectures (e.g. core–shell structures) provide ample opportunities for exploring the effect of surface strain on performance, a phenomenon that is now being exploited in electrocatalysis and photocatalysis. Using LDH nanosheets as an example, through control of the thickness of LDH platelets to around 2 nm and lateral size to approximately 30 nm, abundant of VO can be introduced into LDH nanosheets which result in severe structural distortions.51 X-ray diffraction (XRD) data revealed that the (110) Bragg reflection of CuCr-LDH nanosheets was shifted to higher 2θ angles compared with the bulk counterpart, evidence for an in-plane compressive strain of 0.46% in the basal (110) plane. Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analyses determined that this strain effect originated from an abundance of VO, which dramatically altered the electronic structure of the CuCr-LDH nanosheets (Fig. 10). DFT calculations showed that pure LDH had a bandgap of 1.6 eV (Fig. 10A and D). On introduction of VO, a new defect level appeared in the middle of the bandgap (Fig. 10B and E). Further, after adding 1% compressive strain into the LDH nanosheets, a strong defect level formed in the middle of the bandgap (Fig. 10C and F), assigned to unoccupied Cr 3d orbitals, providing electron-trapping sites for photoinduced electron transfer. The interdependence of the VO defects and strain make the understanding the role of strain in photocatalysis more difficult to pinpoint. However, the complementary use of XRD, EXAFS and DFT calculations can provide valuable insights about VO and strain in 2D nanosheets.
 Fig. 10  Supercell models and corresponding band structures of (A and D) CuCr-LDH; (B and E) VO-doped CuCr-LDH; and (C and F) VO-doped CuCr-LDH model with 1% compression strain. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
4.4 Internal electric field strategy
Internal electric fields (IEFs) are highly beneficial for separating photoinduced bulk-electrons and holes in 2D layered materials. The nonuniform charge distribution between different constituent layers in 2D materials like BiOX, LDH and others layered materials gives rise to a permanent polarization. Recently, Zhang and co-workers reported that carbon doping of BiOCl nanosheets resulted in a 126-fold enhancement in the IEF, thereby allowing more efficient bulk-charge separation.69 To elaborate, the strong IEF drives electron and hole transfer to [BiO] and [Cl] planes, respectively, with the exposed (010) and (110) facets displaying different charge separation characteristics. The net result was enhanced separation and faster migration of photoinduced charges from bulk to the surface, resulting in greatly improved photocatalytic water splitting performance (Fig. 11). The activity of LDH photocatalysts can also be improved via IEF manipulation. By changing the anions (CO32−, NO3−) in the interlayers of LDH materials, the surface zeta potential can be changed from 36.6 mV for NO3-intercalated LDH to 27.8 mV for CO3-intercalated LDH, leading to improved photocatalytic degradation efficiency.86 Tuning the interlayer anions in LDH photocatalysts, as a means of modifying IEF, represents a simple and effective strategy for tuning LDH photocatalyst performance for particular reactions.75,87
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the separation and migration of electrons and holes in Bi3O4Cl and C-doped Bi3O4Cl via an internal electric field modification strategy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
4.5 Interface engineering through heterostructure fabrication
Recently, heterostructured materials comprising a semiconductor and one or more other materials have gained great attention, wherein photo-induced charges in the semiconductor material are transferred to the other component, thereby allowing more efficient electron–hole pair separation and more electrons and holes for photoreactions. For example, various heterostructured photocatalyst systems have been developed for overall water splitting systems, such as (GaxZn1−x)(N1−xOx)–RuO2 and Pt/TiO2.78 Typically, heterostructured systems have the following structure: a semiconductor–semiconductor (S–S) interface most commonly consisting of a p-type and n-type semiconductor junction, coupled with semiconductor–metal (S–M) or semiconductor–carbon materials (S–C, with the carbon materials including graphene, C3N4, carbon nanotubes, etc.). Xie and co-workers recently demonstrated an S–S heterostructure composed of partially oxidized SnS2 nanosheets (Fig. 12A–C). This heterostructure benefits from efficient charge separation processes, as well as a low activation energy barrier for COOH* intermediates, due to an electron localized on Sn atoms near O atoms. Accordingly, the activity of the heterostructure for CO2 reduction to CO (12.28 μmol g−1 h−1) was 2.6 times higher than that of bare SnS2 nanosheets.88 This work provided valuable insights about the role of the locally oxidized domains in S, N, P-containing materials. In water splitting and CO2 reduction, the semiconductor based heterostructure plays the key role in activating H2O molecule via transfer of photoinduced electrons/holes. S–M heterostructures are also attracting attention for solar-driven CO hydrogenation to hydrocarbons. Typically, H2 is usually easily to be activated over metal surfaces, with CO then hydrogenated to a CH2* intermediate, which is subsequently hydrogenated to CH4 or undergoes C–C coupling reactions. Ni catalysts show high selectivity for hydrogenation over C–C coupling reactions in the temperature range 300–500 °C, whereas catalysts containing combinations of Ru, Co and Fe show higher selectivities for C–C coupling reactions.34,89 Interestingly, a heterostructure consisting of Ni nanoparticles partially decorated with Ni oxide overlayers (Fig. 12D) as topological transformation from LDH precursor, displayed good selectivity for CO hydrogenation to C2+ hydrocarbons compared with the pure Ni which gave mainly CH4.37 The Ni oxide layer was important for lowering the C–C coupling barrier making that pathway competitive with CH2* hydrogenation to CH4. A similar heterostructure (Co/Co3O4) was reported to be efficient for CO hydrogenation to olefins, unlike metallic Co or Co-oxides which favored paraffin formation (i.e. CH4 and other alkanes).38 In order to exploit interface engineering in catalytic reactions, smart fabrication of intimately contacting surfaces is required. The individual surfaces may keep their original activity or demonstrate unusual and unexpected activities and selectivities, creating opportunity for both rationale design and serendipitous discovery of efficient solar-driven catalysts. Heterostructures also offer new pathways for the activation/conversion of small molecules by lowering activation energy barriers for desired transformations. Similar to metal surfaces, graphene is active for the activation of H2, allowing hydrogenation of C–C bonds even at room temperature as reported by Garcia and co-workers.90 This work on the metal-free catalysts opens a new pathway for hydrogenation catalyst development, and offers a potential route for the construction of metal/graphene nanostructures for COx hydrogenation with superb C–C coupling ability under mild conditions.
 Fig. 12  (A) Diagram of the energy band structure and the related electron transfer processes in a SnS2/SnO2 heterostructure. Schematics of (B) the locally oxidized SnS2 atomic layers and (C) the SnS2 atomic layers, respectively. (D) Schematic of a Ni/NiO heterostructure obtained from an LDH precursor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society and ref. 37, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
4.6 Coupling catalysts engineering
Very recently, the strategy of coupling thermal catalysts (e.g. traditional FT catalysts and zeolite catalysts) has been explored in order to obtain high-value products such as olefins from syngas (CO, H2) or benzene from CO2 reduction (Fig. 13A–D). Traditionally, FT syntheses to C2–C4 hydrocarbons (olefins and paraffins) offered a selectivity to olefins up to a maximum of 58% according to the Anderson–Schulz–Flory (ASF) model. This raised the question of how to break this rule and achieve precise control of C–C coupling whilst suppressing methane formation. Bao and co-workers91 recently reported a smart strategy for enhancing C–C coupling product selectivities by coupling ZnCrOx and 3D zeolite powder catalysts. This strategy involved CO activation over the ZnCrOx catalysts and C–C coupling over the zeolite with acidic sites, resulting in a C2–C4 selectivity of 94% (including 80% olefins) with only 2% methane at a 17% CO conversion. The syngas to olefins process offers great promise, since coal-derived or biomass-derived syngas could be utilized as the feedstock.92 Aromatics, as a valuable commodity chemical, can also be synthesized by catalyst coupling. A physical mixture of Na–Zn–Fe5C2 and a zeolite, or Zn-doped ZrO2 nanoparticles dispersed on a 3D zeolite H-ZSM-5 (Fig. 13E), displayed good activity for CO hydrogenation to olefins/methanol and dimethyl ether, with the HZSM-5 converting these products to aromatic compounds.93,94 This coupling strategy has been also successfully extended to CO2 hydrogenation to liquid fuels (C5+ selectivity reached 78.6% with only 1% CH4) over an In2O3–zeolite catalyst system.24 The remarkable selectivity that is achievable using bifunctional catalysts results from better control and in some cases separation of CO activation, C–C coupling or chain growth processes, which cannot be controlled precisely using only one kind of active material (e.g. a traditional FT active phase containing Fe, Co, Ru).30 This catalyst coupling strategy should also be widely applicable in solar-driven COx conversion, warranting further investigation.
 Fig. 13  Construction of bifunctional catalysts by integration of a FT catalyst component and a zeolite. (A) Dual-bed reactor. (B) Physically mixed reactor. (C) Core–shell structure. (D) Metal particles loaded on zeolite. (E) Proposed reaction mechanism for the direct conversion of syngas into lower olefins on ZrO2–ZnO/SAPO-34 bifunctional catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science and ref. 94, copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
4.7 Reactor engineering
For CO2 photoreduction with water, batch reactors are typically used and designed for a very low conversion of ∼100 mL over several hours (Fig. 14A).95 The migration from a batch reactor to a flow reactor (10–100 mL min−1, Fig. 14B and C) is necessary from an industrial viewpoint.95 Compared with photothermal CO2 hydrogenation in a batch reactor (96% conversion of CO2 + H2, 330 mL, over 60 min), the flow-type reaction system yielded CH4 (277 mmol g−1 h−1) under a CO2 flow rate of 25 mL min−1. The 10 fold increase in CO2 conversion achieved in the flow reactor under solar excitation is very encouraging, suggesting potential for solar-driven catalytic reactions in industry. A further disadvantage of batch reactors is over hydrogenation to paraffins since the initial reaction products (olefins) are not removed from the reactor until the end of the reaction, lowering the selectivity of olefins.37 From an industry viewpoint, flow reactors and a high olefin selectivity are highly desirable. It should be noted that although the although great improvements in CO2 conversion can be achieved under flow conditions (10–100 fold), the potential for reactor scale up is limited by the area of light irradiation of catalysts, representing a potential bottleneck for the large scale application.
 Fig. 14  Schematic setup of photo-driven conversion of CO2 in (A) batch reactor; (B) flow system; and (C) photograph of the continuous flow photoreactor. (D) Schematic representation of an integrated photovoltaic cell and CO2 reduction system. (E) Schematic illustration of the experimental set-up of the filter-press reactor comprising the Cu–Zn cathode and the Si/Ni foam photoanode. (F) Schematic and (G) photographs of the solar reactor configuration for solar thermochemical splitting CO2 into separate streams of CO and O2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH, ref. 17, copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group and ref. 18 and 19, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The stability of catalysts is also an important parameter that is used in the measurement of catalyst performance. Catalysts need to be mechanically robust and resistant to coking, sintering and poisoning during catalytic operation. For batch reaction systems, some catalysts (like 3D Ru/Al2O3 photothermal catalyst) can maintain their activity for CO2 hydrogenation over 4 or more cycles without obvious change, though the catalyst performance over many cycles (such as 20 or 100 cycles) was not reported. Under flow conditions, no noticeable decrease in the activity for photothermal CO2 conversion over 12 h.95 The excellent stability of certain noble-metal containing systems may be due to the anti-oxidation effect of the noble metal. However, for some earth abundant element-containing catalyst systems (like Fe-containing FT catalysts), the H2O by-product of the FT synthesis is detrimental to stability since the active Fe phase can be easily to be oxidized by water into inactive Fe oxides phases. As an example, the Fe/Fe3O4 heterostructure derived by reduction of ZnFeAl-LDH nanosheets at 500 °C displayed good performance in a batch reactor for 3 cycles of FT,96 with good CO conversion maintained and only a slightly change in the hydrocarbon selectivity. A reduction treatment in H2 was needed to remove the oxide layer formed on the surface of Fe/Fe3O4 heterostructure after each cycle. This oxide layer resulted from existence of CO2 and H2O byproducts in the batch reactor during the cycle. However, under flow conditions, the Fe/Fe3O4 heterostructure displayed enhanced olefin selectivity (olefin/paraffin ratio of 6.1), and excellent stability over 20 h under light irradiation with a lower CO conversion of 11%, compared with the batch reactor (olefin/paraffin of 4.7 at a CO conversion of 20.9%). The shorter contact times with the catalyst surface explains the decreased CO conversion and enhanced olefin selectivity under flow reaction conditions. Also, the quick removal of the byproducts of the FT reaction (CO2 and H2O) from the reaction system avoided over oxidation of the Fe phase in the Fe/Fe3O4 heterostructure, explaining the excellent stability over 20 h. However, from an industry viewpoint, catalysts which maintain good activities and selectivities over several months are needed. Thus, future work relating to 2D catalyst development for COx reduction must include long, continuous operation tests (i.e. a week or more).
In addition, photovoltaic-driven CO2 reduction has recently emerged as promising approach for solar-to-fuel conversion (Fig. 14D and E).16–19 For instance, using a GaInP/GaInAs/Ge photovoltaic, a CuO nanowire + SnO2 cathode could efficiently split CO2 and water to yield CO and O2 with high solar-to-fuel efficiency of 13.4%.17 A nanosized earth-abundant catalyst (Cu foam coated with Zn nanoflakes) coupled with a silicon/Ni foam photovoltaic system was able to efficiently convert CO2 and water to syngas by a bias-free reactor as reported by Urbain and co-workers (Fig. 14E), and more interestingly, the ratio of H2/CO can be tuneable from 14 to 0.5 under different potentials.18 The direct splitting CO2 to CO and oxygen (CO2 → CO + O2) via the solar thermochemical pathway is another attractive technology for solar-energy conversion. Steinfield and co-works designed an optimized solar cavity-receiver configuration containing a reticulated porous ceramic (RPC), which demonstrated superb stability, robustness and enhanced mass and heat transport properties, thereby affording fast reactions kinetics (Fig. 14F and G).19 Under 3000× flux irradiation, this reactor could directly split CO2 into CO and O2 with 100% selectivity, 85% molar conversion and a 5.25% solar-to-fuel energy conversion efficiency, whilst also separating the two product gases.
Multidisciplinary and multiscale approaches needed for photo/photothermal/photoelectrochemical/electrochemical water splitting on a large scale, ranging from electronic structure, morphology control, surface/interface engineering, catalyst coupling, to reactor engineering was recently reviewed, in part, by Zhang and co-workers.97 The same principles are also applicable to the design of efficient materials and processes for COx reduction, since water and H2 are commonly used reducing agents during COx transformation to fuels and other valuable chemical feedstocks.
5. Advanced methods for determining active sites and exploring structure–activity relationships
In the attempt to better understand catalyst function and performance, many in situ and ex situ characterization techniques and computational methods have been developed to probe morphology, defects, strain and electronic properties of catalysts. Further, for photocatalysis, the generation and transport efficiency of photo-induced carriers (electrons and holes) needs to be monitored to allow structure–property–activity relationships to be developed, which subsequently provide a framework new catalyst design. In this section, advanced approaches for examining the active sites and reaction mechanisms on 2D-related catalysts will be briefly summarized. Some of the recently developed in situ methods will also be discussed in the section below exploring the mechanism of COx reduction. Since many of the techniques discussed below are relatively new and not yet widely applied in the characterization of 2D-related catalysts, both 2D and 3D catalysts systems will be used to illustrate the merits of these techniques. It is envisioned that all these techniques will become mainstream for the characterization of 2D catalysts in the near future.
5.1 Microscopy
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is the one of most widely used techniques in nanomaterials and catalysis research since it allows direct observation of specimen morphology (thickness, size, exposed facets, defects, crystal orientation, etc.), a critical first step in establishing the active site of 2D catalysts. The combination of TEM with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) allows both the structure and spatial chemical composition catalysts to be probed.98 High-angle annular dark-field scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM) is an especially important technique when studying catalysts at near atomic scales, as demonstrated in Fig. 15A where it was successfully applied to the study of Pt/g-C3N4 nanosheets. The bright spots corresponding to isolated Pt atoms (size less than 0.2 nm) which are uniformly dispersed on the g-C3N4 support. The Pt loading was around 0.16%.62 On increasing the Pt loading above 0.38%, some sub-nanometer clusters are formed as can be clearly seen in Fig. 15E (inset). The different dispersions of Pt on g-C3N4 nanosheets revealed by HAADF-STEM allowed the markedly different performance of the various Pt/g-C3N4 photocatalysts for water splitting into H2 and O2 to be rationalized.
 Fig. 15  (A) HAADF-STEM image of Pt–g-C3N4 nanosheets. Inset is the size distribution of the bright spots. (B) Fourier transforms (FT) of the Pt L3-edge EXAFS oscillations of Pt–g-C3N4; (C) comparison of Pt L3-edge FT-EXAFS curves between the experimental data and the fit of Pt–g-C3N4; (D) schematic models of Pt–g-C3N4; (E) H2 evolution over Pt/g-C3N4 photocatalysts with different Pt loadings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to single atom dispersed catalysts, the morphologies of ultrathin 2D nanosheets are also routinely examined using HAADF-STEM. As shown in Fig. 16A–G, HAADF-STEM revealed the (001) faceted ZnIn2S4 ultrathin nanosheets with a dihedral angle of 60° between the (100) and (010) planes.68Fig. 16B confirmed the presence of abundant vacancies, with the line intensity profiles in Fig. 16C providing firm evidence for the existence of zinc vacancies (VZn), consistent with the results obtained by electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy (Fig. 16H). Combination of these techniques thus offers a solid structural basis for exploring the relationship between Zn vacancies and CO2 photoreduction activity. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) was successfully applied to the characterization of ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets (Fig. 16I–K).99 The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern confirmed the presence of 2H and 1T phase MoS2 (Fig. 16K). HRTEM analysis also revealed the geometry of the NiO in NiO/TiO2 nanosheets heterostructures formed topologically from NiTi-LDH by calcination. The NiO nanosheets were hexagonal with dominant (110) facets (Fig. 16M–P) with a mean particle size of ∼4 nm.100,101 These studies serve to highlight the versatility of TEM-based methods for exploring the dispersion of single atoms and nanoclusters in 2D materials, as well as atom vacancies, pores, crystallographic phases, exposed facets, particle size and size distribution, and many other properties that underpin catalytic performance.
 Fig. 16  Characterization data for VZn-rich ZnIn2S4 layers: (A and B) HAADF-STEM images and (C) intensity profile corresponding to the dark cyan arrow in B; (D) the crystal structure, (E) SAED patterns; (F and G) AFM image; (H) EPR spectra of VZn-rich and VZn-poor ZnIn2S4; characterization data for mesoporous-1T-MoS2 nanosheets: (I) low-resolution STEM image; (J) high-resolution STEM image with red arrows showing pores; (K) SAED pattern corresponding to (I and L) AFM image; (M and N) TEM and HRTEM images of a NiO/TiO2 heterostructure; (O) FFT pattern of the corresponding NiO area; (P) geometrical model of NiO nanocrystal. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68, 99 and 101, copyright 2016, 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) mapping under STEM mode is also invaluable for identifying the element distribution and valence states in catalysts. Iridium M-edge and oxygen K-edge EELS for various used Ir/CeO2 nanoparticle catalysts are shown in Fig. 17.102 For the used 5 wt% Ir/CeO2 (denoted as 5Ir/Ce-used), a weak Ir M4,5-edge and O K-edge signal were observed by EELS (Fig. 17E and F, respectively), consistent with an IrOx species as confirmed by EXAFS (Fig. 17A). Conversely, for a used 20 wt% Ir/CeO2 catalyst (denoted as 20Ir/Ce) metallic Ir nanoparticles were the dominant species (giving a strong Ir M4,5-edge EELS signal and no O K-edge EELS signal). EXAFS also confirmed that metallic Ir was the dominant species on the surface of 20-Ir/Ce-used (Fig. 17A). For CO2 hydrogenation to CO or CH4, the optimum iridium loading was found to be 20 wt%, with IrOx/Ir identified as the active phase. Pairing EELs with EXAFS was invaluable for understanding the effect of Ir loading on the surface state of the used Ir/CeO2 catalysts.
 Fig. 17  (A) Ir L3-edge EXAFS for Ir/Ce-used catalysts with different Ir loadings. HAADF-STEM images of different Ir/Ce-used catalysts: (B) 5Ir/Ce-used, (C) 15Ir/Ce-used, and (D) 20Ir/Ce-used; (E) Ir M4,5-edge and (F) O K-edge EELS spectra for 5Ir/Ce-used and 20Ir/Ce-used catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
5.2 X-ray absorption fine spectroscopies
XAFS, including X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and EXAFS, are versatile and highly informative techniques that offer a wealth of information about metal valence states (similar to X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, XPS) and also short-range order (similar to XRD) in catalysts and 2D materials. Key structure information provided by these techniques include oxidation state, coordination number, bond lengths and atom arrangements, making these techniques particularly useful for exploring defects, strain, crystal distortions, and the effect of dopants (even at low dopant loadings, as found in single atom doped catalysts). In complex systems such as Ni, Co, Fe-containing catalysts, these techniques provide accurate information about metal oxidation state(s) (e.g. Ni2+, Ni3+ or Ni4+) which cannot be easily extracted from XPS data.

5.2.1 
            Ex situ XAFS. 
EXAFS is widely used to obtain structural information about catalysts before and after reaction. For example, ex situ Pt L3-edge EXAFS analyses on Pt/g-C3N462 show only one single sharp peak at ∼1.5 Å (Fig. 15B and C) with a coordination number of 5, indicating that Pt atoms are highly dispersed on the triazine rings of the C3N4 network, as shown in Fig. 15D. This finding was consistent with HRTEM results. The combination of HAADF-HRTEM and EXAFS thus provides convincing evidence for the successful synthesis of a highly dispersed single atom catalyst. Changes in EXAFS data before and after reaction can provide valuable, though indirect, insights about catalyst activation and deactivation. EXAFS is uniquely powerful in identifying the coordination number, shell distance, the degree of the disorder of metals in ultrathin 2D structures and also the corresponding 3D bulk counterpart. For example, through analysing the first Cu–O shell of CuCr-LDH nanosheets, a shorter Cu–O distance and lower Cu coordination number was found compared with CuCr-LDH bulk, evidence for the presence of abundant VO in the nanosheets. Furthermore, the second Cu–M (M = Cu/Cr) shell distance was reduced by about 0.2% in the nanosheets, providing evidence for a structural compression strain in the ab-plane in the CuCr-LDH nanosheets.51 This strain effect is mainly due to the surface VO, which induce severe structural distortions. Understanding the relationship between defects, structural distortions, active sites in LDH nanosheets, as a function of LDH lateral size and LDH thickness, provides a firm foundation for rationalizing the outstanding performance of LDH nanosheets in many photocatalytic reactions and beyond.103,104


5.2.2 
            In situ XAFS. 
A major advantage of XAFS over many other techniques is the fact it can be used to study catalyst structure during reaction at realistic temperatures and pressures (ultra-high vacuum (UHV) is not a necessary requirement, unlike conventional XPS). Accordingly, in situ XANES and EXAFS have been successfully used to study various gas–solid reactions (e.g. CO2 and CO hydrogenation) and also solid–liquid electrochemical reactions.105 For example, in situ Ni L-edge XANES on an amorphous NiCoFeP electrocatalyst under different oxidation potentials (Fig. 18) provided the first direct experimental evidence for the formation of Ni4+ (Fig. 18D and E), whilst also explaining how the incorporation of Co, Fe and P modulated the Ni-electronic structure to stabilize Ni4+. However, XAFS in fluorescence mode is predominantly a bulk analysis technique, and thus is not very sensitive to the structure evolution on the surface of photocatalysts which may occur during band gap excitation.106
 Fig. 18  (A) In situ experimental XAS flow cell and (B) STEM image of NiCoFeP catalyst; (C) and (D) Ni L-edge XANES of NiCoFeP amorphous catalyst under different reaction potentials and (E) the Ni4+/Ni2+ ratio vs. reaction potential. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105, copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 


5.2.3 Laser-initiated X-ray transient absorption (XTA) spectroscopy. 
XTA spectroscopy is a powerful technique for monitoring transient (ps timescales) electronic and local geometric structures of metal complexes in multicomponent photochemical reactions in solution. We will use a Co-containing molecular catalyst [(CoII(DPA-Bpy)Cl)]Cl ([CoII–Cl]+, Co(II) for short, and Bpy = bipyridine), as an example to illustrate the merits of this technique. Under light irradiation, a Co(I) intermediate can be generated from Co(II), with this intermediate being essential for the formation of Co(III)–H and thus photocatalytic H2 evolution (Fig. 19A). Whilst DFT, spectroelectrochemical methods and X-ray crystallography can reveal basic elements of this catalytic cycle, XTA allows in situ monitoring of the various transient species and their electronic/geometric structure during this photochemical reaction in aqueous solution, a massive advantage to understanding the full photocatalytic mechanism. Recently, Wu and co-workers reported the contraction of Co–N bond lengths with the in situ formation of the Co(I) intermediate responsible for H2 evolution using the XTA technique.107Fig. 19B and C show Co K-edge EXAFS spectra for Co(II) before and after laser excitation, where attention should be focused on the pre-edge feature at 7709 eV (a 1s–3d electric-quadrupole transition with some allowed electric-dipole transition in distorted octahedral Oh sites). After laser excitation, the peak ∼7709 eV increased in amplitude indicating either increased distortion at the Oh site or a change to the C4v symmetry. Peak fitting the EXAFS data revealed the first peak of a penta-coordinated Co(I) intermediate at a lower R (Fig. 19D), with a Co–N bond contraction of 0.09 ± 0.03 Å that was also evidenced in DFT calculations. Thus, XTA was able to provide fundamental new insights about the mechanism of Co-based molecular catalysts for H2 production. Similarly, XTA has been successfully applied to examine charge transfer in Pt/CdSe/CdS QDs systems.106 Pt L3 XANES under laser irradiation reveal a partial reduction of Pt resulting from photoinduced electron transfer from the QDs to Pt with a time scale of ∼65 ps, consistent with the result of ultrafast transient absorption measurements. The data provide further evidence that XTA is able to track interfacial electron transfer processes in photocatalysts. Whilst the XTA tool has been used successfully to probe mechanisms of homogeneous and heterogeneous photocatalytic water splitting systems, CO2 photoreduction has not been well-explored to date by this method. For heterogeneous catalysts systems, the XTA signal originates from the whole catalyst system, whereas light-induced catalytic processes are localized to the photocatalyst surface, thus choice of catalyst system needs to be carefully considered for XTA. Further, since photoinduced charge transfer processes are typically on ps time scales, the time resolution of XTA represents one limitation of this technique.
 Fig. 19  (A) The electron transfer steps of Co and Ru complexes in photocatalytic H2 evolution; Co transient X-ray absorption spectra showing (B) normalized XANES with laser-on (red) and laser-off (black) at the Co K-edge; (C) difference spectrum; and (D) Fourier transform of the reconstructed Co(I) EXAFS and the Co(II) ground state together with the fit of the first coordination shell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 

5.3 
          In situ ESR
ESR is commonly used to investigate the formation of active radicals formed on the surface of photocatalysts during reaction, providing valuable fingerprinting information about trapped electrons and surface vacancies (such as VO108 or Ti3+,109 Ni3+,110 Zn+,111–114etc.) in hydroxide,109 oxides, carbon-based materials, etc.115,116 For example, oxygen defects can be readily detected in ZnAl-LDH nanosheets with lateral size 40 nm and thickness of 2.7 nm by ESR.50 An ESR signal at g = 1.998 can be readily assigned to an electron trapped around a Zn site near VO in the form of Zn+–VO complex (Fig. 20A). Conversely, the defect-free ZnAl-LDH bulk counterpart (4.5 μm in lateral size and 210 nm in thickness) is ESR silent. Since ZnAl-LDH is UV responsive material, UV-vis irradiation enhances the ESR signal of ZnAl-LDH nanosheets, suggesting an increase in the concentration of the Zn+–VO complex. The peak around 2.004 of bulk ZnAl-LDH is due to O2− ions formed through interaction between O2 and photoexcited electrons of LDH (Fig. 20B). Results demonstrate that in situ ESR thus offers a powerful tool for identifying defects, paramagnetic metal cations and O2-derived anions formed in ultrathin photocatalysts.117
 Fig. 20  ESR spectra of (A) ZnAl-LDH nanosheets and (B) bulk ZnAl-LDH under different conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
5.4 
          In situ XPS
XPS using a synchrotron light source can provide invaluable information about photoinduced charge transfer on the surface of photocatalysts, demonstrated by the pioneering studies reported by Bi and co-workers.118 A number of TiO2-based materials were studied to understand their charge separation properties and also migration direction of photoinduced charges. Firstly, core-level Ti 2p spectra were collected to establish the valence state of Ti cations in the ground state, as shown in Fig. 21A and B. Excited state spectra revealing the photo-induced charge transfer and separation processes in the TiO2 photocatalysts were then probed using synchrotron illumination XPS. Fig. 21B shows a schematic diagram for the photoinduced electron transfer from the VB to the CB, with the holes left behind on the VB. For the pure (001)-faceted anatase TiO2 (Fig. 21C), no obvious shift of the Ti 2p peaks were detected with/without light. However, for an HF-etched TiO2 photocatalyst there was an obvious shift in the position of the Ti 2p peaks to higher binding energies, whilst the O 1s spectra shifted to lower binding energies under UV irradiation. On turning the UV source off, the Ti 2p and O 1s peaks reverted to their original positions (Fig. 21D). The in situ XPS results revealed that etching TiO2 facilitates photo-induced charge separation and transfer under UV, involving electrons transfer to O atoms and holes transfer to Ti atoms (Fig. 21E). Further, in situ XPS has also been used to track the surface transformations of supported Ni oxides to Ni metal during heating in a H2 atmosphere at temperatures from 25–600 °C by using NiAl-LDH nanosheets as precursor. Starting with a NiO–Al2O3 mixed metal oxide, a metallic Ni/NiO heterostructure containing metallic Ni first appeared around 475 °C (Fig. 21F),37 with metallic Ni becoming the dominant Ni species at higher temperatures. Results suggest that XPS also should be capable of studying COx reduction reactions under real reaction atmospheres (such as like CO and H2). The recent advent of ambient pressure XPS is expected to encourage the much wider use of in situ XPS for the study of catalytic and photocatalytic reactions under ‘real-world’ conditions of temperature and pressure.
 Fig. 21  (A) Illustration of synchronous illumination XPS technique and (B) corresponding electron density variations. XPS spectra for (C) intact-, and (D) etched-TiO2, respectively; (E) the bulk atomic structural model of an anatase TiO2 crystal; (F) in situ XPS spectra of NiAl-MMO reduction by H2 under different temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society and ref. 37, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
5.5 Femtosecond transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy, positron annihilation spectroscopy (PAS) and fluorescence spectroscopy
The electron–hole pair recombination kinetics of semiconductor photocatalysts is routinely studied by femtosecond transient-absorption (pump–probe) spectroscopic measurements and fluorescence spectroscopy. Following 400 nm laser excitation, bare CdSe/CdS QDs recover only ∼12.5% within 100 ps, indicating long-lived excitons and weak exciton–exciton annihilation (Fig. 22A and B).106 For Pt/CdSe/CdS, an improved 66.5% recovery is observed within a 100 ps time scale, with an amplitude-weighted electron transfer time of ∼65 ps (Fig. 22C). The TA spectroscopy and XTA results (Fig. 19B) thus provide useful information about interparticle electronic communication, and confirm the relatively sluggish kinetics of interparticle electron transfer processes.
 Fig. 22  (A) Scheme for Pt/CdSe/CdS QDs system used for photocatalytic water splitting; (B) femtosecond TA spectra of the Pt/CdSe/CdS QDs system; (C) comparison of the TA kinetics of CdSe/CdS QDs excited state with/without Pt nanoparticles; TA spectra between pump and probe pulses of the In2O3−xOHx, samples excited with near band gap (405 nm) light under (D) Ar, (E) CO2 and (F) H2 atmosphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society and ref. 120, copyright 2016, National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
TA spectroscopy has also been successfully applied in the characterization of various 2D materials, including ZnInS2 nanosheets with different vacancy types. Through hydrothermal synthesis, O-doped ZnInS2 nanosheets can be obtained by partial replacement of S atoms. TAS revealed an average lifetime of ∼110 ps for the charge separation inside the O-doped nanosheets, 1.53 times longer than that of pristine ZnInS2 nanosheets (∼72 ps). The enhanced e/h separation can be explained by the presence of new oxygen defect states, that acted as new trap states in the band structure, providing more photoinduced electrons for photocatalysis.119 Further, through controlling the hydrothermal reaction temperature, two ZnIn2S4 samples of atomic thickness were obtained with different Zn vacancy (VZn) concentrations.68 TAS showed a decay component time (around ∼4 ns) for VZn-rich nanosheets, 1.7 times longer than that of the VZn-poor nanosheets. The increased lifetime was attributed to long-lived photoinduced electrons trapped by VZn, thereby providing more electrons for CO2 photoreduction.
Ozin and co-workers120 used TA spectroscopy to probe the excited state carrier dynamics of In2O3−xOHx containing defects, and to track the interaction between the photoinduced charges in different gas surroundings (O2, Ar, H2, CO2) (Fig. 22D–F). Indium oxide has an electron-rich surface, and gases such as O2 (in air) are good electron acceptors, resulting in a strong interaction that suppressed charge recombination in In2O3−xOHx. Non-interacting gases such as Ar resulted in faster decay processes, whereas CO2 binds weakly to the surface of defected indium oxide to form carbonate and bicarbonate species. These weekly adsorbed species impacted the relaxation dynamics by altering the energetics of the surface. H2 interacted strongly with the indium oxide surface, exhibiting a substantial positive effect on the charge carrier relaxation dynamics, both in the near-IR and the visible regions of the spectra. TA spectroscopy is therefore very useful for exploring the relationship between the defect concentration and the photoinduced charge carrier lifetimes, which is of particular importance to photocatalytic CO2 reduction from a carrier dynamics viewpoint.
PAS provides important information about the types and amounts of defects in a semiconductor. PAS was used successfully to identify defects in ultrafine Bi-containing nanosheets (BiOCl121 and BiVO4122etc.).11,12 For o-BiVO4 atomic layers, PAS confirmed the presence of vanadium vacancies (Vv) with a lifetime of ∼200 ps, with the different defect concentrations found depending on the heating conditions (Fig. 23A–C). Surface photovoltage (SPV) spectroscopy and time-resolved fluorescence emission decay spectra were also performed to track the dynamics of the photoinduced charge carriers. The enhanced SPV intensity for defect-containing BiVO4 nanosheets indicates more efficient separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs (Fig. 23D). Further, the longer fluorescence lifetime (143.6 ns) of defect-rich BiVO4 confirmed that the presence of Vv could effectively facilitate the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes (Fig. 23E). Accordingly, defect-rich BiVO4 nanosheets exhibited superior performance to BiVO4 nanosheets for CO2 photoreduction to methanol (398.3 μmol g−1 h−1 with a quantum efficiency of 5.96% at 350 nm).122 The combination of the above techniques permits detailed understanding of the structure–activity relationship that underpins the CO2 reduction reaction, offering a solid basis for the future rational design of even more efficient photocatalysts.
 Fig. 23  Defect characterization for Vv-rich and Vv-poor o-BiVO4 atomic layers. (A) Positron lifetime spectra; (B and C) schematic representation of trapped positrons; (D) SPV spectra and (inset) corresponding phase spectra; (E) time-resolved fluorescence emission decay spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
5.6 
          In situ diffuse reflectance Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy
Whilst X-ray techniques can provide detailed information about surface and bulk catalyst compositions and structures, they are of limited value for the study of reaction intermediates and reaction pathways on surfaces. In situ FTIR is a very powerful tool for exploring the surface intermediates and reaction pathways via monitoring the change with time of particular functional groups on the catalyst surface under light irradiation or thermal heating conditions. Fig. 24 shows the successful application of in situ FTIR to study the reaction of CO2 and H2O over SnS2 catalysts, allowing insights into the mechanism of the catalytic reaction.
 Fig. 24  (A–C) In situ FTIR spectra for the co-adsorption of CO2 and H2O vapor on the mildly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers; (A) 3D color surface showing changes in absorption bands with time (B) 2D contour map corresponding to the line plots in (C); (D and E) expanded views of selected areas in (C); (F) schematic representation of the CO2 photoreduction mechanism on the mildly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
For CO2 photoreduction over the SnS2/SnO2 heterostructure,88 IR peaks appear around 1550 cm−1 and 1200 cm−1 under light irradiation, which can readily be assigned to surface COOH* groups, a key intermediate in CO2 reduction to CO. Monodentate carbonate (m-CO32−) groups were also identified (Fig. 24A–E). Based on the in situ FTIR data, a probable mechanism for CO2 photoreduction over the SnS2/SnO2 heterostructure was developed (Fig. 24F). Firstly, adsorbed CO2 is reduced by protons produced by the splitting of H2O, leading to the formation of the key COOH* intermediate, which then reacts with a further proton to give CO* and water, with the CO* then desorbing from the catalyst surface. Thus FTIR allowed the CO2 reduction pathway to be firmly established, which guided the further DFT calculation to explore the relationship between the structure and activity.
IR spectroscopy was recently successfully applied to electrocatalytic reduction of another small molecule (i.e. N2) over Au and Pt surfaces.123 Traditionally, N2 reduction to NH3 was considered to occur via three reaction pathway (termed distal, alternating or enzymatic mechanisms), all involving 6-proton and 6-electron hydrogenation processes (Fig. 25A).124 The distal process releases NH3 after 4 steps with protonation occurring only at the distal-N site (followed by a further release of NH3 in step 7), whereas for the alternating and enzymatic pathways both N atoms are protonated as the cycle proceeds, resulting in the release of NH3 in the 6th and 7th steps. During the electroreduction of N2 over an Au surface, IR peaks were observed at 1453 cm−1, 1298 cm−1 and 1109 cm−1, associated with vibrational modes of surface adsorbed *N2Hy (1 < y < 4) (Fig. 25B). Since hydrazine (N2H4) has been reported as a byproduct of N2 reduction on Au surfaces in KOH solution, the alternating pathway was deemed most plausible for the N2 electroreduction process (Fig. 25C). Recent advances in operando XANES, IR and Raman spectroscopy have allowed exploration of thermal CO2 methanation processes over Ru loaded oxygen-vacancy-containing CeO2.125 Steady-state isotope transient kinetic analysis (SSITKA) coupled with in situ diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) identified a formate route during CO2 hydrogenation, with defects catalyzing formate dissociation to methanol which is then hydrogenated to methane. This operando strategy allows rapid exploration of structure–activity relationships for thermal CO2 hydrogenation catalysts and beyond.126
 Fig. 25  (A) Schematic depiction of the three reaction pathways for conversion of N2 to NH3 catalyzed by FeN3–graphene. The dotted arrow represents a hybrid path between the distal and alternating pathways; (B) FTIR spectra during the first segment from 0.4 to −0.5 V on the Au film electrode in a N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution; (C) the proposed N2 electroreduction pathway. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Step-scan Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy with the submicrosecond time resolution is particularly advantageous for tracking reaction intermediates. Recently, the technique was successfully applied to measure the kinetics of NOx removal with CO over Ag/Al2O3 catalysts.127 Although a reaction mechanism involving –CN and –NCO intermediates has been proposed, no direct evidence for these intermediates had been reported due to the short lifetimes of the intermediates. Using real-time step-scan IR, peaks at 2130, 2205 and 2265 cm−1 were observed and assigned to Ag–CN, Ag–CN–Al and Al–NCO intermediates, respectively. The lifetime of each intermediate was 2, 5 and 12 μs, respectively (Fig. 26A and B). Further, the detection of Ag–CN–Al as a key intermediate enabled the full mechanism for the reaction to be established, which emphasizes the key role of the interfaces between the Ag clusters and the alumina support in effective NOx removal. This also explains why the NOx reaction is sensitive to the size of the Ag clusters, with highest rates seen at small cluster sizes (Fig. 26C). IR as a versatile, cheap and easy to use tool thus has great potential in the study the photo/thermal/electro-catalysis related to CO2, CO, N2 and NOx reduction under gaseous or liquid environments. The coupling of IR with other techniques to allow operando studies is a current research focus.
 Fig. 26  (A) IR spectra for the reaction of CO and NO on an alumina supported silver catalyst during the first 7 μs; (B) time traces for the FTIR bands associated with adsorbed cyanide (green), isocyanates (blue), and a short-lived bridging intermediate (red); (C) proposed reaction mechanism for the NOx reaction on Ag/Al2O3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127, copyright 2009, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
5.7 DFT and excited time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT)
DFT calculations have been used extensively to probe electronic structure of catalysts with different morphologies (thickness, size, exposed facets, defects, and crystal orientation). Indeed, DFT calculations are now indispensable to the understanding of the effect of structural modifications on semiconductor band gaps, defect states, band edges, charge distribution, adsorption energies, and so forth. Results of DFT calculations thus complement experimental data collected from the same materials (such as UV-vis, XANES and EXAFS, HRTEM, PAS, catalytic tests), thus allowing comprehensive structure–activity relationships to be developed.
Consider BN-doped graphene catalysts as an example.128 Through preciously controlling the order of heteroatom (B, N) doping, a series of BN-doped graphene catalysts were obtained with the structure of graphene and in-plane h-BN domains (denoted as BN-G, Fig. 27A). B-Doped, N-doped, and B, N co-doped graphene (denoted as B-G, N-G, and B,N-G, respectively) were also synthesized. Amongst these catalysts, the BN-G catalysts exhibited a H2 production rate ∼10 times higher than the others materials in photocatalytic H2 evolution. ESR and periodic on/off photocurrent density measurements confirmed that BN-G was very efficient in generating photoinduced charges under light irradiation. However, the photoexcitation mechanism and band structure remained unclear. With the assistance of DFT calculations, the band gap of BN-G was calculated to be ∼2.8 eV (Fig. 27B), much larger than graphene (∼0 eV) and the other photocatalysts (B-G, N-G, and B,N-G all had a band gap around 1.4 eV due to a random doping pattern) (Fig. 27C). The unique doping pattern of BN-doped graphene with its h-BN domains played a key role in the band gap widening as is clearly seen from DFT results. The widening of the band gap of graphene was proposed to improve electron and hole pair separation, explaining the increased photocatalytic H2 evolution.
 Fig. 27  (A) Atomic structure model; (B) band structure; (C) calculated band gaps of G, B-G, N-G, B,N-G, BN-G, and h-BN; (D) calculated DOS and (E) band alignment of the (010), (110), and (001) facets of C-doped Bi3O4Cl; (F) N–N distance of free N2, N2 on CuCr–VO, N2 on CuCr–VO-strain, N2H2 and N2H4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society, and ref. 51 and 69, copyright 2016, 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to exploring the band gap structure of doped or defect-containing-photocatalysts, DFT can also be used to explore the reactivity of different exposed facets of semiconductor, as shown in Fig. 27D and E for C-doped BiOCl catalysts. Through density of states (DOS) calculations, the relative reduction/oxidation ability of different exposed facets can be probed, which can then be used to rationalize the relative activity of photocatalysts with different morphologies and proportions of each kind of facet.69 Further, the electronic properties of different surfaces, together with surface and bulk modifications resulting from different types of defect (anion or metal-type vacancy), layer stacking, doping amount, are not easily accessed by experiment, though can be obtained quite easily by DFT calculation. Since catalysis is primarily a surface process, DFT also provides valuable insights about the adsorption ability of molecules (including CO, CO2 and H2O) on different catalyst surfaces (like defective/defect-free surface), which is especially important when comparing stoichiometric and oxygen defect containing surfaces. Taking photocatalytic CO2 reduction on LDH surfaces as an example,50 a defective LDH surface (representing ultrathin LDH nanosheets) possessing abundant VO exerted the stronger adsorption energies for both CO2 and H2O compared with defect-free surfaces (representing the defect-free bulk LDH). The stronger adsorption allows more efficient photoinduced electron transfer from ultrathin LDH nanosheets to the adsorbates, explaining in part the enhanced photocatalytic activity of VO-rich LDH nanosheets for CO2 reduction to CO. Similar results were found for N2 photoreduction to NH3 with water over LDH nanosheets rich in VO compared, which displayed much higher activity than the bulk LDH counterpart.51 DFT calculations revealed a lengthening and weakening of the dinitrogen triple bond following adsorption on a defective LDH layer (Fig. 27F). However, it should be noted that the reactant adsorption step is just one step in often complex catalytic pathways to products and generally not the rate determining step. Thus, a degree of caution is required when discussing reactant adsorption energies in the context of catalytic and photocatalytic processes. Thermodynamic calculations, taking into account key reaction intermediates and energy barriers, are also needed.
Very recently, ground state calculations on co-catalysts (e.g. Pt, Ti3C) have attracted attention. Pt nanoparticles are widely used as co-catalysts in semiconductor photocatalysis, especially for H2 evolution. Zhang and co-workers examined the effect of Pt nanoparticle size on the performance of Pt/TiO2–SiO2 photocatalysts for CO2 reduction to CH4, a reaction in which H2 is evolved via a competitive reaction pathway.129 Small Pt nanoparticles (∼1.8 nm), due to a high concentration of low-coordination sites (corners, edge sites), favor both CO2 reduction to CH4 (39.1%) and H2 (58.7%), whereas larger Pt nanoparticles (∼7 nm) with a high proportion of terrace sites displayed superior selectivity to CH4 (79.1%) with an obvious suppression of H2 evolution. DFT calculations were used to try and rationalize the dependence of the reaction selectivity on Pt nanoparticle size. A Pt55 cluster was modelled (Fig. 28A) to represent the 1.8 nm Pt nanoparticles with a high proportion of low coordination sites, and a Pt(111) surface was used to represent the 7 nm nanoparticles whose surface was dominated by terrace sites (Fig. 28C). Gibbs free energy diagrams were then calculated for CO2 reduction to CO and CH4, and also the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). For the hydrogenation process, the hydrogenation step from *CO to *COH and subsequently to *CHOH had the highest energy barrier can thus be regarded as the rate determining step (Fig. 28B). In the case of Pt(111), the energy barrier of 0.74 eV was lower than that for Pt55 (0.96 eV), implying that Pt(111) strongly favors CO2 reduction to CH4, which was also evidenced by a high energy barrier for H2 evolution on the same surface (Fig. 28D). The DFT data thus did an excellent job in explaining the differences in the product selectivities of the Pt nanoparticle-containing photocatalysts for CO2 photoreduction. In photocatalytic CO2 reduction, the Pt co-catalysts accept an electron from the VB of a semiconductor and transfer that electron to adsorbed CO2.
 Fig. 28  The adsorption energy of CO on (A) a Pt55 cluster and (C) Pt(111) surface; (B) calculated free energy diagram for CO2 reduction to CH4 and (D) calculated free energy diagram for H+ reduction to H2 by thermal/chemical model on Pt(111) and Pt55; (E) the mechanism of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction with water on Pt/carbon-coated-In2O3; (F) DFT-calculated relative energy profiles for the proton reduction into H2 and proton transfer to an O atom of CO2 on Pt2/pure-In2O3 and Pt2/carbon-coated In2O3; (G) structure models and (H) TDDFT-calculated absorption spectra of In2O3−x(OH)y; (I) visualization of the transition densities of S1 (HOMO to LUMO) and (J) illustration of the activation energy barriers for the RWGS under ground state (in the dark) and excited state (band gap excited) regimes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129, copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group and ref. 131 and 132, copyright 2017, 2016, American Chemical Society. 
DFT calculations are based on a ground state configuration and have been exhaustively used to establish structure–activity in thermal/photothermal and electrocatalysts, notably in the computation of free energy diagrams to establish volcano-shaped plot for HER and CO2 reduction, as pioneered by Norskov.130 However, in photocatalysis the surface of catalysts and the reaction intermediates are all in exited states, a regime where DFT calculations don’t perform well. Software needed to model such excited state surfaces is not yet commercially available and restricts the potential of DFT methods for modelling photo-induced catalytic reactions.
Whilst photoinduced electrons and holes cannot be calculated using conventional ground DFT, the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of proton reduction to H2 over photoexcited Pt-loaded In2O3 with/without carbon coating can be calculated, as reported by Yu and co-workers131 (Fig. 28E). For Pt loaded pure In2O3 (denoted as Pt2/P-In2O3), H2 formation is relatively easy with an energy barrier of 0.68 eV compared with proton transfer to CO2 with a barrier of 0.95 eV, explaining the high selectivity to H2 during CO2 photoreduction. For Pt loaded carbon-coated In2O3 systems (denoted as Pt2/C-In2O3), a low barrier of 0.52 eV was found for proton transfer to CO2 with a higher barrier of 0.74 eV for proton transfer to form H2 (Fig. 28F). The DFT data are thus in good agreement with the experiment which revealed a high selectivity to CH4 and CO over Pt2/C-In2O3. Although the related photo-induced reaction pathway for CO2 reduction has not yet been obtained, this proton transfer modelling during photocatalysis offers valuable insights about the mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 reduction.
Very recently, time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT)132 or constrained DFT96 as a formally exact treatment of electronic excited states has emerged for modelling complex photocatalytic systems, and was applied successfully to study CO2 hydrogenation into CO over InO(OH) systems, and FT synthesis over Fe/Fe3O4 heterostructured photocatalyst, etc.96,132 Using the NWChem package, TD-DFT-calculated absorption spectra for In2O3−x(OH)y were obtained (Fig. 28G–J), with the excitation energy, oscillator strengths (OS) and dominant orbital transitions from ground to excited electronic states visualized using the software (Fig. 28I). The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of In2O3−x(OH)y is mainly composed of s and p orbitals of indium, whereas the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and LUMO+1/2 are associated with s orbitals of the O atoms/OH groups. During photoexcitation, photoinduced charges move from the In atom to the bonding electron-rich OH species (as is clearly seen from the visualisations), leading to more Lewis acid sites and frustrated Lewis pairs (FLP) on the In2O3−x(OH)y surface. Compared with the ground state, the photoexcited state (ES) with the increased FLPs acts to lower the activation barrier for CO2 reduction by ∼20 kJ mol−1 (Fig. 28J), a finding well-supported by experiment results.133 TD-DFT is thus extremely useful for gaining deeper insights about photocatalytic mechanisms under the excited state.
In general, DFT and TD-DFT/constrained DFT calculations provide a robust theoretical platform for correlating atomic structure, defect type, strain effects, adsorption ability, charge transfer and the physical properties of catalysts and photocatalysts with their performance. They also allow researchers to overcome experimental and characterization limitations that might otherwise handicap catalyst development, by suggesting likely catalysts modifications that will benefit a particular reaction. It is expected that the use of DFT calculations for catalyst and photocatalyst screening, performance optimization and new catalyst design will increase significantly in the near future.
6. 2D and 2D-related materials for solar-driven COx conversion
6.1 Metal-containing catalysts

6.1.1 Transition metal hydroxides (TMH). 
1. LDH-based photocatalysts for CO2 conversion with H2O. 
LDH nanosheet photocatalysts show great promise for CO2 reduction, offering the following advantages: (1) a high sorption ability for CO2 due to the abundance of surface OH groups on the positively charged sheets, as well as the interlayer region which can accommodate various anions. The sorption capacity of LDH for CO2 (∼1 mmol gsorbent−1) is comparable to zeolites (1–3 mmol gsorbent−1), and superior to many other layered materials such as montmorillonites (∼0.5 mmol gsorbent−1). For ZnAl-LDH, the Zn/Al ratio strongly influences the CO2 adsorption ability, ranging from 0.083 per metal for [Zn0.83Al0.17(OH)2](CO32−)0.083 to 0.25 per metal for [Zn0.5Al0.5(OH)2](CO32−)0.25; (2) the tunable semiconductor properties for solar-energy utilization that is achievable by introducing particular photoactive metal cations (such as Zn, Ga, Ti) into the LDH structure. The inclusion of various other divalent and trivalent cations of Ni, Co, In, Cr, etc. can further modify the electronic structure of LDH-based photocatalysts, whilst these and other metal cations (in the form of negatively charged ions with ligands) can also be intercalated between the LDH sheets to act as photosensitizers or electronic promoters for further incremental gains in catalytic performance.
The first research into LDH materials as photocatalysts was by the Garcia group.134 They studied the effect of “doping” Zn-based LDHs with photoactive metal cations such as Cr, Ti and Ce to produce ZnCr, ZnTi and ZnCe-LDH, respectively. The concentration of the “doped” second metal (like Cr) in LDH could be tuned (from Cr/Zn 1:16 to 1:1) whilst preserving the layered structure. By virtue of the d–d transitions of Cr, the UV-vis absorption of the LDHs photocatalysts could be extended from the <400 nm for ZnAl-LDH to 700 nm for ZnCr-LDH. For ZnCr-LDH, photocatalytic water oxidation activity was observed up to 570 nm, exhibiting in particular excellent photocatalytic oxygen evolution performance. Subsequently, NiTi-LDH,49,135 ZnTi-LDH,109 various Cr-containing LDH,86 LDH/layered TiO2 hybrid nanocomposites,136,137 and ZnO@LDH arrays138 have been pursued and have displayed good performance in photo(electro)catalytic water splitting and dye degradation.41
The first report on CO2 photoreduction using LDHs was by the Izumi group.139 They examined CO2 hydrogenation using ZnAl/Ga-LDH and ZnCuGa-LDH (Fig. 29A), identifying CO or CH3OH as the main reaction products. Interestingly, ZnAl-LDH was active for CO evolution with 94 mol% selectivity at 0.16% conversion, whereas ZnCuGa-LDH afforded CH3OH with a selectivity of 68 mol% at 0.03% conversion. The distribution of products also depended on the excitation wavelength used in the photoreaction. As shown in Fig. 29B and C, ZnGa-LDH afforded CO as the main product when the excitation wavelength was >320 nm, whereas ZnCuGa-LDH showed a high selectivity to CH3OH selectivity up to 420 nm with CO becoming the main product at longer excitation wavelengths up to 480 nm. The selectivity to CO and CH3OH was thus dependent on the LDH metal cation composition and the excitation wavelength. A plausible reaction mechanism was proposed based on traditional understanding of CO2 reduction processes (Fig. 29D).
 Fig. 29  (A) Structure of LDH; (B) diffuse reflectance UV-visible absorption spectra of (a) ZnAl-LDH, (b) CuZnAl-LDH, (c) ZnGa-LDH, (d) CuZnGa-LDH; (C) dependence of formation rate of CH3OH and CO on the excitation wavelength for ZnGa-LDH and CuZnGa-LDH. The reactant gas contained CO2 and H2; (D) proposed photocatalytic cycle of CO2 reduction to methanol or CO over ZnCuGa-LDH catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139, copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
These early works laid the platform for many subsequent works targeting improved LDH-photocatalysts for CO2 photoreduction. A composite photocatalyst WO3–CuZnGa-LDH was successfully fabricated and assimilated into a reverse polymer electrolyte photo fuel cell to increase the efficiency of CO2 reduction.140 In addition, co-catalyst modified LDH materials (where the co-catalyst is one of Pt, Pd, Au or Cu2O)141 have been explored to improve the efficiency of CO2 reduction or to tune the product selectivity.142
Current research is aimed at finding other metal-containing LDH that could be used for CO2 photoreduction (i.e. alternatives to the widely studied Cu, Zn, Ga-based LDH systems). MgAl-LDH was found to be superior to most other earth abundant element LDH systems (NiAl-LDH, ZnAl-LDH, ZnCr-LDH), which can be attributed to the strong CO2 adsorption ability of Mg-based LDH systems. Tanaka and co-workers recently synthesized a range of Mg/Zn/Ni–Al/Ga/In-LDH systems and evaluated their performance.143 Almost all were active for CO2 photoreduction to CO, with activities falling in the range 0.6 μmol g−1 h−1 for ZnIn-LDH to 3.6 μmol g−1 h−1 for NiIn-LDH in the absence of any noble metal co-catalyst or sacrificial agent (Fig. 30). Interestingly, related layered compounds such as Mg(OH)2 and In(OH)3 photocatalysts showed almost negligible CO evolution (less than 0.3 μmol g−1 h−1) compared with MgIn-LDH (3.2 μmol g−1 h−1). The high activity of MgIn-LDH can thus be attributed to the homogeneous cation dispersion in the LDH structure which allows improved separation of photo-induced electron–hole pairs. The following mechanism was proposed for CO2 reduction to CO over LDH photocatalysts.Oxidation: H2O → 1/2O2 + 2H+ + 2e−Reduction: CO2 + 2e− + 2H+ → CO + H2OOverall: CO2 → CO + 1/2O2
 Fig. 30  Yields of O2 and CO for the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 in water over various LDH sheets photocatalysts under UV-vis excitation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143, copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. 
The crystallinity of LDH photocatalysts is also important for CO2 photoreduction. LDH materials typically undergo a special “reconstruction effect”.144 Calcination of LDHs at high temperature leads to collapse of the LDH structure and the formation of porous mixed metal oxide materials, which on rehydration revert to the LDH structure. Tanaka compared fresh MgIn-LDH with MgIn-LDH obtained by the calcination-rehydration approach. The reconstructed MgIn-LDH offered a lower activity for CO2 photoreduction (1.5 μmol g−1 h−1) compared with fresh MgIn-LDH (3.2 μmol g−1 h−1), which was rationalized in terms of the lower crystallinity of the reconstructed sample which reduced the migration efficiency of photo-induced e–h pairs. Various other hybrid systems such as Pd/C3N4/LDH,145 and C3N4/NiFe-LDH146 have been synthesized to further increase the activity for CO2 photoreduction. Detailed understanding and performance optimization of LDH-based photocatalysts is challenging, due to interdependent effects of morphology, size, surface defects and composition on light absorption, charge separation, charge migration efficiency and reactant adsorption.
Synthetic advances and the introduction of new techniques for materials characterization at the atomic level allow detailed exploration of structure–function relationships that underpin photo/electro/thermal catalysis. Techniques such as in situ XANES/EXAFS, in situ HRTEM, supported by DFT calculations, deepen understanding of the catalysts and their electronic structure, offering a firm framework for rational catalyst design.11 During photocatalytic reactions such as CO2 reduction, a photocatalyst absorbs photons with E > Eg to create e–h pairs, which under ideal conditions can be quickly separated and transported to the surface of photocatalyst to drive CO2 photoreduction (and typically in parallel water oxidation). Effective adsorption of CO2 (and water) at the “active sites” is needed to maximize the probability of the migrating electrons and holes reacting with the adsorbates. Inspired by natural catalyst systems, especially enzymes with coordinately unsaturated metal sites, research in the field of photocatalysis is increasingly placing emphasis on the development of materials exposing “coordinately unsaturated metal sites”, which frequently are located in abundance at the catalyst surface (i.e. edge, corner, facet or point defects). In the absence of surface defects, there will be little or no interaction between a photocatalyst and reactants. Accordingly, defect-engineered semiconductor photocatalysts with exposed facets, including TiO2,147 ZnO148 and BiOCl149 and VO-doped In2O3,108 WO354etc., demonstrate improved photocatalytic performance compared with their bulk counterpart without obvious defects.
Whilst Zn-containing LDHs are known to be active for the photoreduction of CO2 to CO, the influence of morphology and surface states (including defects) has until quite recently been a black box. Recent research by Zhao and co-workers has provided useful insights into the effect of LDH morphology on photocatalytic activity. A series of ZnAl-LDH photocatalysts with well-defined size and thickness were successfully synthesized.50 Using XAFS and ESR measurements, the LDH nanosheets with thickness below 5 nm were found to contain severe structural distortions and an abundance of VO, creating coordinatively unsaturated Zn defects (Zn+ sites with a single 4s electron), which acted as the active site for electron transfer to CO2. The ZnAl-LDH nanosheets with thickness less than 5 nm were active for CO2 reduction to CO in the presence of water vapour, affording a CO evolution rate of 7.6 μmol g−1 h−1. By comparison, a bulk ZnAl-LDH counterpart with a size of 4 μm and thickness ∼250 nm was largely inactive for CO2 reduction. DFT was used to examine the electronic structure of ZnAl-LDH nanosheets containing VO. A new defect level appeared in the band gap of ZnAl-LDH on introducing VO, confirming the existence of Zn+–VO complex which acted as the electron trapping site for CO2 reduction. This work demonstrates that coordinatively unsaturated Zn-containing LDHs are a promising materials for CO2 photoreduction. VO defect engineering by reducing LDH nanosheet thicknesses down to a few nanometers, and lateral sizes to less than 20 nm, appears a simple and effective strategy for introducing coordinatively unsaturated metal cations in LDH photocatalysts.
Various other LDH nanosheet photocatalysts have been developed for water splitting, CO2 photoreduction and N2 fixation, including ZnCr-LDH/layered titanate,136,137 NiTi-LDH,49 ZnTi-LDH,109,150 CoFe-LDH, CuCr-LDH,51 CoAl-LDH nanosheet,151 and Cu2O-loaded ZnCr-LDH.141 The systems all benefit from surface defects such as VO or metal-vacancies.152 Further improvements in the performance of LDH based photocatalysts for CO2 reduction are very possible, though two key aspects of LDH photocatalysis need clarification:
(1) Many researchers regard LDH materials as a metal-to-metal charge-transfer (MMCT) system,153,154 thus traditional semiconductor-based theory may not be suitable for such materials. Al-containing binary LDH systems such as ZnAl-LDH may can be considered as models in this discussion since there is no contribution by Al to the charge transfer. Further, electronic excitation in CuCr-LDH or NiTi-LDH systems under UV-vis or visible light needs further investigation, to clarify the impact of d–d transitions on light absorption and subsequent photoreactions. Finally, the relationship between charge separation and morphology/exposed crystal facets of LDH needs further exploration
(2) Although the VO in LDH may serve as the adsorption site for CO2, metal-vacancies are inevitably formed in LDH nanosheets. Identifying the real “active site” and location (edge or plane) for CO2 reduction requires further thought. Ascertaining reaction mechanisms and CO2 reduction pathways needs special attention over the next decade to guide large-scale technology development.
2. TMH and TMH-driven catalysts for solar CO2 hydrogenation. 
Although CO2 photoreduction using H2O as reduction agent has great potential, the reaction rates are typically on the order of 1–10 μmol g−1 h−1 for even the best photocatalysts (Table 2), values far lower than those realized in practical thermal catalytic CO2 reduction process (rates of 10–1000 mmol g−1 h−1,155 a gap of 4–6 orders of magnitude). The much lower rates for photocatalysis are due to the slow kinetics of water oxidation needed release for protons to drive the CO2 hydrogenation process. Therefore, an alternative approach for CO2 reduction is to use H2 instead of H2O as the reducing agent, thereby allowing much faster CO2 hydrogenation. However, in traditional thermal catalysis high temperatures (250–400 °C) and pressures (typically 2–5 MPa) are need to break the H–H bond on the most catalysts.20 Thus, using H2 as a hydrogenating agent in solar-driven photocatalytic CO2 reduction is not particularly efficient. However, photocatalysis is not the only means of solar energy utilization. Recent research has focused on photothermal catalysis as a means of driving CO2 hydrogenation with H2, wherein surface plasmon excitation of supported metal nanoparticles causes rapid catalyst heating to several hundred degrees (i.e. into the regime where conventional thermal catalysts operate). Ye and co-workers reported that black-colored Group VIII metals (Ru, Rh, Fe, Co, Ni, etc.) loaded on Al2O3 were particularly active for photothermal conversion of CO2 with H2, yielding CH4 or CO with bed temperature as high as 400 °C reached after 10 min light excitation.156 Photothermal catalysis offers enormous potential for CO2 reduction, and is now actively being pursued by many groups.157
Table 2 Summarized literature data for 2D-related catalysts in solar-driven CO2 reduction




Catalyst
Feeds (CO2 + H2O/H2)

P (MPa)

T (°C)
Mass (mg)
Light source
CO2 con.
Product production rate/selectivity
Ref.




ZnAl-LDH
CO2 + H2O
0.18
Solar RT
100
300 W Xe lamp
—
CO: 7.6 μmol g−1 h−1

50



CoAl-LDH
CO2 + H2O
0.1
Solar RT
30
300 W Xe lamp
—
CO: 0.36 μmol g−1 h−1

151



CH4: 4.3 μmol g−1 h−1


Graphene/TiO2
CO2 + H2O
0.1
Solar RT
100
300 W Xe lamp
—
CH4: 10.1 μmol g−1 h−1

160



C2H6: 7.2 μmol g−1 h−1


BiOBr atomic layers
CO2 + H2O
0.1
Solar RT
100
300 W Xe lamp (visible light)
—
CO: 87.4 μmol g−1 h−1

161



ZnIn2S4
CO2 + H2O
0.1
Solar RT
100
300 W Xe lamp (visible light)
—
CO: 33.2 μmol g−1 h−1

162



Vv-rich BiVO4 atomic layers
CO2 + H2O
0.1
Solar
200
300 W Xe lamp
—
CH3OH: 398.3 μmol g−1 h−1

122



SnS2 atomic layers
CO2 + H2O
0.1
Solar RT
100
300 W Xe lamp (visible light)
—
CO: 12.28 μmol g−1 h−1

88



Pt/C-In2O3
CO2 + H2O (sacrificial agent)
0.1
Solar RT
200
300 W Xe lamp
—
CO: 126.6 μmol g−1 h−1

131



CH4: 27.9 μmol g−1 h−1


SnNb2O6
CO2 + H2O
0.1
Solar RT
30
300 W Xe lamp
—
CH4: 110.9 μL h−1 g−1

163



Co3O4 hexagonal platelets
CO2 + H2O (sacrificial agent)
0.1
Solar RT
10
300 W Xe lamp (λ > 420 nm)
—
CO: 2003 μmol h−1 g−1

164



Pt–TiO2/GaN/n+–p Si
CO2 + H2O (in 0.5 M KHCO3)
—
PEC
—
300 W Xe lamp (100 mW cm−2)
TOF = 24800 h−1
Solar-to syngas efficiency: 0.87%

165



Zn nanoflake
CO2 + H2O
0.1
PEC


100 mW cm−2
—
Current density: 5.0 mA cm−2

18



Solar-to-syngas efficiency: 4.3%


WSe2 nanoflake
CO2 + H2O (CO2 flow rate = 20 mL min−1)
—
PV
—
—
—
Solar-to-fuel efficiency: 4.6%

16



CuO + SnO2
CO2 + H2O (CO2 flow rate = 10 mL min−1)
0.1
PV
—
100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G)
—
Solar-to-CO efficiency: 13.4%

17



Co4N nanosheets
CO2 + H2 (1/3)
3.2
150
20
Thermal catalysis
TOF = 25.6 h−1
CH3OH: ∼4.2 mmol HCOOH: ∼0.4 mmol (15 h)

166



[Zn3Al(OH)8]2[CO3]-LDH
CO2 + H2
0.1
Solar RT
100
500 W Xe lamp
0.16%
CO: 94.1%

139



CH3OH: 5.9%


[Zn1.5Cu1.5Ga(OH)8]2[Cu(OH)4]-LDH
CO2 + H2
0.1
Solar RT
100
500 W Xe lamp
0.05%
CO: 12.5%

167



CH3OH: 87.5%


Ru@FL-LDH
CO2 + H2
0.1
Solar ∼350
150
300 W Xe lamp
96.3% (1 h)
CH4: 99.3%, 277 mmol g−1 h−1

95



CoFe/Al2O3 from LDH nanosheets
CO2 + H2
0.18
Solar ∼320
100
300 W Xe lamp
78.6% (2 h)
CO: 4.97%

158



CH4: 59.77%


C2+: 35.26%


CeO2
CO2 only


Solar thermo chemical


4 kV solar
83%
Solar-to-fuel efficiency: 5.25%

19



In2O3−x(OH)y
CO2 + H2 (flow: 6 mL min−1)
0.1
Solar RT
15
130 W Xe lamp
—
CH3OH: 50%, 0.06 mmol g−1 h−1

168





Due to their excellent CO2 adsorption properties, MgAl-LDH nanosheets were selected as supports for the synthesis of photothermal Ru/LDH nanosheet catalysts by Ye and co-workers.95 The Ru/LDH nanosheets afforded fast 96.3% CO2 conversion over the first 30 min with ∼100% selectivity to CH4 at a CO2/H2 ratio = 1:4 (superior performance to Ru/bulk LDH, and Ru/SiO2 reference catalysts, Fig. 31), with bed temperature reaching ∼350 °C which is sufficient for Ru to activate H–H bonds for CO2 methanation even in a flow-type system (Fig. 31D). The Ru/LDH nanosheet catalyst had stronger basicity, which enhanced CO2 adsorption and thus promoted the photothermal conversion reaction. CH4 evolution was achieved at rates up to 277 mmol g−1 h−1 (230.8 mmol g−1 m−2) at CO2 flow rates of 25.0 mL min−1. Whilst this still represents a gap compared with industry requirements, this rate is 4 orders of magnitude higher than those typically reported for CO2 reduction by water over LDH photocatalysts.
 Fig. 31  (A) HRTEM image of Ru-loaded LDH nanosheets; (B) CO2 conversion and (C) CH4 production in photothermal CO2 hydrogenation in a batch reactor and (D) long term stability test in a flow system (S1, Ru/LDH nanosheets; S2, Ru/bulk LDH; S3, Ru/SiO2; S4, LDH nanosheets). Reproduced with permission from ref. 95, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Generally, the products of photothermal CO2 hydrogenation are CH4 or CO, which are low-value products. For methane formation, 4 moles of H2 are typically consumed for 1 mole of CO2 converted (e.g. CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O). Thus, tuning CO2 hydrogenation to yield more valuable products such as C2+ hydrocarbons, olefins, alcohols or benzene is highly desirable (Table 2). The key for obtaining these more valuable products is the ability of a catalyst to drive the C–C coupling reactions. In thermal CO hydrogenation, metallic Fe and Co are considered the best FT catalysts for controllable C–C coupling and the synthesis to olefins or long-chain alkanes.31 Taking inspiration from FTS catalysts, a smart CoFe alloy structured catalyst was recently reported by Zhang and co-workers for the efficient photothermal CO2 hydrogenation to hydrocarbons.158 H2 reduction of a CoFeAl-LDH precursor at various temperatures up to 700 °C yielded a series of different catalysts supported by either a Co–Al mixed metal oxide (MMO) or amorphous alumina. At 400 °C, FeOx nanocrystals on a Co–Al MMO was obtained, which was active for photothermal evolution of CO via the RWGS reaction (CO2 + H2 → CO + H2O). Increasing the CoFeAl-LDH reduction temperature to 550 °C resulted in FeOx and CoOx supported by alumina, which afforded higher CO2 conversion and increased selectivity to CH4. At a CoFeAl-LDH reduction temperature above 600 °C, CoFe-alloy nanoparticles formed supported by Al2O3 (see EXAFS results, Fig. 32A–C), which afforded a remarkable C2+ selectivity of ∼38% and a CO2 conversion of 77% (Fig. 32D and E). Under concentrated UV-visible excitation, the catalyst temperature reached 320 °C due to photothermal excitation of the supported CoFe nanocatalysts. Heating the same CoFe-alloy nanoparticle catalyst to 320 °C in the dark afforded almost exactly the same performance for CO2 hydrogenation, confirming that the high CO2 conversion achieved under UV-vis excitation was indeed due to photothermal processes, rather than photocatalytic processes. DFT calculations confirmed that the alumina-supported CoFe-alloy structure offered a lower barrier to C–C coupling products, explaining the formation of C2+ hydrocarbons. This study was the first reported synthesis of C2+ hydrocarbons from CO2 and H2 driven by solar energy. However, most of the longer chain hydrocarbons formed in this study were C2–C4 paraffins. Economic incentives exist to synthesize C5+ hydrocarbons and olefins from CO2 hydrogenation, motivating further research into photothermal catalyst development in the future.
 Fig. 32  (A) Illustration of CoFe-x catalysts formed by hydrogen reduction of a CoFeAl-LDH nanosheet precursor at different temperatures up to 700 °C; (B) Co K-edge and (C) Fe K-edge EXAFS spectra for different CoFe-x samples; (D) time course of CO2 conversion and product selectivities and (E) the hydrocarbon product distribution obtained over CoFe-650 under UV-vis irradiation for 2 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Whilst CO2 reduction with H2 can yield useful hydrocarbon products, H2 is a valuable chemical commodity sourced non-sustainably by steam methane reforming. Alternative and low cost approaches need to be found for H2 manufacture, distribution and storage that will allow CO2 reduction to become a viable proposition for reducing anthropogenic CO2 emissions. Combining photoelectrochemical water splitting into H2 with CO2 reduction technologies would be a prudent approach (though this demands improved electrocatalysts and catalysts, respectively, for both these processes). In addition to high CO2 conversions, valuable products (olefins or benzene etc.) must be the target for future photothermal CO2 conversion. The first commercially viable photothermal power generation system was established in Spain in 1981. China Huaneng Group Co., Ltd is now the dominant player in photothermal power systems for industry applications. This success of photothermal power generation technologies gives hope that photothermal CO2 reduction technologies may one day become a viable alternative to traditional thermal catalytic processes.
3. TMH derived catalysts for solar-driven CO hydrogenation. 
Syngas (CO and H2) as the feed for FTS can be widely produced from non-petroleum sources, such as natural gas, coal or biomass. The gasification of biomass to produce syngas is highly desirable as it can be considered a renewable and sustainable technology. FTS can yield high-quality fuels, such as diesel and commodity chemicals (C2–4 alkenes). FTS catalysts are typically based on Ru, Co, Fe and Ni.7 Metallic Co and Fe based catalysts are the most commonly used FTS catalysts, with Fe-containing FTS catalysts used in industry to produce around 4000 kT oil per year in China. Co-based FTS catalysts are actively being pursued in fundamental research, though the high cost of Co is a barrier to industrial uptake. Ru is very expensive, but has stronger C–C coupling properties suitable for low-temperature FTS. Industrial FTS reactors typically operate under harsh conditions (250–500 °C, 1–3 MPa) due to thermodynamic and kinetic demands of CO hydrogenation. Ni-based FTS catalysts yield light hydrocarbons during the initial stages of use, though the products shift progressively towards CH4 and CO over time. Further, the reaction of Ni with CO at the higher temperature leads to volatile carbonyls (Ni(CO)x). For this reason, Ni-based FTS catalysts stopped being used in industry in 1933.34 After WWII, Ni-based catalysts were redeployed for methane production from synthesis gas, and renamed as methanation catalysts. Ni FTS catalysts have been compared to a spirited horse, delicate (to overhydrogenation), too difficult to be controlled, and of course, incapable of sustainable work for a long time.33
Solar driven CO hydrogenation is widely regarded as the greenest and sustainable solution to address energy and environment issues associated with conventional thermal FTS processes. The first reported solar-driven FTS catalyst was Ru loaded on graphene.36 Subsequently, Ni and various Group VIII metal-containing catalysts were developed, which all showed ∼100% selectivity to CH4 for CO/CO2 hydrogenation.56,156,159 Balancing hydrogenation and C–C coupling reactions, whilst preventing or minimizing overhydrogenation, is of importance from both a fundamental scientific viewpoint and an industrial viewpoint. Very recently, Zhang and coworkers reported a series of NiO/Ni/Al2O3 catalysts for visible light driven FTS to hydrocarbons.37 NiAl-LDH nanosheets were first calcined to give NiO/Al2O3, followed by partial hydrogen reduction to give a NiO/Ni/Al2O3 heterostructure when the reduction temperature was ∼500 °C. At higher reduction temperatures, the product was Ni nanoparticles loaded on amorphous Al2O3 as revealed by in situ XRD, EXAFS and XPS results. During CO hydrogenation under light irradiation, the Ni/NiO/Al2O3 heterostructure afforded a C+2 selectivity of 58%, far higher than Ni/Al2O3 (26%) and NiAl-MMO catalysts (4%). DFT calculations revealed that the thin NiO layer on the Ni0 nanoparticles offered a lower C–C coupling barrier than pure Ni metal, thus changing the reaction path of *CH2 intermediates towards larger hydrocarbons. As mentioned above, the stability of Ni-containing catalysts is concern for their industrial application. For the Ni/NiO/Al2O3 heterostructure, no obvious change in the selectivity to C+2 products was observed over 5 catalytic cycles, although a slightly increased CO2 selectivity was observed (at the expense of CH4). Since the lifetime of Ni-containing FTS catalysts is typically around 4–6 weeks due to the volatilization of carbonyls (Ni(CO)x), further testing of the Ni/NiO/Al2O3 heterostructure for photo-driven FTS over the same timescale is required to establish the true feasibility of this highly promising catalyst system. Further, even though hydrocarbons were obtained through lowering the hydrogenation ability (i.e. introduction of NiO), C2–C4 alkanes were the main reaction products, which are much less valuable compared with alkenes or longer chain hydrocarbons (C5+). Achieving a better balance between the hydrogenation and C–C coupling is a persistent challenge in the development of solar-driven FTS catalysts.
By modulating the electronic structure of FTS catalysts with milder hydrogenation ability such as Co, the FTS products can be tuned towards olefins via exploitation of metal–support interaction effects. Reduction in H2 of ZnCoAl-LDH nanosheets between 300–700 °C afforded a series of photothermal catalysts denoted as Co-x, where x refers to the reduction temperature (Fig. 33A and B).38 The Co-450 catalyst exhibited a remarkable selectivity for FTS to olefins (36% of hydrocarbon products) under UV-vis irradiation (Fig. 33C and D). Here the co-existence of Co-oxides tuned the electronic structure of the FTS active site (metallic Co), leading to a catalyst surface with modest hydrogenation ability and excellent FTS to olefins. This study was the first to report the successful synthesis of olefins from Co-based catalysts under solar light. Similar catalyst activities/selectivities were found under batch and flow conditions, with the latter being particularly relevant to industry. Table 3 summarizes recent literatures relating to the thermocatalytic and solar-driven FTS reaction over Fe, Co and Ni-based catalysts. It should be noted that the solar-driven FT reaction over Fe/Co-catalysts afford a similar activity/selectivity even under flow condition, highlighting the potential for application in industry.
 Fig. 33  (A) Fabrication of Co-x catalysts by H2 reduction of a LDH nanosheets precursor in H2 at 300–700 °C; (B) EXAFS spectra and (C) XPS spectra of Co for Co-x catalysts; (D) the hydrocarbon product distribution obtained over Co-450 under UV-vis irradiation; (E) scheme for CO hydrogenation over Co/Co3O4 photothermal catalyst under UV-vis irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Table 3 Summarized literature data for CO hydrogenation to hydrocarbons using Fe/Co/Ru-based catalysts




Catalysts
Feed CO/H2

P (MPa)

T (°C)
mL (g h)−1
Mass (mg)
CO con. %
CO2 sel.%
Hydrocarbon selectivity (%)
O/P
Ref.


CH4
C2–4 olefin
C2–4 paraffin
C+5





a CxHy = 100%.
b CO2 + CxHy = 100%.





Fe/K/SiO2
1:1.2
1.5
250
2000
120
41.7
—
9.6
29.8
9.3
51.3
3.2a

178



K/FeOx
1:2
1.0
300
2000
300
95.2
31.5
13.2
34.3
7.2
45.3
4.8a

179



Bulk Fe–Mn
1:1
1.0
280
—
500
65.8
24.6
10.5
21.4
16.5
51.6
1.3a

180



Fe/MnK-CNTs
1:1
2.0
270
30000
100
22.7
—
28.8
50.3
7.6
13.3
6.6a

181



Fe/NG
1:1
0.5
340
2000
100
3.2
14.2
35.8
47.0
8.4
8.8
5.6a

182



Mn/Fe3O4
1:1
1.0
320
—
500
41.5
37.8
9.7
60.1
6.5
23.7
9.2a

183



2D FeK/rGO
1:1
2.0
340
30000
100
58–64
49–52
22.0
67.0
6.8
5.0
9.8a

184



ZnCrOx/MSAPO
1:1.5
2.5
400
4800
140
17
45
2
80
14
4
5.7a

91



Fe–Zn–0.81Na
1:2.7
2.0
340
60000
20
77.2
23.8
9.7
22.7
3.2
40.6
7.1b

185



2D Fe/Fe3O4–ZnAlOx
1:3
0.18
Solar
Batch
100
20.9
11.4
28.6
42.4
9.0
8.6
4.7b

96



2D Fe/Fe3O4–ZnAlOx
1:3
0.18
Solar
2500
120
11.4
7.1
37.7
40.0
6.6
8.6
6.1b

96



CoC2 nanoparticles
1:2
1.0
250
2000
1500
31.8
47.3
5.0
60.8
2.0
31.4
30

31



2D Co/Co3O4–Al2O3
1:3
0.18
Solar
2500
100
15.4
47.6
48.0
36.0
5.9
10.1
6.1

38



2D Ni-NiO/Al2O3
1:3
0.18
Solar
Batch
100
27.7
2.7
38.8
<1
37.4
21.1
∼0

37



Co/TiO2–SiC
1:2
1.0
230
2850
100
50.5
0.2
5.9
2.2
91.7
—



186



Co/Al2O3
1:2
1.0
210
4000
150
33.9
—
9.3
10.8
79.9
—



187



Co/a-Al2O3
1:2
2.0
210
—
1700
40.0
—
10.9
7.5
81.6
—



188



Hcp-Co/Cufoam
1:2
1
220
545
3300
31.9
—
18.3
10.6
71.1
0.056



189



Co/SiO2–Al2O3
1:2
1
220
545
3300
24.5
—
26.0
16.2
57.8
0.114



189



Co–Co2C
1:2
3.0
220
3665
550
25.3
4.6
32.4
26.0
38.4
—



190



Ru/meso-ZSM-5
1:1
2.0
260
1000
500
29.6
—
5.9
14.6
79.5
—



191



Ru/CNT
1:1
2.0
260
1000
500
34.0
—
8.3
9.1
82.6
—



192



2D Ru/graphene
1:2
3
Solar
—
30
43
—
2.6
15.7
81.7
—



36







6.1.2 Transition metal oxides. 
1. Oxide-based photocatalysts for photocatalytic CO2 conversion with H2O and H2. 
Recently, various 2D-related oxide nanosheet photocatalysts (TiO2,5 WO3,169 ZnGa2O4,170 ZnGe2O4,171 Co3O4,57etc.)4 have been evaluated for the photoreduction of CO2 under visible light or infrared light, as reviewed by the Zou and Ozin groups.172,173 Reaction products in most cases are mainly CO and CH4. Interestingly, Ozin and co-workers reported that defect-containing In2O3−x(OH)y can give efficient CO2 hydrogenation to methanol and CO with a selectivity ratio of 1:1 under light irradiation and 1 bar. Remarkably, the CH3OH production rate was 0.06 mmol g−1 h−1, which is 120 times higher than other reported photocatalysts for CO2 hydrogenation to alcohols. Results suggest that solar-driven In-containing photocatalysts offer a potential pathway towards a methanol production technology with a low carbon footprint.168
2. Supported oxide catalysts for solar-driven photothermal and photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction. 
Low temperature reduction of CO2 using sunlight is highly desirable from a sustainability viewpoint.157,174 Garcia first reported that Ni/SiO2–Al2O3 particles allowed 95% CO conversion with 97% selectivity to CH4 under light irradiation.159 Further, Ye and co-workers reported a universal approach for CO2 hydrogenation using Group VIII metal-loaded Al2O3 particles under light irradiation.156 In the first 10 min, all the Group VIII materials tested displayed a strong photothermal effect due to their dark colour and surface plasmon resonance-related heating.175 In some cases (like Ru/Al2O3), the surface temperature of the catalysts reached as high as 400 °C (Fig. 34A and B), with the CO2 totally converted into CH4 within 15 min. This work suggested a potential process for combining photo(electric)catalytic H2O splitting into hydrogen with photothermal CO2 methanation (Fig. 34C).176 Very recently, Na-promoted Co@carbon nanoparticles were fabricated by Garcia and co-workers (Fig. 34D and E). Under light irradiation, hydrocarbons as well as ethanol (6.5% selectivity) were obtained with a CO conversion of 37%.177 Interestingly, under thermal conditions, no ethanol was formed with hydrocarbons the only products (Fig. 34F and G). Further, under photothermal conditions the Co@carbon nanocomposite without Na afforded only CH4 (Fig. 34H). Near ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron and in situ Raman spectroscopy revealed that light irradiation stabilized intermediates responsible for the production of ethanol and C–C coupling products. The special selectivity to ethanol encourages wider investigation of photo-induced CO2 hydrogenation processes.30 Very recently, photoelectrochemical (PEC) reduction of CO2 with H2O was explored as further pathway for reducing CO2. Through judicious selection of particular metal/oxides interfaces, CO/H2 product ratios could be tuned from 4:1 to 1:6, with excellent stability over 10 h.165 This work offers a new paradigm for selective CO2 reduction into valuable chemicals.
 Fig. 34  (A) Monitoring of the catalyst temperature during photothermal CO2 hydrogenation; (B) photo of the alumina-supported catalyst powders; (C) two-step water-based CO2 conversion driven by Group VIII metals/Al2O3 under solar irradiation; (D and E) HRTEM image and a schematic illustration of Na–Co@C nanoparticles; schematic illustration of CO2 hydrogenation over Na–Co@C nanoparticles under (F) thermal and (G) photothermal conditions; (H) photothermal catalysis using Co@C nanoparticle without Na. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH and ref. 177, copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
3. Oxide-based photocatalysts for solar CO reduction. 
Solar-driven photocatalytic and photothermal CO reduction with H2O or H2 is a relatively new research area, but offers particular advantages over traditional thermal WGS and FTS reactions due to the far milder reaction condition. Pioneering work reported by Garcia and co-workers28,56 compared the performance of various p-type transition metal oxide particles (NiO, Fe2O3, Fe3O4, Co2O3, Co3O4, CuO) for photocatalytic CO reduction by H2O, with H2 and CH4 (<10% selectivity) formed as the major products. Further, by using H2 instead of H2O, CH4 was the main product (selectivity ∼92%) along with a small amount of CO2. This work conclusively demonstrated that p-type semiconductors are efficient for the reduction of CO to CH4 with H2O or H2 as reducing agents.


6.1.3 Bi oxides and perovskite oxides. 
VO formed on the surface of ultrathin semiconductors can introduce new defect levels that modify the electronic band structure, typically narrowing the band gap and extending light absorption by the semiconductor to longer wavelengths resulting in better solar spectrum utilization. Further, the new defect states may increase the efficiency of photoinduced charge separation, stabilize the intermediates of CO2 photoreduction, and reduce energy barriers to desirable products, all of which may enhance photocatalytic performance. Through UV light irradiation, BiOBr forms VO193,194 resulting in a CO formation rate of 87.4 μmol g−1 h−1, 20 and 24 times higher than a single BiOBr layer and bulk BiOBr, respectively. This approach thus offers a route for controlling VO formation in BiOBr nanosheets for optimized CO2 reduction performance. Further, by loading metal co-catalysts on Bi-containing nanosheets, the CO2 hydrogenation performance may be further enhanced under light irradiation via the co-catalysts acting as electron acceptors and tuning the product selectivity.
Perovskite oxides with the general formula ABO3 show promise for CO2 reduction due to their high catalytic activity, good stability and long charge diffusion lengths. Typical perovskite oxides possess a cubic structure, with the larger A cation (typically alkali/alkaline-earth metals Li, Na, K; Mg, Ca, Ba, etc.) locating at the corners of the cube and the smaller B cations (3-5d metals such as Ti, Nb, Mo, Fe, Co, etc.) occupying the site the centre of the cube with octahedral coordination by face-centered oxygen atoms. Further, oxygen substitution with anions like N or S allows a degree of bandgap tuning. Layered perovskite oxides with extended corner-sharing BO6 units arranged along the ab planes (such as Bi2WO6, Bi2MoO6, Sr3Ti2O7, CaLa4Ti4O15,195etc.) are also of interest for photocatalytic applications, including CO2 reduction. As with other 2D photocatalyst systems, improvements in the performance of perovskite photocatalysts for photocatalytic applications are focused on the following key areas: defect engineering, interface construction, improved solar spectrum utilization, and so forth.196


6.1.4 Metal chalcogenide-based photocatalysts for solar CO2 conversion with H2O. 
Many metal sulfides (In2S3, SnS2, CdS, ZnIn2S4, CdIn2S4, ZnSe etc.) act as efficient visible-light-responsive photocatalysts due to their narrow band gaps. In particular, atomically thin metal sulfides exhibit enhanced photocatalytic activities due to the short diffusion length of electrons and holes to the photocatalyst surface, high specific surface areas and exposed active sites. Hollow structures, such as thin walled spheres and nanotubes, offer additional advantages for photocatalysis such as enhanced photoharvesting ability due to light scattering inside these structures, high surface area with easily accessible external and internal surfaces, and efficient separation of charge carriers due to the 2D semiconductor component. Recently, Lou and co-workers reported the successful fabrication of hierarchical In2S3–CdIn2S4 heterostructured nanotubes. These exhibited enhanced activity for CO2 reduction to CO under visible light in the presence of a Co-complex and TEOA in H2O/acetonitrile mixture solvent, 12 times higher than that of In2S3.197 This work provides a basis for the rational design of hierarchical ultrathin photocatalysts for solar energy conversion and CO2 reduction. Other types of metal sulfides containing one or more of Ni, Co, Fe or Mo, including NiS, NiCo2S4, FeMoSx, and CuSbS2 show potential for application in electrochemical catalysis due to their narrow bandgaps and higher electronic conductivity.198 MXenes are a new family of transition metal carbides/nitrides with tunable compositions.199,200 MXenes possessing semiconducting properties may in the future prove useful for photocatalytic COx reduction. Conversely, MXenes that are metallic may find interesting use in photothermal CO2 or CO hydrogenation. Indeed the high thermal stability of MXenes makes them very suitable for photothermal applications.

6.2 Single metal-containing catalysts (SMC) for solar CO2 reduction
Solar-driven water splitting and CO2 reduction may benefit from catalysts and photocatalysts with single metal atom sites which should offer improved charge-separation and/or fast electron exchange with adsorbates.201 As outlined above, coordinatively unsaturated single-metal sites on the surface of semiconductors such as graphitic carbon nitrides or TiO2 may enhance photocatalysis.202–205 Yao and co-workers reported single atom Co sites on g-C3N4 nanosheets were very efficient for photocatalytic H2 evolution. By using EXAFS, the Co–N/C coordination sites (Co1–N4, Co1–N2, Co1–N3C2, etc.) were identified, with porphyrin-like Co1–N4 centers being primarily responsible for water splitting.202 Very recently, Xiong and co-workers reported the single atom Co-dispersed on graphene nanosheets was highly efficient for the visible light-driven reduction of CO2. The graphene provided a support for the anchoring of Co atoms (Fig. 35A–C) and bridge to Ru-based light sensitizers. The Co sites accelerated the photoexcited electron transfer process, resulting in fast CO2 reduction to CO and H2 (Fig. 35D and E). This work provides a new strategy for the smart manipulation of charge kinetics in photocatalytic CO2 reduction.205
 Fig. 35  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Co1–G nanosheets catalyst. (B) TEM and (C) HAADF-STEM images of the Co1–G catalyst. (D) TONs of CO and H2 production by Co1–G nanosheets under visible-light, comparison with other references materials including graphene and CoCl2; (E) schematic energy-level diagram showing electron transfer from [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 to the Co1–G catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Combining C3N4, TiO2 and homogenous complexes (like binuclear RuRu-complex, ReI, CoIII complex206) allowed efficient CO2 photoreduction to formate/syngas with a high turnover rate.207 Further, single active site-enzymes (e.g. the CO2-reducing enzyme: Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans (Ch)) have been loaded onto TiO2 and shown enhance the efficiency of CO2 reduction to CO under visible light with the assistance a Ru sensitizer.208,209
MOF are porous coordination polymers, composed of metal cations or metal clusters and organic linkers. MOFs attract great interest for CO2 capture and conversion due to their intrinsic micro/mesoporosity, extremely high specific surface areas, high-density of metal sites.210,211 MOF-related catalysts for CO2 photoreduction were recently reviewed by Zhou and Yaghi's group, respectively.212,213 Notably, Xu and coworkers211 reported a Ni-containing metal–organic hybrids photocatalyst with a high activity for CO2 reduction to CO, with a remarkable 100% selectivity to CO. After decoration with Rh or Ag nanocrystals, this photocatalyst produced formic acid and acetic acid, thereby affording a novel photocatalytic system for transforming CO2 into high-valuable fuels from photocatalysis. Whilst single metal atom catalysts and photocatalyst are currently attracting a lot of research attention, their future potential for solar-driven CO2/CO reduction is unclear and requires further investigation.
6.3 Metal-free catalysts (MFC)
Metal-free catalysts containing B, C, N, P, S and their composites warrant discussion, as these elements are abundant on Earth and thus of low cost. Carbon-based materials (fullerene, carbon nanotubes, graphene, carbon dots, diamond, etc.) find wide application due to their special electrical properties and thermal conductivity, along with mechanical strength and lightness. For a long time, carbon-based materials (such as activated carbon) have been used as supports for catalytic particles or as adsorbents. Su and co-workers first reported the defect-containing carbon nanotubes can catalyze the oxidative hydrogenation of n-butane, with the level of performance comparable to industrial V-containing catalysts.214 Defect-containing carbon materials are now being widely pursued due to their special electronic properties. Since carbon materials are generally black with no obvious band gap, carbon-based photocatalysts were long ignored until the discovery of graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) by Wang and co-workers.215 Subsequently, g-C3N4-based photocatalysts,216 heteroatom doped-graphene oxides,217–219 C-doped h-BN220 or h-BN-doped graphene oxides sheets,128 and related materials have been found to exhibit excellent properties for photocatalytic water splitting, CO2 reduction, N2 fixation, and other important photoreactions. Metal-free photocatalysts for CO2 reduction were recently reviewed.70,221 It should be noted that these carbon-based photocatalysts show good CO2 photoreduction ability mainly using H2O as proton source. In a notable breakthrough, graphene and a B,N-co-doped nanodiamond-based carbon material with Lewis pairs can split H2 to form H+/H− pairs for hydrogenation.90,222,223 These pioneering discoveries will likely open the door to other metal-free catalytic systems for CO2 reduction with H2, including photothermal COx hydrogenation.
Although much attention has been focused on the development of carbon-based catalysts for CO2 reduction, some recent works suggest boron-based catalyst might also be promising in this context. Ye and co-workers demonstrated an amorphous boron material with a dark brown color (Fig. 36) could absorb strongly at UV-vis-IR wavelengths, resulting in catalyst heating up to 462 °C (Fig. 36B). Under light irradiation, CO2 reduction to CO (1.0 μmol h−1) and CH4 (2.5 μmol h−1) was observed in the presence of water.224 Results encourage further investigation of elemental boron as a photothermal catalyst.
 Fig. 36  (A) UV-vis-NIR spectrum of an amorphous boron material (inset shows a TEM image of the same material), with the solar spectrum shown in grey; (B) the surface temperature of the amorphous boron sample under light irradiation; (C) gas evolution under a Xe lamp in the presence of CO2 and H2O; (D) gas-evolution rates under different conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
7. Future challenges and perspectives
Efficient technologies for the conversion of CO and CO2 to fuels and valuable chemical feedstocks are essential for the sustainability of future societies. The development of such disruptive technologies hinges on the discovery of new catalytic, photocatalytic and electrocatalytic materials to drive these challenging chemical transformations. 2D and 2D-related materials due to their unique and remarkable properties (many of which are absent in bulk 3D counterparts) are especially promising in the field of solar-driven CO and CO2 reduction. Whilst many great achievements have been made over the last decade in the design and synthesis of 2D-related catalysts for COx conversion, a number of questions remain unanswered about the future technical feasibility of 2D catalysts in industrial applications. The following concerns need to be addressed on the path to disruptive 2D technologies for the chemical industry and energy sector:
1. Most research on 2D-related materials for CO2 reduction generally advocates the use of H2O as the reducing agent, since water is cheap and abundant. Rates of product formation are typically on the order of a few μmol h−1 g−1 at best, with CO and CH4 the main reaction products. Such low rates of CO2 conversion do not warrant practical interest. This photo(electro)catalytic, photothermal and photovoltaic cell-driven catalysts based on 2D materials all need to be pursued with energy and vigor in order to identify a few very promising candidates for scale-up testing. Practically speaking, planting trees, crops or growing algae still remain much better technologies for CO2 reduction into valuable chemical feedstocks.
2. Most characterization studies of 2D-related photocatalysts consider only the ground state, and do not consider the photoinduced charges comprehensively. Transient absorption spectroscopy can provide some useful information of carrier dynamics under light irradiation, though the contribution of photoinduced carriers or heat (phonons) is still unclear, which restricts deep mechanistic understanding of solar-driven COx reduction.
3. In the traditional thermal catalysis, the catalyst bed is typically heated externally to afford particular reaction temperatures and thus predefined reactant conversions. However, for solar-driven catalysis, the real temperature at the micrometric scale and at the surface of the catalyst may be much higher than that measured by a thermocouple positioned in or near the catalyst bed (the uncertainty in temperature may be as high as 100 °C for photothermal reactions). Further, the solar light intensity may be different at different points in the catalyst bed, again requiring the obtained data be treated with a degree of caution. This imposes challenges for the detailed thermodynamic and kinetic analysis of CO and CO2 reduction reactions. Studying the activity/selectivity profiles of COx reduction under thermal catalysis conditions over a range of temperatures, followed then by the study of the same reaction without direct heating under photothermal conditions, may be the best approach for estimating the actual temperature reached in the photoassisted reaction.
4. Controversy exists relating to mechanisms of CO and CO2 hydrogenation to hydrocarbons/alcohol under ground state conditions (thermal condition), especially C–C coupling mechanisms leading to the formation of olefins. The same applies for photocatalytic and photothermal reactions under light irradiation (excited state conditions). Also, the impact of solar irradiation (UV or visible or IR) on the adsorption ability of reactants and products (different carbon-chain hydrocarbons) on 2D-related catalysts needs further exploration.
5. Ground state DFT calculations on thermal catalytic reactions are now routine and offer great insights for explaining/predicting CO2/CO hydrogenation selectivities to hydrocarbons over heterogeneous catalysts. However, the excited state DFT calculations which are highly relevant to photocatalysis remain in their infancy, though TD-DFT and constrained DFT96 are beginning to shed some light on excited state reaction systems.
6. Although solar-driven CO hydrogenation to olefins can afford a partly similar activity compared to traditional thermal catalysts, reactor design is still a challenge since solar energy utilization is restricted by the irradiation area and also day/night cycles. There is still long road to travel in the development of practical photo(electro)catalytic and photothermal systems for solar-driven COx reduction.
7. The challenge of scale-up. Being able to move from laboratory scale testing to pilot plant and industrial scale processes is critical for any truly useful COx reduction technology. Among the 2D and 2D-related materials, LDH materials represent one of the most promising catalysts for scale-up due to their very simple synthesis (typically co-precipitation process from aqueous solution through pH control). Since 2002, Duan and co-workers have used a scale-up process called separate nucleation and aging steps (SNAS) to prepare various Mg/Zn/Ni/Co/Cu–Al/Cr/Fe-LDH materials on a large scale, with size around 30–100 nm, by mixing salt and alkali solutions simultaneously in a colloid mill. This SNAS process for preparation of LDHs has been scaled up to the pilot plant scale (100 T per annum) in laboratory, with various production lines in China (10000 T per annum).225 Very recently, a collaboration between Beijing University of Chemical Technology (China), SCG Chemicals (Thailand) and the University of Oxford (UK) was established relating to the synthesis of new generation LDH materials with high surface area. This is expected to further expand the industrial application of LDHs as additives, catalysts/precursors etc.226 Other 2D-related materials, like g-C3N4 and TiO2 sheets, offer excellent catalysis and a similar potential for scale up production due to their easy synthesis and cheap raw materials. Given the growing commercial interest in solar-driven catalysis, 2D-related materials are expected to undergo tremendous development in the next few decades.
This review summarized some of the most important work that has been reported in the past 5 years relating to 2D-related materials for solar-driven CO2 reduction by H2O or H2, as well as CO reaction with the same reducing agents. COx hydrogenation to produce high-valuable products (especially hydrocarbons, alcohols and aromatics) has been demonstrated in the laboratory, though much work is still needed exploring structure–function relationships to allow the rational design and synthesis of high efficiency catalytic materials that could be used in large scale COx reduction. Over the next few decades, it is likely that 2D materials and their related composites will play an increasingly important role in solar energy conversion and storage via COx conversion to high-value products, and may eventually even supplant traditional thermal catalysis in some processes.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the financial support from the National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFB0600901, 2017YFA0206904, 2017YFA0206900), the National Key Projects for Fundamental Research and Development of China (2014CB239402), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51772305, 51572270, U1662118), the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB17000000), the Royal Society-Newton Advanced Fellowship (NA170422), the International Partnership Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (GJHZ1819), the Young Elite Scientist Sponsorship Program by CAST (YESS20160137) and the Youth Innovation Promotion Association of the CAS. GINW acknowledges funding support from the University of Auckland Faculty Research Development Fund, the Energy Education Trust of New Zealand and the MacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology.
References
E. V. Kondratenko, G. Mul, J. Baltrusaitis, G. O. Larrazabal and J. Perez-Ramirez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3112–3135 RSC .
C. Li, F. Wang and J. C. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 100 RSC .
C. X. Zhang, C. H. Chen, H. X. Dong, J. R. Shen, H. Dau and J. Q. Zhao, Science, 2015, 348, 690–693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang and T. Sasaki, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9455–9486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kattel, P. Liu and J. G. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9739–9754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Y. Khodakov, W. Chu and P. Fongarland, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1692–1744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hao, G. Q. Dong, Y. Yang, Y. Y. Xu and Y. W. Li, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2007, 30, 1157–1165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. An, T. J. Lin, F. Yu, Y. Z. Yang, L. S. Zhong, M. H. Wu and Y. H. Sun, Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60, 887–903 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X.-J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G.-H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, S. Gao, F. Lei, C. Xiao and Y. Xie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 3–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Sun, S. Gao and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 530–546 RSC .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Kang, S. K. Choi, D. J. Ham, S. M. Ji, W. Choi, D. S. Han, A. Abdel-Wahab and H. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2638–2643 RSC .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato, R. Haasch, P. Zapol, B. Kumar, R. F. Klie, J. Abiade, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Science, 2016, 353, 467–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schreier, F. Heroguel, L. Steier, S. Ahmad, J. S. Luterbacher, M. T. Mayer, J. S. Luo and M. Gratzel, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17087 CrossRef CAS .
F. Urbain, P. Y. Tang, N. M. Carretero, T. Andreu, L. G. Gerling, C. Voz, J. Arbiol and J. R. Morante, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2256–2266 RSC .
D. Marxer, P. Furler, M. Takacs and A. Steinfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1142–1149 RSC .
F. Wang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5773–5783 RSC .
L. K. Rihko-Struckmann, A. Peschel, R. Hanke-Rauschenbach and K. Sundmacher, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 11073–11078 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, C. Liu, D. Mei and Q. Ge, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1296–1306 CrossRef CAS .
O. Martin, A. J. Martin, C. Mondelli, S. Mitchell, T. F. Segawa, R. Hauert, C. Drouilly, D. Curulla-Ferre and J. Perez-Ramirez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6261–6265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, S. Li, X. Bu, S. Dang, Z. Liu, H. Wang, L. Zhong, M. Qiu, C. Yang, J. Cai, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, G. Li, Z. Li, C. Tang, Z. Feng, H. An, H. Liu, T. Liu and C. Li, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701290 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xu, S. He, H. Chen, G. Cui, L. Zheng, B. Wang and M. Wei, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7600–7609 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, X. Zhang, W. Zhou, R. Gao, W. Xu, Y. Ye, L. Lin, X. Wen, P. Liu, B. Chen, E. Crumlin, J. Guo, Z. Zuo, W. Li, J. Xie, L. Lu, C. J. Kiely, L. Gu, C. Shi, J. A. Rodriguez and D. Ma, Science, 2017, 357, 389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sastre, M. Oteri, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2211–2215 RSC .
V. Subramani and S. K. Gangwal, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 814–839 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Cheng, J. Kang, D. L. King, V. Subramanian, C. Zhou, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, in Advances in Catalysis, ed. C. Song,  2017, vol. 60, pp. 125–208 Search PubMed .
L. Zhong, F. Yu, Y. An, Y. Zhao, Y. Sun, Z. Li, T. Lin, Y. Lin, X. Qi, Y. Dai, L. Gu, J. Hu, S. Jin, Q. Shen and H. Wang, Nature, 2016, 538, 84–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, Y. Zhao, H. Chen, H. Chen, Y. Li, S. He, Y. Zhang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1525–1534 RSC .
V. P. Ananikov, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1964–1971 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Enger and A. Holmen, Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng., 2012, 54, 437–488 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Li, J. Ciston and M. W. Kanan, Nature, 2014, 508, 504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, Z. Jiao, G. Jin and X. Guo, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3836–3840 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, B. Zhao, J. Liu, G. Chen, R. Gao, S. Yao, M. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, J. Xie, X. Wen, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung, D. Ma and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4215–4219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, G. Chen, R. Shi, X. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Wei, X.-D. Wen, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 
              1800527 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Behrens, F. Studt, I. Kasatkin, S. Kuehl, M. Haevecker, F. Abild-Pedersen, S. Zander, F. Girgsdies, P. Kurr, B.-L. Kniep, M. Tovar, R. W. Fischer, J. K. Norskov and R. Schloegl, Science, 2012, 336, 893–897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He, Z. An, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5912–5920 RSC .
Y. F. Zhao, X. Jia, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung, D. O'Hare and T. R. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 
              1501974 CrossRef .
G. Fan, F. Li, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7040–7066 RSC .
Y. Xu, Z. Wang, L. Tan, H. Yan, Y. Zhao, H. Duan and Y. Song, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 5259–5267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Jia, G. I. N. Waterhouse, R. Shi, X. Zhang, F. Zhan, Y. Tao, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung, D. O'Hare and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 
              1703585 CrossRef .
L. Li, R. Ma, Y. Ebina, K. Fukuda, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8000–8007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang and D. O'Hare, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4124–4155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, Q. Wang, D. O'Hare and L. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5950–5974 RSC .
J. Feng, Y. He, Y. Liu, Y. Du and D. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5291–5319 RSC .
Y. Zhao, B. Li, Q. Wang, W. Gao, C. J. Wang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans, X. Duan and D. O'Hare, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 951–958 RSC .
Y. Zhao, G. Chen, T. Bian, C. Zhou, G. I. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung, L. J. Smith, D. O'Hare and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7824–7831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Zheng, X. Cao, F. Teng, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung, D. O'Hare and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 
              1703828 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 136–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Bi, C. M. Ye, C. Xiao, W. Tong, X. D. Zhang, W. Shao and Y. Xie, Small, 2014, 10, 2820–2825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, X. Li, H. Ye, S. Chen, H. Ju, D. Liu, Y. Lin, W. Ye, C. Wang, Q. Xu, J. Zhu, L. Song, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8928–8935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Li, G. Zhan and L. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 112–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sastre, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12983–12987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gao, Q. Meng, K. Zhao, H. Yin, D. Wang, J. Guo, S. Zhao, L. Chang, M. He, Q. Li, H. Zhao, X. Huang, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6485–6490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Duan, N. Yan, R. Yu, C. R. Chang, G. Zhou, H. S. Hu, H. Rong, Z. Niu, J. Mao, H. Asakura, T. Tanaka, P. J. Dyson, J. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3093 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, A. W. Robertson, M. M.-J. Li, W. C. H. Kuo, M. T. Darby, M. H. Muhieddine, Y.-C. Lin, K. Suenaga, M. Stamatakis, J. H. Warner and S. C. E. Tsang, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 810–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Bi, L. Zhang, S. Tao, W. Chu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2427–2431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Chen, R. Zhang, L. Jiao and H.-L. Jiang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 362, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiang, Q. Dai, J.-F. Chen and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6253–6261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, Z. Sun, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2160–2164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, C. Zhai, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 645–651 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Y. Zhao, C. Sun, F. Li, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4516–4520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiao, Z. Chen, X. Li, Y. Sun, S. Gao, W. Yan, C. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Lin, Y. Luo and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7586–7594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, L. Cai, J. Shang, Y. Yu and L. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4059–4064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, N. Talreja, H. Tao, J. Texter, M. Muhler, J. Strunk and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7610–7627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Xu, T. Pan, Y.-B. Dou, H. Yan, S.-T. Zhang, F.-Y. Ning, W.-Y. Shi and M. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18823–18834 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Xu, H. Yan and M. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2683–2695 CrossRef CAS .
D. Voiry, H. S. Shin, K. P. Loh and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 0105 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, L. Wang, H. G. Yang, H.-M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 831–843 RSC .
J. Xu, J. Zhang, W. Zhang and C.-S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 
              1700571 CrossRef .
R. Li, F. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Yang, M. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Han and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1432 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, H. G. Yang, J. Pan, Y. Q. Yang, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9559–9612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. A. Moniz, S. A. Shevlin, D. J. Martin, Z.-X. Guo and J. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 731–759 RSC .
Y. Xu, Z. Wang, L. Tan, Y. Zhao, H. Duan and Y.-F. Song, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 10411–10420 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, K. Zhao, X. Y. Xiao and L. Z. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4473–4476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Guo, Z. P. Deng, M. X. Li, B. J. Jiang, C. G. Tian, Q. J. Pan and H. G. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1830–1834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Shang, Z. H. Ai and L. Z. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6393–6399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, Z. Dai, F. Tian, B. Zhou, B. Zhao, H. P. Zhao, Z. Q. Chen, Y. L. Liu and R. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23453–23459 RSC .
S. Bai, X. Y. Li, Q. Kong, R. Long, C. M. Wang, J. Jiang and Y. J. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3444–3452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Luo and S. Guo, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17059 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, S. Zhang, B. Li, H. Yan, S. He, L. Tian, W. Shi, J. Ma, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13175–13181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kang, L. Vernisse, R. C. Remsing, A. C. Thenuwara, S.
L. Shumlas, I. G. McKendry, M. L. Klein, E. Borguet, M. J. Zdilla and D. R. Strongin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1863–1870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiao, X. Li, X. Jin, Y. Sun, J. Xu, L. Liang, H. Ju, J. Zhu, Y. Pan, W. Yan, Y. Lin and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18044–18051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He, C. Li, H. Chen, D. Su, B. Zhang, X. Cao, B. Wang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1040–1046 CrossRef CAS .
A. Primo, F. Neatu, M. Florea, V. Parvulescu and H. Garcia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jiao, J. Li, X. Pan, J. Xiao, H. Li, H. Ma, M. Wei, Y. Pan, Z. Zhou, M. Li, S. Miao, J. Li, Y. Zhu, D. Xiao, T. He, J. Yang, F. Qi, Q. Fu and X. Bao, Science, 2016, 351, 1065–1068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cheng, B. Gu, X. Liu, J. Kang, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4725–4728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, P. Zhai, P. Wang, J. Li, T. Li, M. Peng, M. Zhao, G. Hu, Y. Yang, Y.-W. Li, Q. Zhang, W. Fan and D. Ma, Chem, 2017, 3, 323–333 CAS .
K. Cheng, W. Zhou, J. Kang, S. He, S. Shi, Q. Zhang, Y. Pan, W. Wen and Y. Wang, Chem, 2017, 3, 334–347 CAS .
J. Ren, S. Ouyang, H. Xu, X. Meng, T. Wang, D. Wang and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 
              1601657 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, Z. Li, M. Li, J. Liu, X. Liu, G. I. Waterhouse, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, W. Gao, Z. Zhang, R. Long, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Wen, D. Ma, L.-Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 
              1803127 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tang, H.-F. Wang and Q. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 881–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, T. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Liu, H. Sun, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 
              1706279 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yin, J. Han, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, P. Xu, Q. Yuan, L. Samad, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, P. Zhang, X. Cao, B. Song and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7965–7972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Patra, S. K. Kundu, D. Kim and A. Bhaumik, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 791–798 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Jia, G. Chen, L. Shang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung, D. O’Hare and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6517–6524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Chen, W. Li, L. Lin, M. Li, Y. Deng, X. Wang, B. Ge, C. Yang, S. Yao, J. Xie, Y. Li, X. Liu and D. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10761–10765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, Z. Gu, N. Kurniawan, W. Y. Chen and Z. P. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 
              1700373 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li, J. Tang, W. Y. Chen, G. Y. Hao, N. Kurniawan, Z. Gu and Z. P. Xu, Biomaterials, 2018, 177, 40–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, B. Zhang, P. De Luna, Y. Liang, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, L. Han, F. P. G. de Arquer, M. Liu, D. Cao Thang, T. Regier, J. J. Dynes, S. He, H. L. Xin, H. Peng, D. Prendergast, X. Du and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 149–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-B. Li, Y.-J. Gao, Y. Wang, F. Zhan, X.-Y. Zhang, Q.-Y. Kong, N.-J. Zhao, Q. Guo, H.-L. Wu, Z.-J. Li, Y. Tao, J.-P. Zhang, B. Chen, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4789–4796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Li, F. Zhan, H. Xiao, X. Zhang, Q.-Y. Kong, X.-B. Fan, W.-Q. Liu, M.-Y. Huang, C. Huang, Y.-J. Gao, X.-B. Li, Q.-Y. Meng, K. Feng, B. Chen, C.-H. Tung, H.-F. Zhao, Y. Tao and L.-Z. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5253–5258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lei, Y. Sun, K. Liu, S. Gao, L. Liang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6826–6829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. J. Wang, W. Gao, B. Li, Q. Wang, L. Zheng, M. Wei, D. G. Evans, X. Duan and D. O'Hare, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 5988–5994 RSC .
Y. F. Zhao, Q. Wang, T. Bian, H. J. Yu, H. Fan, C. Zhou, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung, D. O'Hare and T. R. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7168–7173 RSC .
Y. Tian, G. D. Li and J. S. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6622–6623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, A. M. Zheng, X. M. Wang, G. D. Qi, J. H. Su, J. F. Du, Z. H. Gan, J. F. Wu, W. Wang and F. Deng, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2932–2940 RSC .
G. D. Qi, J. Xu, J. H. Su, J. F. Chen, X. M. Wang and F. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6762–6765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, G. D. Li, C. Yan, X. Y. Mu, X. L. Pan, X. X. Zou, K. X. Wang and J. S. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8299–8303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Wu, Q. G. Zhang, R. Q. Wang, Y. F. Zhao, Z. T. Li, H. Ning, Q. S. Zhao, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. S. Qiu and M. B. Wu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 747–753 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, J. Zhang, W. Fan, Z. Li, L. Wang, X. Li, Y. Wang, R. Wang, J. Zheng, M. Wu and H. Zeng, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3365–3371 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, Y. Zhao, L. Shang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, X. Kang, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 
              1500424 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, G. Dong, S. Li, G. Lu and Y. Bi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2917–2920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, L. Zhang, J. Xie, X. Zhang, Q. Liu, T. Yao, S. Wei, Q. Zhang and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6716–6720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Hoch, P. Szymanski, K. K. Ghuman, L. He, K. Liao, Q. Qiao, L. M. Reyes, Y. Zhu, M. A. El-Sayed, C. V. Singh and G. A. Ozin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E8011–E8020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Guan, C. Xiao, J. Zhang, S. J. Fan, R. An, Q. M. Cheng, J. F. Xie, M. Zhou, B. J. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10411–10417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, B. Gu, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, X. Zu, F. Yang, W. Zhu, C. Wang, Z. Feng, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3438–3445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, S. Zhu, H. Wang, H. Li and M. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1496–1501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-F. Li, Q.-K. Li, J. Cheng, L. Liu, Q. Yan, Y. Wu, X.-H. Zhang, Z.-Y. Wang, Q. Qiu and Y. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8706–8709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, S. He, H. Chen, B. Wang, L. Zheng, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6298–6305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, L. Wang, Y. Dai, Z. Pu, Z. Lao, Y. Chen, M. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, W. Zhang, R. Si, C. Ma and J. Zeng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Thibault-Starzyk, E. Seguin, S. Thomas, M. Daturi, H. Arnolds and D. A. King, Science, 2009, 324, 1048–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Y. Wang, P. Tang, N. Xie, Y. Zhao, X. Liu, G. Hu, J. Xie, Y. Zhao, J. Tang, T. Zhang and D. Ma, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2769–2776 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dong, C. Lian, S. Hu, Z. Deng, J. Gong, M. Li, H. Liu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 252 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. B. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-X. Pan, Y. You, S. Xin, Y. Li, G. Fu, Z. Cui, Y.-L. Men, F.-F. Cao, S.-H. Yu and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4123–4129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Ghuman, L. B. Hoch, P. Szymanski, J. Y. Y. Loh, N. P. Kherani, M. A. El-Sayed, G. A. Ozin and C. V. Singh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1206–1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Ghuman, T. E. Wood, L. B. Hoch, C. A. Mims, G. A. Ozin and C. V. Singh, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 14623–14635 RSC .
C. Gomes Silva, Y. Bouizi, V. Fornes and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, Y. Zhao, S. Zhang, W. Gao and M. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10233–10239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Gunjakar, T. W. Kim, H. N. Kim, I. Y. Kim and S. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Gunjakar, I. Y. Kim, J. M. Lee, Y. K. Jo and S.-J. Hwang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3847–3863 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shao, F. Ning, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 580–586 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahmed, Y. Shibata, T. Taniguchi and Y. Izumi, J. Catal., 2011, 279, 123–135 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morikawa, Y. Ogura, N. Ahmed, S. Kawamura, G. Mikami, S. Okamoto and Y. Izumi, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1644–1651 RSC .
H. Jiang, K.-i. Katsumata, J. Hong, A. Yamaguchi, K. Nakata, C. Terashima, N. Matsushita, M. Miyauchi and A. Fujishima, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 783–790 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Izumi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 171–186 CrossRef CAS .
K. Teramura, S. Iguchi, Y. Mizuno, T. Shishido and T. Tanaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, Y. Dou, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2171–2174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Zhou and R. Xu, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 2315–2321 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nayak, L. Mohapatra and K. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18622–18635 RSC .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Yin, G. Liu, L. Wang, R. Saito, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3976–3979 RSC .
H. Li, J. Li, Z. Ai, F. Jia and L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 122–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shao, J. Han, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 168, 519 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Su, D. Shao, S. Zeng and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8366–8373 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Xie, S. Feng, D. Liu, M. Shao and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5867–5871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mohapatra, K. Parida and M. Satpathy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13063–13070 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bruhwiler and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8547–8556 CrossRef .
J. Liu, C. Li, F. Wang, S. He, H. Chen, Y. Zhao, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2627–2633 RSC .
X. Meng, T. Wang, L. Liu, S. Ouyang, P. Li, H. Hu, T. Kako, H. Iwai, A. Tanaka and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11478–11482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Li, D. Zhang, N. Q. Su, W. Yang, H. O. Everitt and J. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Chen, R. Gao, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, G. I. N. Waterhouse, R. Shi, J. Zhao, M. Zhang, L. Shang, G. Sheng, X. Zhang, X. Wen, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 
              1704663 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Sastre, A. V. Puga, L. Liu, A. Corma and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6798–6801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wenguang, Z. Yong, L. Qi, Y. Shicheng, B. Shanshan, W. Xiaoyong, X. Min and Z. Zhigang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1743–1749 CrossRef .
W. Ju, L. Xiaodong, S. Wen, L. Peiquan, S. Yongfu, J. Xingchen, G. Shan, L. Liang, X. Jiaqi, Y. Wensheng, W. Chengming and X. Yi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8719–8723 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Jiao, Z. Chen, X. Li, Y. Sun, S. Gao, W. Yan, C. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Lin, Y. Luo and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7586–7594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, S. Liang, J. Bi, M. Liu, L. Zhou, L. Wu and X. Wang, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 1355–1363 RSC .
G. Chao, M. Qiangqiang, Z. Kun, Y. Huajie, W. Dawei, G. Jun, Z. Shenlong, C. Lin, H. Meng, L. Qunxiang, Z. Huijun, H. Xingjiu, G. Yan and T. Zhiyong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6485–6490 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chu, P. Ou, P. Ghamari, S. Vanka, B. Zhou, I. Shih, J. Song and Z. Mi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7869–7877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Zhang, X. Zheng, Y. Chen, W. Wu, J. Qiu, X. Zhao, X. Zhao, Y. Dai and J. Zeng, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 869–876 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahmed, M. Morikawa and Y. Izumi, Catal. Today, 2012, 185, 263–269 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, M. Ghoussoub, H. Wang, Y. Shao, W. Sun, A. A. Tountas, T. E. Wood, H. Li, J. Y. Y. Loh, Y. Dong, M. Xia, Y. Li, S. Wang, J. Jia, C. Qiu, C. Qian, N. P. Kherani, L. He, X. Zhang and G. A. Ozin, Joule, 2018, 2, 1369–1381 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, X. Li, Y. Sun, Y. Tan, X. Jiao, H. Ju, Z. Qi, J. Zhu and Y. Xie, Joule, 2018, 2, 1004–1016 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yan, J. Wang, H. Gao, N. Wang, H. Yu, Z. Li, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1839–1845 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Kou, X. Chen, Z. Tian, J. Gao, S. Yan and Z. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14385–14387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, J. Ye and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 998–1013 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, C. Qian, Y. Dong, Y. F. Li, H. Wang, M. Ghoussoub, K. T. Butler, A. Walsh and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4631–4644 RSC .
H. Huang, M. Y. Mao, Q. Zhang, Y. Z. Li, J. L. Bai, Y. Yang, M. Zeng and X. J. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 
              1702472 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, T. Wang, J. Wang, H. Liu, D. Thang Duy, M. Li, G. Liu, X. Meng, K. Chang, L. Shi, T. Nagao and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3703–3710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, L. Liu, S. Ouyang, H. Xu, D. Wang, N. Zhao and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6781–6803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, A. V. Puga, J. Cored, P. Concepción, V. Pérez-Dieste, H. García and A. Corma, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 235, 186–196 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, Y. Yang, C. Zhang, X. An, H. Wan, Z. Tao, H. Xiang, Y. Li, F. Yi and B. Xu, Fuel, 2007, 86, 921–928 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Kang, J. W. Bae, J.-Y. Cheon, Y.-J. Lee, K.-S. Ha, K.-W. Jun, D.-H. Lee and B.-W. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 103, 169–180 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J.-F. Chen and Y. Zhang, React. Kinet., Mech. Catal., 2014, 114, 433–449 CrossRef .
D. Wang, X. Zhou, J. Ji, X. Duan, G. Qian, X. Zhou, D. Chen and W. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4560–4567 RSC .
X. Chen, D. Deng, X. Pan, Y. Hu and X. Bao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 217–220 RSC .
Y. Liu, J.-F. Chen, J. Bao and Y. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3905–3909 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, J. Lin, K. Xu, H. Wang, X. Yao, Y. Pei, S. Yan, M. Qiao and B. Zong, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 389–399 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhai, C. Xu, R. Gao, X. Liu, M. Li, W. Li, X. Fu, C. Jia, J. Xie, M. Zhao, X. Wang, Y.-W. Li, Q. Zhang, X.-D. Wen and D. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9902–9907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, B. de Tymowski, F. Vigneron, I. Florea, O. Ersen, C. Meny, P. Nguyen, C. Pham, F. Luck and P.-H. Cuong, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 393–404 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, L. Wei, J. Hong, L. Wang, S. Chen, G. Wang and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 570–581 RSC .
Z. Yu, Ø. Borg, D. Chen, B. C. Enger, V. Frøseth, E. Rytter, H. Wigum and A. Holmen, Catal. Lett., 2006, 109, 43–47 CrossRef CAS .
K. Soulantica, J. Harmel, L. Peres, M. Estrader, A. Berliet, S. Maury, A. Fecant, B. Chaudret and P. Serp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10579–10583 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-P. Pei, J.-X. Liu, Y.-H. Zhao, Y.-J. Ding, T. Liu, W.-D. Dong, H.-J. Zhu, H.-Y. Su, L. Yan, J.-L. Li and W.-X. Li, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3620–3624 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, K. Cheng, L. Zhang, Q. Zhang, J. Ding, W. Hua, Y. Lou, Q. Zhai and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5200–5203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, S. Zhang, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2565–2568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, W. Wang, D. Jiang, E. Gao and S. Sun, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 821–831 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, X. Li, W. Shi, P. Ling, Y. Sun, X. Jiao, S. Gao, L. Liang, J. Xu, W. Yan, C. Wang and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8719–8723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Iizuka, T. Wato, Y. Miseki, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20863–20868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse and T. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 
              1700126 CrossRef .
S. Wang, B. Y. Guan, Y. Lu and X. W. D. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17305–17308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 
              1701592 CrossRef .
Y. Zhong, X. H. Xia, F. Shi, J. Y. Zhan, J. P. Tu and H. J. Fan, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 
              1500286 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, J. Wang, H. X. Xu and Y. J. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2799–2823 RSC .
Y. Cao, S. Chen, Q. Luo, H. Yan, Y. Lin, W. Liu, L. Cao, J. Lu, J. Yang, T. Yao and S. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12191–12196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, L. Cao, W. Cheng, Y. Cao, X. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Mou, L. Jin, X. Zheng, W. Che, Q. Liu, T. Yao and S. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, T. Yao, W. Chen, R. You, C. Zhao, G. Wu, J. Wang, W. Huang, J. Yang, X. Hong, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1944–1948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gao, S. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, L. Song, W. Zhang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 
              1704624 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, D.-I. Won, W.-J. Jung, H.-J. Son, C. Pac and S. O. Kang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 976–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kuriki, M. Yamamoto, K. Higuchi, Y. Yamamoto, M. Akatsuka, D. Lu, S. Yagi, T. Yoshida, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4867–4871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, E. Reisner, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2393–2399 RSC .
H. Zhang, J. Wei, J. Dong, G. Liu, L. Shi, P. An, G. Zhao, J. Kong, X. Wang, X. Meng, J. Zhang and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14308–14312 Search PubMed .
K. Niu, Y. Xu, H. Wang, R. Ye, H. L. Xin, F. Lin, C. Tian, Y. Lum, K. C. Bustillo, M. M. Doeff, M. T. M. Koper, J. Ager, R. Xu and H. Zheng, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700921 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Li, W. Zhang and K. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 
              1705512 CrossRef PubMed .
C. S. Diercks, Y. Liu, K. E. Cordova and O. M. Yaghi, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 301–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Liu, R. Blume, A. Zhang, R. Schloegl and D. S. Su, Science, 2008, 322, 73–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Chen and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3092–3108 RSC .
X. Jiang, J. Nisar, B. Pathak, J. Zhao and R. Ahuja, J. Catal., 2013, 299, 204–209 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11350–11366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Low, J. Yu and W. Ho, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4244–4251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, C. Chen, M. Zhang, L. Lin, X. Ye, S. Lin, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7698 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Huang, W. Ye and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 
              1700194 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ding, X. Huang, X. Yi, Y. Qiao, X. Sun, A. Zheng and D. S. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 42, 13800–13804 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sun, B. Li, T. Liu, J. Song and D. S. Su, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 11120–11124 RSC .
G. Liu, X. Meng, H. Zhang, G. Zhao, H. Pang, T. Wang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5570–5574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2006, 485 RSC .

          http://www.gzs.buct.edu.cn/zhxw/68721.htm
        .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Yufei Zhao
	Dr Yufei Zhao obtained dual BS degrees in Applied Chemistry and Computer Science and Technology at Shanxi University (2007), and his PhD degree in Applied Chemistry at Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2013 under the supervision of Prof. Xue Duan. During 2011–2012, he visited Prof. Dermot O’Hare's laboratory (Oxford University), and subsequently joined the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry (TIPC), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in the lab of Prof. Tierui Zhang. In 2018, he became a Professor at State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His research focuses on layered double hydroxide nanostructured catalysts.

Geoffrey I. N. Waterhouse
	Prof. Geoffrey I. N. Waterhouse completed a PhD in Chemistry at the University of Auckland in 2003. He is a Fellow of the New Zealand Institute of Chemistry, a Principal Investigator in the MacDiarmid Institute (a New Zealand CoRE) and a Chair Professor of both the South China University of Technology and Shandong Agricultural University. His research interests include solar energy capture technologies, photocatalysis, photonic band gap materials, and biosensors.

Guangbo Chen
	Guangbo Chen received his BS degree (2013) and master degree (2016) in Chemistry from Northwest University. During 2014–2016, he studied as a joint master student under the supervision of Prof. Tierui Zhang at TIPC, CAS. He is currently pursuing his PhD at Department of Chemistry and Food Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany. His research interest mainly focuses on the development of 2D nanomaterials for energy conversion applications.

Tierui Zhang
	Prof. Tierui Zhang is a full professor at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He obtained his PhD degree in Chemistry in 2003 at Jilin University, China. He then worked as a postdoctoral researcher in the labs of Prof. Markus Antonietti, Prof. Charl F. J. Faul, Prof. Hicham Fenniri, Prof. Z. Ryan Tian, Prof. Yadong Yin, and Prof. Yushan Yan. His current scientific interests focus on catalyst nanomaterials for energy conversion.

 	Fig. 1  Design and development of 2D-related nanostructured catalysts for solar-driven CO or CO2 reduction to high value products.	 
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
CO2 + H+ + e− → HCOO*
HCOO* + H+ + e− → HCOOH*
HCOOH* + H+ + e− → HCO* + H2O*
HCO* + H+ + e− → CH2O*
CH2O* + H+ + e− → CH2OH*
CH2OH* + H+ + e− → CH2* + H2O*
CH2* + H+ + e− → CH3*
CH3* + H+ + e− → CH4*
CO2 + H+ + e− → HCOO*
HCOO* + H+ + e− → HCOOH*
HCOOH* + H+ + e− → HCO* + H2O*
HCO* + H+ + e− → CH2O*
CH2O* + H+ + e− → CH2OH*
CH2OH* + H+ + e− → CH3OH*

Hydrogen	2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2	−0.41	(1)
Carbon monoxide	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	−0.51	(2)
Formic acid	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH	−0.58	(3)
Oxalic acid	2CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2C2O4	−0.87	(4)
Methanol	CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O	−0.39	(5)
Methane	CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	−0.24	(6)
Ethanol	2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O	−0.33	(7)
Ethane	2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 + 4H2O	−0.27	(8)

 	Fig. 2  CO2 reduction map for large-scale chemical syntheses. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) The energy profile of the WGS reaction on an α-MoC(111) surface. (B) UV-driven photocatalytic WGS and (C) visible-light driven plasmonic WGS reaction, showing (i) photon absorption, (ii) electron migration, (iii) interfacial migration, (iv) water splitting to give hydrogen and (v) CO oxidation to CO2. Reproduced with permission ref. 27, copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science and ref. 28, copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  The CO map for the catalytic conversion of syngas to fuels and chemicals: (WGS: water-gas shift; MTG: methanol-to-gasoline; MTO: methanol-to-olefin; DME: dimethyl ether; HPA: heteropoly acid). Reproduced with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Simplified reaction mechanism for Fischer–Tropsch syntheses. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Structural models of Cu(111), Cu(211), and CuZn(211) facets; (B) Gibbs free energy diagram obtained from DFT calculations for CO hydrogenation to methanol on close-packed (black), stepped (blue) and Zn substituted steps (red); and (C) the proposed mechanism for the conversion of syngas to ethanol over Rh-containing catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39, copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science and ref. 29, copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Crystal structures of some typical 2D materials, including layered double hydroxides (LDHs), layered metal oxides, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), g-C3N4, black phosphorus and various carbon-based materials (graphene, graphene oxide (GO), and reduced GO).	 

 	Fig. 8  Conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) potentials of some common 2D materials versus NHE at pH 7. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH and ref. 71 and 72, copyright 2015, 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Surface engineering of 2D-related catalysts for efficient photocatalysis.	 

 	Fig. 10  Supercell models and corresponding band structures of (A and D) CuCr-LDH; (B and E) VO-doped CuCr-LDH; and (C and F) VO-doped CuCr-LDH model with 1% compression strain. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the separation and migration of electrons and holes in Bi3O4Cl and C-doped Bi3O4Cl via an internal electric field modification strategy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Diagram of the energy band structure and the related electron transfer processes in a SnS2/SnO2 heterostructure. Schematics of (B) the locally oxidized SnS2 atomic layers and (C) the SnS2 atomic layers, respectively. (D) Schematic of a Ni/NiO heterostructure obtained from an LDH precursor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society and ref. 37, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  Construction of bifunctional catalysts by integration of a FT catalyst component and a zeolite. (A) Dual-bed reactor. (B) Physically mixed reactor. (C) Core–shell structure. (D) Metal particles loaded on zeolite. (E) Proposed reaction mechanism for the direct conversion of syngas into lower olefins on ZrO2–ZnO/SAPO-34 bifunctional catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science and ref. 94, copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic setup of photo-driven conversion of CO2 in (A) batch reactor; (B) flow system; and (C) photograph of the continuous flow photoreactor. (D) Schematic representation of an integrated photovoltaic cell and CO2 reduction system. (E) Schematic illustration of the experimental set-up of the filter-press reactor comprising the Cu–Zn cathode and the Si/Ni foam photoanode. (F) Schematic and (G) photographs of the solar reactor configuration for solar thermochemical splitting CO2 into separate streams of CO and O2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH, ref. 17, copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group and ref. 18 and 19, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) HAADF-STEM image of Pt–g-C3N4 nanosheets. Inset is the size distribution of the bright spots. (B) Fourier transforms (FT) of the Pt L3-edge EXAFS oscillations of Pt–g-C3N4; (C) comparison of Pt L3-edge FT-EXAFS curves between the experimental data and the fit of Pt–g-C3N4; (D) schematic models of Pt–g-C3N4; (E) H2 evolution over Pt/g-C3N4 photocatalysts with different Pt loadings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  Characterization data for VZn-rich ZnIn2S4 layers: (A and B) HAADF-STEM images and (C) intensity profile corresponding to the dark cyan arrow in B; (D) the crystal structure, (E) SAED patterns; (F and G) AFM image; (H) EPR spectra of VZn-rich and VZn-poor ZnIn2S4; characterization data for mesoporous-1T-MoS2 nanosheets: (I) low-resolution STEM image; (J) high-resolution STEM image with red arrows showing pores; (K) SAED pattern corresponding to (I and L) AFM image; (M and N) TEM and HRTEM images of a NiO/TiO2 heterostructure; (O) FFT pattern of the corresponding NiO area; (P) geometrical model of NiO nanocrystal. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68, 99 and 101, copyright 2016, 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Ir L3-edge EXAFS for Ir/Ce-used catalysts with different Ir loadings. HAADF-STEM images of different Ir/Ce-used catalysts: (B) 5Ir/Ce-used, (C) 15Ir/Ce-used, and (D) 20Ir/Ce-used; (E) Ir M4,5-edge and (F) O K-edge EELS spectra for 5Ir/Ce-used and 20Ir/Ce-used catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) In situ experimental XAS flow cell and (B) STEM image of NiCoFeP catalyst; (C) and (D) Ni L-edge XANES of NiCoFeP amorphous catalyst under different reaction potentials and (E) the Ni4+/Ni2+ ratio vs. reaction potential. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105, copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) The electron transfer steps of Co and Ru complexes in photocatalytic H2 evolution; Co transient X-ray absorption spectra showing (B) normalized XANES with laser-on (red) and laser-off (black) at the Co K-edge; (C) difference spectrum; and (D) Fourier transform of the reconstructed Co(I) EXAFS and the Co(II) ground state together with the fit of the first coordination shell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  ESR spectra of (A) ZnAl-LDH nanosheets and (B) bulk ZnAl-LDH under different conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Illustration of synchronous illumination XPS technique and (B) corresponding electron density variations. XPS spectra for (C) intact-, and (D) etched-TiO2, respectively; (E) the bulk atomic structural model of an anatase TiO2 crystal; (F) in situ XPS spectra of NiAl-MMO reduction by H2 under different temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society and ref. 37, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) Scheme for Pt/CdSe/CdS QDs system used for photocatalytic water splitting; (B) femtosecond TA spectra of the Pt/CdSe/CdS QDs system; (C) comparison of the TA kinetics of CdSe/CdS QDs excited state with/without Pt nanoparticles; TA spectra between pump and probe pulses of the In2O3−xOHx, samples excited with near band gap (405 nm) light under (D) Ar, (E) CO2 and (F) H2 atmosphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society and ref. 120, copyright 2016, National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.	 

 	Fig. 23  Defect characterization for Vv-rich and Vv-poor o-BiVO4 atomic layers. (A) Positron lifetime spectra; (B and C) schematic representation of trapped positrons; (D) SPV spectra and (inset) corresponding phase spectra; (E) time-resolved fluorescence emission decay spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A–C) In situ FTIR spectra for the co-adsorption of CO2 and H2O vapor on the mildly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers; (A) 3D color surface showing changes in absorption bands with time (B) 2D contour map corresponding to the line plots in (C); (D and E) expanded views of selected areas in (C); (F) schematic representation of the CO2 photoreduction mechanism on the mildly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) Schematic depiction of the three reaction pathways for conversion of N2 to NH3 catalyzed by FeN3–graphene. The dotted arrow represents a hybrid path between the distal and alternating pathways; (B) FTIR spectra during the first segment from 0.4 to −0.5 V on the Au film electrode in a N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution; (C) the proposed N2 electroreduction pathway. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (A) IR spectra for the reaction of CO and NO on an alumina supported silver catalyst during the first 7 μs; (B) time traces for the FTIR bands associated with adsorbed cyanide (green), isocyanates (blue), and a short-lived bridging intermediate (red); (C) proposed reaction mechanism for the NOx reaction on Ag/Al2O3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127, copyright 2009, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) Atomic structure model; (B) band structure; (C) calculated band gaps of G, B-G, N-G, B,N-G, BN-G, and h-BN; (D) calculated DOS and (E) band alignment of the (010), (110), and (001) facets of C-doped Bi3O4Cl; (F) N–N distance of free N2, N2 on CuCr–VO, N2 on CuCr–VO-strain, N2H2 and N2H4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society, and ref. 51 and 69, copyright 2016, 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 28  The adsorption energy of CO on (A) a Pt55 cluster and (C) Pt(111) surface; (B) calculated free energy diagram for CO2 reduction to CH4 and (D) calculated free energy diagram for H+ reduction to H2 by thermal/chemical model on Pt(111) and Pt55; (E) the mechanism of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction with water on Pt/carbon-coated-In2O3; (F) DFT-calculated relative energy profiles for the proton reduction into H2 and proton transfer to an O atom of CO2 on Pt2/pure-In2O3 and Pt2/carbon-coated In2O3; (G) structure models and (H) TDDFT-calculated absorption spectra of In2O3−x(OH)y; (I) visualization of the transition densities of S1 (HOMO to LUMO) and (J) illustration of the activation energy barriers for the RWGS under ground state (in the dark) and excited state (band gap excited) regimes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129, copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group and ref. 131 and 132, copyright 2017, 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (A) Structure of LDH; (B) diffuse reflectance UV-visible absorption spectra of (a) ZnAl-LDH, (b) CuZnAl-LDH, (c) ZnGa-LDH, (d) CuZnGa-LDH; (C) dependence of formation rate of CH3OH and CO on the excitation wavelength for ZnGa-LDH and CuZnGa-LDH. The reactant gas contained CO2 and H2; (D) proposed photocatalytic cycle of CO2 reduction to methanol or CO over ZnCuGa-LDH catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139, copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 
Oxidation: H2O → 1/2O2 + 2H+ + 2e−
Reduction: CO2 + 2e− + 2H+ → CO + H2O
Overall: CO2 → CO + 1/2O2

 	Fig. 30  Yields of O2 and CO for the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 in water over various LDH sheets photocatalysts under UV-vis excitation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143, copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH.	 

ZnAl-LDH	CO2 + H2O	0.18	Solar RT	100	300 W Xe lamp	—	CO: 7.6 μmol g−1 h−1	
50

CoAl-LDH	CO2 + H2O	0.1	Solar RT	30	300 W Xe lamp	—	CO: 0.36 μmol g−1 h−1	
151

CH4: 4.3 μmol g−1 h−1
Graphene/TiO2	CO2 + H2O	0.1	Solar RT	100	300 W Xe lamp	—	CH4: 10.1 μmol g−1 h−1	
160

C2H6: 7.2 μmol g−1 h−1
BiOBr atomic layers	CO2 + H2O	0.1	Solar RT	100	300 W Xe lamp (visible light)	—	CO: 87.4 μmol g−1 h−1	
161

ZnIn2S4	CO2 + H2O	0.1	Solar RT	100	300 W Xe lamp (visible light)	—	CO: 33.2 μmol g−1 h−1	
162

Vv-rich BiVO4 atomic layers	CO2 + H2O	0.1	Solar	200	300 W Xe lamp	—	CH3OH: 398.3 μmol g−1 h−1	
122

SnS2 atomic layers	CO2 + H2O	0.1	Solar RT	100	300 W Xe lamp (visible light)	—	CO: 12.28 μmol g−1 h−1	
88

Pt/C-In2O3	CO2 + H2O (sacrificial agent)	0.1	Solar RT	200	300 W Xe lamp	—	CO: 126.6 μmol g−1 h−1	
131

CH4: 27.9 μmol g−1 h−1
SnNb2O6	CO2 + H2O	0.1	Solar RT	30	300 W Xe lamp	—	CH4: 110.9 μL h−1 g−1	
163

Co3O4 hexagonal platelets	CO2 + H2O (sacrificial agent)	0.1	Solar RT	10	300 W Xe lamp (λ > 420 nm)	—	CO: 2003 μmol h−1 g−1	
164

Pt–TiO2/GaN/n+–p Si	CO2 + H2O (in 0.5 M KHCO3)	—	PEC	—	300 W Xe lamp (100 mW cm−2)	TOF = 24800 h−1	Solar-to syngas efficiency: 0.87%	
165

Zn nanoflake	CO2 + H2O	0.1	PEC	
	100 mW cm−2	—	Current density: 5.0 mA cm−2	
18

Solar-to-syngas efficiency: 4.3%
WSe2 nanoflake	CO2 + H2O (CO2 flow rate = 20 mL min−1)	—	PV	—	—	—	Solar-to-fuel efficiency: 4.6%	
16

CuO + SnO2	CO2 + H2O (CO2 flow rate = 10 mL min−1)	0.1	PV	—	100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G)	—	Solar-to-CO efficiency: 13.4%	
17

Co4N nanosheets	CO2 + H2 (1/3)	3.2	150	20	Thermal catalysis	TOF = 25.6 h−1	CH3OH: ∼4.2 mmol HCOOH: ∼0.4 mmol (15 h)	
166

[Zn3Al(OH)8]2[CO3]-LDH	CO2 + H2	0.1	Solar RT	100	500 W Xe lamp	0.16%	CO: 94.1%	
139

CH3OH: 5.9%
[Zn1.5Cu1.5Ga(OH)8]2[Cu(OH)4]-LDH	CO2 + H2	0.1	Solar RT	100	500 W Xe lamp	0.05%	CO: 12.5%	
167

CH3OH: 87.5%
Ru@FL-LDH	CO2 + H2	0.1	Solar ∼350	150	300 W Xe lamp	96.3% (1 h)	CH4: 99.3%, 277 mmol g−1 h−1	
95

CoFe/Al2O3 from LDH nanosheets	CO2 + H2	0.18	Solar ∼320	100	300 W Xe lamp	78.6% (2 h)	CO: 4.97%	
158

CH4: 59.77%
C2+: 35.26%
CeO2	CO2 only	
	Solar thermo chemical	
	4 kV solar	83%	Solar-to-fuel efficiency: 5.25%	
19

In2O3−x(OH)y	CO2 + H2 (flow: 6 mL min−1)	0.1	Solar RT	15	130 W Xe lamp	—	CH3OH: 50%, 0.06 mmol g−1 h−1	
168


 	Fig. 31  (A) HRTEM image of Ru-loaded LDH nanosheets; (B) CO2 conversion and (C) CH4 production in photothermal CO2 hydrogenation in a batch reactor and (D) long term stability test in a flow system (S1, Ru/LDH nanosheets; S2, Ru/bulk LDH; S3, Ru/SiO2; S4, LDH nanosheets). Reproduced with permission from ref. 95, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 32  (A) Illustration of CoFe-x catalysts formed by hydrogen reduction of a CoFeAl-LDH nanosheet precursor at different temperatures up to 700 °C; (B) Co K-edge and (C) Fe K-edge EXAFS spectra for different CoFe-x samples; (D) time course of CO2 conversion and product selectivities and (E) the hydrocarbon product distribution obtained over CoFe-650 under UV-vis irradiation for 2 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 33  (A) Fabrication of Co-x catalysts by H2 reduction of a LDH nanosheets precursor in H2 at 300–700 °C; (B) EXAFS spectra and (C) XPS spectra of Co for Co-x catalysts; (D) the hydrocarbon product distribution obtained over Co-450 under UV-vis irradiation; (E) scheme for CO hydrogenation over Co/Co3O4 photothermal catalyst under UV-vis irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 



Fe/K/SiO2	1:1.2	1.5	250	2000	120	41.7	—	9.6	29.8	9.3	51.3	3.2a	
178

K/FeOx	1:2	1.0	300	2000	300	95.2	31.5	13.2	34.3	7.2	45.3	4.8a	
179

Bulk Fe–Mn	1:1	1.0	280	—	500	65.8	24.6	10.5	21.4	16.5	51.6	1.3a	
180

Fe/MnK-CNTs	1:1	2.0	270	30000	100	22.7	—	28.8	50.3	7.6	13.3	6.6a	
181

Fe/NG	1:1	0.5	340	2000	100	3.2	14.2	35.8	47.0	8.4	8.8	5.6a	
182

Mn/Fe3O4	1:1	1.0	320	—	500	41.5	37.8	9.7	60.1	6.5	23.7	9.2a	
183

2D FeK/rGO	1:1	2.0	340	30000	100	58–64	49–52	22.0	67.0	6.8	5.0	9.8a	
184

ZnCrOx/MSAPO	1:1.5	2.5	400	4800	140	17	45	2	80	14	4	5.7a	
91

Fe–Zn–0.81Na	1:2.7	2.0	340	60000	20	77.2	23.8	9.7	22.7	3.2	40.6	7.1b	
185

2D Fe/Fe3O4–ZnAlOx	1:3	0.18	Solar	Batch	100	20.9	11.4	28.6	42.4	9.0	8.6	4.7b	
96

2D Fe/Fe3O4–ZnAlOx	1:3	0.18	Solar	2500	120	11.4	7.1	37.7	40.0	6.6	8.6	6.1b	
96

CoC2 nanoparticles	1:2	1.0	250	2000	1500	31.8	47.3	5.0	60.8	2.0	31.4	30	
31

2D Co/Co3O4–Al2O3	1:3	0.18	Solar	2500	100	15.4	47.6	48.0	36.0	5.9	10.1	6.1	
38

2D Ni-NiO/Al2O3	1:3	0.18	Solar	Batch	100	27.7	2.7	38.8	<1	37.4	21.1	∼0	
37

Co/TiO2–SiC	1:2	1.0	230	2850	100	50.5	0.2	5.9	2.2	91.7	—	
	
186

Co/Al2O3	1:2	1.0	210	4000	150	33.9	—	9.3	10.8	79.9	—	
	
187

Co/a-Al2O3	1:2	2.0	210	—	1700	40.0	—	10.9	7.5	81.6	—	
	
188

Hcp-Co/Cufoam	1:2	1	220	545	3300	31.9	—	18.3	10.6	71.1	0.056	
	
189

Co/SiO2–Al2O3	1:2	1	220	545	3300	24.5	—	26.0	16.2	57.8	0.114	
	
189

Co–Co2C	1:2	3.0	220	3665	550	25.3	4.6	32.4	26.0	38.4	—	
	
190

Ru/meso-ZSM-5	1:1	2.0	260	1000	500	29.6	—	5.9	14.6	79.5	—	
	
191

Ru/CNT	1:1	2.0	260	1000	500	34.0	—	8.3	9.1	82.6	—	
	
192

2D Ru/graphene	1:2	3	Solar	—	30	43	—	2.6	15.7	81.7	—	
	
36


 	Fig. 34  (A) Monitoring of the catalyst temperature during photothermal CO2 hydrogenation; (B) photo of the alumina-supported catalyst powders; (C) two-step water-based CO2 conversion driven by Group VIII metals/Al2O3 under solar irradiation; (D and E) HRTEM image and a schematic illustration of Na–Co@C nanoparticles; schematic illustration of CO2 hydrogenation over Na–Co@C nanoparticles under (F) thermal and (G) photothermal conditions; (H) photothermal catalysis using Co@C nanoparticle without Na. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH and ref. 177, copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 35  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Co1–G nanosheets catalyst. (B) TEM and (C) HAADF-STEM images of the Co1–G catalyst. (D) TONs of CO and H2 production by Co1–G nanosheets under visible-light, comparison with other references materials including graphene and CoCl2; (E) schematic energy-level diagram showing electron transfer from [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 to the Co1–G catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 36  (A) UV-vis-NIR spectrum of an amorphous boron material (inset shows a TEM image of the same material), with the solar spectrum shown in grey; (B) the surface temperature of the amorphous boron sample under light irradiation; (C) gas evolution under a Xe lamp in the presence of CO2 and H2O; (D) gas-evolution rates under different conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
