High performance perovskite solar cell via multi-cycle low temperature processing of lead acetate precursor solutions   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CC10608G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CC10608G
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4784-4787High performance perovskite solar cell via multi-cycle low temperature processing of lead acetate precursor solutions†

        
          
            Trilok 
            Singh
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Tsutomu 
            Miyasaka
          
        
      
Graduate School of Engineering, Toin University of Yokohama, 1614 Kurogane-cho, Aoba, Yokohama, Kanagawa 225-8503, Japan. E-mail: trilok@toin.ac.jp
Received 
      28th December 2015
    , Accepted 1st March 2016First published on 2nd March 2016AbstractA lead acetate-based precursor, as a lead source in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite, showed potential in rapidly (<60 seconds) forming homogeneous films with a very smooth interface and large grain growth at relatively low temperatures via multi-step coating. Cells based on this method exhibited high power conversion efficiency beyond 17% with good reproducibility.
Next-generation photovoltaic devices employing hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites as an active optical absorption layer have gained tremendous attention and have become a major field of research since the pioneering work from our group.1,2 In a very short time span, research in this field has already achieved certified power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) up to 21%,3 nearly approaching the performance of mature technologies such as silicon solar cells. The organic–inorganic perovskites possess excellent requisite properties for application in solar cells, such as high absorption coefficients, tuneable bandgaps,4,5 and long carrier diffusion lengths,6–8 and most importantly, they can be produced by low cost solution processing which further opens the possibility to cheap, large scale, roll-to-roll fabrication. Despite the rapid progress in device performances, there are still several issues. For example, reliable and consistent fabrication processes need to be well understood and addressed before mass production. From this perspective, different preparation methods such as vacuum deposition,9–11 solution processing from a precursor solution12 or sequential deposition13 methods with various solvents or an appropriate mixture of different solvents14–16 have been adopted to deposit active layers. Lead iodide (PbI2) and methyl ammonium iodide (MAI) have been used as primary sources to prepare the pure iodide perovskite material (CH3NH3PbI3), however, later studies showed remarkable improvement in device performances upon replacing lead iodide with lead chloride.17,18 The crystallization of perovskite films deposited from various lead precursors drastically depends on the different processing parameters, and the successful fabrication of high performance perovskite solar cells needs appropriate controlled processing conditions or suitable material selection.2,19 The other key factor limiting device performance is discontinuous perovskite film formation, which leads to pinholes and contributes to leakage current,20,21 whereas a relatively long annealing time is necessary to form perovskite22via single step deposition when a lead halide (PbX2, X = Cl, I, Br) based precursor is used as a source of lead. For high performance devices like photodiodes, smooth, trap- and pinhole-free layers with large crystal sizes are desired to allow efficient transport properties.23
Recently, non-lead halide precursors, such as lead acetate (PaAc2)24,25 lead acetylacetone,26 lead thiocyanate27 and lead nitrate,28 have been reported as new lead sources for efficient perovskite photovoltaic devices. The driving force for exploring new lead sources is to pave the ways for greater flexibility in solvent choice and materials processing conditions. Hsieh et al. reported perovskite formation using water-based lead nitrate via sequential deposition, which showed the stoichiometric control of multi halide perovskite and improvement in wettability between the substrate and Pb(NO3)2 during spin-coating. Furthermore, Zhang et al. demonstrated a significant improvement in the optoelectronic properties of perovskite by adding hypophosphorous acid (HPA) in the precursor solution. The addition of HPA in the precursor solution reduced the oxidized I2 back into I−, and retained the I/Pb stoichiometry in the perovskite.29
The advantage of using PbAc2 over lead halide is the accelerated crystal growth because of the facile removal of CH3NH3Ac. An ultrasmooth and pinhole-free perovskite film is obtained, which in turn leads to superior device performance.
Here we report a simple, low temperature multi-cycle and quick coating solution process to fabricate uniform and pinhole-free CH3NH3PbI3 layers using PbAc2 as the lead source. The multi-cycle coated perovskite films have larger grains with a very smooth interface with the compact layer as well as the hole transport materials. The multi-cycle coating favours a reduction in the area of grain boundaries, which drastically contributes to the recombination of charge carriers and highly efficient perovskite devices are produced, with a champion cell achieving up to 18.5% efficiency. All the devices showed a high open circuit voltage (Voc > 1.0 V) despite the low processing temperature. High quality perovskite films can be obtained via a very short annealing time (time < 60 s) at low temperature (T < 100 °C) with a high degree of coverage of large substrates (25 × 25 mm2).

Fig. 1 shows a schematic diagram of the multiple stacking of various layers and multi-step coating of PbAc2:MAI solution on the compact layer (CL). The perovskite layer was prepared on a UV-ozone treated TiO2 compact layer (∼50 nm) using double coating from a freshly prepared 45 wt% solution of anhydrous lead acetate and methylammonium iodide (MAI) in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). The coated layers were transferred to a hot plate and heated for 60 to 1200 seconds before coating with Spiro-OMeTAD. More details of this procedure is given in the experimental section.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of multiple stacking of various layers and perovskite coating in multiple steps, followed by heating at 90 °C for 60 seconds. 
The optical absorption measurement showed the complete formation of the pristine perovskite absorber layer, with a typical strong broad absorption centred around 775 nm being observed (S1, ESI†) after only 60 s annealing at 90 °C, whereas longer annealing showed no significant difference in the absorption band. The X-ray diffraction pattern of the absorber perovskite layer showed high crystallinity for the 60 s annealed samples, and no significant improvement in the crystallinity (S2, ESI†) was observed for a longer annealing time, which further indicates the accelerated crystal growth kinetics when lead acetate is used as the lead source for perovskite. The XRD pattern of MAPbI3 fabricated using the anhydrous lead acetate precursor revealed no PbI2 residue, even when annealing at low temperature for less than 1 minute. Furthermore, the XRD patterns of the single coating and double coating films annealed at 90 °C for 60 seconds showed the same characteristics with no preferential growth grains in either films, which also supports the literature.30 The XRD observations further strongly support the optical absorption measurements regarding the complete formation of perovskite in a very short annealing time (60 s). The crystallization of perovskite films, grain growth and morphology is directly influenced by the choice of precursor solution, temperature and rate at which the by-products are driven out of the film. The morphology exhibits almost full coverage on the substrates with an absence of pinholes (Fig. 2a and b), and the crystal grains range from a few hundred nanometres to several hundred nanometres in size, whereas the cross-section SEM images showed smooth interfaces with both the compact layer as well as the hole transport layer (Fig. 2c). From Fig. 2a it is evident the substrate coverage is uniform with no pinholes for the first coating of perovskite, whereas for the second coating, the films have almost full coverage of the substrate (Fig. 2b) with larger grain growth (insets of Fig. 2a and b). However, we observed smaller grains and non-uniform film growth for multi-cycle coating (more than 2 cycles) due to the very rapid crystallization of perovskite films using the lead acetate precursor (S3, ESI†).
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM top view of single coating (Inset high magnification), (b) SEM top view of double coating (Inset high magnification) and (c) cross sectional SEM image of perovskite device with the configuration of glass-FTO/TiO2 compact layer/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au. 
In Fig. 3(a), the current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics of the solar cells, measured by back scans, are compared for the perovskite films formed from double-cycle coating and single-cycle coating. The inset of Fig. 3(a) summarizes the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and PCE of the champion devices. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) in Fig. 3(b) corroborates a fairly high efficiency of over 80%, indicating well-suppressed recombination. The best single-cycle coated device has a Jsc of 18.5 mA cm−2. However, the current density further increased by 16% for the double-cycle coated device (21.5 mA cm−2), with a slight increase in Voc (1.07 to 1.09). The double-cycle coated device increased the overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 14.6% to 18.5%.
 Fig. 3  (a) J–V curves of the champion devices (on back scan) for single and double coatings using PbAc2 as the lead source measured under simulated AM 1.5 sunlight of 100 mW cm−2 irradiance and in the dark, (b) EQE spectrum of the champion double-cycle coated device. 
A significantly high efficiency was obtained by the low-temperature process using a non-lead halide precursor. The J–V curves of PbAc2-based perovskite cells exhibited hysteresis, which gives a difference in the FF but does not substantially change Jsc and Voc (S4, ESI†), indicating that hysteretic behaviour, which is often large in planar structured cells, is suppressed in this cell structure. The device performance distribution is shown in Fig. 4, which depicts a narrow distribution of high performing devices, with more than 90% of devices having an efficiency over 13% in the case of single coating, and more than 70% of devices having an efficiency above 17% for the double coating perovskite devices.
 Fig. 4  Histogram of power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single coating (black bars) and double coating (red bars) perovskite devices. PCEs given are the results measured on the back scan of the I–V curves. 
To the best of our knowledge, such a PCE value is the highest ever reported for a perovskite-based solar cell by using a non-lead halide precursor source for the lead in MAPbI3 perovskite. The overall enhancement in the device performance in this study can be attributed to the large grain size, very smooth interfaces, compact/dense films and almost pinhole-free perovskite films, which is found to contribute mainly to a longer carrier recombination lifetime.
Dong et al. observed abnormal grain growth behaviour in mixed halide (MAPbI3−xClx) perovskite films deposited by a multi-cycle coating using PbI2 and MAI:MACl solutions.30 Some very large mixed halide perovskite grains with preferred orientation were observed resulting from a new grain growth mode, whereas no abnormal and large grain growth was observed for MAPbI3. Cl incorporation in the mixed halide perovskite was considered as a driving force to form abnormal growth grains due to the slow crystallization process of mixed halide perovskite.7,16,31 However, in the case of PbAc2, the crystallization of perovskite was very rapid (<60 seconds) in the single-step coating,24–27 whereas the multi-cycle coating process, with optimized conditions, provides longer duration in the solvent environment to promote the longer range diffusion of precursor ions which accelerate larger grain growth. The advantage of larger grains and dense perovskite films are that the grain boundaries are reduced, which facilitates low charge carrier recombination.
In summary, we developed a novel perovskite coating using a non-lead halide precursor as a lead source for the fabrication of highly efficient perovskite solar cells. The multi-step coating of perovskite from PbAc2 not only promotes large grain growth, but also forms dense MAPbI3 perovskite films. The champion device exhibited a remarkable efficiency of 18.5% under standard conditions (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). To the best of our knowledge, such a PCE value is the highest ever reported for a perovskite-based solar cell by using a non-lead halide precursor source for the lead in MAPbI3 perovskite. Our study reveals the importance of controlling the formation of grain growth and fast crystallization of perovskites, whereas the non-lead halide choice of precursor solution omits the possibility of impurity phases for very short annealing processes. The method of using a PbAc2 precursor to tune the device performance can be extended to explore other lead salts like lead propionate. Our study may provide guidelines to develop stable and high-performance perovskite solar cells.
T. S. would like to acknowledge the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) for the JSPS postdoctoral fellowship. This study was supported by the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Advanced Low Carbon Technology R&D program (ALCA). T. M. acknowledges financial support from the Japanese Society for Promotion of Science (JSPS) Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research B Grant Number 26289265. We thank Prof. Hiroshi Segawa for allowing access to research facilities at Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology (RCAST), University of Tokyo.
Notes and references
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 720 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg
        .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. Il Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, J.-H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926 CAS .
D. Shi, V. Adinol, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Malinkiewicz, A. Yella, Y. H. Lee, G. M. Espallargas, M. Graetzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 128 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Chen, H.-W. Kang, S.-Y. Hsiao, P.-F. Yang, K.-M. Chiang and H.-W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, H. Yu, H. Xu and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1120 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) E. Zheng, X.-F. Wang, J. Song, L. Yan, W. Tian and T. Miyasaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18156 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Kogo, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20952–20957 RSC ; 
  (c) J. Song, E. Zheng, J. Bian, X.-F. Wang, W. Tian, Y. Sanehira and T. Miyasaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10837 RSC .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Colella, E. Mosconi, P. Fedeli, A. Listorti, F. Gazza, F. Orlandi, P. Ferro, T. Besagni, A. Rizzo, G. Calestani, G. Gigli, F. D. Angelis and R. Mosca, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4613 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2359 CAS .
A. Dualeh, N. Tetreault, T. Moehl, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Greatzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3250 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, Z. Hong, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Il Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Horantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2014, 6, 6142 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Forgacs, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14121 CAS .
F. K. Aldibaja, L. Badia, E. Mas-Marza, R. S. Sanchez, E. M. Barea and I. Mora-Sero, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9194 CAS .
G. Balaji, P. H. Joshi, H. A. Abbas, L. Zhang, R. Kottokkaran, M. Samiee, M. Noack and V. L. Dalal, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 10369 RSC .
T. Hsieh, T. C. Wei, K. L. Wu, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13294 RSC .

          W. Zhang, S. Pathak, N. Sakai, T. Stergiopoulos, P. K. Nayak, N. K. Noel, A. A. Haghighirad, V. M. Burlakov, D. W. deQuilettes, A. Sadhanala, W. Li, L. Wang, D. S. Ginger, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, DOI: http://10.1038/ncomms10030.
Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Y. Fang, Q. Wang and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2464 CAS .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D. D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cc10608gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of multiple stacking of various layers and perovskite coating in multiple steps, followed by heating at 90 °C for 60 seconds.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM top view of single coating (Inset high magnification), (b) SEM top view of double coating (Inset high magnification) and (c) cross sectional SEM image of perovskite device with the configuration of glass-FTO/TiO2 compact layer/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) J–V curves of the champion devices (on back scan) for single and double coatings using PbAc2 as the lead source measured under simulated AM 1.5 sunlight of 100 mW cm−2 irradiance and in the dark, (b) EQE spectrum of the champion double-cycle coated device.	 

 	Fig. 4  Histogram of power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single coating (black bars) and double coating (red bars) perovskite devices. PCEs given are the results measured on the back scan of the I–V curves.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cc10608g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
