Hybrid effect of gas flow and light excitation in carbon/silicon Schottky solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM15938D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM15938D
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3330-3334Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsHybrid effect of gas flow and light excitation in carbon/silicon Schottky solar cells†

        
          
            Guifeng 
            Fan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lili 
            Fan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhen 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xi 
            Bai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Stephen 
            Mulligan
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Jia
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kunlin 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jinquan 
            Wei
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Anyuan 
            Cao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Dehai 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bingqing 
            Wei
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Hongwei 
            Zhu
          
        
      *ad
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering and Key Laboratory for Advanced Manufacturing by Material Processing Technology, Ministry of Education, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China. E-mail: hongweizhu@tsinghua.edu.cn;  Fax: + 86 1062770190;   Tel: + 86 1062781065
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716, USA
cDepartment of Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China
dCenter for Nano and Micro Mechanics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China
Received 
      17th November 2011
    , Accepted 12th January 2012First published on 20th January 2012AbstractWe study the gas flow assisted photovoltaic behaviour of the carbon/Si Schottky solar cells and reveal a hybrid effect with a flow-induced enhancement in cell efficiency. Gas flow sensing using the carbon/Si solar cells is proposed and tested.
Innovations in photovoltaics and sensors originating from advanced materials have attracted more and more interest. Current and potential technologies, such as thin film technology, nanotechnology, compound and organic technology, offer new chances to achieve low-cost, high performance, stable and sustainable solar cells1–4 and sensors.5–7 Though there is still a long way to go before commercial application, research on new functional devices has demonstrated extraordinary value in scientific fundamentals.
Bulk heterojunction photovoltaics and sensors based on new carbon materials are rising stars for their high performance and facile fabrication. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene (G) are novel sp2 bonded crystalline carbons with high room-temperature carrier mobility,8,9 tunable electrical10,11 and outstanding optical properties.12,13 CNTs can form two-dimensional networks while graphene is an instinctive two-dimensional atomic layer of carbon. In particular, the flat membrane structure makes graphene an ideal candidate for photovoltaic applications. Recently, we have developed carbon/silicon Schottky junction solar cells by coating CNTs or graphene on n-type Si with efficiencies of up to 7%14 and 1.6%,15 respectively. In these structures, carbon films act as transparent electrodes and active layers for carrier separation and transport. We further improved the efficiencies of the carbon/Si cells to 13.8%16 and 4.35%17 by chemical doping.
CNTs18–21 and graphene related nanomaterials22,23 are hot candidates for brand new flow-sensing devices for their unique structure and outstanding properties. Extreme flow sensitivity of CNTs and graphene has been demonstrated. For example, measurable voltage signals in CNTs24,25 and graphene26 have been observed by introducing gas or liquid flow. A similar behavior was also observed when gas flowed over a variety of solids (graphite and semiconductors) at the modest speed of a few meters per second. The underlying mechanism is an interplay of Bernoulli's principle and the Seebeck effect.25 However, flow-induced signals in these sensors are not strong enough for practical application. One solution might come from coupling or combined effects introduced by multifunctional devices to enlarge the signals. In the light of previous work, we carried out studies on the combined effect of gas flow and light excitation in CNT/n-Si and G/n-Si solar cells and revealed the effect of gas flow through the surface on the cell performance.
The solar cell system is basically constructed by coating a transparent carbon film (CNTs or graphene) directly over n-Si wafer allowing sunlight to pass towards the n-Si.14–17 The detailed synthesis of CNTs and graphene is described in the ESI.† The utilization of a carbon top layer has numerous advantages as reducing the weight, facilitating the assembly and lowering the cost. A schematic of the device is shown in Fig. 1a. We made two set samples of CNT/n-Si and G/n-Si solar cells and tested the performance under constant solar excitation and on-off nitrogen flow. As shown in Fig. S1,† the cell was placed under a solar simulator at AM 1.5 condition (100mW cm−2) and a nozzle (2 mm in diameter) that discharged pure nitrogen gas at specific volumetric rates. The nozzle was arranged in a manner that forced the gas over the cell at an approximate 45° angle from the horizontal. The gas flow over the cell was controlled using a flow meter and a manual means of toggling flow. The flow was toggled at a hose connector mid-stream at the main pneumatic line. Attaching and removing the hose from the main line avoided a build-up of pressure at the nozzle trigger. This design provided intermittent gas flows. The tested cells were enclosed in a box with a removable top to simulate dark flow conditions.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic and photograph of the carbon/n-Si Schottky solar cell. (b,c) Efficiencies of CNT/n-Si and G/n-Si cells under constant solar excitation. Gas flow introduced at marked regions. (d,e) Corresponding Voc and Jsc of Cells 1 and 3. 
As shown in Fig. 1b,c, the efficiencies of all tested cells drop under constant solar excitation. The cell performance has been enhanced (by 5–10%) by introducing gas flow. We obtained the photovoltaic parameters, including open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and conversion efficiency (η) for Cells 1,2 (CNT/n-Si) and Cells 3,4 (G/n-Si) (see details in Tables S1 and S2†) and only observed the obvious flow-induced change of Voc. To confirm and further understand the effect of gas flow, we recorded the continuous changes of Voc and Jsc (Fig. 1d,e). Similar but not the same, Voc changed considerably while Jsc altered slightly in all cells. Without gas flow, the Voc dropped constantly under illumination, first at a rapid speed and then at a moderate speed. The situation changed once the gas flow was introduced again. Voc stopped falling down immediately and reached a new level of 20–30mV higher rapidly. This level of Voc was broken when the gas flow was switched off.
The power output of the solar systems depends on the solar power input, the ambient temperature, the flow speed, the operating temperature of the system parts. From previous results on silicon solar cells, we can conclude that it is the temperature variation that mainly influences the Voc and η of the cell during the test. Most of the absorbed solar radiation by solar cells is not converted to electricity and increases their temperature, thus reducing their efficiency. Some investigations stated that the efficiency increases when the cell temperature decreases. The cell temperature can be lowered by heat extraction with a proper natural or forced fluid circulation. In this work, we believe that the nitrogen gas flow brings a comprehensive impact. These influential factors, including the temperature gradient, pressure, and surface adsorption and desorption, could be magnified at the junction. To further understand the combined effect of the gas flow and light excitation, we conducted several experiments as follows. We first carried out the dark tests on the carbon/n-Si solar cells and didn't observe any flow-induced change in the series resistance of the cell. Similarly, the resistances of CNTs and graphene films under solar irradiation and gas flow increased slightly but not remarkably. We then measured the flow-induced thermoelectric effect in CNTs and graphene (not in Si due to its poor thermoelectric properties) as reported previously.24–26 For this purpose, a special cell with two separated upper electrodes was assembled (see Fig. S2†). During the combined photovoltaic and flow test, the gas flow direction remained unchanged while the photovoltaic parameters of the cell were measured when either the left or the right electrode was used. We expected to see the cell performed differently with different electrodes if the flow-induced thermoelectric effect was influential. However, as shown in Fig. S2 and Table S3, the variations of the results were almost the same for these two cases. Moreover, we found that the increase in Voc induced by the gas flow was not stable (see Fig. S3†). The decay during long duration gas flow was remarkable.
We then investigated the relationship between Voc, temperature and gas flowing to figure out the combined effect. As shown in Fig. 2a, we recorded the temperature variation during the photovoltaic and flow test using a tip thermometer. Before flowing gas, the solar radiation increased the temperature of the solar cell, resulting in a drop of the efficiency. The relation between Voc and temperature fitted well with a exponential decline function (Fig. 2b,e) (some samples gave a nearly linear relation): Voc = V0 + αexp(−T/β)(1)where V0, α, β are fit parameters specifically for individual cells. After introducing the gas flow, the flow-induced cooling increased the efficiency. Voc jumped up and declined continuously with a considerable speed while the temperature dropped down first then remained at a constant value. To reveal the influential factors of the combined effect excluding the temperature, we introduced ΔVoc which is defined as: ΔVoc = Vocf − Vocm(2)where Vocf is calculated from eqn (1) with measured T and Vocm is the experimental value. In this way, we could figure out the decline effect introduced by the gas flow for CNT/n-Si and G/n-Si cells, as shown in Fig. 2c and 2f. The curve shape reminded us that the amount of gas might be a key parameter. To verify this, a quartz plate was placed over the surface of the cell to isolating the gas flow while still conducting heat and transmitting light. The decline effect receded as expected. The variation trends of Voc for two cells under gas flow with and without quartz cover are shown in Fig. 2d and the inset of Fig. 2e, respectively.
 Fig. 2  The relationship of Voc, temperature, and gas flowing in (a–d) CNT/n-Si and (e,f) G/n-Si solar cells. (a) Voc and temperature under on–off gas flow. (b,e) Vocversus temperature. (c,f) Flow induced ΔVoc with and without quartz cover. (d) and the inset of (e) show Voc changes under on–off gas flow with and without quartz cover. 
The regularity and repeatability of the decline effect suggested that our carbon/n-Si soar cells could also be used for gas flow sensing. Fig. 3 shows both G/n-Si and CNT/n-Si cells display the dependence of ΔVoc on the flow velocity. The smooth shape of the curve shown in Fig. 3a indicates the stable response of the flow velocity. When putting the curves together, one can see the declining effect gradually enhanced with the flow velocity (Fig. 3b and 3e). We collected the data at 7 min from each cycle and found them fitted well with a linear relation (Fig. 3c and 3f). Furthermore, we demonstrated the stability of the effect in the G/Si cell with constant flow cycling. As shown in Fig. 3d, the ΔVoc is almost the same at each point (note that the values of ΔVoc are different between Fig. 3a and 3d due to the different experimental situation). The results indicate the flow sensitivity of our carbon/silicon solar cell is accurate, stable, and repeatable.
 Fig. 3  The relationship of the flow velocity and ΔVoc in (a–d) G/n-Si and (e,f) CNT/n-Si solar cells. (a) ΔVocversus flow velocity. (b,e) Combined ΔVoc-flow velocity curves, showing (c,f) linear relations. (d) ΔVoc under constant flow velocity. 
In our previous work,14,15 we have shown that the CNT film is superior to the graphene film in conductivity, continuity, and mechanical strength and the photovoltaic performance of CNT/n-Si is better than that of G/n-Si. In this work, the photovoltaic results are in good agreement with previous studies. However, it is worth mentioning that the flow response of the G/n-Si cell is stronger than that of the CNT/n-Si cell, which will be explained below.
We also found that the combined decline effect of gas flow and light excitation is more apparent in cells that perform not so well in photoelectric conversion. Motivated by previous work,27 we infer that the effect is due to the change of surface states at the junction. We hold this view for three reasons: (i) ΔVoc, the direct reflection of the combined decline effect, can be more than 100 mV in G/n-Si cells; (ii) the effect is time-dependent and reversible; iii) the effect is sensitive to the flow velocity and stable under flow of constant velocity. It is well known that the surface states could greatly influence the performance of silicon based devices. Recently, we demonstrated that by introducing an oxide insulator layer between CNTs and silicon, the performance of the CNT/n-Si solar cell was greatly enhanced.28 It has been demonstrated that carbon film will be de-doped after the desorption of oxygen29 and electron trapping sites dominate after the evaporation of water layer between carbon/SiO2 interface.30 Here, we infer from these related results that the mechanism of flow sensing would be the adsorption and desorption of gas molecules and the magnification effect in the junction. Under nitrogen flowing and light excitation, i) the carbon film is de-doped due to the desorption of oxygen; ii) the traps and recombination centres in carbon films and Si/SiO2 will increase due to the water molecules and oxygen species evaporate; iii) the interaction between carbon and Si/SiO2 magnifies this effect. Thanks to its intrinsic two-dimensional structure, the modification of graphene and the interaction between G/n-Si/SiO2 are stronger and shows better flow sensing performance than that of CNT/n-Si. Further investigations involving flow type (gases and liquids), higher flow velocity, surface analysis are needed to gain a full understanding of the combined effect of flow and light induced in carbon/silicon solar cells.
Conclusions
To conclude, we reveal an intrinsic flow-induced enhancement of the power output for carbon/n-Si Schottky junction solar cells. Gas flow sensing using our carbon/Si solar cells is proposed and tested. Our results suggest that, by proper circulation of a gas flow, heat is extracted from the solar cells and their surface states are modified keeping the cell efficiency at satisfactory values.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Science Foundation of China (50972067), Research Fund for Doctoral Program of Ministry of Education of China (20090002120019, 20090002120030), Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList) Cross-discipline Foundation.
Notes and references
M. Thelakkat, C. Schmitz and H. W. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 577 CrossRef CAS .
E. Garnett and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, B. Tee, M. Vosgueritchian and Z. N. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1771 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Kim, M. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, G. Lim, Y. S. Choi, N. G. Park, K. Kim and W. I. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3668 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Li, J. Hu, R. Q. Wu and J. G. Lu, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 485502 CrossRef .
T. Yamada, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Yamamoto, Y. Yomogida, A. Izadi-Najafabadi, D. N. Futaba and K. Hata, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 296 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dutta, S. D. Lewis and A. Dodabalapur, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 133115 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS .
T. Durkop, S. A. Getty, E. Cobas and M. S. Fuhrer, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 35 CrossRef .
M. Y. Han, B. Ozyilmaz, Y. B. Zhang and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206805 CrossRef .
X. Lu and Z. F. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 3643 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Wu, Z. H. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, A. Y. Cao, Q. K. Shu, X. C. Gui, Y. Q. Zhu, D. M. Zhuang, G. Zhang, B. B. Ma, L. D. Wang, W. J. Liu, Z. C. Wang, J. B. Luo and D. H. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4594 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Li, H. W. Zhu, K. L. Wang, A. Y. Cao, J. Q. Wei, C. Y. Li, Y. Jia, Z. Li, X. Li and D. H. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, A. Y. Cao, X. Bai, Z. Li, L. H. Zhang, N. Guo, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, H. W. Zhu, D. H. Wu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1901 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, H. W. Zhu, D. Xie, K. L. Wang, A. Y. Cao, J. Q. Wei, X. Li, L. L. Fan and D. H. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3520 RSC .
J. Kong, N. R. Franklin, C. W. Zhou, M. G. Chapline, S. Peng, K. J. Cho and H. J. Dai, Science, 2000, 287, 622 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. J. Lu, Q. Ye, M. Cinke, J. Han and M. Meyyappan, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 929 CrossRef CAS .
P. Slobodian, P. Riha, A. Lengalova, P. Svoboda and P. Saha, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2499 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Collins, K. Bradley, M. Ishigami and A. Zettl, Science, 2000, 287, 1801 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Lu, L. E. Ocola and J. H. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 445502 CrossRef .
G. H. Lu, L. E. Ocola and J. H. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94 Search PubMed .
S. Ghosh, A. K. Sood and N. Kumar, Science, 2003, 299, 1042 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Sood and S. Ghosh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 099901 CrossRef .
J. Yin, J. X. Zhou, X. M. Li, Y. Q. Chen, G. A. Tai and W. L. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 073103 CrossRef .
A. Ivanisevic, J. Y. Yeh, L. Mawst, T. F. Kuech and A. B. Ellis, Nature, 2001, 409, 476 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, P. X. Li, X. C. Gui, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, H. W. Zhu, D. H. Wu, L. H. Zhang, A. Y. Cao and Y. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 133105 CrossRef .
Y. Shi, W. Fang, K. Zhang, W. J. Zhang and L.-J. Li, Small, 2009, 5, 2005 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Ong, J. W. Cheah, L. Chen, H. TangTang, Y. Xu, B. Li, H. Zhang, L.-J. Li and J. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 093509 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Methods, Fig. S1–S3 and Tables S1–S3. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm15938dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic and photograph of the carbon/n-Si Schottky solar cell. (b,c) Efficiencies of CNT/n-Si and G/n-Si cells under constant solar excitation. Gas flow introduced at marked regions. (d,e) Corresponding Voc and Jsc of Cells 1 and 3.	 
Voc = V0 + αexp(−T/β)	(1)
ΔVoc = Vocf − Vocm	(2)

 	Fig. 2  The relationship of Voc, temperature, and gas flowing in (a–d) CNT/n-Si and (e,f) G/n-Si solar cells. (a) Voc and temperature under on–off gas flow. (b,e) Vocversus temperature. (c,f) Flow induced ΔVoc with and without quartz cover. (d) and the inset of (e) show Voc changes under on–off gas flow with and without quartz cover.	 

 	Fig. 3  The relationship of the flow velocity and ΔVoc in (a–d) G/n-Si and (e,f) CNT/n-Si solar cells. (a) ΔVocversus flow velocity. (b,e) Combined ΔVoc-flow velocity curves, showing (c,f) linear relations. (d) ΔVoc under constant flow velocity.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Methods, Fig. S1–S3 and Tables S1–S3. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm15938d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
