Unraveling photoexcitation dynamics at “dots-in-a-perovskite” heterojunctions from first-principles  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA04871E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA04871E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18012-18019Unraveling photoexcitation dynamics at “dots-in-a-perovskite” heterojunctions from first-principles

        
          
            Wei 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xu 
            Zhang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Gang 
            Lu
          
        
      *b
aCollege of Science, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha 410128, People's Republic of China
bDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, California State University Northridge, Northridge, CA 91330, USA. E-mail: ganglu@csun.edu
Received 
      10th May 2019
    , Accepted 1st July 2019First published on 1st July 2019AbstractBoth organohalide perovskites and colloidal quantum dots are attractive and promising materials for optoelectronic applications. Recent experiments have combined the two to create “quantum dot-in-perovskite” assemblies for highly efficient light emissions. In this work, we unravel photoexcitation dynamics at the interface between the perovskite and the quantum dot by means of first-principles non-adiabatic molecular dynamics simulations. We find that such assemblies adopt the type-I band structure and are free of defect states. The interfacial and the electronic structure are robust against the thermal fluctuations at 300 K. The lowest excitation is predicted to be localized entirely on the quantum dot and the photoexcited charge transfer takes place in a picosecond timescale. The charge transfer dynamics of the photoexcited electron and hole exhibits a moderate asymmetry, which can be attributed to the differences in electronic coupling between the donor and the acceptor. The ultrafast and balanced charge transfer dynamics endows the ‘dot-in-a-crystal’ devices with unprecedented performance, which could lead to important applications in photovoltaics, photocatalysis, and infrared light emissions.
1. Introduction
Hybrid organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites have emerged as one of the most promising materials for optoelectronic applications, including solar cells, light-emitting diodes and lasers, owing to their high optical absorption coefficients, ambipolar charge transport, and long carrier diffusion lengths.1–3 Colloidal quantum dots (CQDs), on the other hand, are attractive candidates for light-emission applications, thanks to their size-tunable luminescence with high quantum yields and excellent photostability.4 How to combine the two classes of materials to achieve unprecedented optoelectronic performance thus represents a highly appealing but challenging undertaking.
Nonetheless, significant progress has been made recently by Sargent's group who pioneered the so-called “dots-in-a-matrix” strategy in which CQDs are embedded in the halide perovskite crystals.5 The strategy combines the best features of the two – the optical emission properties of the CQDs with the transport properties of the perovskites. Specifically, methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) was used as the perovskite matrix and PbS as the CQDs. In the epitaxially aligned hetero-crystals, the PbS QDs are fully passivated by the MAPbI3 matrix without the need for conventional organic ligands. The resultant hetero-crystals exhibit remarkable optoelectronic properties: the photo-electrons and holes generated in MAPbI3 can be transferred with 80% efficiency to become excitons in PbS QDs. The photoluminescence quantum efficiency can reach ∼9.3%, two orders of magnitude higher than that in the pure QD film.5 To further improve the interfacial coherence, a mixed-halide MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite was employed to lower the lattice mismatch between PbS QDs.6 As a result, the external quantum efficiency has increased by more than two-fold.6 To increase the device stability against heat and moisture, two-dimensional perovskites were introduced as the matrix for the embedded PbS QDs.7 The resultant hetero-crystals showed much enhanced stability. More recently, Sargent's group has applied the “dots-in-a-matrix” strategy to thin film solar cells, which led to an impressive power conversion efficiency of 8.95%, a major improvement over previous CQD based photovoltaic devices.8 Similar perovskite/CQD heterostructures have also been developed for optoelectronic applications, including CsPbX3/ZnS (X = Cl, Br, I) for light emission,9 MAPbI3/SnS and CsPbI3/PbS for solar cells,10,11 and MAPbI3−xClx/CdSe for electron transport layers.12 The perovskites have also been combined with planar quantum structures, such as graphene and transition-metal dichalcogenides for novel applications.13–15 Central to the performance of all these heterostructures is interfacial charge transfer dynamics.
The experimental advance has also inspired theoretical investigations on the “dots-in-a-matrix” platform. Insofar, the theoretical effort has been primarily confined to the elucidation of atomic structure and energetics, including band offsets, at the perovskite–QD interfaces.5,9,12,16 These ground state properties, albeit important, do not probe charge transfer dynamics at the interfaces, which is crucial to the performance of the “dots-in-a-matrix” hetero-crystals. In this paper, we examine the photoexcitation dynamics at the interface between MAPbI3 perovskite and PbS QD via first-principles non-adiabatic molecular dynamics (NAMD) simulations. The timescale for the interfacial charge transfer is established and the phonon modes and electronic states responsible for the charge transfer are identified. The difference in the charge transfer dynamics for the photoexcited electron and hole is rationalized. The theoretical study provides critical insights which are not readily available from the experiments and guidance for the future development of the “dots-in-a-matrix” devices.
2. Theory and simulation methods
2.1. TDDFT method for exciton charge density
The electronic excitations in semiconductors, such as perovskites and QDs, can be modeled by time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT). The excited state energies and wavefunctions can be obtained by solving a non-Hermitian eigenvalue equation17,18 (1)here, ωα is the αth excitation energy,  is the linear-response orbitals, and  is the overlap operator in the projector augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotential method.19 The matrix operators Ã and  act on the linear-response orbitals according to the following equations: (2)where σ is the Kohn–Sham (KS) Hamiltonian. εijσ and iσ are the energy and wavefunction of KS orbitals, respectively. i, and j represent occupied KS orbitals; σ and τ denote spin.  is the projection operator. στ is the Hartree and exchange–correlation (XC) kernel whose expression can be found elsewhere.17,20 To calculate the charge density of the αth excited state, we introduce a Lagrangian functional (3)where  and Γ are Lagrangian multipliers to enforce the Brillouin condition and the orthonormal condition for the KS orbitals, respectively. The detailed description of the Lagrangian functional can be found in our previous publication.18 The charge density of the excited states can be obtained by the derivative of the Lagrangian functional with respect to the external potential as 
2.2. 
          Ab initio nonadiabatic molecular dynamics
The charge transfer dynamics is examined by ab initio non-adiabatic molecular dynamics (NAMD) combined with the fewest switches surface hopping (FSSH) algorithm in the time-dependent Kohn–Sham framework.21–23 The time-dependent wavefunction of the excited electron is expanded in terms of its adiabatic Kohn–Sham orbitals at time t, (4)here cpk(t) is the time-dependent expansion coefficient and k(r;R) is the kth KS orbital at a given atomic structure R. Substitute eqn (4) to the time-dependent KS equation: (5)yielding the time evolution of the expansion coefficient: (6)
The last term in the above equation is the so-called nonadiabatic coupling (NAC) between the KS orbitals k and m: (7)
NAC represents the electronic coupling between the KS orbitals in response to nuclear motion. The expansion coefficients and the nonadiabatic coupling are used for the determination of electronic transition rates based on the FSSH method. The classical path approximation (CPA) is employed here under the assumption that the nuclear dynamics is independent of electronic excitations, but the electronic evolution is affected by the nuclear degree of freedom. Based on CPA, a large number of stochastic realizations in FSSH can be achieved using a single molecular dynamics (MD) trajectory, which greatly reduces the computational cost. This methodology has been widely used to investigate charge transfer processes in a broad range of nanoscale systems.24–35
2.3. Computational details
The planewave PAW pseudopotential DFT method as implemented in Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) is used for structural relaxation, electronic structure, and adiabatic molecular dynamics simulations.36–39 Generalized gradient approximation with Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional is used to account for the exchange and correlation contribution to the electronic energy.40,41 400 eV cutoff energy is employed. Due to the unique 3D–0D heterostructure, large supercells with more than 700 atoms were adopted in the calculations. As a result, only the Gamma point is sampled in the Brillouin zone to minimize spurious interactions between the supercells. The system is heated to 300 K by a repeated velocity rescaling starting from the optimized structure at 0 K. Subsequently, a 1 picosecond (ps) long MD trajectory is generated using the Verlet algorithm with 1 femtosecond (fs) time step. 250 initial conditions sampled from each adiabatic MD trajectory are used to create the ensemble averages for NAMD; 1000 stochastic realizations for the surface hopping processes are employed. For the calculation of the exciton charge density, 24 valence bands are included in the TDDFT calculation, which yield converged energy for the lowest-energy excited state. A uniform background charge is employed to ensure that the net charge of the system remains zero.
3. Results and discussion
To construct a model for the “dots-in-a-matrix” hetero-crystal amenable to first-principles simulations, we first generate a 4 × 4 × 4 MAPbI3 supercell as shown in Fig. 1a based on the experimental lattice parameter of the cubic MAPbI3 phase.42 Next, a cavity is created by removing a cube with {100} facets from the perovskite. Finally, a cubic PbS QD with a dimension of ∼1.2 nm (Fig. 1b) is fully relaxed in vacuum and subsequently inserted into the cavity of the perovskite. The entire computational model has dimensions of 25 × 25 × 25 Å and consists of 748 atoms. The perovskite MAPbI3 and PbS QD share the {100} interfaces.
 Fig. 1  (a) The constructed 4 × 4 × 4 cubic supercell for the MAPbI3 matrix. (b) The fully relaxed atomic structure of the MAPbI3–PbS hetero-crystal at 0 K with the interfacial structure clearly presented. (c) A representative atomic structure of the hetero-crystal at 300 K obtained from the MD simulations. (d) The contour plot showing the bonding charge density for the MAPbI3–PbS hetero-crystal. The charge accumulation and depletion are represented by the blue and yellow color, respectively. The contour isosurface level is set at 0.073 e bohr−3. The purple, dark gray, yellow, light pink, light blue, and dark brown spheres represent I, Pb, S, H, C, and N atoms, respectively. 
The key feature of the “dots-in-a-matrix” hetero-crystals is the structural affinity between the two constituents. The perovskite MAPbI3 and the PbS QD both have six-coordinated Pb atoms with a similar Pb–Pb bond length, leading to nearly coherent interfaces. To confirm the stability of the heterostructure under thermal disturbance, we carry out first-principles molecular dynamics simulations of the hetero-crystal at 300 K. Fig. 1b shows the relaxed molecular structure of the hetero-crystal at zero temperature and Fig. 1c displays a representative snapshot of the MD trajectory at 300 K. The Pb–Pb bond length at 0 K in MAPbI3 is about 6.4 Å, which is ∼6% larger than that in the PbS QD. We find that although the thermal fluctuations at 300 K strongly disturb the interfacial coherence, the overall heterostructure remains stable. In general, the organic cations undergo extensive rotational displacement that is coupled to the thermal distortion of Pb–I inorganic cages, consistent with previous theoretical finding.43 The displacements of I ions are greater than those of Pb ions in MAPbI3 due to the lighter mass of I. The interatomic distance between Pb and I across the interface is found to be ∼3.5 Å, similar to the Pb–I bond length in pristine MAPbI3. As shown in Fig. 1d, chemical bonds with ionic features are formed at the heterojunction, contributing to the interfacial cohesion and charge transfer. Recent experimental observations of high photovoltaic performance based on CsPbI3/PbS “dots-in-a-matrix” can also be attributed to the structural affinity between the two constituents. The lattice constant of cubic CsPbI3 (6.29 Å) is very close to that of cubic MAPbI3 (6.28 Å).
The density of states (DOS) of the MAPbI3–PbS hetero-crystal is calculated at 0 K based on the relaxed atomic structure. As shown in Fig. 2, the total DOS is split into contributions from MAPbI3 and PbS. The partial DOS clearly indicates the formation of the type-I band alignment in the hetero-crystal, with the band gap of PbS falling entirely within the gap of MAPbI3. The vanishing DOS in the band gap suggests the absence of “mid-gap” defect states in the hetero-crystal, which attests the fact that the hetero-interface between the QD and the perovskite is well passivated. The projected DOS shows that Pb, I, and S contribute to the states near the band gap, with the conduction band edge (CBE) mainly consisting of Pb 6p orbitals and the valence band edge (VBE) comprised of I 5p and S 3p orbitals, consistent with the previous findings.44–47 We find that the thermal fluctuations at 300 K narrow the band gap from 1.37 eV at 0 K to 1.01 eV (averaged from the 1 ps MD trajectory), which is in good agreement with the experimental value of ∼1 eV.5 The tensile strain imposed on the QD by the interfacial lattice mismatch was believed to increase the band gap of the hetero-crystal.5 However, the strain is expected to be relieved by the thermal fluctuations, thus the band gap at 300 K is lowered. We note that the apparent agreement with the experimental band gap is merely fortuitous thanks to the well-known error cancellation between the neglect of the spin–orbit coupling (SOC) effect and the underestimate of the band gap by the DFT calculations.48,49 We did not consider the SOC correction explicitly in this work because the Rashba/Dresselhaus band splitting (or the SOC effect) was shown to vanish at the Gamma point.50 Since our calculations were performed at the Gamma point, the SOC effect is negligible.
 Fig. 2  (a) The partial density of states (DOS) of the MAPbI3–PbS hetero-crystal projected onto the perovskite (black) and the QD (red). The projected DOS of the hetero-crystal projected onto the Pb (b), I (c) and S (d) atoms. 
Thanks to the formation of the type-I band alignment, the photoexcited charge carriers in MAPbI3 could be injected into PbS QDs driven by the band offset. To examine the interfacial charge transfer, we need to identify the initial and final states that are most pertinent to the charge transfer process. To this end, we choose the lowest-energy-unoccupied-state whose spatial distribution is primarily (>80%) confined on MAPbI3 (or donor) to represent the photoexcited electron state before the charge transfer. Similarly, we choose the highest-energy-occupied-state with >80% spatial distribution on MAPbI3 to represent the photoexcited hole before the charge transfer. For the final state after the charge transfer, we choose the lowest-unoccupied-molecular-orbital (LUMO) and the highest-occupied-molecular-orbital (HOMO) of the hetero-crystal to represent the state of the transferred electron and the hole, respectively. These initial and the final states are shown in Fig. 3. We find that the HOMO and LUMO levels are entirely localized on the QD (or the acceptor), thus they are a good representation of the final states. Although we focus on the lowest energy excitation in this work, higher energy excitations are also relevant to the interfacial charge transfer. However, since these “hot” excitations would undergo ultrafast relaxation to the band edges before the charge transfer takes place, we do not consider them explicitly here. As a result, the charge transfer timescales determined in this work represent the lower limits.
 Fig. 3  (top panel) The charge density for the photoexcited hole before (left) and after (right) the interfacial charge transfer. (bottom panel) The charge density for the photoexcited electron before (left) and after (right) the interfacial charge transfer. 
We have also calculated the charge density of the lowest energy exciton in the MAPbI3–PbS hetero-crystal at both 0 K and 300 K using TDDFT, as shown in Fig. 4. The exciton charge density corresponds to the charge density difference between the excited state and the ground state, with the red and blue color representing the density of the excited electron and hole, respectively. Remarkably, at both temperatures, the photoexcited electron and hole are entirely confined to the PbS QD, suggesting that the lowest excitation of the hetero-crystal occurs exclusively in the QD. Hence, there is a complete transfer of photoexcitation from the perovskite to the QD and the QD is the sole source of photoluminescence quenching. This result also justifies the choice of the final state as the one localized entirely on the QD. The electron and hole densities are spatially entangled in the QD, which could lead to ultrafast charge recombination.
 Fig. 4  The charge density of the lowest energy exciton for the MAPbI3–PbS hetero-crystal at 0 K and 300 K. The red and blue colors represent the electron and hole, respectively. 
The above results are also supported by the MD simulations of the hetero-crystal at 300 K. More specifically, we calculate the time evolution in the energy of the donor and acceptor states mentioned above. As shown in Fig. 5, there is no energy crossing for any of the four states during the MD simulations, suggesting that the type I band offset is preserved for at least 1 ps at 300 K. The robustness of the electronic structure is an important feature of the “dots-in-a-matrix” hetero-crystal, which underpins its remarkable properties. We find that the thermal fluctuation of the acceptor states is stronger than that of the donor states, owing to the smaller atomic mass of S ions compared to I ions in the hetero-crystal. We emphasize that the greater energy oscillation is an indication of strong electron–phonon coupling, which has important implications to non-adiabatic charge transfer processes.
 Fig. 5  Energy as a function of time for the photoexcited electron and hole states on the donor and the acceptor. 
In the “dots-in-a-matrix” hetero-crystal, the photoexcitation in the perovskite leads to the formation of excitons in MAPbI3. Due to the small exciton binding energy,2,51 the bound electron–hole pair could easily dissociate into free charge carriers in MAPbI3. The photo-generated electron and hole are injected into the acceptor states of the QD driven by the band offset. Subsequently, the electron and hole can recombine in the QD via the radiative channels, leading to light emission. Thus, ultrafast charge (both electron and hole) transfer from the perovskite to the QD is a key requirement for efficient light emission. In the following, we examine the interfacial charge transfer dynamics by performing the NAMD simulations at 300 K. The charge transfer across the perovskite–QD interface proceeds by a nonradiative relaxation of the photoexcited electron and hole from the perovskite donor to the QD acceptor. The time-dependent population of the transferred electron and hole onto the acceptor is obtained by the FSSH calculations and the results are summarized in Fig. 6. The time-dependent population curves are fitted by exponential functions to extract the relaxation times. We find ultrafast transfer for both electron and hole from the perovskite to the QD. In particular, the estimated electron transfer time is ∼0.8 ps, two times faster than the estimated hole transfer time (∼1.9 ps). The faster dynamics of the electron is due to the stronger coupling and the smaller energy offset between the donor's and acceptor's CBE states. As shown in Fig. 3, the electron wavefunction spreads over to both the donor and acceptor, demonstrating a strong coupling between the CBE states on the donor and the acceptor. In contrast, the hole wavefunction is primarily confined to the donor, implying a weaker coupling between the VBE states on the donor and the acceptor. In addition, as shown in Fig. 5, the energy offset between the CBE states (photoexcited electron) on the donor and acceptor is considerably smaller than that between the VBE states on the donor and acceptor (photoexcited hole), and this contrast persists throughout the MD simulation timescale of 1 ps. These two factors (wavefunction overlap and energy offset) explain the faster charge transfer dynamics of the photoexcited electron. However, despite the moderate asymmetry (a factor of two), the charge transfer dynamics of the electron and the hole can still be considered as balanced. Indeed, the ultrafast and nearly balanced interfacial charge transfer underscores the efficient charge transfer and the high photoluminescence quantum efficiency observed in the experiments.5
 Fig. 6  Time evolution for the population (occupation number) of the transferred electron and hole from MAPbI3 to PbS. 
Finally, we identify the phonon modes that drive the non-adiabatic electronic transitions. To this end, we have calculated the phonon spectrum (also known as spectral density) by discrete Fourier transforms (FTs) of the autocorrelation function of the energy difference between the representative pairs of electronic states. The spectrum characterizes the phonon frequencies that are involved in the electronic transitions. The intensity of the FT peak reflects the magnitude of non-adiabatic electron–phonon coupling. Particularly, the red curve shows the FT of the energy gap between the hole states on the donor and the acceptor, while the blue curve represents the FT of the energy gap between the electron states on the donor and the acceptor. The energy gaps for the electron and the hole are shown in Fig. 5. We observe that both the electron and hole transfers are facilitated by the phonon modes in the low frequency domain (<500 cm−1), which consists of the stretching modes of Pb–I bonds and the torsion modes of methylammonium cation. As Pb–I bonds are either in MAPbI3 or across the interface, the charge transfer appears to be driven primarily by the lattice vibrations of the perovskite. The participation of the low-energy acoustic modes in the electronic transitions is not surprising owing to the “softness” of the perovskites, similar to the previous findings.52,53 As shown in Fig. 7, a broad spectrum of the phonon modes is involved in the interfacial electron transfer, with a maximum amplitude three times higher than that for the interfacial hole transfer. The stronger electron–phonon coupling enables the delocalization of the electronic state over the entire hetero-crystal. On the other hand, there is weaker coupling to the lattice vibrations for the hole, which explains its slower dynamics, especially given the initial localization of the hole wavefunction on the donor (Fig. 3). The average NAC for the electron and the hole states is estimated as 5.8 and 3.5 meV, respectively, which is consistent with the above analysis.
 Fig. 7  Fourier transform for the time evolution of the electron and the hole energy offset between the donor and the acceptor. The involvement of a broader range of low-frequency vibrations provides additional channels for the electron transfer (blue curve). 
4. Conclusion
In summary, we have carried out first-principles simulations to unravel the interfacial charge transfer dynamics in the “dots-in-a-matrix” hetero-crystal. We find that Pb–I bonds are formed across the coherent hetero-interfaces. The type-I band structure with the donor states on MAPbI3 and the acceptor states on PbS is revealed in the absence of mid-gap defect states, consistent with the experimental observations. The lowest-energy excitation is found to be localized entirely on the QD. Both the hetero-interface and its electronic structure remain robust under thermal fluctuations at 300 K. The interfacial charge transfer is predicted to be in a ps timescale, with the transfer of the photoexcited electron twice as fast as that of the hole. The difference in the charge transfer dynamics can be rationalized from the donor and the acceptor electronic coupling strength. The wavefunctions of the photoexcited electron are delocalized onto the entire hetero-crystal while the wavefunctions of the photoexcited hole are largely confined to the donor. While the interfacial transfer for both the electron and the hole is facilitated by the phonons, the electron couples more strongly to the low energy phonon modes, yielding more efficient charge transfer. We believe that the current study fills the critical knowledge gap that is essential to the operating mechanism of the “dots-in-a-matrix” platform. This work could provide useful insights and guidance to the future development of the “dots-in-a-matrix” devices.
Conflicts of interest
The are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the startup funding from Hunan Agricultural University (grant no. 540741800499 and 18QN02). The work at California State University Northridge was supported by the US National Science Foundation (DMR-1828019).
References
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Long-Range Balanced Electron- and Hole-Transport Lengths in Organic-Inorganic CH3NH3PbI3, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Electron-Hole Diffusion Lengths Exceeding 1 Micrometer in an Organometal Trihalide Perovskite Absorber, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 Search PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Electron-hole diffusion lengths exceeding 1 micrometer in an organometal trihalide perovskite absorber, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Ngo and I. Mora-Sero, Interaction between Colloidal Quantum Dots and Halide Perovskites: Looking for Constructive Synergies, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1099–1108 Search PubMed .
Z. Ning, X. Gong, R. Comin, G. Walters, F. Fan, O. Voznyy, E. Yassitepe, A. Buin, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Quantum-dot-in-perovskite solids, Nature, 2015, 523, 324–328 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, Z. Yang, G. Walters, R. Comin, Z. Ning, E. Beauregard, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Highly efficient quantum dot near-infrared light-emitting diodes, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 253–257 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, O. Voznyy, G. Walters, J. Z. Fan, M. Liu, S. Kinge, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Quantum Dots in Two-Dimensional Perovskite Matrices for Efficient Near-Infrared Light Emission, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 830–836 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, A. Janmohamed, X. Lan, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, O. Voznyy, E. Yassitepe, G. H. Kim, Z. Ning, X. Gong, R. Comin and E. H. Sargent, Colloidal Quantum Dot Photovoltaics Enhanced by Perovskite Shelling, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7539–7543 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, J. Hao, W. Hu, Z. Zang, X. Tang, L. Fang, T. Niu and M. Zhou, Enhanced Stability and Tunable Photoluminescence in Perovskite CsPbX3/ZnS Quantum Dot Heterostructure, Small, 2017, 13, 1604085 CrossRef .
J. Han, X. Yin, H. Nan, Y. Zhou, Z. Yao, J. Li, D. Oron and H. Lin, Enhancing the Performance of Perovskite Solar Cells by Hybridizing SnS Quantum Dots with CH3 NH3PbI3, Small, 2017, 13, 1700953 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. Phuyal, J. Du, L. Tian, V. A. Öberg, M. B. Johansson, U. B. Cappel, O. Karis, J. Liu, H. Rensmo, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, Inorganic CsPbI3 Perovskite Coating on PbS Quantum Dot for Highly Efficient and Stable Infrared Light Converting Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702049 CrossRef .
X. Zeng, T. Zhou, C. Leng, Z. Zang, M. Wang, W. Hu, X. Tang, S. Lu, L. Fang and M. Zhou, Performance improvement of perovskite solar cells by employing a CdSe quantum dot/PCBM composite as an electron transport layer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17499–17505 RSC .
F. Xia, T. Mueller, Y. M. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia and P. Avouris, Ultrafast graphene photodetector, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 839–843 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Chang, W. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Han, J. Pu, J. K. Chang, W. T. Hsu, J. K. Huang, C. L. Hsu, M. H. Chiu, T. Takenobu, H. Li, C. I. Wu, W. H. Chang, A. T. Wee and L. J. Li, Monolayer MoSe2 grown by chemical vapor deposition for fast photodetection, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8582–8590 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, Y. Shi, W. Hu, M. H. Chiu, Z. Liu, A. Bera, F. Li, H. Wang, L. J. Li and T. Wu, Heterostructured WS2/CH3NH3PbI3 Photoconductors with Suppressed Dark Current and Enhanced Photodetectivity, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3683–3689 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Jung, K. T. Butler and A. Walsh, Halide Perovskite Heteroepitaxy: Bond Formation and Carrier Confinement at the PbS–CsPbBr3 Interface, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 27351–27356 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Zhang and G. Lu, Charge Stripe Formation in Molecular Ferroelectric Organohalide Perovskites for Efficient Charge Separation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 23969–23975 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and G. Lu, Subspace formulation of time-dependent density functional theory for large-scale calculations, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 143, 064110 CrossRef .
P. E. Blöchl, Projector augmented-wave method, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953–17979 CrossRef .
X. Zhang and G. Lu, First-order nonadiabatic couplings in extended systems by time-dependent density functional theory, J. Chem. Phys., 2018, 149, 244103 CrossRef .
C. F. Craig, W. R. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, Trajectory Surface Hopping in the Time-Dependent Kohn-Sham Approach for Electron-Nuclear Dynamics, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 163001 CrossRef .
J. C. Tully, Perspective: Nonadiabatic Dynamics Theory, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 22A301–22A307 CrossRef .
J. C. Tully, Molecular-Dynamics with Electronic-Transitions, J. Chem. Phys., 1990, 93, 1061–1071 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, H. Jin, C. Long, T. Wang, R. Peng, B. Huang and Y. Dai, MoSSe nanotube: a promising photocatalyst with an extremely long carrier lifetime, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7885–7890 RSC .
Z. Li, X. Zhang and G. Lu, Exciton diffusion in disordered small molecules for organic photovoltaics: insights from first-principles simulations, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2014, 26, 185006 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Y. Y. Sun, L. Li, Z. Zhou, J. Tang and O. V. Prezhdo, Control of Charge Recombination in Perovskites by Oxidation State of Halide Vacancy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15753–15763 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, R. Long, Z. Hou, J. Tang and O. V. Prezhdo, Influence of Encapsulated Water on Luminescence Energy, Line Width, and Lifetime of Carbon Nanotubes: Time Domain Ab Initio Analysis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4006–4013 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jankowska and O. V. Prezhdo, Real-Time Atomistic Dynamics of Energy Flow in an STM Setup: Revealing the Mechanism of Current-Induced Molecular Emission, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3591–3597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, A. S. Vasenko, R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, Halide Composition Controls Electron–Hole Recombination in Cesium–Lead Halide Perovskite Quantum Dots: A Time Domain Ab Initio Study, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1872–1879 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, W.-H. Fang and R. Long, Unravelling the Effects of A-Site Cations on Nonradiative Electron–Hole Recombination in Lead Bromide Perovskites: Time-Domain ab Initio Analysis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 4834–4840 CrossRef CAS .
L.-y. Wei, W. Ma, C. Lian and S. Meng, Benign Interfacial Iodine Vacancies in Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 5905–5913 CrossRef CAS .
R. Long, D. Casanova, W.-H. Fang and O. V. Prezhdo, Donor–Acceptor Interaction Determines the Mechanism of Photoinduced Electron Injection from Graphene Quantum Dots into TiO2: π-Stacking Supersedes Covalent Bonding, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2619–2629 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Zhang and G. Lu, Dipole-Assisted Charge Separation in Organic–Inorganic Hybrid Photovoltaic Heterojunctions: Insight from First-Principles Simulations, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9845–9851 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nijamudheen and A. V. Akimov, Criticality of Symmetry in Rational Design of Chalcogenide Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 248–257 Search PubMed .
R. D. Senanayake, A. V. Akimov and C. M. Aikens, Theoretical Investigation of Electron and Nuclear Dynamics in the [Au25(SH)18]−1 Thiolate-Protected Gold Nanocluster, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 121, 10653–10662 CrossRef .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Efficient iterative schemes forab initiototal-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169–11186 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmuller, Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15–50 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Ab initiomolecular-dynamics simulation of the liquid-metal–amorphous-semiconductor transition in germanium, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 49, 14251–14269 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Ab initiomolecular dynamics for liquid metals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 558–561 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Erratum: Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 1396 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baikie, Y. N. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. X. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, Synthesis and crystal chemistry of the hybrid perovskite (CH3NH3) PbI3 for solid-state sensitised solar cell applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628–5641 RSC .
W. Li, J. Liu, F.-Q. Bai, H.-X. Zhang and O. V. Prezhdo, Hole Trapping by Iodine Interstitial Defects Decreases Free Carrier Losses in Perovskite Solar Cells: A Time-Domain Ab Initio Study, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1270–1278 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, D. H. Kim, J. H. Lee and J. C. Grossman, Impact of stoichiometry on the electronic structure of PbS quantum dots, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 196802 CrossRef .
W. J. Yin, T. T. Shi and Y. F. Yan, Unusual Defect Physics in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cell Absorber, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903–063907 CrossRef .
Y. He and G. Galli, Perovskites for Solar Thermoelectric Applications: A First Principle Study of CH3NH3AI3(A = Pb and Sn), Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5394–5400 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Du, Efficient Carrier Transport in Halide Perovskites: Theoretical Perspectives, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9091–9098 RSC .
W. Li, L. Zhou, O. V. Prezhdo and A. V. Akimov, Spin–Orbit Interactions Greatly Accelerate Nonradiative Dynamics in Lead Halide Perovskites, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2159–2166 CrossRef CAS .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, J.-M. Jancu and C. Katan, Importance of Spin–Orbit Coupling in Hybrid Organic/Inorganic Perovskites for Photovoltaic Applications, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2999–3005 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mosconi, T. Etienne and F. De Angelis, Rashba Band Splitting in Organohalide Lead Perovskites: Bulk and Surface Effects, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2247–2252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, Perovskites: The Emergence of a New Era for Low-Cost, High-Efficiency Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Trivedi, L. Wang and O. V. Prezhdo, Auger-mediated electron relaxation is robust to deep hole traps: time-domain ab initio study of CdSe quantum dots, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2086–2091 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, A. J. Neukirch and O. V. Prezhdo, Phonon-induced pure-dephasing of luminescence, multiple exciton generation, and fission in silicon clusters, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139, 164303 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 1  (a) The constructed 4 × 4 × 4 cubic supercell for the MAPbI3 matrix. (b) The fully relaxed atomic structure of the MAPbI3–PbS hetero-crystal at 0 K with the interfacial structure clearly presented. (c) A representative atomic structure of the hetero-crystal at 300 K obtained from the MD simulations. (d) The contour plot showing the bonding charge density for the MAPbI3–PbS hetero-crystal. The charge accumulation and depletion are represented by the blue and yellow color, respectively. The contour isosurface level is set at 0.073 e bohr−3. The purple, dark gray, yellow, light pink, light blue, and dark brown spheres represent I, Pb, S, H, C, and N atoms, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The partial density of states (DOS) of the MAPbI3–PbS hetero-crystal projected onto the perovskite (black) and the QD (red). The projected DOS of the hetero-crystal projected onto the Pb (b), I (c) and S (d) atoms.	 

 	Fig. 3  (top panel) The charge density for the photoexcited hole before (left) and after (right) the interfacial charge transfer. (bottom panel) The charge density for the photoexcited electron before (left) and after (right) the interfacial charge transfer.	 

 	Fig. 4  The charge density of the lowest energy exciton for the MAPbI3–PbS hetero-crystal at 0 K and 300 K. The red and blue colors represent the electron and hole, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Energy as a function of time for the photoexcited electron and hole states on the donor and the acceptor.	 

 	Fig. 6  Time evolution for the population (occupation number) of the transferred electron and hole from MAPbI3 to PbS.	 

 	Fig. 7  Fourier transform for the time evolution of the electron and the hole energy offset between the donor and the acceptor. The involvement of a broader range of low-frequency vibrations provides additional channels for the electron transfer (blue curve).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
