Competing hydrogen evolution reaction: a challenge in electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1QM00546D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1QM00546D
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 5954-5969Competing hydrogen evolution reaction: a challenge in electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation

        
          
            Jiangyue 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Cheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liang-Xin 
            Ding
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Haihui 
            Wang
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: lxding@scut.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: cehhwang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Received 
      7th April 2021
    , Accepted 6th June 2021First published on 8th June 2021AbstractAmmonia (NH3) is an important chemical for human beings; however, the majority of NH3 is produced by the energy-intensive and environmentally unfriendly Haber–Bosch process. The electrocatalytic N2 reduction reaction (NRR) under mild conditions is a promising candidate for replacing the conventional Haber–Bosch process. Nevertheless, competition between the H2 evolution reaction (HER) and the NRR results in a low NRR performance (that is, a low faradaic efficiency and a low NH3 yield rate). In this review, several NRR mechanisms have been summarized: dissociative/associative, Mars–van Krevelen, and surface hydrogenation mechanisms. Moreover, some methods, such as optimization of reaction systems and other approaches for N2 fixation, to improve the electrocatalytic NRR performance are discussed. Directly suppressing the competing HER seems to be a feasible approach to enhance the NRR performance; however, interestingly, protons are also involved as a reactant in the NRR, and directly suppressing the HER would definitely restrict the NRR. Furthermore, the reaction potentials of the HER and NRR are similar, and the potential of the HER is always lower than that of the NRR under both acidic and alkaline conditions; this indicates that the dominant NRR mechanism will involve vigorous H2 evolution. Therefore, it is necessary to control the HER during the NRR via both catalyst design and optimization of experimental conditions rather than directly suppressing it.
1. Introduction
Ammonia (NH3) is an important component of various chemicals and is widely utilized in medicine, fiber synthesis, and fertilizer production.1–6 Fertilizers play an important role in agricultural development,7,8 and without NH3, half of the world's population may not survive.9 As the mass proportion of H in NH3 molecules is as high as 17.6%, NH3 is a promising medium for H2 storage.10 Additionally, gaseous NH3 can be appropriately stored in low-pressure vessels.11,12 During decomposition, carbon-free NH3 does not generate carbon emissions,10 which would be a suitable candidate for H energy storage in the near future. For over a hundred years, the industrial production of NH3 has been mainly based on the Haber–Bosch process, in which N2 directly reacts with H2 in the presence of a catalyst under high temperature and high pressure conditions.13 Because N2 is the most abundant molecule in nature, it is an ideal source of N for NH3 production. However, N2 is chemically inert due to the strong NN bonds (941 kJ mol−1), which makes the reaction between N2 and H2 difficult to occur, and therefore, a significant amount of energy is required for the cleavage of NN bonds.14,15 In addition, the energy for the Haber–Bosch process is mostly derived from non-renewable natural gases or coal burning, which leads to numerous carbon emissions.9,16 Moreover, H2 production generates a considerable amount of carbon emissions.9 Therefore, the development of an economic and efficient method for NH3 synthesis is urgently required.
N2 fixation is a natural process that is mainly accomplished by microorganisms under ambient conditions.17 Mo- and Fe-based nitrogenase enzymes of microorganisms ensure the effective fixation of N2.18,19 Nevertheless, the ultralow N2 reduction rate of natural N2 fixation severely hinders the industrial application of this process.20 In comparison, the electrocatalytic N2 reduction reaction (NRR) is a promising alternative to the conventional Haber–Bosch process21–23 because the NRR equipment can be powered by clean and renewable energy sources such as solar and wind.7,24,25 Inspired by the metal active center in nitrogenase enzymes, researchers are paying extensive attention to the design and fabrication of electrocatalysts for N2 fixation.10,26 As the cleavage of NN also consumes a large amount of energy because of the substantially high bond energy of NN,27 the design and fabrication of efficient NRR electrocatalysts for weakening the NN bond and reducing the energy barrier of NN cleavage is necessary for facilitating the electrocatalytic NRR.
The industrial application of the electrocatalytic NRR for NH3 synthesis is still limited by the low NH3 yield rate and faradaic efficiency.10,25 Over the past few years, significant progress has been made in the electrocatalytic NRR, and most of the studies have been focused on suppressing the H2 evolution reaction (HER) to boost the NRR performance as the HER is deemed as a competing reaction of the NRR owing to the very closed reaction potentials of these reactions.28–30 From the mechanistic point of view, the NRR involves the reaction of gaseous N2 with protons and electrons to form NH3. However, during the NRR in a strong reducing environment, large quantities of protons transform into H2 after receiving electrons rather than reacting with N species to form NH3 on the catalyst surface; this causes a low NH3 yield rate and faradaic efficiency. As protons are reactants in the NRR, directly suppressing the HER would suppress the NRR because the hydrogenation of N2 is an important step in N2 fixation, and in the absence of H activation, N2 cannot combine with H species to form NH3. A high-performance NRR catalyst must first be an HER-active catalyst, and in a proton-containing solution, protons are more likely to be activated than NN. That is, if the catalyst could not even activate the protons, let alone the NN. Considering the competition between the NRR and HER is particularly important while designing and selecting catalysts for electrocatalytic N2 fixation. In this review, we summarize the recent studies on catalysts with appropriate electrocatalytic activities in both the NRR and HER and discuss the role of H2 evolution in the NRR and the widely accepted dissociative/associative mechanism, Mars–van Krevelen (MvK) mechanism for transition metal nitrides (TMNs), and the recently proposed surface hydrogenation mechanism for the NRR. We hope that this review will provide inspiring guidance for the correct understanding of the HER in the NRR, rational catalyst design, and experimental optimization toward an efficient NRR.
2. Fundamental understanding
2.1 Haber–Bosch process
NH3 is one of the most important chemicals in the world, and the majority of NH3 is synthesized by the Haber–Bosch process, which can be traced back to the early 20th century.31 In the past hundred years, the Haber–Bosch process of NH3 production has consumed more than 1% of the world's energy supply32,33 and produced nearly 140 MT NH3 per year (2011).34 This energy-intensive process of NH3 production involves the reaction between N2 and H2 and requires a high pressure and temperature of 20 MPa and 500 °C, respectively,35 contributing to approximately 1.6% of the global carbon emissions.36 The corresponding reaction pathway is depicted in the following eqn (1): N2 + 3H2 ↔ 2NH3(1)
However, the Haber–Bosch process is still employed as a crucial N2 fixation method. Therefore, an effective and eco-friendly strategy for the production of NH3 is urgently required. The electrocatalytic NRR is a promising pathway for the efficient and eco-friendly synthesis of NH3, and the reaction of N2 and H2 in the Haber–Bosch process indicates that the hydrogenation of N2 is an important step for the electrocatalytic NRR and the activation of H species is crucial for N2 reduction.
2.2 Dissociative/associative mechanism for NRR
N2 is an ideal source of N for NH3 production as it is the most abundant molecule in nature. However, N2 is a highly stable and chemically inert molecule in the world because of its very strong NN bonds, and high energy is required to cleave this bond during the synthesis of NH3.37,38 Electrocatalytic reduction of N2 in the presence of protons and electrons is an ideal alternative to the energy-intensive Haber–Bosch process for NH3 synthesis. The reaction formula for the electrocatalytic NRR is expressed by eqn (2): N2 + 6H+ + 6e− ↔ 2NH3(2)
The various proposed and widely accepted pathways for N2 reduction toward the synthesis of NH3 on a heterogeneous surface are shown in Fig. 1, which can be generally classified into two types: dissociative pathways (Fig. 1a) and associative pathways (Fig. 1b–d). In the dissociative pathway, at first, the NN bond is cleaved, and two isolated N atoms are generated on the substrate surface; then, two NH3 molecules are produced after the hydrogenation of the two isolated N atoms. The dissociative pathway consumes a large amount of energy for the cleavage of the strong NN bond. Additionally, the reduction of N2 to NH3 in the Haber–Bosch process is commonly believed to follow a dissociative pathway.
 Fig. 1  N2 reduction via the (a) dissociative pathway, (b) associative distal pathway, (c) associative alternating pathway, and (d) associative enzymatic pathway on a heterogeneous surface. 
The associative pathway can be divided into associative distal, associative alternating, and associative enzymatic pathways based on the adsorption configurations of N2; the end-on configurations (Fig. 2a) lead to the associative distal pathway and associative alternating pathway, whereas the side-on configurations (Fig. 2b) result in the associative enzymatic pathway.
 Fig. 2  N2 adsorption configurations on a Mo-BN monolayer: (a) end-on configuration and (b) side-on configuration. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
(i) In the associative distal pathway (Fig. 1b), N2 molecules adsorb on the substrate in the end-on configurations, and protonation and reduction initially occur at the farthest N atom; after three steps of protonation and reduction, one equivalent of NH3 is synthesized. Once the prepared NH3 is released, the remaining N atom is protonated and reduced to another equivalent of NH3 after the three steps of protonation and reduction, and the synthesized NH3 is released; this completes one cycle of the associative distal pathway.
(ii) In the associative alternating pathway (Fig. 1c), N2 adsorbs on the substrate in the end-on configuration. At first, protonation and reduction proceed at the farthest N atom, and then, these reactions alternately occur at the N atoms to form the *NH2NH2 intermediate; finally, the *NH2NH2 intermediate is protonated and sequentially reduced, and two equivalents of NH3 are formed and released; this constitutes one cycle of the associative alternating pathway.
(iii) In the associative enzymatic pathway (Fig. 1d), N2 adsorbs on the substrate in the side-on configuration, where both N atoms of N2 are bound to the surface of the substrate; protonation and reduction sequentially occur to form the *NH2NH2* intermediate, whose further protonation to generate NH3 becomes difficult as the protonation of *NH2 species to *NH3 may be the potential-determining step (PDS).
Spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT) is commonly applied to investigate the elementary steps in a reaction. A computational study was proposed by Chen and Zhao39 in 2017, where a single Mo atom was anchored on a defective boron nitride monolayer (Mo-BN) as an efficient electrocatalyst for N2 fixation, and several types of abovementioned NRR pathways were evaluated via DFT calculations. The mode of N2 adsorption plays an important role in the reaction pathway to activate the NN bond. DFT calculations were based on Mo-BN, in which the NRR-active sites were isolated Mo atoms. When the N2 molecules adsorbed on the Mo atoms in the end-on and side-on configurations, electrons were transferred to N2, resulting in the elongation of the N–N bond length to 1.14 and 1.20 Å as compared to that in the individual N2 molecule (Fig. 2a and b), respectively. The free energy (ΔG) values of N2 adsorption for the end-on and side-on configurations were −0.21 and −0.22 eV, respectively, indicating that N2 adsorption and activation easily occurred on the Mo–BN surface. Fig. 3a–c show the atomic configurations and free-energy diagrams of the various associative pathways. As shown in Fig. 3d, when the NRR followed the associative distal pathway, N2 was adsorbed on the Mo site in the end-on configuration, and then, protonation along with the transfer of one electron formed the *N2H species; this elementary step was slightly uphill in the ΔG profile by 0.75 eV. Subsequently, the protons along with electrons continuously attacked the distal N atom of the *NNH species, and then, ΔG decreased by 0.76 eV because of the formation of *NNH2 species. The first synthesized NH3 molecule was released after the third protonation of the distal N atom in the *NNH2 group, and ΔG for the transformation of *NNH2 to NH3 + N* decreased by 0.12 eV. The second NH3 molecule was generated after the remaining N* was adsorbed on the Mo site followed by reactions with other three protons and electrons, and the ΔG values of these three steps were −0.90, −0.67, and 0.63 eV, respectively. Finally, ΔG for the desorption of the second NH3 molecule increased by 0.31 eV. Note that the first protonation of N2 to *NNH was the PDS because the ΔG value was +0.75 eV, maximum among those of all the elementary steps. For the associative alternating and enzymatic pathways, protonation alternately occurred between the two N atoms, thus forming the *NH2NH2 and *NH2NH2* species, and further protonation led to the synthesis of NH3. The formation of *NH2NH2 was the PDS of the associative alternating pathway, and there was a slight uphill in the ΔG profile from *NHNH2 to *NH2NH2, as shown in Fig. 3e. The PDS of the associative enzymatic pathway was the protonation of *NH2 to NH3, which could be easily verified from Fig. 3f. η is an appropriate evaluation criterion of the catalytic activity; the lower the η value, the faster the N2 reduction. η values of the associative distal, alternating, and enzymatic pathways were calculated according to the computational hydrogen electrode model using eqn (3): η = Uequilibrium − Ulimiting,(3)where Uequilibrium is the equilibrium potential of the NRR for the Mo–BN catalyst (approximately −0.16 V), and Ulimiting is the applied potential to overcome the energy barriers, which can be determined viaeqn (4): Ulimiting = −ΔG/e,(4)where ΔG is the free energy of the PDS. η values were measured to be as 0.59, 0.72, and 0.19 V for the distal, alternating, and enzymatic pathways on the Mo–BN monolayer, respectively. These values indicate that the associative enzymatic pathway is more favorable than the other two pathways for the NRR on the Mo–BN monolayer due to its lowest η value.
 Fig. 3  Geometric configurations during the N2 reduction and hydrogenation mechanisms: (a) associative distal, (b) associative alternating, and (c) associative enzymatic pathways on the Mo–BN monolayer. Free energy diagrams of N2 reduction mechanisms derived from the DFT calculations for the (d) associative distal, (e) associative alternating, and (f) associative enzymatic pathways on the Mo–BN monolayer. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Actually, under practical NRR conditions, in most of the reaction systems, one of the pathways would be more favorable than the others; this does not imply that other pathways are not present in the system, and different systems or catalysts would have different favorable pathways. Moreover, the HER is a side reaction of the NRR because in proton-containing solutions, protons are easily activated and directly couple with electrons, yielding H2 instead of protonating N2 for NH3 synthesis.
2.3 MvK mechanism for NRR
TMN catalysts (such as VN, MnN, and ZrN) have also been developed for the electrocatalytic NRR. Abghoui et al.40 proposed a MvK mechanism for TMN catalysts toward the NRR.
Unlike the cases of traditional dissociative/associative mechanisms, in the proposed MvK mechanism, the lattice N atoms on the TMN catalyst surface can be continuously protonated, and the formed NH3 molecule subsequently results in a N-vacancy, which is replenished by the adsorption of gaseous N2 molecules (Fig. 4a). The NRR via the MvK mechanism focuses on the replenishment of the N-vacancy and catalyst regeneration rather than on N2 adsorption as in the case of the dissociative/associative mechanisms. Mononitrides in both rocksalt (RS) and zinc blende (ZB) structures were examined in this study; owing to the large thermochemical barrier of replenishing the N-vacancies with gaseous N2, the ZB and RS ScN, TiN, CrN, YN, and MnN surfaces formed dimer N-vacancies in this mechanism. Furthermore, two NH3 molecules were formed from two surface N atoms, thus creating a dimer N-vacancy before the regeneration of the catalyst by the adsorption of gaseous N2. The stability of the N-vacancies was also investigated. In the MvK mechanism, before gaseous N2 replenishment, the N-vacancy should be stabilized on the surface; otherwise, it would migrate from the surface to the bulk of the catalyst, and NH3 would be formed from the TMN itself instead of gaseous N2, leaving behind the pure metal. The stability of the N-vacancy was estimated based on the difference between the energies (ΔEvac) of a single N-vacancy in the surface layer (Evac,1) and a single N-vacancy in the first subsurface layer (Evac,2). The ΔEvac = Evac,2 − Evac,1 was used to estimate the thermodynamic stability of the N-vacancy on the TMN surface. The activation barriers for vacancy migration (Ea,vac) were also calculated, and the ΔEvacvs. Ea,vac plots are presented in Fig. 4b. These plots suggest that in most of the TMN catalysts, the surface N-vacancy would migrate to the bulk as the ΔEvac values are mostly less than or equal to 0 eV. In contrast, many of the TMN catalysts exhibited Ea,vac values higher than 1 eV, which are unlikely to surpass at room temperature, demonstrating a relatively stable surface vacancy.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the Mars–van Krevelen mechanism. (b) Energy difference (ΔEvac) of a vacancy in the surface layer and in the first subsurface layer of a nitride, and the related activation barrier of vacancy migration (Ea,vac). (c) Free energy diagram of the NRR following a constrained Mars–van Krevelen mechanism on the RS ZrN facet (100) and (d) RS MnN facet (100). Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2015. Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As shown in Fig. 4c, the rate-determining step (RDS) was the first protonation step on the RS ZrN facet (100), which demonstrated a significant ΔG uphill of 0.99 eV. When an external bias of −0.99 V was applied, this ΔG uphill diminished, and all the electrochemical steps became downhill; furthermore, for the steps that did not involve electron transfer, there was no change in ΔG under the external bias. For all the ZB surfaces and some of the RS nitrides, the replenishment of the N-vacancy with N2 is endothermic, leading to an increase in ΔG that cannot be eliminated by the external bias. Then, the dimer N-vacancy was considered for these nitrides, as shown in Fig. 4d, where the ΔG of N2 replenishment was significantly downhill, and the RDS became an electrochemical step that was eliminated via the external bias.
2.4 Surface hydrogenation mechanism for NRR
Although over the past few years, numerous studies have been reported on the electrocatalytic NRR, our understanding of NRR mechanisms still remains very limited. To the best of our knowledge, the main challenges in the electrocatalytic NRR are the low NH3 yield rate and faradaic efficiency. Researchers believe that the HER is the main factor that lowers the NRR performance of catalysts, and thus, suppressing the HER during the NRR is considered important to improve the NRR performance. However, the industrial application of the electrocatalytic NRR for NH3 production is still restricted because suppressing the HER to facilitate the NRR performance may still not sufficiently boost the NRR performance. Therefore, it is necessary to open or find a new avenue for the electrocatalytic NRR to facilitate its practical applications.
Recently, Ling et al.41 proposed a surface hydrogenation mechanism for the NRR. Unlike the cases of the dissociative/associative and MvK mechanisms, in the surface hydrogenation mechanism, initially, protons are reduced to H*, which adheres to the catalyst surface (surface hydrogenation); then, the surface H* species reacts with gaseous N2, followed by protonation and reduction of the N2 molecule; subsequently, the NN bond is cleaved and NH3 is obtained (Fig. 5). This mechanism of NH3 synthesis can drive the NRR on catalysts with weak N2-binding strength at low potentials; further details are provided hereinafter.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the surface hydrogenation mechanism for the NRR on noble-metal-based catalysts. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The authors evaluated the dissociative and associative pathways for the NRR on different crystal phases and facets: hexagonal close-packed (hcp) Au(10), hcp Au(110), face-centered cubic (fcc) Au(101), fcc Au(100), fcc Pd(100), and fcc Pd(101) surfaces. At first, the possibility of NRR via the dissociative pathway on the abovementioned surfaces was evaluated by calculating the reaction energy (ΔE2N) of N2 dissociation (N2 + 2* = 2N*), which was measured to be 5.95, 5.32, 5.13, 5.09, 1.20, and 3.33 eV for hcp Au(110), hcp Au(10), fcc Au(100), fcc Au(101), fcc Pd(100), and fcc Pd(101) surfaces (Fig. 6a), respectively. The high-energy barriers implied that the dissociative pathway was inhibited on these noble-metal-based catalysts. Then, for the associative pathway, the free energy (ΔG*NNH) for the first protonation step of N2 (N2 + * + H+ + e− = *NNH) was assessed because the weak interaction between the catalyst and N2 hampered the activation and hydrogenation of N2. As shown in Fig. 6b, among all the selected calculation models, the Pd-based catalysts (fcc Pd(101) and fcc Pd(100)) exhibited the lowest ΔG*NNH values; nevertheless, the absolute values were extremely high for all the catalysts, suggesting that the Au- and Pd-based catalysts can drive the NRR only at highly negative potentials. However, the abovementioned conclusions contradict the actual situation. Actually, the Au- and Pd-based catalysts can drive the NRR at very low potentials, which is not in accordance with the calculated high ΔG*NNH values. Theoretically, Pd-based catalysts may exhibit higher NRR activities than Au-based catalysts, whereas actually, Au-based catalysts demonstrate better NRR performances than Pd-based catalysts. These discrepancies indicate that there must be some unknown mechanisms and the associative pathway for the NRR on these noble-metal-based catalysts is not applicable.
 Fig. 6  (a) Calculated reaction energy (ΔE2N) for the NRR via the dissociative pathway. (b) Free energy diagram for the first hydrogenation step of the NRR via an associative pathway, and (c) free energy diagram for the H2 evolution reaction on the hcp Au(1_10), hcp Au(110), fcc Au(101), fcc Au(100), fcc Pd(100), and fcc Pd(101) surfaces. Minimum-energy pathways for the protonation of N2 into N2H2* on the (d) hcp Au(110), (e) hcp Au(1_10), (f) fcc Au(100), (g) fcc Au(101), (h) fcc Pd(100), and (i) fcc Pd(101) surfaces; insets show the corresponding structures from the initial state to the final state. Golden, dark cyan, blue, and white balls denote Au, Pd, N, and H atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
As shown in Fig. 6c, the ΔG of H adsorption (ΔGH) was calculated to be 0.28, 0.37, 0.12, 0.17, −0.27, and −0.29 eV for the hcp Au(110), hcp Au(10), fcc Au(100), fcc Au(101), fcc Pd(100), and fcc Pd(101) surfaces, respectively. These values are close to the experimental working potentials for the NRR on the corresponding Au- and Pd-based catalysts, implying that initially, the Volmer reaction (H+ + e− + * = H*) will take place at the working potential instead of the adsorption and activation of N2. This will lead to the hydrogenation of the catalyst surface, and subsequently, gaseous N2 will directly react with the surface H* species to form the N2H2* species, which would result in high energy consumption and is thus the RDS. Once the N2H2* species is formed, the other four protons coupled with four electrons will continuously attack the N2H2* group and generate two NH3 molecules, and all the elementary reactions are exothermic. Herein, the surface hydrogenation mechanism for the NRR on noble-metal-based catalysts was analyzed. The proposed surface hydrogenation mechanism can generally be divided into three steps, as shown in Fig. 5. First, hydrogenation occurs on the catalyst surface: H+ + e− + * = H*, which is the PDS. Then, N2 activation takes place, in which gaseous N2 reacts with the surface H* species to form N2H2*: N2(g) + 2H* = N2H2*, which is the RDS. Finally, the N2H2* group reacts with protons and electrons, and NH3 is formed.
The most crucial step in the proposed surface hydrogenation mechanism is the RDS, that is, the hydrogenation of N2 into N2H2*. As shown in Fig. 6d–i, the energy barriers (Ea) for the reduction of N2 to N2H2* on the Au- and Pd-based catalyst surfaces were calculated, and the hcp Au surfaces demonstrated the smallest Ea values (Fig. 6d and e), indicating the fastest reaction rate of N2 to N2H2*. The Ea values for the fcc Au surfaces (Fig. 6f and g) were substantially higher than those for the hcp Au surfaces. Furthermore, the Ea values for the reduction of N2 to N2H2* on the fcc Pd surfaces were significantly high (Fig. 6h and i). Therefore, the NH3 yield rate on the hcp Au surfaces was the highest, followed by those on the fcc Au and fcc Pd surfaces.
The effects of surface H* coverage on Ea were also analyzed by increasing the coverage of surface H* from low to full; with an increase in the H* coverage from 25 to 100%, Ea slightly decreased on the fcc Au(110) surface (Fig. 7a). A similar phenomenon was observed on the fcc Pd(101) surface by comparing the Ea value at low H* coverage (Fig. 6i) and the Ea value at full H* coverage (Fig. 7b). Moreover, the presence of subsurface H* weakened the binding strength of surface H*, which would make the surface hydrogenation mechanism more facile (Fig. 7c). The HER is the main competing reaction of NRR; therefore, the HER energy barriers for these Au- and Pd-based catalysts were evaluated. The relatively low energy barriers of 0.53, 0.67, 0.69, 0.77, 0.96, and 0.62 eV for the HER via the Tafel reaction were obtained for hcp Au(110), hcp Au(10), fcc Au(100), fcc Au(101), fcc Pd(100), and fcc Pd(101) surfaces, as shown in Fig. 7d–i, respectively. The energy barriers for the HER are always lower than those for the NRR in all the studied systems, indicating that the HER always has a higher H2 yield rate than the NH3 yield rate of the NRR; this explains the low faradaic efficiency and low NH3 yield rate of the NRR.
 Fig. 7  (a) Calculated energy barriers for the H* coverage range from 25 to 100% on the fcc Au(100) surface. Minimum-energy pathways for the hydrogenation of N2 into N2H2* on the (b) fcc Pd(101) surface with 100% H* coverage and the (c) fcc Pd(101) surface with 100% H* coverage and two subsurface H*. Minimum-energy pathways for the H2 evolution reaction through the Tafel reaction on (d) hcp Au(110), (e) hcp Au(1_10), (f) fcc Au(100), (g) fcc Au(101), (h) fcc Pd(100), and (i) fcc Pd(101). Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the surface hydrogenation mechanism on a catalyst with weak N2-binding strength, the surface hydrogenation mechanism on a catalyst with strong N2-binding strength was investigated. An N-doped carbon-supported single Mo catalyst and a pure Mo catalyst were used as prototypes for calculations. Both catalysts demonstrated strong N2-binding strength and relatively high activity toward the NRR, and the calculated energy barriers of these catalysts for the N2(g) + 2H* = N2H2* reaction were comparable (1.47 and 1.31 eV). This indicated that the surface hydrogenation mechanism is feasible on these catalysts and is applicable not only to catalysts with weak N2-binding strengths but also to those with strong N2-binding strengths. Several mechanisms may coexist in a single system; nevertheless, one mechanism would always be dominant. For catalysts with weak N2-binding strength, the surface hydrogenation mechanism may be more favorable than other mechanisms. In contrast, for catalysts with strong N2-binding strength, the surface hydrogenation mechanism may compete with other mechanisms. Although the surface hydrogenation mechanism for the NRR occurs at a low applied potential, a low NH3 yield rate is obtained because the competing HER is more favorable than the NRR. Increasing the concentration of alkali metal cations, such as Li+, Na+, and K+, may only accelerate the NRR41 as compared to the case of increasing the surface H* species, which promotes the HER during the NRR.
3. Main challenges in the electrocatalytic NRR
There are two main challenges in the electrocatalytic NRR: the low NH3 yield rate and low faradaic efficiency;42 the possibility of realizing a higher NH3 yield rate for the NRR is significantly more than that of achieving a higher faradaic efficiency.20 In recent years, considerable improvements have been made in the electrocatalytic NRR performance; however, the faradaic efficiency realized in most of the reported studies is still not sufficiently high (below 10%) to meet the requirement of industrial NH3 production because of the larger energy input as compared to that of the Haber–Bosch process. For instance, Yang et al.43 proposed a vanadium nitride (VN) nanoparticle catalyst for the NRR, and a faradaic efficiency of approximately 6.0% and an NH3 yield rate of 3.3 × 10−10 mol s−1 cm−2 were acquired within 1 h at −0.1 V versus RHE (reversible hydrogen electrode). Peng et al.44 reported a bioinspired core/shell structured Fe3C@C composite as an efficient electrocatalyst for the NRR. Using Fe3C@C, a relatively high faradaic efficiency of 9.15% and an NH3 yield rate of 8.53 μg h−1 mg−1cat. were attained at −0.2 V versus RHE. Regarding the NRR, there is a consensus that the low NH3 yield rate and faradaic efficiency are mainly caused by the competition between the HER and the NRR.45,46Via DFT investigation, Nørskov et al. have demonstrated that the HER is the main side reaction of the NRR,47 and the reduction of protons requires a relatively low overpotential. Reaction potentials of the HER and NRR are very close under both acidic and alkaline conditions, and the reaction potential of the HER is always lower than that of the NRR, indicating that the NRR would always be accompanied by a vigorous HER. The reaction formulas and the corresponding reaction potentials are presented in eqn (5)–(8):Acidic: 2H+(aq) + 2e− ↔ H2(g) Eθ(vs. RHE) = 0.000 V(5)N2(g) + 6H+(aq) + 6e− ↔ 2NH3(aq) Eθ(vs. RHE) = +0.092 V(6)Alkaline: 2H2O(l) + 2e− ↔ H2(g) + 2OH−(aq) Eθ(vs. RHE) = −0.828 V(7)N2(g) + 6H2O(l) + 6e− ↔ 2NH3(aq) + 6OH−(aq) Eθ(vs. RHE) = −0.736 V(8)
Suppressing the HER can enhance the faradaic efficiency of the NRR as more electric energy will be available for the NRR; however, this may slightly decrease the NH3 yield rate. Because the protons are employed as a reactant in the NRR, directly suppressing the HER would directly suppress the NRR. Thus, achieving a balance between the HER and NRR is important for the development of effective electrocatalytic NRR-active catalysts.
4. Dual character of the HER for NRR
The HER plays a dual character role in the electrocatalytic NRR process. On one hand, the HER competing with the NRR results in a low NRR performance; on the other hand, suppressing the HER to a great extent leads to deficient of protons in N2 hydrogenation. Various methods, including the catalyst design, pH control, and application of an appropriate electrolyte or even a suitable electrolytic cell, have been reported to suppress the HER during the NRR.2,20 Suppressing the HER may boost the NRR. Catalyst design is also crucial for realizing efficient NRR performance. To suppress the HER and thus boost the NRR, it is logical that we first chose appropriate materials with low HER activities as this might prevent the direct reduction of protons with electrons and competition of this reaction with the NRR. However, significant suppression of the HER may be counterproductive to N2 fixation because for N2 protonation, a suitable amount of H species should be present in the electrolyte during the NRR. Theoretically, if the catalysts could not even activate protons, let alone the NN. Therefore, uncontrollable suppression of the HER may not be a rational approach for developing effective NRR catalysts. In addition to NRR catalysts with low HER activities, several catalysts with high HER activities have been reported for the NRR. Mo-, Co-, and Pt-based materials are known to be HER active. Recent studies have revealed that using these materials as NRR-active catalysts, relatively high NRR performances have been achieved, which are unmatched with the abovementioned HER suppression method for boosting the NRR.
4.1 Mo-based catalyst
Mo-based materials, including Mo2C-,48–51 MoS2-52–54 and Mo single atom (MoSAs)-55,56 based materials, have been widely employed as HER-active catalysts. Recently, a pioneering study has been proposed by our group, where molybdenum carbide nanodots embedded in ultrathin carbon nanosheets (Mo2C/C) were employed as a candidate catalyst for highly efficient and robust N2 fixation through the electrocatalytic NRR.57 The Mo2C nanodots served as NRR-active sites, which were 2–3 nm in diameter and uniformly distributed in the catalyst, and the thickness of the embedded carbon nanosheets was approximately 3.5 nm. Electrocatalytic N2 fixation was performed in a 0.5 M Li2SO4 aqueous solution (pH = 2). Mo2C/C exhibited outstanding NRR performance: the highest NH3 yield rate and faradaic efficiency were 11.3 μg h−1 mg−1Mo2C (at −0.3 V versus RHE) and 7.8% (Fig. 8a and b), respectively. Moreover, the effects of the HER on the NRR were examined by substituting the hydrophilic carbon cloth with a hydrophobic carbon cloth and increasing the pH from 2 to 3. As shown in Fig. 8a and b, under the proton-suppressed conditions, approximately five-fold enhancement was achieved in the faradaic efficiency when compared with that under the proton-enriched conditions. However, the NH3 yield rate decreased (8.2 μg h−1 mg−1Mo2C under the proton-suppressed conditions and 11.3 μg h−1 mg−1Mo2C under the proton-enriched conditions) at the optimal applied potentials. This suggests that under the proton-suppressed conditions, the competing HER was inhibited, and thus, the faradaic efficiency of the NRR increased. In contrast, without sufficient proton donation, the hydrogenation of N2 slowed down and further decreased the NH3 yield rate, and substantial HER suppression did not benefit the NRR because a suitable amount of protons is important for electrocatalytic N2 fixation during the NRR (Fig. 8c). The abovementioned results reveal that Mo2C/C is a promising candidate material for the NRR, which demonstrates excellent NRR performance along with vigorous H2 evolution. The transition metal carbide Mo2C possesses unoccupied d orbitals that exhibit adsorption behaviors for electron-rich adsorbates such as N2, which is beneficial for the cleavage of NN and thus accelerates the NRR. This study provides new insights into the HER during the electrocatalytic NRR.
 Fig. 8  (a) Faradaic efficiency and (b) yield rate of NH3 achieved using Mo2C/C under proton-suppressed and proton-enriched conditions. (c) NRR catalytic mechanisms of Mo2C/C under proton-suppressed and proton-enriched conditions. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2018. Wiley-VCH. (d) Average NH3 yields and faradaic efficiencies of MoS2/CC in 0.1 M Na2SO4 at different applied potentials. (e) Average NH3 yields and faradaic efficiencies of MoS2/CC in 0.1 M HCl at different applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2018. Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to the abovementioned studies, several Mo-based catalysts have been developed for the NRR. Zhang et al.58 proposed a MoS2 nanosheet array hydrothermally grown on carbon cloth (MoS2/CC) as a catalyst for N2 reduction. DFT calculations proved that similar to the case in the HER, the edge of MoS2 acts as an electrocatalytically active site in the NRR, and the inert basal plane cannot effectively adsorb N2 molecules. NRR experiments were separately conducted in 0.1 M Na2SO4 and 0.1 M HCl. When the NRR was performed in 0.1 M Na2SO4 using MoS2/CC, an 8.08 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−2 NH3 yield rate and a 1.17% faradaic efficiency were obtained at an applied potential of −0.5 V versus RHE (Fig. 8d). Furthermore, when the NRR was carried out in 0.1 M HCl (a strong acidic condition) employing MoS2/CC, the highest NH3 yield rate of 8.48 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−2 and a faradaic efficiency of 0.096% were achieved at an applied potential of −0.5 V versus RHE (Fig. 8e). Thus, under strong acidic conditions, excellent NRR activity (a higher NH3 yield rate than that in 0.1 M Na2SO4) was acquired using MoS2/CC, and the NRR was accompanied by vigorous H2 evolution. There are many studies reporting that excellent NRR activity can be realized using Mo-based (HER-active) materials; Li et al.59 proposed a defect-rich MoS2 nanoflower catalyst that exhibited excellent NRR activity. The defect-rich MoS2 nanoflower was deposited on a carbon paper electrode (DR MoS2/CPE; DR MoS2 loading: 0.1 mg), and the NRR was conducted in 0.1 M Na2SO4. A high NH3 yield rate of 29.28 μg h−1 mg−1cat. and a high faradaic efficiency of 8.34% were obtained at −0.4 V versus RHE employing DR MoS2/CPE, whereas considerably inferior results (that is, an NH3 yield rate of 13.41 μg h−1 mg−1cat. and a faradaic efficiency of 2.18% at −0.5 V versus RHE) were acquired using the defect-free counterpart. Zhao et al.60in situ synthesized MoS2 on C3N4 to form MoS2/C3N4 with interfacial Mo–N coordination for the reduction of N2 to NH3. An NRR experiment was performed in 0.1 M Na2SO4 using MoS2/C3N4, and an excellent NH3 yield rate of 19.86 μg h−1 mg−1cat. at −0.5 V versus RHE and an enhanced faradaic efficiency of 6.87% were attained, superior to those of pure MoS2 (6.41 μg h−1 mg−1cat. and 2.85%) and the reference catalyst MoS2/C3N4 without Mo–N coordination, denoted as MoS2/C3N4-R (9.45 μg h−1 mg−1cat. and 3.81%), respectively. Recently, Ma et al.61 proposed a theoretically guided composite material for N2 reduction by synergizing Mo single atoms and Mo2C nanoparticles on N-doped carbon nanotubes (MoSAs–Mo2C/NCNTs). DFT calculations proved that MoSAs and Mo2C are selective to the HER and NRR, respectively. HER-selective MoSAs in MoSAs–Mo2C/NCNTs provide a large H* coverage environment for NRR-selective Mo2C, thus enhancing the performance of the entire catalyst toward N2 activation. An NRR experiment was conducted using a mixed electrolyte comprising 0.005 M H2SO4 and 0.1 M K2SO4, and all potentials were converted to RHE. The highest NH3 yield rate of 16.1 μg h−1 cm−2cat. at −0.25 V and a faradaic efficiency of 7.1% at −0.20 V were achieved using MoSAs–Mo2C/NCNTs. In addition, the contrast samples Mo2C/NCNTs (4.3 μg h−1 cm−2cat. and 3.6%) and MoSAs/NCNTs (3.3 μg h−1 cm−2cat. and 1.4%) exhibited relatively lower activities toward the NRR. The sharp discrepancies between the NRR activities of MoSAs–Mo2C/NCNTs and the contrast samples indicated that the synergistic effect of MoSAs and Mo2C would be the main reason for the boosted NRR activity of MoSAs–Mo2C/NCNTs. The MoSA sites provide an abundant H* coverage environment around Mo2C via a catalyst surface hydrogenation-like mechanism; this might be the reason for the high NRR activity of MoSAs–Mo2C/NCNTs even at relatively low applied potentials (−0.25 and −0.20 V) as the reduction of proton to H* might be the PDS.
4.2 Co-based catalyst
Co-based materials have also been investigated for N2 reduction. Note that transition metal phosphides exhibit promising HER performance, and Co-based materials have been widely utilized for the design and construction of effective HER catalysts.62–67 Guo et al.68 proposed a hierarchical CoP hollow nanocage (CoP HNC) derived from ZIF-67 and Co-LDH (Fig. 9a and b) for N2 reduction. An NRR experiment was performed in 1 M KOH, and the results are presented in Fig. 9c; all potentials were converted to RHE. Unlike most of the previously reported catalysts, which demonstrated peak performances at optimized potentials, the CoP HNC exhibited higher NRR activity at more negative potential, indicating the high intrinsic activity of CoP HNC for the NRR. The highest faradaic efficiency was achieved at the low potentials of 0 (7.36%) and −0.1 V (4.86%), which decreased with an increase in the negative potential. Moreover, the NH3 yield rates increased, and the highest NH3 yield rate (10.78 μg h−1 mg−1cat.) was obtained at −0.4 V. However, the CoP HNC demonstrated the lowest faradaic efficiency of 0.03% at −0.4 V, which could be ascribed to the dominance of HER at more negative applied potentials; nevertheless, it is difficult to explain why the highest NH3 yield rate was achieved at the ultralow faradaic efficiency. This may be explained as follows: Initially, the charge transferred from Co to P in CoP results in positively charged Co sites and negatively charged P sites. Then, during the NRR, N2 molecules and protons adsorb on the Co and P sites, respectively. Subsequently, protons react with electrons and form H* species, significantly increasing the H* coverage on the Co sites and thus facilitating the NRR. Consumption of energy input for the formation of H* species leads to ultralow faradaic efficiency while significantly promoting the synthesis of NH3.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic for the synthesis of a CoP HNC. (b) TEM image of the CoP HNC. (c) NH3 yield rate and faradaic efficiency of the CoP HNC at each specified potential. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2018. Wiley-VCH. 
4.3 Pt-based catalyst
Pt-based materials are known to be the most active materials for the HER,51,69–71 among which commercial 20 wt.% Pt/C is the state-of-the-art electrocatalyst for the HER.51,71,72 Thus, few studies have been conducted on the application of Pt-based materials for the design of efficient NRR catalysts. Hao et al.73 proposed isolated Pt sites anchored on WO3 nanoplates (Pt SAs/WO3) for the electrocatalytic NRR. As shown in Fig. 10a and b, the isolated Pt sites were successfully and uniformly anchored on the WO3 substrate. An NRR experiment was carried out in 0.1 M KOH, 0.1 M K2SO4, and 0.05 M H2SO4 aqueous solutions, and the optimum NH3 yield rate and faradaic efficiency of 342.4 μg h−1 mg−1Pt and 31.1% at a relatively low applied potential of −0.2 V versus RHE were achieved using Pt SAs/WO3 in 0.1 M K2SO4, superior to those of Pt NPs/WO3 (22.0 μg h−1 mg−1Pt and 2.1%), respectively (Fig. 10c). Furthermore, Pt SAs/WO3 worked well in acidic and alkaline electrolytes (Fig. 10d); a relatively high NH3 yield rate but a relatively lower faradaic efficiency were acquired under both conditions due to the different effects of acidic and alkaline electrolytes in the suppression of the HER. In the 0.1 M KOH solution, the ultralow concentration of protons led to a relatively lower NRR activity. In the 0.05 M H2SO4 solution, the high concentration of protons resulted in the dominance of the HER, which competed with the NRR, causing a relatively lower faradaic efficiency. In the 0.1 M K2SO4 solution, the suitable proton concentration balanced the NRR and the HER, resulting in optimal NRR performance. This study revealed that Pt-based materials might be promising candidates for the effective reduction of N2, providing a new avenue for the design and fabrication of efficient electrocatalysts for the NRR.
 Fig. 10  (a) Elemental mapping image of Pt SAs/WO3. (b) HAADF–STEM image of Pt SAs/WO3; the isolated Pt sites are marked with red circles. (c) NH3 yield rates and faradaic efficiencies of Pt SAs/WO3 and Pt NPs/WO3 at each specified potential in 0.1 M K2SO4. (d) NH3 yield rates and faradaic efficiencies of Pt SAs/WO3 and Pt NPs/WO3 at −0.2 V versus RHE in 0.1 M KOH, 0.1 M K2SO4, and 0.05 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2020. Wiley-VCH. 
The abovementioned cases of catalysts for N2 reduction proved that boosting the NRR activity by directly suppressing the HER might not be an ideal method, particularly while using HER-active materials. HER plays an important role in the NRR. As HER competes with the NRR, suppressing the HER might enhance the NRR performance. Nevertheless, the HER provides abundant H* species for the reduction of N2 to NH3, thus facilitating the NRR. Therefore, we should properly utilize the HER instead of directly suppressing it. For catalyst design, HER- and NRR-active sites on the catalyst surface are equally important for effective electrocatalytic N2 fixation because the HER-active sites offer abundant H* species for the hydrogenation of N2 on the NRR-active sites; this may significantly improve the NRR performance. The introduction of both HER- and NRR-active sites for the design of effective NRR catalysts might be an ideal approach for efficient electrocatalytic N2 fixation, and a few studies have already been reported in this regard. For example, MoSAs–Mo2C/NCNTs,61 CoP HNC,68 and the PtMo-6 cluster catalyst have been recently proposed by Guo et al.;74 in PtMo-6, Pt acts as a proton donor to promote the hydrogenation of N2 on the adjacent Mo sites, and a relatively high faradaic efficiency (14.37%) and NH3 yield rate (65.3 μg h−1 mg−1cat.) were obtained by employing PtMo-6 in 0.1 M KOH. To date, the industrial application of the electrocatalytic NRR is still restricted because of its low performance. Thus, a new approach based on catalyst design and optimization of experimental conditions may be proposed for improving the NRR performance and promoting the industrial application of the electrocatalytic NRR for NH3 production.
5. Methods to improve the NRR performance
Over the past few years, the development of electrocatalytic NRR has been impressive; however, the unsatisfactory NH3 yield rate and faradaic efficiency suggest that the industrial application of the electrocatalytic NRR for NH3 synthesis is still not feasible. Thus, schemes to boost the NRR performance are urgently needed. Some methods, including the use of different reaction systems and other approaches for N2 fixation, to improve the NRR performance are presented hereinafter.
5.1 Reaction systems
The choice and optimization of reaction systems, including electrolyte systems and reactors, are important for the NRR.

5.1.1 Electrolytes. 
The selection of appropriate electrolytes for the electrocatalytic NRR is crucial for effective N2 reduction as the proton supply directly affects the NRR performance. Based on our experimental studies, there are at least three ways to improve the NRR performance: pH adjustment, optimization of electrolyte counter-ion composition, and use of a suitable electrolyte solvent.
For an aqueous electrolyte solution, the pH value influences the proton transport in the NRR, and an acidic electrolyte is more favorable than an alkaline electrolyte for proton donation, which promotes both the NRR and HER according to the corresponding reaction equation; however, the HER competes with the NRR, resulting in a low selectivity for N2 reduction. In this regard, directly suppressing the HER by increasing the pH to decrease the proton concentration is a feasible way to improve the NRR selectivity; nevertheless, protons are also involved as a reactant in the NRR, and the decrease in proton concentration would inevitably affect the NRR activity; a similar phenomenon has been reported in the abovementioned study57 presented by our group. A neutral electrolyte, such as 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution (PBS), can effectively suppress the competing HER as it increases the barrier for mass and charge transport.75 Better NRR performance may be achieved in a counter-ion electrolyte; after introducing an alkali metal ion (including Li+, Na+, and K+) into the electrolyte, the steric hindrance effect of the counter-ion produced in the catalyst active sites effectively inhibits the contact between the water molecules and active sites, thus restricting H2 evolution.43,76
A low-proton hybrid electrolyte can also effectively balance the NRR and the HER. Generally, a low-proton hybrid electrolyte is a mixture of an organic solvent and a proton donor, and the concentration of protons can be controlled by adjusting the solvent: proton donor ratio, which can balance the NRR and the HER. In 1987, Becker et al.77 reported a bis(cyclopentadienyl)titanium(IV) dichloride (Cp2TiCl2) catalyst for the reduction of N2 in the hybrid electrolytes H2O/THF and H2O/methanol; Cp2TiCl2 exhibited a lower faradaic efficiency in H2O/methanol (0.017%) than that in H2O/THF (0.114%), proving that the HER is inhibited at lower concentrations of the proton donor. Lee et al.78 proposed a reaction system containing 1% ethanol in dry THF as a hybrid electrolyte and Ag–Au encapsulated by a hydrophobic ZIF layer as a catalyst; they acquired a faradaic efficiency of 18 ± 4%, which was ascribed to the suppression of the HER by the low-proton hybrid electrolyte and the hydrophobic ZIF layer. Therefore, a balance between the NRR and the HER can be achieved by controlling the concentration of the proton donor or the hydrophilic/hydrophobic properties of the catalyst.


5.1.2 Reactors. 
NRR performance can also be enhanced by using a reactor. In addition to the convention electrolyte cells, the application of a high-pressure reactor and an air-diffusion electrode reactor is discussed hereinafter.
(i) High-pressure reactor. In an ordinary electrolytic cell, compared with an ambient-pressure reactor, a high-pressure reactor requires a relatively higher N2 pressure to significantly increase the solubility of N2 in the electrolyte and the coverage of N2 on the surface of the catalyst, subsequently enhancing the NRR performance. According to Le Chatelier's principle, with an increase in N2 pressure in the high-pressure reactor, the chemical equilibrium would shift forward in the direction of decreasing gas volume; this would facilitate the NRR and simultaneously inhibit the HER. Recently, a pressure change strategy for efficient electrocatalytic NRR has been proposed by our group,79 where the Fe3Mo3C/C catalyst was employed as an active component for N2 reduction and the N2 pressure ranged from 0.1 to 0.7 MPa. The highest NH3 yield rate and faradaic efficiency of 13.55 μg h−1 cm−2 and 14.74% were achieved at −0.025 and 0.1 V under the N2 pressure of 0.7 MPa, respectively, which were substantially higher than those obtained under 0.1 MPa. The faradaic efficiency is approximately 11 times higher than that acquired under 0.1 MPa. This revealed that when the electrocatalytic NRR was conducted under a high N2 pressure, the HER was effectively inhibited, whereas the NRR was promoted because the relatively higher pressure enhanced the solubility of N2. Applying an appropriate N2 pressure might be an efficient method for an effective electrocatalytic NRR.
(ii) Air-diffusion electrode reactor. Air-diffusion electrodes can also be used as a reactor for an efficient electrocatalytic NRR. To date, the electrocatalytic NRR has demonstrated a relatively low performance because of the low solubility of N2 in the electrolyte. Therefore, the electrocatalytic reduction of N2 in the gas phase has been proposed. Chen et al.80 reported the use of a carbon nanotube-based electrocatalyst deposited on a gas diffusion layer (GDL) electrode for the synthesis of NH3 from water and N2. As shown in Fig. 11, the gas-diffusion electrode reactor consisted of an anode half-cell containing a diluted aqueous solution of KHCO3 for electrolysis to generate protons, a cathode half-cell comprising gaseous N2 under ambient conditions, and the GDL electrode. The GDL electrode was fabricated by hot-pressing a Nafion membrane and a GDL. In this reactor, the protons passed through the proton exchange membrane and came in direct contact with the catalyst; moreover, N2 diffused from the carbon paper layer to the catalyst and was protonated and reduced by applying an external bias. Consequently, NH3 and H2 were generated as the main products, and a total faradaic efficiency of 95.1% and an NH3 yield rate of 2.2 × 10−3 gNH3 m−2 h−1 were obtained. In the gas-diffusion electrode reactor, the catalyst absorbs a higher concentration of N2 when compared with that during the reaction in an aqueous solution, resulting in a high electrocatalytic NRR performance. Thus, the electrocatalytic NRR in the gaseous phase can also be an effective method for the synthesis of NH3.
 Fig. 11  Schematic of a gas-diffusion electrode reactor. PEM represents the proton exchange membrane. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017. Wiley-VCH. 

5.2 Other approaches for electrocatalytic N2 fixation

5.2.1 NH3 synthesis from NOx. 
The primary cause of the relatively low electrocatalytic NRR performance is the inert nature of the N2 molecules because of the ultrastrong NN bond; this makes the diffusion of N2 into the electrolyte or the reduction and protonation of N2 into NH3 difficult. Therefore, the development of other approaches for efficient artificial N2 fixation is required. In nature, in addition to the nitrogenase enzyme in microorganisms, the N2 oxidation reaction (NOR) is utilized for N2 fixation. N2 can be oxidized to NOx (a mixture of NO2− and NO3−) after stimulation by lightning; NOx demonstrates better solubility than that of N2 in aqueous solutions, and the N–O bonds are prone to cleavage when compared with the NN bonds; thus, synthesizing NH3 from NOx is a promising pathway for artificial N2 fixation.
A copper-molecular solid catalyst (O-Cu-PTCDA) for the direct and highly selective reduction of NO3− to NH3 in 0.1 M PBS was proposed by our group. O-Cu-PTCDA catalyzed the reduction of NO3− to NH3, and a high faradaic efficiency of 85.9% and an NH3 yield rate of 436 ± 85 μg h−1 cm−2 at −0.4 V versus RHE were achieved.81 These results prove that NOx can be efficiently reduced to NH3, and artificial N2 fixation through intermediary NOx reduction is feasible. However, in industry, NO2− and NO3− are produced from NH3via the Ostwald process; therefore, developing a process for NOx synthesis is necessary.


5.2.2 NH3 synthesis from NOx derived from the plasma method. 
In natural areas, N2 is oxidized to NOx after occasional stimulation by lightning, and under experimental conditions, the oxidation of N2 to NOx can be realized by a plasma process. As shown in Fig. 12a, Lander et al.82 reported a plasma N2 oxidation and catalytic reduction to the NH3 (PNOCRA) process with a considerably lower energy requirement and achieved a reasonable yield of NH3 when compared with that obtained from the plasma-enabled synthesis of NH3 from N2 and H2. The PNOCRA process is composed of two phases: Plasma-assisted N2 oxidation (in which NOx is adsorbed on the lean NOx trap (Phase 1)) and catalytic reduction of NOx with H2 to NH3 (Phase 2). Recently, Sun et al.83 proposed a hybrid plasma electrocatalytic process for NH3 production. As shown in Fig. 12b, the experiment was initially carried out in an H-cell integrated with a plasma-bubbler, and the plasma electrode-driven N2 in air flow was oxidized to NOx species, which was stored in an aqueous electrolyte. Thereafter, the NOx species was reduced to NH4+ on a Cu-based catalyst electrode on the other side of the H-cell. Fig. 12c shows the performance of the plasma electrocatalytic process for NH3 production; the production of NH3 increased along with the faradaic efficiency. At lower potentials, the conversion rate of NO3− and NO2− is low, restricting the yield of NH3 and faradaic efficiency. At relatively high potentials, the conversion rate of NO3− and NO2− is high, and the produced NO2− is subsequently converted to NH3. The authors investigated the reaction species generated on different parts of the plasma reactor and proved that the excited species produced on the glow discharge and spark discharge were different (Fig. 12d). NO3− species were dominantly generated on the glow discharge, whereas NO2− species were preferably produced on the spark discharge because of the absence of air/water in the spark discharge. This process required only air and water to form NH3 in the aqueous phase and consumed less energy than that consumed by the previously reported similar methods. These approaches enable the energy-efficient production of NOx with a high yield by suppressing unwanted collisions and mitigating energy losses at the ground electrode. A similar work also has been proposed by Qiao et al.,84 in which they decoupled the N2-to-NH3 process into two steps, including: (i) N2 to NOxvia a non-thermal plasma technique and (ii) electrocatalytic reductive conversion of NOx to NH3 with high selectivity.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the PNOCRA process.82 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020. Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic of the plasma integrated in an H-cell electrochemical system. (c) NH3 production rate and faradaic efficiency at applied potentials. (d) Schematic of the proposed pathways and excited species in the double reactor glow and spark discharge (DRGSD). Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2021. Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.2.3 NH3 synthesis from synergizing electrocatalytic NOR and NOx reduction. 
The abovementioned hybrid plasma method might possess the potential for large-scale N2 fixation; however, compared with the electrocatalytic method, the plasma method of NOx generation still demonstrates higher energy consumption. Recent studies have shown that the production of NOx from N2via an electrocatalytic method is a feasible pathway. Dai et al.85 proposed a spinel oxide (ZnFe0.4Co1.6O4) for the NOR to form NO3−; ZnFe0.4Co1.6O4 exhibited a relatively high NO3− production rate of 130 ± 12 μmol h−1 gMO−1 at an applied potential of 1.6 V versus RHE. Kuang et al.86 reported a Ru-doped TiO2/RuO2 electrocatalyst for a facile electrocatalytic NOR. A high NO3− yield of 161.9 μmol h−1 gcat−1 and a faradaic efficiency of 26.1% were acquired using this electrocatalyst. The doping of Ru into the TiO2 lattice upshifted the d-band center, which enhanced the activity of the catalyst for the electrochemical conversion of N2 to NO*; however, overdoping of Ru will lead to the formation of RuO2, which would promote the O2 evolution reaction and accelerate the transformation of NO* to NO3−. Han et al.87 proposed tensile-strained Pd porous nanosheets (Pd-s PNSs) for the ambient electrocatalytic NOR; the tensile strain facilitated the formation of PdO2, resulting in a relatively high NOR activity (a NO3− yield rate of 18.56 μg h−1 mgcat−1 and a faradaic efficiency of 2.5%).
Compared with the hybrid plasma method for NH3 synthesis,83,84 the electrocatalytic method for NOx generation requires less energy; thus, synergizing the electrocatalytic NOR and NOx reduction might be a promising pathway for NH3 synthesis.

6. Conclusions and outlook
At present, NH3 is mainly produced via the energy-intensive Haber–Bosch process, which consumes a large amount of energy input mostly derived from natural gases or coal burning and leads to a considerable amount of carbon emissions. Electrocatalytic NRR is a promising alternative to the conventional Haber–Bosch process for NH3 production because the energy input can be provided by clean and renewable energy sources. However, the low NH3 yield rate and low faradaic efficiency severely hamper the industrial application of the electrocatalytic NRR. Moreover, ammonia nitrogen pollution is also a challenge, especially at a low NH3 yield rate. We can conclude from recent studies that researchers have made considerable progress in electrocatalytic artificial fixation of N2; nevertheless, the NRR performance is still far from satisfactory for industrial NH3 production. In most of the reported studies, researchers have focused on enhancing the NRR activity by directly suppressing the HER via various methods (such as catalyst design, pH control, and using appropriate electrolytes or electrolytic cells). Although this approach is slightly feasible, the performance of the electrocatalytic NRR still remains unsatisfactory. Therefore, the NRR needs to be re-examined. Previous studies have proved that the HER is the main side reaction of the electrocatalytic NRR, and it is logical to limit the HER for promoting the NRR. However, directly suppressing the HER would inevitably affect the NRR activity, since an NRR active catalyst must first be an HER active catalyst, and if a catalyst cannot even activate protons, let alone the N2. In a proton-containing solution, protons would always be activated prior to N2 because the reaction potential of the HER will always be lower than that of the NRR. Therefore, the rational design of catalysts and schemes to balance the NRR and the HER must be considered. From a mechanistic point of view, suppressing the HER can clearly enhance the faradaic efficiency toward NH3 synthesis because more electric energy would be available for the NRR, thereby promoting the production of NH3. However, protons are involved as a reactant in the electrocatalytic NRR; thus, kinetically, directly suppressing the HER (coupling of protons with electrons) would directly inhibit the NRR. Herein, HER plays an important role in N2 reduction, and studies should focus more on balancing the HER and NRR by utilizing the HER to boost the NRR rather than directly suppressing it. During the NRR, when the surface hydrogenation mechanism dominates on the catalyst surface, directly suppressing the HER would definitely confine the NRR as the H* species formed on the catalyst surface in the first step are crucial for N2 activation. This may explain why some catalysts demonstrate excellent NRR activity despite a vigorous HER.
In summary, although numerous studies have been reported on the electrochemical synthesis of NH3 in recent years, the NH3 yield rate and faradaic efficiency obtained via strictly controlled experiments are still very low; consequently, the industrial application of this technique is restricted because of its low economic value. Major breakthroughs in catalysts and reaction systems are required to support the development of this technology. At the present stage, considering the difficulty in the activation of NN bonds under mild conditions, the unavoidable competitive HER in conventional water system electrolytes, and the low N2 solubility, appropriately increasing the reaction temperature or pressure may be a feasible strategy. In addition, coupling this technique with other technologies, including plasma-assisted technology or membrane reactors based on proton-conducting membranes, may be an effective way to promote the development of electrochemical NH3 synthesis technology.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the funding from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21776099 and 22022503) and the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2019A1515011579).
References
K. Ithisuphalap, H. Zhang, L. Guo, Q. Yang, H. Yang and G. Wu, Photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis methods of nitrogen reduction for sustainable ammonia synthesis, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800352 CrossRef .
X. W. Lv, C. C. Weng and Z. Y. Yuan, Ambient ammonia electrosynthesis: Current status, challenges, and perspectives, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 3061–3078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, W. Kong, Y. Zhang, Z. Xing, J. Zhao, T. Wang, X. Shi, Y. Luo and X. Sun, Greatly Enhanced Electrocatalytic N2 Reduction on TiO2via V Doping, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900356 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Ye, S. W. Park, Y. Lu, J. Li, M. Sasase, M. Kitano, T. Tada and H. Hosono, Vacancy-enabled N2 activation for ammonia synthesis on an Ni-loaded catalyst, Nature, 2020, 583, 391–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, L. Li, X. Liu, C. Tang, W. Xu, S. Chen, L. Song, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Nitrogen Vacancies on 2D Layered W2N3: A Stable and Efficient Active Site for Nitrogen Reduction Reaction, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1902709 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yao, C. Tang, L. Li, B. Xia, A. Vasileff, H. Jin, Y. Zhang and S. Z. Qiao, 
            In Situ Fragmented Bismuth Nanoparticles for Electrocatalytic Nitrogen Reduction, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001289 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Guo, X. Du, Y. Zeng, J. Chu, C. Gong, J. Huang, C. Fan, X. Wang and J. Xiong, Atomic structure modification for electrochemical nitrogen reduction to ammonia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1903172 CrossRef .
E. Tayyebi, Y. Abghoui and E. Skúlason, Elucidating the mechanism of electrochemical N2 reduction at the Ru(0001) electrode, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11137–11145 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hawtof, S. Ghosh, E. Guarr, C. Xu, R. M. Sankaran and J. N. Renner, Catalyst-free, highly selective synthesis of ammonia from nitrogen and water by a plasma electrolytic system, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaat5778 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, K. Zheng, S. Liu, Z. Dai, Y. Xu, X. Li, H. Wang and L. Wang, Electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction to ammonia by Fe2O3 nanorod array on carbon cloth, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 11754–11759 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Yandulov and R. R. Schrock, Catalytic Reduction of Dinitrogen to Ammonia at a Single Molybdenum Center, Science, 2013, 301, 76–78 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Giddey, S. P. S. Badwal and A. Kulkarni, Review of electrochemical ammonia production technologies and materials, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14576–14594 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, X. Zhu, Z. Xing, S. Mou, C. Li, Y. Qiao, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, X. Shi, Y. Zhang and X. Sun, Greatly Improving Electrochemical N2 Reduction over TiO2 Nanoparticles by Iron Doping, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18449–18453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, D. Liu, H. Cao, F. Hou, J. Liang and S. X. Dou, Nitrogen Reduction to Ammonia on Atomic-Scale Active Sites under Mild Conditions, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800501 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, C. Li, K. Deng, Y. Xu, H. Xue, X. Li, L. Wang and H. Wang, Ambient
nitrogen reduction to ammonia electrocatalyzed by bimetallic PdRu porous nanostructures, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 2400–2405 CrossRef .
G. Zheng, J. M. Yan and G. Yu, Nitrogen Reduction Reaction, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900070 CrossRef .
A. Liu, Y. Yang, X. Ren, Q. Zhao, M. Gao, W. Guan, F. Meng, L. Gao, Q. Yang, X. Liang and T. Ma, Current progress of electrocatalysts for ammonia synthesis through electrochemical nitrogen reduction under ambient conditions, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 3766–3788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Bazhenova and A. E. Shilov, Nitrogen fixation in solution, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1995, 144, 69–145 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Gu, Z. Sun, F. Guo, Y. Xie, B. Tao, X. He, W. Zhang and H. Chang, The in-built bionic “MoFe cofactor” in Fe-doped two-dimensional MoTe2 nanosheets for boosting the photocatalytic nitrogen reduction performance, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13038–13048 RSC .
G. F. Chen, S. Ren, L. Zhang, H. Cheng, Y. Luo, K. Zhu, L. X. Ding and H. Wang, Advances in electrocatalytic N2 reduction-Strategies to tackle the selectivity challenge, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800337 CrossRef .
X. Yang, S. Kattel, J. Nash, X. Chang, J. H. Lee, Y. Yan, J. G. Chen and B. Xu, Quantification of Active Sites and Elucidation of the Reaction Mechanism of the Electrochemical Nitrogen Reduction Reaction on Vanadium Nitride, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13768–13772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, X. Wang, H. Guo, G. Yao, H. Yu, Z. Tian, B. Li and L. Chen, Theoretical screening of single transition metal atoms embedded in MXene defects as superior electrocatalyst of nitrogen reduction reaction, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900337 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Electrocatalytic Refinery for Sustainable Production of Fuels and Chemicals, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021 DOI:10.1002/anie.202101522 .
G. Qing, R. Ghazfar, S. T. Jackowski, F. Habibzadeh, M. M. Ashtiani, C. P. Chen, M. R. Smith, 3rd and T. W. Hamann, Recent advances and challenges of electrocatalytic N2 reduction to ammonia, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 5437–5516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, G. Fan, J. Chen, J. Li, L. Zhang, S. Zhu, X. Su, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Nanoporous Palladium Hydride for Electrocatalytic N2 Reduction under Ambient Conditions, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 3511–3516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, Y. Sun, S. Guo, J. Sun, Y. Fu, S. Chen, S. Zhang and J. Zhu, Identifying electrocatalytic activity and mechanism of Ce1/3NbO3 perovskite for nitrogen reduction to ammonia at ambient conditions, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 280, 119419 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chang, S. R. Li, H. L. Chou, Y. C. Lee, S. Patil, Y. S. Lin, C. C. Chang, Y. J. Chang and D. Y. Wang, Photoactive earth-abundant iron pyrite catalysts for electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reaction, Small, 2019, 15, e1904723 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, J. Gao, J. G. Zhao, D. J. Yan and X. D. Zhu, Synergistically Coupling Black Phosphorus Quantum Dots with MnO2 Nanosheets for Efficient Electrochemical Nitrogen Reduction Under Ambient Conditions, Small, 2020, 16, e1907091 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, Q. Li, C. Wu, J. Zhang, Y. Jin, D. R. MacFarlane and C. Sun, Single-boron catalysts for nitrogen reduction reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2884–2888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, H. Jang, P. Li, J. Wang, Q. Qin, M. G. Kim, G. Li and J. Cho, Antimony-based composites loaded on phosphorus-doped carbon for boosting faradaic efficiency of the electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13329–13334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Haber and R. L. Rossignol, Über die technische Darstellung von Ammoniak aus den Elementen, Z. Elektrochem. Angew. Phys. Chem., 1913, 19, 53–72 CAS .
B. E. Smith, Nitrogenase reveals its inner secrets, Science, 2002, 297, 1654–1655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Yu, Z. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Xu, X. Li, H. Xue and L. Wang, Electrochemical Fabrication of Porous Au Film on Ni Foam for Nitrogen Reduction to Ammonia, Small, 2019, 15, e1804769 CrossRef PubMed .
R. D. Milton, R. Cai, S. Abdellaoui, D. Leech, A. L. De Lacey, M. Pita and S. D. Minteer, Bioelectrochemical Haber-Bosch process: An ammonia-producing H2/N2 fuel cell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2680–2683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kandemir, M. E. Schuster, A. Senyshyn, M. Behrens and R. Schlogl, The Haber–Bosch process revisited: On the real structure and stability of “ammonia iron” under working conditions, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12723–12726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lai, N. Chen, X. Ye, G. He, W. Zong, K. B. Holt, B. Pan, I. P. Parkin, T. Liu and R. Chen, Refining energy Levels in ReS2 nanosheets by low-valent transition-metal doping for dual-boosted electrochemical ammonia/hydrogen production, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907376 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, J. Wu, P. Han, A. M. Al-Enizi, T. M. Almutairi, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, NbO2 electrocatalyst toward 32% faradaic efficiency for N2 fixation, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800386 CrossRef .
J. X. Yao, D. Bao, Q. Zhang, M. M. Shi, Y. Wang, R. Gao, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Tailoring Oxygen Vacancies of BiVO4 toward Highly Efficient Noble-Metal-Free Electrocatalyst for Artificial N2 Fixation under Ambient Conditions, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800333 CrossRef .
J. Zhao and Z. Chen, Single Mo Atom Supported on Defective Boron Nitride Monolayer as an Efficient Electrocatalyst for Nitrogen Fixation: A Computational Study, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12480–12487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Abghoui, A. L. Garden, V. F. Hlynsson, S. Bjorgvinsdottir, H. Olafsdottir and E. Skulason, Enabling electrochemical reduction of nitrogen to ammonia at ambient conditions through rational catalyst design, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4909–4918 RSC .
C. Ling, Y. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Bai, L. Shi and J. Wang, New mechanism for N2 reduction: The essential role of surface hydrogenation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18264–18270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, J. A. Schwalbe, M. Cargnello, K. Chan, T. F. Jaramillo, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Electrochemical ammonia synthesis-The selectivity challenge, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 706–709 CrossRef .
X. Yang, J. Nash, J. Anibal, M. Dunwell, S. Kattel, E. Stavitski, K. Attenkofer, J. G. Chen, Y. Yan and B. Xu, Mechanistic Insights into Electrochemical Nitrogen Reduction Reaction on Vanadium Nitride Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13387–13391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Peng, Y. Qiao, M. Luo, M. Wang, S. Chu, Y. Zhao, P. Liu, J. Liu and Y. Tan, Bioinspired Fe3C@C as highly efficient electrocatalyst for nitrogen reduction reaction under ambient conditions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40062–40068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Choi, S. Back, N.-Y. Kim, J. Lim, Y.-H. Kim and Y. Jung, Suppression of hydrogen evolution reaction in electrochemical N2 reduction using single-atom catalysts: A computational guideline, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7517–7525 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, S. Mallikarjun Sharada, A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, Y. Su, L. Qiao and J. K. Norskov, A theoretical study of the effect of a non-aqueous proton donor on electrochemical ammonia synthesis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 4982–4989 RSC .
E. Skulason, T. Bligaard, S. Gudmundsdottir, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Vegge, H. Jonsson and J. K. Norskov, A theoretical evaluation of possible transition metal electro-catalysts for N2 reduction, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1235–1245 RSC .
H. Lin, W. Zhang, Z. Shi, M. Che, X. Yu, Y. Tang and Q. Gao, Electrospinning hetero-nanofibers of Fe3C-Mo2C/nitrogen-doped-carbon as efficient electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2597–2604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wan, J. Wu, X. Gao, T. Li, Z. Hu, H. Yu and L. Huang, Structure confined porous Mo2C for efficient hydrogen evolution, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703933 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, Z. Yuan, S. Li, H. Li, J. Chen, Y. Wang, Q. Huang, C. Wang, H. E. Karahan, G. Henkelman, X. Liao, L. Wei and Y. Chen, Big to Small: Ultrafine Mo2C Particles Derived from Giant Polyoxomolybdate Clusters for Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Small, 2019, 15, e1900358 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qiu, Z. Wen, C. Jiang, X. Wu, R. Si, J. Bao, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, J. Tang and X. Guo, Rational design of atomic layers of Pt anchored on Mo2C nanorods for efficient hydrogen evolution over a wide pH range, Small, 2019, 15, e1900014 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Ye, Y. Gong, J. Lin, B. Li, Y. He, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Defects Engineered Monolayer MoS2 for Improved Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1097–1103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, S. Lu, F. Liao, L. Liu, Y. Li and M. Shao, Rh-MoS2 nanocomposite catalysts with Pt-like activity for hydrogen evolution reaction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700359 CrossRef .
S. Shi, Z. Sun and Y. H. Hu, Synthesis, stabilization and applications of 2-dimensional 1T metallic MoS2, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23932–23977 RSC .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C.-T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Dong, S. Tian, W.-C. Cheong, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Rational design of single molybdenum atoms anchored on N-doped carbon for effective hydrogen evolution reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16086–16090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, S. Zhang, H. Pan, S. Xiao, Z. Guo, L. Tang, U. Khan, B. F. Ding, M. Li, Z. Cai, Y. Zhao, W. Lv, Q. Feng, X. Zou, J. Lin, H. M. Cheng and B. Liu, Unsaturated single atoms on monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides for ultrafast hydrogen evolution, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, L. X. Ding, G. F. Chen, L. Zhang, J. Xue and H. Wang, Molybdenum carbide nanodots enable efficient electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation under ambient conditions, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1803694 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Ma, X. Shi, Z. Tian, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Electrochemical Ammonia Synthesis via Nitrogen Reduction Reaction on a MoS2 Catalyst: Theoretical and Experimental Studies, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1800191 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, T. Li, Y. Ma, Q. Wei, W. Qiu, H. Guo, X. Shi, P. Zhang, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Boosted electrocatalytic N2 reduction to NH3 by defect-rich MoS2 nanoflower, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801357 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, S. Luo, P. Ma, Y. Luo, W. Wu, Y. Long and J. Ma, In Situ Synthesis of MoS2 on C3N4 To Form MoS2/C3N4 with Interfacial Mo–N Coordination for Electrocatalytic Reduction of N2 to NH3, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 8814–8822 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, T. Yang, H. Zou, W. Zang, Z. Kou, L. Mao, Y. Feng, L. Shen, S. J. Pennycook, L. Duan, X. Li and J. Wang, Synergizing Mo single atoms and Mo2C nanoparticles on CNTs synchronizes selectivity and activity of electrocatalytic N2 reduction to ammonia, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2002177 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, X. Liu, Y. Xiong, X. Bo, Y. Zhang, C. Han and L. Guo, Facile synthesis of various highly dispersive CoP nanocrystal embedded carbon matrices as efficient electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4255–4265 RSC .
N. Bai, Q. Li, D. Mao, D. Li and H. Dong, One-step electrodeposition of Co/CoP film on Ni foam for efficient hydrogen evolution in alkaline solution, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29400–29407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, Y. Chen, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, Ultrathin Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Coated with CoP for Efficient Hydrogen Evolution, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3824–3831 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, Y. Qu, C. Yuan and S. Chen, Electrochemical exfoliation of hierarchical Co3O4 microflowers and their conversion into CoP as high-efficiency hydrogen evolution electrocatalyst, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 322, 134768 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, X. Ma, H. Hu, Y. Pan, W. Zhao, J. Liu, X. Zhao, J. Wang, Z. Yang, Q. Zhao, H. Ning and M. Wu, Robust NiCoP/CoP heterostructures for highly efficient hydrogen evolution electrocatalysis in alkaline solution, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15528–15536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Wang, N. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Sun, L. Fu, Y. Du and W. Zhong, Heterostructure of 2D CoP Nanosheets/1D Carbon Nanotubes to Significantly Boost the Alkaline Hydrogen Evolution, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 7, 1901302 CrossRef .
W. Guo, Z. Liang, J. Zhao, B. Zhu, K. Cai, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Hierarchical cobalt phosphide hollow nanocages toward electrocatalytic ammonia synthesis under ambient pressure and room temperature, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800204 CrossRef .
S. Bai, C. Wang, M. Deng, M. Gong, Y. Bai, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Surface polarization matters: Enhancing the hydrogen-evolution reaction by shrinking Pt shells in Pt–Pd-graphene stack structures, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12120–12124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Chen, X. Yu, Y. Wang and G. Zheng, Superb Alkaline Hydrogen Evolution and Simultaneous Electricity Generation by Pt-Decorated Ni3N Nanosheets, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601390 CrossRef .
X. K. Wan, H. B. Wu, B. Y. Guan, D. Luan and X. W. D. Lou, Confining Sub-Nanometer Pt Clusters in Hollow Mesoporous Carbon Spheres for Boosting Hydrogen Evolution Activity, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1901349 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zheng, W. Sang, Z. He, Q. Wei, B. Chen, H. Li, C. Cao, R. Huang, X. Yan, B. Pan, S. Zhou and J. Zeng, Conductive Tungsten Oxide Nanosheets for Highly Efficient Hydrogen Evolution, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7968–7973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hao, W. Sun, Q. Liu, X. Liu, J. Chen, X. Lv, W. Li, Y. P. Liu and Z. Shen, Efficient electrochemical nitrogen fixation over isolated Pt sites, Small, 2020, 16, e2000015 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Guo, X. Li, Y. Li, J. Yang, X. Wan, L. Chen, J. Liu, X. Liu, R. Yu, L. Zheng and J. Shui, Molecule template method for precise synthesis of Mo-based alloy clusters and electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction on partially reduced PtMo alloy oxide cluster, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105211 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Yu, L. Hu, G. Chen, H. Xin and X. Feng, Ambient ammonia synthesis via palladium-catalyzed electrohydrogenation of dinitrogen at low overpotential, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1795 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Mikosch, E. L. Uzunova and G. S. Nikolov, Interaction of molecular nitrogen and oxygen with extraframework cations in zeolites with double six-membered rings of oxygen-bridged silicon and aluminum atoms: A DFT study, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11119–11125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Becker, S. Avraham and B. Posin, Nitrogen fixation: Part I. electrochemical reduction of titanium compounds in the presence of catechol and N2 in MeOH or THF, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1987, 230, 143–153 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Lee, C. S. L. Koh, Y. H. Lee, C. Liu, I. Y. Phang, X. Han, C.-K. Tsung and X. Y. Ling, Favoring the unfavored: Selective electrochemical nitrogen fixation using a reticular chemistry approach, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaar3208 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cheng, P. Cui, F. Wang, L. X. Ding and H. Wang, High efficiency electrochemical nitrogen fixation achieved with a lower pressure reaction system by changing the chemical equilibrium, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15541–15547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, S. Perathoner, C. Ampelli, C. Mebrahtu, D. Su and G. Centi, Electrocatalytic synthesis of ammonia at room temperature and atmospheric pressure from water and nitrogen on a carbon-nanotube-based electrocatalyst, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2699–2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-F. Chen, Y. Yuan, H. Jiang, S.-Y. Ren, L.-X. Ding, L. Ma, T. Wu, J. Lu and H. Wang, Electrochemical reduction of nitrate to ammonia via direct eight-electron transfer using a copper–molecular solid catalyst, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 605–613 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hollevoet, F. Jardali, Y. Gorbanev, J. Creel, A. Bogaerts and J. A. Martens, Towards green ammonia synthesis through plasma-driven nitrogen oxidation and catalytic reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 23825–23829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, D. Alam, R. Daiyan, H. Masood, T. Zhang, R. Zhou, P. J. Cullen, E. C. Lovell, A. Jalili and R. Amal, A hybrid plasma electrocatalytic process for sustainable ammonia production, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 865–872 RSC .
L. Li, C. Tang, X. Cui, Y. Zheng, X. Wang, H. Xu, S. Zhang, T. Shao, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Efficient Nitrogen Fixation to Ammonia through Integration of Plasma Oxidation with Electrocatalytic Reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 133, 14250–14256 CrossRef .
C. Dai, Y. Sun, G. Chen, A. C. Fisher and Z. J. Xu, Electrochemical oxidation of nitrogen towards direct nitrate production on spinel oxides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9418–9422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kuang, Y. Wang, W. Fang, H. Tan, M. Chen, J. Yao, C. Liu, J. Xu, K. Zhou and Q. Yan, Efficient nitrate synthesis via ambient nitrogen oxidation with Ru-doped TiO2/RuO2 electrocatalysts, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2002189 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Han, C. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Electrosynthesis of nitrate via the oxidation of nitrogen on tensile-strained palladium porous nanosheets, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 133, 4524–4528 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:
N2 + 3H2 ↔ 2NH3	(1)
N2 + 6H+ + 6e− ↔ 2NH3	(2)

 	Fig. 1  N2 reduction via the (a) dissociative pathway, (b) associative distal pathway, (c) associative alternating pathway, and (d) associative enzymatic pathway on a heterogeneous surface.	 

 	Fig. 2  N2 adsorption configurations on a Mo-BN monolayer: (a) end-on configuration and (b) side-on configuration. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 
η = Uequilibrium − Ulimiting,	(3)
Ulimiting = −ΔG/e,	(4)

 	Fig. 3  Geometric configurations during the N2 reduction and hydrogenation mechanisms: (a) associative distal, (b) associative alternating, and (c) associative enzymatic pathways on the Mo–BN monolayer. Free energy diagrams of N2 reduction mechanisms derived from the DFT calculations for the (d) associative distal, (e) associative alternating, and (f) associative enzymatic pathways on the Mo–BN monolayer. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the Mars–van Krevelen mechanism. (b) Energy difference (ΔEvac) of a vacancy in the surface layer and in the first subsurface layer of a nitride, and the related activation barrier of vacancy migration (Ea,vac). (c) Free energy diagram of the NRR following a constrained Mars–van Krevelen mechanism on the RS ZrN facet (100) and (d) RS MnN facet (100). Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2015. Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the surface hydrogenation mechanism for the NRR on noble-metal-based catalysts. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Calculated reaction energy (ΔE2N) for the NRR via the dissociative pathway. (b) Free energy diagram for the first hydrogenation step of the NRR via an associative pathway, and (c) free energy diagram for the H2 evolution reaction on the hcp Au(1_10), hcp Au(110), fcc Au(101), fcc Au(100), fcc Pd(100), and fcc Pd(101) surfaces. Minimum-energy pathways for the protonation of N2 into N2H2* on the (d) hcp Au(110), (e) hcp Au(1_10), (f) fcc Au(100), (g) fcc Au(101), (h) fcc Pd(100), and (i) fcc Pd(101) surfaces; insets show the corresponding structures from the initial state to the final state. Golden, dark cyan, blue, and white balls denote Au, Pd, N, and H atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Calculated energy barriers for the H* coverage range from 25 to 100% on the fcc Au(100) surface. Minimum-energy pathways for the hydrogenation of N2 into N2H2* on the (b) fcc Pd(101) surface with 100% H* coverage and the (c) fcc Pd(101) surface with 100% H* coverage and two subsurface H*. Minimum-energy pathways for the H2 evolution reaction through the Tafel reaction on (d) hcp Au(110), (e) hcp Au(1_10), (f) fcc Au(100), (g) fcc Au(101), (h) fcc Pd(100), and (i) fcc Pd(101). Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 
Acidic: 2H+(aq) + 2e− ↔ H2(g)
Eθ(vs. RHE) = 0.000 V	(5)
N2(g) + 6H+(aq) + 6e− ↔ 2NH3(aq)
Eθ(vs. RHE) = +0.092 V	(6)
Alkaline: 2H2O(l) + 2e− ↔ H2(g) + 2OH−(aq)
Eθ(vs. RHE) = −0.828 V	(7)
N2(g) + 6H2O(l) + 6e− ↔ 2NH3(aq) + 6OH−(aq)
Eθ(vs. RHE) = −0.736 V	(8)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Faradaic efficiency and (b) yield rate of NH3 achieved using Mo2C/C under proton-suppressed and proton-enriched conditions. (c) NRR catalytic mechanisms of Mo2C/C under proton-suppressed and proton-enriched conditions. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2018. Wiley-VCH. (d) Average NH3 yields and faradaic efficiencies of MoS2/CC in 0.1 M Na2SO4 at different applied potentials. (e) Average NH3 yields and faradaic efficiencies of MoS2/CC in 0.1 M HCl at different applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2018. Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic for the synthesis of a CoP HNC. (b) TEM image of the CoP HNC. (c) NH3 yield rate and faradaic efficiency of the CoP HNC at each specified potential. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2018. Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Elemental mapping image of Pt SAs/WO3. (b) HAADF–STEM image of Pt SAs/WO3; the isolated Pt sites are marked with red circles. (c) NH3 yield rates and faradaic efficiencies of Pt SAs/WO3 and Pt NPs/WO3 at each specified potential in 0.1 M K2SO4. (d) NH3 yield rates and faradaic efficiencies of Pt SAs/WO3 and Pt NPs/WO3 at −0.2 V versus RHE in 0.1 M KOH, 0.1 M K2SO4, and 0.05 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2020. Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of a gas-diffusion electrode reactor. PEM represents the proton exchange membrane. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017. Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the PNOCRA process.82 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020. Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic of the plasma integrated in an H-cell electrochemical system. (c) NH3 production rate and faradaic efficiency at applied potentials. (d) Schematic of the proposed pathways and excited species in the double reactor glow and spark discharge (DRGSD). Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2021. Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
