Compositionally graded crystals as a revived approach for new crystal engineering for the exploration of novel functionalities  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CE00041E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CE00041E
(Highlight)
CrystEngComm, 2022, 24, 2359-2369Compositionally graded crystals as a revived approach for new crystal engineering for the exploration of novel functionalities

        
          
            Yuji 
            Matsumoto
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Shingo 
            Maruyama
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kenichi 
            Kaminaga
          
        
      
Department of Applied Chemistry, School of Engineering, Tohoku University, 6-6-07 Aramaki Aza Aoba, Aoba-ku Sendai, 980-8579 Japan. E-mail: y-matsumoto@tohoku.ac.jp
Received 
      11th January 2022
    , Accepted 16th February 2022First published on 16th February 2022AbstractThe original concept of nanoscale compositionally graded crystals (NCGCs) dates back to the mid-1980s; here, it is presented as a revived approach for new crystal engineering. The NCGCs are expected to exhibit a variety of novel functionalities that originate from the nanoscale composition gradients artificially implemented within these crystals. In this review article, after looking back at some of the related epoch-making work, an overview of recent studies on bulk and thin-film NCGCs is provided, covering essential topics such as ferroelectricity, magnetism, photocatalysis, and batteries. The review will allow readers to understand the promise of the nanoscale composition gradients approach for the design of new crystalline materials.
1 Introduction
Owing to the recent progress in nanotechnologies for materials characterization, reliable information on the nanoscale structure and composition of crystalline materials has become more accessible than it had been in the last decade. For better or worse, researchers, who are engaged in modern crystal engineering and materials science, must accept that a crystalline material could often have unexpected nanoscale inhomogeneity in its structure and composition. Synthesis of complex crystal materials that aims to improve existing material properties or explore additional functionalities is usually attempted through multiple-element substitution and/or alloying of different materials. Conventionally, as symbolized by the term, “crystallinity”, one of the most important criteria in crystalline materials development that has been postulated is that inhomogeneity in the structure and composition of a crystalline material should be avoided or excluded as much as possible. This stipulation intends to ensure the best reproducibility and functionality, which is expected from perfect crystal periodicity; otherwise, crystals would deteriorate.
However, the idea of inhomogeneity in the structure and composition of crystalline materials has seen some support as well, such as in their utilization to create new functionalities. The concept of “compositionally graded crystals (CGCs)” is among such positive ideas, whose origin dates back to the mid-1980s. Here, it would be better to first introduce a similar concept of “Functionally Graded Materials (FGMs)”,1,2 which was also proposed at the same time to develop new structural materials. In most polycrystalline FGMs, a continuous composition gradient from one material to another across a heterointerface can reportedly suppress abrupt changes in mechanical properties at the interface, leading to improvement in the joining characteristics between metals and biomaterials, among other benefits.3,4 A detailed insight into FGMs was recently provided by M. Sathish et al.5 In contrast, CGCs are crystalline materials, whose composition is continuously graded by processes, such as the partial substitution of a certain site in the unit cell of single crystals, while maintaining almost the same crystal structure. The first attempt of using CGCs was for the development of new compound semiconductor devices based on (AlGa)As that aimed to improve the performance of devices employing them, such as bipolar transistors,6 laser diodes,7 and solar cells.8 In these instances, the introduction of sub-microscale composition gradient in the semiconductor single crystal film helped control the electronic transport properties.9,10 In semiconductor CGCs, quasi-electric fields could be induced by direct band gap and/or effective mass gradients. In such initial stages of the application of CGCs, detailed insight into semiconductor CGCs was reviewed by F. Capasso.11
Afterward, from the end of the 1990s to the beginning of the 2000s, attempts to apply the materials design concept of CGCs to ferroelectric oxides were made, majorly by J. V. Mantese and coworkers in the US.12,13 According to theoretical predictions, the introduction of a nanoscale composition gradient would be equivalent to introducing a polarization gradient, thereby a quasi-electric field will be induced in the ferroelectric CGC like in the semiconductor CGCs.14–16 The existence of such a quasi-electric field was experimentally verified in (BaSr)TiO3 films not only at that time,12,13,16 but also quite recently.17 These reports demonstrate that the nanoscale composition gradient has a strong potential to bring about new functionalities in CGCs that are different from functionalities of semiconductor CGCs with sub-microscale composition gradients. Quantitatively, a nanoscale composition gradient of <1 at%/100 nm could lead to a new functionality emerging that may be regarded as if it were a new single-phase compound. Therefore, CGCs with a nanoscale composition gradient can be distinguished from those with a sub-microscale or microscale composition gradient, and thus, are better referred to as “Nanoscale CGCs (NCGCs)”.
Recently, there has been a growing interest in the nanoscale composition gradient that is accidentally formed within individual grains of complex and alloy bulk materials leading to the origin of unexpected properties and functions.18–22 There has also been an increasing momentum toward the revival of studies on compositionally graded materials that are artificially designed at the nanoscale by taking advantage of recent epitaxial thin-film technologies.
In this review article, we provide an overview of recent studies on NCGCs, improvements in their properties, and the development of new functions. Some historic epoch-making studies on NCGCs have already been introduced in this section (Introduction). In section 2, recent studies on bulk NCGCs are reviewed, followed by a discussion on representative engineering techniques to artificially create nanoscale composition gradients in section 3. In section 4, successful examples of thin-film NCGCs are present by category of some properties and functions as schematically shown in Fig. 1. The review is ended by identifying the challenges faced in the field of NCGC improvement and the areas where further work must be done. Although this review article may not cover all related aspects of NCGCs, the authors hope that this review will be helpful and appealing to a broad readership in crystal engineering and materials design research fields.
 Fig. 1  A schematic diagram of the material design concept of nanoscale compositionally graded crystals (NCGSs) with the emergence of a variety of properties and functionalities. 
2 Bulk NCGCs
Among crystalline materials, whose properties and/or functionalities have recently been dramatically improved, a nano- or submicron-scale composition gradient is sometimes found in the crystalline material; this gradient may not necessarily be intended by the researchers. There has been a growing interest in the idea that improvements observed in some of the properties and functionalities of these crystals could originate from such composition gradients. In this section, two typical examples are illustrated.
2.1 Cathode materials for battery applications
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have become indispensable as one of the most promising energy storage devices in a low-carbon society as they efficiently pair with renewable energy sources. The application of LIBs in electric vehicles (EVs) is the most efficient way to achieve vehicles with low emissions of carbon dioxide. However, high cost, low durability, and small energy density are major drawbacks of LIBs, and thus, further technological solutions are needed for maximal LIB embracement in EVs. One approach to finding solutions is the development of new cathode materials with a focus on a class of layered lithium transition-metal oxides, such as LiCoO2 (LCO), which is representative and has been intensively studied. On the other hand, Li[Ni1−x−yCoxMy]O2(M =Al, Mn:1 − x – y > 0.6)(NCA and NCM), has been considered as a potential candidate to replace LCO currently used in commercial applications, owing to its high reversibility capacity, good rate capability, and relatively low cost. The problem that remains to be solved is its real application which is due to the inherent chemical instability reported for both NCA and NCM. Consequently, NCA and NCM-based LIBs are easily decomposed, particularly at the interface, when they encounter a liquid electrolyte, leading to insufficient lifetimes and poor thermal stability at high temperatures.
Yang-Kook Sun and coworkers22 solved some of the issues discussed above in NCM-based LIBs by successful preparation of a compositionally graded NCM bulk cathode with the average composition of Li[Ni0.61Co0.12Mn0.27]O2 (FCG61). Quantitative (at%) transmission electron microscopy – energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (TEM-EDS) mapping analysis in a single particle of FCG61 is shown in Fig. 2(a), which demonstrates a radial concentration gradient of Ni and Mn from the center of the particle to the surface at the particle. According to the electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) composition profile shown in Fig. 2(b), while the Co concentration is almost constant at ∼12 at%, the ratio of Ni to Mn monotonically decreases from 6.3 to 2.1 at% radially toward the particle surface on a submicron scale with the total concentration of Ni and Mn remaining at 88 at%. In such nanoscale compositionally graded bulk cathode material (NCGM), the relatively low composition of Ni at the particle surface brings a substantial improvement in the thermal and structural stability, while the Ni-rich center aids in keeping its high capacity to some extent. Furthermore, as shown in a TEM image in Fig. 2(a), the radial growth of rod-like grains within the particle was found to increase resistance against deterioration due to the anisotropic volume change characteristic of this material. As a result, as shown in Fig. 2(c), the compositionally graded NCM bulk cathode materials exhibit a long cycle life of >3000 cycles, and the Al substituted FCG61 (Al-FCG) is found to be much superior to FCG61, maintaining 84% of its initial capacity even after the 3000 cycles.
 Fig. 2  (a) Quantitative (at%) transmission electron microscopy – energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (TEM-EDS) mapping analysis of a single particle of Li[Ni0.61Co0.12Mn0.27]O2 (FCG61). (b) Electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) composition profile of FCG61. (c) Cyclic performances of FCG61 and Al-FCG61 at 1.0 °C in a full-cell versus a graphite anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. 
2.2 Photocatalysis
Efficient production of H2 from an inexhaustible source of solar energy is required for a sustainable society in the future that can rely on renewable energy. Photocatalysis is a phenomenon through which solar energy can be converted directly to chemical energy. According to a recent report, though the conversion efficiency of solar cells is much superior to that of photocatalysts, the external quantum efficiency of an Al-doped SrTiO3 photocatalyst to split water will almost reach unity in the UV light region.24 Owing to the lower production cost of photocatalysts than that of solar cells, they are expected to serve as an alternative technology for H2 production in the future, which would be superior to existing production processes based on fossil fuel resources.
Sodium tantalate (NaTaO3), which has a crystal structure composed of perovskite as shown in Fig. 3(a), is the first semiconductor photocatalyst capable of overall water splitting in the UV light region. The external quantum efficiency of NaTaO3 exceeds 50% when La is doped into the crystal with the aid of a NiO cocatalyst.25,26 Similar effects have been noticed for other dopants, such as Ca, Sr, and Ba. Onishi and coworkers23 measured the lifetime of electrons photo-excited at a wavelength of 266 nm using time-resolved infrared absorption spectroscopy for doped NaTaO3 photocatalysts. They observed the lifetimes of these photocatalysts to be longer than those of the non-doped NaTaO3 photocatalyst, which was responsible for their high photocatalytic activity (Fig. 3(e)). Furthermore, doped Sr cations were found to substitute for not only the A sites, but also the B sites, and the occupancy ratio of Sr cations in the A and B sites was nearly equal to 3:1 to maintain charge neutrality. Furthermore, TEM-EDX analysis for element mappings near the surface of a single particle as shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c) revealed that the doping level with Sr atoms was likely to increase near the particle surface, while other kinds of atoms, such as Na, Ta, and O, were homogeneously distributed. Quantitatively, the concentration profiles near the surface as shown in Fig. 3(d) confirm the formation of a high concentration gradient of Sr within a 5 nm-deep region at the particle surface. Taking into account the fact that the band gap of NaTaO3 is broadened by Sr doping and that the UV light penetration depth is at its most 10 nm, it has been proposed that the electron–hole pairs are photo-excited only near the surface; furthermore, they could be separated efficiently into electrons and holes traveling in opposite directions along the band gap gradient near the particle surface, resulting in longer lifetimes of the photo-excited electrons as illustrated in Fig. 3(f).
 Fig. 3  (a) A crystal model of NaTaO3. (b) A transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of a single Sr-doped NaTaO3 particle. (c) TEM – energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis for element mapping near the surface of the single particle shown in (b). (d) Concentration profiles of the elements near the surface. (e) Infrared absorbance decay curves for NaTaO3 photocatalysts doped with La, Ca, Sr, or Ba, whose dopant levels are at 2 at%, along with the decay curve for a non-doped NaTaO3 photocatalyst. (f) A schematic diagram of the band gap profile and the resultant efficient separation of the photo-excited electrons and holes near the particle surface of Sr-doped NaTaO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. 
3 Engineering techniques for NCGC thin films
For the implementation of composition gradients in thin films, there are mainly two types of processes: non-vacuum solution and vacuum deposition, whose merits and demerits are discussed in terms of usability, cost-effectiveness, and controllability in this section.
3.1 Non-vacuum solution processes

(a) Metalorganic decomposition (MOD). 
Metalorganic decomposition synthesis is a method for fabricating thin films, such as metal oxides, through thermal decomposition of organometallic compound solutions pre-coated on a substrate. For fabricating NCGM films by using this method, the process for a hypothetical A1−xBx oxide film is illustrated in Fig. 4(a). First, liquid metalorganic solution layers in the proportions, A1−xBx, for discrete x values are successively spin-coated by mixing set amounts of each of the two metalorganic solutions corresponding to compositions A and B, respectively. In each step between the successive depositions from x = 0 to 1, the remaining solvent in the layer is removed by preheating the sample for a short time on a hot plate in open-air. The sample is then annealed in an air muffle furnace at a temperature high enough for pyrolysis. After completing the successive deposition from x = 0 to 1, the multi-layered sample is finally annealed by flowing oxygen over it at a temperature high enough for the constituent layers to diffuse into each other at their interfaces. As a result, NCGM films are obtained with their composition graded more smoothly in the film. This method is a cost-effective process with easy handling, which has often been employed by the group of J. V. Mantese et al.; this group made a significant contribution to the early studies on ferroelectric NCGM films in the 2000s.12,16
 Fig. 4  Non-vacuum solution processes for fabricating nanoscale compositionally graded material (NCGM) films: (a) metalorganic decomposition (MOD) synthesis and (b) pulsed spray pyrolysis. 


(b) Pulsed spray pyrolysis. 
Pulsed spray pyrolysis is essentially the same as MOD, where metalorganic solutions pre-coated on a substrate are thermally decomposed to fabricate metal oxide films. It is different in that the solutions are sprayed in a pulsed mode, which enables the precise control of the amount deposited. For fabricating NCGM films by this method, the process for a hypothetical A1−xBx oxide film is illustrated in Fig. 4(b). Contrary to the MOD method, where multilayers with different compositions are stacked in a gradient (Fig. 4(a)), in this method, a bi-layer structure of A and B is first formed on the substrate, which undergoes thermal annealing at a temperature high enough for constituent elements of the upper layer B to diffuse into the layer A beneath the layer B.27 The pulsed spray pyrolysis method is not capable of generating the composition gradients as precisely as MOD, but it is simpler.

3.2 Vacuum deposition processes
In preparation of semiconductor CGM films, which were addressed in the Introduction section, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), a typical vacuum deposition process for semiconductor films, is employed. In this case, effective deposition rates of each constituent component can be changed to implement a given composition gradient for 1 μm-thick films by controlling either the temperature or the shutter opening time in each evaporation cell. However, no further details could be found in the literature on this aspect. In this section, among vacuum deposition processes, sputtering, metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), and pulsed laser deposition (PLD) have been focused on as the methods that are often employed for the preparation of NCGM films.

(a) Sputtering. 
In sputtering, Ar+ ions, i.e., atoms of a noble gas ionized in a plasma atmosphere, are accelerated under a high electric field, where they bombard the target, which is a solid material to be deposited with high energy. As a result, the atoms and their complexes kicked out of the target surface by the accelerated Ar+ ions are deposited on the substrate.28 In the case of magnetron sputtering, a strong magnet that is set behind the target can make and stabilize the plasma state, and increase the density of Ar+ ions in the plasma, thereby increasing the sputtering efficiency. The process has the advantage of fabricating large-area thin films with high-deposition rates and is often employed for the preparation of thin metal films. For fabricating NCGM films by using this process as shown in Fig. 5(a), either the RF-power of each sputtering gun for the target sources (A or B) or the bias voltage applied on the substrate relative to each of the targets is continuously changed during deposition. At least one study in 1994 reports the preparation of compositionally modulated magnetic multilayer films using sputtering based on this principle.29
 Fig. 5  Vacuum deposition processes for fabricating nanoscale compositionally graded material (NCGM) films: (a) sputtering, (b) metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), and (c) pulsed laser desorption (PLD). 


(b) MOCVD. 
In MOCVD for fabricating metal oxide films, volatile metalorganic compounds containing the constituent metals in a metal oxide are fed into a deposition chamber, where they are thermally decomposed and oxidized on a heated substrate under an O2 environment. Metalorganic compounds readily decompose thermally due to their natural instability, allowing them to fabricate thin films more efficiently in MOCVD than in CVD at relatively low temperatures. Since the first MOCVD growth report by Manasevil in 1968,30 a variety of thin films, such as compound semiconductors, oxides, and nitride compounds, have been fabricated by MOCVD. For fabricating NCGM films as shown in Fig. 5(b), the flow ratio of the metalorganic compounds as sources of A and B is continuously changed during deposition.31 The process can be adopted for commercial production of large-area thin films with high-deposition rates like the sputtering process.


(c) PLD. 
PLD is the deposition method in which a solid material to be deposited in a target form is ablated with a focused pulsed UV laser beam, and the ablated precursor species in a plume of plasma are deposited on a substrate.32 For fabricating NCGM films using this process, as shown in Fig. 5(c), the number ratio of the UV laser pulses to ablate A and B targets is continuously changed during deposition. There are three ways to do so: (i) targets A and B mechanically switch their positions on a fixed optical path of the laser beam,33 (ii) the laser beam is rapidly scanned with a Galvano mirror between targets A and B that have fixed positions,34 or (iii) the laser beam is gradually scanned on the surface of a rotating single segmented-target35 along the radial direction.36 On the one hand, PLD is generally less suitable for deposition of large-area thin films with a high deposition rate as compared to sputtering and MOCVD. On the other hand, PLD is much better at implementing a designed composition gradient in a film by digitally controlling the number ratio of laser pulses.

4 Design of functionalities in NCGM films
4.1 Ferroelectricity and related functions
Trial research on ferroelectric oxide NCGC films was first conducted around the 2000s. At that time, however, since it was still at the dawn of oxide epitaxy, the NCGC films were prepared by solution methods, such as MOD. Thereafter, there were almost no reports until the recent maturity of oxide epitaxy techniques, such as PLD. L. W. Martin's group is one of the world-leading research groups to publish impressive studies on ferroelectric oxide NCGC epitaxial films. His group has been successful in visualizing the polarization and/or strain gradient induced by the composition gradient, which had only been theoretically claimed at that time; for this purpose, their group took the advantage of a recent transmission electron microscope (TEM) technique called STEM (scanning-TEM).17Fig. 6(a) is a cross-sectional high-angle annular dark-field STEM (HAADF-STEM) image of a 150 nm-thick Ba1−xSrxTiO3 (0 < x < 0.6) NCGC film on a 40 nm-thick SrRuO3/GdScO3(110) substrate. Fig. 6(b) is a 2D map of local displacement of the Ti cation, which was constructed from Fig. 6(a), showing a smooth gradient of polarization along the growing direction. The resultant Ba1−xSrxTiO3 NCGC film has been found to exhibit large dielectric permittivity with low loss, negligible temperature-dependence within a deviation of 13% up to 500 °C.
 Fig. 6  (a) A cross-sectional high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image of 150 nm-thick Ba1−xSrxTiO3 nanoscale compositionally graded material (NCGM) film. (b) A 2D map of the local displacement of the Ti cation, which was constructed from (a). (c) and (d) out-of-plane piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) amplitude images for PbZrxTi1−xO3 CGM film (c) and homogeneous PbZr0.2Ti0.8O3 film (d), with phase images inset in the upper right corners of the images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17 and 37. Copyright 2016 and 2017, Macmillan publisher limited. 
In ferroelectric materials, some macroscopic properties and functionalities result from the microscopic structures of polarization domains and the behaviors of their domain walls. Thus, it is intriguing to see how the composition gradient in a ferroelectric material can affect microscopic structures and behaviors of polarization domains and walls. L. W. Martin's group has also reported the polarization domain structure for a PbZrxTi1−xO3 NCGM film, where x varied from 0.2 to 0.8 on a 30 nm-thick SrRuO3/GdScO3(110) substrate using piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM).37Fig. 6(c) is a PFM image of the PbZrxTi1−xO3 NCGC film. Since the top-most surface composition of the NCGC film is PbZr0.8Ti0.2O3 (x = 0.8), it should have exhibited a complex mosaic domain structure characteristic to its rhombohedral phase. However, the domain structure is c/a/c/a-like, which is typically observed for the tetragonal phase of PbZr0.2Ti0.8O3, when compared with a PFM image of a homogeneous PbZr0.2Ti0.8O3 film grown on another similar substrate as shown in Fig. 6(d). This indicates that the presence of the compositional and strain gradients can stabilize the tetragonal phase and domain structure throughout the film despite the rhombohedral phase being compositionally dominant according to the bulk phase diagram. Furthermore, in the NCGC film, from the substrate to the free surface, due to a gradual increase in the lattice mismatch, i.e., the compressive strain, the unit-cell tetragonality increases, reducing the volume fraction of the a domains. As a result, the a domains should taper to a point, where they can be referred to as needle-like domains because of their cross-section. The tapering wall is energetically high and relatively unstable, therefore, the elastic domain walls originating from the needle-like domains are highly mobile to give rise to a locally enhanced piezoresponse under electrical/mechanical stimuli.
4.2 Magnetism
At the time of the early studies on ferroelectric NCGCs, J. V. Mantese and coworkers in the US were one of the prominent research groups. They attempted to verify quasi-internal magnetostatic potential even in magnetization-graded ferrite materials based on the theoretical prediction. This was done analogous to the quasi-electric field induced in the ferroelectric NCGCs during the second half of the 2000s.38,39 However, the composition gradient was on a sub-centimeter scale or larger, where several bulk ferrite ceramics or layers with different compositions were bound or stacked mechanically and/or chemically in a given order such that the composition gradient was implemented in the ferrite material.
On the other hand, during that period, in magnetic metal alloy systems, there were some attempts to fabricate exchange-coupled composite (ECC) graded thin-film media for ultrahigh density magnetic recording. A typical example is an Ll0–FePt/Fe ECC graded media by D. Goll and coworkers,40 where the Fe gradient was formed due to interdiffusion of Ll0–FePt and Fe in a primitive way. However, in the works that followed a few years later, this idea was extended further to achieve magnetic NCGC films that were fabricated by magnetron co-sputtering as described in section 3. The examples include continuously anisotropically graded single (Fe53Pt47)100−xCux films by C. L. Zha and coworkers41 and exchange coupling graded NixCu1−x films by B. J. Kirby et al.42

Fig. 7(a) is the derivative of magnetic moment with respect to temperature for a NixCu1−x alloy NCGC films (0.61 < x < 0.7) on a Si substrate in which the Ni composition increased from the substrate to the film surface, along with those of homogeneous films. A broad magnetic transition in the NCGC film was observed in a temperature range between the transition temperatures of the homogeneous alloy films with x = 0.61 and 0.70. The fits to the data of the amplitude of the spin symmetry in polarized neutron reflectivity measurement (Fig. 7(b) and (c)) can construct the profile of magnetization in an NCGC film. Fig. 7(d) is the result of the NixCu1−x alloy NCGC film, where the magnetization was found to gradually increase from the substrate to the film surface and changed its profile depending on the external magnetic field strength. All these magnetic behaviors could be explained theoretically by adopting an exchange strength gradient model, which was solved numerically in the mean-field approximation. B. J. Kirby and L. Fallarino et al. also reported the fabrication of exchange strength modulated ferromagnetic alloy films of Co1−xRux in which the up- and down-graded composition sequence was repeated on a nanometer scale.43 A recent review by this group44 would be helpful for more details on magnetic metal alloy NCGCs.
 Fig. 7  (a) Derivative of the magnetic moment with respect to temperature for NixCu1−x alloy nanoscale compositionally graded crystal (NCGC) films (0.61 < x < 0.7) on a Si substrate. (b) and (c) the fits to the data of the amplitude of the spin symmetry in polarized neutron reflectivity measurements. (d) The profile of magnetization in the NCGC film of NixCu1−x. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2016, AIP publishing. 
There was a recent report by D. Kan et al. on the PLD growth of thin-film NCGC of ferrimagnetic NiCo2O4 (NCO). In NCO, the Td-site is almost occupied by Co and the Oh-site is populated by Ni and Co evenly in its stoichiometric composition. They found that the occupancy ratio of Ni to Co in the Oh-site in NCO thin films strongly depended on the partial pressure of O2 during deposition. The ratio varied from the stoichiometric side to the Ni-poor (Co-rich) side as the partial pressure of O2 decreased from 100 to 10 mTorr.45 The O2 partial pressure dependence of the composition in the PLD growth of NCO films allows NCGC films of NCO to grow just by gradually changing the O2 partial pressure during deposition. In the stoichiometric NCO films grown at high O2 partial pressures around or above 100 mTorr, perpendicular magnetic anisotropy is dominant. However, the lower the O2 partial pressure during deposition, the smaller both the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and the saturated out-of-plane magnetization become in the Ni-poor (Co-rich) NCO films. As a result, continuously magnetic anisotropy graded films can be obtained as well even for a transition metal oxide.46 The temperature dependence of remnant magnetization Mr in an NCGC film (Fig. 8(a)) shows that switching of magnetic anisotropy from perpendicular to in-plane occurs around 150 K. Fig. 8(b) is a schematic diagram of temperature-induced changes in magnetic anisotropy and magnetization configuration of NCGC, stoichiometric and Ni-poor NCO films. Per this diagram, the variation in the magnetization reversal behavior for different temperatures is seen in the transverse Hall resistivity measurement while changing the direction of the externally applied magnetic field (θH). Furthermore, Fig. 8(c)–(e) show the results of the magnetic field dependence of the rxx and the anomalous part of rxy at θH values of 180°, 135°, and 225° at 40 K for the NCGC film. For all the θH values, the ρxx is almost independent of the directions of the canted magnetizations. In contrast, the anomalous Hall resistivity ρxy, when the magnetic field is swept along the out-of-plane direction (θH = 180°), is biased by the configuration of the canted magnetizations. A more interesting finding is that the reversal of the out-of-plane and canted magnetizations are induced at different magnetic fields when they are applied along with the diagonal directions of θH = 135° and 225°, yielding apparent anti-ferromagnetically coupled magnetization configurations.
 Fig. 8  (a) The temperature dependence of remnant magnetization, Mr, in a nanoscale compositionally graded crystal (NCGC) film of NiCo2O4 (NCO). (b) A schematic diagram of the temperature-induced changes of magnetic anisotropy and magnetization configuration for NCGC, stoichiometric, and Ni-poor NCO films. (c)–(e) Magnetic-field dependence of ρxx and the anomalous part of ρxy at θH values of 180°, 135°, and 225° at 40 K for NCGC film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2021, AIP publishing. 
4.3 Photocatalysis
The composition gradient in semiconductor CGCs induces a quasi-electric field to enhance the spatial separation efficiency of the photo-generated electron–hole pairs, potentially leading to improvement in the activity of semiconductor photocatalysis. As already addressed in section 2, the longer lifetime of the photo-excited electrons in Sr-doped NaTaO3 photocatalysts has been inferred to originate from the Sr composition gradient naturally formed near the particle surface. This section includes two recent examples of thin film photocatalytic NCGCs.
The first example is polycrystalline CuBi2O4 films with Cu composition increasing or decreasing from the substrate to the film surface (henceforth referred to as forward- and reverse gradient films, respectively), which are prepared by the pulsed spray pyrolysis method discussed in section 3.27Fig. 9(a) is a cross-sectional SEM-EDX mapping of a 200 nm-thick forward gradient CuBi2O4 film. Quantitatively, as shown in Fig. 9(b), the Cu and Bi compositions monotonically increase and decrease, respectively, from the substrate to the surface, although mutual diffusion seems to occur to some degree at the film-substrate interface. As the Cu deficiencies in the p-type semiconductor of CuBi2O4 act as acceptors, the Cu composition gradient causes a concentration gradient of holes in the film. In this case, some charge transfer necessarily occurs to equalize the Fermi level within the film under equilibrium. For example, the hole carriers are transferred from the substrate to the surface in the forward gradient film, and a downward band bending is formed not only near the surface but also throughout the film as shown in Fig. 9(c). Such downward band bending is favored for photocatalytic H2 production on the film surface because of the resultant efficient electron transport even from deeper regions of the film to the surface. The forward gradient CuBi2O4 film exhibits higher anodic photocurrent than any other CuBi2O4 films as found in a comparison of their photocurrent-voltage curves (Fig. 9(d)).
 Fig. 9  (a) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy – energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDX) mapping of 200 nm-thick forward gradient CuBi2O4 film. (b) Composition depth profiles of Cu, Bi, and Sn for the film shown in (a). (c) A schematic diagram of downward band bending formed throughout the film. (d) Comparison of the photocurrent-voltage curves of forward, reverse, and homogeneous CuBi2O4 films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
The second example is Sr-doped NaTaO3 epitaxial films with Sr composition increasing or decreasing from the substrate to the film surface (henceforth referred to as up- and down-graded films, respectively).47 This was intended to verify the hypothesis proposed by Onishi et al. that the Sr composition gradient near the particle surface of Sr-doped NaTaO3 was responsible for the longer lifetimes of the excited photocarriers. A series of up-, down-graded, and homogeneous Sr-doped NaTaO3 epitaxial films, as well as a non-doped NaTaO3 film for reference, were all prepared by PLD with rapid beam deflection (see section 3) on LaAlO3(001) substrates as shown in Fig. 10(a). The maximum doping level of Sr was set to 10 at%, and the film thickness was 100 nm for all the films. Fig. 10(b) shows the depth profiles of Sr in the films which were examined by secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS). In the homogeneous film, some Sr atoms were found segregated to form the composition gradient within a depth region of 20 nm below the film surface. This was an anticipated result based on the corresponding powder experiment of Sr-doped NaTaO3 discussed in section 2, but the Sr composition became almost constant in regions deeper than 20 nm. On the other hand, the Sr composition gradients were confirmed throughout the up- and down-graded films, respectively, although there were some deviations from the composition gradients that had been designed to be linear due to self-diffusion. Time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) signal decay curves for the non- and Sr-doped NaTaO3 films, when the carriers were photoexcited with a UV light at 266 nm, are displayed in Fig. 10(c). The up- and down-graded films both exhibited longer lifetimes of the photoexcited carriers than any films of non-doped NaTaO3 and homogeneous Sr-doped NaTaO3. It is noteworthy that the homogeneous Sr-doped NaTaO3 film in which a Sr composition gradient was unintentionally formed near the film surface did not show such an effect of its Sr composition gradient on the photoexcited carrier lifetime. The absorbance values of NaTaO3 and Sr-doped NaTaO3 epitaxial films at the wavelength (266 nm) of the UV light used in the TRMC, as well as time-resolved infrared absorption spectroscopy experiments, were significantly smaller than those reported in the corresponding bulk powder samples. As a result, while the greatest UV light penetration depth was 10 nm in the bulk experiments shown in Fig. 3(e), the UV light could penetrate and be absorbed in the deeper regions of the films. This likely enhanced the effect of the Sr composition gradient on the photoexcited carrier lifetime in the film experiment.
 Fig. 10  (a) A schematic diagram of homogeneous Sr-doped and up- and down-graded Sr-doped NaTaO3 films, including non-doped NaTaO3 film for reference. (b) Set of depth profiles of Sr in the films, which were examined via secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS). (c) Time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) signal decay curves for non- and Sr-doped NaTaO3 films, including those for a substrate of LaAlO3(001). Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
5 Outlook
In this review, we have presented recent development in CGCs, with a focus on NCGC thin films, after looking back at some epoch-making work since the 1980s. Some readers, who patiently looked through the review, may wonder why this review does not address any CGCs or NCGCs based on organic materials. Some works have indeed reported compositionally graded organic bulk and thin-film materials, but most of them consist of non-crystalline polymers (see a good review in ref. 48) or crystalline organic compounds with different crystal structures, e.g., C60 and CuPc.49 Therefore, they could not be categorized as CGCs or NCGCs as defined in this review. This is likely because most organic solar cells are hetero-junctions of different n- and p-type compounds. The recent progress in perovskite solar cells, however, encourages us to challenge the conventional method of developing organic NCGCs for such solar cell applications because site substitution produces a compositional variety of organic–inorganic halide perovskites in perovskite solar cells. There has been growing interest in fabricating organic CGCs based on organic–inorganic halide perovskites,50,51 most of which are far from being categorized as NCGCs because of their gradient structures at the microscale. Halide perovskite-based CGCs with no inclusion of organic components have also been synthesized with improved optical properties to act as scintillators.52 Accordingly, to further develop new NCGCs, organic NCGCs are an unexplored treasure. The challenge will not only result in the improvement of existing functionalities, such as photovoltaics, electroluminescence (EL), ferroelectricity, and magnetism like inorganic NCGCs but it will also lead to the discovery of new functionalities that could not be obtained otherwise. For this purpose, especially for organic thin-film NCGCs, developing new synthetic processes is needed to enable the efficient fabrication of NCGC films by processes such as PLD with a galvano-mirror for inorganic thin-film NCGCs. Furthermore, an infrared (IR) laser deposition technique for organic material deposition might be useful for this purpose; this process is similar to PLD, but an IR laser is used instead of a UV laser.53,54
Furthermore, readers may have received a rather negative impression due to the minimal discussion about direct structure–property relationships – even the semi-quantitative ones – from the studies on compositionally graded crystal materials that have been so far published. For this reason, we would like to emphasize that this is arguably one of the biggest challenges that must be overcome to further develop compositionally graded crystal materials with new functionalities. Recent progress in machine learning and/or AI technologies boosted by large-scale computation has a great impact on the field of modern materials science55–59 and should be helpful. For example, computational calculations using large material systems, such as NCGCs, will become more accessible within a realistic time scale. More researchers in the crystal and materials science fields are hence expected to experience the infinite possibilities stemming from this innovative crystal engineering approach and to embark on the intensive development of new NCGCs with conviction.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references
M. Koizumi, Int. J. SHS, 1997, 6, 295–306 CAS .
I. M. EI-Galy, B. I. Saleh and M. H. Ahmed, SN Appl. Sci., 2019, 1, 1378 CrossRef .
W. Pompe, H. Worch, M. Epple, W. Friess, M. Gelinsky, P. Greil, U. Hempel, D. Scharnweber and K. Schulte, J. Mater. Sci. Eng. A, 2003, 362, 40–60 CrossRef .
A. Sola, D. Bellucci and V. Cannillo, Biotechnol. Adv., 2016, 34, 504–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sathish, N. Radhikaa and B. Saleh, Composites, Part B, 2021, 225, 109278 CrossRef CAS .
F. Capassol, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1986, 16, 263–291 CrossRef .
J. R. Hayes, F. Capasso, R. J. Malik, A. C. Gossard and W. Wiegmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1983, 43, 949–951 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jr. Holonyak, R. M. Kolbas, R. D. Dupuis and P. D. Dapkus, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 1980, 16, 134–137 CrossRef .
J. M. Woodall and H. J. Hovel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1977, 30, 492–493 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Levine, W. T. Tsang, C. G. Bethea and F. Capasso, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1982, 41, 470 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Levine, C. G. Bethea, W. T. Tsang, F. Capasso, K. K. Thornber, R. C. Fulton and D. A. Kleinman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1983, 42, 769 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Mohammed, G. W. Auner, R. Naik, J. V. Mantese, N. W. Schubring and A. L. Micheli, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 3322 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jin, G. W. Auner, R. Naik, N. W. Schubring, J. V. Mantese, A. B. Catalan and A. L. Micheli, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 2838 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pintillie, I. Boerasu and M. J. M. Gomes, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 9961 CrossRef .
M. Marvan and P. Chvosta, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 221922 CrossRef .
J. V. Mantese, N. W. Schubring, A. L. Micheli, A. B. Catalan, M. S. Mohammed, R. Naik and G. W. Auner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 2047 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Damodaran, S. Pandya, Y. Qi, S.-L. Hsu, C. Nelson, A. Dasgupta, P. Ercius, C. Ophus, L. R. Dedon, J. C. Agar, H. Lu, J. Zhang, A. M. Minor, A. M. Rappe and L. W. Martin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 10, 1–8 Search PubMed .
L. An, Y. Park, Y. Sohn and H. Onishi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28440–28447 CrossRef CAS .
L. An and H. Onishi, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3196–3206 CrossRef CAS .
L. An, T. Sasaki, P. G. Weidler, Ch. Wöll, N. Ichikuni and H. Onishi, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 880–885 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Noh, Z. Chen, C. S. Yoon, J. Lu, K. Amine and Y. K. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2109–2115 CrossRef CAS .
U.- H. Kim, E.-J. Lee, C. S. Yoon, S.-T. Myung and Y.-K. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601417 CrossRef .
H. Onishi, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1825–1834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Takata, J. Jiang, Y. Sakata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, V. Nandal, K. Seki, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nature, 2020, 581, 411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and H. Kato, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 331, 373–377 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, K. Asakura and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3082–3089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, W. Septina, A. Chemseddine, F. F. Abdi, D. Friedrich, P. Bogdanoff, R. van de. Krol, S. D. Tilley and S. P. Berglund, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15094–15103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Smentkowski, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2000, 64, 1–58 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kamiuchi, H. Kiriake, M. Nawate and S. Honda, The Institute of Image Information and Television Engineers, 1994, 18, 381–384,  DOI:10.11485/tvtr.17.25_9 .
H. M. Manasevil, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1968, 12, 157 Search PubMed .
X. Xie, Z. Zhang, B. Li, S. Wang and D. Shen, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 32329–32336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. R. Ashfold, F. Claeyssens, G. M. Fuge and S. J. Henley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 23–31 RSC .
Y. Matsumoto, M. Murakami, Z. W. Jin, A. Ohtomo, M. Lippmaa, M. Kawasaki and H. Koinuma, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, EXL603-605 Search PubMed .
S. Maruyama, N. Sannodo, R. Harada, Y. Anada, R. Takahashi, M. Lippmaa and Y. Matsumoto, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2019, 90, 093901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Fischer, G. F. de la Fuente and M. Jansen, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83, 043901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. von Wenckstern, M. Kneiß, A. Hassa, P. Storm, D. Splith and M. Grundmann, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2020, 257, 1900626 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Agar, A. R. Damodaran, M. B. Okatan, J. Kacher, C. Gammer, R. K. Vasudevan, S. Pandya, L. R. Dedon, R. V. K. Mangalam, G. A. Velarde, S. Jesse, N. Balke, A. M. Minor, S. V. Kalinin and L. W. Martin, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Mantese, A. L. Micheli, N. W. Schubring, R. W. Hayes, G. Srinivasan and S. P. Alpay, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 082503 CrossRef .
C. Sudakar, R. Naik, G. Lawes, J. V. Mantese, A. L. Micheli, G. Srinivasan and S. P. Alpay, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 062502 CrossRef .
D. Goll, A. Breitling, L. Gu, P. A. van Aken and W. Sigle, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 083903 CrossRef .
C. L. Zha, R. K. Dumas, Y. Y. Fang, V. Bonanni, J. Nogués and J. Åkerman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 182504 CrossRef .
B. J. Kirby, H. F. Belliveau, D. D. Belyea, P. A. Kienzle, A. J. Grutter, P. Riego, A. Berger and C. W. Miller, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 047203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Kirby, L. Fallarino, P. Riego, B. B. Maranville, C. W. Miller and A. Berger, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 064404 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fallarino, B. J. Kirby and E. E. Fullerton, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2021, 54, 303002 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, D. Kan, Z. Tan, Y. Wakabayashi and Y. Shimakawa, Phys. Rev. B, 2020, 101, 094412 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kan, I. Suzuki and Y. Shimakawa, J. Appl. Phys., 2021, 129, 183902 CrossRef CAS .
R. Konno, S. Maruyama, T. Kosaka, R. Katoh, R. Takahashi, H. Kumigashira, N. i. Ichikuni, H. Onishi and Y. Matsumoto, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 226–233 CrossRef CAS .
S. Inaba and V. Vohra, Materials, 2017, 10, 518 (1-27) CrossRef PubMed .
B. Beyer, R. Pfeifer, J. K. Zettler, O. R. Hild and K. Leo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9537–9542 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bian, D. Bai, Z. Jin, K. Wang, L. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1500–1510 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, K. Deng, J. Xiong and L. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903347 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shao, Y. Li, X. Wang, X. Ouyang, J. Cai, C. Li, X. Ouyang, Z. Wu and Q. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 6970–6974 RSC .
S. Yaginuma, K. Itaka, M. Haemori, M. Katayama, K. Ueno, T. Ohnishi, M. Lippmaa, Y. Matsumoto and H. Koinuma, Appl. Phys. Express, 2008, 1, 015005 CrossRef .
Y. Takeyama, S. Maruyama and Y. Matsumoto, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2011, 12, 054210-1-5 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Schmidt, M. R. G. Marques, S. Botti and M. A. L. Marques, npj Comput. Mater., 2019, 5, 83 CrossRef .
L. DeCost, J. R. Hattrick-Simpers, Z. Trautt, A. G. Kusne, E. Campo and M. L. Green, Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol., 2020, 1, 033001 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Sha, Y. Guo, Q. Yuan, S. Tang, X. Zhang, S. Lu, X. Guo, Y.-C. Cao and S. Cheng, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2020, 2, 1900143 CrossRef .
G. Pilania, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2021, 193, 110360 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maruyama, K. Ouchi, T. Koganezawa and Y. Matsumoto, ACS Comb. Sci., 2020, 22, 348–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A schematic diagram of the material design concept of nanoscale compositionally graded crystals (NCGSs) with the emergence of a variety of properties and functionalities.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Quantitative (at%) transmission electron microscopy – energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (TEM-EDS) mapping analysis of a single particle of Li[Ni0.61Co0.12Mn0.27]O2 (FCG61). (b) Electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) composition profile of FCG61. (c) Cyclic performances of FCG61 and Al-FCG61 at 1.0 °C in a full-cell versus a graphite anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A crystal model of NaTaO3. (b) A transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of a single Sr-doped NaTaO3 particle. (c) TEM – energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis for element mapping near the surface of the single particle shown in (b). (d) Concentration profiles of the elements near the surface. (e) Infrared absorbance decay curves for NaTaO3 photocatalysts doped with La, Ca, Sr, or Ba, whose dopant levels are at 2 at%, along with the decay curve for a non-doped NaTaO3 photocatalyst. (f) A schematic diagram of the band gap profile and the resultant efficient separation of the photo-excited electrons and holes near the particle surface of Sr-doped NaTaO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Non-vacuum solution processes for fabricating nanoscale compositionally graded material (NCGM) films: (a) metalorganic decomposition (MOD) synthesis and (b) pulsed spray pyrolysis.	 

 	Fig. 5  Vacuum deposition processes for fabricating nanoscale compositionally graded material (NCGM) films: (a) sputtering, (b) metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), and (c) pulsed laser desorption (PLD).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A cross-sectional high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image of 150 nm-thick Ba1−xSrxTiO3 nanoscale compositionally graded material (NCGM) film. (b) A 2D map of the local displacement of the Ti cation, which was constructed from (a). (c) and (d) out-of-plane piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) amplitude images for PbZrxTi1−xO3 CGM film (c) and homogeneous PbZr0.2Ti0.8O3 film (d), with phase images inset in the upper right corners of the images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17 and 37. Copyright 2016 and 2017, Macmillan publisher limited.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Derivative of the magnetic moment with respect to temperature for NixCu1−x alloy nanoscale compositionally graded crystal (NCGC) films (0.61 < x < 0.7) on a Si substrate. (b) and (c) the fits to the data of the amplitude of the spin symmetry in polarized neutron reflectivity measurements. (d) The profile of magnetization in the NCGC film of NixCu1−x. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2016, AIP publishing.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The temperature dependence of remnant magnetization, Mr, in a nanoscale compositionally graded crystal (NCGC) film of NiCo2O4 (NCO). (b) A schematic diagram of the temperature-induced changes of magnetic anisotropy and magnetization configuration for NCGC, stoichiometric, and Ni-poor NCO films. (c)–(e) Magnetic-field dependence of ρxx and the anomalous part of ρxy at θH values of 180°, 135°, and 225° at 40 K for NCGC film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2021, AIP publishing.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy – energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDX) mapping of 200 nm-thick forward gradient CuBi2O4 film. (b) Composition depth profiles of Cu, Bi, and Sn for the film shown in (a). (c) A schematic diagram of downward band bending formed throughout the film. (d) Comparison of the photocurrent-voltage curves of forward, reverse, and homogeneous CuBi2O4 films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) A schematic diagram of homogeneous Sr-doped and up- and down-graded Sr-doped NaTaO3 films, including non-doped NaTaO3 film for reference. (b) Set of depth profiles of Sr in the films, which were examined via secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS). (c) Time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) signal decay curves for non- and Sr-doped NaTaO3 films, including those for a substrate of LaAlO3(001). Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
