Design strategies for markedly enhancing energy efficiency in the electrocatalytic CO 2 reduction reaction  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE00472K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE00472K
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3603-3629Design strategies for markedly enhancing energy efficiency in the electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction

        
          
            Wenchuan 
            Lai†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Qiao†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jiawei 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhiqun 
            Lin
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Hongwen 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan 410082, People's Republic of China. E-mail: huanghw@hnu.edu.cn
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA. E-mail: zhiqun.lin@mse.gatech.edu
Received 
      10th February 2022
    , Accepted 17th June 2022First published on 21st June 2022AbstractThe electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) offers a promising approach to ameliorate global warming and the energy crisis. On the route to deploying this technology, tremendous efforts have been dedicated to designing remarkable electrocatalysts and electrolysis systems. While the performance indicators of the CO2RR such as current density and faradaic efficiency are well researched, the energy efficiency (EE), a guiding metric for industrial implementation and economic feasibility of the CO2RR, should merit more deliberation. In this context, our review aims at providing a comprehensive understanding of full-cell EE of the CO2RR. First, the fundamental principles towards achieving high EE in the CO2RR are presented. Subsequently, recent state-of-the-art strategies for kinetically boosting EE are elaborated, with focus on electrocatalysts and system design to lower the cell voltage and increase faradaic efficiency. In particular, the emerging integrated electrolysis is highlighted, where the conventional anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is replaced with other value-added oxidation reactions, affording great promise to enhance the EE and economic benefits of the CO2RR. Finally, future research opportunities in this rapidly evolving field are outlined. This review would attract considerable attention to full-cell EE and further inspire investigation into increasing EE at a commercially relevant current density to motivate the scale-up of the CO2RR.
Wenchuan Lai
Dr Wenchuan Lai received his PhD degree in Materials Science from Sichuan University in 2020. Between 2019 and 2020, he was also a visiting PhD scholar in the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, majoring in Nanoscale Science under the supervision of Prof. Klaus Kern. He joined the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Hunan University in 2021 and then worked as a postdoctoral fellow. His current research studies are focused on materials chemistry, functional nanomaterials and their application in the energy-related conversion process.
Yan Qiao
Yan Qiao received her master's degree in the college of chemistry and chemical engineering from Hunan University in 2021. She is now studying in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Hunan University for a PhD degree. Her current research is focused on nanomaterials and their application in energy storage and conversion involved in the electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 and proton exchange membrane fuel cells.
Jiawei Zhang
Dr Jiawei Zhang received his PhD degree in chemical engineering and technology from the Nanjing University of Science and Technology in 2019. He joined Hunan University as a postdoctoral fellow in 2019 and then worked as a postdoctoral fellow under the supervision of Prof. Zhiqun Lin at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He is now working in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Hunan University. His current research is focused on nanomaterials and their application in energy storage and conversion.
Zhiqun Lin
Prof. Zhiqun Lin is a professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. His research interests include electrocatalysis, batteries, solar energy conversion, photocatalysis, semiconductor organic–inorganic nanocomposites, multifunctional nanocrystals, conjugated polymers, block copolymers, hierarchical structure formation and assembly, and surface and interfacial properties.
Hongwen Huang
Prof. Hongwen Huang is a full professor at Hunan University. He received his bachelor's degree from the South China University of Technology in 2009 and a PhD degree in materials science and engineering from the Zhejiang University in 2015. After graduation, he joined the University of Science and Technology of China as a postdoctoral fellow from 2015 to 2017 and moved to Hunan University in 2017. His research interests include the controlled growth of nanocrystals and their applications in energy-related electrocatalysis.

Broader context
The ever-increasing consumption of fossil fuels has caused a tremendous increase in the atmospheric CO2 concentration, which has triggered a sequence of global environmental hazards. The electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) shows great promise to convert CO2 into valuable chemicals, enabling the closing of the carbon cycle and storing of intermittent renewable energy. Efforts have been mainly made previously to improve the performance indicators of the CO2RR such as production efficiency and selectivity. However, the energy efficiency (EE), defined as the percentage of energy reserved in targeted products compared to the total electricity input, should merit more deliberation since it is a guiding metric for industrial implementation and economic feasibility. To this end, here, we offer a timely and tutorial review on full-cell EE of CO2RR technology, with emphasis on relevant fundamental principles, and design strategies by developing robust electrocatalysts and advanced electrolysis systems to boost EE. Notably, the emerging integrated electrolysis is highlighted, where the conventional anodic OER with high voltage requirement is replaced with more useful oxidation reactions and EE can be enhanced. Above all, this review provides a comprehensive understanding, visionary discussions and future opportunities for promoting the full-cell EE and economic benefits of the CO2RR, which would attract considerable attention to this subfield and further inspire investigations to advance CO2RR technology.

1. Introduction
Since the era of industrial revolution, the ever-increasing consumption of fossil fuels has caused a massive emission of CO2 and its increasing concentration in the atmosphere. As a typical greenhouse gas, excessive CO2 hinders the reflected solar energy from dissipating into outer space, thus triggering climate warming and a sequence of global environment hazards. In this setting, the capture and conversion of CO2 are important in order to lower the atmospheric CO2 concentration and close the anthropogenic carbon loop.1 The conversion strategy particularly includes the electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) driven by clean electricity that can effectively transform CO2 into value-added chemicals under mild conditions.2–4 As future electricity could come from sustainable energy sources such as wind, solar and tidal energy, the CO2RR also enables their storage in chemicals, which overcomes the geographic or time constraints during utilization of these renewable sources.5–7
In recent years, tremendous efforts have been witnessed in developing the CO2RR by academia and industry.8,9 For electrochemical conversion of CO2, electrocatalysts play a crucial role in activating stable linear CO2 molecules and driving the reaction path forward.10–14 Beyond electrocatalysts, the system design, including the consideration of electrodes, electrolytes, ion-exchange membranes, and electrolysis reactors, as well as the controlling of electron–proton transfer, mass transfer and the reaction microenvironment, is equally significant to facilitate CO2 conversion.15,16 To systematically evaluate the CO2RR performance, several key indicators are examined as follows. The current density reflects the reaction rate of the CO2RR, with emphasis on the productivity of a specific product when using partial current density. The faradaic efficiency stands for selectivity towards the desired product, and higher faradaic efficiency will also correspond to the less downstream separation requirements and total energy demands. Energy efficiency (EE) is the percentage of energy reserved in the targeted product divided by the total electricity input to the electrolysis system and is closely related to the cell voltage and faradaic efficiency. The stability signifies that the CO2RR system must proceed over a prolonged period of time, while maintaining the expected performance target (such as the current density, faradaic efficiency and EE) simultaneously.17–20
Through efforts during all this time, the challenges in the current density and faradaic efficiency, as the most concerning topics in CO2RR studies, have been adequately surmounted, in relative terms. The current density (>300 mA cm−2) and faradaic efficiency (>80%) have reached the acceptable levels that can almost meet the industrial demands, in particular, for the production of CO and formate.8,21 By contrast, the EE of the CO2RR still remains low, whose importance is increasingly but yet deficiently focused.15 From the perspective of techno-economic analysis, the EE of the CO2RR system at a commercially relevant current density must be increased as far as possible to lower the total electricity input, since the electricity contributes to a significant portion of production cost in the CO2RR.22,23 This issue becomes more highlighted for products beyond CO and formate (e.g., multicarbon products and C2+) because of more electron transfer requirements and the corresponding higher energy demands, where electricity could account for the predominant operating cost. To date, limited studies have calculated the overall EE in the CO2RR, while a few of them are satisfying in terms of targeted overall EE > 70% at a commercially relevant current density.24,25 On the other hand, it has been recognized that the anode reaction in the CO2RR system expends a large proportion of the supplied electrical energy due to the thermodynamic and kinetic difficulties of the conventional oxygen evolution reaction (OER) process.26–29 As indicated in the systematic analysis by Verma et al., more than 90% of input energy is consumed by a relatively less valued OER, while, by comparison, only less than 10% contributes to productive CO2 conversion to CO.30 Therefore, the anodic reaction in the conventional CO2 electrolysis system needs reconsideration so as to reduce the energy consumption for CO2 conversion and improve the system economics.
With the booming development of the CO2RR currently, many of its subfields have been systematically reviewed, such as electrocatalysts (activity, selectivity and stability), specific products, or electrocatalytic mechanisms; however, a comprehensive discussion on EE is still absent.3,31–33 Therefore, this review aims to afford a tutorial understanding of the full-cell EE of the CO2RR system, which is a guiding performance indicator for its industrial implementation, especially when considering the market scale and economic feasibility. First, the fundamental principles of EE are proposed, involving the faradaic efficiency and the cell voltage determined by reaction overpotentials and system voltage loss. In the following, recent state-of-the-art strategies to increase the faradaic efficiency and lower the cell voltage for kinetically promoting full-cell EEs are summarized, with emphasis on the impact of catalysts, electrolytes, ion-exchange membranes, electrolyzers, pulsed electrolysis and external conditions. In particular, integrated electrolysis (or coupled/paired electrolysis), in which the anodic OER with a high voltage demand in a CO2 electrolysis system is replaced with other value-added oxidation reactions, is also highlighted, which shows great promise to markedly improve the energy efficiency for CO2 conversion and system profitability. We finally conclude by presenting the future opportunities to move this field forward.
2. Fundamentals of energy efficiency in the CO2RR
Energy efficiency (EE) is the percentage of energy reserved in the targeted product divided by the total energy input to the electrolysis system.34 A high EE is indispensable in order to lower the electricity cost and improve the economic efficiency of the CO2RR. In principle, the full-cell EE is highly associated with the cell voltage and faradaic efficiency, as given by the equation (1)where ΔG0 is the standard Gibbs free energy change, n is the molar amount of the desired product, E0 is the thermodynamic potential of the overall reaction (e.g., EOER − ECO2RR), F is the Faraday constant, z is the electron transfer number, Q is the amount of the Coulomb charge transferred into the desired product, I is the total current, t is the operation time, and FE is the faradaic efficiency. More specifically, Ecell is derived as follows: Ecell = EOER − ECO2RR + ηCO2RR + ηOER + Eloss + ηmasstransfer(2) Eloss = I(Relectrode + Relectrolytes + Rion-exchangemembrane)(3)where ηCO2RR and ηOER refer to the reaction overpotentials of the cathodic CO2RR and anodic OER, respectively, ηmass transfer represents the system overpotentials triggered by mass transfer limitations, and Eloss is the ohmic loss which is equal to the product of the current (I) and the system resistance from the electrode/catalyst, electrolytes and ion-exchange membrane. As can be seen, towards achieving high EE, the full-cell voltage should be reduced and the faradaic efficiency of the specific product should be improved as far as possible.
In some situations, cathodic energy efficiency (CEE) is also used to evaluate half-reactions at the cathode, as given by (4)where overpotential of the anodic OER is irrespective, and iR-correction is also employed to calculate the ηCO2RR value in the three-electrode system.35 Compared to CEE, EE is closer to practical implementation due to the more comprehensive and systematic consideration. As a consequence, it is encouraged to adopt EE for general evaluation and comparison as far as possible. Referring to commercial CO2 thermochemical hydrogenation and the water electrolysis process, the whole EE of the CO2RR is supposed to be more than 70% at a commercially relevant current density, so as to make this technology economically available.25 Besides the overall EE, for briefness, the cell voltage is also employed sometimes to evaluate the energy consumption, and should be less than 3 V at a commercially relevant current density for most products of the CO2RR.15,36 In this section, we will then discuss several aspects presented in the equation of the overall EE for its complete understanding.
2.1 Reaction overpotentials
The reaction overpotential is intrinsically related to the cathodic CO2RR and anodic OER (ηCO2RR and ηOER), which, experimentally, is the difference between the equilibrium potential and measured potential (with iR-correction usually) in a three-electrode system, where the maximum faradaic efficiency or a given current density is achieved. As a linear molecule with strong CO (750 kJ mol−1), CO2 is thermodynamically stable and quite difficult to convert electrochemically.37 In this context, electrocatalysts play an extremely important role in activating CO2 by decreasing the kinetic energy barrier to lower the overpotentials. Fig. 1 schematically depicts the typical reaction pathways for various products on the electrocatalyst surface during the CO2RR.4,31 The CO2 reduction starts with a consecutive electron–proton transfer step to create adsorbed COOH species on the catalyst surface. The binding configuration of a COOH moiety, classified as a C atom (*COOH type, mainly on Au, Ag and Zn surfaces) or an O atom (*OCOH type, mainly on Bi, Sn, and In surfaces) linked with active sites, would determine the production of CO or formate respectively after another electron-transfer step. The competitive hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) can be relatively suppressed by reducing the binding strength of the H atom on metal sites. *CO is an important intermediate, and the moderate binding affinity of *CO on the Cu surface makes *CO conversion more likely. The subsequent hydrogenation and C–C coupling reaction of *CO would steer the formation of CH4 and C2+ products such as C2H4, while the selectivity relies on energy profiles on different pathways. The coupling step is typically proposed as the *CO–*CO mechanism and a rate-determining step (RDS) to generate C2+. However, other pathways could also occur such as *CO–*COH, *CO–*CHO and *CO–*CO, which largely depend on potentials, electrolytes and active sites (facet, defects or oxidation state).37
 Fig. 1  Overview of the reaction pathway in the electrocatalytic CO2RR towards various C1–C3 products. Arrows represent the concerted proton or electron transfer steps. Reproduced with permission.4 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
Overall, the complicated multi-step proton/electron transfer reactions are accompanied by an energy barrier in the elementary reaction to create additional overpotentials. Among these diverse products, it is generally concluded that CO and formate can be produced with the lowest overpotential compared with hydrocarbons and C2+, in line with viewpoints that CO and formate are the most potentially economic products from the CO2RR. As a powerful tool to explore the reaction mechanism, theoretical calculations can provide the energy diagram of electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to final products, typically as shown in Fig. 2.38 The overpotential generally corresponds to a maximum energy difference between neighboring states in the energy diagram, namely the energy barrier in the RDS. In Fig. 2 where reduction takes place on the (111) facet of B- and N-co-doped nanodiamonds, the RDS appears in the second step, namely *COOH conversion to *CO. In contrast, other works regard the coupling of two *CO as the RDS during the production of C2+, suggesting that the RDS strongly relies on features of active sites and computational settings.39 It should be noted that the extensively used calculation methods for the CO2RR at present, the standard thermodynamic approach, may fail to give accurate predictions on the RDS sometimes.40 Beyond the thermodynamic considerations where only the binding energy of stable reaction intermediates is supposed to dominate the electrocatalytic performance, the pragmatic activation barriers and transition state with the highest free energy should not be ignored when evaluating the reaction kinetics and RDS.41 In addition, the mass-transport limitations are usually not taken into account as well; therefore, the computational results might not totally be in accordance with the practical situations and should only be used for rational reference.42
 Fig. 2  (a) Free energy diagram of CO2 reduction to ethanol on the (111) facet of B- and N-co-doped nanodiamonds. (b) Energetically optimized configurations for elementary steps during CO2 reduction. The gray, pink, blue, red and white balls in (b) correspond to carbon, boron, nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
On the other hand, the anodic OER also exhibits evident overpotentials due to its sluggish kinetics.43,44 As indicated by a number of studies in the field of water electrolysis, overpotentials of the anodic OER are much higher than those of the cathodic HER, ranging from 200 to 500 mV at 10 mA cm−2 depending on the conditions, and become even larger at a current density matching the industrial application of the CO2RR.45 OER overpotentials are also responsible for the higher cell voltage of the CO2 electrolysis system, which should be markedly lowered to elevate EE.
2.2 Mass transfer limitations
Apart from the reaction overpotentials caused by barriers, the limited mass transfer could also lead to the additional system overpotential (ηmass transfer) in some circumstances.46 Due to the low solubility of CO2 in aqueous solution (about 30 mM at 25 °C, 1 atm), the amount of CO2 supplied at the electrode may fail to match the amount of CO2 depleted with the increasing reaction rate, which could limit the reaction dynamics. In an electrolyzer where the reactant CO2 is fed from aqueous solution, the limiting current density (iL) can be estimated according to the semi-infinite diffusion model via the equation  where D is the diffusion coefficient typically of 1 × 10−5 m2 s−1, δ = 1 µm is the diffusion length, CCO2 = 30 mM is the bulk concentration of CO2 in aqueous solution, and n is regarded as 2 for CO production. iL is calculated to be 60 mA cm−2 based on the equation, which is significantly lower than the typical requirement for the industrial electrochemical process.25 To break through this restriction, researchers have attempted to enhance CO2 dissolution in electrolytes by using high pressure, rigorous stirring, external field, and non-aqueous electrolytes, so as to improve the mass transfer and reduce ηmasstransfer.47 For instance, the much higher iL approach to 500 mA cm−2 has been achieved through the utilization of non-aqueous media such as methanol and ionic liquids where CO2 solubility is several orders of magnitude higher than that in water (e.g., CCO2 = 8 M in methanol, at 25 °C and 40 atm).48,49 For another, choosing a gas-diffusion-electrode (GDE), where CO2 is directly supplied from the back of the electrode and reacts at the triple phase boundary, is also a robust solution to significantly enhance the mass transfer in the CO2RR and even eliminate the transfer limitation. Currently, this method has allowed negligible ηmasstransfer in the CO2RR, and a maximum current density can reach up to >1 A cm−2.34,50
2.3 Ohmic loss
The ohmic loss, arisen from the current flow across the electrode/catalyst, electrolyte and ion-exchange membrane, includes electronic/ionic conductivity and would improve as the current density increases. The dissipative electric energy caused by the ohmic loss is finally converted to waste heat owing to the Joule effect.1 To be specific, the ohmic loss on the electrode/catalyst is relatively small, where a high electronic conductivity of the electrode (e.g., generally >105 S m−1 for metal/carbon-based electrodes) contributes to tiny resistance. The catalyst layers also have low resistance due to the small thickness, although with a low ionic conductivity at around 2 S m−1. In contrast, the electrolyte resistance is relatively larger, depending on the electrolyte type, concentration (e.g., ionic conductivity is 2 S m−1 for 10% w/w KHCO3 aqueous solution), and thickness of solution layers. Besides, ion-exchange membranes also cause a fraction of ohmic loss, with a protonic conductivity of 10 S m−1 for typical Nafion® 112 proton-exchange membranes (PEMs), and an ionic conductivity of 4.5 S m−1 for Sustainion X37-50 anion-exchange membranes (AEMs). On the basis of overall analysis, the total ohmic loss of a system might be high as 950 mV at 100 mA cm−2 or even more relying on the operating conditions.25,34,51 This warns that the CO2RR system should be delicately designed from every assembly in order to reduce the ohmic loss and energy loss as far as possible. To sum up, the constitution of the full-cell voltage in a typical CO2RR system is shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Cell voltage of the CO2RR for CO production coupled with the OER as a function of current density, including thermodynamic equilibrium potential (E0 = EOER − ECO2RR), overall reaction overpotentials (ηOER + ηCO2RR), ohmic loss (Eloss) and system potential related to mass transfer (ηmasstransfer). Adapted with permission.25 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.4 Interplay between energy efficiency and current density
The current density reflects the reaction rate of the CO2RR, with a highlight on the productivity of a specific product when using partial current density. In a classical polarization curve, the current density is associated with the intrinsic activity of electrocatalysts and reaction kinetics. Moreover, the current density also strongly relies on the reaction microenvironment such as the electrolyte composition and mass transport conditions.34 Notably, the EE should be calculated at a commercially relevant current density; however, the relationship between the EE and current density is more complicated. In general, with the increasing total current density, the required voltage would increase and faradaic efficiency reaches maximum somewhere. Accordingly, the EE–current density correlation is not simply monotonic, as shown using a representative study in Fig. 4, in which too high current density might reduce the EE.52 Therefore, the trade-off between the EE and current density should be judiciously adopted to consider the profit rate and productivity. The techno-economic analysis by Jouny et al. demonstrated that a moderate current density of 250–300 mA cm−2 can make CO2RR technology most economically available, while a higher current density up to 500 mA cm−2 just slightly alters the profit margin.24 Nevertheless, it should be noted that such a reference also depends on the electrolyzer type, product selectivity, mark price, electricity price, etc.
 Fig. 4  The cell voltage, faradaic efficiency and energy efficiency of the CO2RR to CO on a MWNT/PyPBI/Au catalyst at different total current densities, where IrO2 was used as the anode and 2.0 M KOH as the electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
3. Robust strategies for boosting the energy efficiency of the CO2RR from a kinetics aspect
In recent years, tremendous efforts have been witnessed to develop remarkable catalysts to advance the CO2RR. Meanwhile, with respect to full-cell EE, the system considerations beyond cathodic CO2RR catalysts are equally important, covering the anodic OER catalyst, electrolyte, ion-exchange membranes, and electrolyzer configuration. In this section, the recent strategies that are employed to boost the EE are comprehensively summarized, with emphasis on the abovementioned aspects to lower the cell voltage and increase the faradaic efficiency of the CO2RR for achieving satisfying full-cell EE at a commercially relevant current density. Notably, as thermodynamic potentials at the cathode (CO2RR) and anode (OER) are constant, the discussed strategies here are mainly based on the kinetic perspective to reduce the system loss and enhance product selectivity. In addition, the effects of an external field and a special electrolysis method are also concerned.
3.1 Design strategies of CO2RR catalysts
The rational design of catalysts with low overpotential, high current density, high faradaic efficiency, and long-term stability is the central mission for elevating the EE of the CO2RR. So far, representative strategies for engineering catalysts, such as facet engineering, alloying, oxidation state regulation, surface functionalization, and defect engineering, have been applied to tune the CO2 reduction and increase the EE by tuning the activity and selectivity. In this section, numerous theoretical and experimental studies that are associated with these mentioned strategies are discussed.

3.1.1 Facet engineering. 
Nanostructure engineering such as control over facets is widely used to tailor the reaction pathways and catalytic properties, which can be tracked to some basic principles, especially the modulation of the electronic structure and intermediate adsorption. Through regulating the nucleation rates or employing ligands in synthesis, the exposed facet of nanocrystals, with specific atom arrangements, surface energy and intermediate affinity, can be rationally controlled.53,54 It was found that the Cu cube enclosed with the (100) facet benefited CO2 conversion into C2H4, and Cu octahedra enclosed with the (111) facet favored CH4 production, while Cu spheres enclosed with mixed facets did not exhibit exclusive selectivity (Fig. 5a).55 Notably, creating high-index facets on catalysts can provide abundant active sites for adsorption and activation of CO2 molecules. The Cu catalysts with (711) and Cu (911) facets and high density of atomic steps preferred C2H4 formation while suppressed CH4 at low overpotentials. By using a metal ion battery cycling strategy, Wang et al. selectively exposed the (100) facet which benefits the initial C–C coupling steps as indicated by the density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The as-obtained 100-cycled Cu nanocube catalyst displayed a six-fold enhancement in the C2+/C1 product ratio in contrast to the original polished Cu foil with the primary (111) surface, offering opportunities to enhance the EE toward producing C2+.56
 Fig. 5  (a) CO2RR selectivity as a function of potential for Cu nanocatalysts with various shapes (spheres, cubes and octahedra). Measured in a GDL-based flow cell using the 1 M KOH electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the mesoporous PdCu alloy catalyst for CO2 conversion. (c) Faradaic efficiency of CO vs. the potential for PdCu alloys with different compositions. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) CH4/C2H4 selectivity vs. the potential for Cu catalysts after various plasma treatments. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Qdefects/Q100 (defect density) and product selectivity as a function of ta/tc (pulsing width ratio between Ea = 0.6 V and Ec = −1.0 V) under pulsed electrolysis conditions. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Schematic illustration of the CO2RR to CO with the CB[6] cavity on the Au surface. (g) Surface-enhanced infrared absorption of Au and Au-CB[6] in CO2-purged 0.1 M KHCO3 solution. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic of the nano-defective Cu nanosheet converting CO2 to C2H4 with high selectivity. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 


3.1.2 Alloying. 
Alloying has been employed to develop advanced electrocatalysts by combining at least two types of metals, in which heteroatom interactions cause the geometric and electronic effects to tune the surface adsorption affinity and reactivity in the CO2RR.11 By altering the chemical composition, morphology, element distribution and crystal structure, alloying can offer possibilities to create unique catalytic behaviors.62,63 Taking PdCu alloys with different compositions as examples, over 80% of the faradaic efficiency for CO production was achieved in mesoporous Pd7Cu3, in which Cu regulated the electronic structure of adjacent Pd to enhance the CO2/*COOH adsorption and CO desorption on reactive Pd centers (Fig. 5b and c).57 In the work of Roy et al., the CO selectivity on the Cu catalyst increased with the content of guest metal Au.64 This could have originated from the weaker binding between CO and the guest metal to motivate CO desorption. In some circumstances, Cu-based bimetallic alloys show the possibility of favoring C2+ production with a low overpotential and good selectivity.65 The de-alloyed Cu–Al catalysts developed by Sargent et al. can achieve a high selectivity of ethylene of >80% at −1.5 V vs. RHE (VRHE), with a cathodic EE of 55% at 150 mA cm−2. The high selectivity and EE could benefit from the role of Al as a modulator to induce more active sites for the Cu catalyst, the highly nanotextured catalyst surface, and the electrolyte effect related to OH− or K+ ions.66


3.1.3 Oxidation state regulation. 
The oxidation state has been widely discussed in the CO2RR due to the phenomenon that oxide-derived Cu (OD-Cu) exhibits impressive catalytic performance toward producing C2+. Considering the complicated and varying conditions that catalysts confront, including the synthetic process, exposure to air or an electrolyte, and applied voltage, the oxidation state is generally dynamic rather than steady.67 Therefore, the real-time monitoring of the oxidation state by operando techniques, such as in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), is of particular significance to uncover the true correlation between the oxidation state and catalytic performance. In principle, the effect of the oxidation state on the CO2RR performance involves the modulation of active sites and electronic structures such as the energy band, work function and spin state, which is in consequence determines the activation of a CO2 molecule and adsorption of key intermediates.68 It is notable that during the evolution process of the oxidation state, the catalyst nanostructure and morphology could transform as well, so as to generate defects or grainy boundaries that may facilitate CO2 reduction.20 With regard to Cu-based catalysts, the operando XAS studies on plasma-treated Cu foil demonstrated that initial Cu+ species survived under cathodic reaction conditions, which also contributed to the highly selective production of C2H4 (Fig. 5d).58 By using a pulsed electrolysis strategy, the improved selectivity of ethanol was observed by Cuenyauet al., where defects and Cu+ moieties were in situ continuously created by the periodic anodic voltage and synergistically facilitated C–C coupling pathways (Fig. 5e).59 Overall, as concluded from many research studies, the coexistence of Cu0 and Cu+ generally lowers the activation energy of the CO2 molecule and C–C coupling step, so as to enhance the C2+ production and corresponding EE. In addition to Cu, the oxidation state also matters in other metals, such as Ag, Zn, In, and Sn, where chemical and nanostructuring evolution together determine the product selectivity.69


3.1.4 Surface functionalization. 
Surface functionalization by organic molecules represents a convenient and powerful strategy to control the activity/selectivity of the catalyst and EE of a specific product. It provides a bridge between molecular catalysis and heterogeneous catalysis, where the surface molecules reshape the energetic states of the core-catalysts, and change the reaction microenvironment near the catalysts. The influence of functional molecules depends on the composition, coverage density, spatial arrangement, and the interaction strength between the ligands and reactive species. The potential mechanisms, in which surface functionalization works to regulate catalytic behaviors, can be associated with the steric effect, electronic effect and solubility effect.70 Xie et al. reported the enhanced production of C2H6 and C2H4 on amino acid-modified Cu nanowires compared with the bare nanowires.71 It was assumed that –NH2 and –COOH groups of amino acids can promote the stabilization and transformation of *CHO to improve the selectivity of C2+ products. By using the co-electroplating method to decorate the Cu electrode with a polyamine layer, significant enhancement in C2H4 production was achieved with a remarkable faradaic efficiency of 87% at −0.47 VRHE.72 The full-cell electrolysis based on these modified catalysts delivered a whole EE of 50% and a cell voltage of 2.02 V in the 10 M KOH electrolyte. On the other hand, the mass transfer can be altered by surface coating, where, as an example, the molecular films on the Ag electrode limit the mass transport of protons but not CO2, resulting in an almost fully suppressed HER and facilitated CO2RR. Interestingly, based on the host–guest chemistry, Wagner et al. decorated the Au electrode with supramolecular cucurbit[6]uril (CB[6]) to alter the catalytic performance. The local CO2 concentration at the metal surface was significantly improved by CB[6] as indicated by surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 5f and g).60


3.1.5 Defect engineering. 
Defects are majorly classified as point defects, line defects, planar defects and bulk defects.73 They can be created in the synthetic and post-treatment process of the catalyst, or even in situ generated under electrochemical operating conditions. Defect engineering has been demonstrated to effectively tune the surface composition, charge distribution, electronic structure, and active sites of electrocatalysts, which provide an opportunity to affect the reaction pathway and the activity/selectivity of the CO2RR.74 Towards C2+ products, introducing defects to copper-bearing catalysts favors the adsorption of key intermediates. Due to the abundant nano-defects being beneficial to adsorption and confinement of intermediates, as well as the C–C coupling step, the synthesized porous Cu nanosheet displayed a high faradaic efficiency of ethylene of 83.2% (Fig. 5h).61 Beyond Cu, the synthesized SnO2 quantum wires (QWs), with numerous grain boundaries on the surface, showed a larger current density and faradaic efficiency for HCOOH compared to SnO2 nanoparticles (NPs) in a wide potential window, resulting in an EE of 52.7% at −0.82 VRHE.75 The excellent catalytic CO2RR performance can be mainly tracked to the contained grain boundaries and defects that broke the local spatial symmetry and tailored the binding energies of key intermediates. These findings significantly deepen the understanding of the correlation between defect engineering and the altered CO2RR performance in nanocatalysts, affording a promising solution to increase the overall EE.

3.2 Designing OER catalysts
The anodic reaction, typically as the OER process at present, offers electrons to drive the CO2 reduction at the cathode, while keeping the mass/charge balance in electrochemical reactions. Although the OER cannot directly influence the faradaic efficiency of the CO2RR, its sluggish reaction kinetics still contributes to the high cell voltage and ultimately lowers the EE.45 In some extreme cases where OER performance at the anode is too terrible, the cathodic CO2 reduction at high current density might be distributed yet due to the limitations on the charge transfer balance. Nowadays, the reported OER catalysts for the CO2RR operating in alkaline or neutral media mainly include Pt wire/gauze/foil, IrO2, Ni foam, carbon rod, NiFeOx, CoOx/CNT, etc.18,76 Among them, the noble metal Pt is widely employed due to its stability, although it is not a perfect OER catalyst and would be oxidized at higher potentials. IrO2 is an excellent OER catalyst and can withstand the corrosion caused by locally generated protons, which works well toward high EE during the CO2RR (Fig. 6a and b);77 however, the high cost and scarcity impede its wide utilization. Therefore, it is important to design an inexpensive electrocatalyst with remarkable OER performance to lower the full-cell voltage. Fortunately, the booming advances of the OER driven by the significance in many electrochemical energy conversion processes, such as water splitting, metal–air batteries and fuel cells, can offer some guidance for this target.44,78
 Fig. 6  (a) LSV curves of IrO2–Ta2O5/Ti, Pt and β-PbO2/Ti in 0.3 M Na2SO4 media at 1 mV s−1. (b) The faradaic efficiency, EE, power consumption and output–input ratio of the CO2RR toward producing formate for different anodic catalysts. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the OER mechanism in alkaline (blue arrows) and neutral/acid (red arrows) environments. Adapted with permission.34 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) LSV curves of NiFe hydroxide and Pt in different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Fundamentally, the OER pathways are closely associated with the reaction environments, including alkaline and neutral/acidic media, as typically shown in Fig. 6c.34 In alkaline media (blue arrows), OH− provides oxygen resource as the reactant, and the first step of the OER occurs via one-electron oxidation of OH− adsorbed on the metal surface to create M–OH species. Subsequently, M–OH accepts another OH− and is converted to the M–O intermediate by removing a water molecule and another electron. In the following, M–OH is made from M–O by adding OH− and removing the electron. The participation of another OH− together with electron desorption would finally result in the targeted O2 molecule, water molecule and recovered active site on the metal surface. Note that M–O would be directly transformed to the metal site after releasing the 1/2 O2 molecule. For the OER purpose, the optimal catalysts should possess active sites to generate M–OH, M–O and M–OOH intermediates with appropriate barriers, while enabling the unlimited charge transfer and final O2 desorption. At present, typical inexpensive OER catalysts are compounds of transition metal including oxides, hydroxides/double hydroxides, perovskite oxides/hydroxides, phosphides/phosphates, and nitrides/borides/sulfides, which exhibit remarkable OER performance with relatively low overpotentials in the alkaline environment.78 For example, NiFe-hydroxides outperform Pt by far in OER performance, with a decrease in overpotentials of about 400 mV in 1 M NaOH (Fig. 6d).79 In contrast, with regard to acid/neutral media, water molecules offer the oxygen for the OER as the reactant, while the release of electrons and protons is involved in whole pathways to produce O2 at last (red arrows, Fig. 6c). The protons produced at the anode might have a significant corrosion impact on compounds of transition metals like NiFe hydroxides, leading to fast deterioration of the OER performance and escalation of the full-cell voltage. Hence, for long-term stable operation of the CO2RR in neutral or acid media, commercial IrO2 with an ability to resist acid corrosion is presently the most durable OER catalyst at the anode. In the future, the introduction of high-performance alkaline OER catalysts, typically like NiFe hydroxides, is recommended for the alkaline CO2RR, while seeking cheap alternatives to IrO2 for the OER in neutral/acid media is important.
3.3 Engineering electrolytes
Electrolytes act as the medium to transfer protons or reactive species, which directly affect the catalytic behavior depending on their different nature like cations, anions, pH, concentration and composition. In some cases, these influencing factors work collectively due to the multiple attributes of the electrolyte and the complexity of the CO2RR system. In addition to the impact on the catalytic reaction to control the faradaic efficiency and overpotentials, engineering electrolytes also has an effect on the EE by reducing the system resistance and enhancing the mass transport.

3.3.1 Cation effects. 
Metal cations are indispensable to enable electrochemical CO2 reduction on typical catalysts such as gold, bismuth and copper. The activity and selectivity can be markedly influenced by the identity of cations in the electrolyte. Several theories were used to elucidate the cation effects on the CO2RR, such as the electric field effect, local interactions, modulation of interfacial pH and local CO2 concentration.80,81 On the one hand, the larger cations with weak hydration, such as K+ and Cs+, are more likely to adsorb on catalysts to move the potential at an outer Helmholtz plane (OHP) toward a more positive direction, consequently repulsing proton adsorption and suppressing the HER.82–84 The alteration of the interfacial water structure in the electrical double layer caused by cations also has an impact on the HER.85 On the other hand, cations would directly determine the CO2RR process via changing mass transport and local interaction. As suggested by Singh et al., the larger cations (Cs+) possessed better buffering abilities so as to lower the local pH and increase the local CO2 concentration, which untimely boosted the CO2 reduction (Fig. 7a).86 Moreover, the DFT calculations by Bell et al. demonstrated the electrostatic interactions between hydrated cations on OHP and reaction intermediates such as *CO2, *CO or *OCCO that had large dipole moments. Through such interactions, larger cations can exert notable influence on the product distribution of the CO2RR, and improve the C2+ production on the Cu surface.87 The diversity of the mechanistic path suggests the great opportunity to design cation-aided electrocatalytic interfaces for manufacturing desired CO2RR products with improved faradaic efficiency and EE.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the cation effect on local pH and CO2 concentration to alter the CO2RR selectivity. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Mechanism illustration of the halide effect on activation of CO2 and stabilization of the reaction intermediate. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Tafel plots of CO reduction (COR) for C1 and C2 products at pH = 7 and pH = 13. (d) and (e) Free energy diagram differences of the dominant pathway for the formation of C1 and C2 products at pH = 7 and pH = 13. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Faradaic efficiency of CO and C2H4 as a function of potential measured at KOH with different concentrations. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (g) The efficiency of the ionic liquid-mediated CO2RR and the corresponding turnover vs. cell voltage. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


3.3.2 Anion effects. 
Anions can be specifically adsorbed on the catalyst surface or appear in the reaction microenvironment, thereby altering the electronic structure, the intermediate adsorption and mass delivery of reactants like protons.69 As the most frequently used anions, HCO3− can serve as the supplementary proton donor for the reduction reaction beyond protons or water, in which the undesired HER could be promoted.88,89 In some cases, HCO3− also provided the carbon reactant for the CO2RR when it is close to the reaction interface.90 Moreover, halide anions abundant in sea water (environmentally friendly electrolyte) have also demonstrated their functions in adjusting the activity and selectivity of the CO2RR on account of their strong interaction with the metal surface. For instance, Cuenya et al. found that the existence of halide additives (0.3 M KCl, 0.3 M KBr, and 0.3 M KI) in the 0.1 M KHCO3 electrolyte can lower the overpotentials of the CO2RR without evidently affecting the selectivity, and enhancing the current density by following the trend of no halide ion < Cl− < Br− < I−. The effect originated from the specific adsorption of halide ions on the oxidized Cu surface, therefore causing partial charge transfer to activate CO2 and also stabilize the *COOH intermediate (Fig. 7b).91 The adsorption behavior and the corresponding consequence in affecting the surface charge of the catalyst surface could also differ for various halides, as shown in another work where Cl−/Br− benefited from CO production while I− preferred methane.92


3.3.3 pH effect. 
The environmental pH is essential for determining the overpotentials and relevant selectivity during electrochemical reactions.96 Many studies have confirmed the unique pH dependencies of the product distribution in the CO2RR.97 Currently, the alkaline and neutral electrolytes are widely employed in the CO2RR, as the alkaline environment is beneficial for the formation of CO2RR products, especially C2+, under lower overpotential, and suppression of the competitive HER.98 By establishing a pH-dependent microkinetic model, Chan et al. presented the pH dependence on reaction kinetics on stepped copper.93 The differences in pH dependence between C1 and C2 pathways came from the different rate-determining proton–electron transfer steps when water served as the proton source. With pH increasing, a much higher Tafel slope and a smaller enhancement in activity were achieved (Fig. 7c). It was found that the free energy of C1/C2+ formation at pH of 13 is smaller than that at pH of 7, suggesting the critical effect of pH on the production of C2+ products (Fig. 7d and e). Moreover, it should be also mentioned that because of the proton depletion by the CO2RR and HER to generate abundant OH− species, the local pH near to the cathode interface differs from the pH in the bulk electrolyte.99 Therefore, the local pH in the case of neutral media could be similar to the case of alkaline media. However, the carbonate formation, originating from the reaction of CO2 with bulk/local OH− in alkaline/neutral media, would also bring about some problems like the low carbon efficiency and poor operation stability on the GDE.98,100 In this regard, emerging acidic CO2 electrolysis has been recently developed to address the alkalinity problem and inhibit carbonate formation. Although the competitive HER is preferable at low pH, the efficient CO2 reduction to CO or C2+ can still be actualized by subtly controlling the local reaction microenvironments. In this case, it is still promising to increase the carbon efficiency, decrease the energy costs and maintain a relatively high EE simultaneously.101,102


3.3.4 The effect of concentration and composition. 
The composition and concentration of the electrolyte are important issues with regard to the EE through altering the cell voltage and faradaic efficiency. Different aqueous electrolytes possess various ohmic resistances, for example, compared with 1 M KHCO3 (117.9 10−4 S m2 mol−1), the 1 M Cs2SO4 (234.4 10−4 S m2 mol−1) electrolyte has a much higher conductivity and decreases the ohmic loss.102 Highly soluble alkali and salts can provide a highly concentrated medium, allowing high conductivity and catalytic activity. For instance, by using a high concentration of the KOH electrolyte (7 M, pH = 15), Sargent et al. achieved an overpotential of 1.0 V and a cathodic EE of 45% towards ethylene production on copper.103 Another work of them showed the shifting of overpotential to the positive direction when the KOH concentration became even larger as 10 M (Fig. 7f). The large concentration of hydroxide ions near to the catalyst surface can lower energy barriers for the C2+ formation especially the CO–CO coupling step, and also reduce the ohmic loss. Thus, the whole system provided a full-cell EE of 34% for ethylene production with an average current density of 110 mA cm−2.94
While aqueous electrolytes are widely employed, organic electrolytes, ionic liquids and solid electrolytes have also entered CO2RR studies. Various kinds of organic electrolytes are studied for the CO2RR such as dimethyl formamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), propylene carbonate (PC), acetonitrile and methanol.15 The CO2RR in organic electrolytes takes place more facilely due to the enhanced CO2 solubility and mass transfer compared to that in the aqueous solution, and lessened proton source devoted to the competitive HER. Furthermore, ionic-liquids can help in lowering the activation energy of CO2 and stabilizing the reaction intermediate, thus lowering the CO2RR overpotential. Masel et al. reported that the high concentration of the ionic liquid electrolyte can reduce the initial reduction barrier of CO2, which resulted in a low cell voltage of 1.5 V and a high EE of 87% for CO production (Fig. 7g).95 In addition, solid electrolytes (polymer electrolytes or solid oxides) with high ionic conductivity have also been considered recently, which are beneficial to product separation and stable operation of the electrolysis system. In particular, for CO2 conversion to CO, the overall EE of 45% has been commercially realized in a solid-oxide device by Haldor Topsoe.104 Despite the progress, the investigations on unconventional electrolytes beyond aqueous solution are relatively insufficient, and the products are mainly limited to C1 compounds. The technical challenges and electrolyte cost should be integrally examined in further studies.

3.4 Engineering ion-exchange membranes
Ion-exchange membranes typically consist of a polymer backbone and side chains tethering with ionic moieties. The function of membranes is to separate the anode and cathode while enabling the delivery of ions across them. The membranes integrated into the CO2RR are primarily derived from water electrolyzers and fuel cells.105 For satisfying the operation of the electrolyzer, high ionic conductivity and chemical/mechanical/thermal stability are essential requirements for high-performance membranes. Depending on the categories of ionic sites, exchange membranes mainly include three types, anion-exchange membranes (AEMs) transporting anions (e.g. OH−, HCO3−), cation-exchange membranes (CEMs) transporting cations (e.g. H+, alkaline metal ions), and bipolar membranes (BPMs) transporting both anions and cations, as shown in Fig. 8a.34 The AEM is the most employed membrane for the CO2RR in neutral and basic electrolytes, which is beneficial to CO2 reduction, while the CEM is used in neutral media as well. The BPM, composed of an AEM laminated with a CEM, works relying on water dissociation at the interface layer between the AEM and CEM, and subsequent migration of OH− and H+ to the cathode and anode chambers. The BPM has been recently used in the CO2RR to allow the cathode and anode to operate in different environments and suppress the product's crossover.106,107
 Fig. 8  (a) The illustration of ion transport through different membranes (AEM, CEM and BPM) in different electrolyte environments. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Summary of the voltage distribution of the CO2RR in the traditional system (Ag–Nafion–Pt), Ag–BPM–NiFe hydroxide system, and outlook system after replacing cathodic Ag by the oxide-derived Au catalyst. From bottom to up in every column, the voltage composition includes the overpotentials of CO2 reduction, equilibrium potential of the overall reaction, ohmic loss from the membrane and electrolyte, and OER overpotential. The data are measured after operation of 10 h and normalized to 5 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Structure schematic of the gas-fed CO2 electrolyzer, and (d) stability comparison between the BPM and Nafion membrane based CO2RR system at 80 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Accordingly, the EE of the CO2RR could also be affected by membrane features. On the one hand, the electrical conductivity differs from that, for instance, the protonic conductivity is about 10 S m−1 for typical Nafion® 112 proton-exchange membranes (PEM, a kind of CEM), and the ionic conductivity is about 4.5 S m−1 for Sustainion X37-50 AEMs. Considering the better ion conductivity of the PEM compared to the AEM, and higher molar conductivity of H+ compared to OH−, electrolysis in acid media employing the PEM could be a future strategy to suppress the ohmic loss of the CO2RR system. In contrast to the AEM and CEM, the BPM has a significantly larger inherent resistance due to the thicker layer, a partial neutralization of ionic moieties, and the kinetic loss associated with the water dissociation reaction (WDR) inside the BPM, which leads to more ohmic loss of the membrane.107,109,110 Despite these, on the other hand, the BPM is of particular interest for the CO2RR as it can prevent species from the crossover, and maintain unique and more stable environments in cathode and anode chambers. In AEM and CEM based electrolyzers, the electrolyte at the cathode and anode are commonly the same. As reactions proceed, H+ is consumed at the cathode and OH− is consumed at the anode, while the ion transport across membranes cannot catch the depletion, which leads to the change of pH in the catholyte and anolyte. As the OER strongly relies on pH, the decrease of pH in the anolyte (from alkaline to neutral) would bring more kinetic overpotentials for the OER, finally lowering the full-cell EE. Notably, the BPM allows the anode to operate in a strong alkaline environment and supplies OH− to stabilize pH, so as to achieve smaller overpotentials of the OER. Taking the work by Vermaas et al. as an example, a cell voltage reduction of >1 V was achieved in the BPM compared to the Nafion PEM system (Fig. 8b, Ag–BPM–NiFe vs. Ag–Nafion–Pt), by creating anodic circumstances with higher pH and using NiFe hydroxide as the catalyst to enhance OER kinetics in the BPM based electrolyzer.79 A similar case was observed by Li et al. that, for the gas-fed CO2 electrolyzer, a smaller and much more stable cell voltage occurred in the BPM compared to that of the Nafion counterpart at the same current density (Fig. 8c and d).108 These pioneering studies demonstrate the availability of the BPM toward higher full-cell EE and more stable operation of CO2 electrolysis. Future efforts on expanding the applications of the BPM in the CO2RR will be meaningful, and it is necessary to develop a better BPM with low ohmic resistance, fast WDR kinetics, higher water permeability and chemical/mechanical stability. Further performance optimizations of the commercial AEM and PEM are also required to enhance the stable transport of ions and improve the full-cell EE in the CO2RR.106
3.5 Constructing electrolyzer
The electrolyzer configuration strongly affects the properties of the CO2RR system such as the current density, faradaic efficiency, durability, and EE focused in this review. The conventional H-cell reactors have been widely discussed at the early stage in the CO2RR area, where the planar electrode loaded with catalysts is immersed in the electrolyte, while anode and cathode chambers are separated by an ion-exchange layer (Fig. 9a and b). In this configuration, the gaseous reactants diffuse from the bulk electrolyte to the electrode. The electrochemical reduction is thus determined by the CO2 concentration in the bulk aqueous electrolyte which is, nevertheless, very low (at most 30 mM at 25 °C, 1 atm). Due to the consumption of CO2, the CO2 concentration gradually decreases from the bulk solution to the electrode surface due to the diffusion limitation. In this case, CO2 feeding cannot match the reduction rate, thus hindering the further electrochemical reaction (Fig. 9a). These finally lead to the failure in achieving the commercially relevant high current density in the H-cell.34,111 Despite these drawbacks, the CO2RR in the H-cell represents a good platform for mechanism investigations given that the simple modeling, when the mass transport limitations, does not govern the reaction. With respect to the energy conversion process, the EE value is less calculated in the H-cell. Taking the work by Han et al. as an example, where the CO2RR to formate and the OER are catalyzed by ultrathin bismuth nanosheets and IrO2, respectively, the calculation based on the polarization curve in Fig. 9c demonstrates a full-cell EE of 47% at 6 mA cm−2.112 Although it is promising to further improve the EE, the low current density makes the industrial application of the H-type electrolyzer nearly impossible.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the gas concentration as a function of current density and distance from the catalyst surface, and the proposed substance diffusion pathways and directions for the planar electrode in the H-cell. (b) Structural diagram of the traditional H-cell. (c) Polarization curve of full-cell CO2 electrolysis by using ultrathin bismuth nanosheets as catalysts coupled with the OER at the anode. (d) Schematic of the gas concentration as a function of current density and distance from the catalyst surface, and the proposed substance diffusion pathways and directions for the gas-diffused electrode. I Structural diagram of the flow cell based on the gas-diffused electrode. (f) Performance statistics at a maximum partial current density for Cu CIBH catalysts. EE1/2 means cathodic energy efficiency. (g) Polarization curve of full-cell CO2 electrolysis in a flow cell using the best Cu CIBH catalysts. The overall EE is estimated as 20% for C2+ products at 1.1 A cm−2. (h) Structural diagram of MEA. (i) The operation stability of current and ethylene selectivity on MEA at a cell voltage of 3.6 V by using Cu-12 as the cathodic CO2RR catalyst and iridium oxide supported on titanium mesh as the anodic OER catalyst. Humidified CO2 was supplied at cathode channels and 0.1 M KHCO3 was used as the anolyte. (a) and (d) Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VC. (c) Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (e) and (h) Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) and (g) Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (i) Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. 
To address the shortcoming in the H-cell, studies have switched to the reactor configuration upgrading the traditional planar electrode into the gas-diffusion electrode (GDE). In the GDE-based configuration, the CO2 reactant is supplied from the back of catalyst electrodes, passes through the porous channels on the GDE, and reaches and reacts at the triple phase boundary composed of gaseous CO2, the liquid electrolyte, and solid catalysts (Fig. 9d). This configuration breaks through the mass transport limitation, and enables the CO2RR at the triple phase interface. The smaller thickness of the diffusion layer down to about 50 nm ensures the maintenance of the high-concentration gaseous reactant near the GDE, rendering CO2 reduction to take place at industrial-level current density. Fig. 9e illustrates the architecture of the typical GDE-based electrolyzer, a flow cell containing current collectors for the anode and cathode, the GDE loading with the catalyst, three chambers for electrolytes and gaseous, and an ion-exchange membrane.34 CO2 is provided from the gas chamber and reacts at the GDE–catholyte interface, while gas products diffuse back to the gas chamber with unreacted CO2 and liquid products are mainly brought into the catholyte flow. Beyond the surmounting of mass transfer limitation to realize high current, the flow cell further allows the utilization of a strong alkaline catholyte (e.g., 1 M KOH or even higher concentration) which is beneficial to reducing CO2RR overpotentials, suppressing the HER, and rendering C–C coupling. Therefore, CO2 electrolysis in the flow cell in strong alkaline media can achieve the selective production of C2+ such as C2H4 and C2H5OH.114 On the other hand, the flow cell reduces the distance from the cathode to the anode, which lowers the electrolyte resistance and system ohmic loss. Taken together, the CO2RR EE in the flow cell especially for C2+ production at a commercially relevant current density is promising. The representative demonstration has been reported by Sargent et al., where the Cu catalyst was modified, and the electrode architecture, reaction interface and electrolyte were elaborately designed. As a result, the CO2 electrolysis in the flow cell produced C2H4 with a partial current density of 1.3 A cm−2, and a cathodic EE of 45% and a full-cell EE of 20% for C2+ compounds (Fig. 9f and g).103 It is expected that the flow cell electrolyzer would be a potential candidate for the industrial CO2RR with considerable EE and production economy in the future. However, the flow cell still faces problems like carbonate formation that lowers the CO2 conversion, electrolyte flooding through the GDE, and poor operation stability.20,115
Another type of GDE-based configuration is membrane electrode assembly (MEA), or called the “zero-gap”, “full cell-type”, “gas-phase electrolyzer”, where the catholyte is abandoned while the GDE cathode and anode are closely located at two sides of the exchanging membrane, as displayed in Fig. 9h. In the absence of a catholyte, the proton source for the CO2RR is the water vapor from humidified CO2 gas, and water or protons diffused from the anode side.116 The MEA markedly minimizes the electrolyte resistance, enabling to reduce the system ohmic loss and increase EE. On the other hand, by avoiding the contact between catalysts and electrolytes and eliminating the GDE flooding problem, system stability is also enhanced in MEA. The comparative investigation by Sinton et al. demonstrated that the cell voltage in the flow cell reactor fluctuated and increased with operating time in galvanostatic electrolysis, while MEA manifested much better stability with a negligible decrease in the cell voltage at the same current density.117 In another representative work from the Sargent group, the Cu cathodic catalyst was carefully decorated with N-aryl-substituted tetrahydro-bipyridine and iridium oxide was used as the anodic OER catalyst. CO2-to-ethylene conversion was implemented with the constructed MEA with a stable selectivity of more than 60% and a full cell EE of 20% for 190 h of operation (Fig. 9i).113 Moreover, it is also convenient to collect the high-concentrated liquid products brought out by CO2 gas flow, thereby saving the cost of the downstream separation process. All these advantages make MEA quite promising in the practical implementation of CO2RR technology to achieve high selectivity, production rate, and EE. However, further popularization of the MEA technique still requires solving some challenges, such as hydration management, the precise control of reaction microenvironments, and the CO2/product crossover. In addition to the utilization of a liquid electrolyte, a solid-state electrolyte can also be incorporated into the GDE-based configuration. In a typical design by Wang et al., electrochemically generated HCOO− and H+ ions diffused from the cathode and anode can be integrated into the solid-state electrolyte to form the pure HCOOH product, allowing the stable and continuous manufacturing of ultrahigh-purity liquid products from the CO2RR.118 An impressive full-cell EE of 42.3% from electricity to pure liquid HCOOH products was achieved at around 30 mA cm−2, which could be further increased by improving the ion conductivity and optimizing the system design.
There are also some electrolyzers beyond the abovementioned classic configuration for the specific purpose or industrial application. Typically, the high-temperature solid oxide electrolyzer is composed of a cathode, an anode and a solid oxide electrolyte like zirconia, doped ceria, or lanthanum gallate-based oxides.119,120 In this setting, gaseous CO2 feedstock directly diffuses to the porous solid cathode and is electrochemically reduced into gaseous products. The high electrolysis temperature can greatly accelerate the electron transfer or reaction kinetics and maintain the large ionic conductivity of O2− charge carriers. As a consequence, it can efficiently covert CO2 at high temperatures (>600 °C) with high current density and low cell voltage.121–123 The full-scale EE of 45.4% for CO2 reduction to CO has been commercially achieved in the solid-oxide electrolyzer by Haldor Topsoe.104 Although this electrolyzer is limited by-product types (mainly C1) and the additional cost from temperature demands, it can be used to effectively manufacture primary product CO for further conversion, thereby avoiding the problem in the direct CO2 reduction process, like the carbonate formation. A similar high-temperature CO2 conversion is performed using the protonic ceramic electrolysis cell that utilizes proton-conducting electrolytes and protons as charge carriers.124 Furthermore, the microfluidic electrolytic cells abandon the ion-exchange membranes and employ the flowing liquid electrolyte layer and laminar-flow interface to separate the cathode and anode.125,126 The EE could be enhanced due to the elimination of the membrane and reduction of the system resistance. Nevertheless, the relatively low selectivity, particularly for C2+ products, and substance mixing hinder its research interest.
3.6 Pulsed electrolysis
Different from the conventional static electrolysis that constant potential (or constant current) is input to the system, pulsed electrolysis has been recently developed by applying periodically alternating potentials with specific pulse potential, length and shape.127 Although not inconvenient in operation, extra parameters and new opportunities are created in pulsed electrolysis to regulate the electrocatalytic performance. Through this mode, specific purposes have been realized in water electrolysis, like strengthening mass transfer or reducing energy consumption.128 The progress in the CO2RR area by using pulsed electrolysis is also witnessed towards optimizing the activity, selectivity and operation stability. Mechanistically, the pulse effect originates from the dynamic features of electrocatalyst structures and reaction microenvironments when applying dynamic potentials.129 Manipulation of the oxidation state and structural motifs of Cu(100) electrode catalysts by optimizing the pulse conditions (anodic potential, Ea, is 0.6 VRHE) resulted in 76% of C2+ products at a cathodic potential (Ec) of −1.0 VRHE.59 It is hinted that continuous regeneration of defects and coexistence of Cu(I)/Cu(0) species collaboratively promote the C–C coupling step. On the other hand, pulsed electrolysis enables the alterations of reaction microenvironments, e.g., the local distribution of species (OH−, H+, mass transport of CO2), at the electrode–electrolyte interface to steer the electrocatalytic process. For instance, as demonstrated by Bell et al., the pulse conditions (Ec = −1.15 VRHE, Ea = −0.8 VRHE, 10 s duration) can further increase the surface local pH and CO2 concentration on the ionomer layer modified Cu electrode to achieve 90% C2+ and 4% H2.130 Interestingly, a self-cleaning pulsed CO2RR system was further developed by Sargent et al. to enhance the operation stability of MEA.131 In their system, the regeneration anode voltage drove the CO32− electromigration from the cathode to the anode chamber, which therefore suppressed the carbonate accumulation on the GDE and made a total duration of 236 h, at the expense of <1% additional energy input. Although it is hard to accurately evaluate the EE value in pulsed electrolysis, these studies still manifest their great promise of increasing the productivity of desired products and reducing the energy consumption of the CO2RR.
3.7 Rational coupling of multiple fields of interest
Apart from the design of electrocatalysts and electrolysis systems, an external field including thermal, magnetic, optical, or strain field can be coupled with electrochemical conditions to tune the CO2RR activity or selectivity.132,133 Through these methods affect the electronic structures of catalysts, reactant concentrations or reaction pathways, the corresponding overpotentials/current density, faradaic efficiency and ohmic loss can be modulated to enable the full-cell EE promotion. Temperature is an important factor that affects many properties of the CO2RR system including mass transport and reaction kinetics, as typically displayed in Fig. 10a.15 For instance, a higher current density of the CO2RR is observed at a lower temperature in the H-cell thanks to the large CO2 solubility compared to that at a higher temperature. In some cases of the H-cell where mass transfer limitations do not matter, temperature increase can also promote the CO2 conversion, with higher current density and faradaic efficiency for a specific product by reasons of lowered energy barrier and improved surface diffusion of reaction intermediates.134,135 With regard to the GDE-based flow cell without unlimited mass transport, the comprehensive investigations by Dufek et al. demonstrated the enhancing production rate of syn-gas and the declining cell voltage with the increasing temperature. The corresponding EE increase at 70 mA cm−2 was about 18% from 15 to 70 °C.136 Similarly, in the MEA electrolyzer where CO2 supply is sufficient, increased temperatures contribute to the reinforced electrochemical kinetics, increased conductivity and higher humidity content (Fig. 10a), which finally leads to the higher CO2RR current density at the same cell voltage. Moreover, in particular, Bao et al. detailedly elucidated the temperature dependence of the CO partial current density over Fe–N–C and Ni–N–C single atom catalysts.137 As the temperature increased, the CO current density on Fe–N–C gradually improved, while for Ni–N–C, the current density first increased and then decreased after 323 K (Fig. 10b and c). Based on CO temperature programmed desorption (CO-TPD) and DFT calculations, the mechanistic studies demonstrated that the temperature-dependence difference between two catalysts was determined by the adsorption strength of reaction intermediates. Due to the relatively stronger adsorption of CO on Fe–N–C (Fig. 10d), the increasing temperature facilitated the CO desorption step and thus increased the CO current density. In contrast, the *COOH formation and CO desorption jointly controlled the CO production over Ni–N–C, and therefore the maximum current density occurred at a moderate temperature (Fig. 10e). In addition, the electrolyzer temperature for the CO2RR should not be too high, usually less than 90 °C, so as to avoid the membrane damage or electrolyte leakage.138,139
 Fig. 10  (a) The variation of diverse parameters that may affect the CO2RR as a function of temperature (normalized to the value at 20 °C). Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) and (c) CO partial current density of Fe–N–C and Ni–N–C catalysts versus potentials and temperature. (d) CO-TPD profiles of Fe–N–C and Ni–N–C single atom catalysts. (e) *COOH formation energy (ΔG(*COOH)) and CO desorption energy (−ΔG(*CO)) of Fe–N–C and Ni–N–C catalysts at different temperatures. Adapted with permission.137 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
Magneto-electrochemistry has recently become a novel strategy to intensify the electrochemical process, such as water splitting, CO2 reduction and fuel cells.140 The corresponding mechanism depends on the modulation of mass transfer and reaction kinetics, while the fundamental principles are multifarious, including the magnetothermal effect, magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) and micro-MHD effects, Kelvin force effect, Maxwell stress effect, and the spin selectivity effect mechanism.141 For the CO2RR, the representative work is performed by Pan et al. based on the spin selectivity effect (Fig. 11).142 The spin state of radical pairs (singlet state and the triplet state) is important to determine the activity and product selectivity in electron-transfer reactions. By applying an external magnetic field, the efficiency of the singlet-to-triplet spin mixing process is tuned, thus enabling the regulation of the CO2RR. This explained the observation that a constant magnetic field (about 0.9 T) doubled the yield of HCOOH in the 0.3 M KHCO3 electrolyte compared to the case without a magnetic field (Fig. 11). Similarly, through the MHD effect, the OER modulation by applying a magnetic field has successfully lowered the anode overpotentials during the CO2RR, resulting in the small cell voltage and higher full-cell EE reaching 45%.143 Furthermore, strain engineering is another strategy that modulates the activity and selectivity by breaking the scaling relationship.144,145 As demonstrated by Reske et al., through controlling the thickness of the Cu overlayer on Pt support to adjust the surface tensile strain and adsorption energy of reactive intermediates during the CO2RR, the CH4 and C2H4 selectivity can be controlled.146 Meanwhile, the onset potential shifting for CH4 production on the Cu monolayer supported on Pt was further observed compared to that of bulk-like Cu layers. In addition, the optical field has shown to be effective to control the electrochemical water splitting, and similar exploration in the CO2RR area is emerging and will be meaningful as well to promote the conversion efficiency of CO2.147,148
 Fig. 11  (a) Current change as a function of time (blue, red and olive lines) on applying a triangular wave of the magnetic field (dark line) at −1.7 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 M KHCO3 electrolytes saturated by CO2. (b) The reaction pathway of the CO2RR to formate with/without the magnetic field. (c) Formate yield of the CO2RR in different electrolytes with/without applying the magnetic field. (d) Mechanism schematic of the CO2RR on the Sn catalyst electrode modulated by the magnetic field. Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
4. Integrated electrolysis: a promising route to boosting energy efficiency and economic benefit of CO2 electrolysis
Recent advances in improving the full-cell EE discussed above are concentrated on the CO2RR where cathodic CO2 reduction is coupled with the OER process. However, the OER should be partly responsible for the low EE of the current CO2RR system for several reasons. First, the thermodynamic equilibrium potential of the OER is 1.23 VRHE, much higher than the thermodynamic equilibrium potential of CO2 reduction, suggesting that the OER constitutes a large part of cell voltage and energy consumption. Notably, from the thermodynamics aspect, the distribution of energy consumption in the CO2RR can be evaluated using Hess's law to calculate the standard Gibbs free energy of the individual and whole reaction, as shown in eqn (5)–(8).30 Based on the calculations, 92.2% of the energy input is consumed to drive the anode OER, while only 7.8% contributes to productive CO2 reduction to CO at the cathode. To emphasize this, herein we redefine the concept of energy efficiency by separating cathodic CO2 conversion and anodic oxidation, as shown in eqn (9) and (10), while the full-cell EE is the sum of two values. It can be understood that the large cell voltage caused by the high thermodynamic potential of the anode oxidation (OER) logically leads to the low energy efficiency for CO2 conversion that should be the central target. Second, high overpotentials of the OER account for the slow reaction kinetics and thus further enlarge the cell voltage and reduce the full-cell EE. Although impressive progress in the field of the OER has been achieved in recent years, the relevant overpotentials at larger current density (e.g., >500 mA cm−2) are still too high to date.149 Third, the economic value of the product from the OER (i.e. O2) is much less than other chemical compounds. Therefore, a significant part of the energy input is wasted for producing less valuable O2.18 Taking these aspects into consideration, the OER largely suppresses the EE and profitability of CO2 electrolysis. CO2 + H2 → CO + H2O ΔG0cathode = 20.1 kJ mol−1, 7.8% of total energy(5) H2O → 1/2O2 + H2 ΔG0anode = 237.1 kJ mol−1, 92.2% of total energy(6) Overall: CO2 → CO + 1/2O2 ΔG0 = 257.2 kJ mol−1, total energy(7) ΔG0 = nF|E0|(8) (9) (10)
To address these issues, the strategy of integrated electrolysis (or coupled/paired electrolysis, co-electrolysis) has emerged in recent years, where the OER at the anode is replaced with other oxidation reactions. The choice of alternative anodic oxidation should be thoughtful, relying on thermodynamic potentials, overpotentials, abundance of feedstock, values of products, and technology feasibility.26,27 First, considering the sluggish kinetics of the OER and the corresponding high overpotential at a large current density, the smaller overpotential of the new anodic reaction in comparison to the OER would greatly improve the system EE. Second, the reduction in anodic thermodynamic potential can lower the cell voltage. In this case, on the basis of eqn (5)–(8), the distribution of energy consumption in electrolysis can also be regulated. Taking glycerol oxidation to glyceraldehyde as an example (equilibrium potential 0.41 V), the corresponding standard ΔG0anode is equal to 77.38 kJ mol−1, much less than that of the OER. Consequently, the energy distribution on the cathodic CO2RR will improve from 7.8% to 20.6%, when glycerol electrooxidation occurs at the anode. Therefore, the energy efficiency for cathodic CO2 conversion can be increased from thermodynamics aspects in the integrated electrolysis system, enabling the conversion of more CO2 at the same energy input. On the other hand, by using alternative oxidation with smaller equilibrium potential, the current density at the same applied cell voltage would increase, thus improving the production efficiency of the system. Third, the integrated electrolysis could produce chemical compounds more valuable than O2, enabling the promotion of economic feasibility of the CO2RR system.18,27,150 In this section, we will concentrate on some optional anodic oxidations coupled with the cathodic CO2RR, particularly highlighting its prospect of lowering the cell voltage, improving EE (or energy efficiency for CO2 conversion) and economic benefits of the electrolysis system.
4.1 Alcohol oxidation
To date, several types of alternative reactions at the anode have been reported. Among them, alcohol oxidation is the most concerned, covering the oxidation reactions of glycerol, methanol, propanediol and other primary/secondary alcohols.27 Glycerol, as a byproduct from industrial biodiesel and soap production, is one of the most important platform compounds and can be converted into value-added chemicals like glyceric, tartronic, lactic acid, and formic acid. The oxidation conversion process of glycerol into various products is complicated, while the equilibrium potential of most of the processes is smaller than that of the OER. As demonstrated by Verma et al., by using Pt-catalyzed glycerol oxidation to replace the OER at the anode, the cell voltage of the CO2RR was reduced by ∼0.85 V at a current density of 1–100 mA cm−2, corresponding to the saving in electricity by maximum 53%. The coupling of glycerol oxidation can produce value-added chemicals like formate and lactate, which further enhances the economic benefits of overall reactions, while without affecting cathodic CO2 reduction.30 A similar work on integrated electrolysis was performed by Houache et al., which used carbon supported Ni1−xMx alloys as anodic catalysts to convert glycerol to formic acid. The highest partial current density of 6.0 mA cm−2 and the lowest onset cell voltage of about −1.0 V for CO production can be achieved on the Ag cathodic catalyst when using the anodic Ni0.9Au0.1/C catalyst, which markedly improved the EE of CO2 conversion.151
Very recently, the utilization of methanol oxidation to substitute the anodic OER has been simultaneously reported by several groups. Interestingly, in these cases, selective oxidation of methanol at the anode and selective CO2 reduction at the cathode produce the same formate products.152–154 By using in situ generated Ni–NF–Af and Bi-ene(BDC) from metal organic framework precursors as anodic and cathodic catalysts, Cao et al. obtained formate with selectivity nearly 100% at both the anode and cathode, with a cell voltage of 2.13 V at 10 mA cm−2, lowered by 213 mV compared to that of the traditional CO2RR (Fig. 12a–c).152 The decrease of the cell voltage and energy consumption is ascribed to the easier thermodynamics and kinetics of selective methanol oxidation compared to the OER (Fig. 12d). Similar studies have been performed by Wei et al.153 and Wu et al.154 as well, where a decrease of the cell voltage by >0.4 V at 5 mA cm−2 and significant saving of energy consumption are observed, respectively. Aside from glycerol and methanol, reaction candidates to replace the OER further include the oxidation of ethanol to acetate, isopropanol to acetone, 1,2-propanediol to lactic acid, 1-phenylethanol to acetophenone, benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde or benzoic acid, etc.155–157 However, the economy and technology availability of these reported coupled reactions still need further assessment. Moreover, as pathways of alcohol oxidation are generally complicated and related to various products, it is crucial as well to design the specific anodic catalysts to achieve selective oxidation toward the desired product and low reaction overpotentials.27
 Fig. 12  (a) The schematic illustration of CO2 reduction coupled with methanol oxidation to simultaneously produce formate. (b) LSV curves of full-cell electrolysis for different catalysts Ni–NF–Af/Bi-ene(BDC) and Ni(OH)2–NF/Bi-ene(BDC) pairs with/without methanol in the anolyte. (c) Formate faradaic efficiency of anodic methanol oxidation and cathodic CO2RR as a function of voltage. The inset corresponds to each i–t curve. (d) LSV curves for different catalysts in 1 M KOH with/without 0.5 M methanol. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
4.2 Biomass conversion
Electrocatalytic conversion of biomass (e.g. starch, cellulose, and lignin) and its derived feedstocks to valuable chemicals holds great promise to lessen our long-standing addiction to fossil fuels in the chemical industry.158 Through electrooxidation, value-added products can be synthesized from biomass derivatives like furfural, glucose and xylose, making biomass conversion a potential alternative to substitute the OER.159 In this light, Bharath et al. have recently incorporated furfural conversion with CO2 reduction in a photoelectrochemical cell.160 The furfural oxidation clearly shows its better kinetics compared to that of the OER, with a decrease of half-reaction potential by 0.35 V at 10 mA cm−2. Based on the Au/α-Fe2O3/RGO photocathode and the Ru/RGO/Pt anode, they achieve CO2 reduction to CH3OH with 91% faradaic efficiency at −0.6 V under visible light, and concurrent furfural conversion to 2-furoic acid and 5-hydroxyfuroic acid with a conversion efficiency of 82%. Moreover, the oxidation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) to 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA) mediated by the nickel oxide catalyst was used as an anodic alternative by Choi et al.161 In their work, the onset potential of HMF oxidation was lower than that of the OER; nevertheless, HMF oxidation exhibited a slightly slower kinetics as indicated by the Tafel slope. Indeed, sometimes, the reaction potentials of oxidation conversion of biomass derivatives could be higher than those of the OER. In this case, replacing the OER with biomass oxidation fails to lower the cell voltage and energy consumption, which does not meet the intention of lowering EE. However, this strategy can still work in some special occasions when considering the industrial value of chemicals produced from biomass conversion.159
4.3 Waste degradation
Another choice of the anodic reaction is the oxidation degradation of waste or hazardous substances with no damage to the environment, containing but not limited to H2S, dye compounds, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and nitrogenous waste (nitrophenol, urea, ammonia, etc.)27 The degradation may rely on the oxidation reaction itself, or highly active species like hydroxyl/peroxy radicals produced by anodic reactions. Li et al. designed a solar-driven electrochemical CO2RR coupled with H2S oxidation in the presence of redox couples at the anode.162 By employing ZnO@graphene and graphene as cathodic and anodic catalysts, CO2 conversion to CO at the cathode and removal of toxic purity H2S from natural gas at the anode were achieved with the aid of EDTA-Fe2+/EDTA-Fe3+ redox couples (Fig. 13a). The corresponding cell voltage was reduced by about 0.8 V at 4 mA cm−2 compared to that of the OER and can therefore boost the EE of CO2 conversion. (Fig. 13b). Medvedeva et al. demonstrated that coupling Ni-catalyzed oxidation of ammonia or urea waste with the CO2RR can significantly lower the cell voltages and save the energy consumption,163 while simultaneous efficient electrosynthesis of formate and removal of the p-nitrophenol pollutant was further achieved by Wang et al.164 Moreover, as the photocatalytic method is widely used for removing pollutants, oxidation degradation can also participate in the photocatalytic/photoelectrocatalytic reduction of CO2. In this light, Peng et al. have once successfully incorporated the photoeletrochemical oxidation of methyl orange with the CO2RR by using a nitrogen-doped TiO2 thin film as a photoanode.165 Compared to the electrochemical method, the photoeletrochemical process exhibited noteworthy enhancement in catalytic capability with regard to CO2 reduction and degradation of harmful pollutants. For waste degradation coupled with the CO2RR, further development in the photocatalytic/photoelectrocatalytic system could be attractive. Notably, the technology feasibility of large-scale incorporation of waste degradation with CO2 electrolysis requires further verification.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of coupled electrochemical conversion of CO2 and H2S from natural gas. The anodic oxidation of H2S relies on the EDTA–Fe2+/EDTA–Fe3+ redox couples. (b) LSV curves of full-cell for the coupled CO2RR with the OER (H2O oxidation) and H2S oxidation (EDTA–Fe2+ oxidation) on an anode. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) LSV curves of full-cell for the coupled CO2RR with/without L-DOPA in the anolyte. (d) Cell voltage-dependent FECO for the coupled electrolysis of CO2 reduction with L-DOPA polymerization. (e) Illustration of L-DOPA polymerization to form the poly-L-DOPA nanomaterial. Adapted with permission.166 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.4 Other oxidation candidates
Aside from the concerned alcohol/biomass oxidation and waste degradation, other dispersive efforts have also been given to reduce the cell voltage and energy consumption of the CO2RR, or enhance the economy. For instance, oxidative polymerization of Levodopa (L-DOPA) has recently been adapted to reduce the anodic kinetics.166 By designing a bifunctional molecular catalyst N3NiPc–CNT, for both the cathodic CO2RR and anodic polymerization of L-DOPA, CO2-to-CO conversion with nearly 100% selectivity and the porous poly-L-DOPA nano-framework are achieved simultaneously, with a decrease of cell voltage by 1.05 V (at 10 mA cm−2) compared to the conventional CO2RR system (Fig. 13c–e). The anodic polymerization strategy is attractive, as many conducting polymers with more values than O2, like polyaniline and polypyrrole, can be synthesized from oxidative polymerization of the respective monomers. Interestingly, Guo et al. integrated the chlorine evolution reaction with CO2 electroreduction, which promoted techno-economics and efficient CO2 utilization by concurrently producing CO, Cl2 and KHCO3.167 Similar attempts were dedicated by Lister et al.168 and Quan et al.,169 yielding syngas/Cl2 and CO/NaClO, respectively. It should be mentioned that when using a membraneless electrochemical cell for coelectrolysis of CO2 and KBr, 2-bromoethanol could be obtained through an integrated reaction pathway.170
Moreover, Llorente et al. have attempted to replace the OER with the oxidative condensation of syringaldehyde and o-phenylenediamine that yielded 2-(3,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxyphenyl)-benzimidazole.171 Through this strategy, it was allowed to produce valuable synthetic compounds at both the anode and cathode with less energy requirements. As demonstrated by Kong et al., due to the faster reaction kinetics, SO32− oxidation to SO42− at the anode significantly worked on reducing the cell voltage during CO2 electroreduction.172 In addition, referring to the integrated electrolysis research studies in water splitting where the OER also occupies most energy consumption, there exist some other anodic alternatives yet to reduce cell voltage and electricity expending, including hydrazine oxidation, 3-methylpyridine conversion to 3-pyridinecarboxylic acid, and so on.18 However, more economic and technical analyses on these alternatives should be thoughtfully carried out, even though when the cell voltage can be lowered. Further efforts on integrated electrolysis are strongly suggested to explore new alternative oxidation especially to produce compounds with high demand in the modern society and chemical industry (rather than oxidation just with small reaction potential). The emerging challenges in integrated electrolysis, such as system complexity, electrolyzer re-design, downstream product separation, and overall carbon balance, should be first addressed as well.
5. Concluding remarks and perspectives
In summary, we have provided a comprehensive understanding of the EE of the CO2RR, which is a crucial performance target for its industrial deployment and economic feasibility. The fundamental principles and recent state-of-the-art strategies to boost the full-cell EE are presented by focusing on the electrocatalysts and system design to lower the cell voltage and increase the faradaic efficiency. Notably, the integrated electrolysis where the conventional anodic OER is substituted by other value-added oxidations is highlighted, with great hope to enhance the energy efficiency for CO2 conversion and economic benefits of the system. Representative tactics to improve the full-cell EE in recent years are discussed, where EE for CO/formate production is better developed over C2+ products (Table 1 and Fig. 14). It should be mentioned that the overall EE is a consequence of many factors, the trade-off between different parts should thus be considered when designing the full-cell system. Yet, the accurate evaluations of the full-cell EE in the current CO2RR studies remain relatively insufficient, and thus call for further attention to galvanize the commercial implementation of the CO2RR. The challenges and future opportunities are outlined as follows to drive the field forward.
Table 1 Summary of representative strategies to control full-cell EE in the CO2RR, including the corresponding product, cell voltage and EE at a specific current density, CO2RR catalyst and design tactics




Product
Current density (mA cm−2)
Cell voltage (V)
EE (%)
CO2RR catalyst and design strategy
Ref.




CO
350
3.00
45
Ag/MWCNTs.

173



99
2.00
64
MWNT/PyPBI/Au. Optimizing electrolyte.

52



N/A
1.50
87
Silver. Using ionic liquid electrolyte (18 mol% EMIM-BF4 aqueous solution).

95



110
2.70
45
Ag. Using high temperature and pressure.

174



10
1.83
71
Ag. Using IrO2 dihydrate at the anode.

175



35
3.10
22
BiOx/BMIM+OTf−. Using BPM.

108



N/A
2.70
37
Ag. Using NiFe hydroxide at the anode and BPM.

79



565
2.58
45
Ag. Magnetic field to control the anodic OER.

143



100
2.16
60
Ag NP. Coupled with urea oxidation at the anode.

176



14
1.10
46
Ag NP. Coupled with glycerol electrolysis.

30



Formate
134
1.88
60
Sn-GDE with the imidazole ionomer modifier.

177



40
2.80
48
Pb. Using a dual electrolyte microfluidic reactor.

125



100
2.68
36
2D-Bi. Using solid electrolyte SSE.

118



12
4.50
27
Sn. Using IrO2-Ta2O5/Ti at the anode.

77



42
2.10
65
Sn. Electrolysis at 343 K.

139



10
2.13
63
Bi-ene(BDC). Coupled with methanol oxidation.

152



CH4
5
2.50
14
Electrodeposited Cu2O. Cationic and anionic solid polymer electrolytes.

178



136
4.00
16
CuPc/carbon nanoparticle (1:4). Membrane electrode assembly.

179



C2H4
N/A
2.02
50
Cu-P1. Catalyst modification by polyamine and using a 10 M KOH electrolyte.

72



110
2.40
34
Graphite/carbon NPs/Cu/PTFE. NiFeOx/Ni foam as the anode, 7 M KOH electrolyte.

94



600
3.65
20
Cu modified by N-aryl substituted tetrahydro-bipyridine.

113



C2+
156
4.20
20
Cu. Tuning the electrolyzer and electrolyte.

117



1100
4.00
20
Cu CIBH. Engineering the electrode, electrolyte and reaction interface.

103





 Fig. 14  Summary of the CO2RR EE with the corresponding current density for various products. The data are produced from Table 1. The region with a current density of >300 mA cm−2 and an EE of > 70 that meet the commercial feasibility is still vacant nevertheless, calling for further development of this area. 
(i) Designing robust electrocatalysts
Electrocatalysts play the central role to activate the CO2 molecule and tune the reduction path, enabling the access to desirable products with a high EE. In contrast to CO and formate, the conversion efficiency of CO2 to hydrocarbons and C2+ products, typically on copper-bearing catalysts, is still unsatisfactory and needs further optimization by increasing the faradaic efficiency and reducing overpotentials. More efforts are encouraged to focus on combining in situ experiment investigations with theoretical calculations to uncover the in-depth catalytic mechanism and real-time structure–performance relationship, thereby providing scientific guidance for designing advanced catalysts towards C2+. Moreover, for industrial electrolysis, the catalyst stability is of great significance as well, and should reach thousands of hours with desirable selectivity and EE simultaneously. Unfortunately, the current maximum duration of the CO2RR catalyst is limited to only hundreds of hours. To address this issue especially on copper-bearing catalysts, the mechanistic understanding of catalyst degradation is critically urgent, where the systematic investigation into dynamic evolution through operando techniques under working conditions represents an important endeavor. The implementation of some strategies, such as strengthening atomic interaction inside the catalyst, introducing a protective layer, and enhancing the catalyst–support interactions, would contribute to the stability matter.180 It is also meaningful to capitalize on new methods to large-scale produce catalysts at low cost for industrial applications by employing unique techniques, such as microfluidic synthesis. Going beyond metal-bearing catalysts, the development of cheap, environmentally friendly and high-performance metal-free catalysts (e.g., carbon nanomaterials, organocatalysts, etc.) is further encouraged.
(ii) Optimizing the electrolysis system
The design of the electrolysis system is also important to achieve high EE in the CO2RR technology. For instance, the commercially relevant current density has been reached in the GDE-based reactor by eliminating mass transport limitations. The MEA with a zero-gap feature works impressively in terms of long-term stability and system EE. Nevertheless, challenges, such as industrial-scale fabrication and operation stability of GDE, hydration management, and CO2 crossover, remain to be overcome. Down to the micro aspects, a well-designed reaction interface (electrode–reactant–electrolyte) and local microenvironment would be profitable for control of CO2 electrolysis and optimization of performance. Moreover, the BPM allows for relatively high and stable EE by creating a unique environment at the anode to maintain the facile kinetics of anodic OER, while the inside WDR kinetics needs to be improved. By using a two-step strategy, that is, the electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO (is technically mature and conducted in high-temperature solid oxide electrolyzers), followed by CO conversion to C2+ compounds, the energy requirements could be economized due to the inhibition of carbonate formation and by-products in the one-step CO2RR. Further attempts to optimize the CO2RR system are attractive to increase the full-cell EE at a commercially relevant current density from the aspects of the 3D free-standing integrated catalyst–electrode, novel electrolyte, high-performance membranes, and powerful electrolyzer, where the introduction of concepts and devices from chemical engineering area is strongly recommended.
(iii) Developing integrated electrolysis
Emerging integrated electrolysis by replacing the conventional anodic OER with other valuable oxidation reactions has showcased its prospect to reduce the energy consumption, and increase the energy utilization efficiency for CO2 conversion and economic benefits. It should be cogitative to choose the alternative anodic oxidation, with a comprehensive assessment of thermodynamic potentials, overpotentials, the abundance of feedstock, values of products and technical feasibility. Seeking new alternatives is still crucial as most of the reported cases cannot totally meet these evaluation criteria. From the industry standpoint, the global CO2 emission amount is estimated to be 14.7 Gt per year. In this context, incorporating the oxidation of those bulk chemicals with market size partly matching the CO2 emission (at least >100 Mt per year) into the CO2RR system could be more advisable. These probably include methane (electrooxidation to methanol, formate, etc.), brine (to halogens), and methanol (to formaldehyde/formate). Waste degradation may be worth pursuing while the relevant technical feasibility of integration requires further verification. On the other hand, to adapt the integrated electrolysis, the CO2RR system should be re-designed, with consideration of the anodic catalyst (inexpensive, stable, with good activity and selectivity), electrolyzer architecture, and product separation. In addition to the normal integrated electrolysis, the newly emerged bio-anode-assisted CO2RR technique deserves attention as well to promote EE and output value, where microbes or “electroactive bacteria” oxidize the organic substance and provide electrons to drive cathodic reduction.181 Aiming at reducing energy consumption for CO2 conversion, integrated electrolysis is a very promising strategy for lowering the cell voltage. Notably, the increasing EE is not the only goal here, because the anodic reactants should be easily obtained and the products must be valuable to the industry and society.
(iv) Combining electrolysis with other technologies
Although the electrocatalytic CO2RR shows great potential for CO2 neutralization and transformation into useful chemicals, it suffers from some challenges originating from the limitations of electrolysis technology and reactor design. For instance, the single-pass CO2 conversion is very low to date, usually <20% depending on operation conditions,182 while the conversion in heterogeneous thermocatalytic catalysis can be much higher.183 The combination of electrocatalysis with thermocatalysis could be an effective solution to significantly increase the CO2 conversion. Moreover, as an external parameter, the temperature influences Gibbs free energy and apparent activation energy, thereby altering the thermodynamic potentials and kinetic overpotentials respectively to control the EE of the CO2RR. As an example, the high-temperature solid oxide electrolyzer enables CO2 reduction at a lower cell voltage and high current density. The ohmic loss can also be reduced, because of the higher ionic conductivity at a higher temperature, to increase full-cell EE. Moreover, incorporating photocatalysis is an innovative choice to boost the electron transfer process and reaction kinetics so as to enhance EE. In this case, solar energy directly participates in the CO2 transformation process, also making the whole system more similar to natural renewable energy. Looking into the future, more investigations can be conducted by incorporating external conditions (e.g., magnetic field, biotechnology) into the CO2RR to craft an intriguing electrolysis system with special functional responsiveness, thereby further improving the full-cell EE at a commercially relevant current density of the CO2RR and reinforcing its economic feasibility.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2021YFA1502000), the NSFC (No. U2032149 and 22102052), the Science and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province (No. 2021RC3065 and 2021RC2053), the Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 2020JJ2001), the Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (No. JCYJ20210324120800002), and the Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale (No. KF2020108).
References
R. G. Grim, Z. Huang, M. T. Guarnieri, J. R. Ferrell, L. Tao and J. A. Schaidle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 472–494 RSC .
N. Han, P. Ding, L. He, Y. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902338 CrossRef .
L. Wang, W. Chen, D. Zhang, Y. Du, R. Amal, S. Qiao, J. Wu and Z. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5310–5349 RSC .
Y. Y. Birdja, E. Pérez-Gallent, M. C. Figueiredo, A. J. Göttle, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 732–745 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, R. G. Grim, J. A. Schaidle and L. Tao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3664–3678 RSC .
J. M. Spurgeon and B. Kumar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1536–1551 RSC .
J. Zhang, C. D. Sewell, H. Huang and Z. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102767 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, Z. Hao, K. Zhang, Z. Yan and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 20627–20648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liang, K. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Lei and X. Sun, Small, 2021, 17, 2100323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. K. Norskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Lee, K. D. Yang, D. H. Nam, J. H. Jang, N. H. Cho, S. W. Im and K. T. Nam, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1704717 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhu, E. P. Delmo, T. Li, X. Qin, J. Tian, L. Zhang and M. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005484 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, W. Wang, H. Zheng, X. Wang, Z. Xie, L. Ding, S. Yu, Y. Yao and F. Y. Zhang, Mater. Today Phys., 2021, 19, 100427 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, W. Zhang, M. Qiu and Y. Yu, Mater. Today Phys., 2021, 20, 100443 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kibria, J. P. Edwards, C. M. Gabardo, C. T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807166 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, F. Ahmad, W. Zhao, W. Yan, W. Zhang, H. Huang, C. Ma and J. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4029–4034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, S. Xue, J. Barber, Y. Zhou, J. Meng and X. Ke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4700–4734 RSC .
X. Tan, C. Yu, Y. Ren, S. Cui, W. Li and J. Qiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 765–780 RSC .
S. Jiao, X. Fu, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, S. Ruan, Y.-J. Zeng and H. Huang, Nano Today, 2021, 36, 101028 CrossRef CAS .
S. Popović, M. Smiljanić, P. Jovanovič, J. Vavra, R. Buonsanti and N. Hodnik, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14736–14746 CrossRef PubMed .
R. I. Masel, Z. Liu, H. Yang, J. J. Kaczur, D. Carrillo, S. Ren, D. Salvatore and C. P. Berlinguette, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 118–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Peters, M. Baltruweit, T. Grube, R. C. Samsun and D. Stolten, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 34, 616–634 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, P. Anderson, H.-R. M. Jhong, M. Paster, J. F. Stubbins and P. J. A. Kenis, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 5980–5989 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jouny, W. Luc and F. Jiao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 2165–2177 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Martín, G. O. Larrazábal and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 5114–5130 RSC .
J. Na, B. Seo, J. Kim, C. W. Lee, H. Lee, Y. J. Hwang, B. K. Min, D. K. Lee, H.-S. Oh and U. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5193 CrossRef .
Á. Vass, B. Endrődi and C. Janáky, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2021, 25, 100621 CrossRef .
Y. Wang and T. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 87–110 RSC .
L. Gao, X. Cui, C. D. Sewell, J. Li and Z. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 8428–8469 RSC .
S. Verma, S. Lu and P. J. A. Kenis, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 466–474 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhi, A. Vasileff, Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao and S.-Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3912–3930 RSC .
D. Karapinar, C. E. Creissen, J. G. Rivera de la Cruz, M. W. Schreiber and M. Fontecave, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 694–706 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, E. P. Delmo, T. Li, X. Qin, J. Tian, L. Zhang and M. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2005484 CrossRef PubMed .
T. N. Nguyen and C.-T. Dinh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7488–7504 RSC .
C. M. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, J. P. Edwards, C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, C. P. O’Brien, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2531–2539 RSC .
D. Salvatore and C. P. Berlinguette, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 215–220 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Todorova, M. W. Schreiber and M. Fontecave, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1754–1768 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, K. Cheng, X. Quan, X. Fan, Y. Su, S. Chen, H. Zhao, Y. Zhang, H. Yu and M. R. Hoffmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15607–15611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu and E. A. Carter, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 6631–6669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Á. Morales-García, F. Viñes, J. R. B. Gomes and F. Illas, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2021, 11, e1530 Search PubMed .
K. S. Exner and H. Over, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1240–1247 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Hansen, H. Prats, K. K. Toudahl, N. Mørch Secher, K. Chan, J. Kibsgaard and I. Chorkendorff, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1175–1180 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, L. Pan, F. Idrees, X. Zhang, L. Wang, J.-J. Zou and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 136–157 CrossRef CAS .
N.-T. Suen, S.-F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
J. Song, C. Wei, Z.-F. Huang, C. Liu, L. Zeng, X. Wang and Z. J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2196–2214 RSC .
Y. Zhong, S. Wang, M. Li, J. Ma, S. Song, A. Kumar, H. Duan, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Mater. Today Phys., 2021, 18, 100354 CrossRef CAS .
E. Brunner, W. Hültenschmidt and G. Schlichthärle, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 1987, 19, 273–291 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8798–8801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Saeki, K. Hashimoto, A. Fujishima, N. Kimura and K. Omata, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 8440–8446 CrossRef CAS .
T. Burdyny and W. A. Smith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1442–1453 RSC .
D. Kopljar, A. Inan, P. Vindayer, N. Wagner and E. Klemm, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44, 1107–1116 CrossRef CAS .
S. Verma, Y. Hamasaki, C. Kim, W. Huang, S. Lu, H.-R. M. Jhong, A. A. Gewirth, T. Fujigaya, N. Nakashima and P. J. A. Kenis, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 193–198 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Yang, Y. Shi, A. Janssen and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15378–15401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, Z. Lyu, M. Zhao, R. Chen, Q. N. Nguyen and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2020, 121, 649–735 CrossRef PubMed .
G. L. De Gregorio, T. Burdyny, A. Loiudice, P. Iyengar, W. A. Smith and R. Buonsanti, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4854–4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, R. B. Sandberg, A. J. Akey, X. Liu, D. C. Bell, J. K. Nørskov, K. Chan and H. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, J. Wang, P. Li, K. Chang, C. Li, T. Wang, B. Jiang, H. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Yamauchi, N. Umezawa and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4776–4782 RSC .
H. Mistry, A. S. Varela, C. S. Bonifacio, I. Zegkinoglou, I. Sinev, Y.-W. Choi, K. Kisslinger, E. A. Stach, J. C. Yang, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12123 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Arán-Ais, F. Scholten, S. Kunze, R. Rizo and B. Roldan Cuenya, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 317–325 CrossRef .
A. Wagner, K. H. Ly, N. Heidary, I. Szabó, T. Földes, K. I. Assaf, S. J. Barrow, K. Sokołowski, M. Al-Hada, N. Kornienko, M. F. Kuehnel, E. Rosta, I. Zebger, W. M. Nau, O. A. Scherman and E. Reisner, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 751–761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Hua, Q. Wan, Z. Su, X. Tan, L. Liu, F. Zhang, G. Chen, D. Tan, X. Cheng, B. Han, L. Zheng and G. Mo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 13606–13613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sankar, N. Dimitratos, P. J. Miedziak, P. P. Wells, C. J. Kiely and G. J. Hutchings, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8099–8139 RSC .
D. Yu, L. Gao, T. Sun, J. Guo, Y. Yuan, J. Zhang, M. Li, X. Li, M. Liu, C. Ma, Q. Liu, A. Pan, J. Yang and H. Huang, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1003–1010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Roy, J. Galipaud, L. Fréchette-Viens, S. Garbarino, J. Qiao and D. Guay, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 246, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, M. Sadakiyo, M. Heima, R. Luo, R. T. Haasch, J. I. Gold, M. Yamauchi and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 47–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhong, K. Tran, Y. Min, C. Wang, Z. Wang, C.-T. Dinh, P. De Luna, Z. Yu, A. S. Rasouli, P. Brodersen, S. Sun, O. Voznyy, C.-S. Tan, M. Askerka, F. Che, M. Liu, A. Seifitokaldani, Y. Pang, S.-C. Lo, A. Ip, Z. Ulissi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2020, 581, 178–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, H.-Y. Tan, Y. Zhu, H. Chu and H. M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 2–16 CrossRef .
Z.-Z. Wu, F.-Y. Gao and M.-R. Gao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1121–1139 RSC .
J. Chen and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2103900,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202103900 .
L. Lu, S. Zou and B. Fang, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 6020–6058 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Xie, B. Y. Xia, Y. Li, Y. Yan, Y. Yang, Q. Sun, S. H. Chan, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1687–1695 RSC .
X. Chen, J. Chen, N. M. Alghoraibi, D. A. Henckel, R. Zhang, U. O. Nwabara, K. E. Madsen, P. J. A. Kenis, S. C. Zimmerman and A. A. Gewirth, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiao, X. Fu, L. Zhang, Y.-J. Zeng and H. Huang, Nano Today, 2020, 31, 100833 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiao, X. Fu, S. Wang and Y. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1722–1770 RSC .
S. Liu, J. Xiao, X. F. Lu, J. Wang, X. Wang and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 8499–8503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, H. Tao and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2003786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Wang, Y. Kong, F. Li and P. Li, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 408–414 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-P. Wu, X. F. Lu, S.-Q. Zang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910274 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Vermaas and W. A. Smith, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1143–1148 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Waegele, C. M. Gunathunge, J. Li and X. Li, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 160902 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ringe, E. L. Clark, J. Resasco, A. Walton, B. Seger, A. T. Bell and K. Chan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3001–3014 RSC .
M. R. Thorson, K. I. Siil and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 160, F69 CrossRef .
M. Moura de Salles Pupo and R. Kortlever, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 2926–2935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gu, S. Liu, W. Ni, W. Ren, S. Haussener and X. Hu, Nat. Catal., 2022, 5, 268–276 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ge, Y. Chen, Y. Fan, Y. Zhu, H. Liu, L. Song, Z. Liu, C. Lian, H. Jiang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 6613–6622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Singh, Y. Kwon, Y. Lum, J. W. Ager and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13006–13012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Resasco, L. D. Chen, E. Clark, C. Tsai, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo, K. Chan and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11277–11287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wuttig, Y. Yoon, J. Ryu and Y. Surendranath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17109–17113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Koshy, S. A. Akhade, A. Shugar, K. Abiose, J. Shi, S. Liang, J. S. Oakdale, S. E. Weitzner, J. B. Varley, E. B. Duoss, S. E. Baker, C. Hahn, Z. Bao and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 14712–14725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, B. Jiang, W.-B. Cai and M. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15664–15667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, F. Scholten and B. Roldan Cuenya, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5112–5120 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Varela, W. Ju, T. Reier and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2136–2144 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, P. Schlexer, J. Xiao, Y. Ji, L. Wang, R. B. Sandberg, M. Tang, K. S. Brown, H. Peng, S. Ringe, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and K. Chan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, G. Kibria Md, A. Seifitokaldani, M. Gabardo Christine, F. P. García de Arquer, A. Kiani, P. Edwards Jonathan, P. De Luna, S. Bushuyev Oleksandr, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and H. Sargent Edward, Science, 2018, 360, 783–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rosen Brian, A. Salehi-Khojin, R. Thorson Michael, W. Zhu, T. Whipple Devin, J. A. Kenis Paul and I. Masel Richard, Science, 2011, 334, 643–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wagner, C. D. Sahm and E. Reisner, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 775–786 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Chang, H. Zhang, A. S. Malkani, M.-J. Cheng, B. Xu and Q. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Li and P. Yang, Joule, 2021, 5, 737–742 CrossRef .
X. Lu, C. Zhu, Z. Wu, J. Xuan, J. S. Francisco and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 15438–15444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Huang Jianan, F. Li, A. Ozden, A. Sedighian Rasouli, F. P. García de Arquer, S. Liu, S. Zhang, M. Luo, X. Wang, Y. Lum, Y. Xu, K. Bertens, K. Miao Rui, C.-T. Dinh, D. Sinton and H. Sargent Edward, Science, 2021, 372, 1074–1078 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. O. Monteiro, F. Dattila, B. Hagedoorn, R. García-Muelas, N. López and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 654–662 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. O. Monteiro, M. F. Philips, K. J. P. Schouten and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. García de Arquer, C.-T. Dinh, A. Ozden, J. Wicks, C. McCallum, R. Kirmani Ahmad, D.-H. Nam, C. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, X. Wang, C. Li Yuguang, F. Li, J. Edwards, J. Richter Lee, J. Thorpe Steven, D. Sinton and H. Sargent Edward, Science, 2020, 367, 661–666 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ma, X. He, W. Wang, S. Xie, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 12897–12914 RSC .
T. Luo, S. Abdu and M. Wessling, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 555, 429–454 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Weekes, D. A. Salvatore, A. Reyes, A. Huang and C. P. Berlinguette, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 910–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Blommaert, D. Aili, R. A. Tufa, Q. Li, W. A. Smith and D. A. Vermaas, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2539–2548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Li, D. Zhou, Z. Yan, R. H. Gonçalves, D. A. Salvatore, C. P. Berlinguette and T. E. Mallouk, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1149–1153 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Giesbrecht and M. S. Freund, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 8060–8090 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pärnamäe, S. Mareev, V. Nikonenko, S. Melnikov, N. Sheldeshov, V. Zabolotskii, H. V. M. Hamelers and M. Tedesco, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 617, 118538 CrossRef .
H. Rabiee, L. Ge, X. Zhang, S. Hu, M. Li and Z. Yuan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1959–2008 RSC .
N. Han, Y. Wang, H. Yang, J. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1320 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, A. Thevenon, A. Rosas-Hernández, Z. Wang, Y. Li, C. M. Gabardo, A. Ozden, C. T. Dinh, J. Li, Y. Wang, J. P. Edwards, Y. Xu, C. McCallum, L. Tao, Z.-Q. Liang, M. Luo, X. Wang, H. Li, C. P. O’Brien, C.-S. Tan, D.-H. Nam, R. Quintero-Bermudez, T.-T. Zhuang, Y. C. Li, Z. Han, R. D. Britt, D. Sinton, T. Agapie, J. C. Peters and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2020, 577, 509–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Sa, C. W. Lee, S. Y. Lee, J. Na, U. Lee and Y. J. Hwang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6632–6665 RSC .
K. Yang, R. Kas, W. A. Smith and T. Burdyny, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
D. Higgins, C. Hahn, C. Xiang, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Z. Weber, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 317–324 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Gabardo, C. P. O’Brien, J. P. Edwards, C. McCallum, Y. Xu, C.-T. Dinh, J. Li, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Joule, 2019, 3, 2777–2791 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, P. Zhu, Q. Jiang, Y. Pan, W. Liang, E. Stavitski, H. N. Alshareef and H. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 776–785 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, X. Zhang, K. Xie, G. Wang and X. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1902033 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Wang, B. Yu, W. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Qiao and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1427–1463 RSC .
L. Zhang, S. Hu, X. Zhu and W. Yang, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 593–601 CrossRef .
S. D. Ebbesen, S. H. Jensen, A. Hauch and M. B. Mogensen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10697–10734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Song, G. Wang and X. Bao, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 839–853 CrossRef .
N. Danilov, A. Tarutin, J. Lyagaeva, G. Vdovin and D. Medvedev, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16341–16346 RSC .
X. Lu, D. Y. C. Leung, H. Wang and J. Xuan, Appl. Energy, 2017, 194, 549–559 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Whipple, E. C. Finke and P. J. A. Kenis, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, B109 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, J. Wang, X. Yang and M. Gong, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 59, 69–82 CrossRef .
I. Vincent, B. Choi, M. Nakoji, M. Ishizuka, K. Tsutsumi and A. Tsutsumi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 10240–10248 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jeon, J. Timoshenko, C. Rettenmaier, A. Herzog, A. Yoon, S. W. Chee, S. Oener, U. Hejral, F. T. Haase and B. Roldan Cuenya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 7578–7587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kim, J. C. Bui, X. Luo, J. K. Cooper, A. Kusoglu, A. Z. Weber and A. T. Bell, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 1026–1034 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, J. P. Edwards, S. Liu, R. K. Miao, J. E. Huang, C. M. Gabardo, C. P. O’Brien, J. Li, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 809–815 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631–675 RSC .
J. Yao, W. Huang, W. Fang, M. Kuang, N. Jia, H. Ren, D. Liu, C. Lv, C. Liu, J. Xu and Q. Yan, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000494 CrossRef CAS .
M. Azuma, K. Hashimoto, M. Watanabe and T. Sakata, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1990, 294, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Ahn, I. Abu-Baker and G. T. R. Palmore, Catal. Today, 2017, 288, 24–29 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Dufek, T. E. Lister and M. E. McIlwain, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 623–631 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, H. Li, Y. Wang, H. Li, P. Wei, B. Nan, R. Si, G. Wang and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 13, 26786–26790 CrossRef .
S. M. A. Kriescher, K. Kugler, S. S. Hosseiny, Y. Gendel and M. Wessling, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 50, 64–68 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, Y. E. Kim, M. H. Youn, S. K. Jeong and K. T. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6883–6887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Roy, P. Devi and P. Kumar, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, C. Liang, J. Wu, H. Liu, B. Zhang, Z. Jiang, S. Li and P. Xu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 10303–10316 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, X. Jiang, X. Wang, Q. Wang, M. Wang and Y. Shen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 48–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Bhargava, D. Azmoodeh, X. Chen, E. R. Cofell, A. M. Esposito, S. Verma, A. A. Gewirth and P. J. A. Kenis, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2427–2433 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Jansonius, L. M. Reid, C. N. Virca and C. P. Berlinguette, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 980–986 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, H. Jia, Z. Liu, P. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Luo, J. Yang and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3594–3598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Reske, M. Duca, M. Oezaslan, K. J. P. Schouten, M. T. M. Koper and P. Strasser, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2410–2413 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, D. Yang, Y. Zhou and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 13721–13730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, L. Zheng, D. Yang, H. Yang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, Z. Zhu, W. Xue, B. Y. Xia and B. You, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2105852 Search PubMed .
N. P. Martínez, M. Isaacs and K. K. Nanda, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 5617–5637 RSC .
M. S. E. Houache, R. Safari, U. O. Nwabara, T. Rafaïdeen, G. A. Botton, P. J. A. Kenis, S. Baranton, C. Coutanceau and E. A. Baranova, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 8725–8738 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cao, D.-D. Ma, J. Jia, Q. Xu, X.-T. Wu and Q.-L. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wei, Y. Li, L. Chen and J. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 3148–3155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, J. Hao, Z. Song, X.-Z. Fu and J.-L. Luo, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 412, 127893 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Gonell, U. R. Mathiyazhagan, Y. Liu, D. Wang, A. J. M. Miller and T. J. Meyer, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 97–101 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, Y. Cao, J. He and C. P. Berlinguette, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 778–783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Bajada, S. Roy, J. Warnan, K. Abdiaziz, A. Wagner, M. M. Roessler and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15633–15641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Holade, N. Tuleushova, S. Tingry, K. Servat, T. W. Napporn, H. Guesmi, D. Cornu and K. B. Kokoh, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 3071–3112 RSC .
H. Liu and W. Li, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2021, 30, 100795 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bharath, K. Rambabu, A. Hai, N. Ponpandian, J. E. Schmidt, D. D. Dionysiou, M. Abu Haija and F. Banat, Appl. Catal., B., 2021, 298, 120520 CrossRef .
S. Choi, M. Balamurugan, K.-G. Lee, K. H. Cho, S. Park, H. Seo and K. T. Nam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2941–2948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, H. Wang, W. Yu, X. Wang, Z. Xu, X. Zong and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3473–3477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. V. Medvedeva, J. J. Medvedev, S. W. Tatarchuk, R. M. Choueiri and A. Klinkova, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 4456–4462 RSC .
Q. Wang, W. Wang, C. Zhu, C. Wu and H. Yu, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 47, 101497 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Peng, Y.-T. Yeh, S. I. Shah and C. P. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 123–124, 414–423 CrossRef CAS .
D.-D. Ma, S.-G. Han, C. Cao, W. Wei, X. Li, B. Chen, X.-T. Wu and Q.-L. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1544–1552 RSC .
J.-H. Guo and W.-Y. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 275, 119154 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Lister and E. J. Dufek, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 4244–4249 CrossRef CAS .
F. Quan, G. Zhan, H. Shang, Y. Huang, F. Jia, L. Zhang and Z. Ai, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 3256–3262 RSC .
S. Zhong, Z. Cao, X. Yang, S. M. Kozlov, K.-W. Huang, V. Tung, L. Cavallo, L.-J. Li and Y. Han, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 600–605 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Llorente, B. H. Nguyen, C. P. Kubiak and K. D. Moeller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15110–15113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kong, L. Wang, H. Jiang, F. Li, T. Zhao, M. Zhuo, Q. Chen, M. Mao and Y. Xu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 847, 113264 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, R. Luo, J. I. Gold, A. Z. Yu, B. Kim and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8573–8578 RSC .
E. J. Dufek, T. E. Lister, S. G. Stone and M. E. McIlwain, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, F514–F517 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, R. Luo, S. Moniri, Y. Lan and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F1124–F1131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Zhu, Y. Wen, S. Li, C. Cui, F. Ni, Y. Liu, H. Lin, Y. Li, H. Peng and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 10577–10582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, J. J. Kaczur, S. D. Sajjad and R. I. Masel, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 20, 208–217 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Aeshala, R. G. Uppaluri and A. Verma, J. CO2 Util., 2013, 3–4, 49–55 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, F. Li, A. Xu, J. P. Edwards, S.-F. Hung, C. M. Gabardo, C. P. O’Brien, S. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Li, J. Wicks, R. K. Miao, Y. Liu, J. Li, J. E. Huang, J. Abed, Y. Wang, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Yuan, L. Gao, G. Zeng, M. Li and H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, Y. Zhang, B. Zhao, Y. Chang and Z. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 5198–5204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-T. Dinh, Y. C. Li and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2019, 3, 13–15 CrossRef .
S. De, A. Dokania, A. Ramirez and J. Gascon, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 14147–14185 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Wenchuan Lai
	Dr Wenchuan Lai received his PhD degree in Materials Science from Sichuan University in 2020. Between 2019 and 2020, he was also a visiting PhD scholar in the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, majoring in Nanoscale Science under the supervision of Prof. Klaus Kern. He joined the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Hunan University in 2021 and then worked as a postdoctoral fellow. His current research studies are focused on materials chemistry, functional nanomaterials and their application in the energy-related conversion process.

Yan Qiao
	Yan Qiao received her master's degree in the college of chemistry and chemical engineering from Hunan University in 2021. She is now studying in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Hunan University for a PhD degree. Her current research is focused on nanomaterials and their application in energy storage and conversion involved in the electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 and proton exchange membrane fuel cells.

Jiawei Zhang
	Dr Jiawei Zhang received his PhD degree in chemical engineering and technology from the Nanjing University of Science and Technology in 2019. He joined Hunan University as a postdoctoral fellow in 2019 and then worked as a postdoctoral fellow under the supervision of Prof. Zhiqun Lin at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He is now working in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Hunan University. His current research is focused on nanomaterials and their application in energy storage and conversion.

Zhiqun Lin
	Prof. Zhiqun Lin is a professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. His research interests include electrocatalysis, batteries, solar energy conversion, photocatalysis, semiconductor organic–inorganic nanocomposites, multifunctional nanocrystals, conjugated polymers, block copolymers, hierarchical structure formation and assembly, and surface and interfacial properties.

Hongwen Huang
	Prof. Hongwen Huang is a full professor at Hunan University. He received his bachelor's degree from the South China University of Technology in 2009 and a PhD degree in materials science and engineering from the Zhejiang University in 2015. After graduation, he joined the University of Science and Technology of China as a postdoctoral fellow from 2015 to 2017 and moved to Hunan University in 2017. His research interests include the controlled growth of nanocrystals and their applications in energy-related electrocatalysis.

Broader context
The ever-increasing consumption of fossil fuels has caused a tremendous increase in the atmospheric CO2 concentration, which has triggered a sequence of global environmental hazards. The electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) shows great promise to convert CO2 into valuable chemicals, enabling the closing of the carbon cycle and storing of intermittent renewable energy. Efforts have been mainly made previously to improve the performance indicators of the CO2RR such as production efficiency and selectivity. However, the energy efficiency (EE), defined as the percentage of energy reserved in targeted products compared to the total electricity input, should merit more deliberation since it is a guiding metric for industrial implementation and economic feasibility. To this end, here, we offer a timely and tutorial review on full-cell EE of CO2RR technology, with emphasis on relevant fundamental principles, and design strategies by developing robust electrocatalysts and advanced electrolysis systems to boost EE. Notably, the emerging integrated electrolysis is highlighted, where the conventional anodic OER with high voltage requirement is replaced with more useful oxidation reactions and EE can be enhanced. Above all, this review provides a comprehensive understanding, visionary discussions and future opportunities for promoting the full-cell EE and economic benefits of the CO2RR, which would attract considerable attention to this subfield and further inspire investigations to advance CO2RR technology.

	(1)
Ecell = EOER − ECO2RR + ηCO2RR + ηOER + Eloss + ηmasstransfer	(2)
Eloss = I(Relectrode + Relectrolytes + Rion-exchangemembrane)	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 1  Overview of the reaction pathway in the electrocatalytic CO2RR towards various C1–C3 products. Arrows represent the concerted proton or electron transfer steps. Reproduced with permission.4 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Free energy diagram of CO2 reduction to ethanol on the (111) facet of B- and N-co-doped nanodiamonds. (b) Energetically optimized configurations for elementary steps during CO2 reduction. The gray, pink, blue, red and white balls in (b) correspond to carbon, boron, nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Cell voltage of the CO2RR for CO production coupled with the OER as a function of current density, including thermodynamic equilibrium potential (E0 = EOER − ECO2RR), overall reaction overpotentials (ηOER + ηCO2RR), ohmic loss (Eloss) and system potential related to mass transfer (ηmasstransfer). Adapted with permission.25 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  The cell voltage, faradaic efficiency and energy efficiency of the CO2RR to CO on a MWNT/PyPBI/Au catalyst at different total current densities, where IrO2 was used as the anode and 2.0 M KOH as the electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) CO2RR selectivity as a function of potential for Cu nanocatalysts with various shapes (spheres, cubes and octahedra). Measured in a GDL-based flow cell using the 1 M KOH electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the mesoporous PdCu alloy catalyst for CO2 conversion. (c) Faradaic efficiency of CO vs. the potential for PdCu alloys with different compositions. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) CH4/C2H4 selectivity vs. the potential for Cu catalysts after various plasma treatments. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Qdefects/Q100 (defect density) and product selectivity as a function of ta/tc (pulsing width ratio between Ea = 0.6 V and Ec = −1.0 V) under pulsed electrolysis conditions. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Schematic illustration of the CO2RR to CO with the CB[6] cavity on the Au surface. (g) Surface-enhanced infrared absorption of Au and Au-CB[6] in CO2-purged 0.1 M KHCO3 solution. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic of the nano-defective Cu nanosheet converting CO2 to C2H4 with high selectivity. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) LSV curves of IrO2–Ta2O5/Ti, Pt and β-PbO2/Ti in 0.3 M Na2SO4 media at 1 mV s−1. (b) The faradaic efficiency, EE, power consumption and output–input ratio of the CO2RR toward producing formate for different anodic catalysts. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the OER mechanism in alkaline (blue arrows) and neutral/acid (red arrows) environments. Adapted with permission.34 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) LSV curves of NiFe hydroxide and Pt in different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the cation effect on local pH and CO2 concentration to alter the CO2RR selectivity. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Mechanism illustration of the halide effect on activation of CO2 and stabilization of the reaction intermediate. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Tafel plots of CO reduction (COR) for C1 and C2 products at pH = 7 and pH = 13. (d) and (e) Free energy diagram differences of the dominant pathway for the formation of C1 and C2 products at pH = 7 and pH = 13. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Faradaic efficiency of CO and C2H4 as a function of potential measured at KOH with different concentrations. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (g) The efficiency of the ionic liquid-mediated CO2RR and the corresponding turnover vs. cell voltage. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The illustration of ion transport through different membranes (AEM, CEM and BPM) in different electrolyte environments. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Summary of the voltage distribution of the CO2RR in the traditional system (Ag–Nafion–Pt), Ag–BPM–NiFe hydroxide system, and outlook system after replacing cathodic Ag by the oxide-derived Au catalyst. From bottom to up in every column, the voltage composition includes the overpotentials of CO2 reduction, equilibrium potential of the overall reaction, ohmic loss from the membrane and electrolyte, and OER overpotential. The data are measured after operation of 10 h and normalized to 5 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Structure schematic of the gas-fed CO2 electrolyzer, and (d) stability comparison between the BPM and Nafion membrane based CO2RR system at 80 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the gas concentration as a function of current density and distance from the catalyst surface, and the proposed substance diffusion pathways and directions for the planar electrode in the H-cell. (b) Structural diagram of the traditional H-cell. (c) Polarization curve of full-cell CO2 electrolysis by using ultrathin bismuth nanosheets as catalysts coupled with the OER at the anode. (d) Schematic of the gas concentration as a function of current density and distance from the catalyst surface, and the proposed substance diffusion pathways and directions for the gas-diffused electrode. I Structural diagram of the flow cell based on the gas-diffused electrode. (f) Performance statistics at a maximum partial current density for Cu CIBH catalysts. EE1/2 means cathodic energy efficiency. (g) Polarization curve of full-cell CO2 electrolysis in a flow cell using the best Cu CIBH catalysts. The overall EE is estimated as 20% for C2+ products at 1.1 A cm−2. (h) Structural diagram of MEA. (i) The operation stability of current and ethylene selectivity on MEA at a cell voltage of 3.6 V by using Cu-12 as the cathodic CO2RR catalyst and iridium oxide supported on titanium mesh as the anodic OER catalyst. Humidified CO2 was supplied at cathode channels and 0.1 M KHCO3 was used as the anolyte. (a) and (d) Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VC. (c) Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (e) and (h) Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) and (g) Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (i) Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The variation of diverse parameters that may affect the CO2RR as a function of temperature (normalized to the value at 20 °C). Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) and (c) CO partial current density of Fe–N–C and Ni–N–C catalysts versus potentials and temperature. (d) CO-TPD profiles of Fe–N–C and Ni–N–C single atom catalysts. (e) *COOH formation energy (ΔG(*COOH)) and CO desorption energy (−ΔG(*CO)) of Fe–N–C and Ni–N–C catalysts at different temperatures. Adapted with permission.137 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Current change as a function of time (blue, red and olive lines) on applying a triangular wave of the magnetic field (dark line) at −1.7 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 M KHCO3 electrolytes saturated by CO2. (b) The reaction pathway of the CO2RR to formate with/without the magnetic field. (c) Formate yield of the CO2RR in different electrolytes with/without applying the magnetic field. (d) Mechanism schematic of the CO2RR on the Sn catalyst electrode modulated by the magnetic field. Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 
CO2 + H2 → CO + H2O ΔG0cathode = 20.1 kJ mol−1, 7.8% of total energy	(5)
H2O → 1/2O2 + H2 ΔG0anode = 237.1 kJ mol−1, 92.2% of total energy	(6)
Overall: CO2 → CO + 1/2O2 ΔG0 = 257.2 kJ mol−1, total energy	(7)
ΔG0 = nF|E0|	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 12  (a) The schematic illustration of CO2 reduction coupled with methanol oxidation to simultaneously produce formate. (b) LSV curves of full-cell electrolysis for different catalysts Ni–NF–Af/Bi-ene(BDC) and Ni(OH)2–NF/Bi-ene(BDC) pairs with/without methanol in the anolyte. (c) Formate faradaic efficiency of anodic methanol oxidation and cathodic CO2RR as a function of voltage. The inset corresponds to each i–t curve. (d) LSV curves for different catalysts in 1 M KOH with/without 0.5 M methanol. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of coupled electrochemical conversion of CO2 and H2S from natural gas. The anodic oxidation of H2S relies on the EDTA–Fe2+/EDTA–Fe3+ redox couples. (b) LSV curves of full-cell for the coupled CO2RR with the OER (H2O oxidation) and H2S oxidation (EDTA–Fe2+ oxidation) on an anode. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) LSV curves of full-cell for the coupled CO2RR with/without L-DOPA in the anolyte. (d) Cell voltage-dependent FECO for the coupled electrolysis of CO2 reduction with L-DOPA polymerization. (e) Illustration of L-DOPA polymerization to form the poly-L-DOPA nanomaterial. Adapted with permission.166 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

CO	350	3.00	45	Ag/MWCNTs.	
173

99	2.00	64	MWNT/PyPBI/Au. Optimizing electrolyte.	
52

N/A	1.50	87	Silver. Using ionic liquid electrolyte (18 mol% EMIM-BF4 aqueous solution).	
95

110	2.70	45	Ag. Using high temperature and pressure.	
174

10	1.83	71	Ag. Using IrO2 dihydrate at the anode.	
175

35	3.10	22	BiOx/BMIM+OTf−. Using BPM.	
108

N/A	2.70	37	Ag. Using NiFe hydroxide at the anode and BPM.	
79

565	2.58	45	Ag. Magnetic field to control the anodic OER.	
143

100	2.16	60	Ag NP. Coupled with urea oxidation at the anode.	
176

14	1.10	46	Ag NP. Coupled with glycerol electrolysis.	
30

Formate	134	1.88	60	Sn-GDE with the imidazole ionomer modifier.	
177

40	2.80	48	Pb. Using a dual electrolyte microfluidic reactor.	
125

100	2.68	36	2D-Bi. Using solid electrolyte SSE.	
118

12	4.50	27	Sn. Using IrO2-Ta2O5/Ti at the anode.	
77

42	2.10	65	Sn. Electrolysis at 343 K.	
139

10	2.13	63	Bi-ene(BDC). Coupled with methanol oxidation.	
152

CH4	5	2.50	14	Electrodeposited Cu2O. Cationic and anionic solid polymer electrolytes.	
178

136	4.00	16	CuPc/carbon nanoparticle (1:4). Membrane electrode assembly.	
179

C2H4	N/A	2.02	50	Cu-P1. Catalyst modification by polyamine and using a 10 M KOH electrolyte.	
72

110	2.40	34	Graphite/carbon NPs/Cu/PTFE. NiFeOx/Ni foam as the anode, 7 M KOH electrolyte.	
94

600	3.65	20	Cu modified by N-aryl substituted tetrahydro-bipyridine.	
113

C2+	156	4.20	20	Cu. Tuning the electrolyzer and electrolyte.	
117

1100	4.00	20	Cu CIBH. Engineering the electrode, electrolyte and reaction interface.	
103


 	Fig. 14  Summary of the CO2RR EE with the corresponding current density for various products. The data are produced from Table 1. The region with a current density of >300 mA cm−2 and an EE of > 70 that meet the commercial feasibility is still vacant nevertheless, calling for further development of this area.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
