Bio-inspired structural colors and their applications  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CC04386B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CC04386B
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 13448-13464Bio-inspired structural colors and their applications

        
          
            Fengxiang 
            Chen†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Ya 
            Huang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Run 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Shiliang 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Baoshun 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenshuo 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xueke 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qinyuan 
            Jiang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Wang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Rufan 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aBeijing Key Laboratory of Green Chemical Reaction Engineering and Technology, Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: zhangrufan@tsinghua.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of New Textile Materials and Advanced Processing Technologies, Wuhan Textile University, Wuhan 430200, P. R. China
Received 
      10th August 2021
    , Accepted 8th November 2021First published on 9th November 2021AbstractStructural colors, generated by the interaction of interference, diffraction, and scattering between incident light and periodic nanostructured surfaces with features of the same scale with incident visible light wavelengths, have recently attracted intense interest in a wide range of research fields, due to their advantages such as various brilliant colors, long-term stability and environmental friendliness, low energy consumption, and mysterious biological functions. Tremendous effort has been made to design structural colors and considerable progress has been achieved in the past few decades. However, there are still significant challenges and obstacles, such as durability, portability, compatibility, recyclability, mass production of structural-color materials, etc., that need to be solved by rational structural design and novel manufacturing strategies. In this review, we summarize the recent progress of bio-inspired structural colors and their applications. First, we introduce several typical natural structural colors displayed by living organisms from fundamental optical phenomena, including interference, diffraction grating, scattering, photonic crystals effects, the combination of different phenomena, etc. Subsequently, we review recent progress in bio-inspired artificial structural colors generated from advanced micro/nanoscale manufacturing strategies to relevant biomimetic approaches, including self-assembly, template methods, phase conversion, magnetron sputtering, atomic layer deposition, etc. Besides, we also present the current and potential applications of structural colors in various fields, such as displays, anti-counterfeiting, wearable electronics, stealth, printing, etc. Finally, we discuss the challenges and future development directions of structural colors, aiming to push forward the research and applications of structural-color materials.
1. Introduction
Colors play a very important role in the evolution and survival of animals and plants, which is also one of the most important attributes of human visual perception.1 Pigments, bioluminescence, and structural colors are three primary natural colors for living creatures.2 Pigmentary colors make objects exhibit beautiful colors by the selective absorption of light in a certain wavelength range by the electrons of molecules embedded in pigments and dyes, which have been extensively applied in our daily life since the mass production of organic dyes. However, traditional dyeing approaches also cause many problems, such as difficulty in recycling and degradation, serious environmental pollution, weak durability, etc. Bioluminescence is commonly produced in tissues or organs and shines out from the emitter's body, which can be attributed to the complex chemical reactions in the photophores of many organisms.3 Structural colors are the third type of coloration, and are also known as physical colors, generated by the interaction of interference, diffraction, and scattering between incident light and periodic nanostructured surfaces with features of the same scale as incident visible light wavelengths,4–10 which usually have a distinctive appearance that contrasts with the common pigmentary colors. Structural colors possess many advantages over pigments and bioluminescence, such as long-term light/chemical/environmental stability and that they do not fade with time, low dissipative loss, high sensitivity for environmental alterations, environmental friendliness, even dynamical tunability, etc.11–15 What's more, structural colors also show superiorities not only in the low-cost and large-scale fabrication method of color decoration but also in compatibilities with new functions, such as energy conversion, self-cleaning, anti-counterfeiting, information encryption, etc.16–24 Therefore, structural colors play important roles in signaling and camouflage for living creatures to meet their different survival needs,25–27 which are further applied in sensors, bioassays, anti-counterfeiting, smart windows, wearable electronics and optical components28–38 through a series of biomimetic technologies.
Structural coloration in nature has fascinated scientists and engineers and the corresponding timeline of representative studies, theories and technologies is given in Fig. 1. The earliest scientific description for structural colors can be traced back to 1665 by Hooke.39 He discovered that the bright colors on the feathers of peacocks and ducks can disappear quickly after dripping a drop of water on them, and then he speculated about the relationship between brilliant colors and microstructures. Subsequently, many scientists, including Newton,40 also found some new phenomena about colors with iridescence in other organisms and tried to clarify them. However, these scientists failed to make significant achievements due to the limitations in optical science at that time. After the discovery of the electromagnetic field theory (1865–1888) and the invention of the electron microscope (1932), research on structural colors was quickly promoted to the micro-nanometer scale level. Researchers also attempted to determine the mechanism of structural colors for the ivory-breasted pitta's beautiful feathers for the first time by using an electron microscope.41 Since then, various micro- and nanostructures have been revealed such as in Morpho butterflies, the wings of Humming birds, the exocuticle of Scarabaeid beetles, the elytra of Euchroma gigantea L, the iridocytes of Neon tetra, etc.,42–45 which played a key role in the description and understanding of the phenomenon of structural colors.
 Fig. 1  The timeline of structural colors. 
The advances in recent nanofabrication technologies have attracted researchers’ great interest in structural colors. A prodigious array of color-producing architectures has been achieved by scientists in animals, plants, minerals, etc.,46–49 and some sub-wavelength micro-nanometer structures have been created with a resolution beyond the diffraction limit.50–54 Among these, ordered self-assembly of photonic crystals derived from coating,55,56 microfluidics,57,58 and ink-jet printings59,60 further accelerates the development and application of structural colors, but how to efficiently construct new nanostructured materials still remains a challenge. Therefore, extensive efforts have been made to tackle the limits. Biomimicry is an elegant shortcut towards optimizing structural design and has become a main driving force and technology to push progress in structural colors.
In this review, we first introduce several typical natural structural colors displayed by living organisms derived from various physical mechanisms, such as multi-film interference, diffraction grating, scattering, 2-D photonic crystals, 3-D photonic crystals, and composite structure. Then, we summarize some novel strategies and relevant biomimetic approaches based on different physical principles to design and construct structural color materials. Finally, we discuss the future development trend, aiming to maximize the technological benefits from these special nanostructures.
2. Natural structural colors
Structural color widely exists in a lot of animals and plants.13 In the long process of biological evolution, many organisms in nature, including pals, barbules, mussels, insect shells, bird feathers, plants, fruits, exoskeletons and other objects,61 take full advantage of colors, generated by geometric structures present on the surface of the body, to adapt to the surrounding environments by utilizing them as signals to warn or mislead the natural enemies or transmit information.62–67 These structural colors are produced by periodic nanostructures via combinations of several fundamental optical processes, such as interference, diffraction grating, scattering, photonic crystals effect, etc. Among these processes, interferences, including single-layer film interference and multilayer film interference, are the most common and the simplest sources of structural colors in nature. The basic principle of single-layer film interference is light interference on the boundaries of materials with different refractive indexes. A color's category and intensity depend greatly on film thickness and refractive index. Color caused by thin-film interference exists in the wings of some houseflies and some birds.68 Multilayer film interference from the Japanese jewel beetle Chrysochroa fulgidissima is one of the most well-known examples (Fig. 2a).69–75 The remarkable color changes of Chrysochroa fulgidissima at various viewing angles from the elytron to its tail was revealed to be from yellowish green to deep blue. Moreover, these color changes are rather continuous, different from other organisms, such as the Morpho butterfly. The multi-layer film characteristics with continuous alternating layers are further clearly supported by the SEM photograph. Of course, multi-layered structural film interference also widely exists in many insects and birds.
 Fig. 2  Typical creatures in nature with structural colors derived from different physical mechanisms. (a) Photographs of the Japanese jewel beetle Chrysochroa fulgidissima at various viewing angles, and corresponding microstructures of the surface and cross-section of an iridescent elytron by SEM. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Wiley, Copyright (2005). (b) Photographs and microstructure of the hairs in the seed-shrimp (ostracod crustacean) Azygocypridina lowryi, the iridescence color was caused by grating diffraction. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from The Royal Society, Copyright (1995). (c) Photographs of male asities Neodrepanis hypoxantha and the nanostructures in light blue caruncle tissue from TEM. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Company of Biologists Ltd, Copyright (1999). (d) Photograph of a peacock tail feather and corresponding SEM images of barbule structures. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, Copyright (2003). (e) Photograph of the weevil Entimus imperialis and corresponding SEM images derived from the 3D natural photonic crystals. Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright (2011). (f) Photograph of a Morpho butterfly and various complex and hierarchical structures in a butterfly wing. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from Taylor & Francis, Copyright (2010). 
Diffraction gratings are regarded to be rare in nature, and are believed to exist only in invertebrates in nature.2 This may be because the diffraction gratings need a highly long-range orderly structure on the 60 mm scale, which is very difficult to satisfy in animals and plants due to the dominant irregular structure at this length scale. Otherwise, diffraction gratings are also difficult to achieve the well-defined colors, instead of iridescence color, such as the antenna male seed-shrimp Azygocypridina lowryi (Fig. 2b).14,76 In the antenna of Azygocypridina lowryi, the grating was formed by the regular undulations like juxtaposed rings, which exist on the external surface of the hair with a periodicity grating thickness of 600–700 nm.14
Scattering, including coherent scattering and incoherent scattering, is also the most common structural color mechanism in nature, which mainly produces blue green, or iridescent coloration by scattering all incident light equally. Fig. 2c displays photographs of a male yellow-bellied asity bird Neodrepanis hypoxantha and the TEM micrographs of structurally colored facial caruncles. It shows that a nearly hexagonal array of collagen fibers in the tissues of Neodrepanis hypoxantha are substantially nanostructured at the appropriate spatial scale, which can scatter light coherently.77 These results further confirm that the micro-nano structures in the organisms can directly determine the colors of the tissue, resulting from the coherent scattering mechanism. Similar phenomena were also found in plants with blue leaves.78,79
Photonic crystals, including one-dimensional (1D) photonic crystals, two-dimensional (2D) photonic crystals and three-dimensional (3D) photonic crystals, are a special case of composites which have two different refractive indices and can exhibit brilliant structural colors by forming spatially ordered lattices.4,80,81 The transmission and reflection of light on the photonic crystals are controlled by the photonic bandgaps. Generally, 1D photonic crystals can be regarded as thin-film interference and were described earlier in many organisms. However, it was originally discovered in the sea Aphroditidae Polychaeta65 for 2D photonic crystals and opal in the weevil for 3D photonic crystals.68 In the subsequent studies, photonic crystals were also discovered successively in many organisms, such as marine animals, insects, birds, plants, etc.82–89Fig. 2d shows a typical example, the peacock feather,90 which can exhibit bright blue, green, yellow, and brown colors derived from the 2D photonic crystals incorporated on the surface of the barbules with a well-ordered structure. Zi et al. revealed that the lattice structures of 2D photonic crystals are closely-packed and parallel to the surface in the blue and yellow barbules, whereas they form a rectangular lattice in the brown barbule. The simulated results further reveal that the lattice constant and the number of periods in the photonic-crystal structure determine the final coloration.90,91 Diversified colors are often achieved by regulating the lattice constant, while the reduction of the number of periods often brings some additional colors and produces mixed coloration.
Unlike 2D photonic crystals, 3D photonic crystals have periodicities in all directions and can confine and control light in three spatial dimensions via complete photonic bandgaps.92 The 3D photonic crystal structures are the most complex of all structural colors in nature. A typical representative is an opal; its brilliant colors come from the face-centered cubic structure of silica particles. Similar to opals, many weevils,68 butterflies93 and longhorns94 have microstructures composed of three-dimensional photonic crystals. Among all the reported structural-colored organisms, the Brazilian ‘‘diamond weevil’’ Entimus imperialis is regarded as featuring one of the perfect 3D photonic crystals in nature.8 The wings of the weevil are covered with colorful scales, like overclothes studded with gems (Fig. 2e). Indeed, weevil wings are inlaid with a matrix of pits and each pit is filled with hundreds of drop-shaped scales, which are made of chitins. The chitin and air pores are triangular primitive cells, which have a face-centered cubic structure, similar to inverse opal, produced by the stacking of chitin slabs with protrusions and perforations, with a triangular lattice arrangement. Under the irradiation of white light, the scales of the weevil with different lattice constants can scatter the light into many different colors, from dark blue to red, derived from the interference and diffraction mechanism, instead of refraction and dispersion of gem stones. Non-uniform nanostructures of photonic crystals offer excellent reflectivity over a broad-angle range. Therefore, in the past 20 years, photonic crystal materials have been widely applied in artificial structural colors.
Butterflies might be the most impressive insects in the world, and have attracted tremendous research interest.95,96 So far, the best-studied structural color has been the butterfly scale, especially for the blue wings of the Morpho butterfly, which is a superior example of optics in nature. The brilliant and colorful colors on butterfly wings have always been an important direction of biological structural color. Most of these colorations come from the complex structures of butterfly scales. Through series characterization and extensive analysis of the butterfly structure, Ghiradella et al.97 summarized six typical scale structures by analyzing various butterflies, which were the upper and lower layers of the epidermis, ridges, cross-ribs, ridge-lamellae and micro-ribs structures. Fig. 2f displays a diagrammatic view of various complex and hierarchical structures in butterfly wings at an unspecialized scale. Among them, the structural color of type A originates from the interference and diffraction of the ridge-multilayer film structures, which is responsible for the brilliant blues of the genus Morpho and the greens in some Papilionid butterflies. The structural color of type B is derived from the scattering of the complex structure between the two ridges, which determines the blue-green coloration of Papilionid butterfly wings.97,98 The structural color of type C is caused by the interference or diffraction of the flake or micro-rib structure, the structural color of type D is derived from the micro-rib structure between the two ridges, the structural color of type E is caused by the hole-like or flake-like structure between the two ridges, the structural color of type F is due to the interference or diffraction of the multilayer film structure in the body, and the structural color of type G is caused by the diffraction of the periodic crystal structure. Note that any of these structures might be altered in any of several ways to produce variants and suit the functions.
3. Bioinspired structural colors
Learning from nature is always beneficial for rational structure design. Researchers have made great effort in the preparation and fabrication of bio-inspired variable structural-color materials. The structural colors with unique characteristics developed in nature cannot be obtained merely by chemical dyes or pigments. To mimic biological species, various methods were proposed and elaborate structures were fabricated (Fig. 3). Different fabrication methods and progress are summarized here to better understand and guide optimized structural design.
 Fig. 3  Bioinspired strategies for the design of structural-color materials. 
3.1 Self-assembly
Self-assembly refers to a technique in which basic structural units (e.g., molecules, nano materials, micro or larger scale materials) form ordered structures spontaneously, which is one of the most commonly used methods in generating structural colors. Self-assembly is economical and environmentally friendly, and generally requires little external consumption or material addition since it is a spontaneous process. Moreover, it is one of the most promising methods for industrial production because of the relatively simple operation and high repeatability. Therefore, the preparation of photonic crystals by self-assembly of colloidal microspheres has attracted more and more attention. During this process, colloidal microspheres transit to an ordered state gradually with the help of electrostatic repulsion and van der Waals forces, and finally form a highly ordered structure.99–101 Researchers developed many colloidal self-assembly methods, such as gravitational sedimentation, vertical deposition and electrophoretic deposition.

3.1.1 Gravitational sedimentation. 
Colloidal microspheres are deposited on the substrate surface under gravity and form periodic photonic crystal structures spontaneously with the volatilization of liquids in a gravitational sedimentation method. The utilization of gravity reduces energy consumption to a great extent. Comoretto et al. fabricated artificial PS opal films with different sphere diameters and different qualities by gravitational sedimentation and obtained highly ordered samples.102 The opal films were used as a well-characterized nanoscale photonic template for subsequent infiltration with photo-active and optical nonlinear materials like organic semiconductors and conjugated polymers. Liu et al. fabricated structural colors on polyester fabric based on a photonic crystal structure by self-assembly of monodisperse P(St–MAA) colloidal microspheres via gravitational sedimentation (Fig. 4a and b).103 They investigated the elaborate self-assembly process of the colloidal microspheres on a polyester fabric surface and found that the self-assembly process firstly occurred in the gaps of fibers, then in the fiber surface, and eventually formed the photonic crystal structure with long-range order on polyester fabrics. Gravitational sedimentation is simple and does not have many requirements of experimental equipment, but it is quite time-consuming and it is hard to control the layer numbers and morphology of photonic crystals accurately. Therefore, more deposition methods are investigated.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the surface array in the self-assembly process: (i) P(St–MAA) colloidal microsphere emulsion; (ii) the black polyester fabrics used as the substrate; (iii) self-assembly by heating treatment; (iv) crystallization of microspheres; and (v) photonic crystal structure on polyester fabrics. (b) The FESEM images of polyester-woven fabrics before and after the self-assembly process: (i) the original polyester-woven fabrics (×100); (ii) the surface of polyester-woven fabrics separated from the photonic crystal structure (×100); (iii) the amplified polyester fiber gaps of (b) (×500); and (iv) the residual photonic crystal structure in the gaps of polyester fibers (×15000). Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from The Textile Institute, Copyright 2015. (c) (i) Self-assembly of multi-layer colloidal arrays through the vertical deposition technique. Reproduced from ref. 1 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016. (ii) Colloidal crystal in the opal structure. (iii) The inverse opal structure produced through infiltration of the opals, and subsequent selective removal of the colloidal spheres. (d) (i) Experimental set up of the EPD process. (ii) Dark-field images of red, green and blue-colored fibers under the microscope. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013. 


3.1.2 Vertical deposition. 
In the vertical deposition method, the substrate is placed in a colloidal microsphere dispersion, the colloidal microsphere is loaded on the substrate surface with the rise of the liquid due to capillary action, and the regular photonic crystal structure is assembled on the fabric surface through the volatilization of the liquid (Fig. 4c).1 Mishchenko et al. prepared multi-layered, colloidal crystal films on topographically patterned substrates via evaporative deposition of polymeric spheres with and without a silicate sol–gel precursor solution directly.104 They demonstrated that colloidal self-assembly can be systematically studied and manipulated with rationally designed micrometer-scale topographical substrates to either form large patterned single crystals, or crystals with a fine-tuned extent of disorder, and to nucleate distinct colloidal domains of a defined size, location, and orientation in a wide range of length-scales. Lin et al. fabricated 3D photonic crystals with a face centered cubic (fcc) structure on soft polyester fabrics via vertical deposition self-assembly, with monodisperse P(St–MAA) microspheres prepared by soap-free emulsion copolymerization.105 The resultant polyester fabrics presented some favorable properties including double-sided coloration effect, clear fabric texture, and soft fabric feel. The structural coloration by vertical deposition self-assembly of P(St–MAA) photonic crystals provides a new strategy for textile coloration without using chemical colorants and shows potential in reducing pollution in current textile dyeing and printing processes.


3.1.3 Electrophoretic deposition. 
Electrophoretic deposition is a typical electrochemical method, which can also be used for the preparation of structural-color fabrics. The group to be deposited is used as one pole of the electrophoresis cell, and then a platinum sheet is placed in the electrophoresis cell as the counter electrode. The two poles of the electrophoresis cell are respectively connected to the primary cell. With the help of an external electric field, the charged colloidal particles move in a certain direction and deposit on the surface of the substrate to form a structural-color layer. Zhou et al. fabricated structural-color fibers using different sized PS nanospheres via electrophoretic deposition on conductive carbon fiber surfaces (Fig. 4d).106 The outer layer of the core–shell colloidal fibers consisted of fcc domains without long-range order. This technique is speculated to have potential application in structural coloration and radiation-proof fabrics. Liu et al. fabricated structurally colored fibers by an electrophoretic deposition method under a circinate electric field.107 They further developed a horizontal and continuous process to fabricate a long range structurally colored fiber. The method is a drastic acceleration compared with the gravity sedimentation technique that needs weeks or even months, and it would be fast and facile for the further study of structural color on the surface of the fiber. In comparison with etching, template and phase separation methods, the colloidal self-assembly method is more and more attractive because of its relatively simple steps, low cost and wide application range.
With the advantages of simplicity, universality, low-cost and high efficiency, great progress has been made in the fabrication of structural-color coatings by colloidal assembly methods. However, the production of large-area structural-color coatings with high quality is still very difficult. In addition, the colors are not bright enough. These drawbacks limit the industrial application to a great extent.

3.2 Template
Template methods can be mainly divided into two categories. In many cases, inverse opal structures are fabricated using the opal structure formed by colloidal crystal as templates. It can be regarded as an extension of the self-assembly method. Another significant and commonly used technique is lithography, which is to etch the mask with the help of photoresists, and then transfer the pattern to the target substrate. Lithography is a well-developed technique in the manufacturing of electronic devices. It can also be used to generate structural colors because lithography patterning can directly control the sub-micro-metre structure on the reflecting surface of a dielectric material.

3.2.1 Colloidal crystal-induced assembly. 
Inverse opal structures or 3D ordered macroporous structures can be prepared through self-assembly of photonic crystals by template methods. The most common templates are colloidal crystals arranged by colloidal spheres such as SiO2, PS, PMMA, etc. Materials with a high refractive index (e.g., semiconductor, metal nanoparticles) are filled into the gaps of colloidal spheres repeatedly, and then the template is removed by etching or calcination to obtain the inverse opal structure. The refractive index of the structures is greater than that of the corresponding colloidal crystals, which widens the band gaps.
As is known, to obtain inverse opal structures, the gaps of the opal must be filled uniformly at first. To make the opal structures have complete photonic band gaps, the filled material must have a high refractive index (usually ≥2.8). Besides, according to calculation, when the filling rate is more than 80%, the best band gap can be obtained.108 The common filling methods include a chemical liquid deposition (CLD) method, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method, electrodeposition method, nanocrystalline calcination method, etc. Galusha et al. developed a simple sol–gel chemistry-based opal infiltration method for the fabrication of high-quality planar titania photonic crystals.109 They proposed a new “lift-off/turn-over” backfilling technique in which planar titania inverse opals with a flat and completely open surface were formed without additional processing steps to remove any excess surface coating of the backfilling material (Fig. 5a). Vlasov et al. obtained planar, single-crystalline silicon photonic crystals with sufficiently low defect densities.110 Instead of demonstrating sedimented opals with homogeneous infiltration, they filled planar planar opals using a commercially available low-pressure chemical vapour deposition (LPCVD) furnace that provides complete control of the growth parameters. This technique is in principle well suited to conformal filling of the interstitials of the opal as LPCVD is surface-reaction-limited. Besides, LPCVD is the standard Si deposition technique for the microelectronics industry, which is quite advantageous. Electrodeposition should also be an ideal way to fill topologically complex structures because it starts from deep within the structures and then grows out towards the exposed surfaces. Braun et al. obtained microporous CdSe structures by potentiostatic deposition in the interstitial space of a polystyrene colloidal template (Fig. 5b).111 Prakash et al. fabricated CdSe photonic crystals by the electrochemical growth of CdSe through the interstitial spaces between polymer nano/micro sphere templates.112 Electrochemical deposition has several advantages as the growth is from the bottom and hence ensures complete space filling with high density materials, without any need of further processing.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic showing the “lift-off/turn-over” inverse opal fabrication technique. Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2008. (b) (i) Schematic representation of the electrodeposition experimental set-up. (ii) SEM image of CdSe potentiostatically deposited in the interstitial space of a polystyrene colloidal assembly formed from polystyrene spheres 0.466 mm in diameter. After the electrodeposition, the polystyrene template was fully dissolved with toluene. SCE, standard calomel electrode; ITO, indium tin oxide. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, Copyright 1999. (c) In photolithography, a pattern is transferred from a mask to a photoresist by a curing light; further chemical treatment develops the profiled layer. Reproduced from ref. 1 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016. (d) (i) The patterned structures collapsed in parallel and overlapped each other to form a multilayer configuration, mimicking the butterfly wing structures. (ii) Strong rainbow-type color patterns when the incident collimated white light beam was turned 360° around the vertical axis. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2009. (e) OM images of the pixelated inverse opals prepared to reflect a single color. The inverse opals were templated from the opals composed of silica particles of diameter (i) 343, (ii) 278, or (iii) 249 nm. The insets in each panel show the hexagonal arrays of air cavities on the top surfaces of the pixels. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2014. 


3.2.2 Lithography. 
In the last few years, lithography techniques have been developed quite quickly, especially in the manufacture of integrated circuits and microchips. In essence, lithography is a kind of template method. The general lithography process includes photoresist coating, soft drying, exposure, development, hard drying, etching, photoresist removal and other steps (Fig. 5c).1 With the help of photoresists, which are usually light sensitive polymer materials, the geometric pattern of the photomask is transferred to the substrate. Lee et al. prepared colloidal photonic crystals with high optical transparency and physical rigidity using photocurable colloidal suspensions.113 The colloidal particles dispersed in a photocurable medium crystallized during capillary force-induced infiltration into a slab, and subsequent photopolymerization of the medium permanently solidifies the structures. Moreover, conventional photolithography enables micropatterning of the crystal structures. Siddique et al. fabricated hierarchical photonic nanostructures inspired by blue Morpho butterflies using laser interference lithography (LIL) as a tool.114 The artificial Morpho replicas produced with this technique feature brilliant blue iridescence up to an incident angle of 40°. Moreover, the nanoimprint lithography (NIL) process has attracted more and more attention as the feature sizes of the patterned structures can be as small as 5 nm.115 Because of the adoption of a pattern reproduction technique instead of using complicated photomasks and optical imaging equipment, NIL reduces the cost to a great extent. As a promising next-generation lithography technique, NIL is considered to be one of ten emerging technologies that are likely to change the world.116 Kustandi et al. fabricated butterfly-mimetic photonic nanostructures by shearing large arrays of nanometer-scale structures, which were prepatterned using NIL.117 The overlapping domino-like structures generate a tunable bright iridescent effect similar to that found in natural butterfly wings (Fig. 5d). Furthermore, Ahn et al. developed a high-speed roll-to-roll NIL process to continuously imprint polymer patterns down to a 70 nm feature size on a flexible web.118 The result represented a drastic increase in the process throughput, which addresses one of the bottlenecks in nanopatterning for many practical applications.
Advanced lithography techniques such as interference & holographic lithography,119,120 and electron-beam lithography (EBL) are being developed quickly to meet the requirements of various photonic structures.121 Lithography is believed to be one of the most promising methods in the fabrication of photonic nanostructures. Moreover, lithography techniques are also combined with other techniques such as self-assembly methods to fabricate photonic crystals. Lee et al. prepared multi-colored inverse opal micropatterns by combining the convective assembly of colloidal particles with photolithographic techniques.122 The crystal deposition and photolithography procedures were repeatable and provide a general means for preparing multi-colored micropatterns of inverse opals. With this flexible approach, they pixelated inverse opals with three distinctive squares of red (R), green (G), and blue (B) structural colors, each of which has a different cavity size (Fig. 5e).

3.3 Phase separation methods
The phase separation methods are biologically inspired by the feather barbs of birds. The amorphous packing of submicrometer spheres or tortuous channels composed of β-keratin and air nanostructures found in the feather barbs of birds can produce vibrant structural color without angular dependence.122 According to Durfresne, Prum, et al., feather barbs’ nanostructures are self-assembled by the phased separation of β-keratin from a cellular cytoplasm; the polymerization of β-keratin proves the phase separation within a cell, and the arrest of phase separation is facilitated by the entanglement or cross-linking of β-keratin filaments. As the molecular weight of β-keratin filaments increases, the entropic incentive for mixing drops, and the phase boundary shifts to higher temperatures, with the result of phase separation. Based on the theory above, researchers employed this assumption to fabricate such phase-separated structures by self-assembly approaches for artificial structural-color materials. For example, Takeoka et al. fabricated a self-assembled channel-type porous gel which revealed unexpected tunable structural colors in response to solvent composition and temperature even though the average domain sizes in the porous gel were much larger than the wavelength of visible light.123 The microstructures in the porous gel were self-assembled by phased separation of poly(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate) along with reversible deactivation radical polymerization, the so-called atom transfer radical polymerization. The porous swollen gel changed color reversibly with solvent, covering the whole visible region in response to solvent composition and temperature by means of changes in the wavelength dispersions of the reflective indices of the gel portion and the solvent portion in the pore. Compared with other materials which are difficult to obtain in large-scale production, the structural-color materials generated using the phase-separation methods could be obtained without difficulty, and exhibited brilliant colors. The structurally colored materials prepared by structural color materials should have potential as sensors and monolith systems for reactors and separation.
3.4 Magnetron sputtering
Magnetron sputtering has become the process of choice for the deposition of a wide range of industrially important coatings due to the advantages of simple equipment, easy control, large coating areas, strong adhesion and so on.124 The substrate to be coated represents the anode, while the cathode carries the target, which is eroded due to bombardment by energetic argon ions created in the gas discharge, as shown in Fig. 6a. The atoms move towards the substrate where they form the thin film.125
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustrations of the Ag/Ag2O film by magnetron sputtering. (b) Relationship between deposition time, film thickness and color. (c) Reflectance of the as-prepared samples. (d) Patterns with different structural colors. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (e) Colors of films. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2012. (f) Optical image of different thicknesses. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. (g) Dark field scanning electron transmission electron microscopy image and schematic of a strong interference resonator. (h) Optical micrograph of a resonator (top), resonators with TiAlN thicknesses deposited on stainless steel knife blades (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2018. (i) Reflectance spectra for three typical samples respectively in cyan, yellow, and magenta color. The insets show the photographic images of these samples. (j) The full-color palettes obtained in this study by varying volume filling fractions and nanowire lengths. (k) Chromaticity coordinates of all samples in the CIE 1931 color space. (l) Optical graphs of structural color samples fabricated on the rigid (the left panel) or flexible (the right panel) substrate. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2020. 
Ag has higher reflectance than most materials in broadband visible and infrared light absorption, while Ag2O is almost transparent in the broadband infrared and visible light spectra. Thus, Zhang et al.126 deposited Ag/Ag2O bilayer films on polyester fabrics using Ag as a reflective substrate and Ag2O as an anti-reflective coating (Fig. 6a). By controlling the thickness of the Ag2O films deposited onto the fabric samples, a series of fabrics with different colors could be obtained. (Fig. 6b). From the spectral reflectance (Fig. 6c), the reflectance region was mainly distributed from 530 nm to 700 nm and the reflectance was extremely low in the blue spectrum range when the thickness of samples was 10 nm. As shown in Fig. 6d, fabric samples were masked with cardboard to produce the word and the targets were sputtered onto them with varying durations of time to create different patterned colors.
Color diversity is an important prerequisite for the wide use of structural colors. Chung et al.127 developed a process using the combination of a silica microsphere base layer and directional deposition of a dielectric multilayer to produce a multilayered ridge's structure. As shown in Fig. 6e, the structure can be folded repeatedly in half, yet retains the bright color and angle independent iridescence of the encased multilayer thin film. Shi et al.128 controlled the deposition time to change the thickness of AlN color films on Si wafers during reactive magnetron sputtering from an Al target in an Ar/N2 atmosphere. As the thickness increases from 57 nm to 165 nm, the interference effect takes place between the film and the Si wafer, resulting in a full color spectrum of purple, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange and red. When the thickness is between 165 nm and 281 nm, the same color with higher saturation and brightness repeats in the same sequence because of the integer multiple changes of the optical path difference in the film/wafer system (Fig. 6f). Schnabel et al.129 fabricated TiN and TiAlN coating with magnetron sputtering (Fig. 6g). Although only several nanometers thick, the TiAlN coating on TiN severely alters the coupling of light to the structure, manifesting in structural coloration. By changing the coating thickness via growth or polishing, vivid structural color spanning can be observed, as shown in Fig. 6h.
Plasma structural colors, as environmentally friendly substitutes for traditional pigments and dyes, have the advantages of high efficiency, long-term stability and non-photobleaching. Hu et al.130 proposed and demonstrated a novel structural color design, composed of an Ag nanowire array/SiO2 composite metamaterial layer (as building block), dielectric gap layer, and metal mirror, all of which were successively deposited by magnetron sputtering. By setting different Ag NWs filling fractions by means of changing the operation power of the Ag target, three typical vivid colors (cyan, yellow, and magenta) were successfully created with different reflectance spectra (Fig. 6i). With the help of microstructure modulation (nanowire filling fraction, length) in the building block layer, or/and stacked structure design (tri- or four-layer), a wide gamut plasmonic color palette was successfully constructed and shown in Fig. 6j. Except for the black color, all the color reflectance data are transformed into the CIE 1931 color space, as shown in Fig. 6k. This scheme can be used for flexible substrates. As shown in Fig. 6l, both the rigid and flexible substrates show vivid colors.
3.5 Atomic layer deposition
Atomic layer deposition was created by Tuomo Suntola to fabricate electroluminescent (EL) flat panel displays in Finland, starting in the 1970s.131 With the rise of the semiconductor industry and the increasing demands on various component sizes and integration, ALD technology reached a golden period of development in the 1990s. Most ALD processes are based on binary reaction sequences where two surface reactions occur and deposit a binary compound film. The two reactions may proceed in a sequential fashion to deposit a thin film with atomic level control if each of the two processes are self-limiting.132 Up to now, ALD has been recognized as one of the most efficient and promising approaches due to its high efficiency, precise and simple thickness control, and excellent conformability to the sophisticated surfaces.
The Morpho menelaus butterflies living in rainforests, in which most species exhibit a uniform blue color, are colorful when their wings are illuminated by light. Liu et al.133 observed that the “Christmas-tree” nanostructures on butterfly wings were responsible for the formation of structural colors though SEM (Fig. 7a(i)) and TEM (Fig. 7a(ii)). By microscope, the nearly transparent cover scales in a greenish hue and the highly reflective ground scales with a blue color can be discerned (Fig. 7a(iii)). ALD is used to replicate such a structure (Fig. 7a(iv and v)). From Fig. 7a(vi), it can be seen that the scales appear green after 200 cycles of deposition of Al2O3. Similarly, Rodriguez et al.,134 inspired by butterfly wings, coated ZnO on M. sulkowskyi wings by ALD at low temperatures (<150 °C). Fig. 7b shows the highly conformal thin films in different scales by ALD that perfectly preserve the Morpho nanostructures, demonstrating the exceptional ability of ALD as a biological template method. The structural coloration can be precisely manipulated by tuning the thickness of the ZnO coating (Fig. 7c).
 Fig. 7  (a) Photograph of M. menelaus. (i) SEM image, (ii) TEM image and (iii) optical images of M. menelaus wings; (iv) SEM image, (v) TEM image and (vi) optical images of coated M. menelaus wings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images of films at (i) 10000×, (ii) 50000×, and (iii) 250000× magnification. (c) Optical images of the Morpho wing with varying ALD thickness. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. (d) SEM images of (i) PAM and (ii) PAM after the processes of ALD. (iii) Reflectance of different thickness samples and the inset image displays the colors of the samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. (e) Schematic illustration of an Al2O3-coated PtYAl nanomaterial. (f) Photographs of vibrant colors and the continuous color change with increasing coat thickness. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. (n) Models of (i) conductive E-textile and (ii) colored E-textile. (p) Photographs showing the coloring of the corresponding TiO2 layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. (q) Schematic illustrations of fabrication multicolored CFFs using the ALD and the mechanism for deposition of the TiO2 layer on CFFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. 
Yang et al.135 used a method with a template and ALD. The porous alumina membrane (PAM) template was prepared firstly, where the ordered pore arrays could be observed clearly (Fig. 7d(i)). Then, TiO2 was deposited on PAM to adjust the reflectance index (Fig. 7d(ii)). As shown in Fig. 7d(iii), tuning color could be achieved by varying the deposition thickness. As the thickness increases, the reflectance curve moves toward a long wavelength with the displaying color accordingly tuned with the pore size fixed. Galinski et al.136 developed an approach based on large-scale network metamaterials in the same way, which combined dealloyed subwavelength structures at the nanoscale with lossless, ultra-thin dielectric coatings, dealloying to assemble a honeycomb nanoscale metallic network with controllable features firstly and then coating an ultra-thin layer of Al2O3 by ALD (Fig. 7e). By changing the coating thickness, the formation of a multitude of colors spanning from yellow, orange, and red to blue can be observed (Fig. 7f).
Recently, wearable electronics has been the focus of attention. Conductive textiles, called E-textiles, play an important role (Fig. 7g(i)). Khan et al.137 coated Pt, Al2O3 and TiO2 respectively on commercial E-textiles (Fig. 7g(ii)) and a silicon (Si) substrate was used as the reference material. From Fig. 7g(iii), it is evident that the color of the TiO2-coated Pt/Si samples changed successively as the layer thickness increased. Chen et al.138 proposed a feasible, environmentally friendly method that deposited a TiO2 layer on dye-inert CFFs to produce color. Structural colors spanning different color categories with vibrant and uniform hues can be precisely regulated simply by varying the thickness of the TiO2 coatings (Fig. 7h).
4. Application
Based on these methods, researchers have made a lot of effort to explore applications of structural colors, especially in displays, anticounterfeiting and wearable electronics. In this part, we summarize three main applications of structural colors and discuss their potential applications in the future.139–141
4.1 Displays
Structural-color materials are very promising candidates for optical displays which provide color images by reflecting the selected wavelengths of ambient illumination, instead of using active light-emitting elements.142–144 Xu et al. designed and demonstrated a low-loss dielectric metasurface-enabled brightness-tunable full-color nanopainting, and reproduced the famous artwork “girl with a pearl earring”, mimicking the vivid visual impact and texture of an oil-painting.145 The metasurface consisted of a periodic arrangement of TiO2 nanopillars which was supported on a SiO2 substrate with spatial variation of the dimension and orientation, which, respectively, determined the hue and brightness of the output colors (Fig. 8a and b). And then, electron beam lithography together with atomic layer deposition of TiO2 and dry etching were employed to realize the metasurface patterns (Fig. 8c and f). By encoding the brightness and color information into the spatially varying nanopillars, the nanoprinted image enabled photorealistic color presentation and stereoscopic impression. In addition to the photorealistic full-color nanopainting, Wu et al. demonstrated smart, energy-efficient, and tunable retroreflective structural-color films that were especially suitable for nighttime traffic safety and advertisement display applications.146 They embedded a monolayer of polymer microspheres on the sticky side of transparent tape to form an interferometric structure on the surface of air-cushioned microspheres, which could lead to unique structural colors that remained non-iridescent under coaxial illumination and viewing conditions, but appeared iridescent under noncoaxial illumination and viewing conditions. To demonstrate the practical application of these retroreflective structural-color films, they further fabricated a traffic sign using the retroreflective structural-color films for nighttime traffic safety application as an example and placed it on the roadside at a height of 1.7 m. They then simulated a typical nighttime traffic scene where a vehicle was moving forward with its headlights on while a pedestrian was walking toward the traffic sign, as illustrated in Fig. 8e. The driver could see a luminous and stable colorful traffic signal at distances of 80, 50 and 30 m (Fig. 8f–h). In contrast, for the moving pedestrian, the angle between their line of sight and the axis of the headlight illumination of the traffic sign varied with the position of the moving vehicle. The angle increased slowly when the vehicle was far from the sign and more rapidly as the vehicle came closer to the sign. Therefore, the pedestrian could see a constant color signal when the vehicle was far away but a changing color signal when the vehicle was close by (see Fig. 8f–k for when the vehicle is 80, 50, and 30 m away, respectively). Besides, they used nine polyacrylate-coated triangle plexiglass plates fabricated by precoating a sticky layer on one side of a transparent substrate to fabricate new retroreflective structural-color films, which could exhibit a variety of colors including violet, orange, blue, sky blue, yellow, bluish green, magenta, green, and orange-red under normal illumination and viewing conditions (Fig. 8l0–l15). Such color-changing features could be used in nighttime devices to enable unique smart display functionalities. Zarzar et al. created structural coloration via interference occurring when light undergoes multiple total internal reflections at microscale interfaces.147 They found the key requirements to generate this effect were: (1) an interfacial refractive index contrast that supported total internal reflection, and (2) a microscale geometry that supported multiple trajectories for total internal reflection of light for specific directions of light incidence and observation. They used this optical effect to create structural coloration within a wide range of materials and geometries including sessile droplets, biphasic droplets, solid particles and polymeric microstructures with both curved and flat sides. By introducing a light-responsive azobenzene surfactant, they were able to use ultraviolet and blue light to photo-pattern the droplet morphologies and create reflective colored images which could be of interest for use in sensors or displays.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematics of the full-color nanopainting generation setup which was based on a single TiO2 nanopillar supported by an SiO2 substrate. (b) The color printing of “girl with a pearl earring”. (c) Optical image of the fabricated pattern in reflection mode without any polarizers. (d) Scanning electron micrograph of the highlighted area in (c). Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Optical Society of America, copyright 2020. (e) A schematic model of a typical nighttime traffic scene where a vehicle is moving forward with its headlights on while a pedestrian is walking toward the traffic sign. (f)–(h) Photographs of the pedestrian's view of the traffic sign when the distance between the vehicle and the sign is 80 m (f), 50 m (g), and 30 m (h). (i)–(k) Photographs of the driver's view of the traffic sign at distances of 80 m (i), 50 m (j), and 30 m (k). (m0)–(m15) Wide variety of colors formed on polyacrylate-coated plexiglass plates. The photographs were taken normal to the sample surfaces and at an illumination angle from 0° (l0) to 15° (l15) at about 1° intervals. Scale bars, 50 μm (b), 100 μm (c), 50 μm (d), 30 cm (f to l), and 4 cm (l0 to l15). Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2019. 
4.2 Anti-counterfeiting
Anti-counterfeiting is a technique of identifying the authentication of products, which is essential for many concerns including economic security and human health.148 Among many kinds of anti-counterfeiting materials, structural-color materials are the most prominent ones due to their stable and easy-perceivable optical signals. In addition, structural-color materials also have the advantages of being able to design arbitrary patterns graphically, engineered on different substrates at a relatively low cost, benefiting from a variety of manufacturing techniques and so on. These features have made structural-color materials excellent choices for anti-counterfeiting applications. For example, Gu et al. proposed colloidal photonic crystal patterns with vapor-revealed implicit images by inkjet printing mesoporous colloidal nanoparticle ink on both rigid and soft substrates.149 As shown in Fig. 9a, latex droplets of mesoporous silica nanoparticles or solid silica nanoparticles were inkjet printed onto a substrate with a designed pattern. Implicit images could be revealed upon exposure to certain vapors because of the strong vapor-responsive color shifting ability of the mesoporous silica nanoparticles. Zhao et al. demonstrated an innovative three-dimensional dynamic micromolding approach for generating novel photonic barcodes.150 They integrated an immobilized positive microcylindrical-array substrate and a complementary negative microhole-array mold with flexible positions to generate photonic crystal microparticles. One-dimensional sequences or two-dimensional arrays were designed by adjusting the microhole-array mold one by one in the vertical direction to assemble structurally different colors of micro-particles into its vertical holes. Due to the unique characteristics of photonic crystal microparticles, the barcodes were endowed with a specific structural color illuminated by full spectrum reflected light. As illustrated in Fig. 9b, it showed the applicability of this photon barcode on a series of complex substrates, including drug packaging, credit cards, banknotes, coins and keys. Moreover, Clark et al. showed a new approach to high-density data encoding using full color, dual-state plasmonic nanopixels, doubling the amount of information that could be stored in a unit-area.151 Based on the resonant photon-electron interaction, each aperture could exhibit two arbitrary color signals and then high-density QR codes were fabricated, which possessed optically readable outputs with polarization switching ability.
 Fig. 9  (a) (i) Scheme of the ink-jet printing process. (ii) Responsive color change of a printed pattern upon being saturated in EtOH vapor. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from American Chemistry Society, copyright 2014. (b) (i)–(v) The anti-counterfeiting capability of the photonic barcodes: the top line shows different substrates used in the anti-counterfeiting experiments observed on a macro level; the middle and bottom lines show the specific structural colors of the barcodes observed by a microscope device under a halogen cold light source. Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. (c) (i) Magnified view of a device operating in the blue region of the spectrum, without and with integrated patterns of dots that have fixed colors for calibration. (ii) Image of a device immediately after local heating at the center of the array. (iii) Optical images showing the device on the wrist for a reactive test. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Spring Nature, copyright 2014. (d) Photographs showing the rGO–IOAC device attached on the neck with different directions (left and right) and angles (0°, 45° and 90°). Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. (e) Scheme of the fabrication process of the biohybrid autonomous color tuning film composed of synthetic inverse opal hydrogels topped with a layer of live cardiomyocyte tissues. Scale bars, 1 mm (a), 1 mm (b), 2 cm, 1 cm, 3 cm (c (i–iii)). Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2018. 
4.3 Wearable electronics
A new class of devices with various functionalities and amenabilities is essential for the human bodies.152 Wearable electronics are emerging as a platform for next-generation, human-friendly, electronic devices.153–155 In general, these systems should have the advantages of being light-weight, long-lasting, flexible, comfortable, etc. In particular, structural color materials have been designed to meet these requirements. Gao et al. developed a photonic device for thermal generation by combining colorimetric temperature indicators with wireless stretchable electronics (Fig. 9c).156 The device was made by patterning thermochromic liquid crystals into pixelated arrays on a stretchable elastomer substrate. In addition to thermal generation, Gu et al. developed a multifunctional, wearable sensor based on a reduced oxide graphene (rGO) film onto a porous inverse opal acetylcellulose (IOAC) film to monitor human motion and sweat.157 The rGO was prepared by simple drop-casting and reduction, which could be seen as a strain-sensing layer for monitoring human motion via its resistance change. Furthermore, the porous IOAC film was fabricated by the replication of a silica opal template, which was used for sweat ion concentration analysis through a color shift caused by the refractive index change. They demonstrated that the sensors could quantitatively monitor different degrees of the human body motions and were suitable for various parts in the human body such as the finger, wrist, neck, etc. For example, as shown in Fig. 9d, the rGO/IOAC sensor was mounted on a person's nape for continuous monitoring of the sophisticated head-moving process. Inspired by the structural color shift mechanism of chameleons, which occurs through the control of dermal iridophores via active tuning of their guanine nanocrystal lattice photonic band gap, Zhao et al. described structural color materials with an autonomic regulation capability, which were produced by assembling engineered cardiomyocyte tissues on a synthetic inverse opal hydrogel film (Fig. 9e).158 Due to the surface microgroove structure and high biocompatibility of the hydrogel, the assembled cardiomyocytes were able to recover their autonomic beating ability with guided cellular orientation and improved contraction performance on the elastic films. Furthermore, they constructed 2D self-regulating structural color patterns and 3D dynamic Morpho butterflies based on these materials which proved that biohybrid living structural color hydrogels are perfect for the design of intelligent actuators and soft robotic devices.
4.4 Other applications
In addition to the three applications, structural colors have attracted great attention in sensors, smart windows, stealth, printing, etc., because of their unique ability to manipulate the flow of light, causing a number of striking optical effects.21–23 Though there are a lot of obstacles in the application of structural colors, such as high cost, poor durability, etc., we believe that the progress in bio-inspired structural-color materials will boost the performance of structural color devices in the coming years (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the integration of structural color materials with other advanced technologies. 
5. Conclusions and outlook
In the long era of biological evolution, the structural colors of living creatures are designed for various types of biological functions. Natural structural colors also exhibit fascinating features, including various brilliant colors, long-term stability, environmental friendliness, and energy-efficiency. Structural color materials have been widely studied in the past few decades, and great achievements have been made. Herein, we summarized several typical natural structural colors displayed by living organisms derived from various optical phenomena and revised the recent achievements in bioinspired these structures with variable structural colors from the diverse fabrication approach. Current or potential applications of structural colors in extensive areas are also presented in detail.
Although considerable achievements in developing novel structural-color materials have been made by researchers in past years, there are still significant challenges and obstacles that need to be addressed in the development of structural-color materials and technological improvements. First, nature has optimized a series of elaborate structured surfaces and materials with rather mysterious properties over millions of years of evolution, but most of them have never been discovered by scientists. Therefore, the understanding of natural structural coloration and its biological functions is far from enough. Intriguing structural colors in living organisms are composed of different levels of biological macromolecules, cells, tissues, trachea, and systems, which are closely related to multiple-level biological life activities. An in-depth understanding of these behaviors of living organisms is helpful to obtain the implications of coloration-related biological functions other than just visual appearance and then guide the development of novel variable structural-color materials with new functions beyond nature for more commercial applications. With the advanced micro–nano preparation technologies, the more elaborate nanostructures of the colorful creatures can be observed and analyzed in-depth. The related research results are easily spread through the highly-developed technology platform. Undoubtedly, bio-inspired variable structural-color materials will bring a bright future. In addition, the cost, durability, portability, compatibility, recyclability, and scalability of structural colors are still challenges for practical applications, which need to be overcome to close the gap between the experimental products and the practical applications through rational design and processes. Finally, some of the coloration-related nanostructures in natural organisms are very complicated, bringing extremely high complexity for bionics. Therefore, there is an urgent need for multidisciplinary research including chemistry, physics, mathematics, materials science, engineering, and biology to develop novel micro/nano processing manufacturing strategies and then fabricate the bioinspired artificial structural-color materials for various novel devices with special functions and widespread applications. Overall, there are still huge amounts to be explored regarding structural colors before commercialization. We believe that they can take the place of chemical pigments with the continuous development of fundamental science and advanced micro/nanoscale manufacturing technologies, which will undoubtedly achieve unprecedented performance and dramatically drive the potential applications in information, energy, health, environmental resources, and other fields in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was financial supported by the National Key Research Program (2020YFA0210702, 2020YFC2201103), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51903008, 51872156, 22075163, 22005215), Science and Technology Research Project of the Educational Commission of Hubei Province (D20211703), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant 2021M691717), and Open Foundation of State Key Laboratory of Bio-Fibers and Eco-Textiles from Qingdao University (Grant No. 2020105).
Notes and references
A. G. Dumanli and T. Savin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6698–6724 RSC .
A. R. Parker, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., 2000, 2, R15–R28 CrossRef .

          S. Kinoshita, Structural Colors in the Realm of Nature, World Scientific, Singapore,  2008 Search PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2059–2062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Parker and H. E. Townley, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 347–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Land, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., 1972, 24, 75–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Srinivasarao, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1935–1962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Vigneron and P. Simonis, Phys. B, 2012, 407, 4032–4036 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Wilts, K. Michielsen, H. De Raedt and D. G. Stavenga, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2012, 9, 1609–1614 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Noh, S. F. Liew, V. Saranathan, S. G. Mochrie, R. O. Prum, E. R. Dufresne and H. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2871–2880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. O. Prum, E. R. Dufresne, T. Quinn and K. Waters, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2009, 6(Suppl 2), S253–S265 CAS .
A. R. Parker, Mater. Today, 2002, 5, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vukusic and J. R. Sambles, Nature, 2003, 424, 852–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Parker, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2004, 362, 2709–2720 CrossRef PubMed .
L. P. Lee and R. Szema, Science, 2005, 310, 1148–1150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, S. W. Wang, X. Liu, R. Ji, Z. Li, X. Chen, Y. Chen and W. Lu, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, A92–A103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, S.-W. Wang, X. Liu, R. Ji, L. Yu, X. Chen and W. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7353–7360 RSC .
H. Nam, K. Song, D. Ha and T. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, R. S. Hegde, I. Y. Phang, H. K. Lee and X. Y. Ling, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 282–288 RSC .
J. Yao, C. Zhang, H. Liu, Q. Dai, L. Wu, S. Lan, A. V. Gopal, V. A. Trofimov and T. M. Lysak, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 7625–7632 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tian, J. Zhang, J. Yu, J. Wu, J. Zhang, J. He and F. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703548 CrossRef .
M. Song, X. Li, M. Pu, Y. Guo, K. Liu, H. Yu, X. Ma and X. Luo, Nanophotonics, 2018, 7, 323–331 Search PubMed .
Y. Gao, C. Huang, C. Hao, S. Sun, L. Zhang, C. Zhang, Z. Duan, K. Wang, Z. Jin, N. Zhang, A. V. Kildishev, C. W. Qiu, Q. Song and S. Xiao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8847–8854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Abuturab, Appl. Opt., 2012, 51, 3006–3016 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yoshioka, E. Nakamura and S. Kinoshita, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2007, 76, 013801 CrossRef .
R. Maia, J. V. Caetano, S. N. Bao and R. H. Macedo, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2009, 6(Suppl 2), S203–S211 CAS .
A. E. Seago, P. Brady, J. P. Vigneron and T. D. Schultz, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2009, 6(Suppl 2), S165–S184 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Li, L. Gao, J. Qiu, L. Heng, B. Z. Tang and L. Jiang, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2014, 15, 507–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Gu, R. Hu, J. W. Y. Lam, D. Zhang and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 5692–5698 RSC .
Z. Cai, L. A. Luck, D. Punihaole, J. D. Madura and S. A. Asher, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4557–4562 RSC .
J. Li, S. Dong, J. Tong, P. Zhu, G. Diao and Z. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 284–287 RSC .
O. Poncelet, G. Tallier, P. Simonis, A. Cornet and L. A. Francis, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2015, 10, 026004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Xiong, L. Shan, L. Zheng, T. Wei and Q. Yan, Small, 2015, 11, 4910–4921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Shalaev, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 41–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Do, J. H. Park, B. Y. Hwang, S.-M. Lee, B.-K. Ju and K. C. Choi, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 133–138 CrossRef .
G. Si, X. Jiang, J. Lv, Q. Gu and F. Wang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 299 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Si, Q. Wang, J. Lv, L. Miao, F. Wang and S. Peng, Mater. Lett., 2014, 128, 373–375 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Clausen, E. Hojlund-Nielsen, A. B. Christiansen, S. Yazdi, M. Grajower, H. Taha, U. Levy, A. Kristensen and N. A. Mortensen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4499–4504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Hooke, Micrographia: or some physiological descriptions of minute bodies made by magnifying glasses with observations and inquiries thereupon, Dover, New York,  1961 Search PubMed .

          N. Isaac, Opticks, or a treatise of the reflections, refractions, inflections & colors of light, Courier Corporation,  1952 Search PubMed .
F. Frank and H. Ruska, Naturwissenschaften, 1939, 27, 229–230 CrossRef .
T. Anderson and A. Richards, J. Appl. Phys., 1942, 13, 748–758 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gentil, Zoomorphology, 1942, 38, 344–355 Search PubMed .
C. Greenewalt, W. Brandt and D. Friel, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1960, 50, 1005–1013 CrossRef .
A. Neville and S. Caveney, Biol. Rev., 1969, 44, 531–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Land, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., 1972, 24, 75–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gur, B. A. Palmer, B. Leshem, D. Oron, P. Fratzl, S. Weiner and L. Addadi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12426–12430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Stavenga, B. D. Wilts, H. L. Leertouwer and T. Hariyama, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2011, 366, 709–723 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Holt, A. M. Sweeney, S. Johnsen and D. E. Morse, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2011, 8, 1386–1399 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Clausen, E. Hojlund-Nielsen, A. B. Christiansen, S. Yazdi, M. Grajower, H. Taha, U. Levy, A. Kristensen and N. A. Mortensen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4499–4504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, X. Yu, K. Zhou, X. Yang and Y. Yu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 214 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. K. Wu, A. E. Hollowell, C. Zhang and L. J. Guo, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1194 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Tan, L. Zhang, D. Zhu, X. M. Goh, Y. M. Wang, K. Kumar, C. W. Qiu and J. K. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4023–4029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kumar, H. Duan, R. S. Hegde, S. C. Koh, J. N. Wei and J. K. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 557–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mihi, M. Ocaña and H. Míguez, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2244–2249 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gao, C. Huang, D. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Guo and J. Wei, Dyes Pigm., 2018, 148, 108–117 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Shang, F. Bian, X. Zhang, S. Wang, M. Zhou and Y. Zhao, Small, 2019, 15, e1900056 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shang, Y. Cheng and Y. Zhao, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 7964–8040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qin, Y. Huang, Y. Li, M. Su, B. Chen, H. Sun, P. Yong, C. Ye, F. Li and Y. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6911–6914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, L. Xu, M. Yang, X. Chen, X. Chen and W. Hong, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8918–8926 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. C. Almeida, J. P. Canejo, S. N. Fernandes, C. Echeverria, P. L. Almeida and M. H. Godinho, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1703655 CrossRef PubMed .
H. M. Whitney, M. Kolle, P. Andrew, L. Chittka, U. Steiner and B. J. Glover, Science, 2009, 323, 130–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, X. Yan, X. Yao, L. Xu, K. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Yang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2213–2217 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Parker, R. C. McPhedran, D. R. McKenzie, L. C. Botten and N. A. Nicorovici, Nature, 2001, 409, 36–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Marlow, Muldarisnur, P. Sharifi, R. Brinkmann and C. Mendive, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6212–6233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Darragh, A. J. Gaskin, B. C. Terrell and J. V. Sanders, Nature, 1966, 209, 13–16 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Parker, V. L. Welch, D. Driver and N. Martini, Nature, 2003, 426, 786–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, B. Bhushan and J. Tong, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 14862–14889 RSC .
S. Kinoshita, Cell Tech., 2003, 22, 1113–1119 Search PubMed .
S. Kinoshita and S. Yoshioka, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2005, 6, 1442–1459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Onslow, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 1921, 211, 1–74 Search PubMed .
C. W. Mason, J. Phys. Chem., 1927, 31, 321–354 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Nevillle, J. Insect Physiol., 1977, 23, 1267–1274 CrossRef .
M. Kurachi, Y. Takaku, Y. Komiya and T. Hariyama, Naturwissenschaften, 2002, 89, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hariyama, Y. Takaku, M. Hironaka, H. Horiguchi, Y. Komiya and M. Kurachi, Forma, 2002, 17, 123–132 Search PubMed .
A. R. Parker, D. R. McKenzie and S. T. Ahyong, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 1998, 265, 861–867 Search PubMed .
R. O. Prum, R. Torres, C. Kovach, S. Williamson and S. M. Goodman, J. Exp. Biol., 1999, 202, 3507–3522 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. Lee, Iridescent blue plants, Am. Sci., 1997, 85, 56–63 Search PubMed .
K. S. Gould and D. W. Lee, Am. J. Bot., 1996, 83, 45–50 CrossRef .
V. P. Bykov, Quantum Electron., 1975, 4, 861–871 Search PubMed .
S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2486–2489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kinoshita, S. Yoshioka and J. Miyazaki, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2008, 71, 076401 CrossRef .
N. F. Hadley, Science, 1979, 203, 367–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. McClain, M. K. Seely and N. F. Hadley, Ecology, 1985, 66, 112–118 CrossRef .
C. W. Mason, Entomol. News, 1929, 45, 52–56 Search PubMed .
J. Aizenberg, A. Tkachenko, S. Weiner, L. Addadi and G. Hendler, Nature, 2001, 412, 819–822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Eliason and M. D. Shawkey, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 21284–21292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cong, B. Yu and X. S. Zhao, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 12799–12808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Colomer, P. Simonis, A. Bay, P. Cloetens, H. Suhonen, M. Rassart, C. Vandenbem and J. P. Vigneron, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2012, 85, 011907 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zi, X. Yu, Y. Li, X. Hu, C. Xu, X. Wang, X. Liu and R. Fu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 12576–12578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Lu, H. Yin, X. Yu, X. Liu and J. Zi, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 72, 010902 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fu, C. A. Tippets, E. U. Donev and R. Lopez, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2016, 8, 758–775 Search PubMed .
A. Argyros, S. Manos, M. C. J. Large, D. R. McKenzie, G. C. Cox and D. M. Dwarte, Micron, 2002, 33, 483–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simonis and J. P. Vigneron, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2011, 83, 011908 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. Gu, Q. Liu, H. Su, T. Fan and D. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19767–19780 RSC .

          H. Ghiradella, Microscopic anatomy of invertebrates,  1998, vol. 11, pp. 257–287 Search PubMed .
H. Ghiradella, Appl. Opt., 2010, 30, 3492–3500 CrossRef PubMed .
T. M. Trzeciak, B. D. Wilts, D. G. Stavenga and P. Vukusic, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 8877–8890 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, G. J. Liu, Y. J. Wu, Q. G. Fan and J. Z. Shao, Fibers Polym., 2014, 15, 1112–1122 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, G. Q. Zhuang, Y. R. Jia, Q. G. Fan and J. Z. Shao, Text. Res. J., 2015, 85, 785–794 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Shao, Y. Zhang, G. D. Fu, L. Zhou and Q. G. Fan, J. Text. Inst., 2014, 105, 938–943 CrossRef CAS .
D. Comoretto, R. Grassi, F. Marabelli and L. C. Andreani, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2003, 23, 61–65 CrossRef .
G. J. Liu, J. Z. Shao, Y. Zhang, Y. J. Wu, C. C. Wang, Q. G. Fan and L. Zhou, J. Text. Inst., 2015, 106, 1293–1305 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mishchenko, B. Hatton, M. Kolle and J. Aizenberg, Small, 2012, 8, 1904–1911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Liu, L. Zhou, Y. J. Wu, C. C. Wang, Q. G. Fan and J. Z. Shao, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 41750 Search PubMed .
N. Zhou, A. Zhang, L. Shi and K. Q. Zhang, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 116–120 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Liu, Q. H. Zhang, H. Z. Wang and Y. G. Li, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6917–6922 RSC .
J. Luo, D. Qu, A. Tikhonov, J. Bohn and S. A. Asher, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 345, 131–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Galusha, C. K. Tsung, G. D. Stucky and M. H. Bartl, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4925–4930 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Vlasov, X. Z. Bo, J. C. Sturm and D. J. Norris, Nature, 2001, 414, 289–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Braun and P. Wiltzius, Nature, 1999, 402, 603–604 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Prakash, R. Singh, A. Kumar and R. K. Mishra, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 1744–1747 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Lee, T. S. Shim, H. Hwang, S. M. Yang and S. H. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2684–2690 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Siddique, R. Hunig, A. Faisal, U. Lemmer and H. Holscher, Opt. Mater. Express, 2015, 5, 996–1005 CrossRef .
T. Balla, S. M. Spearing and A. Monk, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 174001 CrossRef .
L. J. Guo, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2004, 37, R123–R141 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Kustandi, H. Y. Low, J. H. Teng, I. Rodriguez and R. Yin, Small, 2009, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Ahn and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2044–2049 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jang, C. K. Ullal, M. Maldovan, T. Gorishnyy, S. Kooi, C. Y. Koh and E. L. Thomas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3027–3041 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Wong, M. C. Gupta, B. Robins and T. L. Levendusky, Opt. Lett., 2003, 28, 2342–2344 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Takeoka, Polym. J., 2016, 49, 301–308 CrossRef .
S. Y. Lee, S. H. Kim, H. Hwang, J. Y. Sim and S. M. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2391–2397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kumano, T. Seki, M. Ishii, H. Nakamura and Y. Takeoka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4012–4015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Kelly and R. D. Arnell, Vacuum, 2000, 56, 159–172 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bräuer, B. Szyszka, M. Vergöhl and R. Bandorf, Vacuum, 2010, 84, 1354–1359 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, S. Jiang, M. Cai, H. Zhao, F. Pan, D. Miao and X. Ning, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 13342–13349 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chung, S. Yu, C. J. Heo, J. W. Shim, S. M. Yang, M. G. Han, H. S. Lee, Y. Jin, S. Y. Lee, N. Park and J. H. Shin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2375–2379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, X. Yu, C. Nie, F. Li and S. Zhang, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 21546–21553 CrossRef CAS .
V. Schnabel, R. Spolenak, M. Doebeli and H. Galinski, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800656 CrossRef .
H. Hu, W. Gao, R. Zang, J. Gao, S. Tang, X. Li, L. Liang, H. Zhang and H. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002287 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Puurunen, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2014, 20, 332–344 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. George, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 111–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Huang, X. Hu, B. Dong, W. Shi, Y. Xie and X. Ye, Opt. Commun., 2011, 284, 2376–2381 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Rodriguez, S. P. Agarwal, S. An, E. Kazyak, D. Das, W. Shang, R. Skye, T. Deng and N. P. Dasgupta, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4614–4621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, W. Shen, Y. Zhang, Z. Ye, X. Zhang, K. Li, X. Fang and X. Liu, Appl. Opt., 2014, 53, A142–A147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Galinski, G. Favraud, H. Dong, J. S. T. Gongora, G. Favaro, M. Dobeli, R. Spolenak, A. Fratalocchi and F. Capasso, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e16233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Khan, H. G. Kim, J. S. Park, J. W. Shin, C. T. Nguyen and H. B. Lee, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 2794–2801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, H. Yang, K. Li, B. Deng, Q. Li, X. Liu, B. Dong, X. Xiao, D. Wang, Y. Qin, S. M. Wang, K. Q. Zhang and W. Xu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10330–10336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shang, W. Zhang, K. Xu and Y. Zhao, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 945–958 RSC .
J. H. Lee, B. Fan, T. D. Samdin, D. A. Monteiro, M. S. Desai, O. Scheideler, H. E. Jin, S. Kim and S. W. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3632–3641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Park, S. Yu, S. H. Cho, H. S. Kang, Y. Kim, M. J. Kim, H. Eoh, C. Park, B. Jeong, S. W. Lee, D. Y. Ryu, J. Huh and C. Park, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, 328–339 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lee, S. H. Kim, H. Hwang, J. Y. Sim and S. M. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2391–2397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gu, Y. Zhao, Y. Cheng, Z. Xie, F. Rong, J. Li, B. Wang, D. Fu and Z. Gu, Small, 2013, 9, 2266–2271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Arbabi, E. Arbabi, Y. Horie, S. M. Kamali and A. Faraon, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 415–420 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huo, M. Song, W. Zhu, C. Zhang, L. Chen, H. J. Lezec, Y. Lu, A. Agrawal and T. Xu, Optica, 2020, 7, 1171–1172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fan, J. Zeng, Q. Gan, D. Ji, H. Song, W. Liu, L. Shi and L. Wu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw8755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Goodling, S. Nagelberg, B. Kaehr, C. H. Meredith, S. I. Cheon, A. P. Saunders, M. Kolle and L. D. Zarzar, Nature, 2019, 566, 523–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Shang, Y. Yu, F. Fu, Y. Zhao and Z. Gu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704569 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Bai, Z. Y. Xie, W. Wang, C. W. Yuan, Y. J. Zhao, Z. D. Mu, Q. F. Zhong and Z. Z. Gu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11094–11100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, L. Shang, H. Wang, H. Zhang, M. Zou and Y. Zhao, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 979–983 RSC .
E. Heydari, J. R. Sperling, S. L. Neale and A. W. Clark, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701866 CrossRef .
O. Bubnova, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tricoli, N. Nasiri and S. De, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605271 CrossRef .
W. Zeng, L. Shu, Q. Li, S. Chen, F. Wang and X.-M. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5310–5336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Q. Trung and N.-E. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4338–4372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, Y. Zhang, V. Malyarchuk, L. Jia, K. I. Jang, R. C. Webb, H. Fu, Y. Shi, G. Zhou, L. Shi, D. Shah, X. Huang, B. Xu, C. Yu, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, Y. F. Lu, J. X. Xiang, M. K. Zhang, Y. J. Zhao, Z. Y. Xie and Z. Z. Gu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2090–2098 RSC .
F. Fu, L. Shang, Z. Chen, Y. Yu and Y. Zhao, Sci. Robot., 2018, 3, eaar8580 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The timeline of structural colors.	 

 	Fig. 2  Typical creatures in nature with structural colors derived from different physical mechanisms. (a) Photographs of the Japanese jewel beetle Chrysochroa fulgidissima at various viewing angles, and corresponding microstructures of the surface and cross-section of an iridescent elytron by SEM. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Wiley, Copyright (2005). (b) Photographs and microstructure of the hairs in the seed-shrimp (ostracod crustacean) Azygocypridina lowryi, the iridescence color was caused by grating diffraction. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from The Royal Society, Copyright (1995). (c) Photographs of male asities Neodrepanis hypoxantha and the nanostructures in light blue caruncle tissue from TEM. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Company of Biologists Ltd, Copyright (1999). (d) Photograph of a peacock tail feather and corresponding SEM images of barbule structures. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, Copyright (2003). (e) Photograph of the weevil Entimus imperialis and corresponding SEM images derived from the 3D natural photonic crystals. Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright (2011). (f) Photograph of a Morpho butterfly and various complex and hierarchical structures in a butterfly wing. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from Taylor & Francis, Copyright (2010).	 

 	Fig. 3  Bioinspired strategies for the design of structural-color materials.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the surface array in the self-assembly process: (i) P(St–MAA) colloidal microsphere emulsion; (ii) the black polyester fabrics used as the substrate; (iii) self-assembly by heating treatment; (iv) crystallization of microspheres; and (v) photonic crystal structure on polyester fabrics. (b) The FESEM images of polyester-woven fabrics before and after the self-assembly process: (i) the original polyester-woven fabrics (×100); (ii) the surface of polyester-woven fabrics separated from the photonic crystal structure (×100); (iii) the amplified polyester fiber gaps of (b) (×500); and (iv) the residual photonic crystal structure in the gaps of polyester fibers (×15000). Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from The Textile Institute, Copyright 2015. (c) (i) Self-assembly of multi-layer colloidal arrays through the vertical deposition technique. Reproduced from ref. 1 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016. (ii) Colloidal crystal in the opal structure. (iii) The inverse opal structure produced through infiltration of the opals, and subsequent selective removal of the colloidal spheres. (d) (i) Experimental set up of the EPD process. (ii) Dark-field images of red, green and blue-colored fibers under the microscope. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic showing the “lift-off/turn-over” inverse opal fabrication technique. Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2008. (b) (i) Schematic representation of the electrodeposition experimental set-up. (ii) SEM image of CdSe potentiostatically deposited in the interstitial space of a polystyrene colloidal assembly formed from polystyrene spheres 0.466 mm in diameter. After the electrodeposition, the polystyrene template was fully dissolved with toluene. SCE, standard calomel electrode; ITO, indium tin oxide. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, Copyright 1999. (c) In photolithography, a pattern is transferred from a mask to a photoresist by a curing light; further chemical treatment develops the profiled layer. Reproduced from ref. 1 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016. (d) (i) The patterned structures collapsed in parallel and overlapped each other to form a multilayer configuration, mimicking the butterfly wing structures. (ii) Strong rainbow-type color patterns when the incident collimated white light beam was turned 360° around the vertical axis. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2009. (e) OM images of the pixelated inverse opals prepared to reflect a single color. The inverse opals were templated from the opals composed of silica particles of diameter (i) 343, (ii) 278, or (iii) 249 nm. The insets in each panel show the hexagonal arrays of air cavities on the top surfaces of the pixels. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustrations of the Ag/Ag2O film by magnetron sputtering. (b) Relationship between deposition time, film thickness and color. (c) Reflectance of the as-prepared samples. (d) Patterns with different structural colors. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (e) Colors of films. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2012. (f) Optical image of different thicknesses. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. (g) Dark field scanning electron transmission electron microscopy image and schematic of a strong interference resonator. (h) Optical micrograph of a resonator (top), resonators with TiAlN thicknesses deposited on stainless steel knife blades (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2018. (i) Reflectance spectra for three typical samples respectively in cyan, yellow, and magenta color. The insets show the photographic images of these samples. (j) The full-color palettes obtained in this study by varying volume filling fractions and nanowire lengths. (k) Chromaticity coordinates of all samples in the CIE 1931 color space. (l) Optical graphs of structural color samples fabricated on the rigid (the left panel) or flexible (the right panel) substrate. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photograph of M. menelaus. (i) SEM image, (ii) TEM image and (iii) optical images of M. menelaus wings; (iv) SEM image, (v) TEM image and (vi) optical images of coated M. menelaus wings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images of films at (i) 10000×, (ii) 50000×, and (iii) 250000× magnification. (c) Optical images of the Morpho wing with varying ALD thickness. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. (d) SEM images of (i) PAM and (ii) PAM after the processes of ALD. (iii) Reflectance of different thickness samples and the inset image displays the colors of the samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. (e) Schematic illustration of an Al2O3-coated PtYAl nanomaterial. (f) Photographs of vibrant colors and the continuous color change with increasing coat thickness. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. (n) Models of (i) conductive E-textile and (ii) colored E-textile. (p) Photographs showing the coloring of the corresponding TiO2 layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. (q) Schematic illustrations of fabrication multicolored CFFs using the ALD and the mechanism for deposition of the TiO2 layer on CFFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematics of the full-color nanopainting generation setup which was based on a single TiO2 nanopillar supported by an SiO2 substrate. (b) The color printing of “girl with a pearl earring”. (c) Optical image of the fabricated pattern in reflection mode without any polarizers. (d) Scanning electron micrograph of the highlighted area in (c). Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Optical Society of America, copyright 2020. (e) A schematic model of a typical nighttime traffic scene where a vehicle is moving forward with its headlights on while a pedestrian is walking toward the traffic sign. (f)–(h) Photographs of the pedestrian's view of the traffic sign when the distance between the vehicle and the sign is 80 m (f), 50 m (g), and 30 m (h). (i)–(k) Photographs of the driver's view of the traffic sign at distances of 80 m (i), 50 m (j), and 30 m (k). (m0)–(m15) Wide variety of colors formed on polyacrylate-coated plexiglass plates. The photographs were taken normal to the sample surfaces and at an illumination angle from 0° (l0) to 15° (l15) at about 1° intervals. Scale bars, 50 μm (b), 100 μm (c), 50 μm (d), 30 cm (f to l), and 4 cm (l0 to l15). Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) (i) Scheme of the ink-jet printing process. (ii) Responsive color change of a printed pattern upon being saturated in EtOH vapor. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from American Chemistry Society, copyright 2014. (b) (i)–(v) The anti-counterfeiting capability of the photonic barcodes: the top line shows different substrates used in the anti-counterfeiting experiments observed on a macro level; the middle and bottom lines show the specific structural colors of the barcodes observed by a microscope device under a halogen cold light source. Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. (c) (i) Magnified view of a device operating in the blue region of the spectrum, without and with integrated patterns of dots that have fixed colors for calibration. (ii) Image of a device immediately after local heating at the center of the array. (iii) Optical images showing the device on the wrist for a reactive test. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Spring Nature, copyright 2014. (d) Photographs showing the rGO–IOAC device attached on the neck with different directions (left and right) and angles (0°, 45° and 90°). Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. (e) Scheme of the fabrication process of the biohybrid autonomous color tuning film composed of synthetic inverse opal hydrogels topped with a layer of live cardiomyocyte tissues. Scale bars, 1 mm (a), 1 mm (b), 2 cm, 1 cm, 3 cm (c (i–iii)). Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the integration of structural color materials with other advanced technologies.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
