Recent advances in hydrogen storage using catalytically and chemically modified graphene nanocomposites  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA05068B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA05068B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22897-22912Recent advances in hydrogen storage using catalytically and chemically modified graphene nanocomposites

        
          
            Rupali 
            Nagar†
a, 
      
        
          
            Bhaghavathi P. 
            Vinayan†
*cd, 
      
        
          
            Sai Smruti 
            Samantaray
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Sundara 
            Ramaprabhu
          
          
        
      b
aApplied Science Department, Symbiosis Institute of Technology, Symbiosis International University, Lavale, Pune-412 115, India
bAlternative Energy and Nanotechnology Lab (AENL), Nano Functional Materials Technology Center (NFMTC), Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, 600036, India
cHelmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU), Helmholtzstraße-11, 89081, Ulm, Germany
dKarlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), PO Box 3640, D-76021, Karlsruhe, Germany. E-mail: vinayan.parambath@kit.edu
Received 
      10th June 2017
    , Accepted 9th October 2017First published on 9th October 2017AbstractThe need for efficient and renewable energy fuels is growing stronger with environmental consciousness, stringent emission norms, rising fossil fuel prices and their depleting stocks. Hydrogen could be a significant replacement for fossil fuels if targets of volumetric and gravimetric densities required for the automobile industry can be met. In this regard, hydrogen economy and hydrogen storage have become thrust areas of research in the past few decades. It is possible to store hydrogen in the solid state as chemically bound hydrogen using metal/alloy nanostructures with favorable adsorption sites. These nanoparticles when dispersed over suitable carbon nanomaterials exhibit better storage capabilities and improved adsorption–desorption kinetics. High surface area carbon supports such as graphene favor good dispersion of catalyst nanoparticles alleviating their agglomeration and modulating the interaction strength between hydrogen atoms and metal nanoparticles by providing pathways for chemi–physisorption of hydrogen in these nanocomposites. In this review, the contribution of chemically modified graphene-based materials and their composites with metal/alloy catalyst nanostructures in the field of hydrogen storage is reviewed and its future outlook discussed.Rupali NagarDr Rupali Nagar is working at the Symbiosis Institute of Technology (SIT), Pune, India as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Applied Science. She completed her PhD at the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi (IITD) and continued her research while working at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IITM) as a Project Officer until 2012. Her research interests include nanomaterials for energy and gas sensing applications.Bhaghavathi P. VinayanDr Bhaghavathi P. Vinayan is currently working as an Alexander von Humboldt Fellow at Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU) and Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany. He received his PhD in Physics from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IITM) with the best PhD thesis award. His research interests include energy storage materials and hydrogen energy technology.Sai Smruti SamantarayMs Sai Smruti Samantaray is currently pursuing a PhD at the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras. Her current research is focused on graphene-based composites for energy applications, mainly focusing on solid state hydrogen storage and electrochemical hydrogen storage.Sundara RamaprabhuProf. Sundara Ramaprabhu is the Institute Chair Professor at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India. He has guided 30 PhD students and developed 10 technologies. He is a member of the American Chemical Society and a member of the Electrochemical Society. He has authored 330 international journal publications and published 43 patents. His research areas are nanotechnology, hydrogen energy technology, and fuel cell technology.
Introduction
Today, hydrogen (H2) is perceived as the best energy carrier or energy vector (due to the intended direction of energy flow) for harnessing energy as it is abundantly available and is a clean fuel with zero or near zero emissions. It is the lightest element of the periodic table and on the parameter of highest chemical energy stored per unit mass emerges as the best fuel. More specifically, hydrogen yields about 142 MJ kg−1 chemical energy per mass as compared to 47 MJ kg−1 given by liquid hydrocarbons.1 This implies that for the same mass of the fuel, hydrogen yields about 3 times more energy. The concept of replacing the current oil-driven socio-economic set-up to one that is hydrogen centric is termed hydrogen economy and includes the production of H2, its distribution, storage, and eventually energy transfer. The energy transfer step, in particular, involves the integration of a hydrogen storage system with hydrogen-driven fuel cells.2,3 The water released during fuel cell operation can be stored and later split into its constituent elements, O2 and H2, by the process of electrolysis while the released H2 can be stored for future usage.4 H2 regenerated in certain processes for instance in fuel cells can be subsequently utilized and hence enjoy the benefits of recycled fuel.
Hydrogen is the unifying factor for bringing various storage–distribution processes together giving rise to the concept of smart energy grids as shown in Fig. 1. The grids can further be integrated with other renewables (solar/wind etc.).5 The adaptability of technologies utilizing hydrogen as fuel is also diverse ranging from on-board storage catering to automotive vehicles to stationary (storage or grid technology) as well as portable energy storage (hybrid vehicles). For example, hydrogen energy storage systems can provide fuel for fuel cell driven electric vehicles, powering forklifts or pushback tractors at airports while also supplying backup power.6 A net energy analysis by Pellow and co-workers shows that a regenerative hydrogen fuel cell energy storage system makes more efficient use of manufacturing energy inputs as compared to lithium ion battery storage but lacks in round-trip efficiency.5 Round trip efficiency is defined as the ratio of out-flow to the in-flow of energy in a regenerative hydrogen fuel cell. Nonetheless, such hydrogen-based energy systems can work in conjunction with renewables such as wind or solar power to improve the return energy efficiency. A great deal of effort continues to be invested in the direction of harnessing energy from hydrogen to bring it on par with current day competitive technologies.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of a smart energy grid integrating hydrogen economy with other renewables. 
In making the hydrogen economy a commercial reality, it has been acknowledged that hydrogen storage and its efficient conversion into electricity remains a formidable barrier. The US Department of Energy (DOE) reviews the progress in the field of hydrogen storage and sets the targets for a system's gravimetric density, volumetric density, cost, refuel time, etc.Table 1 shows the gravimetric, volumetric and cost targets for the year 2020 for on-board hydrogen storage by light duty fuel cell vehicles.7
Table 1 On-board H2 storage targets for light duty fuel cell vehicles7




Parameter
Units
Targets for 2020
Ultimate value




System gravimetric capacity
kW h kg−1
1.8
2.5


kg H2 per kg system
0.055
0.075


System volumetric capacity
kW h L−1
1.3
2.3


kg H2 per L system
0.040
0.070




Solid-state hydrogen storage
The methods of storing H2 under pressure in tanks (pressurized H2 gas of 300 bar to 700 bar) besides being not-so-safe are cost and energy intensive, while H2 storage in solid materials is safer, can reach acceptable mass or volume densities and can be used both for stationary and portable applications. Fig. 2(a) shows material categories studied for hydrogen storage and how they compete in terms of gravimetric and volumetric densities.8 The targets for 2020 and ultimate targets have been indicated for a ready comparison. Clearly, metal hydrides have higher volumetric densities but lower gravimetric densities whereas carbon adsorbents offer better gravimetric densities but lower volumetric densities. Hydrogen can be stored in solids either as physically bound (usually in molecular form) or chemically bound (atomic form) hydrogen. Fig. 2(b) shows the potential energy curve when a gas molecule approaches the surface of a solid. At the onset, the gas is in molecular form and adsorbs on the surface via van der Waals forces of attraction that arise due to mutually induced dipole moments in the carbon substrate and hydrogen molecule. Once the entire surface of the adsorbent is covered by H2 gas molecules, the adsorption saturates. This is so because the incoming gas molecules would interact with the first layer of already adsorbed gas molecules. The strength of this interaction is very weak, about 10–20 kJ mol−1, and is characterized by the minimum of the potential energy curve. If the gas molecule has sufficiently high kinetic energy so that it can approach the surface within one molecule radius (∼0.5–1 Å), the wave functions of the hydrogen molecule and carbon substrate can overlap. This type of interaction involves the binding of hydrogen atoms to the solid surface through the exchange or sharing of electrons between the solid substrate and the hydrogen atom. Thus, in chemisorption, interchange of electron density between hydrogen and carbon atoms takes place. The binding energy value of this interaction is about 100–200 kJ mol−1. The overall potential energy profile is marked by a (green) dotted curve in Fig. 2(b). The curve is vertically shifted for clarity. In principle, it overlaps potential energy curves 1 and 2. Therefore, for successful adsorption the molecule should come into close proximity to the adsorbent, and for absorption adequate energy for molecular dissociation should be available. The catalyst nanoparticles help in reducing this barrier. A hydrogen storage material can be regarded as a strong contender if it meets certain criteria such as good affinity and selectivity towards hydrogen, plenty of adsorption/absorption sites, fast sorption kinetics, easy availability, safe, lightweight and economical. Table 2 summarizes the different non-carbon based materials which incorporate hydrogen atoms into their lattice.
 Fig. 2  (a) A comparison of gravimetric and volumetric densities of promising H2 storage materials. Adapted from Ströbel et al., Hydrogen storage by carbon materials, Journal of Power Sources, 159, 781–801, Copyright (2006), with permission from Elsevier.8 (b) Potential energy curve of gas adsorption and absorption. The dotted curve (green) is the overall potential energy curve and shifted vertically for clarity. 
Table 2 Material-based H2 storage strategies and challenges




Material
How H2 is incorporated
Performance
Main concerns
Ref.







Forms strong chemical bonds with metals
High hydrogen content of 19.6 wt%
Regeneration

9






AB5 type metal-hydride metallic bonds, H atoms share electrons with metal atoms
1.3 wt% of H, 0.1 kg L−1 volumetric density
Reversibility, high cost

10






The equilibrium modification of MgH2 under normal conditions, α-MgH2 has a tetragonal crystal structure of rutile type. Under high pressure α-MgH2 undergoes polymorphic transformation to form two modifications: γ-MgH2 and β-MgH2, having an orthorhombic structure and hexagonal structure, respectively
Very good theoretical hydrogen storage capacity (7.6 wt%), and relatively low cost
High dehydrogenation temperature (350–400 °C), poor kinetics

11 and 12






Complex metal hydride H forms a negatively charged coordination complex and surrounds metal cations
Greater than 5 wt%
Poor kinetics, regeneration at very high temperatures (>∼500 K)

13






Structures contain organic heterocyclic hydrides
4.7 wt%
Increasing H2 yield

14






H2 molecules absorbed in the voids, some cations can also induce spillover of H2 gas
Pt nanoparticles introduced into MOF-5 showed 0.62 wt% uptake
Require cryogenic temperatures

15






Hydrogen molecules by virtue of their small size can enter pores of zeolites
1.81 wt% @ 77 K and 15 bar
Require cryogenic temperatures

16





Hydrogen storage using carbon materials
Carbon can easily hybridize in sp, sp2, and sp3 types of bonds favouring the formation of its 0-D, 1-D, 2-D and 3-D forms, their composites or their functional derivatives. They possess pores of various sizes, which are ideal physisorption sites for gases. Activated carbon has been used as an adsorbent for centuries and the discovery of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in 1991 followed by the discovery of graphene (G) in 2004 led to the synthesis of many different carbon nanoforms such as single-walled, double-walled, and multi-walled CNTs, graphite nanoflakes, few-layered graphene, graphene oxide, graphene and any combination of the different nanoforms.17–20 These nanoforms differ in their pore arrangement and pore dimensions. IUPAC classification of pores is done as per the pore size according to which micropores have widths less than 2 nm, mesopores have widths ranging from 2 to 50 nm and macropores have widths in the 50–100 nm range. Pore sizes comparable to the dimensions of hydrogen molecules can result in a higher density of adsorbed molecules. This is because adsorption potentials for smaller pore widths (∼0.7 nm) overlap within the pore volume, thereby increasing the adsorption energy of the adsorbed gas molecules.8 Porous carbons have also been investigated for H-storage.21 The arrangement of carbon atoms in the network governs the interaction between the gas molecules and the carbon nanoform. CNTs (single-walled, double-walled and multi-walled) are capable of storing hydrogen in molecular form either inside the cylindrical cavity, between shells, on the surface or at the tube ends. Graphene, which has the highest surface area of ∼2630 m2 g−1 can theoretically adsorb hydrogen gas on both surfaces. Few-layered graphene can accommodate hydrogen molecules in the interlayer spacing as well as on the exposed surfaces of the first and the last sheets. Carbon-based adsorbents mostly fulfil the requirements for a H2 storage material as they possess merits such as large surface area, high porosity, light weight, chemical inertness, ease of functionalization, good mechanical strength, etc.Table 3 lists some important studies on hydrogen storage using carbon nanotubes and their derivatives.
Table 3 Highlights of progress made from the 1990s to the present in the field of hydrogen storage using CNTs




Year
Study
Ref.




1990–1999
C soot containing SWNTs: 5–10 wt% @ 133 K; SWNTs found to have 4.2 wt% @ room temperature and 100 bar; alkali doped MWNTs: 20 wt% for Li-doped at 635 K and 14 wt% for K-doped @ 300 K

22–24



2000–2009
MWNTs show 3.2 wt% at room temperature and 120 bar; carbon nanostructures: 4.5 wt% at 77 K; carbon aerogel: 5 wt% at 77 K and 20–30 bar; B-CNTs: 2 wt% at 80 bar while CNTs: 0.6 wt%; ordered porous carbon: 7 wt% at 77 K and 20 bar; porous materials: less than 0.5 wt% at standard temperature and high pressures; Pd-CNTs: 0.66 wt% and V-CNTs: 0.69 wt% @ 20 bar

25–31



2010–2017
CNT packings with different orientations: 19 wt% @ 77 K and 5.5 wt% @ 300 K; theoretical study on Si-doped SWNTs: 2.5 wt% H2 storage at room temperature; under ambient conditions storage capacities were found to be CNTs – 0.3 wt%, Ca-CNTs – 0.05 wt%, Co-CNTs – 1.51 wt%, Fe-CNTs – 0.75 wt%, Ni-CNTs – 0.4 wt% and Pd-CNTs – 7 wt%, Ru nanoparticles on a porous carbon surface: 0.8 wt% @ 298 K and 75 bar and 4.1 wt% @ 77 K and 40 bar; polyaniline-derived mesoporous carbon supported Pd nanoparticles catalyze hydrogenation dehydrogenation reactions

32–36





As summarized in Table 3, the storage capacities at ambient temperature and under moderate pressure conditions are far from the US DOE targets. In spite of extensive results on H2 uptake by carbonaceous materials being available, the actual mechanism for storing hydrogen varies from sample to sample. The primary interaction between carbon supports and hydrogen molecules is van der Waals attractive forces (physisorption), which arise due to mutually induced local dipole moments in hydrogen molecules and surface carbon atoms. Faster kinetics and good reversibility support this mechanism.26 As discussed in the previous section, the energy of such interactions is about 0.01–0.1 eV, i.e. about 10 kJ mol−1.37 Physisorption can cause linkage of a hydrogen atom to two carbon atoms yielding a H2 storage capacity of 4.2 mass%. If hydrogen approaches the carbon support within a certain distance of the hydrogen molecule, then due to the possible overlap of wave functions of the carbon atom with that of the hydrogen electron, the activation energy barrier for hydrogen dissociation can be overcome. As a result, the H–H bond of the hydrogen molecule loosens. Hydrogen atoms then chemisorb over carbon atoms with a typical energy of about 2–3 eV (∼10–50 kJ mol−1).38 This is an ideal value for the binding of hydrogen, since a material with a slightly weak hydrogen bond would not be suitable as a H2 storage material. Therefore, efforts are being made to increase the binding energy of H2 atoms or molecules on adsorbent surfaces without compromising on kinetics or reversibility.
Graphene based hydrogen storage
Graphene, theoretically, is a single sheet of carbon atoms and has been predicted to have a hydrogen uptake capacity of 8.3 wt% on both its surfaces with chemisorption.39 It is important to acknowledge that modelling of graphene sheets in theoretical studies is far from the actual practical conditions. Therefore, even the best experimentally reported values do not approach the ideal theoretical value. Nonetheless, theoretical studies predict the performance of materials under specific conditions and enhance the fundamental understanding of various processes at play. For instance, curvatures as well as strain in graphene sheets have been reported to influence the adsorption capacity.40,41 Theoretical studies also show that an increase in the interlayer distance (d) of graphene layers can lead to increased physisorption free energy and binding energy of H2 on graphene substrates. An interlayer distance of approximately 6–7 Å was found to be optimal to achieve high volumetric density.42 It is understood that a large surface area, defect sites such as carbon vacancies, wrinkles, and sheet edges and the presence of π-electron density out-of-plane of graphene sheets favour physisorption of incoming gas molecules. Therefore, the hydrogen uptake capacity of graphene depends on how it has been processed. Table 4 lists some experimental studies that investigated the hydrogen adsorption capacity of graphene.43
Table 4 Hydrogen storage studies on graphene sheets. G: graphene sheet, T: temperature, P: pressure




Carbon nano-material
H2 wt% @T (K)/P (bar)
Ref.




G nanosheets
1.2% @77/10, 0.1% @298/10 and 0.72% @298/100

44



G
0.7% @298/40

45



G
0.9% @298/100

48



G
<0.2% @290/60; 0.4% @77/1

49



G
0.067% @303/57

50



G
3.1% @300/100

51



G
1.38% @77/1

52



Hierarchical G
4.01% @77/1.07

53



G
1.1% @77/2

54





H2 storage of about 0.1–0.7 wt% under moderate temperature and pressure conditions has been reported by different authors for exfoliated graphene sheets that possess high BET surface areas, defects and porosity.44,45 Srinivas et al. studied the hydrogen storage properties of graphene powder with a BET surface area of 640 m2 g−1 in the temperature range of 77 K to 298 K up to a maximum hydrogen pressure of 10 bar. Fig. 3(a) shows the hydrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms. The graphene powders exhibited a better storage of ∼1.2 wt% at 77 K and 10 bar pressure. An isosteric heat of adsorption of about 5.9 kJ mol−1 for 0.1 wt% of hydrogen uptake (inset of Fig. 3(b)) suggested some favorable interaction between the adsorbate and the adsorbent.44 In our previous study, a similar isosteric heat of adsorption of ∼6 kJ mol−1 was determined.46 In a similar study, Klechikov et al. studied the hydrogen adsorption isotherms at 77 K for graphene samples with surface areas ranging from 370 m2 g−1 to 2300 m2 g−1. The highest uptake of about 4.1 wt% at 77 K and 10 bar pressure was reported using graphene with the largest surface area of 2300 m2 g−1.47 The role of higher surface area support materials in achieving higher storage capabilities was investigated and established as shown in Fig. 3(b).
 Fig. 3  (a) Hydrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of graphene powder at various temperatures in the range of 77–298 K and pressures up to 10 bar. Inset: The isosteric heat of adsorption versus adsorption capacity. The hydrogen uptake isotherm of graphite powder was measured at 298 K (1–2 microns, synthetic grade from Aldrich) for comparison. Reprinted from Srinivas et al., Synthesis of graphene-like nanosheets and their hydrogen adsorption capacity, Carbon, 48, 630–635, Copyright (2010), with permission from Elsevier.44 (b) Hydrogen adsorption isotherms recorded for graphene samples with different surface areas at 77 K using an immersion thermostat. The isotherm recorded for the reference sample of activated carbon is shown by red symbols. Reprinted from Klechikov et al., Hydrogen storage in bulk graphene-related materials, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 210, 46–51, Copyright (2015), with permission from Elsevier.47 
Hydrogen uptake by chemically modified graphene and its analogues
Functionalized graphene (f-G) refers to graphene that has been chemically modified by attaching various functional groups containing oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus, boron, etc. Interested readers are directed to an excellent review on the functionalization of graphene by Georgakilas et al.55 Acid functionalization is often used to attach surface oxygen functional groups like hydroxyl, carboxyl, carbonyl, etc. on graphene sheets. These functional groups attach at the surface irregularities, defect sites or edges and serve as adsorption sites for impinging gas molecules or as nucleation sites for catalyst nanoparticles.45,46 Some authors believe that such functionalities result in increasing the inter-layer spacing of graphene sheets. For instance, activation of reduced graphene oxide using KOH resulted in a high specific surface area value of 3000 m2 g−1 and a pore volume of 2.2 cm3 g−1.56 The measured hydrogen uptake capacity of samples activated by high temperature annealing in a H2 gas environment yielded a saturation value of about 7.8 wt% at 77 K. The increased surface area helps in promoting the adsorption/accumulation of a larger number of H2 molecules in the inner layers.57 Yan et al. have shown the electronic properties of graphene to be significantly influenced by oxidation.58 In both these cases, the interaction between the gas molecule support and the catalyst nanoparticle support is strengthened. Guo et al. synthesized a “hierarchical” graphene-based material containing a hierarchy of micro- (∼0.8 nm), meso- (∼4 nm) and macro- (>50 nm) pores and was thus named.53 The pores are visible in the SEM image of the material in Fig. 4(a). The synthesized material exhibited a 4 wt% hydrogen storage capacity via physisorption at atmospheric air pressure.53Fig. 4(b) depicts the synthesis schematic of the hierarchical graphene-based material, which involves vacuum heat treatment of graphite oxide that contains abundant oxygen functional groups. These functional groups under high temperature and vacuum conditions convert into O2 and CO2 gases. Pores are created between graphene sheets by these escaping gases forming wave-like graphene layers.53,59 Thus, functional groups can either cause changes in the local dipole moment and end up in a stronger interaction between gas molecules and the carbon support by acting as tethering sites for incoming gas atoms/molecules or even play a role in restructuring the graphene sheets. The results of hydrogen uptake by different functionalized graphenes or composites are listed in Table 5.
 Fig. 4  Synthesis schematic of hierarchical graphene. The SEM image of the hierarchical graphene is at the centre of the synthesis schematic. Reprinted with permission from Guo et al., ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 1, 14–18, 2013, Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.53 
Table 5 Hydrogen uptake values reported in the literature for modified/functionalized graphene. T: temperature, P: pressure, MWNTs: multi-walled carbon nanotubes




Carbon nano-material
Functionalization with
H2 wt% @T (K)/P (bar)
Ref.




f-G
Chlorosulphonic acid
1.6% @77/2

54



f-G
Oleum
1.4% @77/2

54



GO
—
1.4% @298/50

60



GO + MWNTs
—
2.6% @298/50

60



G + MWNTs
—
2.1% @298/50

60



f-G
Pt
0.15% @303/57

50



f-G
Pd
0.156% @303/57

61



f-G
Pd
0.81% @298/40

45





Doping of graphene has also been employed to achieve desirable properties. Doped-graphene here refers to substitutional doping of carbon networks with foreign atoms. Doping methods can be classified into in situ and ex situ treatments. In situ treatments can incorporate the heteroatoms simultaneously during the synthesis of graphene itself. Ex situ methods are post treatments in which the diffusion of heteroatoms into pre-synthesized graphene takes place. Ex situ methods are more advantageous as they provide better control over the synthesis procedure/parameters such as the doping level, creation of a porous structure in the product, etc. Dai et al. studied the gas adsorption on graphene doped with boron, nitrogen, aluminium and sulphur atoms using density functional theory (DFT).62 While the planar surface of the pristine graphene sheet was retained after B- and N-doping, an out-of-plane protrusion was observed in the case of Al- and S-doping.62 The possible cause was attributed to longer bond-lengths of Al–C and S–C as compared to C–C, B–C and N–C bond lengths. The out-of-plane protrusion caused a slight curvature of the graphene sheet resulting in some strain within the sheets and a change in the local reactivity at the dopant site. The adsorption energies of H2 gas were estimated to be −0.014 eV for B-G, −0.008 eV for N-G, 2.92 eV for Al-G and −0.006 eV for S-G.62 Thus, out of B, N, Al and S doped graphene, Al-G exhibited the least hydrogen uptake. In another study by Ao et al., the hydrogen storage capacity of aluminium-doped graphene was investigated using density functional theory and a capacity of 5.13 wt% at 300 K and a high pressure of 1000 bar was estimated.63 Defect sites in graphene can undergo C–C reconstruction in order to stabilize the lattice and attain the most stable configuration. However, the C–C reconstruction would mean a loss in the defect site density in the carbon network, an effect undesirable for adsorption studies and/or applications. In situ investigations of graphene sheets in a nitrogen environment have shown that nitrogen dopant atoms donate 1 or 2 π-electrons to the carbon lattice, thereby avoiding its reconstruction at defect sites.64 Nitrogen-doped graphene nanoplatelets yielded a H2 storage capacity of 0.42 wt% at 25 °C and 32 bar.65 The phosphorus-doped graphene sheets prepared by Ariharan et al. showed a hydrogen uptake of ∼2.2 wt% at 298 K and 100 bar pressure.66 Thus, even the doped-graphene sheets do not meet the DOE targets but are effective in enhancing the hydrogen-uptake capacity as compared to pristine graphene.
Influence of metal or alloy catalyst doping on the hydrogen uptake of graphene and its analogues
Since its discovery in 2004, graphene has been the subject of theoretical as well as experimental studies in many diverse fields due to its unique properties.67 Theoretical studies enable researchers to carry out in-depth investigations. For instance, the structure of graphene sheets can be designed with control over the number of contributing layers, pore size, pore volume, pore distribution, curvature, edge- or sheet-defects, etc., all of which are known to influence the adsorption capability of support materials. Of particular importance is the study reported by Dimitrakakis et al. who reported a novel CNT separated graphene three-dimensional pillared network shown in Fig. 5(a).68 Gravimetric hydrogen uptake by graphene, CNTs, pillared graphene and Li-doped pillared graphene was studied at 77 K and 300 K in the 0–100 bar pressure range as shown in Fig. 5(b) and (c). The hydrogen uptake by Li-doped pillared graphene was the highest among the studied samples exhibiting 41 g H2 per liter, which was very close to the then DOE volumetric requirement of 45 g H2 per liter.68 Ca-Decorated zigzag graphene nanoribbons studied by Lee et al. showed a 5 wt% hydrogen capacity. The low-cohesive energy of calcium atoms helps in maintaining their dispersion over the support and avoids their agglomeration.69
 Fig. 5  (a) Pillared graphene. A novel 3-D network nanostructure proposed for enhanced hydrogen storage. Gravimetric hydrogen uptake for graphene (diamonds), (6,6) carbon nanotubes (squares), pillared material (triangles), and Li-doped pillared graphene (stars) at (b) 77 K and (c) 300 K. Reprinted with permission from Dimitrakakis et al., Pillared graphene: A new 3-D network nanostructure for enhanced hydrogen storage, Nano Letters, 8, 3166–3170, 2008. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society.68 
As shown in Fig. 6, Ca atoms tend to adsorb on the zigzag edge of graphene with a Ca–Ca distance of 10 Å, without clustering of the Ca atoms and up to six H2 molecules could bind to a Ca atom with a binding energy of ∼0.2 eV per H2. Another recent theoretical study addressed the role of topological defects of graphene in anchoring and binding hydrogen to defect sites such as Stone–Wales type and single and double vacancy defects.70 It was found that a single vacancy in the vicinity of a Stone–Wales defect had a favorable hydrogen binding ability for reversible adsorption. Fig. 7 shows the charge density variation of different defects and variation in hydrogen binding energy as hydrogen coverage increases.70 The authors found that Stone–Wales defects in the vicinity of a single vacancy are favorable sites for hydrogen binding due to an increased binding energy. Some more studies on graphene and graphene-like supports reported by researchers on hydrogen storage capability have been summarized in Table 6.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) The optimized atomic geometries of a Ca atom adsorbed on the edge of a zigzag graphene nanoribbon (ZGNR) and armchair graphene nanoribbon (AGNR), respectively. (c and d) The charge density difference between the Ca atom and the ZGNR with an isosurface value of 0.0005 e (au)−3 when the Ca atom is attached on the edge and the middle, respectively. Red and blue colours indicate electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. (e–i) The optimized atomic structures of a Ca atom adsorbed on the armchair edge of a zigzag-armchair-edged GNR, the zigzag edge of an armchair-zigzag-edged GNR, the zigzag edge of a large vacancy-defected graphene, a (7,0) C-BN nanotube junction, and a (7,7) mixed C-BN nanotube, respectively. Reprinted with permission from Lee et al., Calcium-decorated graphene-based nanostructures for hydrogen storage, Nano Letters, 10, 793–798, 2010. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.69 
 Fig. 7  (a) Top view charge density plot of the single vacancy defect. The three carbon atoms adjacent to the vacancy can be observed to have a lower charge density around them in comparison to the rest of the carbon atoms in the graphene sheet. The carbon atom with a dangling bond is located just above the vacancy in the figure. The other two adjacent atoms have a greater amount of charge between them than the amount of charge between either of them and the dangling bond atom, giving these two adjacent atoms slightly higher stability than the dangling bond atom. Change in average hydrogen binding energy of high defect density systems with increasing number of hydrogen molecules: (b) single vacancy (SVMD) system and (c) Stone–Wales and single vacancy (SWSVMD) system. Adapted from Yadav et al., Defect engineering of graphene for effective hydrogen storage, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 39, 4981–4995, Copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier.70 
Table 6 Studies carried out to understand the adsorption/absorption properties of graphene and graphene-based materials




Material
Outcome/prediction year
Year
Ref.





a Theoretical prediction.
b Experimental study.





Graphitic plateletsa
Physisorption energy of H2 on graphitic platelets and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons estimated to be 3.5 kJ mol−1 and 7.2 kJ mol−1, both of attractive nature
2004

71



Graphene and SWNTsa
The binding energy of hydrogen bound inside nanotubes is about twice as high as that of hydrogen adsorbed outside nanotubes or on the graphene layer. The parallel orientation of the hydrogen bond more effectively binds to the carbon substrate
2007

72



C Linear chain, graphene and NTsa
Transition-metal atoms can bind on the inner as well as the outer surface of NTs and also on both sides of graphene
2008

73



Li-Adsorbed graphenea
The Li 2s orbital donates part of its electronic charge to graphene inducing metallic character in it and reaching a gravimetric density of 12.8 wt%
2008

74



3-D carbon nano-structurea
By design the material has tunable pore sizes and surface areas; if doped with lithium cations, the material's storage capacity can reach ∼41 g H2 L−1 under ambient conditions
2008

68



Ti on graphene oxidea
Each Ti can bind multiple H2 molecules with desired binding energies (14–41 kJ mol−1 of H2). Theoretical gravimetric and volumetric densities are estimated to be 4.9 wt% and 64 g L−1
2009

75



Ca on porous 3-D graphenea
Ca donates its 4s charge partly to the empty π* band of graphene, Ca becomes positively charged while graphene on receiving electron density exhibits metallic character. By adsorbing Ca on both sides of the graphene sheet, the hydrogen storage capacity can be increased to 8.4 wt%
2009

76



Ca on graphenea
Ca atoms preferably adsorb on sp3 hybridized vertex sites as compared to the sp2 hybridized planar surface. Coulomb and Kubas interactions result in a higher (5–6 wt%) storage capacity
2009

77



Alkoxide OLi groupa
Interaction of H2 with the alkoxide material can be increased to 3.7 kcal mol−1, gravimetric and volumetric targets can be met at low hydrogen pressures and 77 K
2010

78



Graphene-like nanosheetsb
At 10 bar, hydrogen absorption capacities of 1.2 wt% @ 77 K and 0.1 wt% at 298 K
2010

44



Li on boron-doped graphenea
Li coated boron-doped graphene has p–p hybridization that increases the binding energy to about 0.13 eV per H2 such that four polarized H2 molecules are attached to a Li atom
2010

79



Li-Graphene, Ti-graphenea
Effect of strain on adsorption of metal atoms over a graphene surface was studied. A tensile strain of 10% increases adsorption with a binding energy of 0.2 eV per H2, gravimetric density for Li and Ti increases to 15.4 wt% and 9.5 wt%, respectively
2010

41



Transition metal (TM) doped defected graphenea
Periodic arrangement of carbon atom vacancy forms the defected graphene. TM atoms adsorbed at these defect sites are bound sufficiently strongly so as to avoid their clustering. Fe–Ti decorated defected graphene has a gravimetric efficiency of 5.1 wt% of hydrogen with desorption starting at ∼400 K
2010

80



Al adsorbed graphenea
Al adsorbed on both sides of graphene can store up to 13.79 wt% with recycling under ambient conditions with an average adsorption energy of −0.193 eV per H2
2010

81



Li-Doped porous graphenea
A gravimetric capacity of 12 wt% is estimated
2010

82



Ca on a graphene-based nanostructurea
Ca atoms adsorb on zigzag edges of graphene, a binding energy of −0.2 eV per H2 and a gravimetric density of 5 wt% is estimated
2010

69



Pd and Pt decorated grapheneb
Volumetric adsorption done to study H2 adsorption up to 303 K and 5.7 MPa. Both Pd and Pt decorated graphene adsorb more hydrogen as compared to pristine graphene
2011

50



Ti in double-vacancy graphenea
Up to eight hydrogen molecules can be stored per unit cell
2011

83



Ni and B doped grapheneb
Graphene doped with Ni (0.83 wt%) and B (1.09 wt%) stores 4.4 wt% H2 at 77 K and 106 kPa
2011

84



Ca decorated B-doped graphenea
Ca atoms on graphene form clusters and doping graphene with B avoids the clustering problem of Ca atoms. The average binding energy is about −0.4 eV per H2. A theoretical gravimetric density of 8.38 wt% for double-sided Ca-decorated graphene doped with 12 at% of B atoms has been estimated
2011

85



Graphenea
Corrugations and curvature of graphene can be used to influence the binding energy by about 2 eV. Reversible storage of hydrogen is possible by changing the curvature of graphene sheets under ambient conditions. Gravimetric capacities of up to 8 wt% were estimated
2011

40



Pillared graphenea
Pillared graphene is shown to have better hydrogen storage capacity as compared to CNTs
2012

86



Lithium amidoborane (LiAB) and GO
–O and –OH groups help in the combination of GO and LiAB as GO3–LiAB, which exhibits better dehydrogenation properties
2013

87



Mg–rGOb
Mg nanocrystals in graphene oxide, a gravimetric density of 6.5 wt%
2016

88



N-Doped graphenea
Physisorption preferred on pristine and substitutional N-doped graphene whereas pyrrolic and pyridinic nitrogen doped graphene prefer chemical adsorption
2016

89



MgH2 catalyzed by Fe3O4@graphene sheetsb
Improved H-storage capacity (6.2 wt% at 290 °C and 15 bar), a lower desorption temperature of 262 °C, which is about 160 °C lower than that of pristine MgH2. Formation of Mg1−xFexO which penetrates the MgO layer providing H-diffusion pathways resulting in better kinetics
2016

90



Pd decorated graphene and nitrogen-doped graphenea
Nitrogen-doped graphene binds Pd more effectively as compared to Pd-graphene. At 0 K a gravimetric density of 3.622 wt% was estimated
2017

91





The above discussion and studies listed in Table 6 suggest that a significant number of theoretical studies report a high gravimetric or volumetric density for H2 storage in graphene, which are difficult to substantiate with practically observed values. The strength of physisorption on large area and nanoporous carbon favors fast kinetics of adsorption/desorption but low binding energies render them thermodynamically less stable. Hong et al. studied graphene oxide wrapped TiO2 and V2O5 nanostructures for hydrogen adsorption and found that wrapping the oxide nanostructures with few layers of graphene resulted in an increased uptake of hydrogen as shown in Fig. 8.92 The authors further found that the C–OH species present in GO react with the surface-adsorbed oxygen of metal oxides and favor bonding between graphene sheets with the metal oxide nanostructures.
 Fig. 8  TEM images of (a) GO/V2O5 and (b) GO/TiO2. It can be seen that thin layers of GO wrap V2O5 and TiO2. Arrows indicate GO layers. High pressure H2 adsorption of (c) V2O5, GO, GO/V2O5, and (d) TiO2, GO and GO/TiO2. Reprinted from Hong et al., Agent-free synthesis of graphene oxide/transition metal oxide composites and its application for hydrogen storage, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 37, 7594–7599, Copyright (2012), with permission from Elsevier.92 
Recently, Cho and co-researchers reported safe and selective hydrogen storage in graphene oxide-metal nanocrystal multilaminates.93 Magnesium nanocrystals were encapsulated in reduced graphene oxide sheets. The reduced graphene oxide sheets played a dual role. The sheets being atomically thin firstly eliminate any extra inactive mass that could be present in the adsorbent resulting in high hydrogen uptake capacities. Secondly, the encapsulation provides a protective coating against oxygen or moisture, thereby retaining the Mg nanocrystals in their metallic state ready for hydrogen absorption. Interestingly, the metallic state of Mg nanocrystals was retained even after three months of air exposure highlighting the robustness of the encapsulating layer. Fig. 9 shows the reduced graphene oxide–Mg laminates and their hydrogen adsorption/desorption characterization. The material could achieve 6.5 wt% of gravimetric density as shown in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 9  Mixed dimensional rGO–Mg laminates for stable and energetically dense hydrogen storage. (a) Illustrations depicting the structure of the rGO–Mg nanolaminates where rGO layers prevent O2 and H2O from penetrating, while allowing the diffusion of H2 (inset: photograph of rGO–Mg in air). (b) TEM images of rGO–Mg showing the high density of Mg nanocrystals with no visible aggregates. The upper inset is a high-resolution image and the lower inset is the diffraction pattern where the hexagonal dots are matched to Mg (100), corresponding to a d-spacing of 2.778 Å (JCPDS 04-0770). (c) XRD spectra of rGO–Mg after synthesis and after 3 months in air with indices of peaks (JCPDS 04-0770; the bottom bars represent the XRD patterns of hexagonal Mg (hcp) (red), tetragonal MgH2 (pink), hexagonal Mg(OH)2 (green) and cubic MgO (blue)). Reproduced from https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms10804 licensed under CC BY, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, DOI: 10.1038/ncomms10804.88 
 Fig. 10  Hydrogen absorption/desorption characterization of rGO–Mg multilaminates. (a) Hydrogen absorption/desorption (at 200 °C and 15 bar H2/300 °C and 0 bar) of the prepared rGO–Mg multilaminates. (b) Hydrogen absorption/desorption cycling of rGO–Mg multilaminates that were first exposed to air overnight. The first 5 cycles were performed at 250 °C and 15 bar H2/350 °C and 0 bar, and the additional 20 cycles at 200 °C and 15 bar H2/300 °C and 0 bar. (c) XRD spectra of rGO–Mg after absorption/desorption (the bottom bars represent the XRD patterns of Mg (red), MgH2 (pink), Mg(OH)2 (green) and MgO (blue)). Reproduced from https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms10804 licensed under CC BY, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, DOI: 10.1038/ncomms10804.88 
From experimental studies it is clear that hydrogen storage capacities of carbonaceous materials can be increased by the incorporation of alkali metal, transition metal or metal oxide nanoparticles. These reports have suggested that in the presence of transition metal nanoparticles, molecular hydrogen complexes of transition metals can be formed.94 The binding is strong due to Kubas interaction in which the charge from the highest occupied orbital of the H2 ligand is donated to empty metal d-orbitals and back-donated to the lowest unoccupied orbital of the ligand.8 Another mechanism proposed and tested is the hydrogen spillover mechanism depicted in Fig. 11 that involves the dissociation of H2 molecules into hydrogen atoms followed by their chemisorption on metal nanoparticles. The hydrogen molecules get polarized in the vicinity of metal nanoparticles and the H–H bond loosens up, while hydrogen atoms chemisorb on metal nanoparticles. As the metal nanoparticles saturate, the hydrogen atoms migrate and diffuse over the supporting material, which is the adsorbent. A good contact between the metal nanoparticles and the supporting adsorbent material lowers the barrier for hydrogen atom migration and plays a very important part in “spilling” the hydrogen atoms over the adsorbent surface.95 Since the cohesive forces between metal nanoparticles are strong, metal nanoparticles tend to agglomerate. The resulting bigger nanoparticles have considerably fewer adsorption sites and compromise the hydrogen uptake capacity. In connection with the spillover mechanism, the system of Ni–graphene was studied for hydrogen storage, and at room temperature a gravimetric density of 0.14 wt% at 1 bar pressure and 1.18 wt% at 60 bar pressure was reached.96 In other studies, the Pd–graphene system studied by Zhou et al. was found to yield a gravimetric density of 6.7 wt% at 50 bar pressure for a 1% Pd/graphene nanocomposite, while the capacity increased to 8.67 wt% at 60 bar.97 Furthermore, for a 5% Pd/graphene nanocomposite, a gravimetric density of 7.16 wt% at 60 bar was reported.97 At room temperature (25 °C), Pd–graphene and Pt–graphene were found to have gravimetric densities of 1.76 wt% at 20 bar pressure and 1.4 wt% at 30 bar, respectively.46,98 At room temperature and 10 bar pressure, a TiO2–graphene nanocomposite exhibited a H2 storage capacity of 0.39 wt%.99
 Fig. 11  Schematic depicting the concept of hydrogen spillover.45,46 
Hydrogen uptake by metal/metal alloy-decorated chemically modified graphene
Chemical modification of carbon support materials can significantly affect the hydrogen adsorption and desorption process and result in uniform dispersion of metal catalyst nanoparticles over the support. Kim and co-workers investigated metal dispersion on N-doped graphene by a pseudopotential density functional theory approach and found that the new acceptor-like states near the Fermi level resulting from lone pairs of nitrogen atoms strengthen the binding of transition metals on graphene.100 Boron-doped graphene (B-G) decorated with Ni, Pd and Co nanoparticles was investigated using first principles calculations for hydrogen storage through spillover and it was found that B-G promotes faster H-diffusion.101 DFT studies on a transition metal–alkali metal decorated B-G surface revealed that high gravimetric densities of ∼6.5 wt% could be achieved.102 The system chosen by Nachimuthu et al. for the study was Ni–Ti–Mg. The criterion of such selection by the authors was based on the hydrogen adsorption energies of the metals which are strong (Ni = −0.92 eV), medium (Ti = −0.52 eV) and weak (Mg = −0.01 eV) to optimize the adsorption/desorption processes. DFT calculations on dual-surface Ca decorated boron-doped graphene show that a gravimetric density of 8.38 wt% can be achieved.85 Polarization of H2 molecules due to the electric field of the Ca–graphene dipole and hybridization of 3d orbitals of Ca and σ orbitals of H2 together contribute to the adsorption process.
The theoretical studies have been corroborated experimentally by various research groups. For instance, our earlier results show that Pd can act as a very good catalyst for hydrogen storage.46,103 The uniform dispersion of catalyst particles in nano-dimensions over an adsorbent material with strong bonding enhances the catalytic activity and hence the hydrogen storage capacity. Chemical modification of carbon supports is necessary for the uniform dispersion of metal catalyst nanoparticles without compromising on the inherent properties of the support such as porosity and high surface area.4,104,105 In our previous study, Pd catalyst nanoparticles were dispersed on chemically modified few layer graphene (FLG) samples. The chemical modifications of the graphene samples were carried out by acid functionalization (f-FLG) and nitrogen doping (N-FLG). Acid functionalization resulted in different oxygen functional groups (–OH, –COOH, –CO, etc.) on the graphene support. Meanwhile, nitrogen doping by N2 plasma treatment introduced pyridinic, pyrrolic and graphitic nitrogen functional groups into the graphene support. Fig. 12 shows the SEM images of f-FLG (a), Pd/f-FLG (b), N-FLG (d) and Pd/N-FLG (e). The SEM images of f-FLG and Pd/f-FLG show that acid functionalization leads to the restacking of graphene sheets. The SEM images of N-FLG and Pd/N-FLG illustrate that nitrogen doping by the plasma method does not lead to restacking of sheets, and thus the high surface area of the graphene structure is retained even after chemical modification. The Pd nanoparticle dispersion over chemically modified graphene sheets was seen to be fairly uniform (Fig. 12(c) and (f)). The Pd particle sizes in Pd/f-FLG and Pd/N-FLG samples were approximately 4 nm and 3.1 nm, respectively. A uniform decoration and distribution of nanoparticles over the carbon supports is difficult yet important to realize, as mentioned earlier. The decorated nanoparticles make surface sites available for adsorption. A nanoparticle well-connected with the support can also transfer the dissociated hydrogen atoms via the spillover effect on the carbon support contributing to a higher hydrogen uptake.46,65 Thus, it is important that the catalyst nanoparticles adhere to the support strongly and in turn mitigate cohesive forces that cause agglomeration.
 Fig. 12  SEM images of (a) f-FLG, (b) Pd/f-FLG, (d) N-FLG and (e) Pd/N-FLG. TEM images of (c) Pd/f-FLG and (f) Pd/N-FLG. Reprinted with permission from Vinayan et al., JPCC, 115, 15679–15685, 2011, Copyright (2011) and Langmuir, 28, 7826–7833, 2012, Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society.45,46 
The hydrogen uptake capacity of FLG, N-FLG, Pd/f-FLG and Pd/N-FLG at 25 °C and 20 bar (20 bar) pressure was found to be 0.53, 0.88, 1.75 and 2.10 wt%, respectively as shown in Fig. 13. Nitrogen doping and the subsequent Pd catalyst nanoparticle dispersion increase the hydrogen storage capacity of FLG by 0.6 times and 2.96 times, respectively, at 25 °C and 20 bar pressure. Even though Pd catalyst dispersion over acid functionalized FLG increases the hydrogen storage capacity considerably, it is smaller as compared to the Pd catalyst dispersion over nitrogen doped FLG. The main reason for this is the large agglomeration of graphene sheets after acid functionalization that reduces the physical surface area required for the adsorption of hydrogen. Maximum hydrogen storage capacities of 2.94 wt% and 4.4 wt% were achieved for Pd/f-hydrogen exfoliated graphene and Pd/N-hydrogen exfoliated graphene samples at 25 °C and 40 bar pressure.45,103
 Fig. 13  Pressure–composition isotherms of (a) FLG, (b) N-FLG, (c) Pd/f-FLG and (d) Pd/N-FLG at different temperatures. Reprinted with permission from Vinayan et al., JPCC, 115, 15679–15685, 2011, Copyright (2011) and Langmuir, 28, 7826–7833, 2012, Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society.45,46 
The interaction of hydrogen with graphene, doped-graphene and metal catalyst dispersed doped-graphene was investigated by estimating the heats of adsorption of H2 for these samples using Clausius–Clapeyron equation.46 The isosteric heats of adsorption (ΔH) were calculated by evaluating the slope of the plot (η) of ln(P) vs. (1/T) at the same adsorption amount (wt%). It has been observed that the isosteric heat of adsorption (ΔH) varies with H2 wt% and the average heat of adsorption for the samples tabulated in Table 7. The authors have reported isosteric heats of adsorption of ∼6 kJ mol−1 for pristine graphene samples in an earlier study.46 After incorporation of Pd catalyst nanoparticles on the chemically modified graphene support, the ΔH value is found to increase to ∼14.5 kJ mol−1, indicating a shift from physisorption to chemisorption.
Table 7 Average isosteric heat of adsorption for all metal catalyst nanoparticle decorated doped and undoped graphene samples. Reprinted with permission from Vinayan et al., Langmuir, 28, 7826–7833, 2012, Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society45,46




Sample
Hydrogen wt% at 20 bar and 25 °C
Average isosteric heat of adsorption, – Qst, (kJ mol−1) between 0.1 ≤η ≥ 1




Few layer graphene (FLG)
0.53
6.0


N-FLG
0.88
8.2


Pd/f-FLG
1.75
10.5


Pd/N-FLG
2.10
14.5




In the spillover mechanism, the use of transition metals and their alloys can reduce the hydrogen dissociation barrier. But transition metals such as Ti bind H atoms strongly after dissociation and hinder their migration to the carbon support.45 In this case, the metal nanoparticles become inactive after their saturation with H atoms. Thus, the catalyst nanoparticles should carry out the dissociation of H2 molecules with an optimum binding energy. One recent report showed that alloying of Pd with a 3d-TM such as Co could give a very good catalyst for H2 adsorption. The authors showed a H2 storage capacity of 5.3 ± 0.1 wt% for a Pd3Co/g-C3N4 sample at room temperature and 33 bar H2 pressure.106 Alloying of Pd with Co can lead to a deficiency of electrons in the valence d orbital of Pd.107 These changes in the electronic density of states of Pd by the inclusion of Co can result in an easy dissociation of H atoms and their optimum binding energy with catalyst nanoparticles. In addition, the alloying with Co would reduce the hydrogen corrosion in palladium leading to better stability of the material after several cycles of hydrogenation.
Recent developments on multicomponent graphene-based systems
Efforts are constantly being made to enhance the H2 storage capacity of solid state materials, and graphene-based materials have shown promising results to be a part of this solution. The authors believe that a few recently reported studies are very promising, which would be useful for designing future hydrogen storage materials. The first study explores the possibility of using graphene together with LiAlH4 which has a high H2 storage capacity of 10.5 wt% and can release 7.9 wt% but requires high temperatures (∼200 °C) for H2 release.108 1 wt% of NiCo alloy encapsulated in graphene (NiCo@G) was used as a catalyst for ball-milled LiAlH4 and the dehydrogenation temperature could be reduced by 109 °C, which is a great achievement in this direction. It is understood that after doping with 1 wt% NiCo@G alloy, the particle size significantly reduces resulting in increased grain boundaries. Graphene, due to its high mechanical strength, serves as a good grinding agent for ball milling. This study could well prove to be a trend-setter, opening up a window of opportunities combining the strengths of graphene for hydrogen adsorption with other methods of H2 storage. In the second study, nanocrystalline TiO2@C-doped sodium alanate (NaAlH4) was used for hydrogen storage by Liu et al.109 Sodium alanate is known for its poor reversibility and slow kinetics. However, the TiO2@C-doped NaAlH4 exhibited a remarkable improvement in uptake and release of hydrogen. While the hydrogen release temperature could be brought down by 114 °C, i.e. to 63 °C, hydrogen reabsorption could be started at 31 °C. Moreover, the dehydrogenated sample could be completely hydrogenated at 100 bar and 50 °C. The study highlights that ambient temperature hydrogen storage by alanates is possible due to the synergistic effects of Al–Ti and carbon.109 In the third study, photocatalytic hydrogen generation followed by hydrogen storage in a capsule has been discussed.110 This pioneering work integrates hydrogen generation with H2 storage. In this study, carbon nitride functionalized on either side by different functional groups is sandwiched between two graphene sheets. Light absorbed by the top layer generates electron–hole pairs and delivers the holes to the outer graphene sheet where water splitting and proton generation take place. The protons penetrate through the graphene sheet and combine with electrons on the inner surface of carbon nitride to produce hydrogen molecules. The penetration of holes through the graphene sheets occurs due to electrostatic attraction between protons and electrons. The hydrogen thus produced stays within the sandwiched volume. Fig. 14 shows the mechanism of the entire process and completes the generation to storage sequence.
 Fig. 14  Scheme of water splitting and hydrogen capsuling. (a) Models of graphitic carbon nitrides CN, C2N, and C3N4. (b) The photocatalytic (water splitting) hydrogen generation and capsule storage scheme: (1) photo-generated electrons (e−) and holes (h+) separating; (2) water splitting to produce protons (H+) through the attack of holes (h+); (3) protons (H+) penetrating through GO and producing H2 molecules; and (4) the prohibition of H2 molecules from moving out of the sandwich. Here GO–CN–GO is used as an example. Blue, grey, pink and red beads represent N, C, H (H+) and O atoms, the yellow and light blue clouds are for photo-generated electrons (e−) and holes (h+), and the blue and magenta arrows represent the migration of corresponding particles. Reproduced from https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms16049 licensed under CC BY, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, DOI: 10.1038/ncomms16049.110 
Conclusions and future prospects
Efforts to present the world with a green, efficient, renewable and economical fuel are in progress and there are still milestones to be achieved. In this direction, success on the front of hydrogen storage will expedite the realization of a hydrogen economy and the smart renewable energy grid concept. The challenge is to find a material with a reasonably good hydrogen storage capability with recyclability and faster kinetics. Graphene due to its high surface area, edge defects and curvature is widely employed as a popular support material. A lot of reports have appeared in the past few years which have focused on theoretical studies and structures so ideal that they are impossible to imitate practically. Therefore, there is a huge difference in the theoretical and experimental values. While on the theoretical front it would be challenging to imitate real graphene-based scalable structures and carry out simulations of hydrogen adsorption/desorption, it would be even more challenging to synthesize near-perfect graphene-based materials and study their H2 adsorption/desorption properties under ambient conditions. In order to tune the binding energy of H2 gas molecules on support materials, the techniques of surface chemical modification and metal/alloy catalyst dispersion are very promising. Graphene supports modified by heteroatom doping or functionalization exhibit marked improvement over pristine graphene supports. Research into combining metal hydrides, alanates and MOFs with graphene materials may lead to some improvement in hydrogen storage in the coming years.
In addition, the prospect of designing graphene-based “smart” devices is anticipated by the authors. These devices could be made up of units of bilayer graphene sheets stacked together in the form of a three-dimensional network capable of tuning the curvature and interlayer spacing of graphene sheets. The curvature of interlayer spacing could be self-tuned by the “smart” material after receiving stimulus from an external agent that could be pressure, temperature, electric field, etc. A change in curvature or interlayer spacing would result in a change in binding energy of the adsorbents thus either promoting or suppressing adsorption. These “smart” devices should be able to sense the demand for hydrogen adsorption/desorption and accordingly undergo structural modification. So in conclusion, combining techniques of structural/surface modifications and introducing new materials could be a way forward to elevate the current H2 storage capabilities using graphene-based materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
RN acknowledges Symbiosis International University for a research seed grant. B. P. Vinayan acknowledges the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation for research support.
References
L. Schlapbach and A. Zuttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Energy, 2015, 80, 509–521 CrossRef .

          http://www.rte-france.com/en/article/annual-electricity-reports, Réseau de transport d'électricité (RTE) Annual Electricity Reports, http://www.rte-france.com/en/article/annual-electricity-reports, accessed 02 15 2016, 2016.

          R. Nagar and B. P. Vinayan, in Metal Semiconductor Core–Shell Nanostructures for Energy and Environmental Applications, ed. M. Misra, Elsevier,  2017,  DOI:10.1016/b978-0-323-44922-9.00005-3, pp. 99–132 .
M. A. Pellow, C. J. M. Emmott, C. J. Barnhart and S. M. Benson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1938–1952 CAS .

          M. Melaina and J. Eichman, Hydrogen Energy Storage: Grid and Transportation Services, National Renewable Energy Laboratory,  2015 Search PubMed .

Suppliment 1 to Original Target Explanation Document: Onboard Hydrogen Storage Systems for Light-Duty Fuel Cell Vehicles, US Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy and the Freedom CAR and Fuel Partnership, 2015.
R. Ströbel, J. Garche, P. T. Moseley, L. Jörissen and G. Wolf, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 781–801 CrossRef .
A. Gutowska, L. Li, Y. Shin, C. M. Wang, X. S. Li, J. C. Linehan, R. S. Smith, B. D. Kay, B. Schmid, W. Shaw, M. Gutowski and T. Autrey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3578–3582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen and M. Zhu, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 36–43 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Jain, C. Lal and A. Jain, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 5133–5144 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Stampfer, C. E. Holley and J. F. Suttle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1960, 82, 3504–3508 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Suttisawat, P. Rangsunvigit, B. Kitiyanan and S. Kulprathipanja, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 1813–1819 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, P. G. Campbell, L. N. Zakharov and S.-Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19326–19329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, S. Yeo, J.-D. Jeon and S.-Y. Kwak, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 202, 8–15 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Langmi, A. Walton, M. M. Al-Mamouri, S. R. Johnson, D. Book, J. D. Speight, P. P. Edwards, I. Gameson, P. A. Anderson and I. R. Harris, J. Alloys Compd., 2003, 356–357, 710–715 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, G. Zhou, L.-C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107–131 CrossRef CAS .
O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Small, 2010, 6, 711–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, T. Maiyalagan and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 781–794 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, Y. Shao, M. W. Ellis, R. B. Moore and B. Yi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15384–15402 RSC .
Y. Xia, Z. Yang and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9365–9381 CAS .
A. C. Dillon, K. M. Jones, T. A. Bekkedahl, C. H. Kiang, D. S. Bethune and M. J. Heben, Nature, 1997, 386, 377–379 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y. Y. Fan, M. Liu, H. T. Cong, H. M. Cheng and M. S. Dresselhaus, Science, 1999, 286, 1127–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, X. Wu, J. Lin and K. L. Tan, Science, 1999, 285, 91–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Z. Huang, X. B. Zhang, J. P. Tu, F. Z. Kong, J. X. Ma, F. Liu, H. M. Lu and C. P. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 78, 144–148 CrossRef .
B. Panella, M. Hirscher and S. Roth, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2209–2214 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kabbour, T. F. Baumann, J. H. Satcher, A. Saulnier and C. C. Ahn, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 6085–6087 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sankaran and B. Viswanathan, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2816–2821 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Xia and R. Mokaya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1673–1679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Thomas, Catal. Today, 2007, 120, 389–398 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zacharia, K. Y. Kim, A. K. M. Fazle Kibria and K. S. Nahm, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 412, 369–375 CrossRef CAS .
B. Assfour, S. Leoni, G. Seifert and I. A. Baburin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1237–1241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Cho, S. J. Yang, K. Lee and C. R. Park, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 12286–12295 CrossRef CAS .
A. Reyhani, S. Z. Mortazavi, S. Mirershadi, A. Z. Moshfegh, P. Parvin and A. N. Golikand, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6994–7001 CAS .
Y. Chen and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9193–9199 CAS .
K. Koh, M. Jeon, D. M. Chevrier, P. Zhang, C. W. Yoon and T. Asefa, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 820–828 CrossRef CAS .
A. Züttel, P. Wenger, P. Sudan, P. Mauron and S.-i. Orimo, Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2004, 108, 9–18 CrossRef .

          M. Kutz, Environmentally Conscious Alternative Energy Production, Wiley,  2007 Search PubMed .
V. Tozzini and V. Pellegrini, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 80–89 RSC .
V. Tozzini and V. Pellegrini, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25523–25528 CAS .
M. Zhou, Y. Lu, C. Zhang and Y. P. Feng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 103109 CrossRef .
S. Patchkovskii, J. S. Tse, S. N. Yurchenko, L. Zhechkov, T. Heine and G. Seifert, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10439–10444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sterlin Leo Hudson, H. Raghubanshi, S. Awasthi, T. Sadhasivam, A. Bhatnager, S. Simizu, S. G. Sankar and O. N. Srivastava, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 8311–8320 CrossRef CAS .
G. Srinivas, Y. Zhu, R. Piner, N. Skipper, M. Ellerby and R. Ruoff, Carbon, 2010, 48, 630–635 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Vinayan, R. Nagar and S. Ramaprabhu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7826–7833 CrossRef PubMed .
B. P. Vinayan, R. Nagar, K. Sethupathi and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15679–15685 Search PubMed .
A. G. Klechikov, G. Mercier, P. Merino, S. Blanco, C. Merino and A. V. Talyzin, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 210, 46–51 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, N. R. Stuckert and R. T. Yang, AIChE J., 2011, 57, 2902–2908 CrossRef CAS .
L.-P. Ma, Z.-S. Wu, J. Li, E.-D. Wu, W.-C. Ren and H.-M. Cheng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 2329–2332 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Huang, N.-W. Pu, C.-A. Wang, J.-C. Huang, Y. Sung and M.-D. Ger, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2011, 82, 210–215 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Subrahmanyam, S. R. C. Vivekchand, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1517–1523 RSC .
A. Ghosh, K. S. Subrahmanyam, K. S. Krishna, S. Datta, A. Govindaraj, S. K. Pati and C. N. R. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15704–15707 CAS .
C. X. Guo, Y. Wang and C. M. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 14–18 CAS .
P. Bénard and R. Chahine, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 849–855 CrossRef .
V. Georgakilas, M. Otyepka, A. B. Bourlinos, V. Chandra, N. Kim, K. C. Kemp, P. Hobza, R. Zboril and K. S. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6156–6214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Klechikov, G. Mercier, T. Sharifi, I. A. Baburin, G. Seifert and A. V. Talyzin, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15280–15283 RSC .
R. S. Rajaura, S. Srivastava, V. Sharma, P. K. Sharma, C. Lal, M. Singh, H. S. Palsania and Y. K. Vijay, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 9454–9461 CrossRef CAS .
J.-A. Yan and M. Y. Chou, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 125403 CrossRef .
K. Spyrou, D. Gournis and P. Rudolf, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2013, 2, M3160–M3169 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Aboutalebi, S. Aminorroaya-Yamini, I. Nevirkovets, K. Konstantinov and H. K. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1439–1446 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Byers, H. Zhang, D. F. Swearer, M. Yorulmaz, B. S. Hoener, D. Huang, A. Hoggard, W.-S. Chang, P. Mulvaney, E. Ringe, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, S. Link and C. F. Landes, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1 Search PubMed .
J. Dai, J. Yuan and P. Giannozzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 232105 CrossRef .
Z. M. Ao, Q. Jiang, R. Q. Zhang, T. T. Tan and S. Li, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 074307 CrossRef .
K. Brenner and R. Murali, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 113115 CrossRef .
B. P. Vinayan, K. Sethupathi and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 6608–6614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ariharan, B. Viswanathan and V. Nandhakumar, Graphene, 2016, 5, 39–50 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Dimitrakakis, E. Tylianakis and G. E. Froudakis, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3166–3170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, J. Ihm, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 793–798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yadav, Z. Zhu and C. V. Singh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 4981–4995 CrossRef CAS .
T. Heine, L. Zhechkov and G. Seifert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 980–984 RSC .
D. Henwood and J. D. Carey, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 245413 CrossRef .
E. Durgun, S. Ciraci and T. Yildirim, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 085405 CrossRef .
C. Ataca, E. Aktürk, S. Ciraci and H. Ustunel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 043123 CrossRef .
L. Wang, K. Lee, Y.-Y. Sun, M. Lucking, Z. Chen, J. J. Zhao and S. B. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2995–3000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ataca, E. Aktürk and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 041406 CrossRef .
G. Kim and S.-H. Jhi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20499–20503 CAS .
E. Tylianakis, G. M. Psofogiannakis and G. E. Froudakis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2459–2464 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Liu and Z. Zeng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 123101 CrossRef .
A. Bhattacharya, S. Bhattacharya, C. Majumder and G. P. Das, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10297–10301 CAS .
Z. M. Ao and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 205406 CrossRef .
A. Du, Z. Zhu and S. C. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2876–2877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu, L. Hu, X. Hu, M. Yang and J. Deng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 12324–12328 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. X. Guo, X. Wang, C. Guan, H. Yang, K. Wang and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 195–200 CAS .
E. Beheshti, A. Nojeh and P. Servati, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1561–1567 CrossRef CAS .
C.-D. Wu, T.-H. Fang and J.-Y. Lo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 14211–14216 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, J. Gao, J. Zhang, F. Xu, J. Zhao and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8016–8022 CAS .
E. S. Cho, A. M. Ruminski, S. Aloni, Y.-S. Liu, J. Guo and J. J. Urban, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, K. Fan, M. Wu and G. Yin, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2016, 75, 10402 CrossRef .
A. Bhatnagar, S. K. Pandey, A. K. Vishwakarma, S. Singh, V. Shukla, P. K. Soni, M. A. Shaz and O. N. Srivastava, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14761–14772 CAS .
O. Faye, J. A. Szpunar, B. Szpunar and A. C. Beye, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 362–374 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Hong, B. H. Kim, S. M. Lee, H. Y. Yu, Y. J. Yun, Y. Jun, J. B. Lee and H. J. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 7594–7599 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Cho, A. M. Ruminski, S. Aloni, Y.-S. Liu, J. Guo and J. J. Urban, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Konda and A. Chen, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 100–108 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, A. C. Cooper, G. P. Pez and H. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18995–19000 CAS .
C. Zhou, J. A. Szpunar and X. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15232–15241 CAS .
C. Zhou and J. A. Szpunar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25933–25940 CAS .
D. Puthusseri and S. Ramaprabhu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 26725–26729 RSC .
Z. G. Bajestani, A. Yurum and Y. Yurum, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 32C831–32838 RSC .
G. Kim, S.-H. Jhi and N. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013106 CrossRef .
S. Nachimuthu, P.-J. Lai and J.-C. Jiang, Carbon, 2014, 73, 132–140 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nachimuthu, P.-J. Lai, E. G. Leggesse and J.-C. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Vinayan, R. Nagar and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11192–11199 CAS .
B. P. Vinayan, R. Nagar, N. Rajalakshmi and S. Ramaprabhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3519–3526 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bhaghavathi Parambath, N. Rupali and R. Sundara, Mater. Res. Express, 2016, 3, 095017 CrossRef .
A. A. S. Nair and R. Sundara, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9612–9618 CAS .

          L. Guczi, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, ed. J. W. Ward, Elsevier,  1988, vol. 38, pp. 85–96 Search PubMed .
C. Jiao, L. Sun, F. Xu, S.-S. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Jiang and L. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Zhang, K. Wang, Y. Yang, M. Gao and H. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1087–1095 CAS .
L. Yang, X. Li, G. Zhang, P. Cui, X. Wang, X. Jiang, J. Zhao, Y. Luo and J. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Both authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Rupali Nagar	Dr Rupali Nagar is working at the Symbiosis Institute of Technology (SIT), Pune, India as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Applied Science. She completed her PhD at the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi (IITD) and continued her research while working at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IITM) as a Project Officer until 2012. Her research interests include nanomaterials for energy and gas sensing applications.
Bhaghavathi P. Vinayan	Dr Bhaghavathi P. Vinayan is currently working as an Alexander von Humboldt Fellow at Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU) and Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany. He received his PhD in Physics from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IITM) with the best PhD thesis award. His research interests include energy storage materials and hydrogen energy technology.
Sai Smruti Samantaray	Ms Sai Smruti Samantaray is currently pursuing a PhD at the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras. Her current research is focused on graphene-based composites for energy applications, mainly focusing on solid state hydrogen storage and electrochemical hydrogen storage.
Sundara Ramaprabhu	Prof. Sundara Ramaprabhu is the Institute Chair Professor at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India. He has guided 30 PhD students and developed 10 technologies. He is a member of the American Chemical Society and a member of the Electrochemical Society. He has authored 330 international journal publications and published 43 patents. His research areas are nanotechnology, hydrogen energy technology, and fuel cell technology.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of a smart energy grid integrating hydrogen economy with other renewables.	 

System gravimetric capacity	kW h kg−1	1.8	2.5
kg H2 per kg system	0.055	0.075
System volumetric capacity	kW h L−1	1.3	2.3
kg H2 per L system	0.040	0.070

 	Fig. 2  (a) A comparison of gravimetric and volumetric densities of promising H2 storage materials. Adapted from Ströbel et al., Hydrogen storage by carbon materials, Journal of Power Sources, 159, 781–801, Copyright (2006), with permission from Elsevier.8 (b) Potential energy curve of gas adsorption and absorption. The dotted curve (green) is the overall potential energy curve and shifted vertically for clarity.	 



	Forms strong chemical bonds with metals	High hydrogen content of 19.6 wt%	Regeneration	
9



	AB5 type metal-hydride metallic bonds, H atoms share electrons with metal atoms	1.3 wt% of H, 0.1 kg L−1 volumetric density	Reversibility, high cost	
10



	The equilibrium modification of MgH2 under normal conditions, α-MgH2 has a tetragonal crystal structure of rutile type. Under high pressure α-MgH2 undergoes polymorphic transformation to form two modifications: γ-MgH2 and β-MgH2, having an orthorhombic structure and hexagonal structure, respectively	Very good theoretical hydrogen storage capacity (7.6 wt%), and relatively low cost	High dehydrogenation temperature (350–400 °C), poor kinetics	
11 and 12



	Complex metal hydride H forms a negatively charged coordination complex and surrounds metal cations	Greater than 5 wt%	Poor kinetics, regeneration at very high temperatures (>∼500 K)	
13



	Structures contain organic heterocyclic hydrides	4.7 wt%	Increasing H2 yield	
14



	H2 molecules absorbed in the voids, some cations can also induce spillover of H2 gas	Pt nanoparticles introduced into MOF-5 showed 0.62 wt% uptake	Require cryogenic temperatures	
15



	Hydrogen molecules by virtue of their small size can enter pores of zeolites	1.81 wt% @ 77 K and 15 bar	Require cryogenic temperatures	
16


1990–1999	C soot containing SWNTs: 5–10 wt% @ 133 K; SWNTs found to have 4.2 wt% @ room temperature and 100 bar; alkali doped MWNTs: 20 wt% for Li-doped at 635 K and 14 wt% for K-doped @ 300 K	
22–24

2000–2009	MWNTs show 3.2 wt% at room temperature and 120 bar; carbon nanostructures: 4.5 wt% at 77 K; carbon aerogel: 5 wt% at 77 K and 20–30 bar; B-CNTs: 2 wt% at 80 bar while CNTs: 0.6 wt%; ordered porous carbon: 7 wt% at 77 K and 20 bar; porous materials: less than 0.5 wt% at standard temperature and high pressures; Pd-CNTs: 0.66 wt% and V-CNTs: 0.69 wt% @ 20 bar	
25–31

2010–2017	CNT packings with different orientations: 19 wt% @ 77 K and 5.5 wt% @ 300 K; theoretical study on Si-doped SWNTs: 2.5 wt% H2 storage at room temperature; under ambient conditions storage capacities were found to be CNTs – 0.3 wt%, Ca-CNTs – 0.05 wt%, Co-CNTs – 1.51 wt%, Fe-CNTs – 0.75 wt%, Ni-CNTs – 0.4 wt% and Pd-CNTs – 7 wt%, Ru nanoparticles on a porous carbon surface: 0.8 wt% @ 298 K and 75 bar and 4.1 wt% @ 77 K and 40 bar; polyaniline-derived mesoporous carbon supported Pd nanoparticles catalyze hydrogenation dehydrogenation reactions	
32–36


G nanosheets	1.2% @77/10, 0.1% @298/10 and 0.72% @298/100	
44

G	0.7% @298/40	
45

G	0.9% @298/100	
48

G	<0.2% @290/60; 0.4% @77/1	
49

G	0.067% @303/57	
50

G	3.1% @300/100	
51

G	1.38% @77/1	
52

Hierarchical G	4.01% @77/1.07	
53

G	1.1% @77/2	
54


 	Fig. 3  (a) Hydrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of graphene powder at various temperatures in the range of 77–298 K and pressures up to 10 bar. Inset: The isosteric heat of adsorption versus adsorption capacity. The hydrogen uptake isotherm of graphite powder was measured at 298 K (1–2 microns, synthetic grade from Aldrich) for comparison. Reprinted from Srinivas et al., Synthesis of graphene-like nanosheets and their hydrogen adsorption capacity, Carbon, 48, 630–635, Copyright (2010), with permission from Elsevier.44 (b) Hydrogen adsorption isotherms recorded for graphene samples with different surface areas at 77 K using an immersion thermostat. The isotherm recorded for the reference sample of activated carbon is shown by red symbols. Reprinted from Klechikov et al., Hydrogen storage in bulk graphene-related materials, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 210, 46–51, Copyright (2015), with permission from Elsevier.47	 

 	Fig. 4  Synthesis schematic of hierarchical graphene. The SEM image of the hierarchical graphene is at the centre of the synthesis schematic. Reprinted with permission from Guo et al., ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 1, 14–18, 2013, Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.53	 

f-G	Chlorosulphonic acid	1.6% @77/2	
54

f-G	Oleum	1.4% @77/2	
54

GO	—	1.4% @298/50	
60

GO + MWNTs	—	2.6% @298/50	
60

G + MWNTs	—	2.1% @298/50	
60

f-G	Pt	0.15% @303/57	
50

f-G	Pd	0.156% @303/57	
61

f-G	Pd	0.81% @298/40	
45


 	Fig. 5  (a) Pillared graphene. A novel 3-D network nanostructure proposed for enhanced hydrogen storage. Gravimetric hydrogen uptake for graphene (diamonds), (6,6) carbon nanotubes (squares), pillared material (triangles), and Li-doped pillared graphene (stars) at (b) 77 K and (c) 300 K. Reprinted with permission from Dimitrakakis et al., Pillared graphene: A new 3-D network nanostructure for enhanced hydrogen storage, Nano Letters, 8, 3166–3170, 2008. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society.68	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) The optimized atomic geometries of a Ca atom adsorbed on the edge of a zigzag graphene nanoribbon (ZGNR) and armchair graphene nanoribbon (AGNR), respectively. (c and d) The charge density difference between the Ca atom and the ZGNR with an isosurface value of 0.0005 e (au)−3 when the Ca atom is attached on the edge and the middle, respectively. Red and blue colours indicate electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. (e–i) The optimized atomic structures of a Ca atom adsorbed on the armchair edge of a zigzag-armchair-edged GNR, the zigzag edge of an armchair-zigzag-edged GNR, the zigzag edge of a large vacancy-defected graphene, a (7,0) C-BN nanotube junction, and a (7,7) mixed C-BN nanotube, respectively. Reprinted with permission from Lee et al., Calcium-decorated graphene-based nanostructures for hydrogen storage, Nano Letters, 10, 793–798, 2010. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.69	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Top view charge density plot of the single vacancy defect. The three carbon atoms adjacent to the vacancy can be observed to have a lower charge density around them in comparison to the rest of the carbon atoms in the graphene sheet. The carbon atom with a dangling bond is located just above the vacancy in the figure. The other two adjacent atoms have a greater amount of charge between them than the amount of charge between either of them and the dangling bond atom, giving these two adjacent atoms slightly higher stability than the dangling bond atom. Change in average hydrogen binding energy of high defect density systems with increasing number of hydrogen molecules: (b) single vacancy (SVMD) system and (c) Stone–Wales and single vacancy (SWSVMD) system. Adapted from Yadav et al., Defect engineering of graphene for effective hydrogen storage, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 39, 4981–4995, Copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier.70	 


Graphitic plateletsa	Physisorption energy of H2 on graphitic platelets and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons estimated to be 3.5 kJ mol−1 and 7.2 kJ mol−1, both of attractive nature	2004	
71

Graphene and SWNTsa	The binding energy of hydrogen bound inside nanotubes is about twice as high as that of hydrogen adsorbed outside nanotubes or on the graphene layer. The parallel orientation of the hydrogen bond more effectively binds to the carbon substrate	2007	
72

C Linear chain, graphene and NTsa	Transition-metal atoms can bind on the inner as well as the outer surface of NTs and also on both sides of graphene	2008	
73

Li-Adsorbed graphenea	The Li 2s orbital donates part of its electronic charge to graphene inducing metallic character in it and reaching a gravimetric density of 12.8 wt%	2008	
74

3-D carbon nano-structurea	By design the material has tunable pore sizes and surface areas; if doped with lithium cations, the material's storage capacity can reach ∼41 g H2 L−1 under ambient conditions	2008	
68

Ti on graphene oxidea	Each Ti can bind multiple H2 molecules with desired binding energies (14–41 kJ mol−1 of H2). Theoretical gravimetric and volumetric densities are estimated to be 4.9 wt% and 64 g L−1	2009	
75

Ca on porous 3-D graphenea	Ca donates its 4s charge partly to the empty π* band of graphene, Ca becomes positively charged while graphene on receiving electron density exhibits metallic character. By adsorbing Ca on both sides of the graphene sheet, the hydrogen storage capacity can be increased to 8.4 wt%	2009	
76

Ca on graphenea	Ca atoms preferably adsorb on sp3 hybridized vertex sites as compared to the sp2 hybridized planar surface. Coulomb and Kubas interactions result in a higher (5–6 wt%) storage capacity	2009	
77

Alkoxide OLi groupa	Interaction of H2 with the alkoxide material can be increased to 3.7 kcal mol−1, gravimetric and volumetric targets can be met at low hydrogen pressures and 77 K	2010	
78

Graphene-like nanosheetsb	At 10 bar, hydrogen absorption capacities of 1.2 wt% @ 77 K and 0.1 wt% at 298 K	2010	
44

Li on boron-doped graphenea	Li coated boron-doped graphene has p–p hybridization that increases the binding energy to about 0.13 eV per H2 such that four polarized H2 molecules are attached to a Li atom	2010	
79

Li-Graphene, Ti-graphenea	Effect of strain on adsorption of metal atoms over a graphene surface was studied. A tensile strain of 10% increases adsorption with a binding energy of 0.2 eV per H2, gravimetric density for Li and Ti increases to 15.4 wt% and 9.5 wt%, respectively	2010	
41

Transition metal (TM) doped defected graphenea	Periodic arrangement of carbon atom vacancy forms the defected graphene. TM atoms adsorbed at these defect sites are bound sufficiently strongly so as to avoid their clustering. Fe–Ti decorated defected graphene has a gravimetric efficiency of 5.1 wt% of hydrogen with desorption starting at ∼400 K	2010	
80

Al adsorbed graphenea	Al adsorbed on both sides of graphene can store up to 13.79 wt% with recycling under ambient conditions with an average adsorption energy of −0.193 eV per H2	2010	
81

Li-Doped porous graphenea	A gravimetric capacity of 12 wt% is estimated	2010	
82

Ca on a graphene-based nanostructurea	Ca atoms adsorb on zigzag edges of graphene, a binding energy of −0.2 eV per H2 and a gravimetric density of 5 wt% is estimated	2010	
69

Pd and Pt decorated grapheneb	Volumetric adsorption done to study H2 adsorption up to 303 K and 5.7 MPa. Both Pd and Pt decorated graphene adsorb more hydrogen as compared to pristine graphene	2011	
50

Ti in double-vacancy graphenea	Up to eight hydrogen molecules can be stored per unit cell	2011	
83

Ni and B doped grapheneb	Graphene doped with Ni (0.83 wt%) and B (1.09 wt%) stores 4.4 wt% H2 at 77 K and 106 kPa	2011	
84

Ca decorated B-doped graphenea	Ca atoms on graphene form clusters and doping graphene with B avoids the clustering problem of Ca atoms. The average binding energy is about −0.4 eV per H2. A theoretical gravimetric density of 8.38 wt% for double-sided Ca-decorated graphene doped with 12 at% of B atoms has been estimated	2011	
85

Graphenea	Corrugations and curvature of graphene can be used to influence the binding energy by about 2 eV. Reversible storage of hydrogen is possible by changing the curvature of graphene sheets under ambient conditions. Gravimetric capacities of up to 8 wt% were estimated	2011	
40

Pillared graphenea	Pillared graphene is shown to have better hydrogen storage capacity as compared to CNTs	2012	
86

Lithium amidoborane (LiAB) and GO	–O and –OH groups help in the combination of GO and LiAB as GO3–LiAB, which exhibits better dehydrogenation properties	2013	
87

Mg–rGOb	Mg nanocrystals in graphene oxide, a gravimetric density of 6.5 wt%	2016	
88

N-Doped graphenea	Physisorption preferred on pristine and substitutional N-doped graphene whereas pyrrolic and pyridinic nitrogen doped graphene prefer chemical adsorption	2016	
89

MgH2 catalyzed by Fe3O4@graphene sheetsb	Improved H-storage capacity (6.2 wt% at 290 °C and 15 bar), a lower desorption temperature of 262 °C, which is about 160 °C lower than that of pristine MgH2. Formation of Mg1−xFexO which penetrates the MgO layer providing H-diffusion pathways resulting in better kinetics	2016	
90

Pd decorated graphene and nitrogen-doped graphenea	Nitrogen-doped graphene binds Pd more effectively as compared to Pd-graphene. At 0 K a gravimetric density of 3.622 wt% was estimated	2017	
91


 	Fig. 8  TEM images of (a) GO/V2O5 and (b) GO/TiO2. It can be seen that thin layers of GO wrap V2O5 and TiO2. Arrows indicate GO layers. High pressure H2 adsorption of (c) V2O5, GO, GO/V2O5, and (d) TiO2, GO and GO/TiO2. Reprinted from Hong et al., Agent-free synthesis of graphene oxide/transition metal oxide composites and its application for hydrogen storage, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 37, 7594–7599, Copyright (2012), with permission from Elsevier.92	 

 	Fig. 9  Mixed dimensional rGO–Mg laminates for stable and energetically dense hydrogen storage. (a) Illustrations depicting the structure of the rGO–Mg nanolaminates where rGO layers prevent O2 and H2O from penetrating, while allowing the diffusion of H2 (inset: photograph of rGO–Mg in air). (b) TEM images of rGO–Mg showing the high density of Mg nanocrystals with no visible aggregates. The upper inset is a high-resolution image and the lower inset is the diffraction pattern where the hexagonal dots are matched to Mg (100), corresponding to a d-spacing of 2.778 Å (JCPDS 04-0770). (c) XRD spectra of rGO–Mg after synthesis and after 3 months in air with indices of peaks (JCPDS 04-0770; the bottom bars represent the XRD patterns of hexagonal Mg (hcp) (red), tetragonal MgH2 (pink), hexagonal Mg(OH)2 (green) and cubic MgO (blue)). Reproduced from https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms10804 licensed under CC BY, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, DOI: 10.1038/ncomms10804.88	 

 	Fig. 10  Hydrogen absorption/desorption characterization of rGO–Mg multilaminates. (a) Hydrogen absorption/desorption (at 200 °C and 15 bar H2/300 °C and 0 bar) of the prepared rGO–Mg multilaminates. (b) Hydrogen absorption/desorption cycling of rGO–Mg multilaminates that were first exposed to air overnight. The first 5 cycles were performed at 250 °C and 15 bar H2/350 °C and 0 bar, and the additional 20 cycles at 200 °C and 15 bar H2/300 °C and 0 bar. (c) XRD spectra of rGO–Mg after absorption/desorption (the bottom bars represent the XRD patterns of Mg (red), MgH2 (pink), Mg(OH)2 (green) and MgO (blue)). Reproduced from https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms10804 licensed under CC BY, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, DOI: 10.1038/ncomms10804.88	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic depicting the concept of hydrogen spillover.45,46	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM images of (a) f-FLG, (b) Pd/f-FLG, (d) N-FLG and (e) Pd/N-FLG. TEM images of (c) Pd/f-FLG and (f) Pd/N-FLG. Reprinted with permission from Vinayan et al., JPCC, 115, 15679–15685, 2011, Copyright (2011) and Langmuir, 28, 7826–7833, 2012, Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society.45,46	 

 	Fig. 13  Pressure–composition isotherms of (a) FLG, (b) N-FLG, (c) Pd/f-FLG and (d) Pd/N-FLG at different temperatures. Reprinted with permission from Vinayan et al., JPCC, 115, 15679–15685, 2011, Copyright (2011) and Langmuir, 28, 7826–7833, 2012, Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society.45,46	 

Few layer graphene (FLG)	0.53	6.0
N-FLG	0.88	8.2
Pd/f-FLG	1.75	10.5
Pd/N-FLG	2.10	14.5

 	Fig. 14  Scheme of water splitting and hydrogen capsuling. (a) Models of graphitic carbon nitrides CN, C2N, and C3N4. (b) The photocatalytic (water splitting) hydrogen generation and capsule storage scheme: (1) photo-generated electrons (e−) and holes (h+) separating; (2) water splitting to produce protons (H+) through the attack of holes (h+); (3) protons (H+) penetrating through GO and producing H2 molecules; and (4) the prohibition of H2 molecules from moving out of the sandwich. Here GO–CN–GO is used as an example. Blue, grey, pink and red beads represent N, C, H (H+) and O atoms, the yellow and light blue clouds are for photo-generated electrons (e−) and holes (h+), and the blue and magenta arrows represent the migration of corresponding particles. Reproduced from https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms16049 licensed under CC BY, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, DOI: 10.1038/ncomms16049.110	 
Footnote
† Both authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
