Principles of photothermal gas-phase heterogeneous CO 2 catalysis  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EE02790K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EE02790K
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1122-1142Principles of photothermal gas-phase heterogeneous CO2 catalysis

        
          
            Mireille 
            Ghoussoub
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Meikun 
            Xia
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Paul N. 
            Duchesne
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dvira 
            Segal
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Geoffrey 
            Ozin
          
        
      *a
aGAO Materials Chemistry Group, Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, 80 St George Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3H6, Canada. E-mail: gozin@chem.utoronto.ca
bChemical Physics Theory Group, Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, 80 St George Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3H6, Canada
Received 
      21st September 2018
    , Accepted 21st December 2018First published on 8th January 2019AbstractPhotothermal catalysis is an emerging sub-discipline of heterogeneous catalysis. It is distinct from both thermochemical catalysis driven by heat and photochemical catalysis powered by sunlight. Instead, photothermal catalysis exploits broad absorption of the solar spectrum to stimulate a combination of thermochemical and photochemical processes, which contribute synergistically to driving catalytic reactions. In particular, it is proving an effective and promising strategy for converting CO2 to synthetic fuels. This article provides a critical appraisal of the concepts and principles underpinning the theory and practice of photothermal CO2 catalysis. Ultimately, the goal is to gain an appreciation of the scientific, technological, economic, and environmental challenges inevitably confronted by those pursuing the development of photothermal CO2 refineries.

Broader context
The urgency to reduce anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and yet continue to provide fuel for a growing global population remains one of the biggest technological challenges of our time. The concept of converting gaseous carbon dioxide (CO2) into synthetic fuels offers a promising solution towards building a sustainable carbon-neutral economy and is being increasingly endorsed by both the academic and industrial communities. One way to accomplish this conversion is by using sunlight as an energy source. Although there currently exist several types of catalysis (e.g., electrochemical, photochemical, thermochemical) that can integrate light into their process, photothermal catalysis, which draws on both the thermal and photochemical contributions of sunlight, has become increasingly popular by allowing for complete exploitation of the solar spectrum. In this review paper, we provide a comprehensive background of the physical principles underlying the photothermal effect in gas-phase heterogeneous catalysts; propose a figure of merit based on the catalyst's optical, photochemical, and thermal properties, to serve as a quantitative metric by which the photothermal effect might be assessed and compared across different systems; and, finally, offer design strategies based on chemistry and materials science for developing and enhancing the performance of photothermal catalysts for CO2 conversion.

1. Introduction
The harm threatened to both humanity and the environment by climate change requires that we shift away from our current fossil fuel economy towards one built upon renewable and carbon-neutral energy technologies. However, this remains increasingly challenging as global energy demand continues to grow, with some forecasts estimating increases of up to 30% by the year 2040.1 Greenhouse-gas-to-synthetic-fuels conversion technologies offer a path towards mitigating excessive carbon emissions without threatening to halt our current transportation, manufacturing, and energy economies. Given that they may be significantly energy-intensive, the best means of realizing these technologies may be powering them with sunlight.
To illustrate how this can be achieved, Fig. 1 depicts the major catalytic pathways towards producing solar fuels. Taking the most direct route, sunlight can be employed ‘directly’ to convert CO2 and H2O into solar fuels using photochemistry. Direct solar fuel production using photochemistry requires a photoactive catalyst that can enable the photoexcitation of electrons into higher-energy states. The complete mechanism involves light absorption to induce charge carrier separation, followed by the transport of carriers to the active surface sites for catalytic CO2 reduction. Photocatalysts are often hybrid materials involving a semiconductor (e.g., TiO2, ZnS) embedded with a metal or metal oxide co-catalyst (e.g., Pt, Pd, Cu, Ru, NiO, RuO2), and often a sensitizing agent to increase light absorption.2 Nanostructuring strategies have largely dominated the research and development of photocatalysts, with nanoparticle (NP) catalysts being favored for their readily tuneable bandgap and surface properties. The use of high surface area support materials can also offer increased dispersion, stability, and photoresponse of the NP catalysts, resulting in their improved efficiency and durability. Sastre et al., for example, demonstrated a CO2 conversion over 90% for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to methane under solar irradiation using nickel supported on silica–alumina.3 Despite these breakthroughs, the principle challenge of this approach remains the limited absorption and utilization of the solar spectrum by existing photocatalysts.
 Fig. 1  Flow diagram depicting the different strategies used for transforming solar energy, either directly or indirectly, into chemical energy in the form of synthetic fuels. 
CO2 can also be reduced directly via homogeneous photocatalysis. These homogeneous catalysts are typically metal complexes that serve the dual function of light absorber and active site; however, such molecular catalysts often rely on costly and rare metals (e.g., Ru or Rh) and thus have limited potential for industrial scaling.4
While a lack of standardization for reported measurements has impeded benchmarking of photocatalytic CO2 reduction, formation rates of products remain on the order of micromoles per gram of catalyst per hour (μmol gcat−1 h−1).2,5
Alternatively, sunlight can be ‘indirectly’ employed in conjunction with solar concentrators, to generate heat, or photovoltaic (PV) panels, to generate electricity; the heat and electricity so generated are then used to convert CO2 and H2O into solar fuels using thermochemistry or electrochemistry, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1.
In the case of solar-driven electrochemistry, a photovoltaic cell is used to provide electricity to an electrochemical cell, in which CO2 is reduced at the cathode. Solar electrochemical CO2 conversion has the benefit of being readily controllable, via changing the applied electrode potential, and simultaneously offers a storage solution to intermittency problems faced by renewably generated electricity.6 Key issues faced by the electrochemical reduction of CO2 include the high overpotentials required to perform multi-electron transfers, poor reaction selectivities, insufficient electric current densities, mass transport issues, catalyst instabilities, and high costs of electrode materials.7 The need for high overpotentials has rendered selectivity towards products other than carbon monoxide and formic acid, such as methanol and methane which require more than two electrons, particularly challenging to achieve.8 Various innovative solutions are being explored to address these issues, such as altering the structure and composition of the electrode materials, designing hybrid systems featuring fermentation modules to enhance production of longer-chain hydrocarbons, and improving power management to render coupling between the PV-electrochemical cells more efficient.7–10 Schreier et al. recently achieved a benchmark solar-to-CO efficiency of 13.4% using atomic layer deposition of SnO2 on CuO nanowire electrodes.7
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) systems, in which the PV cell is integrated with the electrodes into a single device, offer another interesting approach to solar fuels. Unlike PV-electrochemical (PV-EC) cells, PEC cells use solar irradiation directly to drive reactions at the photoelectrodes and thus eliminate the need for separate photovoltaic and electrolyser components. The electrical potential bias required to drive the catalytic process can also be provided by a PV cell, resulting in a system that uses sunlight both directly and indirectly, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Sugano et al. demonstrated a 2% solar-to-CO conversion using a PV-PEC system with CoOx and Au NP electrodes.11 More recently, Urbain et al. achieved a solar-to-syngas efficiency of 4.3% with a Cu foam–Zn cathode and integrated Si heterojunction solar cell-Ni foam photoanode.12 However, achieving high photovoltages without compromising PV efficiency, designing photoelectrodes that remain stable in aqueous environments, and effective coating of the electrodes with catalysts remain challenges to PEC technologies.12
Another approach to solar fuels is via thermochemistry which employs high-temperature solar reactors driven by concentrated solar radiation to split CO2. In contrast to the photochemical and electrochemical paths to solar fuels, solar thermochemistry can potentially utilize the entire solar spectrum and offers high product purity in comparison to PV-EC and PV-PEC systems that, if implemented at industrial scales, would require further processing.13 One of the earliest such uses of solar concentrators dates to Ancient Greece during the siege of Syracuse in 212 BC, when, according to legend, Archimedes designed a set of lethal mirrors to destroy a fleet of Roman ships using redirected sunlight.14 More recently, tower, trough, and dish-shaped solar concentrating systems have demonstrated the ability to deliver heat and create high-temperatures, which—when integrated with thermal energy storage—can be used to drive heat engines and generate electricity around the clock.15,16 In modern practice, a purely solar thermal approach to catalysis requires the use of a solar concentrator to focus sunlight onto a solar receiver, where it is absorbed to produce elevated temperatures (>1000 K) in a material that enables catalytic reactions.17,18 Solar thermal reactors can make use of such intense heat to drive endothermic chemical reactions, including the reduction of nitrogen to ammonia,19,20 dry reforming of methane,21,22 gasification of carbonaceous materials,23,24 and conversion of carbon dioxide to synthesis gas25,26 or hydrocarbons.27 There has also been much recent activity in the discovery and development of selective surfaces for solar desalination.28–30 Candidate materials for solar thermochemical CO2 catalysis include Zn oxides, Sn oxides, ferrites, and doped ceria.31,32 A benchmark 5.25% solar-to-fuel efficiency reported by Steinfeld et al. for solar thermochemical CO2 splitting technologies was achieved using a two-step ceria redox cycle operated using a temperature/pressure swing approach; however, a solar thermochemical reactor capable of capturing and converting concentrated sunlight into process heat for reducing CO2 in a single step has yet to be demonstrated.13
Most recently, photothermal chemistry, which involves the integration of both photochemical and thermochemical processes, has attracted significant attention in the field of catalysis. In 2014, Meng et al. demonstrated the application of the photothermal effect for the conversion of CO2 and H2 to CH4 and CO using on Group VIII metals.33 More recently, the same group reported a photothermal CO2 methanation rate of 230 mol h−1 m−2 using a Ru-loaded ultrathin layered double hydroxide catalyst.34 Yang et al. were the first to report, in 2016, the use of metal nanocrystals with a metal–organic framework (MOF) for photothermal catalysis.35 Since then, Wang, Wang, Cheng et al. showed photothermally-active oxygen-deficient mesoporous WO3 to reduce CO2 to CH4 at a rate 22 times greater than that of mesoporous WO3.36 Most recently, Chen et al. demonstrated, for the first time ever, the synthesis of C2+ hydrocarbons via light-induced hydrogenation of CO2 using a CoFe-based photothermal catalyst.37
In discussing the importance of photo-thermochemistry, it is essential to explain the relationship between photochemistry and solar-powered thermochemistry. Photochemistry remains distinct from the indirect methods of using solar energy in that it relies on photon-induced transitions between the electronic states of the catalyst, and consequent interaction with the molecular orbitals of adsorbed reactant species. Both processes occur in the same material, that is, the photocatalyst. In contrast, indirect approaches (i.e., thermochemistry and electrochemistry) rely on an alternative energy input (heat or electronic current) produced by an external device (a photovoltaic cell or a solar thermal generator). We refer to the combined use of direct photochemistry with indirect methods as “photothermal chemistry” and “photo-electrochemistry”, as shown in the Venn diagram in Fig. 1. Photothermal catalysis, in particular, offers an interesting strategy for synthesizing solar fuels as the generation of heat can occur within the catalyst alongside the photochemical process. In fact, the photochemical and solar thermal approaches can be viewed as two extreme cases defining the range of light-induced chemistries, with both mechanisms occurring to various degrees in any given photocatalytic system exposed directly to sunlight. We therefore refer to photothermal chemistry, or the “photothermal effect”, as being located somewhere along the spectrum of these approaches; that is, a catalytic system driven by some combination of photochemical and thermochemical processes.
Photothermal chemistry offers a promising approach for converting gaseous CO2 to chemical and fuels as it allows for greater exploitation of the solar spectrum as compared to purely photocatalytic systems, which are limited by their semiconductor bandgap, and eliminates the need for solar concentrators to produce the exceedingly high temperature needed for purely thermochemical conversion. In contrast to PV-EC and PV-PEC systems, a photothermal approach to solar fuels is not limited by the efficiency of PV technologies and eliminates the issues of catalytic stability posed by operating under acidic and aqueous conditions. Here we note that, although crystalline Si photovoltaic technologies have demonstrated power conversion efficiencies of over 20%, most commercial photovoltaic panels operate with efficiencies on the order of 15%.38
Today, the photothermal effect is increasingly applied to a range of environmental problems, including water desalination,39,40 water vaporization,41 air purification,39 and the catalytic reduction of CO2 to fuels.33,42 One of the key advantages of the photothermal strategy is that it offers more effective harvesting of the solar spectrum, including absorption of lower-energy infrared light that would be insufficient to excite purely photochemical reactions. Moreover, when applied to gas-phase heterogeneous catalytic systems, this strategy also enables high production rates while operating under relatively mild conditions, due to localized heating of the catalyst material.43–45 Photothermal catalysis, therefore, offers a promising route to producing fuels and chemicals from gaseous CO2 through a variety of known reactions, some of which are listed below:Reverse Water Gas Shift:42,46 CO2 + H2 → H2O + COMethane Synthesis:36 CO2 + 2H2O → CH4 + 2O2Dry Reforming:47,48 CO2 + CH4 → 2H2 + 2COSabatier Reaction:33,42,49 CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2OMethanol Synthesis:36,45 CO2 + 3H2 → CH3OH + H2OCO2 + 2H2O → CH3OH + 3/2O2
In what follows, we focus on the photothermal catalysis strategy, as an emergent and promising approach for the conversion of carbon dioxide into synthetic fuels using sunlight. We begin with a case study on the use of black silicon nanowires as photothermal catalysts for driving the Sabatier methanation reaction. In subsequent sections, we survey the compound physical principles of the photothermal effect. Based on this analysis we suggest methods of quantifying and measuring the photothermal effect, then outline design strategies for enhancing catalytic performance. Finally, we address the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead for this field.
2. Case study: photothermal methanation over black silicon nanowires
One of the first attempts to study photothermal catalysis focused on the use of Ru NPs supported by silicon nanowires (Ru@SiNW) for the Sabatier methanation reaction, CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O.49 In this experiment, methanation rates over the Ru@SiNW catalyst were compared under both light and dark conditions, as well as given varying wavelengths and light intensities. Silicon nanowires are an especially appealing support material for photothermal catalysis, due to their low-energy band-gap of 1.1 eV that, in conjunction with the deposited Ru NPs, can potentially absorb 85% of the solar irradiance over a broad spectral range.49 This is achieved with minimal reflective losses due to the vertical arrangement of the silicon nanowires etched into the silicon wafer substrate.50 In addition to the silicon support, ruthenium NPs are black (absorbing a wide range of wavelengths) and efficient light harvesters, enabling them to function as photothermal catalysts. This broadband solar absorbance of ruthenium arises from intraband and interband electronic transitions excited by absorption events across the visible and near infrared spectral regions. As a result, photomethanation rates over the Ru@SiNW catalyst are impressively high, in the millimoles per gram of catalyst per hour (mmol gcat−1 h−1) range, as normalized to the weight of the Ru catalyst (see Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Catalytic methanation rates for Ru@SiNW plotted as a function of temperature in the dark (black) and under simulated solar irradiation (yellow). The exponential line of best fit is shown for the series of batch reactions carried out in the light (dashed yellow line) and dark (dashed black line). The inset shows these methanation rates as normalized to the weight of the Ru catalyst on a plot of ln(k) vs. 1000/T, allowing the activation energy Ea under both light and dark conditions to be calculated. The similarity of these activation energies suggests similar surface chemistry; however, the significantly higher methanation rate under light implies that the local temperature of the Ru@SiNW catalyst is higher than that measured for the bulk.29 Reproduced from ref. 29. 
Regarding surface chemistry, the Ru@SiNW catalyst activates the Sabatier reaction both thermochemically and photochemically. In terms of thermochemical activation, the temperature of the Ru@SiNW catalyst was found to increase when irradiated with solar-simulated light, resulting in higher methanation rates due to increased thermal energy. To investigate the photochemical component of the reaction, the incident photon flux was varied by applying high-pass cut-off filters and adjusting the intensity of the Xe lamp such that the catalyst temperature was maintained constant. Additionally, the rate of the Sabatier reaction was observed to increase in proportion to the number of incident photons with energies greater than the bandgap of silicon. These results revealed that the Sabatier reaction proceeded five times faster when the catalyst was irradiated with photons having wavelengths of 615 nm to 1100 nm than when performed in the dark at the same temperature. Furthermore, due to the small bandgap of silicon, this photochemical effect could be induced using only near-infrared photons. At a set temperature, the Sabatier reaction rate nearly doubled when the catalyst was irradiated with photons having wavelengths between just 850 nm and 1100 nm, relative to tests carried out in the dark.
In the first step of the Sabatier reaction on ruthenium catalysts, it is generally accepted that CO2 readily dissociates to form adsorbed CO and O, with the rate-determining step being the subsequent reaction of this adsorbed CO and O with H to form CH4 and H2O.51–53 In the case of the Ru@SiNW catalyst, it is proposed that photogenerated electrons in the SiNWs transfer to the Ru metal, whereas the photogenerated holes face a potential energy barrier at the SiNW–Ru interface and instead interact with H atoms to form H+ ions. These H+ ions then interact with the photogenerated electrons at the Ru surface, enabling Ru–H bond formation and, consequently, the reduction of adsorbed CO to form CH4. While only a small fraction of all photogenerated charge carriers contribute to the photomethanation reaction over Ru@SiNW, the photochemical contribution to the overall reaction rate is found to be significant and greater than the thermochemical contribution under simulated solar irradiation.
It is also interesting to compare the photothermal effect for Ru@SiNW with that observed for In2O3−x(OH)y@SiNW, where the former has a thermocatalyst dispersed on the SiNW support and the latter a photocatalyst. In Fig. 3, a comparison is made between the optical absorption spectrum of nanocrystalline In2O3−x(OH)y (blue line) and how a photon of given energy is utilized by the In2O3−x(OH)y@SiNW hybrid materials.46 Regions of yellow and red shading illustrate the different light harvesting processes for photons with energy greater and less than the band gap of In2O3−x(OH)y, respectively. The former photons (yellow) are capable of creating an electron–hole pair within the nanocrystals and enable the solar-powered reverse water gas shift reaction, whereas the latter (red) are converted into heat within the SiNW support via the photothermal effect. These studies showed that the hybrid In2O3−x(OH)y@SiNWs made more efficient use of the solar spectrum than In2O3−x(OH)y alone by exploiting the heat generated by the SiNWs following light absorption. The photons with energies greater than the 2.9 eV bandgap of In2O3−x(OH)y contribute to the photocatalytic reduction of CO2, whereas <2.9 eV (sub-bandgap) photons absorbed by the SiNWs generate heat to drive the reaction. Uniformly coating In2O3−x(OH)y onto the SiNW arrays was found to reduce reflective losses, improve light harvesting and facilitate heat transfer. Collectively, these effects enhanced the photocatalytic reduction rate of CO2 relative to non-uniform coatings and unsupported In2O3−x(OH)y.
 Fig. 3  In this illustration, a comparison is made between the absorption spectrum of In2O3−x(OH)y and the solar irradiance spectrum, specifically regarding how a photon of given energy is used by the In2O3−x(OH)y@SiNW hybrid to catalyse the reverse water gas shift reaction. Regions of yellow shading indicate photons with energies greater than the bandgap of In2O3−x(OH)y, which are able to create an electron–hole pair within the material, and regions of red shading indicate photons with energies less than the band gap of In2O3−x(OH)y, which are absorbed and converted into heat energy within the SiNW support.25 Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Overall, the study on black silicon nanowires demonstrated a general strategy for enhancing the photocatalytic properties of a nanomaterial by integrating it with a photothermal “nanoheater”. These hybrids provide an effective means of improving the photocatalytic conversion rates of gas-phase reactions using both photogenerated charge carriers and thermal energy originating from sunlight. There are currently many examples of photoactive nanomaterial compositions, structures and morphologies that can promote photothermal CO2 catalysis.33,34,36,43,54,55 These nanomaterials exemplify the effectiveness of the photothermal effect in catalysis and demonstrate the potential of this method for practical implementation and scale-up toward the development of modular and industrial-scale CO2 refineries.
3. Physics of photothermal CO2 conversion
Photothermal catalysis draws its effectiveness from a synergistic combination of physical processes, and is not a strict superposition of photochemical and thermal processes.56 Herein, we briefly review the physical mechanisms underlying both the photochemical and thermochemical processes that form the basis for CO2 reduction over nanoscale catalysts.
Catalytic systems aimed at performing gas-phase heterogeneous CO2 reduction, although varied, typically comprise a nanostructured metal oxide that may be integrated with a metallic co-catalyst.33,37,42 The metal and metal oxide phases form a heterostructure, with each component contributing to the photothermal effect both independently and cooperatively. Although we will address the myriad physical phenomena that can occur in such systems, the mechanisms most relevant to a specific catalyst are ultimately determined by its unique set of optoelectronic, chemical, and thermal properties. For example, depending on their size, shape, and composition, metallic and semiconductor metal oxide NPs may exhibit a localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect57–59 that is very useful in photothermal catalysis.
To offer a more complete and contextualized picture of the relevant physical mechanisms underlying photothermal catalysis, we have opted to present them according to their relevant timescales: ultrafast (<100 fs), fast (100 fs to 100 ps), and “slow” (>100 ps), which are summarized in Fig. 4–6, respectively. The aforementioned figures illustrate a zoomed-in view of configuration k of Fig. 10, wherein the blue substrate represents the nanostructured metal oxide, and the yellow/orange areas represent the plasmonic and non-plasmonic cases of metal NPs. In one such case, the semiconductor metal oxide acts as the catalyst (i.e., it also contains the active surface sites), whereas the metal NPs act as “nanoheaters”. We emphasize that Fig. 4–6 are simplified and generalized for the sake of explanation, and that many options are open for exploration. It should be noted that: (a) surface chemistry is not always restricted to the surface of the metal oxide substrate, (b) while the loaded NPs are typically metallic, they may also be composed of a semiconducting material, and (c) myriad possible heterostructured architectures may exist.
 Fig. 4  Ultrafast photothermal processes (<100 fs) occurring in a metal/metal-oxide heterostructured catalyst under solar irradiation. The light-blue and navy coloured circles denote holes and excited electrons, respectively. Inset lower left: Nanoscale architecture of nanoheaters (spheres) loaded onto a metal oxide catalyst substrate. 
 Fig. 5  Fast photothermal processes (100 fs–100 ps) occurring in a metal/metal-oxide heterostructured catalyst under solar irradiation. The black, red, and blue circles denote carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, respectively. 
 Fig. 6  Slow photothermal processes (>100 ps) occurring in a metal/metal-oxide heterostructured catalyst under solar irradiation. The black, red, and blue circles denote carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, respectively. 
3.1. Light absorption and ultrafast processes
The first step in any photothermal conversion process is the near-instantaneous absorption of solar radiation by the catalyst material. The solar absorptance of a material can be defined as the weighted fraction of incident radiation absorbed: (1)where α is the solar absorptance, λ is the wavelength, R(θ,λ) is the total reflectance for a given wavelength, and I(θ,λ) is the total direct normal solar radiation intensity of wavelength λ and incident angle θ.60 In general, a photocatalyst should absorb as much of the solar spectrum as possible to maximize energy transfer from light to the material and achieve a more efficient system. This point raises the first advantage of photothermal catalysis: not being restricted to energies greater than a certain bandgap, it makes efficient use of a greater portion of the solar spectrum compared to photochemical or solar-powered thermochemical catalysis alone. While photochemical processes are often limited to the UV region of the solar spectrum, photothermal mechanisms can exploit the visible and infrared spectral contributions as well. For example, highly absorbing black nanostructured materials that make efficient use of the entire solar spectrum, from infrared to visible to ultraviolet wavelengths, are proving to be especially useful for driving photothermal heterogeneous catalytic hydrogenations of CO2 under mild conditions.49
Light absorption will trigger different processes depending on the electronic structure of the material, as is illustrated in Fig. 4. Solar irradiation of a metal oxide catalyst substrate will result in absorption of specific wavelengths, as dictated by the electronic band structure of the material. The absorbed light excites an electron from the valence band to the conduction band and leaves behind a hole, thereby creating an electron–hole pair. This entire process occurs on the order of femtoseconds. The holes and electrons then rapidly thermalize to the top and bottom of the valence and conduction band, respectively, where they then either undergo charge-separation and move away from the site of generation or rapidly recombine through radiative or non-radiative processes.
Metallic and certain semiconductor nanostructures (“plasmonic particle” in Fig. 4) that exhibit a localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect can further lead to myriad associated ultrafast processes. While metals tend to exhibit UV-visible plasmons, LSPRs in metal oxides may be tuned via doping, which can lead to plasmonic excitations being observed across the visible, near-infrared, and mid-infrared regions of the electromagnetic spectrum.61
The LSPR excitation gives rise to strong localized electromagnetic fields, which results in an antenna-like effect that enhances light absorption around the nanostructure.62,63 The LSPR then decays, either radiatively or non-radiatively, over a period on the order of femtoseconds. The non-radiative decay process can generate hot electrons through either intraband or interband excitations, with the former being characterized by transitions within the conduction band and the latter by transitions between bands (e.g., from the d-band to the conduction band). Hot electrons originating from LSPR decay are distinguished from other types of electronic excitations in that they are not in thermal equilibrium with the material and are instead described by the Fermi–Dirac distribution with an elevated effective temperature.63
In the case of heterostructured systems, hot carriers (i.e., electrons or holes possessing sufficient energy) can be transported across the Schottky junction formed at the metal/semiconductor interface (see Fig. 4).63 This entire process, from LSPR excitation to hot carrier generation and injection, occurs very quickly, with lifetimes of 50 fs for Au NPs deposited on TiO2 and as low as 30 fs for Au nanorods deposited on MoS2.64,65 Non-plasmonic phenomena can also contribute to the photothermal effects in metallic nanostructures through direct intraband and interband electronic excitations, as shown for the “non-plasmonic” particle in Fig. 4.42,66 While the generation of hot carriers in any form can contribute significantly to photothermal chemistry, those derived from LSPR excitations offer the additional benefit of enhanced light absorption. Here we point out that although plasmonic particles tend to have a large absorption cross section relative to their physical size, their capacity to efficiently collect light is oftentimes limited to a few resonant frequencies. Exceptions exist in which plasmonic structures might efficiently capture light over a broadband spectrum, the details of which will be discussed further in Section 5.2.
Finally, plasmon-induced hot carriers tend to possess higher energies than those generated via direct photoexcitation, and therefore have a higher likelihood of overcoming Schottky junction barriers.67 Ultimately, though, successful injection of plasmon-induced hot carriers is highly dependent on the morphology and interfacial interactions of the materials involved.65
3.2. Fast processes
For the purposes of classifying the physical phenomena underlying photothermal processes in nanostructured catalysts, we define fast processes as those occurring on timescales between 100 fs and 100 ps. While the ultrafast processes are mostly associated with light absorption and the resulting types of electronic excitations, charge transfer phenomena and certain types of non-radiative electronic relaxation processes dominate on the fast timescale. Fig. 5 illustrates the myriad relevant fast processes.
Charge separation/transfer and recombination quickly follow the near-instantaneous formation of an electron–hole pair in a semiconductor. Effective charge separation is, therefore, critical for increasing the efficiency of photochemical processes. The probability of separation compared to recombination depends upon many factors, but most importantly on the presence of an internal electric field or a potential gradient across which electrons and holes can migrate and separate. The presence of high-intensity, near-surface electric fields generated by LSPR in nearby NPs can therefore play an important role in facilitating charge mobility in the semiconductor. Ultimately, the goal of effective charge separation is to enable the migration of charge towards the surface of the NP to induce chemical reactivity in adsorbed reactants. The diffusion length of the charge carriers (the average distance travelled by separated carriers before they recombine) and the efficiency of electron transfer at the particle surface are, therefore, also key considerations to determining the efficacy of photocatalytic processes.
In competition with charge carrier separation are non-radiative relaxation processes, which, in metal oxide semiconductors, can take the form of either Auger or Shockley–Read–Hall (i.e., trap-assisted) recombination. Both processes result in excess energy being dissipated non-radiatively in the form of lattice vibrations (phonons) rendering them the dominant mechanisms for heat generation in non-plasmonic semiconductor nanostructures. Auger recombination involves energy transfer through a three-carrier process and the total lifetime of the process becomes highly size-dependent at the nanoscale, ranging from 10 to 100 ps.
Alternatively, electron–hole pair recombination can occur through Shockley–Read–Hall processes, which involve a two-step mechanism whereby the electron first undergoes a fast relaxation to a mid-gap energy state before fully recombining. Such processes are particularly relevant to metal oxides, which often exhibit trap-states associated with defects and vacancies.68 Indeed, higher defect concentrations have been reported to result in longer excited-state lifetimes, which lead to enhanced charge carrier separation and increased photocatalytic activity.69 In general, however, grain boundaries and surface defect states tend to favour charge carrier recombination over charge carrier separation. It is for this reason that, in contrast to thermal catalysis, increasing the surface area does not necessarily offer a clear performance advantage in photocatalytic systems, which instead require careful consideration of charge carrier pathways and their respective dynamics.70
Fast processes are also present in the form of charge transfer and relaxation in metallic NPs. Hot carriers, generated directly or by means of a LSPR, decay and redistribute their energy in the form of heat through inelastic electron–electron scattering processes over a period of 100 fs to 1 ps.62 Carriers of sufficient energy can also be transferred to available orbitals of adsorbed molecules and induce surface chemical reactions.71 For example, hot carriers have been demonstrated to induce the dissociation of H2, a key step in many CO2 reduction reactions, on Au NPs under visible light illumination.72
3.3. Slow processes
For the purposes of this discussion, we consider slow processes to be those occurring on the order of hundreds of picoseconds or slower. Processes relevant to photothermal catalysis that occur at this timescale are associated with greater length scales, such as heat transfer and molecular diffusion. For a schematic representation, see Fig. 6. The exception to this trend is Shockley–Read–Hall recombination, in which the final relaxation of an electron from a trapped state within the bandgap can take up to hundreds of picoseconds, thus providing ample opportunity for photochemical processes that require long excited-state lifetimes.69
The crux of photocatalytic processes is the transfer of charge to the molecular orbital of an adsorbed species to induce a specific kind of chemistry; however, the entire catalytic surface reaction typically involves several steps that may take up to milliseconds of time to complete. The most basic surface reactions involve: (I) adsorption of reactant molecules, (II) bond dissociation and intermediate species formation at an active surface site, and (III) desorption of product species from the surface. Other key surface processes common to gas-phase heterogeneous catalytic CO2 reactions are the formation of multiple intermediate species and the occurrence of surface diffusion processes, such as hydrogen spillover from nearby metallic NPs.73 Select steps are illustrated in Fig. 6 using methanol synthesis as an example.
Thermal processes are also characteristic of slower timescales and are the key distinguishing feature of photothermal processes. Unlike photochemical processes, the thermal processes present in catalytic systems are driven by a variety of both microscopic and macroscopic mechanisms. We broadly refer to thermal processes as the many routes by which heat can be generated, transported, and utilized in nanocrystalline catalytic systems, a thorough understanding of which is becoming increasingly valuable to the broader field of gas-phase heterogeneous catalysis. Before delving into the details of these processes, however, we believe it is important to briefly review some fundamental concepts underlying the thermal properties of solids.
The heating of a catalyst material by solar irradiation involves, at the most basic level, the transfer of energy from photon-induced electronic excitations to lattice phonons via non-radiative processes (i.e., hot carrier relaxation, Auger recombination, and Shockley–Read–Hall recombination). The efficiency of this energy transfer, together with the thermal properties (i.e., heat capacity and thermal conductivity) of the catalyst and the surrounding media, determines the resulting temperature experienced by the surface reaction.
Although radiative and convective processes may exist in certain systems, and certainly play a role in large scale reactors, thermal conduction is the most relevant mode of heat transfer for catalytic materials.44 Determining factors of thermal conductivity (i.e. heat capacity and average particle velocity) are generally intrinsic to the chemical properties of a material; however, the carrier mean free path is feasibly controllable via various design strategies and is therefore the physical variable upon which much of the remaining discussion is focused.
The phonon mean free path is the average distance travelled between two consecutive phonon scattering events and is, thus, a major determinant of thermal resistance and, hence, thermal conductivity in a lattice. Phononic thermal conduction obviously plays a significant role in photothermal catalysis, particularly in semiconducting nanostructures. Although they do not carry physical momentum, phonons have an associated quasi momentum (i.e., crystal momentum) and can impart their energy through scattering interactions with static features such as defects, imperfections, and crystal boundaries, as well as other particles (i.e., phonons and electrons). Certain scattering processes tend to dominate once the dimensions of an object become comparable to the phonon mean free path. For example, thermal resistance arising from scattering at grain boundaries scales inversely with grain size as the mean free path becomes comparable to the size of the grain. As well, in non-metals at sufficiently high temperatures, the thermal resistance generally grows with increasing temperature due to increased phonon–phonon and boundary scattering rates.
While phononic thermal conduction is the dominant mechanism in non-metals, electrons are the primary transporters of thermal energy in metals, resulting in their thermal resistance being controlled mainly by electron–phonon and geometrical scattering. At high temperatures, thermal resistance is driven predominantly by phonon scattering of electrons, resulting in thermal resistance being constant, whereas at low temperatures, electron scattering due to defects, imperfections, and crystal boundaries become more important, and the electronic thermal resistance scales roughly as T−1.
The phononic thermal conductivity, κ, is the inverse of the thermal resistivity and can be approximated by the relatively simple Klemens–Callaway formula. It is derived by solving Fourier's law of thermal conduction near thermal equilibrium with the Boltzmann transport equation, and it collects the contribution of acoustic modes:74,75 (2)Here, kB is the Boltzmann constant, h = 2πℏ is Planck's constant, τc is the total phonon relaxation time, ν is the speed of sound averaged between the acoustic branches, T is the temperature, and θD is the Debye temperature, that is, the temperature corresponding to the frequency of the highest vibrational mode. The variable x stands for ħω/kBT, with ω being the phonon frequency. Although the Klemens Callaway formula provides a good approximation of the phononic thermal conductivity, we acknowledge its limitations; specifically, the contribution of optical phonons is not negligible, particularly in the nanoscale size regime and at temperatures relevant to photothermal processes.76,77
This expression can be generalized to include boundary scattering processes while interpolating between diffuse or specular scattering events.75 The phonon scattering rate constant, which is the inverse of the relaxation time, τc, incorporates several sources of scattering, including point defects (lattice vacancies, interstitial atoms, dopants, isotopes, and impurities), and more extended imperfections such as strain, voids, and disorder.
Although scattering lifetime is the principal controllable parameter of interest in our discussion, other parameters in the Klemens–Callaway formula are influenced by nanostructuring. Phonon dispersion relations are modified by confinement, generally resulting in a reduced average phonon group velocity and lower Debye temperature relative to the bulk, which in turn further enhances phonon–phonon scattering processes. Diffuse (rather than specular) phonon boundary scattering reduces the thermal conductivity by a large factor. Overall, phonon confinement and boundary scattering processes result in a dramatic decrease of the bulk thermal conductivity. Nanostructured silicon, for example, exhibits a reduction in thermal conductivity by two orders of magnitude, from an initial value of 156 W m−1 K−1 for bulk Si at room temperature.78–80
Interestingly, quantum effects are not expected to play a significant role in photothermal catalysis, as experiments are typically performed at, or well above, room temperature. At these temperatures, medium- and high-frequency modes become localized and do not contribute to the propagation of heat.81 As well, with the reduction of the Debye temperature due to confinement, the impact of quantum mechanical effects is further diminished.82
Photothermal catalysis ultimately demands good thermal conductivity between the nanoheater component of the system and the catalyst, while simultaneously favouring poor thermal conductivity of the catalyst itself, in order to focus thermal energy at the reaction site. The effect of light absorption and thermal confinement in nanoscale structures results in an increase in local temperature as the feature size of the catalyst decreases. At smaller grain sizes, scattering and transport effects at grain boundaries and interfaces between grains and substrates begin to dominate over scattering events within grains, causing the thermal conductivity of grains to decrease and their temperatures to increase. A key technical challenge is, therefore, to understand and control the thermal resistance between grains and across particle interfaces, as this ultimately determines thermal transport properties of the catalytic system and the temperature at the active sites.
In summary, photothermal conversion in nanostructured systems represents the convolution of a multitude of physical processes occurring on a variety of timescales. The simultaneous, and often cooperative, presence of photochemical and thermochemical processes in nanostructured material systems renders photothermal conversion of solar irradiation a robust strategy for CO2 heterogeneous catalysis under chimie douce (“soft chemistry”) conditions. In the subsequent sections, we provide an overview of the key approaches to measuring, and ultimately quantifying, photothermal catalytic conversion of CO2, and finally provide a series of design strategies to aid in optimizing its effect.
4. Quantifying photothermal CO2 conversion
Photothermal conversion is the product of both photochemistry and thermochemistry. Photons interacting with a light-absorbing semiconductor material lead to the formation of electron–hole pairs able to participate in the surface chemistry, whereas heating of the system via the LSPR effect or carrier relaxation contributes to raising the temperature at the active site. Quantifying these various phenomena to assess the merit of a given photothermal catalyst remains a challenging task. In this section we address the consequences of photothermal phenomena on reaction thermodynamics and kinetics, discuss nanoscale thermometry techniques, and finally propose a figure of merit based on the optical, photochemical, and thermal properties of a catalyst, to serve as a quantitative metric by which the photothermal effect might be assessed and compared across different systems.
The photothermal effect enhances both the reaction kinetics and energy efficiency. The impact of the photothermal effect on an endothermic reaction profile is shown in Fig. 7. The initial step in a heterogeneous catalytic reaction involves adsorption of the reagents at specific sites on the catalyst surface. Events following reagent adsorption include activation, reaction, and desorption of product molecules. These events can be described by a free energy profile representing initial, intermediate, and final thermodynamic states along a reaction coordinate pathway. Each state is separated by an activation barrier, which dictates the kinetics of the surface chemical reaction.
 Fig. 7  Effect of solar irradiation on the endothermic reaction profile of a photothermal catalyst. Photochemistry has the effect of reducing the activation energy barrier, while temperature enhances the probability of reactants overcoming the barrier by providing additional thermal energy. 
When the catalytic reaction is enabled photothermally, both photochemical and thermochemical processes can contribute to the overall reaction rate. The photochemical component of photothermal catalysis contributes to increasing the rate of reaction by lowering the activation energy barrier of one or more reaction steps (as shown in Fig. 7). Physically, the reduction in activation barrier arises from charge transfer to the catalyst surface causing an increase in acidity and/or basicity of the active site, or from energy transfer to a vibrational mode of the transition state effectuating bond elongation.83,84
Surface reactions involving a multitude of intermediates on a heterostructured catalyst can result in complex reaction profiles. Changes to the electronic or structural properties of the active site, either via electronic charge transfer or surface reconstruction, may lead to an alternate mechanism being favoured, which can potentially alter the selectivity of the reaction.85 Here, we emphasize that a change in activation energy does not necessarily induce a change in selectivity, nor a change in surface reaction mechanism, as the original reaction may simply proceed in the same manner, albeit at a faster rate. Furthermore, although photochemical processes increase the rate of reaction, they do not always result in a change in the measured activation barrier. The reason for this is that photochemistry may not necessarily affect the rate-limiting step of the reaction and could instead contribute to the reduction of an earlier energetic barrier, resulting in a greater number of intermediate species arriving at the rate-limiting step. An example of this is provided in the following section.
Thermochemical processes, however, have the effect of increasing the rate of reaction by enhancing the temperature experienced at the active site. In terms of a reaction profile, this corresponds to an increase in kBT such that there is an increased probability of overcoming the activation energy by skewing the Boltzmann distribution towards higher energies.43 Specifically, thermal energy can either contribute to enhancing the rate by increasing the formation of products or, alternatively, enabling the desorption of unwanted species from active surface sites. The latter was demonstrated by Mateo et al. in their studies on graphene-support NiO/Ni and Cu2O nanoparticles for the photoassisted methanation reaction.86,87 While the reaction mechanism is evidenced to occur strictly via photogeneration of electron–hole pairs, the reaction temperature was shown to contribute to the desorption of product H2O that would otherwise deactivate the catalyst.87
The consequences on the reaction kinetics are, thus, akin to those resulting from conventional heating methods. The generation of high local temperatures at the surface of the catalyst through the combined contributions of plasmonic and nanoscale thermal transport effects makes the heat-related processes, described earlier, particularly efficient.
On this note, we should address the issue that, while the benefits of the photothermal effect for endothermic reactions are clear-cut, the situation is slightly ambiguous for exothermic reactions, where higher temperatures do not thermodynamically help to drive the reaction. This is especially relevant to industrial reactors where heat management and removal are critical to achieve high conversion. Still, the photothermal effect can offer advantages for exothermic reactions in various ways. These include: (1) increasing selectivity to the target products; (2) offering direct local heating of the active site of the catalyst via renewable solar energy, and thereby circumventing unnecessary heating of reactor equipment; (3) enabling faster cooling that could create opportunity for unsteady operation of heterogeneous photocatalysis; and (4) managing temporal profiles and phase relations of light and heat effects.
While the application of both photochemical and thermochemical phenomena contributes advantageously to driving CO2 catalytic reactions, distinguishing between these effects poses a significant challenge. In the subsequent sections, we address some practical examples and strategies employed to measure and quantify photothermal conversion.
4.1. Nanoscale thermometry
Aside from distinguishing the photochemical and thermochemical contributions to photothermal conversion, the localized nature of heat generation in nanoscale systems renders temperature measurements at the active surface site particularly challenging. The ability to accurately measure the relevant reaction temperature is critical for optimizing catalytic systems, as it is the equilibrium thermodynamics under specific temperature, pressure, and composition conditions that dictate the achievable thermochemical conversion of CO2 and H2 to products. However, measuring the local temperature of the active surface site is not straightforward, as the macroscopic definition of temperature breaks down at the nanoscale, where assumptions of continuum and thermodynamic equilibrium may not apply.88 Further complicating matters, thermometry at the nanoscale can be subject to invasive interactions between the system being studied and the temperature probe.
Local and global temperatures, derived from thermal mapping with infrared cameras or temperature-sensitive photoluminescence probes, can be used in conjunction with temperature measurements obtained via bulk thermocouple or thermistor measurements. Advances in metrology have enabled spatial and temporal resolution of thermal conductivity and temperature profiles at the nanoscale. These advances include instruments such as thermocouple and thermistor proximal probes embedded in the tips of scanning thermal microscopes, which map temperature with nanometer spatial resolution, achieve 0.1 °C temperature precision, and measure heat flow with picowatt accuracy.89–91
Such temporally and spatially resolved measurements of thermally induced changes in reflectance have provided time-resolved thermal conductivity profiles at the nanoscale.88,90–94 Tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy can be used to map local temperatures at the nanoscale through measurement of the intensity ratio of Stokes and anti-Stokes Raman scattering for different phonon modes.92 For sufficiently narrow Raman bands, the temperature-dependent shift of the peak position caused by changes in the average bond length can also provide a measure of local temperature. Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS), which can increase the Raman response by orders of magnitude, has been further demonstrated to provide highly localized temperature information, even at nanoscale junctions.93
Thermometry relying on direct measurements of phonon scattering behaviour can offer further improved spatial resolution over optical techniques. Menges et al. have, for example, introduced a versatile scanning probe thermometry technique capable of obtaining nanometre-resolved temperature measurements of sub-10 mK temperature resolution.94 Local temperature measurements with nanoscale spatial resolution have also been performed by recording the energy shifts of bulk plasmons with changing temperature using scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM).95 More recently, local temperatures of nanoscale systems have been achieved using monochromatic, aberration-corrected STEM to record the ratio between the gain and loss phonon peaks in the energy spectrum.96
Measuring the effective temperature in photothermal systems, however, is also hindered by the non-equilibrium nature of charge carriers and their associated heat dissipation. Weng et al. recently demonstrated the use of a scanning noise microscope (SNoiM), a type of scattering scanning near-field optical microscope (s-SNOM), with the capacity to map out hot electrons via non-equilibrium current fluctuations using a contact-free tungsten tip as a local noise probe.97 Given the method is not restricted to a single mode of charge-carrier dynamics it could offer an interesting means to observe heat dissipation across a wide range of nanoscale materials.
Despite these advances, identifying an operando method for probing the local surface temperature of nanoscale catalysts would be ideal. One such strategy to address this involves comparing the extent of total CO2 conversion both under illuminated and dark conditions. In this way, it is possible to estimate whether the local temperature of the nanoscale catalyst is higher than or equal to the bulk temperature of the sample material. If these temperatures are equal, thermal equilibrium from the nanoscale to the sample scale has clearly occurred. On the other hand, if the local temperature is higher, thermal transport processes within the NPs clearly dominate over collective thermal effects between the catalyst and the support.
An excellent example of this effect is the photothermal catalytic behaviour of palladium NPs dispersed on niobium pentoxide nanorods (Pd@Nb2O5). The activity and selectivity of this catalyst towards the production of CO or CH4 can be tailored by varying the size and, hence, photothermal efficiency of the Pd nanoheaters.42 Employing small (ca. 5 nm) Pd NPs resulted in a 99.5% selectivity toward CO, with a remarkable photothermal conversion rate of 18.8 mol gPd−1 h−1 and an unprecedented turnover frequency as high as 0.61 s−1. Raman spectroscopy measurements, carried out to extract the local temperature of the catalyst, revealed higher concentrations of Pd “nanoheaters” to yield temperatures as high as 470 °C, despite providing no external heating to the reactor. The observed catalytic activity indicates that local temperatures in this range are clearly sufficient to drive the endothermic reverse water–gas shift reaction.
4.2. A figure of merit for photothermal catalysis
As interest in heterogeneous photothermal catalysis grows, it is becoming increasingly important to establish and uphold the use of well-defined performance metrics to ensure standardized reporting and improved benchmarking. As in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis, non-trivial relationships between material properties and photocatalytic rates, as well as variability between different types of reactor setups, render it difficult to establish an all-encompassing efficiency metric by which all photothermal systems might be evaluated and compared. To ensure accurate and consistent reporting of the intrinsic photoefficiencies of photocatalytic materials, Qureshi and Takanabe have recommended including several quantities, such as the incident photon flux as a function of wavelength, the optimal photocatalytic rate (i.e. the highest photocatalytic rate achieved by varying the amount of photocatalyst in the reactor), and rate of reactant consumption or product evolution (i.e. at the optimal photocatalytic rate under different reaction conditions).70 From the perspective of catalytic efficiency, these indicators are also relevant to heterogeneous photothermal catalysts and care should be taken to ensure they are reported accurately.
Photochemical and photothermal catalysts do, however, differ in terms of their underlying physical principles. Whereas photochemical catalytic efficiency is predominantly a function of charge separation efficiency, photothermal catalysis draws from a combination of both photochemical and thermochemical material properties. The overall efficiency of the photothermal process, ηPT, must therefore include both of these processes and their interdependencies, and can thus be approximately written as the sum of the thermal efficiency of the thermochemical process, ηthermal, and the quantum efficiency of the photochemical process, ηphoto, as follows: ηPT = ηphoto + ηthermal(3)For incident photon flux, Pi, on the catalyst, the thermochemical conversion, ηthermal, benefits from high optical absorbance, low radiative emission, low thermal emissivity, and low thermal transport, thereby maximizing the local temperature experienced at the active site. The photochemical conversion, ηphoto, benefits from a high optical absorbance, high population of charge carriers, long charge carrier lifetimes, and low radiative emission. The photothermal performance of a material therefore faces fundamental limitations. Because photochemical processes, which are favoured by the long carrier lifetimes, benefit from minimal scattering, whereas the generation of high localized temperatures demands high thermal resistivity and, thus, maximal scattering of carriers. Indeed, the features that enhance thermal performance, such as decreasing grain size, introducing extended defects, and maximizing particle interfaces, also risk enhancing charge carrier recombination, thereby reducing photochemical conversion. Even in heterostructured systems, in which photochemical function and heat generation often take place in two different material components, heat must still reach and remain confined to the active surface site, rendering the thermal properties of both the nanoheater material and the photochemically active material relevant to controlling the photothermal effect.
To better quantify photothermal performance of materials in a manner that incorporates both photochemical and thermal efficiencies, we define a temperature-dependent dimensionless photothermal figure of merit, PTF(T): (4)where α is the fractional solar absorptance as defined in eqn (1), ηCT(T*) is the photochemical charge transfer efficiency at temperature T*, κint is the thermal conductivity of both the nanoheater and the contact region at the interface between the nanoheater and the catalyst, κcat is the thermal conductivity of the catalyst substrate, T* is the local, non-equilibrium temperature of the catalyst, and T is the measured temperature of the catalyst bed. Adjusting these parameters to maximize PTF(T) is not straightforward due to their antithetical dependencies on scattering, in a manner similar to limitations faced by the thermoelectric figure of merit in the field of thermoelectrics.98–100 Indeed, we shall see that an increase in ηCT(T*) may result in a concomitant reduction in κint/κcat and T*/T, and vice versa.
The charge transfer efficiency, ηCT(T*), is intended to be a metric of the photochemical contribution to the catalytic performance. It can be quantified by the probability of a charge transfer event taking place in lieu of a recombination event, defined in terms of charge carrier lifetimes: (5)where τct is the average lifetime of a carrier being transferred to a molecular orbital of the adsorbed surface species, and τr is the carrier lifetime before undergoing a recombinative process. Recombinative processes can include both radiative and non-radiative recombination; however, the former is not a typical phenomenon in metal oxide photocatalysts and τr can, therefore, be restricted to non-radiative recombination processes.
The rate of each charge carrier process can be expressed as the reciprocal of its lifetime; thus, the efficiency is expressed as the rate of photochemical transfer processes relative to the total rate of possible charge carrier processes. Although not explicitly stated in eqn (5), carrier lifetimes are temperature-dependent, which is illustrative of the coupling of the two terms in eqn (4).
Thermal conductivity can be further expressed as the sum of electron and phonon conductivities, that is: κ = κe + κph; in metals, electrons are the dominant carriers of heat, whereas heat is primarily carried by phonons at insulator/insulator interfaces.91 Indeed, an increase in scattering events has opposing effects on the PTF: scattering can lead to a reduction in τr resulting in a lower PTF, while simultaneously reducing κe and κph, leading to a higher PTF. Enhancing the photothermal figure of merit therefore demands optimization of both the photocatalytic and thermal properties of materials.
From a practical perspective, we estimate good photothermal performance to correspond a PTF of >5 and have evaluated the PTF of Ru@SiNWs as an example. In this case we use the thermal conductivity of Si NWs as κcat (given that this is where the key charge separation processes are reported to occur) and the thermal conductivity of Ru as κint. At 350 K, the thermal conductivities are 37 and 107 W m−1 K−1 for κcat and κint, respectively.101–103 The fractional solar absorptance, α, charge transfer efficiency, ηCT, and local heating ratio, T*/T, are estimated to be 0.85, 0.83, and 5, respectively.49 Thus, the PTF is computed to be approximately 10, which falls into the range of a good photothermal performance material. In contrast, we estimate a PTF of <1 to be indicative of poor photothermal performance. For example, a photothermal catalyst with a charge transfer efficiency of 0.2, a solar absorptance of 0.1, a local temperature of 150 °C, a global temperature of 120 °C, and a thermal conductivity ratio of 4 would result in a PTF of 0.1. Assessing the PTF of an extensive subset of photothermal catalysts will be needed in order to refine these categories further and ultimately develop a robust and effective benchmarking method. Finally, although the PTF is a helpful indicator in predicting a catalyst's intrinsic propensity towards exhibiting a photothermal effect, it does not offer a complete assessment of the catalytic efficiency of the process. As such, we strongly recommend that it be used in conjunction with other key performance indicators, such as incident photon flux, optimal rate, and rate of production evolution, when reporting a system's overall catalytic efficacy. Once the photothermal behaviour of a catalyst has been confirmed, the quantum efficiency, taken using absorbed (rather than incident) photons, can be used as a more complete indicator as to the overall efficiency of a catalytic process.
5. Design strategies for enhanced photothermal catalysis
To harness the full potential of photothermal conversion for gas-phase heterogeneous catalysis, it is necessary to develop nanoscale materials and architectures that meet several requirements. These include, but are not limited to, strong light absorption across the entire solar spectrum, enhanced charge carrier separation efficiency, and high capacity for heat generation. Additionally, such photothermal catalysts must be optimized with respect to the conventional properties required for gas-phase heterogeneous catalysts, such as high surface area, good scalability potential, low cost of synthesis, and the use of non-toxic materials. In the following sections, we outline strategies for optimizing the photothermal effect from the point of view of materials selection and bandgap engineering, nanoscale architectural design, and hierarchical construction.
5.1. Materials selection and bandgap engineering
High surface area nanostructures with strong broadband optical absorbance can achieve high local temperatures via the photo-thermal effect. This class of nanostructures, being typically metallic or semiconducting in character, often appear visibly black, revealing their high optical absorption across much of the solar spectrum. This high degree of optical absorption arises from electronic transitions occurring in narrow bandgap semiconductors. Examples of such materials include non-stoichiometric metal oxides with mid-gap defect states, mixed valence states, and/or conduction electrons; metals exhibiting the LSPR effect or strong intraband/interband excitations; and composite materials in which both metallic and semiconducting systems are present.49,68,104,105
As shown in Fig. 8, bulk and surface defects in nanoscale metal oxides create mid-bandgap states that, if engineered appropriately, can enable materials to perform photothermal CO2 catalysis. These states exist in non-stoichiometric materials containing oxygen and/or metal vacancies (e.g., V2O5−x and Rh1−xO) and interstitials (e.g., UO2+x and Zn1+xO), mixed metal valences (e.g., TiO2−x, WO3−x, BaTiO3−xHx), and conduction electrons (e.g., In2O3−x and HxWO3−x), and can give rise to optical absorption in the visible and near-infrared spectral range. Many materials are not limited to a single one of these three defect types (oxygen vacancies, mixed copper valence states, and conduction band electrons); interestingly, all three can co-exist in the non-stoichiometric perovskite BaY2Cu3O7.106
 Fig. 8  Sketch illustrating defect energy levels located in the mid-bandgap of non-stoichiometric metal oxides. The energy levels lie between the filled oxide-type valence band, VB O(−II), and the empty metal-type conduction band, CB M(+q), according to defect notation, VO = oxygen vacancy, VM = metal vacancy, Oi = oxygen interstitial, Mi = metal interstitial, M + (q − x) lower oxidation state metal than M + q. 
Mesoporous hydrogen-treated tungsten oxide has been well studied for its bandgap modulation and enhanced catalytic performance in photothermally driven CO2 reduction. Mesoporous tungsten oxide treated with hydrogen (denoted m-WO3-H250/350/450/550, in which the final number indicates the applied calcination temperature) exhibits a narrowing of its band gap from 2.7 eV to 2.3 eV, as compared with the 2.8 eV band gap of bulk WO3. As shown in Fig. 9, the narrow band gap of hydrogen-treated WO3, especially m-WO3-550, leads to a distinct increase in light absorbance.36
 Fig. 9  UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectra (a), Tauc plots for the determination of the optical band gap (S1, ESI) (b) and photographs (c) of m-WO3 and hydrogen-treated m-WO3 samples. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
By controlling the type, population, and distribution of these defects, it is possible to tailor their acidity, basicity, and redox activity, thereby providing a means to optimize their reactivity toward photothermal catalytic CO2 reduction.
5.2. Nanoscale architectural design
Another key approach to enhancing the photothermal effect is to employ hybrid architectures to exploit the electronic, chemical, and thermal properties offered by different materials. As mentioned earlier, most photothermal catalytic systems for gas-phase heterogeneous catalysis comprise a metal oxide decorated with metal NPs. Many examples in the literature cite the use of one component to function as the principal catalyst, the component at which the key active site is located (often a semiconductor), while the second component (often a metal) functions as a nanoheater to assist in the surface reaction.43,49,107 Although this arrangement provides a useful conceptual framework, we emphasize that each material component is not restricted to a unique function. Indeed, surface chemistry is often performed on both components of hybrid structures, and the energetic requirements of CO2 reduction often require the presence of different active sites for C–O bond activation and H2 dissociation.

5.2.1. Hybrid structures. 
The structure of nanoscale catalysts has many direct consequences on the physical properties underlying the photothermal effect. A hybrid configuration offers several advantages by drawing on the optical, electronic, structural, and chemical properties of two materials, rather than one.107 The proximity of the two components, for example, will dictate the heat transfer from the source component to the location of the active site and, in the case of plasmonic metals generating high intensity electric fields, can boost charge carrier transport in the semiconductor.
Several examples of possible hybrid architectures are presented in Fig. 10, with red representing the principal catalytic component and black denoting the nanoheating/catalytic component, many of which have been demonstrated in the literature. The core–shell structure (Fig. 10d) has been reported by Wang et al. to enhance activity of the cyclocondensation reaction using a Cu7S4@ZIF-8 heterostructure.43 Although the work was not applied to CO2 reduction chemistry specifically, it illustrates how nanoscale architectures can serve to enhance the photothermal effect. The Cu7S4 core was found to generate high temperatures under laser illumination, allowing for efficient transfer of heat to the surrounding ZIF-8 shell that contained the acid–base active sites.43 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images, shown in Fig. 11a, confirm the core–shell structure to be extremely well-defined, with the ZIF-8 component possessing a thickness of ∼120 nm. Interestingly, the concentration of NPs was found to be critical to the formation of successfully encapsulated and homogeneous core–shell structures, as illustrated in Fig. 11d; for instance, lower core concentrations resulted in nucleation of the ZIF-8, whereas higher concentrations led to the aggregations of the Cu7S4@ZIF-8 structures.43 Despite these limitations, the shell thickness was found to be readily controllable in the range of 72 ± 21 to 249 ± 30 nm. Zhang et al. also demonstrated enhanced photothermal activity using a hybrid architecture comprised of Pt nanocubes and Au nanocages in a ZIF-8 framework (Au&Pt@ZIF). In this instance, the Au nanocages functioned as nanoheaters, the metal–organic framework functioned as a heat insulator to generate high local temperatures, and the Pt nanocubes functioned as a catalyst for CO2 hydrogenation.45 Finally, Mateo et al. have established the merits of using a graphene support to enhance the catalytic activity of NiO/Ni and Cu2O nanoparticles for photoassisted methanation reaction. While their reaction mechanism is reported to occur via strictly photogeneration of electron–hole pairs, the reaction temperature was found to be key to desorbing product H2O that would otherwise deactivate the catalyst.
 Fig. 10  Illustration of a library of photothermal nanoscale architectures where the black objects refer to a broadband light absorber that can function as nanoheater/catalyst and the red objects as the catalyst. 
 Fig. 11  (a) SEM and TEM (inset) images showing the core–shell Cu7S4@ZIF-8 NPs. (b) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of simulated ZIF-8, Cu7S4@ZIF-8, and Cu7S4 NPs. (c) HAADF-STEM image and EDX elemental mapping of the core–shell nanostructures. (d) Shell thickness as a function of core concentration. (e) TEM image and (f) SAED pattern of individual hierarchical Cu7S4 hollow microspheres. (g) HRTEM image of nanocrystal building blocks of the Cu7S4 NP. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Inter-particle coupling of plasmonic structures has also been shown to enhance the photothermal effect by producing uniform temperature distributions throughout NP arrays. While a localized temperature effect might typically be expected around individual NPs, Baffou et al. showed, using numerical simulations, that a collective effect can occur even when a relatively low number of nanometer-sized particles are present.108 The interfacial properties of the hybrid structure are also crucial in determining the effectiveness of the Schottky junction, across which hot electrons can migrate from the plasmonic metal NP to the semiconducting component.65
Recent developments in the field of thermoelectrics can also offer guidance for designing improved photothermal architectures. Although photothermal catalysts require additional optical and photochemical properties, both thermoelectric and photothermal materials are analogous in that they require efficient phonon scattering mechanisms that do not compromise the electronic mean free path. Semiconductor NPs embedded in an alloy matrix, for example, were demonstrated to successfully lower thermal conductivity without affecting the electrical conductive properties of the alloy, resulting in an enhanced thermoelectric figure of merit as compared to the single-crystalline matrix.109 While this approach was specific to enhanced thermoelectrics, it might also be applicable to photothermal catalysts with architectures such as that illustrated in Fig. 10l, in which the nanoheaters are embedded within a catalyst matrix.


5.2.2. Size and surface effects. 
The size of the nanocrystalline components has direct consequences for several photothermal phenomena. At the most basic level, nanocrystalline materials provide a means to increase surface area and maximize the number of active surface sites. Nanostructured morphologies also affect the electronic structure of a material through the effects of quantum confinement, providing opportunities for enhanced charge carrier separation in semiconductors. In the case of NPs displaying the LSPR effect, the resonance energy is directly related to particle size and shape, as dictated by Mie theory and the Gans modification, and can thus be tuned accordingly to overlap with the solar spectrum.110,111
Nanostructuring can also have consequences on the thermal conductivity of a material by altering phonon transport properties. Silicon nanowires, for example, have been shown to display a significant reduction in phonon group velocity relative to bulk silicon, due to confinement effects and increased surface roughness scattering.112,113 The presence of nanograins to create a high density of grain boundaries has also been demonstrated to enhance phonon scattering and consequently reduce thermal conductivity.114 Decreasing the size and increasing the surface roughness of the catalytic component of a photothermal material system can, therefore, offer an effective strategy for reducing the thermal conductivity of a material and, hence, promoting heat generation near to active surface sites.
Smaller particle sizes do not, however, necessarily benefit overall photothermal catalytic performance. Reducing the lattice dimensions of the catalytic component, for example, can lead to poor charge carrier separation due to spatial confinement. In the case of nanostructured plasmonic particles, reducing size can also result in a blue shift in the resonant frequency, thereby lessening absorption of the visible and IR regions of the solar spectrum. Indeed, a wholistic approach should be taken when designing and optimizing photothermal catalysts, as improving one property might negatively impact another.
When designing a photothermal material capable of reducing gaseous CO2, it is important to understand how the number, size, and distribution of the nanoheaters influences both the catalytic rate and its selectivity to a particular product. This can be both a challenge to implement experimentally and difficult to interpret, due to the many chemical and physical effects that can contribute to the observed catalytic performance. One study that has attempted to probe the effect of nanoheater size on photothermal CO2 catalysis focused on a Pd@Nb2O5 system comprising 5 to 20 nm palladium nanocrystals grown on niobium pentoxide nanorods.42 In practice, the reverse water gas shift reaction (CO2 + H2 → CO + H2O) was favored for smaller nanocrystals while the methanation reaction (CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O) was preferred for the larger ones.
Nanoscale characterization of the Pd@Nb2O5 samples precluded a simple interpretation of the results in terms of particle size, due primarily to variation in the size distributions and dispersions of the Pd nanocrystals as a function of the palladium loading used in the synthesis. A gradual transition from small, highly dispersed Pd nanocrystals to larger, less well-dispersed ones was observed on increasing the loading from 0.1 to 15 wt% Pd, as illustrated in Fig. 12. Local temperature measurements using a Raman probe revealed that the larger Pd nanocrystals exhibited a more pronounced photothermal effect. Production rates of 0.75 mol CO gPd−1 h−1 and 0.11 mol CH4 gPd−1 h−1 were observed for the larger Pd nanocrystals, whereas the smaller nanocrystals showed a CO production rate of 18.8 mol gPd−1 h−1 with 99.5% selectivity.
 Fig. 12  Illustration of the effect of palladium precursor loading on the size, population and distribution of Pd NPs on Nb2O5 nanorods, which determine their reactivity and selectivity towards the reverse water gas shift and methanation reactions. Figure adapted from ref. 42. 
The selectivity for CO versus CH4 was also shown to depend on the size of the Pd nanocrystals, as particle size directly determines the percentage of terrace, edge, and corner surface sites available to adsorbing reactant molecules.42 X-ray and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy measurements, in conjunction with density functional theory (DFT) modelling, show that smaller Pd nanocrystals have the greatest positive surface charge and favor lower-coordinate corner and edge sites. As corroborated by in situ FTIR spectroscopy measurements, this results in less strongly bonded terminal Pd–CO surface sites and facilitates CO desorption. In contrast, the lower surface positive charge and larger population of higher-coordinate terrace sites observed in larger Pd nanocrystals favors more strongly bonded bridging Pd2,3–CO surface sites and promotes hydrogenation to CH4.
Based upon these findings, a reaction scheme consistent with the dependence of photothermal CO2 hydrogenation on Pd nanocrystal size has been proposed, with the complete process being divided into three stages.42 In the first stage, dissociation of CO2 to CO occurs, likely near the interface between a Pd nanocrystal and Nb2O5 nanorod. In the second stage, the intermediate CO is adsorbed onto the Pd nanocrystal surface. Finally, in the third stage, the adsorbed CO intermediate is desorbed or converted into CH4.


5.2.3. Shape effects. 
The shape of any component, particularly those displaying a LSPR effect, provides ample opportunity for enhancing the photothermal effect as both optical and thermal properties of nanocrystals have been shown to exhibit some degree of dependence on their shape. In their recent study on Pd NP loaded TiO2 for photothermal CO2 reduction, Xu et al. investigated the effect of visible light-induced LSPR on the spatial distribution of the electric field surrounding a single Pd. Three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (3D-FDTD) simulations were performed to obtain the electric field intensity and vector field of the Pd NP loaded TiO2 system as a function of incident wavelength of light. The results, shown in Fig. 13, indicate that at around 715 nm the direction of the electric field becomes fully reversed due to the LSPR. This electronic state enables the generation and transfer of hot electrons from the Pd NPs to the conduction band of TiO2, where they can react with Ti4+ to produce surface oxygen vacancies, leading to the creation of more active sites for CO2 reduction.115
 Fig. 13  Results of FDTD simulations showing the spatial distribution of the electric field intensity and vector field for Pd NP loaded TiO2 at excitation wavelengths of (a and f) 200, (b and g) 400, (c and h) 600, (d and i) 715, and (e and j) 800 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In the case of plasmonic structures, unique geometries, such as nanorods, hollow nanocubes, and star-shaped NPs, have been demonstrated to induce a red-shift in the resonant frequency allowing for more efficient absorption of the near-IR region of the solar spectrum.116,117 For example, in Zhang et al.'s Au&Pt@ZIF catalyst the Au nanocages served as effective nanoheaters due to their strong extinction in the near-IR region.45 Although small plasmonic structures typically operate around singular resonant frequencies, non-symmetrical and hollow geometries have been shown to increase broadband absorption, allowing light to be harvested across the whole visible spectrum.44,118
Geometry is also a key determinant of temperature distributions in plasmonic structures. Using numerical simulations based on Green's dyadic method, Baffou et al. showed that planar geometries will exhibit higher heating efficiencies and that localized heating can be enhanced by “sharp” geometries, including tips, corners, and edges, due to increased electromagnetic field intensity.119 Interestingly, another study revealed the sphere to be the least efficient geometry in terms of heat dissipation, which suggests that structures exhibiting a high concentration of edges and corners (i.e., cuboids, prisms, rods, etc.) would be preferable choices for maximizing the nanoheating effect.120 Sharp geometries also lend themselves to heat generation and reduced thermal conductivity by increasing boundary scattering of carriers.

5.3. Hierarchical designs
While black nanomaterials can enable efficient photothermal CO2 catalysis, light penetration into catalytic materials is restricted by their high optical absorption strength, limiting the locations of active sites to within micrometers of the catalyst surface. To optimize light harvesting properties, photothermal catalysts are typically fashioned into nanostructured thin films, necessitating the use of very large photoreactors that would be highly demanding in their use of land if increased to the industrial scale. Recent developments have shown that the reactor size, and corresponding land area requirements, can be greatly reduced by preparing photothermal catalysts as macroporous foam monoliths with either ordered or random pores and nanostructured walls to increase both surface area and light absorption.44,121 Depending on the materials used in their preparation, these monoliths can be metallic, semiconducting, or insulating. Due to their hierarchical architectures, incident light is able to penetrate and scatter throughout the entire volume of these monoliths, thereby accessing the active surface sites within and enabling optimally efficient use of the photothermal catalyst.
Enhanced light harvesting by materials is a well-studied topic, with a scope well beyond that of solar fuels. Design strategies to increase the optical absorbance of photothermal catalysts might, therefore, be adopted from other technologies, such as photovoltaics and various photochemical devices. The use of photonic crystals, which can give rise to slow photons, offers a hierarchical approach to increasing light absorption and charge carrier lifetimes. The photoactivity of nanocrystalline TiO2, for example, was shown to be dramatically increased by utilizing “slow” photons with energies close to the electronic bandgap of the semiconductor, which generated a larger population of electron–hole pairs.122 Unique topologies, such as “photonic sponges” comprising networks of interconnected spherical cavities, have also been demonstrated to efficiently absorb in the near-UV and visible regions, thereby increasing the performance of photoelectrochemical cells.123 Integrating photonic crystals into photothermal catalytic systems could also provide an effective strategy for enhancing their optical and photochemical properties. For examples, gas-phase photomethanation of CO2 using silicon inverse opal as a photonic crystal support for nanostructured RuO2 resulted in conversion rates an order of magnitude greater than those achieved by nanostructured RuO2 on regular silicon wafers.124
Hierarchical designs also offer interesting opportunities to enhance the mass transport properties of reactants and products at a larger scale in catalytic systems. The use of foams and porous structures is an excellent strategy for providing accessible pathways for reactant and product molecules to diffuse across the catalyst surface. This is especially relevant to the question of heat management for photothermal catalysts, particularly those adapted for exothermic reactions, where overheating and hot spots risk shifting conversion to low levels due to thermodynamics. Heat diffusion and transfer are not so effective for gas phase photocatalysts as they can achieve high local temperatures. Hierarchical design strategies are therefore crucial to maintaining efficient heat and mass transfer around the catalyst bed.
Porous structure design is also an effective strategy for controlling thermal transport properties within the catalyst. For example, porous nanomaterials can reduce thermal conductivity both by decreasing the phonon mean free path (due to enhanced phonon scattering from the pore boundaries) and by reducing the phonon group velocity.125 This offers clear benefits, as the photothermal catalysis requires poor thermal conductivity to favour localized heat generation within the catalyst to thermally drive reactions at active surface sites (as discussed in Section 3.3). The use of a porous structure to enhance photothermal performance was exemplified in Zhang et al.'s study of CO2 reduction over Au&Pt@ZIF, which demonstrated the metal–organic framework to function as an insulator, allowing the formation of high local temperatures leading to improved activity of the Pt nanocubes.45
6. Outlook
The photothermal strategy described herein provides a technologically attractive opportunity for storing excess renewable energy in the form of chemical energy. However, if photothermal CO2 catalysis is to deliver on its technological potential as a source of solar fuels, it must overcome the challenges posed by nanomaterials synthesis and structuring over multiple length scales, light management, photoreactor engineering, and process optimization. Pushing the theory of nanoscale heat transport far beyond the equilibrium regime is, therefore, imperative for making further progress in our understanding of photothermal catalysis. In all cases, consistent and complete reporting regarding indicators of photothermal catalytic activity is crucial for enabling reproducibility, benchmarking, and advancement of the field both scientifically and technologically.
Photothermal CO2 reduction has the potential to integrate with the existing chemical industrial infrastructure, particularly in locations with abundant sunlight. Its integrability is favourable relative to other CO2 reduction techniques, such as photoelectrochemical and photobiochemical approaches, which require scaling considerations that differ significantly from those of heterogeneous gas-phase catalysts, for which a wealth of scaling information is readily available. Thus, for heterogeneous gas-phase photothermal catalysts, the main challenge is the incorporation of light and not the upscaling of the technology for the laboratory bench to industrial scales. Similar to the other aforementioned pathways to solar fuels, a complete economic assessment of photothermal catalysis must consider the capture and transport of CO2, the efficiency of the catalytic process itself, and, finally, the requirements for product separation and purification.126
With respect to CO2 capture and purification, photothermal catalysis may require CO2 sources with concentrations higher than those of our current atmosphere and would thus be best implemented at manufacturing sites such as breweries and biomass conversion plants.10
In considering the integration of solar irradiation into the system, photothermal catalysis does not require the extremely high temperatures entailed by solar thermal processes, and thus eliminates the need for costly solar concentrators. Implementation of photothermal catalysts will ultimately require the development of photoreactors capable of efficiently harvesting and utilizing light to produce solar fuels at a technologically, environmentally, and commercially significant scale. While specific reactor designs will hinge on local geography and available infrastructure, many existing photoreactor configurations would also be appropriate for photothermal processes. For example, photoreactors based on compound parabolic collector technology comprise a long, reflective parabolic surface that is used to concentrate light on a transparent tube containing the flowing reactant. However, to date, the majority of the photothermal catalytic testing reported in the literature has been performed under batch operation, whereas continuous flow operation is better suited for large-scale processes.127 Moreover, batch processes oftentimes result in the accumulation of products on the catalyst surface, resulting in poor selectivity. Further reporting of photothermal catalyst operation under continuous flow conditions will ultimately be needed to carry out a full technoeconomic analysis of photothermal processes.
As scale-up from contemporary laboratory techniques to modular and pilot-scale photothermal CO2 refineries progresses, further questions of heat management will need to be addressed. Especially in the case of gas phase heterogeneous exothermic reactions, high temperatures can potentially risk shifting the system away from equilibrium resulting in reduced catalytic efficiencies. Thermal management is therefore essential for ensuring that the photothermal effect is exploited productively. Research into the use of pulsed-light sources for engineering the temporal properties of exothermic and photothermal thermal profiles is opening the way to new and interesting heat management strategies for nanoscaled photothermal systems.108 3D-printed metallic and ceramic structures that serve as fluid guiding elements have also recently been demonstrated to enhance heat and mass transport in catalytic flow systems.128 Indeed, the use of 3D printing technology to develop custom-designed microstructured catalyst supports offers huge potential to further optimize light penetration and enhance contact between the reactant gas and the catalyst bed.
Ultimately, a combination of technological, economic, and environmental assessments must be used in conjunction with performance indicators such as formation rate, selectivity, and yield to assess the energy efficiency, commercial viability, and greenhouse gas reduction potential of a catalytic system. Research and development in nanochemistry and materials science will ultimately be critical in accelerating the implementation of energy conversion technologies.129 With the continuous development of broadband, highly absorbing materials and our increased understanding of photochemical and thermal properties in nanostructured catalysts, the future of photothermal catalysis offers many interesting opportunities for CO2 capture and conversion technologies. Beyond CO2 chemistry and catalysis, one can imagine myriad thermally driven reactions in organic, organometallic, and polymer synthesis that could be enabled photothermally.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
GAO acknowledges the financial support of the following agencies: Ontario Ministry of Research and Innovation (MRI); the Ministry of Economic Development, Employment and Infrastructure (MEDI); the Ministry of the Environment and Climate Change (MOECC); Best in Science (BIS); the Ministry of Research Innovation and Science (MRIS) Low Carbon Innovation Fund (LCIF); Ontario Center of Excellence Solutions 2030 Challenge Fund; Alexander von Humboldt Foundation; Imperial Oil; the University of Toronto Connaught Innovation Fund (CIF); the Connaught Global Challenge (CGC) Fund; and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). DS thanks NSERC for support of her research. MG and PD thank NSERC for their graduate and post-graduate scholarships. Finally, the authors express their deepest gratitude to Professor Roland Dittmeyer (Karlsruhe Institute of Technology), Professor Aldo Steinfeld (ETH Zurich), and Dr Ulrich Ulmer (University of Toronto) for their invaluable feedback and commentary.
Notes and references

          IEA, World Energy Outlook 2017,  2017 Search PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sastre, A. V. Puga, L. Liu, A. Corma and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6798–6801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Agarwal, E. Fujita, H. F. Schaefer III and J. T. Muckerman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5180–5186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qureshi and K. Takanabe, Chem. Mater., 2016, 29, 158–167 CrossRef .
B. Kumar, J. P. Brian, V. Atla, S. Kumari, K. A. Bertram, R. T. White and J. M. Spurgeon, Catal. Today, 2016, 270, 19–30 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schreier, F. Héroguel, L. Steier, S. Ahmad, J. S. Luterbacher, M. T. Mayer, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17087 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bullock, D. F. Srankó, C. M. Towle, Y. Lum, M. Hettick, M. Scott, A. Javey and J. Ager, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2222–2230 RSC .
S. Ma, R. Luo, J. I. Gold, Z. Y. Aaron, B. Kim and P. J. Kenis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8573–8578 RSC .
T. Haas, R. Krause, R. Weber, M. Demler and G. Schmid, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 32 CrossRef .
Y. Sugano, A. Ono, R. Kitagawa, J. Tamura, M. Yamagiwa, Y. Kudo, E. Tsutsumi and S. Mikoshiba, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 54246–54252 RSC .
F. Urbain, P. Tang, N. M. Carretero, T. Andreu, L. G. Gerling, C. Voz, J. Arbiol and J. R. Morante, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2256–2266 RSC .
D. Marxer, P. Furler, M. Takacs and A. Steinfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1142–1149 RSC .
A. A. Mills and R. Clift, Eur. J. Phys., 1992, 13, 268 CrossRef .
M. Romero and A. Steinfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9234–9245 RSC .
T. Mancini, P. Heller, B. Butler, B. Osborn, W. Schiel, V. Goldberg, R. Buck, R. Diver, C. Andraka and J. Moreno, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2003, 125, 135–151 CrossRef .
J. Pye, G. Hughes, E. Abbasi, C.-A. Asselineau, G. Burgess, J. Coventry, W. Logie, F. Venn and J. Zapata, AIP Conf. Proc., 2016, 1734, 030029 CrossRef .
T. Von Backström and A. Gannon, Sol. Energy, 2004, 76, 235–241 CrossRef .
R. Michalsky, P. H. Pfromm and A. Steinfeld, Interface Focus, 2015, 5, 20140084 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Heidlage, E. A. Kezar, K. C. Snow and P. H. Pfromm, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 14014–14024 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agrafiotis, H. von Storch, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 29, 656–682 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gokon, Y. Yamawaki, D. Nakazawa and T. Kodama, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7441–7453 CrossRef CAS .
N. Piatkowski, C. Wieckert, A. W. Weimer and A. Steinfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 4, 73–82 RSC .
P. Zedtwitz and A. Steinfeld, Energy, 2003, 28, 441–456 CrossRef .
M. Tou, R. Michalsky and A. Steinfeld, Joule, 2017, 1, 146–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Chueh and S. M. Haile, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 735–739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Marxer, P. Furler, J. Scheffe, H. Geerlings, C. Falter, V. Batteiger, A. Sizmann and A. Steinfeld, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 3241–3250 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Fath, S. M. Elsherbiny, A. A. Hassan, M. Rommel, M. Wieghaus, J. Koschikowski and M. Vatansever, Desalination, 2008, 225, 58–69 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Furler, J. Scheffe, M. Gorbar, L. Moes, U. Vogt and A. Steinfeld, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 7051–7059 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jacot, J. M. Naik, R. Moré, R. Michalsky, A. Steinfeld and G. Patzke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5807–5816 RSC .
X. Meng, T. Wang, L. Liu, S. Ouyang, P. Li, H. Hu, T. Kako, H. Iwai, A. Tanaka and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 11662–11666 CrossRef .
J. Ren, S. Ouyang, H. Xu, X. Meng, T. Wang, D. Wang and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601657 CrossRef .
Q. Yang, Q. Xu, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 3749–3753 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Cheng, Z. Liu, Q. Guo, M. Ngoc Ha and Z. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5314–5322 RSC .
G. Chen, R. Gao, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, G. I. N. Waterhouse, R. Shi, J. Zhao, M. Zhang, L. Shang, G. Sheng, X. Zhang, X. Wen, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704663 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Rakesh Tej Kumar, M. Ramakrishna and G. Durga Sukumar, Int. J. Energy Res., 2018, 42, 2305–2319 CrossRef .
L. Hu, S. Gao, X. Ding, D. Wang, J. Jiang, J. Jin and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4835–4842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-K. Liu, Q. Jiang, S. Tadepalli, R. Raliya, P. Biswas, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7675–7681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018 10.1039/C8EE01146J .
J. Jia, H. Wang, Z. Lu, P. G. O'Brien, M. Ghoussoub, P. Duchesne, Z. Zheng, P. Li, Q. Qiao, L. Wang, A. Gu, A. A. Jelle, Y. Dong, Q. Wang, K. K. Ghuman, T. Wood, C. Qian, Y. Shao, C. Qiu, M. Ye, Y. Zhu, Z.-H. Lu, P. Zhang, A. S. Helmy, C. V. Singh, N. P. Kherani, D. D. Perovic and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700252 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. Chai, M. Zeng, Q. Li, Y. Wang and D. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6887–6893 RSC .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 323–343 RSC .
W. Zhang, L. Wang, K. Wang, M. U. Khan, M. Wang, H. Li and J. Zeng, Small, 2017, 13, 1602583 CrossRef PubMed .
L. B. Hoch, P. G. O’Brien, A. Jelle, A. Sandhel, D. D. Perovic, C. A. Mims and G. A. Ozin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9017–9025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, X. Meng, T. D. Dao, H. Zhang, P. Li, K. Chang, T. Wang, M. Li, T. Nagao and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11545–11549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Han, W. Wei, L. Chang, P. Cheng and Y. H. Hu, ACS Catal., 2015, 6, 494–497 CrossRef .
P. G. O'Brien, A. Sandhel, T. E. Wood, A. A. Jelle, L. B. Hoch, D. D. Perovic, C. A. Mims and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Sci., 2014, 1, 1400001 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-Q. Peng and S.-T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 198–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Eckle, H.-G. Anfang and R. J. Behm, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1361–1367 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yaccato, R. Carhart, A. Hagemeyer, A. Lesik, P. Strasser, A. F. Volpe, H. Turner, H. Weinberg, R. K. Grasselli and C. Brooks, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 296, 30–48 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Prairie, A. Renken, J. G. Highfield, K. Ravindranathan Thampi and M. Grätzel, J. Catal., 1991, 129, 130–144 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, P. G. O'Brien, L. He, Q. Qiao, T. Fei, L. M. Reyes, T. E. Burrow, Y. Dong, K. Liao, M. Varela, S. J. Pennycook, M. Hmadeh, A. S. Helmy, N. P. Kherani, D. D. Perovic and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600189 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Li, N. Soheilnia, M. Greiner, U. Ulmer, T. Wood, A. A. Jelle, Y. Dong, A. P. Yin Wong, J. Jia and G. A. Ozin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018 DOI:10.1021/acsami.8b04982 .
S. Tang, J. Sun, H. Hong and Q. Liu, Front. Energy, 2017, 11, 437–451 CrossRef .
E. Ringe, J. M. McMahon, K. Sohn, C. Cobley, Y. Xia, J. Huang, G. C. Schatz, L. D. Marks and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12511–12516 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garcia, R. Buonsanti, E. L. Runnerstrom, R. J. Mendelsberg, A. Llordes, A. Anders, T. J. Richardson and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4415–4420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. A. Duffie and W. A. Beckman, Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes, Wiley-Blackwell,  2013, pp. 173–201 Search PubMed .
S. D. Lounis, E. L. Runnerstrom, A. Llordés and D. J. Milliron, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1564–1574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
L. Du, A. Furube, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 15, 21–30 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, L. Liu, W.-H. Fang, R. Long, M. V. Tokina and O. V. Prezhdo, Chem, 2018, 4, 1112–1127 CAS .
S. Sarina, H.-Y. Zhu, Q. Xiao, E. Jaatinen, J. Jia, Y. Huang, Z. Zheng and H. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2935–2940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Zheng, H. Zhao, A. Manjavacas, M. McClain, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7797 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jia, C. Qian, Y. Dong, Y. Feng Li, H. Wang, M. Ghoussoub, K. T. Butler, A. Walsh and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4631–4644 RSC .
L. B. Hoch, P. Szymanski, K. K. Ghuman, L. He, K. Liao, Q. Qiao, L. M. Reyes, Y. Zhu, M. A. El-Sayed, C. V. Singh and G. A. Ozin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E8011–E8020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qureshi and K. Takanabe, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 158–167 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cortés, W. Xie, J. Cambiasso, A. S. Jermyn, R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, S. Schlücker and S. A. Maier, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14880 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, F. Libisch, N. Large, O. Neumann, L. V. Brown, J. Cheng, J. B. Lassiter, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 240–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Prins, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2714–2738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Cahill, W. K. Ford, K. E. Goodson, G. D. Mahan, A. Majumdar, H. J. Maris, R. Merlin and S. R. Phillpot, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 93, 793–818 CrossRef .
J. Zou and A. Balandin, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 2932–2938 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tian, K. Esfarjani, J. Shiomi, A. S. Henry and G. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 053122 CrossRef .
N. Mingo, L. Yang, D. Li and A. Majumdar, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1713–1716 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Hochbaum, R. Chen, R. D. Delgado, W. Liang, E. C. Garnett, M. Najarian, A. Majumdar and P. Yang, Nature, 2008, 451, 163–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou and M. Hu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6178–6187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Glassbrenner and G. A. Slack, Phys. Rev. J. Arch., 1964, 134, A1058–A1069 CrossRef .
J. Turney, A. McGaughey and C. Amon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 224305 CrossRef .

          S. Fujita and K. Ito, Quantum theory of conducting matter: Newtonian equations of motion for a Bloch electron, Springer Science & Business Media,  2007 Search PubMed .
A. Corma and H. Garcia, J. Catal., 2013, 308, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .

          R. A. Van Santen and M. Neurock, Molecular heterogeneous catalysis: a conceptual and computational approach, John Wiley & Sons,  2009 Search PubMed .
D. Mateo, J. Albero and H. García, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 563–571 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mateo, J. Albero and H. García, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2392–2400 RSC .

          P. R. Childs, Thermometry at the Nanoscale,  2015, pp. 1–22 Search PubMed .
K. L. Grosse, M.-H. Bae, F. Lian, E. Pop and W. P. King, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 287–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, W. Jeong, W. Lee and P. Reddy, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4248–4257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Cahill, P. V. Braun, G. Chen, D. R. Clarke, S. Fan, K. E. Goodson, P. Keblinski, W. P. King, G. D. Mahan and A. Majumdar, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2014, 1, 011305 Search PubMed .
M. V. Balois, N. Hayazawa, F. C. Catalan, S. Kawata, T.-A. Yano and T. Hayashi, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2015, 407, 8205–8213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Ward, D. A. Corley, J. M. Tour and D. Natelson, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Menges, P. Mensch, H. Schmid, H. Riel, A. Stemmer and B. Gotsmann, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mecklenburg, W. A. Hubbard, E. White, R. Dhall, S. B. Cronin, S. Aloni and B. Regan, Science, 2015, 347, 629–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Idrobo, A. R. Lupini, T. Feng, R. R. Unocic, F. S. Walden, D. S. Gardiner, T. C. Lovejoy, N. Dellby, S. T. Pantelides and O. L. Krivanek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2018, 120, 095901 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Weng, S. Komiyama, L. Yang, Z. An, P. Chen, S.-A. Biehs, Y. Kajihara and W. Lu, Science, 2018, 360, 775–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tan, L.-D. Zhao and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12123–12149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Koumoto, Y. Wang, R. Zhang, A. Kosuga and R. Funahashi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2010, 40, 363–394 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Zeier, A. Zevalkink, Z. M. Gibbs, G. Hautier, M. G. Kanatzidis and G. J. Snyder, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6826–6841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, Y. Wu, P. Kim, L. Shi, P. Yang and A. Majumdar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 2934–2936 CrossRef CAS .
R. Powell, R. Tye and M. J. Woodman, J. Less-Common Met., 1967, 12, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
G. Langer, J. Hartmann and M. Reichling, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1997, 68, 1510–1513 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nagarajan, R. A. D. Souza, D. Samuelis, I. Valov, A. Börger, J. Janek, K.-D. Becker, P. C. Schmidt and M. Martin, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 391–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Szot, W. Speier, G. Bihlmayer and R. Waser, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 312–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Beyers, G. Lim, E. Engler, R. Savoy, T. Shaw, T. Dinger, W. Gallagher and R. Sandstrom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 50, 1918–1920 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Swearer, H. Zhao, L. Zhou, C. Zhang, H. Robatjazi, J. M. P. Martirez, C. M. Krauter, S. Yazdi, M. J. McClain and E. Ringe, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 8916–8920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Baffou, P. Berto, E. Bermúdez Ureña, R. Quidant, S. Monneret, J. Polleux and H. Rigneault, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6478–6488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mingo, D. Hauser, N. Kobayashi, M. Plissonnier and A. Shakouri, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 711–715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, W. Zheng and D. J. Singh, Light: Sci. Appl., 2014, 3, e179 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, B. Li and W. Li, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 115420 CrossRef .
J. Lim, K. Hippalgaonkar, S. C. Andrews, A. Majumdar and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2475–2482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, J. Carrete, Z. Zhang, Y. Qu, X. Shen, Z. Wang, L.-D. Zhao and J. He, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e108 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, W. Huang, Z. Li, B. Deng, Y. Zhang, M. Ni and K. Cen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6582–6593 CrossRef CAS .
A. Genç, J. Patarroyo, J. Sancho-Parramon, R. Arenal, M. Duchamp, E. E. Gonzalez, L. Henrard, N. G. Bastús, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, V. F. Puntes and J. Arbiol, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 770–779 CrossRef .
L.-C. Cheng, J.-H. Huang, H. M. Chen, T.-C. Lai, K.-Y. Yang, R.-S. Liu, M. Hsiao, C.-H. Chen, L.-J. Her and D. P. Tsai, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2244–2253 RSC .
A. Aubry, D. Y. Lei, A. I. Fernández-Domínguez, Y. Sonnefraud, S. A. Maier and J. B. Pendry, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2574–2579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Baffou, R. Quidant and C. Girard, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 153109 CrossRef .
G. Baffou, R. Quidant and F. J. García de Abajo, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 709–716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutiérrez and F. D. Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 42, 794–830 RSC .
J. I. Chen, G. von Freymann, S. Y. Choi, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1915–1919 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ramiro-Manzano, P. Atienzar, I. Rodriguez, F. Meseguer, H. Garcia and A. Corma, Chem. Commun., 2007, 242–244 RSC .
A. A. Jelle, K. K. Ghuman, P. G. O'Brien, M. Hmadeh, A. Sandhel, D. D. Perovic, C. V. Singh, C. A. Mims and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1870041 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, L. Yang, L. Kong, M. H. Nai, D. Liu, J. Wu, Y. Liu, S. Y. Chaim, W. K. Chim, C. T. Lim, B. Li, J. T. L. Thong and K. Hippalgaonkar, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702824 CrossRef .
J. A. Herron, J. Kim, A. A. Upadhye, G. W. Huber and C. T. Maravelias, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 126–157 RSC .
J. Albero, E. Dominguez, A. Corma and H. García, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1303–1307 RSC .
E. Hansjosten, A. Wenka, A. Hensel, W. Benzinger, M. Klumpp and R. Dittmeyer, Chem. Eng. Process., 2018, 130, 119–126 CrossRef CAS .
J. Baxter, Z. Bian, G. Chen, D. Danielson, M. S. Dresselhaus, A. G. Fedorov, T. S. Fisher, C. W. Jones, E. Maginn and U. Kortshagen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 559–588 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Broader context
The urgency to reduce anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and yet continue to provide fuel for a growing global population remains one of the biggest technological challenges of our time. The concept of converting gaseous carbon dioxide (CO2) into synthetic fuels offers a promising solution towards building a sustainable carbon-neutral economy and is being increasingly endorsed by both the academic and industrial communities. One way to accomplish this conversion is by using sunlight as an energy source. Although there currently exist several types of catalysis (e.g., electrochemical, photochemical, thermochemical) that can integrate light into their process, photothermal catalysis, which draws on both the thermal and photochemical contributions of sunlight, has become increasingly popular by allowing for complete exploitation of the solar spectrum. In this review paper, we provide a comprehensive background of the physical principles underlying the photothermal effect in gas-phase heterogeneous catalysts; propose a figure of merit based on the catalyst's optical, photochemical, and thermal properties, to serve as a quantitative metric by which the photothermal effect might be assessed and compared across different systems; and, finally, offer design strategies based on chemistry and materials science for developing and enhancing the performance of photothermal catalysts for CO2 conversion.


 	Fig. 1  Flow diagram depicting the different strategies used for transforming solar energy, either directly or indirectly, into chemical energy in the form of synthetic fuels.	 
Reverse Water Gas Shift:42,46 CO2 + H2 → H2O + CO
Methane Synthesis:36 CO2 + 2H2O → CH4 + 2O2
Dry Reforming:47,48 CO2 + CH4 → 2H2 + 2CO
Sabatier Reaction:33,42,49 CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O
Methanol Synthesis:36,45 CO2 + 3H2 → CH3OH + H2O
CO2 + 2H2O → CH3OH + 3/2O2

 	Fig. 2  Catalytic methanation rates for Ru@SiNW plotted as a function of temperature in the dark (black) and under simulated solar irradiation (yellow). The exponential line of best fit is shown for the series of batch reactions carried out in the light (dashed yellow line) and dark (dashed black line). The inset shows these methanation rates as normalized to the weight of the Ru catalyst on a plot of ln(k) vs. 1000/T, allowing the activation energy Ea under both light and dark conditions to be calculated. The similarity of these activation energies suggests similar surface chemistry; however, the significantly higher methanation rate under light implies that the local temperature of the Ru@SiNW catalyst is higher than that measured for the bulk.29 Reproduced from ref. 29.	 

 	Fig. 3  In this illustration, a comparison is made between the absorption spectrum of In2O3−x(OH)y and the solar irradiance spectrum, specifically regarding how a photon of given energy is used by the In2O3−x(OH)y@SiNW hybrid to catalyse the reverse water gas shift reaction. Regions of yellow shading indicate photons with energies greater than the bandgap of In2O3−x(OH)y, which are able to create an electron–hole pair within the material, and regions of red shading indicate photons with energies less than the band gap of In2O3−x(OH)y, which are absorbed and converted into heat energy within the SiNW support.25 Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Ultrafast photothermal processes (<100 fs) occurring in a metal/metal-oxide heterostructured catalyst under solar irradiation. The light-blue and navy coloured circles denote holes and excited electrons, respectively. Inset lower left: Nanoscale architecture of nanoheaters (spheres) loaded onto a metal oxide catalyst substrate.	 

 	Fig. 5  Fast photothermal processes (100 fs–100 ps) occurring in a metal/metal-oxide heterostructured catalyst under solar irradiation. The black, red, and blue circles denote carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Slow photothermal processes (>100 ps) occurring in a metal/metal-oxide heterostructured catalyst under solar irradiation. The black, red, and blue circles denote carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, respectively.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 7  Effect of solar irradiation on the endothermic reaction profile of a photothermal catalyst. Photochemistry has the effect of reducing the activation energy barrier, while temperature enhances the probability of reactants overcoming the barrier by providing additional thermal energy.	 
ηPT = ηphoto + ηthermal	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 8  Sketch illustrating defect energy levels located in the mid-bandgap of non-stoichiometric metal oxides. The energy levels lie between the filled oxide-type valence band, VB O(−II), and the empty metal-type conduction band, CB M(+q), according to defect notation, VO = oxygen vacancy, VM = metal vacancy, Oi = oxygen interstitial, Mi = metal interstitial, M + (q − x) lower oxidation state metal than M + q.	 

 	Fig. 9  UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectra (a), Tauc plots for the determination of the optical band gap (S1, ESI) (b) and photographs (c) of m-WO3 and hydrogen-treated m-WO3 samples. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Illustration of a library of photothermal nanoscale architectures where the black objects refer to a broadband light absorber that can function as nanoheater/catalyst and the red objects as the catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) SEM and TEM (inset) images showing the core–shell Cu7S4@ZIF-8 NPs. (b) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of simulated ZIF-8, Cu7S4@ZIF-8, and Cu7S4 NPs. (c) HAADF-STEM image and EDX elemental mapping of the core–shell nanostructures. (d) Shell thickness as a function of core concentration. (e) TEM image and (f) SAED pattern of individual hierarchical Cu7S4 hollow microspheres. (g) HRTEM image of nanocrystal building blocks of the Cu7S4 NP. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Illustration of the effect of palladium precursor loading on the size, population and distribution of Pd NPs on Nb2O5 nanorods, which determine their reactivity and selectivity towards the reverse water gas shift and methanation reactions. Figure adapted from ref. 42.	 

 	Fig. 13  Results of FDTD simulations showing the spatial distribution of the electric field intensity and vector field for Pd NP loaded TiO2 at excitation wavelengths of (a and f) 200, (b and g) 400, (c and h) 600, (d and i) 715, and (e and j) 800 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
