Three-dimensional heterostructured ZnSe nanoparticles /Si wire arrays with enhanced photodetection and photocatalytic performances   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2TC00604A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2TC00604A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1345-1351Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsThree-dimensional heterostructured ZnSe nanoparticles/Si wire arrays with enhanced photodetection and photocatalytic performances†

        
          
            Yi-Hsin 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wun-Shan 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chun-Yi 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chiu-Yen 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yu-Cheng 
            Chang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Lih-Juann 
            Chen
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, 101, Section 2 Kuang Fu Road, Hsinchu, Taiwan 30013, Republic of China. E-mail: ljchen@mx.nthu.edu.tw;  Fax: +886-3-5718328;   Tel: +886-3-5731166
Received 
      11th November 2012
    , Accepted 4th December 2012First published on 21st December 2012AbstractP-type micron size silicon wire (SiW) arrays coated with ZnSe nanoparticles (NPs) exhibiting enhanced photodetection and photocatalytic performances were synthesized. The SiWs were grown by combining catalytic etching with nanosphere lithography methods. ZnSe NPs were coated on SiWs with a chemical bath deposition (CBD) method. The high photodetection performance of three-dimensional (3D) heterostructured ZnSe NP/SiW arrays with immediate decay (>99.85%), on/off ratio (>7 × 102) and photoresponse speed (<0.4 s) was recorded under a small applied voltage (80 μV). The immediate decay and on/off ratio increase with decreasing applied voltage and the photocurrent variations of ZnSe NPs/SiWs were larger than 0.3 μA at 1 V. The enhanced UV photocurrent response is attributed to a large surface-to-volume ratio and the presence of the fast conductive pathway of ZnSe NP/SiW shell/core heterostructures. ZnSe NPs/SiWs also showed superb photocatalytic properties with methylene blue (MB) and acid fuchsin (AF) as reagents. The photodegradation data exhibited high activities of 88% and 83% after 120 and 110 min, respectively. The CBD of ZnSe NPs on SiWs provides a facile route for the fabrication of well aligned 3D heterostructured ZnSe NP/SiW arrays with a high on/off ratio photocurrent and photocatalytic activity.
Introduction
In recent years, semiconductor nanostructures (such as nanoparticles, nanowires, nanorods, nanotubes and nanobelts, etc.) with versatile properties have been successfully synthesized. The nanostructures have received a great deal of attention owing to their potential applications in electronic, biosensor, optical, and piezoelectric nanodevices.1–4
Among these semiconductor nanostructures, II–VI group compounds (such as ZnO, ZnS, ZnSe, CdS, and CdSe) have revealed significant properties with great advancement in the synthesis and exploitation of their individual performance in a variety of applications.5 ZnO3,6–9 has been the most popular II–VI group material. Recently, piezoelectric ZnO nanowire array based nanogenerators have been demonstrated by Lu et al.3,10–12 Other II–VI group semiconductor nanostructures, such as CdS13–15 and CdSe16,17 nanostructures with superior luminescence behaviours, have been investigated. Wang et al.14 described signal-on electrochemiluminescence enzyme biosensors based on cadmium sulfide nanocrystals formed in situ on the surface of multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Biomolecular recognition with CdSe NWs has been established with photoluminescence measurements by Sarangi et al.16 Owing to their advantageous properties of luminescence and photochemistry, ZnS nanostructures have also attracted much attention.18–21
ZnSe is an important semiconductor with a large band gap (2.7 eV) and has great potential for applications in photoluminescent, optoelectronic, electroluminescent devices and as an n-type window layer for thin film heterojunction solar cells.22–24 In fact, the first blue-green laser diode was developed based on ZnSe in 1991.25 In addition, ZnSe is an attractive material as a buffer layer in CuInSe2 based solar cells. Most importantly, it has an advantage over the traditionally used CdS buffer layer: it is Cd free and hence environmentally friendly.22 Huang et al. demonstrated the growth of ZnSe nanowires on SiO2 substrates as a photodetector by molecular-beam epitaxy at 280 °C.26 Lee et al. reported the photoelectric properties of periodically twinned ZnSe/SiO2 core/shell nanostructures synthesized using a high-temperature horizontal tube furnace at 1150 °C, and prepared a ZnSe single nanowire device with e-beam evaporated electrodes.27 Chemical bath deposition (CBD) is a facile method to synthesize the ZnSe NPs at low temperature (∼70 °C) and with low energy consumption.22
Recently, zero-dimensional (0D) NPs or quantum dots decorated on one-dimensional (1D) nanowire arrays or two-dimensional (2D) flakes to form three-dimensional (3D) heterostructures have been fabricated and investigated.28–30 The substrate of 3D architecture with high aspect-ratio wires coated with NPs served not only as a conductive pathway but also provided large surface area NPs to raise the reaction rate. A SiW array decorated with NPs possesses unique properties for use in photovoltaic devices2,31,32 and bioapplications.33–35 Peng et al. synthesized Pt NPs attached on SiWs and found enhancement in photoconversion efficiency and an apparent energy conversion efficiency of up to 8.14%.2 Cheng et al. fabricated Ag-coated SiWs to apply surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) for molecular sensing.34 In this paper, we report the use of a CBD method to synthesize ZnSe NPs on SiW arrays, prepared by catalytic etching with nanosphere lithography, for 3D heterostructured array devices (ZnSe NPs/SiWs). Vertically aligned arrays of heterostructured devices are conducive to a variety of applications. The photocurrent on/off ratio and intensity as well as photocatalytic properties are much enhanced compared with other ZnSe nanowire devices.
Experimental
Silicon wafers (p-type, (100) oriented) were used as the substrate. They were cut into 1 cm × 2 cm pieces and cleaned by rinsing with acetone and ethanol each for 10 min in an ultrasonic bath at room temperature to remove organic grease, and rinsing with deionized water (DI water) for 2 to 3 times. The silicon samples were then heated in a boiling Piranha solution (H2SO4:H2O2 = 3:1 (v/v)) at 80 °C for 1 h to render the surface hydrophilic.36 The silicon sample was rinsed several times with DI water, followed by drying with N2 gas to remove residual DI water. A polystyrene (PS) sphere, 0.49 μm in diameter, solution was purchased from Bangs Laboratories, Inc. The PS sphere solution was diluted with ethanol (PS:ethanol = 1:4) for the assembly of the monolayer arrays on the p-type, (100) oriented silicon substrate. A monolayer of PS was obtained with a modified interface technique.37 A piece of glass was immersed in 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution overnight, then cleaned with DI water and dried with N2 gas. The dilute PS solution was dripped and evenly spread on the glass surface. Then the glass was slowly inserted into a beaker with DI water and PS self-assembled to a close-packed monolayer on the water surface. Subsequently, the self-assembled monolayer PS at the water surface was picked up with the silicon substrate at room temperature. Upon the completion of evaporation of water, a large-area ordered close-packed monolayer pattern of PS was formed on the silicon substrate. The close-packed polyspheres were transformed into a non-close-packed arrangement by O2 plasma treatment. The flow of O2 gas in the O2 plasma processing was at the rate of 40 sccm and a pressure of 180 mTorr with an applied power of 80 W.
The catalytic etching method to form SiWs was reported previously.31,37–40 The sputter deposition of the 20 nm Au film on the PS pattern was conducted in a SC7620 sputter coater at a pressure lower than 10 Pa. A Teflon beaker was used as the reaction container. For the etching process, a mixture of DI water, HF, and H2O2 was used as an etching solution at room temperature. The concentrations of HF and H2O2 were 4.6 M and 0.44 M, respectively. After etching, the Au film was removed by immersing into aqua regia (HCl:HNO3 = 3:1 (v/v)) for 5 min. The samples of SiWs were then annealed at 400 °C in O2 flow for 1 h to remove the PS and impurities.
CBD deposition is a modified deposition procedure described in the literature.22 As received aqueous solutions of hydrazine hydrate and ammonia solutions were used. 5 ml ZnSO4 (0.7 M) solution was placed in a 50 ml beaker followed by the addition of hydrazine hydrate solution with rigorous stirring. The color of the mixed solution was milky cream. Subsequently, ammonia solution was added under continuous stirring until the milky cream solution turned to a limpid solution. The reaction beaker was kept in a constant temperature water bath at 70 °C. 5 ml selenourea (0.1 M) solution was prepared. At appropriate temperature, selenourea solution was added to the reaction beaker and SiW substrates were positioned horizontally in the beaker. After the deposition, the SiW substrates were taken out of the beaker, rinsed with DI water, and annealed at 400 °C in Ar flow for 1 h to form the ZnSe NPs/SiWs to remove organic contaminants.
Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JEOL JSM-6500F), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-2010 and ARM 200F) and X-ray diffractometry (XRD, Shimadzu 6000-XRD) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm) were used to determine the morphology, structure and chemical composition of ZnSe NPs and ZnSe NPs/SiWs. Reflection spectra were measured using a HITACHI U4100 spectrophotometer.
FTO glass and SiWs were used as electrodes. Au was coated on top of ZnSe NPs/SiWs. Photocurrent measurements were carried out using a Keithley 2400 system at room temperature in air. The photocatalytic activity of ZnSe NPs/SiWs was tested by the degradation of MB and AF solutions which were irradiated with a 10 W cm−2 commercial UV lamp with a handmade lampshade to protect the eyes at room temperature. The ZnSe NPs/SiWs were cut to a size of 2 cm × 1 cm (2 cm2) and placed at the bottom of the test box containing 4 ml of 0.05 mM MB or AF solution. They were stored in the dark for 20 min to ensure the examined reagent solution and catalysts reached absorption equilibrium. The solution surface was irradiated with a UV lamp from a constant distance. The concentration variation of the examined reagent solution was measured with a UV-Vis spectrophotometer for the duration of the UV exposure time. A 2 ml solution was used for the UV-Vis analysis cell. The solutions were poured back into the flask immediately after the UV-vis analysis (time for analysis less than 1 min) to keep the volume of the test solution the same.
Results and discussion
The metal-assisted catalytic etching method is a fast and scalable path for preparing sub-micrometer silicon wire arrays. The technique of polysphere lithography combined with metal-assisted catalytic etching has been the most efficient method for creating large-area ordered high-aspect-ratio single-crystal SiWs with uniform crystallographic orientations.31,37–40

Fig. 1 shows schematic diagrams illustrating the procedures for fabricating SiW arrays on a p-type silicon substrate with PS as a mask. Though Ag was commonly employed as the catalyst for the metal-assisted catalytic etching method,37 its poor adhesion often leads to the lifting of the film by bubbles generated in the reduction–oxidation reaction. As a result, the etching reaction between the Si substrate and HF solution with Ag catalysts is terminated. In the present work, we choose Au instead of Ag as the catalyst to prevent the film being lifted to improve the uniformity of SiWs. The length of the as-prepared SiWs is about 3 μm and the diameter of the SiWs reaches 0.345 μm. (The length and diameter distributions of SiWs are listed in ESI Fig. S1†.)
 Fig. 1  (a) The schematic plots for fabricating SiW arrays. The p-type Si substrate with a hydrophilic surface consisted of a monolayer of PS. (b) O2 plasma treatment is used to reduce the diameter of the PS, which leads to the formation of non-close-packed arrays. (c) An Au film is coated onto the Si substrate as a catalyst. (d) The Au film catalyzes the etching of silicon beneath it. (e) The PS layer is removed by heating at 400 °C. The SEM images corresponding to each step are shown in insets. (f) Tilted SEM image of SiW arrays. The scale bar of the SEM images is 1 μm in (a–d) and (f). 
Intrinsically, silicon lacks the sensitivity for photodetection due to the indirect band gap. In order to overcome this deficiency, Si based heterostructures were generally used.2,31,32 In this work, the ZnSe NPs/SiWs are produced by coating of ZnSe NPs on SiWs by CBD to enhance the photodetection and photocatalytic properties. ZnSe NPs were also collected for XRD examination as well as reflectance and photocatalytic measurements after the CBD reaction.

Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the SEM images of the SiW and ZnSe NPs/SiW heterostructure, respectively; the differences in contrast, surface roughness, and thickness can be clearly discerned in the images. (The schematic plots of the synthesis of the ZnSe NPs and large-scale SEM images of SiWs and the ZnSe NPs/SiW heterostructure are shown in Fig. S2†.) The surface roughness of SiWs is due to the sidewall etching from HF–H2O2 solution during the etching reaction. After CBD, the ZnSe deposition on the SiW surface resulted in the uneven surfaces, which is also confirmed in TEM images (Fig. 2(c)). The high surface roughness of the SiWs would lead to strong adhesion of the deposited ZnSe NPs to the SiW surface. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern obtained from the ZnSe NPs layer is shown in Fig. 2(d) with the diffraction rings indexed to (111), (220) and (311) of ZnSe. From the XRD analysis of ZnSe NPs/SiWs (Fig. 2(e)), the peaks at 27.25° and 45.17°are ascribed to the (111) and (220) planes of cubic ZnSe (JCPDS no. 371463), respectively. The peak at 34.53° is indexed to (200) planes of Si (JCPDS no. 895012). Detailed TEM analyses are performed to obtain structural and morphological information. The high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image, obtained from ZnSe NPs/SiWs, as shown in Fig. 2(f), reveals the formation of a Si/ZnSe NPs core/shell structure and interplanar spacing of ZnSe. The ZnSe NPs are polycrystalline with 10–30 nm thickness. Fig. 2(g) is a high annular angle dark field (HAADF) STEM image from the marked brown square area in Fig. 2(c). Fig. 2(h)–(j) are the EDS mapping images of Si, Zn, and Se, respectively. The images show the elemental distributions, which are consistent with the formation of ZnSe NPs/SiW heterostructures (the dashed line reveals the discrimination between the core and shell). In addition, the average size of ZnSe NPs was measured to be ∼4 nm from XRD results (Fig. S3 and Table S1†41), which is in agreement with TEM observations (red circles in Fig. 2(f)). The stoichiometric ratios of Zn and Se are determined to be ∼1 by EDS analysis.
 Fig. 2  (a) Tilted SEM images of (a) SiW and (b) ZnSe NPs/SiW. (c) TEM image of ZnSe NPs/SiW heterostructure. (d) SAED pattern of the ZnSe NPs shell with the SiW core. (e) XRD spectrum of ZnSe NPs/SiWs. (f) HRTEM image from the edge (marked in blue) of the ZnSe NPs/SiW shell/core heterostructure in (c). The red circles in (f) indicate the locations of ZnSe NPs and the interplanar spacing of 0.2 nm was determined as shown in the inset. (g) HAADF STEM images of the marked brown square region in (c). (h–j) The elemental distributions of Si, Zn, and Se recorded from the marked area in (g). The scale bars of (a)–(c) and (f) are 200 nm and 5 nm, respectively. 

Fig. 3 shows the reflectance spectra of the Si wafer, SiWs, ZnSe NPs, and ZnSe NPs/SiWs. SiWs significantly reduce reflectance and facilitate the light-trapping effect as compared to the bare Si wafer. ZnSe NPs show higher absorption at shorter wavelengths compared to SiWs. When ZnSe NPs were coated onto SiWs, the net effects are to reduce reflectance significantly throughout compared to either ZnSe NPs or SiWs. It can fully absorb the incident light and effectively trap the light due to the multiple absorption in a high density array structure.
 Fig. 3  The reflectance spectra of the Si wafer, SiWs, ZnSe NPs, and ZnSe NPs/SiWs. SiWs were grown on the Si substrate and ZnSe NPs were collected on the Si substrate. 

Fig. 4(a) shows a schematic of a ZnSe NPs/SiWs photodetector device. The FTO glass electrode and device were clamped together and connected to a Keithley 2400 semiconductor parameter analyzer for measurements. Fig. 4(b) shows the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of ZnSe NPs/SiWs measured in the dark and upon UV light illumination. It is obvious that the conductivity is enhanced upon light exposure. The responsivity of the ZnSe NP/SiW heterostructure photodetector device was measured and the results are shown below and in Fig. S4.† The responsivity shows a notable selective sensitivity above the threshold excitation energy, 2.7 eV, which is close to the bandgap energy of ZnSe and corresponds to a wavelength of ∼460 nm. In general, the spectrally selective photosensitivity at shorter wavelengths indicates advantages for the ZnSe NP/SiW heterostructure array as “visible-light-blind” UV light photodetectors for further application.
 Fig. 4  (a) The schematic of photodetector devices based on ZnSe NP/SiW arrays. (b) The typical I–V curves of ZnSe NP/SiW array devices under UV light illumination and in the dark. The inset is the schematic representation of photogenerated electron–hole pair transfers in ZnSe NPs/SiWs under UV light illumination. (c) The photoresponse as a function of time with constant biases of SiWs at 80 μV, 0.1 V, 1 V for ZnSe NPs/SiWs. The colored rectangles represent UV turn-on and blank regions correspond to turn-off photocurrents. The plots at (d) and (e) highlight the rapid response and recovery of devices, the response and recovery time are less than 0.4 s. 
The differences of photocurrent and dark current in the dark and upon UV light illumination ΔI (ΔI = IUV − Idark), with different applied bias voltages of V = 80 μV, 0.1 V and 1 V, are plotted as a function of time (Fig. 4(c)). The detailed photoresponse plots as a function of time for different applied bias voltages and the outline of photoconductive performances such as dark current, photocurrent, immediate decay, on/off ratio, and response time are given in ESI (Fig. S5 and Table S2†). It was observed that the switching between “ON” and “OFF” states is reversible and reproducible upon UV lamp illumination. Fig. 4(d) and (e) depict the extended plot from Fig. 4(c) demonstrating photoresponse and recovery curves measured with 80 μV.
The inset shown in Fig. 4(b) is the band diagram representation of the photogenerated electron and hole pairs transfer of ZnSe NP/SiW photosensing devices under UV illumination. For better contact, an Au film was sputtered onto the ZnSe nanowires.24,26,27 The Au film was selected to improve the contact of the ZnSe NPs with the FTO glass electrode. The electrons migrate through the contact of Au with the FTO electrode quickly so that the recombination of electrons and holes is suppressed, which favors the increase in ZnSe NPs/SiWs photocurrent intensity.
The work function of Au (−5.1 eV vs. vacuum) is lower than the conduction band of ZnSe NPs (−4.06 eV vs. vacuum). The excited electrons on the conduction band of ZnSe NPs could overcome the Schottky barrier and transfer to Au, which leads to effective charge separation. The electrons passed through the contact of Au with the FTO electrode quickly, hence the recombination of electrons and holes was suppressed, which finally led to the improvement of ZnSe NPs/SiWs photocurrent intensity. The 3D architecture SiWs provide ZnSe NPs with a rough surface to agglutinate. When the size of the NPs reaches the nanoscale, the photogenerated electron and hole pairs will rapidly transfer to the corresponding sites, which decreases the chance of recombination of electron and hole pairs. The ZnSe NPs/SiWs device not only enhances light trapping, but also provides the short migration pathway of electrons and holes to reach the specific electrodes quickly, in good accordance with the result of response time.
The enhancements in current upon UV light illumination may result from three mechanisms: the increase of photoexcited electron–hole pairs, the desorption of oxygen molecules on the surface and the lowering of the Schottky barrier.1,18,27,42,43 Generally, it takes some time (few minutes to few hours) for current to increase to 50% of the maximum value if the increase of photoexcited electron–hole pairs and the desorption of oxygen molecules on the surface upon UV light illumination dominate the photoresponse process. On the other hand, the lowering of the Schottky barrier leads to a very rapid response on the photocurrent, thus, the current in the present instance increases drastically and recovers while UV light is on and off, respectively, implying that the lowering of the Schottky barrier plays a major role in the enhancement of photocurrent. It is seen that high photocurrent, immediate decay (>99.85%), large on/off ratio (725), fast photoresponse speed (<0.4 s), and stable current were recorded under a small applied voltage of 80 μV. These results show that the ZnSe NP/SiW devices have a fast photoresponse to UV illumination in air and at room temperature. It is worthwhile to note that the on/off ratio of ZnSe NPs/SiWs, by irradiation with a 10 W cm−2 UV lamp, is 4 times better than the single crystalline nanowire devices with grown ZnSe NPs by an en-assisted ternary solution technique using a 500 W xenon lamp.24 Compared to the photocurrent generated using other materials of the ZnO array device,42 the present devices exhibit better immediate decay and on/off ratio. The feasibility of using a smaller applied bias of ZnSe NPs/SiWs indicates the advantage in energy saving for photodetection applications.
In recent years, a great deal of interest has been directed to the photocatalytic degradation of organic water pollutants by semiconductor NPs.44–50 However, spherical nanocrystals tend to aggregate, which will reduce their photocatalytic activity. Because photocatalytic reactions occur at the surface of catalysts, a high surface-to-volume ratio is beneficial in enhancing the photodegradation rate.48 On the other hand, reports on photocatalytic properties of ZnSe NPs are scarce. In this concern we demonstrated the potential of ZnSe NPs/SiWs for use as a photocatalyst in the degradation of methylene blue (MB) and acid fuchsin (AF).
MB and AF are typical commercial product dyes and representative of a class of organic water pollutants resistant to biodegradation, which could be utilized in the photocatalytic oxidation experiments. The dramatic drop in the intensities of UV absorption peaks of MB and AF at 664 nm and 548 nm, respectively, with UV irradiation time demonstrate the competitive photocatalytic ability of ZnSe NPs/SiWs.46–50 The photocatalytic degradation efficiency of ZnSe NPs/SiWs is measured by the photodecomposition of 0.05 mM MB and AF solution with a UV lamp as the light source. The UV-Vis absorption curves in Fig. 5(a) show the concentration of MB solution decayed with exposure to UV light for various durations. We also tested AF as a reagent of photocatalytic activity (Fig. S6†). For both MB and AF, the photodegradation data exhibited high activities of 88% and 83% for 120 min and 110 min irradiation, respectively. In Fig. 5(b), C/C0 (C0 and C are the initial concentration of MB and that after the reaction, respectively) vs. time curves of the photodegradation of MB by ZnSe NPs/SiWs (dark condition), SiWs, ZnSe NPs (1 mg), ZnSe film/Si wafer, and ZnSe NPs/SiWs array are shown. The weight of ZnSe NPs in ZnSe NPs/SiWs was estimated to be 1 mg by weighing ZnSe NPs/SiWs and subtracting the weight of SiWs. The samples of the ZnSe film/Si wafer were prepared by coating ZnSe NPs on the Si wafer as we coat ZnSe NPs on SiWs with the same time. The film thickness of ZnSe NPs was estimated to be 10–30 nm (Fig. S7†). Photodegradation rates of SiWs, ZnSe NPs (1 mg), and the ZnSe film/Si wafer were low. The active surface area was minimized due to aggregation of ZnSe NPs in the reagent solution. Compared with ZnSe NPs coating on the flat Si wafer (ZnSe film/Si wafer), the much higher surface area of SiWs would lead to a higher overall amount of ZnSe NPs coating, which would increase the active area with the UV illumination. The absorbance of ZnSe NPs/SiWs in Fig. 5(b) was reduced obviously demonstrating its high photocatalytic ability. Fig. 5(c) shows that ln(C/C0) was reduced to 12.0% after UV irradiation of the MB solution with ZnSe NPs/SiWs for 120 min. All curves shown in Fig. 5(c) follow a linear relationship, indicating that the photodegradation of MB catalyzed by the ZnSe NPs/SiWs orientated array fits well into the pseudo first-order reaction [i.e., ln(C/C0) = −Kt], where K is the apparent rate constant of the degradation. K was calculated to be 0.01736 per min for MB and 0.01432 per min for AF. The speed of photodegradation (<120 min) was faster than those in previous reports for MB and AF.48,50 We have also used P25 TiO2 for photodegradation tests (Fig. S8†). The TiO2 photodegradation results show that C/C0 was reduced to 33.1% for 120 min. The TiO2 particles were suspended in the solution. This will hinder the separation of the NPs from the reaction solution and reutilization in further photodegradation reactions. These comparisons demonstrate the merits of ZnSe NP/SiW heterostructures as photo-catalysts over other NPs such as TiO2. Owing to high surface areas of the vertically aligned, separated sub-micrometer wires of ZnSe NPs/SiWs, superior photocatalytic activity compared with the ZnSe film was found. Therefore, ZnSe NPs/SiWs were shown to remove organic pollutants effectively as a result of their novel 3D architecture structure.
 Fig. 5  (a) UV-Vis absorption spectra of the photocatalytic reaction of MB solution by heterostructured ZnSe NPs/SiWs under exposure to UV light for various durations. (b) and (c) UV-Vis absorbance ratios of MB concentration decaying with time under different conditions. (d) UV-Vis curves of the photocatalytic reaction of AF with ZnSe NPs/SiWs. The samples of the ZnSe film/Si wafer were prepared by coating ZnSe on a Si wafer with the same time as the coating of ZnSe NPs on SiWs. 
 Scheme 1  The illustration of photodecomposition processes of organic pollutants by ZnSe NPs/SiWs under UV illumination. 
During the UV irradiation, the formation of a free electron in the conduction band and a hole in the valence band occurs in the ZnSe NPs. (Scheme 1) Due to the ready vertical pathway of 3D heterostructures, the migration of the photogenerated electron to the surface and the transfer to the organic pollutant solution occurred and, subsequently, electron–hole recombination was avoided. The electron has more chance to take part in the reduction reaction to form oxygen radicals, which are very strong oxidants and can disintegrate organic pollutants effectively. Simultaneously, the photogenerated holes in the ZnSe NPs migrated to the SiWs or organic pollutant solution and participated in the oxidation reaction to form hydroxyl radicals, which are more effective in decomposing the organic pollutants to inorganic CO2, NO3−, SO42− and Cl−.51 Furthermore, the ZnSe NPs themselves can also photodecompose the organic pollutants under UV light irradiation due to the high energy band gap.
Summary and conclusions
In summary, owing to a large surface-to-volume ratio and active area and a fast conductive pathway, ZnSe NP/SiW 3D heterostructures exhibited high performance UV photocurrent response. The high photodetection performance of ZnSe NPs/SiWs with immediate decay (>99.85%), on/off ratio (>7 × 102) and photoresponse speed (<0.4 s) was recorded under a small applied bias (80 μV). In fabrication, the 3D heterostructured ZnSe NPs/SiWs improved the separation of NPs in the solution, restrained the aggregation of NPs and unfavorable recycling and increased the reaction area. It also showed strong photocatalytic properties with MB and AF as reagents. The photodegradation data exhibited high activities of 88% and 83% after 120 min and 110 min UV lamp irradiation of MB and AF, respectively.
The CBD of ZnSe NPs on SiWs provides a facile route for the fabrication of well aligned 3D heterostructured ZnSe NP/SiW arrays with a high on/off ratio photocurrent and photocatalytic activity. The structure was made without using the elaborate e-beam lithography or focused ion beam that is used to fabricate single nanowire devices. The 3D heterostructured ZnSe NPs/SiWs are easy to prepare, less toxic, inexpensive, useful in large-scale devices and have a wide range of potential applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support of National Science Council, Taiwan (ROC) through grant no. NSC 98-2221-E-007-104-MY3. The authors thank Manekkathodi Afsal, Ming-Yen Lu, Ching-Chun Lin, Min-Hsiu Hung, Chih-Yen Chen, and Szu-Ying Chen for their assistance.
Notes and references
Y. F. Hu, J. Zhou, P. H. Yeh, Z. Li, T. Y. Wei and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3327 CrossRef CAS .
K. Q. Peng, X. Wang, X. L. Wu and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3704 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Lu, J. H. Song, M. Y. Lu, M. T. Chen, Y. F. Gao, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1223 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lai, M. Y. Lu and L. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19 RSC .
J. S. Jie, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 313 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. P. Hsieh, H. Y. Chen, M. Z. Lin, S. C. Shiu, M. Hofmann, M. Y. Chern, X. T. Jia, Y. J. Yang, H. J. Chang, H. M. Huang, S. C. Tseng, L. C. Chen, K. H. Chen, C. F. Lin, C. T. Liang and Y. F. Chen, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1839 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Afsal, C. Y. Wang, L. W. Chu, H. Ouyang and L. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8420 RSC .
M. Y. Lu, J. H. Song, M. P. Lu, C. Y. Lee, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 357 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Mandal, M. Deo, A. Yengantiwar, A. Banpurkar, J. Jog and S. Ogale, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3686 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Yang, J. Gong and Y. Deng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13899 RSC .

  (a) A. Manekkathodi, M. Y. Lu, C. W. Wang and L. J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4059 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. C. Chang, W. C. Yang, C. M. Chang, P. C. Hsu and L. J. Chen, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3161 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu, R. S. Yang, S. H. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Hu, Y. Zhang, C. Xu, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 5025 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3004 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, M. Chaker, N. Wu and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8898 RSC .
X. F. Wang, Y. Zhou, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1444 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Mehta, S. Kumar, S. Chaudhary and K. K. Bhasin, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 145 RSC .
S. N. Sarangi, K. Goswami and S. N. Sahu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2007, 22, 3086 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Chou, C. H. Tseng, K. C. Pillai, B. J. Hwang and L. Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2679 RSC .
M. Y. Lu, M. P. Lu, Y. A. Chung, M. J. Chen, Z. L. Wang and L. J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12878 CAS .
X. S. Fang, Y. Bando, M. Y. Liao, U. K. Gautam, C. Y. Zhi, B. Dierre, B. D. Liu, T. Y. Zhai, T. Sekiguchi, Y. Koide and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2034 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. S. Fang, Y. Bando, M. Y. Liao, T. Y. Zhai, U. K. Gautam, L. Li, Y. Koide and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 500 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. S. Fang, T. Zhai, U. K. Gautam, L. Li, L. Wu, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2011, 56, 175 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. S. Fang, L. Wu and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 585 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) L. Hu, J. Yan, M. Liao, H. Xiang, X. Gong, L. Zhang and X. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2305 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Hu, L. L. Ren, Y. G. Guo, H. P. Liang, A. M. Cao, L. J. Wan and C. L. Bai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1269 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Lokhande, P. S. Patil, H. Tributsch and A. Ennaoui, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 55, 379 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Doña and J. Herrero, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 764 CrossRef .
X. S. Fang, S. L. Xiong, T. Y. Zhai, Y. Bando, M. Y. Liao, U. K. Gautam, Y. Koide, X. G. Zhang, Y. T. Qian and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 5016 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hasse, J. Qui, J. DePuydt and H. Cheng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 59, 1272 CrossRef .
C. H. Hsiao, S. J. Chang, S. B. Wang, S. P. Chang, T. C. Li, W. J. Lin, C. H. Ko, T. M. Kuan and B. R. Huang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, J73 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, X. M. Meng, X. H. Zhang, M. L. Zhang, J. S. Jie, W. J. Zhang, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 834 CAS .

  (a) K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. E. Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Manga, J. Wang, M. Lin, J. Zhang, M. Nesladek, V. Nalla, W. Ji and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1697 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Hochbaum and P. D. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 527 CrossRef CAS .
K. Q. Peng and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 198 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Kim, C. H. Lee, P. M. Rao, I. S. Cho and X. L. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2704 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, C. H. Fan and S. T. Lee, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 282 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Zhang, H. S. Wang, L. H. Lu, K. L. Ai, G. Zhang and X. L. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2348 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Wang, W. S. Shi, G. W. She, L. X. Mu and S. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 053104 CrossRef .
K. Y. Lai, Y. R. Lin, H. P. Wang and J. H. He, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 1014 RSC .
Z. P. Huang, H. Fang and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 744 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Liu, W. S. Li, L. W. Chu, M. Y Lu, C. J. Tsai and L. J. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 055603 CrossRef .
Z. P. Huang, N. Geyer, P. Werner, J. de Boor and U. Gösele, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 285 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, T. Y. Zhai, H. B. Zeng, X. S. Fang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 40 RSC .

          B. D. Cullity, Elements of X-ray Diffraction, Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., USA,  1956 Search PubMed .
C. L. Hsu, S. J. Chang, Y. R. Lin, P. C. Li, T. S. Lin, S. Y. Tsai, T. H. Lu and I. C. Chen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 416, 75 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kind, H. Yan, B. Messer, M. Law and P. D. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 158 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Y. Zhou, X. J. Guo, X. Y. Song and X. Y. Liu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2011, 335, 31 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, L. Chen, H. Wang and Z. Yan, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 162, 250 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cao, Y. Xiao and S. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 015604 CrossRef .
V. Taghvaei, A. H. Yangjeh and M. Behboudnia, Physica E, 2010, 42, 1973 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Chung, Y. C. Chang, M. Y. Lu, C. Y. Wang and L. J. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, F75 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Kong, A. D. Li, X. Y. Li, H. F. Zhai, W. Q. Zhang, Y. P. Gong, H. Li and D. Wu, J. Solid State Chem., 2010, 183, 1359 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Chen, C. H. Wang, H. Y. Lin, B. H. Li, W. T. Chen and C. P. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 455604 CrossRef .
P. Chen, H. W. Liang, X. H. Lv, H. Z. Zhu, H. B. Yao and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5928 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The diameter and length of SiWs, the schematic plots of synthesizing the heterostructured ZnSe NPs/SiWs arrays, XRD spectrum of precipitated NPs of ZnSe, calculation of the average size of NPs, the responsivity measured with a bias of 1.5 V at 350–600nm wavelengths, the photoresponse curves for different applied bias voltages, photodegradation of AF by ZnSe NPs/SiWs array, SEM image of ZnSe NPs film on Si wafer, photodegradation of MB by P25 TiO2. See DOI: 10.1039/c2tc00604aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The schematic plots for fabricating SiW arrays. The p-type Si substrate with a hydrophilic surface consisted of a monolayer of PS. (b) O2 plasma treatment is used to reduce the diameter of the PS, which leads to the formation of non-close-packed arrays. (c) An Au film is coated onto the Si substrate as a catalyst. (d) The Au film catalyzes the etching of silicon beneath it. (e) The PS layer is removed by heating at 400 °C. The SEM images corresponding to each step are shown in insets. (f) Tilted SEM image of SiW arrays. The scale bar of the SEM images is 1 μm in (a–d) and (f).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Tilted SEM images of (a) SiW and (b) ZnSe NPs/SiW. (c) TEM image of ZnSe NPs/SiW heterostructure. (d) SAED pattern of the ZnSe NPs shell with the SiW core. (e) XRD spectrum of ZnSe NPs/SiWs. (f) HRTEM image from the edge (marked in blue) of the ZnSe NPs/SiW shell/core heterostructure in (c). The red circles in (f) indicate the locations of ZnSe NPs and the interplanar spacing of 0.2 nm was determined as shown in the inset. (g) HAADF STEM images of the marked brown square region in (c). (h–j) The elemental distributions of Si, Zn, and Se recorded from the marked area in (g). The scale bars of (a)–(c) and (f) are 200 nm and 5 nm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  The reflectance spectra of the Si wafer, SiWs, ZnSe NPs, and ZnSe NPs/SiWs. SiWs were grown on the Si substrate and ZnSe NPs were collected on the Si substrate.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The schematic of photodetector devices based on ZnSe NP/SiW arrays. (b) The typical I–V curves of ZnSe NP/SiW array devices under UV light illumination and in the dark. The inset is the schematic representation of photogenerated electron–hole pair transfers in ZnSe NPs/SiWs under UV light illumination. (c) The photoresponse as a function of time with constant biases of SiWs at 80 μV, 0.1 V, 1 V for ZnSe NPs/SiWs. The colored rectangles represent UV turn-on and blank regions correspond to turn-off photocurrents. The plots at (d) and (e) highlight the rapid response and recovery of devices, the response and recovery time are less than 0.4 s.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) UV-Vis absorption spectra of the photocatalytic reaction of MB solution by heterostructured ZnSe NPs/SiWs under exposure to UV light for various durations. (b) and (c) UV-Vis absorbance ratios of MB concentration decaying with time under different conditions. (d) UV-Vis curves of the photocatalytic reaction of AF with ZnSe NPs/SiWs. The samples of the ZnSe film/Si wafer were prepared by coating ZnSe on a Si wafer with the same time as the coating of ZnSe NPs on SiWs.	 

 	Scheme 1  The illustration of photodecomposition processes of organic pollutants by ZnSe NPs/SiWs under UV illumination.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The diameter and length of SiWs, the schematic plots of synthesizing the heterostructured ZnSe NPs/SiWs arrays, XRD spectrum of precipitated NPs of ZnSe, calculation of the average size of NPs, the responsivity measured with a bias of 1.5 V at 350–600nm wavelengths, the photoresponse curves for different applied bias voltages, photodegradation of AF by ZnSe NPs/SiWs array, SEM image of ZnSe NPs film on Si wafer, photodegradation of MB by P25 TiO2. See DOI: 10.1039/c2tc00604a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
