Insights into the development of Cu-based photocathodes for carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) conversion  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0GC04417B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0GC04417B
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 3207-3240Insights into the development of Cu-based photocathodes for carbon dioxide (CO2) conversion

        
          
            Keke 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanfang 
            Ma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weixin 
            Qiu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qingmei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xuetao 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Liu
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoqing 
            Qiu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenzhang 
            Li
          
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Jie 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China. E-mail: liwenzhang@csu.edu.cn; lijieliu@csu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Super-microstructure and Ultrafast Process in Advanced Materials, School of Physics and Electronics, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China
cHunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Powder supply, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China
Received 
      30th December 2020
    , Accepted 7th March 2021First published on 9th March 2021AbstractThe ever-growing over-consumption of fossil fuels and the accompanying massive emissions of CO2 have caused a severe energy crisis and environmental issues. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) reduction of CO2 that can combine and optimize the merits of both photocatalysis and electrocatalysis has been considered as an attractive prospect for addressing the two problems. Herein, photocathode materials are cores of PEC CO2 reduction. Among various photocathodes, Cu-based photocathodes attract much attention due to their low toxicity, low cost, earth-abundant properties, appropriate range of bandgap values and favorable band edges for CO2 reduction. More to the point, Cu-based photocathodes possess unique advantages for hydrocarbon production such as CO, HCOOH, CH4 or, more importantly, C2 products (like C2H4, C2H5OH and C2H6) compared with other metallic-based photoelectrodes. An insight into the relationships between the properties and functions of photocathodes plays a vital role in the field of PEC CO2 reduction. This review presents the development of Cu-based photocathode materials and discusses future research directions. The photocathode systems mainly include Cu-based oxides, Cu-based chalcogenides and Cu-based electrocatalyst coupled photocathodes. Subsequently, the existing major advantages and disadvantages of each system are also discussed. In conclusion, combining our analyses of the reported photocathodes, we will offer future challenges for the rational design of photoelectrodes. Overall, this review will present a significant overview of Cu-based photocathodes for PEC reduction of CO2.Keke WangKeke Wang is a Ph.D. student at the Central South University. She obtained her master's degree from the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University. Her research interests focus on the photoelectrode materials for solar-driven water splitting and CO2 reduction.Yang LiuYang Liu is currently a lecturer at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, China. He received his master degree from Central South University in 2014. After that, he studied as a Ph.D. candidate at Central South Unversity from September 2014 to September 2016 and as a visiting student at University of Texas at Austin from September 2016 to September 2018. Then he obtained his Ph.D degree at Central South University in 2018. His current research interests include photoelectrochemistry and electrochemistry for water splitting and CO2 reduction.Min LiuMin Liu is currently a professor at the School of Physics and Electronics, Central South University, Hunan, China. He received his Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Electrical Engineering of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2010. He worked as a Research Fellow under the supervision of Prof. Kazuhito Hashimoto at the University of Tokyo from 2010 to 2013. Then, he went on with further study at the University of Toronto, Canada (Advisor: Professor Edward H. Sargent) from 2015 to 2017. His research interests are high performance catalytic materials and devices.Xiaoqing QiuXiaoqing Qiu received his Ph.D. degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008. He joined the Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology at the University of Tokyo (Prof. Hashimoto's group) as a NEDO researcher in 2009. He was promoted to a professor at Fuzhou University in 2012. He has been a full professor at the Central South University since 2016. His current research interests include nanomaterials, energy conversion materials and heterogeneous catalysis.Wenzhang LiWenzhang Li received his B.S. degree and Ph.D. degree from Central South University, both in physical chemistry of metallurgy. He joined the faculty of Central South in January of 2012, where he is currently an associate professor in physical chemistry of metallurgy. His current research focuses on the design of semiconductor nanocrystals in electrocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic fields.Jie LiJie Li is currently a professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, Hunan, China. She obtained her Ph.D. degree from Central South University in 2001. Her research interests include research methods for metallurgical physical chemistry and design and preparation techniques for new energy materials.
1. Introduction
The rapid expansion of the global population and modern industry provoked excessive utilization of fossil fuels (such as oil, coal, natural gas, etc.), which triggered anthropogenic emissions of CO2 and ultimately led to global warming and climate change.1 This called for the development of chemical feedstocks and fuels using earth-abundant resources (e.g. water, CO2etc.) via renewable energy.2 In recent years, direct reduction of CO2 into storable hydrocarbon fuel has gained increased attention.3,4 However, carbon dioxide (CO2) has been demonstrated as a quite stable linear molecule, which possesses two equivalent C=O bonds.5 The corresponding binding energy (750 kJ mol−1) is significantly higher than C–O (327 kJ mol−1), C–C (336 kJ mol−1) and C–H (411 kJ mol−1).6 Thus, it requires a higher activation barrier. Given this, various efforts have been working on CO2 conversion, such as biocatalysis,7,8 thermocatalysis,9,10 electrocatalysis,11,12 photocatalysis13,14 and photoelectrocatalysis.15,16 From the point of view of available energy resources, solar energy is clean, abundant and cheap. However, choosing photocatalysts for photocatalytic CO2 reduction is limited due to their complex synthesis methods, poor selectivity, unfavorable band positions and high recombination rates of photogenerated charges. The electrochemical reduction of CO2 requires a large amount of electricity due to high overpotentials for CO2 reduction. Compared with photocatalytic and electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 processes, the PEC system embodies several distinct merits: (1) the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes at the photocathode and anode can be efficiently suppressed, driven by the applied external electrical bias; (2) the PEC cells can efficiently separate oxidative and reductive products produced by the anode and photocathode; (3) from the viewpoint of energy utilization, photoelectrocatalysis can utilize solar energy to supply additional charges, thus significantly reducing electricity consumption.17 In response to the merits, photoelectrocatalysis is considered to be an efficacious strategy for CO2 reduction. Besides this, compared with the Cu-based photocatalysts or electrocatalysts, designing a photoelectrochemical cathode also has distinctive features: (1) a photoelectrochemical cathode has to be a photoactive semiconductor that must have a reasonable bandgap and suitable conduction and valence band positions for a redox reaction. (2) A photoactive Cu-based thin film is required in the photoelectrochemical system, which can be obtained by directly synthesizing as a thin film or immobilizing the Cu-based semiconductor powder onto a supporting electrode surface. (3) The as-prepared Cu-based thin film needs to form close and high-quality contact with the charge-collecting substrate, which would promote effective charge transfer, thus achieving excellent PEC reduction of CO2 performance.18,19
The seminal investigation of PEC CO2 conversion was reported by Halmann in 1978.20 After that, a series of research investigations were carried out on various inorganic semiconductor materials. For a feasible CO2 conversion, the conduction and valence band position of semiconductors should be higher than the overpotential of CO2 reduction and lower than the overpotential of H2O/O2, respectively. Besides this, the product selectivity of CO2 conversion also depends on the choice of electrode materials.21 It follows that the choice of semiconductors is vitally important for realizing PEC CO2 conversion.
In the long term, implementing the PEC configuration that is made of an n-type photoanode and a p-type photocathode without bias voltage is the ultimate goal for efficient CO2 reduction. However, the prerequisite for no bias is the suitable photoanodes and photocathodes with matched band gaps and band edge positions. Over the years, more attention has been focused on the development of n-type semiconductors, which have the advantage of high stability and low cost. A large number of n-type semiconductors, such as TiO2, WO3, ZnO, Fe2O3 and BiVO4, show stable and excellent water oxidation performance, and CO2 reduction can be realized if the Pt of the counter electrode is replaced by other special metals.22–25 Although many advancements in the development of n-type semiconductor photoanodes have been achieved, the understanding of p-type photocathodes remains limited for CO2 reduction. The reasons are as follows. Firstly, most p-type materials require a high bias potential for realizing the overall CO2 reduction due to the negative VB potential. Secondly, the products of p-type photocathodes for CO2 reduction have a competitive reaction with the production of H2 owing to similar free energies. Besides this, many well-known p-type materials are either toxic, expensive (e.g., GaP, lnP and CdTe) or susceptible to photo-corrosion (e.g., Cu2O, CuO, Si).26,27 Among numerous photocathode materials, Cu-based photocathodes in particular are the focal system in the studies due to their inexpensive nature and high capability of catalyzing the conversion of CO2.28–30 Impressively, Cu-based catalysts have demonstrated promise for selective CO2 reduction to C1 and C2 products.31–33 As a result, developing Cu-based photocathodes is expected to achieve the selectivity to multi-carbon products (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  The conduction band (blue squares) and valence band (green squares) energy levels relative to the NHE for a series of Cu-based semiconductors in solution at pH = 0. 
Nevertheless, up until now, a comprehensive review covering the rational design of Cu-based photocathodes for efficient PEC CO2 reduction is still missing, and it is imperative to obtain a better understanding of the state-of-the-art progress in the area of PEC CO2 reduction, especially for the development of Cu-based photocathodes. It concerns the realization of the optimal Z-scheme system that consists of an n-type photoanode and a p-type photocathode. In this review, we first illustrate the fundamental principle with respect to PEC CO2 reduction systems. After that, we summarize the Cu-based photocathodes for PEC CO2 reduction, including Cu-based oxides, Cu-based chalcogenides and Cu-based electrocatalysts coupled with photocathodes. Finally, the challenges and perspectives of Cu-based photocathodes for PEC CO2 reduction are proposed with an outlook of future research directions. We hope that this review will shed light on the research orientation of Cu-containing semiconductor photocathodes in the realm of PEC CO2 reduction.
2. The fundamentals of CO2 conversion
2.1 Thermodynamics and kinetics of CO2 reduction
As is well known, the fundamentals of photoelectrocatalysis are based on photocatalytic processes. Similarly, the whole process of PEC CO2 reduction can be divided into three steps: (i) photoelectrodes harvest solar-light and generate electron–hole pairs, (ii) charge is separated and transported to the surface of the photoelectrodes, (iii) the electrons that reach the surface can reduce CO2 into various hydrocarbon fuels, while holes oxidize H2O to form O2.34,35 During the process of PEC CO2 reduction, PEC cell also plays an extremely important role in obtaining high conversion efficiency. Generally, a PEC CO2 reduction cell can be configured in accordance with the following three types: (1) the photoanode driven system that is made of an n-type semiconductor photoanode and a metal cathode (Fig. 2a),36,37 (2) the photocathode-driven PEC configuration that combines a p-type semiconductor photocathode for CO2 reduction with a metal anode (Fig. 2b),38–40 (3) the multiple photo-system that is composed of an n-type semiconductor photoanode for O2 evolution and a p-type semiconductor photocathode for CO2 reduction (Fig. 2c).41–43 To this end, it is critical to devise photoelectrodes to accomplish high-efficiency PEC conversion of CO2. Firstly, photoelectrodes possess suitable bandgap and band positions for PEC reactions.44 Secondly, photoelectrodes can make full use of the photogenerated charge carriers for CO2 reduction.36,40 Beyond that, photocathode materials are also capable of favourable adsorption of CO2.45
 Fig. 2  Photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction system: (a) photoanode-driven system, (b) photocathode-driven system, (c) photoanode/photocathode-driven system. 
In general, the semiconductors generate and migrate electrons from VB (valence band) to CB (conduction band) under illumination conditions, which produces a photovoltage. This promotes the band position bending. Fig. 3 shows the band bending diagrams of a p-type semiconductor in the equilibration state (Fig. 3a), the photochemical system (Fig. 3b), the electrochemical (EC) system (Fig. 3c), and the PEC system (Fig. 3d).46 Often, the Fermi level of the solution depends on the concentration, but it is always constant. When the semiconductor is immersed in the electrolyte solution, charge transfer occurs at the interface of the electrode/electrolyte until the Fermi levels of the semiconductor and solution are equal, which produces a space–charge region at equilibrium, also known as the depletion layer. It changes the band diagram near the edges of the CB and VB. Typically, the Fermi level of a p-type semiconductor lies near the VB. Then, downwards band bending of p-type semiconductors promotes CB electrons to the interface to promote the reduction reaction along the potential gradient, thus accelerating the separation of the electron–hole pairs and increasing the CO2 conversion efficiency.
 Fig. 3  Energy band diagram of a p-semiconductor photocathode and electron-transfer pathways during CO2 reduction in (a) the equilibration state, (b) the photochemical system, (c) the EC system, and (d) the PEC system. NHE = normal hydrogen electrode. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2017; Willey.46 
Then, PEC CO2 conversion in an aqueous electrolyte involves multi-electron/proton transfer processes in conjunction with various possible reaction intermediates and products.47,48Table 1 summarizes the half electrochemical thermodynamic reactions of the main C1 (C, CO, HCOOH, CH2O, CH3OH and CH4) and C2 (H2C2O4, C2H4 and CH3CH2OH) products and their corresponding standard redox potentials.49 Compared with C1 products, some C2 and C2+ products with higher volumetric energy densities can provide building blocks to form long-chain hydrocarbon fuels and oxygenates.50,51 Thus, it is highly desirable for obtaining C2 products. However, formation of multicarbon products is difficult due to a higher kinetic barrier of the C–C coupling. Understanding the reaction pathways of various C2 reactions is of paramount importance for achieving the desired reduction to C2 products.
Table 1 Half electrochemical thermodynamic reactions of the main ECR production, together with their corresponding standard redox potentials [V versus (vs.) reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)]. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Science49




 
Acid
Base


Products
Equation

E (V)
Equation

E (V)




Hydrogen
2H+ + 2e− → H2
0.000
2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−
−0.828


Carbon monoxide
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O
−0.104
CO2 + H2O + 2e− → CO + 2OH−
−0.932


Methane
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
0.169
CO2 + 6H2O + 8e− → CH4 + 8OH−
−0.659


Methanol
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + 2H2O
0.016
CO2 + 5H2O + 6e− → CH3OH + 6OH−
−0.812


Formic acid/formate
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH
−0.171
CO2 + H2O + 2e− → HCOO− + OH−
−0.639


Ethylene
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 + 4H2O
0.085
2CO2 + 8H2O + 12e− → C2H4 + 12OH−
−0.743


Ethane
2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 + 4H2O
0.144
2CO2 + 10H2O + 14e− → C2H6 + 14OH−
−0.685


Ethanol
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O
0.084
2CO2 + 9H2O + 12e− → C2H5OH + 12OH
−0.744


Acetic acid/acetate
2CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH3COOH + 2H2O
0.098
2CO2 + 5H2O + 8e− → CH3COO− + 7OH−
−0.653



n-Propanol
3CO2 + 18H+ + 18e− → CH3CH2CH2OH + 5H2O
0.095
3CO2 + 13H2O + 18e− → CH3CH2CH2OH + 18OH−
−0.733




As shown in Fig. 4, three routes can be employed for the generation of different C2 and C3 products. Throughout the pathways, the first reaction step is converting CO2 to CO. On the one hand, many catalysts are capable of reducing CO2 to CO with high activity and selectivity. Nevertheless, it is not easy to transform CO2 to higher added value products (C2 and C2+ products) due to a lack of effective catalysts. On the other hand, the moderate adsorption energy of CO on copper is currently regarded as the key step for its activation for further reduction and C–C bond formation of C2+ products.51,52 Specifically, for the first route, the *COH intermediate determines C2H6 and CH3COO−. Then, the selectivity determining intermediate (SDI) −*CH2 serves as the key intermediate for the formation of specific C2 products. To be specific, a C2H6 product is formed via *CH3 dimerization, while the formation of CH3COO− needs CO insertion into *CH2. For the second route, the precursor of the C2H6O2 product is *CHO, which is also the precursor of CH4. Subsequently, CO insertion and further proton-coupled electron transfer steps generate C2H6O2 products. Unfortunately, this pathway will yield very small amounts of C2 products due to high selectivity to the CH4 product. For the third route, C2H4, CH3CH2OH, and n-propanol (n-C3H7OH) formation possess the same *CO intermediate, in which C2H4 is considered as the most important C2 product. There are a variety of pathways for the formation of C2H4, such as *CO–COH coupling, *CO dimerization, CO insertion mechanism and “carbene”, etc.53 In actual fact, the generally accepted pathway is the *CO dimerization. Firstly, the C–C formation step as a nonelectrochemical step is the rate-determining step (RDS). Secondly, the *CO–CO dimer is formed by a series of electron transfer and protonation steps. It will form the *CH2CHO intermediate, which is the key intermediate for different C2 products.53,54 More specifically, for strong binding of CO–CO−, all C2 pathways are limited by 2*CO → *CO–COH, while for weak CO–CO− binding, the C2H4 pathway is limited by *CH2CHO → *O + C2H4, then *CH2CHO → *CH3CHO → *CH3CH2O limits the C2H5OH pathway.55 In addition, it can be observed that formation of C2H5OH is more difficult than reduction of *CH2CHO to C2H4, which is attributed to its higher energetic barrier (∼0.2 eV).56 The explanation can be further confirmed by Hori's report.57 To obtain high selectivity for C2H5OH formation, some nanotechnology strategies were introduced to improve the energetics of intermediate binding on the engineered Cu surfaces.58
 Fig. 4  The possible pathways of several different C2 and C3 products. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2019, American Chemical Society.59 
2.2 Evaluation parameters for PEC CO2 reduction
PEC CO2 conversion as the combination of electrocatalysis and photocatalysis can be evaluated using the parameters for photocatalysis and electrocatalysis.

2.2.1. Product evolution rate and catalytic current density. 
The product evolution rate is generally normalized according to the mass of the catalyst or the effective area of the photoelectrode (such as μmol h−1 gcat−1 or μmol h−1 cm−2). In the same way, the catalytic current density represents the value for the area of the photoelectrode at the desired potential versus the reference electrode (e.g. mA cm−2vs. RHE). Both product evolution rate and catalytic current density evaluate the performance of PEC CO2 reduction.


2.2.2. Turnover number and turnover frequency. 
Turnover number (TON) and turnover frequency (TOF) are used to evaluate the activity of catalytic active centers. In the field of PEC CO2 reduction, it is usually defined in the following equations:60 TON = nproduct/ncatalyst(1) TOF = nproduct/(ncatalyst × t)(2)in which nproduct and ncatalyst signify the molar numbers of desired products and catalysts, respectively. Then t represents the reaction time.


2.2.3. Faradaic efficiency. 
The selectivity is an important evaluation parameter for CO2 reduction due to various products. In terms of PEC CO2 reduction, the efficiency of producing selective products is typically assessed by using the faradaic efficiency (FE) and the corresponding calculation is shown as follows:61 (3)in which α signifies the number of electrons needed for product evolution, nproduct signifies the molar numbers of desired products, F is Faraday's constant, and Q represents the required total charge for product evolution.


2.2.4. Quantum yield. 
Usually, quantum yield (QY) includes the internal and apparent quantum yields, which is crucial to assess the performance of photocatalysts. The specific equations are listed below.62 (4) (5)where α is the number of electrons needed for product evolution, nproduct signifies the molar numbers of desired products, and nphoton and n′photon represent the number of absorbed and incident photons, respectively.


2.2.5. Current competition ratio (η). 

 

η = [(Ja − Jb)/Ja] × 100%
(6)where Ja and Jb are the current density of PEC measurement under purging CO2 and N2 in the electrolyte, respectively. As we all know, CO2 reduction and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) are competitive reactions, with HER weakening with CO2 purging into the electrolyte. Then, the hydrogen-evolution current decreases63 and Ja − Jb indicates the net current of CO2 reduction when the differences before and after hydrogen-evolution current are ignored. Consequently, the current competition ratio η of PEC CO2 reduction can be calculated.

3. Origin of Cu-based photocathode instability
According to earlier research by Allen Bard and others, the stability of the semiconductors depends on the alignment of the material's self-reduction (Φred) and self-oxidation potential (Φox) relative to E(H2O/H2) and E(O2/H2O) under PEC conditions.64,65 It is thermodynamically unstable for a material to have Φred below E(H2O/H2) and Φox above E(O2/H2O), as shown in Fig. 5a and b. While Φred is located between the conduction band of a material and E(H2O/H2), the stability of a material is decided by the relative split between the HER (kHER) and the electron consumption rates for material self-reduction, namely, the branching ratio. Similarly, there is a competitive reaction between the self-oxidation reaction and the consumption rates of photo-generated carriers for water oxidation (kOER).66
 Fig. 5  Stability change of the photocathode (a) as its reduction potential (Φred) shifts down from above the CB of the p-type semiconductor to below E(H2O/H2). Similarly for the photoanode case (b). (c) Calculated reduction potential Φred (black bars) and oxidation potential Φox (red bars) relative to the NHE and the vacuum level for a series of semiconductors in solution at pH = 0. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.66 
As for Cu-based photocathodes (such as Cu2O), the corresponding Φred and Φox are between the E(H2O/H2) and E(O2/H2O), as displayed in Fig. 5c. Thus, it is thermodynamically unstable. In addition to this, Ng et al. proved that Cu2O tends to occur more in self-oxidation reactions than self-reduction reactions. Namely, it is certain that the dominant photocorrosion pathway of Cu2O is the self-oxidation into CuO under photocatalytic conditions. When applying the external bias for PEC measurement, Cu2O favours self-reduction into Cu.67 Therefore, Cu-based photocathodes can undergo self-oxidation or self-reduction or both under PEC conditions. To this end, it is essential to understand the dominant photocorrosion pathway before undertaking any steps to prevent it, whether in the field of PEC water splitting or CO2 reduction.
4. Cu-Based oxides
Cu-containing oxide photocathodes have been widely studied due to their relatively inexpensive processing costs, ideal absorber materials and the promising production of C2+ hydrocarbons. Furthermore, most of the Cu-based oxides have more negative conduction band edges in comparison with the CO2 reduction potential. Thus, the CO2 reduction is thermodynamically favourable. And for Cu-based oxides, (1) the roughened morphology of Cu species can affect the local pH, favoring the C–C coupling pathway, and (2) many factors like high density of grain boundaries, defects, or uncoordinated sites determine the formation of *CO reaction intermediates, which is the key element for the C–C bond formation. Theoretical studies have shown that Cu+ can cooperate with Cu to promote CO2 activation and *CO dimerization. The Mulliken charge of C is postive in *CO when *CO attches to Cu+, and it is negative when *CO attaches to Cu.68 Therefore, it is accepted that the attractive electrostatics between C of OC–Cu+ and C of OC–Cu contributes to C–C bond formation.59 Significantly, it is still unclear whether the role of Cu+ serves as a direct active site or the precursor to modulate the electronic structure of Cu. Besides this, the serious photocorrosion of Cu-based oxide photocathodes limited further development in PEC CO2 reduction. Thus, it is essential to design photocathodes properly for PEC CO2 reduction. In this section, plenty of effective strategies proposed to improve the stability of photocathodes and enhance the CO2 conversion efficiency are summarized. For instance, coating a protection layer or integrating with a cocatalyst on the surface of photocathodes would significantly enhance the stability and efficiency.69,70 More importantly, modulating the valence state of Cu is also beneficial for the generation of C2 products with high value added.
4.1 Cu2O
Owing to its low toxicity, inexpensive and environmentally benign nature, cuprous oxide (Cu2O) has been one of the most widely studied candidates in the PEC CO2 reduction system.71,72 Furthermore, Cu2O possesses a relatively narrow band gap (ca. 1.9–2.2 eV), which is favorable for harvesting visible light. Even more importantly, Cu2O can provide ease of CO2 reduction due to its sufficiently more negative conduction band and abundant Cu active sites for CO2 reduction. Theoretically, the maximum photocurrent density calculated from its band gap can reach 14.7 mA cm−2 and the maximum solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency is 18% based on the AM 1.5 G illumination.73 However, the current practical photocurrent density and solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency of a Cu2O photocathode are much lower than the theoretical ones, which is mainly limited by the fact that Cu2O suffers from serious photocorrosion in aqueous solution.60,74 Although it is a common issue for most narrow band gap semiconductor materials to experience photocorrosion, many previous studies demonstrated that photocorrosion of the photocathode would greatly influence the conversion efficiency due to the redox reaction of Cu2O itself.75 As a consequence, intelligently designing a protective layer on the surface of Cu2O is the key factor for the long period of Cu2O in PEC CO2 reduction.

4.1.1 Depositing overlayer and conformal cocatalyst for improved stability. 
To relieve the photocorrosion of Cu2O photocathodes, a feasible solution is to introduce a protective layer. As early as 2011, Thimsen and co-workers put forward a protective layer to suppress the rapid photocorrosion of Cu2O photocathodes in the field of PEC water splitting for the first time.73 In the report, the authors introduced a TiO2 layer and an Al-doped ZnO layer in conjunction with a Cu2O photocathode as a protection and buffer layer, respectively. Then, a hydrogen evolution catalyst (Pt) was deposited on the surface of the TiO2 protective layer. Electrochemical test results showed that the photocurrent density of Pt/TiO2/Al-doped ZnO/Cu2O photocathode can maintain 78% of the original current density (5.7 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE) at the end of a 20 min stability test, while the photocurrent density of a Pt/Cu2O without the buffer and protection layers decayed to 0 within 5 min. This implies the importance of a protection layer.
For the same reason, Michael Grätzel and co-workers proposed that employing an amorphous TiO2 overlayer protected Cu2O with the molecular catalyst Re(tBu-bipy)(CO)3Cl for PEC CO2 reduction.76 As shown in Fig. 6a, the device can achieve a photocurrent density of 2.1 mA cm−2 for selective CO evolution with 100% faradaic efficiency and generate 560 mV photovoltage. More importantly, the photocurrent density of the device can maintain stability for 7 h (Fig. 6b). Furthermore, they demonstrated that the TiO2 protection layer is of great importance to obtain stable photocurrent density and selective CO evolution. In order to confirm the importance of the TiO2 protection layer, they carried out the stability test for unprotected and protected Cu2O. It was found that the photoactivity of unprotected Cu2O was decayed within a few minutes and the gas analysis indicated that the degraded Cu2O photocathode produced large amounts of H2 instead of CO (Fig. 6d). Scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction analyses further revealed the emergence of metallic Cu on the unprotected Cu2O on account of corrosion under reaction conditions (Fig. 6c and e). In addition to this, a Cu+-incorporated crystalline TiO2 (TiO2–Cu+) shell acted as a protective overlayer and coated on the Cu2O nanowires for PEC CO2 reduction.77 The study showed that the photocurrent density of a Cu2O photocathode with the TiO2–Cu+ overlayer increased 5.2-fold in comparison with bare Cu2O after 30 min of PEC reduction of CO2. The faradaic efficiency (FE) increased to 56.5% from 23.6% when bare Cu2O photocathodes were modified by TiO2–Cu+ coating. Simultaneously, they found that Cu+ species embedded in a TiO2 layer enhanced the adsorption of CO2 on TiO2 surfaces and Cu+ state on a TiO2 surface became the dominating active site for selectively-produced methanol during PEC CO2 reduction. This work provides a theoretical guide for the photocorrosion issues in spite of relatively low faradaic efficiency compared with other reports mentioned above.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction process involving protected Cu2O photocathodes and a Re-based molecular catalyst, (b) cathodic current density and CO evolution efficiency of the Cu2O photocathode under chopped light at a constant potential of −1.73 V vs. Fc+/Fc with 2 mM Re(tBu-bipy)(CO)3Cl and 7.5 M MeOH under CO2, (c) SEM micrographs of unprotected and protected Cu2O before and after polarization at −1.73 V under AM 1.5 G illumination, (d) representative GC traces from protected and unprotected Cu2O electrodes, (e) XRD analysis of Cu2O electrodes before and after CO2 reduction experiments. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.76 
Besides the inorganic species overlayer, an organic thin film (oligoaniline) was also developed to protect Cu2O against photocorrosion for PEC CO2 reduction processes.78 It revealed that the oligoaniline over-coated Cu2O can adsorb CO2 on the surface. Moreover, the XPS analysis signified no signs of degradation to Cu or CuO, further confirming the better stabilizing effect of oligoaniline. Nevertheless, the oligoaniline-modified copper(I) oxide photocathode is not good for the selectivity of products. Generally, there existed various products, including methanol (predominant product), some ethanol and possibly formic acid. As mentioned above, addition of surface overlayers can relieve the photocorrosion of Cu2O efficiently, however, this is usually performed via an expensive atomic layer deposition method, and effective catalytic sites are hard to be kept. Under ideal conditions, the surface coating materials need to meet two criteria: improving the stability of Cu2O photocathodes and affording the active sites for CO2 activation. Recently, Xiong et al. loaded a metal–organic framework (MOF) layer on the surface of a Cu2O photocathode by a facile in situ method.28 In this regard, the coated MOF (Cu3(BTC)2) layer played an important role in PEC CO2 reduction by protecting a Cu2O underlayer from photocorrosion, offering active sites and facilitating electron transfer. Ultrafast spectroscopy analysis further confirmed that the interface between Cu2O and Cu3(BTC)2 could effectively promote charge transfer from Cu2O to MOF for CO2 reduction (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration for PEC CO2 reduction in acetonitrile using a hybrid Cu-MOF/Cu2O photocathode and ultrafast transient absorption as a function of probe delay for Cu2O and Cu3(BTC)2/Cu2O (pump at 480 nm; probe at 630 nm). Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2019, American Chemical Society.28 
Historically, it has been an effective approach to deposit a surface coating material to avoid photocorrosion. It is worth noting that a buffer layer (e.g. Al-doped ZnO layer) is necessary before depositing the protective layer (e.g. TiO2 layer) on the surface of Cu2O photocathodes, implying recombination loss at the Cu2O/TiO2 interface.73 The intermediate layer provided a more uniform hydroxylated surface for TiO2 to grow on, which favored the charge separation at the Cu2O/TiO2 interface. Furthermore, an atomic layer deposited (ALD) technique was developed to introduce the buffer layer on a Cu2O photoelectrode. However, ALD is difficult for large-scale applications due to its complexity and expense, and some materials are difficult or even impossible to use with the ALD technique as a result of the requirements for a precursor with high vapour pressure and good thermal stability.79
Very recently, Ng's group developed a pulsed electrodeposition method that can effectively control the morphology, thickness and distribution of the deposited thin films.79 The detailed synthesis process and spatial distribution of the TiO2/Cu2O and TiO2/ZnO/Cu2O photoelectrodes are exemplified in Fig. 8a and b. Herein, the uniform coverage of ZnO amorphous layers synthesized by pulsed electrodeposition can not only provide invaluable fine control but also prevent the corrosion of Cu2O at a continuous high bias. Then, time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) results showed that the energetic electrons from the excited Cu2O can be transferred to TiO2 by the ZnO layer (Fig. 8c). This novel strategy can greatly improve the stability and charge separation efficiency of Cu2O, leading to a 1.5-fold increase in photocurrent density compared with the TiO2/Cu2O photoelectrode. Although the CO2 reduction performance is not referred to in this report, it offers a versatile and effective method for PEC CO2 conversion.
 Fig. 8  (a) Flowchart of the synthesis process for TiO2/Cu2O and TiO2/ZnO/Cu2O multilayered photoelectrodes, (b) 3D elemental rendering images by TOF-SIMs, (c) time-resolved PL spectra acquired with an excitation wavelength of 405 nm for prepared Cu2O (black), TiO2/Cu2O (blue) and TiO2/ZnO/Cu2O (red) photoelectrodes. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.79 


4.2.2 Forming heterojunctions for improved stability and charge separation efficiency. 
In addition to the surface coating, the formation of heterojunctions is another possible approach to solve the stability issue and enhance the charge separation efficiency of Cu2O photocathodes. A Cu/Cu2O electrode prepared by electrochemical deposition was performed for PEC CO2 reduction in 0.1 M Na2CO3/NaHCO3 electrolyte.80 The experimental results indicated that the faradaic efficiency of CO2/CH3OH reached 75% under ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) irradiation for 2 h with an applied bias of 0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The authors found that parameters including electrolyte, pH and applied potential affected the production of methanol and ethanol markedly. Besides this, they demonstrated that the stabilization of Cu(I) for the photocathode played an important role in the PEC CO2 reduction process. However, further studies were not conducted for the selectivity of products and electrode stability.
To further study the product evolution during CO2 photoreduction at Cu/Cu2O electrodes, Zanoni and co-workers focused on the product distribution (such as methanol, ethanol, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, and acetone) at a Cu/Cu2O electrode (1 × 1 cm2) during PEC CO2 reduction processes.81 In the study, the authors observed that the products formed in turn are methanol, acetaldehyde and acetone for a short period (<30 min) and longer accumulation periods (>120 min). More importantly, they proposed a self-consistent reaction scheme responsible for the distribution of the products CH3OH, C2H5OH, CH2O, C2H4O, and CH3COCH3. As shown in Fig. 9, the products (e.g. CH3OH, C2H5OH, CH2O, C2H4O, and CH3COCH3) of CO2 conversion relied on the formation of radicals such as OH˙, H˙, and CH3˙ during the PEC CO2 reduction process.
 Fig. 9  Formation mechanism proposed for the products formic acid (CHOOH), methanol (CH3OH), ethanol (C2H5OH), formaldehyde (CH2O), acetaldehyde (C2H4O) and acetone (CH3COCH3) by means of CO2 photoelectrochemical reduction. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2015, Elsevier.81 
Next, Xia and co-workers achieved a better conversion of CO2 by combining metal electrodes with semiconductor thin films.82 At first, the authors deposited p-type and n-type Cu2O thin films onto a Cu substrate, respectively. Then, the as-prepared Cu/Cu2O samples were applied for CO2 reduction in photochemical, electrochemical and PEC systems. Finally, they found that the PEC CO2 reduction system can obtain the best yield on the Cu/Cu2O photoelectrodes. Additionally, the morphology and conduction type of Cu2O interfered markedly with PEC CO2 reduction activity. Under similar morphology, Cu/Cu2O (p-type) electrodes had a higher CO2 conversion efficiency than the Cu/Cu2O (n-type), which is attributed to Cu/Cu2O (p-type) electrodes supplying more electrons for CO2 reduction (Fig. 10a). For the different morphologies, Cu/Cu2O (p-type) electrodes with nanobelt arrays possessed higher conversion efficiency than Cu/Cu2O (p-type) electrodes with stone-like morphology due to a larger surface area for p-type Cu2O with nanobelt arrays (Fig. 10b).
 Fig. 10  (a) Energy-band diagrams of n-type and p-type Cu/Cu2O electrodes during CO2 reduction in the PEC system. (b) Faradaic efficiency for different conduction types and morphologies of Cu/Cu2O electrodes in the PEC CO2 reduction process. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2014, American Chemical Society.82 
To facilitate charge separation and control product selectivity, metals (i.e. Ag, Au, Cd, Cu, Pb, and Sn) decorating CuO/Cu2O hybrid electrodes were developed.74 After introducing these metals into CuO/Cu2O photocathodes, a more efficient electron transfer from semiconductor to electrolyte was achieved through reducing the recombination of photo-generated charges. At −1.6 V vs. RHE, Pb/CuO/Cu2O gave rise to 0.524 μmol h−1 cm−2 for formic acid and 0.102 μmol h−1 cm−2 for methanol with 40.45% of total faradaic efficiency among these metals. It is worth noting that photocurrent density of the resulting electrode rapidly degraded during the reactions. The authors interpreted the phenomenon as destroying the electron–hole pathway (Fig. 11a). Even though the charge transfer and separation of CuO/Cu2O based photocathodes was promoted after decorating with the metals, a decline of photocurrent density still occurred at the CuO–Cu2O photocathode with the time prolongation.
 Fig. 11  (a) Band structure of CuO/Cu2O before (left) and after (right) reaction. Reproduced with permission ref. 74, copyright, 2014, Elsevier. (b) Scheme of the fabricated p–n junction of FTO/Cu2O–TiO2−x/Nafion. Reproduced with permission ref. 85, copyright, 2018, Elsevier. (c) Synthetic procedures for preparation of TiO2–Au–Cu2O and TiO2–Cu2O. (d) I–V profiles collected on TiO2–Au–Cu2O-1.5 photocathodes under chopped AM 1.5 G illumination in N2-saturated or CO2-saturated electrolyte. (e) Proposed charge transfer mechanism for (A) TiO2–Cu2O and (B) TiO2–Au–Cu2O. (f) Time-resolved PL spectra for the relevant samples. (g) Nyquist plots of pure Cu2O, TiO2–Cu2O, and the three TiO2–Au–Cu2O electrodes. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2018, American Chemical Society.84 
Considering this, the stability of p-type Cu2O photocathodes should deserve wide attention. Kulesza et al. constructed a bifunctional p–n junction made of copper(I) oxide (Cu2O) and titanium oxide (TiO2−x) capable of driving PEC reduction of CO2.83 The hybrid system is beneficial for increasing the electron density and improving the overall conductivity. In view of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties of Nafion, the outer-most ultra-thin film of Nafion can act as the protective layer and wetting (favoring proton mobility) medium. Finally, the Nafion-protected mixed-oxides (Cu2O–TiO2−x) system achieved a cathodic photocurrent density of 1.2 mA cm−2 at 0.1 V vs. RHE with remarkable stability. Here, TiO2 treated by the hydrogen flame had many oxygen defects, which would provide better charge mobility and lower extent of recombination. As such, the photogenerated charge carries can be better applied to the CO2 reduction path (Fig. 11b). Although the performance of PEC CO2 reduction can be enhanced by virtue of the heterostructure design, the reduction ability is often limited by inferior electron transfer, particularly for type-II semiconductor/semiconductor heterostructures. To overcome this limitation and retain high redox ability at the same time, Hsu and co-workers introduced the Z-scheme charge transfer mechanism into the heterostructure design, namely, TiO2–Au-supported Cu2O heterostructures.84 The synthetic procedures for preparation of TiO2–Au–Cu2O and TiO2–Cu2O are illustrated in Fig. 11c. Remarkably, the photocurrent density of −1.82 mA cm−2 can be reached at 0.11 V vs. RHE for TiO2–Au–Cu2O photocathodes toward PEC CO2 reduction (Fig. 11d). In the study, the embedded Au particles as a charge transfer mediator facilitated charge transfer from the conduction band of TiO2 to the valence band of Cu2O. The vectorial charge transfer pathway was beneficial to electron aggregation in the conduction band of Cu2O and holes at the valence band of TiO2, which made TiO2–Au–Cu2O photocathodes with a high redox ability for PEC CO2 reduction. For comparison, the severe interfacial charge recombination between Cu2O and TiO2 would lead to poor CO2 reduction ability (Fig. 11e). Even more importantly, the observation from time-resolved photoluminescence spectra and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy indicated that the Au-mediated Z-scheme also improved interfacial charge transfer significantly (Fig. 11f–g).


4.3.3 Loading surface cocatalysts for improved PEC CO2 conversion efficiency. 
Surface area and photogenerated charge carrier transfer mobility are also two key factors to improve the PEC CO2 conversion efficiency of the Cu2O-based photocathodes. The loading of surface cocatalysts (e.g. CO2-reduction cocatalyst) has been demonstrated as an effective approach to promote the charge transfer and thus the surface reaction kinetics.86 As mentioned above (Fig. 4a), molecular complexes have been widely employed as CO2-reduction cocatalysts to improve charge transfer and the selectivity of products. For instance, Grätzel's group adopted a TiO2-protected Cu2O photocathode coupled with a molecular catalyst Re(tBu-bipy)(CO)3Cl for the PEC reduction of CO2.76 In the system, they found a serious charge-transfer limitation from the surface of the TiO2 protective layer to the Re-based molecular cocatalyst. Interestingly, the simple addition of a protic additive such as methanol or n-propanol could overcome the limitation. The protic additive can avoid the electrostatic repulsion between a molecular cocatalyst and Cu2O photocathodes by changing the charge state of the catalyst intermediate. Nevertheless, the reaction with a protic additive is not an ideal CO2 reduction reaction and the cost of the protic additive is high. To figure out the issue, a rhenium-containing CO2 reduction catalyst was attached on the surface of a protected Cu2O-based photocathode in the following year.60 In order to eliminate charge-transfer limitations between the photocathode and the molecular cocatalyst without the addition of extra protic additives, a nanostructured TiO2 scaffold layer, formed at low temperature, was introduced on the surface of the protected Cu2O photocathodes for the first time. Afterwards, a covalent combination between the Re-based molecular cocatalyst and the TiO2 scaffold layer was formed using phosphonate linkers, which made the homogeneous catalyst heterogenized (Fig. 12a). This strategy could vastly facilitate charge transfer from the TiO2-modified Cu2O photocathodes to the surface cocatalyst, which gave rise to a 40-fold enhancement of the photocurrent density in comparison with planar devices (Fig. 12b).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic (not to scale) of protected Cu2O photoelectrode with covalently bound Re(bipy) CO2 reduction catalyst. (b) Photoelectrochemical performance under chopped, simulated sunlight of Cu2O photocathodes with (red) and without (blue) a mesoporous TiO2 layer on the surface, tested under CO2 with molecular Re catalyst covalently bound to the surface. Linear sweep at 10 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, American Chemical Society.60 
Beyond that, taking advantage of the high electrical conductivity of nanocarbon materials in combination with the superior photoactive behavior of Cu2O semiconductor by the formation of nanocarbon/nano Cu2O semiconductor hybrids, it would become a promising approach to further improve the PEC CO2 reduction performance.87 For instance, Rajeshwar et al. developed a hybrid carbon nanotubes (CNTs)/Cu2O photoelectrode employed for PEC CO2 reduction.88 First, Cu2O nanoparticles were deposited on the ultralong carbon nanotubes (CNTs) with a nanonet structure that acted as a highly conductive template through an electrodeposition method (Fig. 13a and b). In the report, the authors found that a prenucleation process was the key factor for reducing the Cu2O nanoparticles and narrowing the particle size distribution (Fig. 13c, d, and f). Then, a five-fold higher electrical conductivity and a dramatically increased photocurrent were achieved for the CNTs/Cu2O hybrid film compared with the pure Cu2O film. Moreover, the observation from long term photoelectrolysis measurements manifested that the hybrid film was more stable than the Cu2O alone (Fig. 13g). The enhanced photocurrent and charge transport property can obtain further evidence by the EIS and voltammetry results. In general, all these advancements were due to the introduction of the highly conductive carbon nanotubes and superior photoactive Cu2O nanoparticles, which is beneficial to transfer photogenerated electrons to the Cu2O/electrolyte interfaces and the photogenerated holes to the supporting electrode. But the detailed CO2 reduction product was not tested by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC–MS) in this work, and only liquid products were detected (Fig. 13h).
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM images of the bare CNT nanonet. (b) CNT/Cu2O hybrid materials obtained at constant E = −0.25 V potential, Q = 200 mC. (c) With a short predeposition step at E = 0.35 V potential, Q = 200 mC. (d) Particle size distribution. (e and f) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images for the same samples shown in (b) and (c). (g) Long-term chronoamperometry data of a Cu2O and a CNT/Cu2O film with an identical Cu2O content (1 C), 0.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl, in CO2 saturated 0.1 m Na2SO4 solution. (h) GC–MS profiles registered using selective ion monitoring (SIM) for the sample after 7 h photoelectrolysis. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.88 
In addition to the above methods for improving stability, using Cu2O as a dark cathode can give rise to stable aqueous CO2 reduction with high faradaic efficiency of 87.4% and selectivity of 92.6% for carbonaceous products at 0.75 V vs. RHE (Fig. 14a, b, and c). In this case, Cu2O can completely overcome the photocorrosion when Cu2O is a dark cathode rather than a photocathode (Fig. 14d and e). Furthermore, the surface of Cu2O was directly in contact with electrolyte, which led to higher selectivity of the carbonaceous products. In the meantime, the authors found that the major reason for the corrosion of Cu2O came from the photogenerated holes rather than the photogenerated electrons, investigated by back-side illumination. Accordingly, employing Cu2O film as a dark cathode can eliminate the adverse effects of holes, thus presenting an unexpected and much better stability.38 This work gave us a hint that it may be a feasible strategy to select Cu2O as a dark cathode with an efficient and stable photoanode for improving the stability and the selectivity for carbonaceous products of Cu2O in the realm of PEC CO2 reduction (Fig. 14f).
 Fig. 14  (a) CO and CH4. (b) H2 as a function of reaction time using TiO2 NRs as working electrode (WE), different cathodes as the counter electrode (CE), and saturated Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode (RE) under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 G and 0.75 V vs. RHE. (c) The calculated selectivity of carbonaceous products (SCP) by different cathodes as a function of reaction time. (d) SCP as a function of the reaction time using different electrodes by three electrode configurations in PEC CO2 reduction. (e) J–t curves during the reactions. (f) Schematic representation of the system for PEC reduction of CO2 to fuels. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Wiley Online Library.38 

4.2 CuO
Cupric oxide (CuO) is a promising p-type binary oxide with an energy bandgap of 1.3–1.6 eV, which has been confirmed as a photocathode for PEC CO2 reduction. Moreover, CuO possesses a wider photoresponse region over a substantial portion of the solar spectrum due to a narrower band gap compared with Cu2O. In theory, CuO should be capable of generating a higher photocurrent than Cu2O.89,90 Additionally, the plentiful and relatively less toxic component elements are additional advantages for CuO from a sustainability and toxicity perspective. More importantly, the negative conduction band edge positions provide a higher conversion efficiency for CO2 reduction.91 Despite these advantages, less attention has been paid to CuO than to Cu2O. On one hand, it can be attributed to the prior uncertainty in the thermodynamic feasibility. On the other hand, similar to Cu2O, rapid photocorrosion of CuO is also the main issue that restricts the application of CuO as a photocathode for PEC CO2 reduction.92

4.2.1 Constructing the heterojunction structure for enhanced stability and efficiency. 
Constructing the heterojunction structure with CuO and another material is a solution for avoiding photocorrosion. For instance, a Cu2O–CuO core–shell nanorod configuration was prepared on Cu substrates for the first time by a simple two-step hybrid thermal growth/electrodeposition approach (Fig. 15a–e).90 The hybrid CuO–Cu2O semiconductor nanorod arrays can drive PEC CO2 reduction into methanol at potential of ∼800 mV that are below the thermodynamic threshold value, and the corresponding faradaic efficiency can reach ∼95%. Furthermore, methanol photogenerated at −0.2 V vs. SHE could be detected by a gas chromatograph equipped with a mass spectrometer (GC–MS). The excellent PEC performance was mainly ascribed to the band-edge positions of both oxides (Fig. 15f). It can be observed that the differences in the band edges of the two oxides promoted the transfer of photogenerated electrons from the Cu2O shell to the CuO core. At the same time, the photogenerated electrons from Cu2O could also directly participate in PEC CO2 reduction since the Cu2O shell is in contact with the electrolyte. Compared with the single Cu2O film, this double pathway for the injection of photoelectrons into CO2 was beneficial to improve the PEC CO2 reduction performance of CuO–Cu2O nanorod arrays. It is important to note that, in this work, it is necessary for the electrolyte to be in contact with the tip of the CuO core. Only in this way can the double injection pathway be sustained.
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of the two-step synthesis of CuO–Cu2O hybrid nanorod arrays for solar photoelectrosynthesis of CH3OH from CO2: (1) thermal growth of CuO nanorods on a Cu foil and (2) cathodic electrodeposition of Cu2O for selected time periods from a cupric lactate solution, pH 9 (a). Morphology/composition of a CuO–Cu2O nanorod is sketched on the right side of the panel (a) SEM images of thermally grown CuO nanorods before (b) and after Cu2O electrodeposition on them for 1 (c), 10 (d) and 30 min (e) respectively. (f) Energy band diagram of hybrid CuO–Cu2O nanorod arrays for solar photoelectrosynthesis of CH3OH from CO2. Semiconductor band edges and redox potentials are shown vs. the SHE ref. electrode. CB: conduction band; VB: valence band. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.90 
Likewise, the CuO with flower clusters (FCs) structure was deposited on the Fe2O3 nanotubes by the pulse electrochemical deposition method.93 The vertically aligned Fe2O3 nanotubes were grown in situ on the Fe substrate according to a potentiostatic anodization method. The CuO FCs/Fe2O3 NTs heterojunctions were finally formed for PEC CO2 reduction (Fig. 16a–e). Also, it could be found that the bandgap of the composite narrowed to 1.78 eV from 2.03 eV after modifying with CuO FCs. Accordingly, the absorption of visible light was also widened significantly. More importantly than all of that, the conduction band and valence band were located at −0.73 eV and 1.05 eV, respectively, which are capable of CO2 reduction and water oxidation reactions (Fig. 16f). In this case, the CuO FCs/Fe2O3 NTs composite could produce 1.00 mmol L−1 cm−2 of methanol and 107.38 mmol L−1 cm−2 of ethanol detected by chromatography after 6 h. During PEC reduction of CO2, the highest amount of methanol and the largest faradaic efficiency (91.20%) as well as the highest current competition ratio (62.19%) were gained at potential of −1.1 V vs. SCE in the system (Fig. 16g). The external applied bias is too high in this work, and the mechanism for the formation of methanol and ethanol needs to be clearly confirmed.
 Fig. 16  (a) SEM image of Fe2O3 NTs. (b) Cross-sectional view of (a) showing the self-assembling NTs. (c) SEM image of CuO FCs/Fe2O3 NTs. (d) TEM image of CuO FCs/Fe2O3 NTs. (e) Schematic strategy of the electrodes preparation. (f) Band-edge positions of Fe2O3 NTs, CuO FCs, and CuO FCs/Fe2O3 NTs in contrast to CO2/CH3OH and H2O/O2. (g) Faradaic efficiency of methanol and a current competition ratio (the inset map) of CuO FCs/Fe2O3 NTs changed with the bias potential during PEC CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.93 
In addition to this, in 2016, Brito and co-workers constructed a Ti/TiO2/CuO n–p junction semiconductor with high porosity by using a dip-coating technique for PEC CO2 reduction.94 The Ti/TiO2/CuO n–p junction semiconductor presented a charge transfer and reduction mechanism as follows (Fig. 17a). The photo-generated electrons from the surface of TiO2 were quickly transferred to the Cu2+ sites, reducing the Cu2+ species to Cu+. After that, CO2 reduction occurred on the Cu+ sites, along with the reoxidation of Cu+ to Cu2+. As a result of this behavior, the PEC CO2 reduction process can proceed smoothly. It should be noted that, in this study, the type of electrolyte influence not only the CO2 reduction performance, but also the product selectivity (Fig. 17b and c). When the supporting electrolyte was 0.1 mol L−1 K2SO4, the products were methanol, ethanol, and acetone. Among them, methanol was the primary product with a conversion efficiency of 91%. When 0.1 mol L−1 NaHCO3 was used as the electrolyte, methanol production was achieved with a higher conversion efficiency of 97% following 2 h of reaction at the applied potential of −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The enhanced performance in the NaHCO3 electrolyte was attributed to the better adsorption of CO2.
 Fig. 17  (a) Mechanism proposed for reducing CO2 to methanol, ethanol and acetone by photoelectrocatalysis using Ti/TiO2/CuO p–n junction semiconductor. (b) Products CH3OH (gray), C2H5OH (light gray) and CH3COCH3 (black) formed by photoelectrocatalytic CO2 reduction after 2 h of reaction in 0.10 mol L−1 NaHCO3 at pH 8 with varying temperatures and UV–Vis light (125 W) under a potential of (a) +0.20 V vs. Ag/AgCl and (c) −0.60 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (d) Diffuse reflectance analysis of TiO2 nanotubes (black line) and NtTiO2/NsCuO (red line) with the insert of band gap for TiO2 nanotubes (black line) and NtTiO2/NsCuO (red line) (e) EIS measurements in 5.0 × 10−3 mol L−1 Fe(CN)63−/4− redox probe (0.1 mol L−1 KCl) for the semiconductors NtTiO2/NsCuO (black curve), Ti/TiO2/CuO (red curve) and NtTiO2 (blue curve). Figure insert: Amplification of Nyquist plot; (f) C−2vs. E relation at 10 Hz in 0.1 mol L−1 phosphate buffer solution (pH7) for the semiconductors NtTiO2/NsCuO (black curve) and NtTiO2 (blue curve). (g) Schematic representation of the charge-transfer mechanism in p–n junction NtTiO2/NsCuO semiconductor under potential and UV-vis irradiation. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2018, Elsevier.95 
Inspired by the reports that nanoparticle films covered on the semiconductor surface can not only improve the kinetics of hole reactions with electrolytes on account of higher penetration of electrolytes, they also alter the material conductivity as well as the adsorption of analytes on the substrate. Given this feature, Brito's group constructed a p–n junction semiconductor based on CuO nanospheres (NsCuO) covering the outside of TiO2 nanotubes (NtTiO2).95 They found that the NtTiO2/NsCuO material possessed smaller charge transfer resistance, smaller flat band potential and a wider optical absorption range compared to the bare NtTiO2 or Ti/TiO2 nanoparticles modified by larger size particles of CuO, namely Ti/TiO2/CuO (Fig. 17d–f). And, under UV-vis irradiation, the NtTiO2/NsCuO material promoted the selective reduction of dissolved CO2 to methanol with 57% faradaic efficiency at a lower potential of +0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 0.1 mol L−1 K2SO4 electrolyte (pH = 8). Surprisingly, they observed that the methanol formation was significantly increased in the presence of hydroxyls (0.62 mmol L−1) and hole scavengers (0.71 mmol L−1), such as p-nitrosodimethylaniline (RNO) or glucose in the supporting electrolyte. The corresponding conclusion indicated that partial reduction products can be reoxidized to CO2 and H2O if the product still came into contact with OH species. The nanostructured NtTiO2/NsCuO electrode obtained the maximum conversion to methanol (generated 0.71 mmol L−1 methanol) in 0.1 mol L−1 K2SO4 (pH = 8) containing 10.0 mmol L−1 glucose. The transfer mechanism of the NtTiO2/NsCuO was based on the Z-scheme mechanism (Fig. 17g). The electrons located in the conduction band of TiO2 can be captured by holes in the VB of CuO. Therefore, more electrons in the conduction band of CuO can participate in the CO2 reduction reaction. More importantly, they point out that the nanostructured heterojunction was beneficial to generate more efficient electrons for CO2 reduction. Furthermore, they also explained that the methanol was oxidized by a more efficient hole, which was further evidenced by the results of RNO discoloration (proportional to hydroxyl generation). Meanwhile, they also observed that the non-nanostructured electrode (Ti/TiO2/CuO) gave rise to fewer hydroxyl radicals. Whereas, the nanostructured NtTiO2/NsCuO semiconductor could generate the same amount of methanol with the non-nanostructured Ti/TiO2/CuO. The result could be indicative that fewer hydroxyl radicals do not interfere with the CO2 reduction when using the non-nanostructured electrode.
For a complete nanostructured electrode, electrons and holes were separated efficiently with fast charge transfer. At the same time, the reduction of products was also consumed rapidly. Although a large amount of heterogeneous catalysis has been done to improve the performance of CO2 reduction, the selective generation of products remains a challenge. A CuFeO2/CuO mixed binary oxide was prepared by an electrodeposition method for PEC CO2 reduction.96 The composite can selectively produce acetate or formate by varying the Fe:Cu atomic fraction, which is different from other reports. The experiment results demonstrated the CuFeO2/CuO mixed binary oxide could convert CO2 to acetate with 80% faradaic efficiency at −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl (pH = 7) under visible light illumination. In addition to this, the authors also found that formate is the primary reaction product when the concentration of Cu is higher than Fe in the catalyst. The primary reaction product is the acetate with a faradaic selectivity of 80% while Fe:Cu atomic fraction within the mixed Fe–Cu oxide catalysts is 1.3 (Fig. 18a and b). Kinetic studies reveal that the Fe–Cu mixed oxide catalyst mainly produces acetate in the PEC CO2 reduction process. Compared to bare CuO and Fe2O3 catalysts, the selective Fe–Cu mixed oxide catalysts displayed higher yield and faradaic efficiency of acetate production after 2 hours reduction reaction at −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl under UV-Vis light illumination (Table 2). Also, it can be observed that the CuFeO2/CuO mixed oxide was partially etched under the reaction conditions, which could be due to the reductive dissolution of photo-excited Fe3+ in reducing environments. Unfortunately, the loss of Fe would cause instability of the catalyst. Moreover, kinetic studies indicated that the formation of acetate deactivated rapidly in the first 10 minutes of the reaction. To this end, it demonstrates that understanding the competing kinetics of CO2 reduction and Fe3+ reductive dissolution better is crucial to stabilize the catalyst for long-term electrolysis.
 Fig. 18  (a) Concentration of acetate and formate in post-reaction electrolyte and (b) corresponding faradaic efficiencies following electrolysis on Fe–Cu oxide catalysts with various Fe:Cu atomic fractions. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2017, American Chemical Society.96 
Table 2 Results of photo-electrolysis experiments performed at −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl during illumination. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2017, American Chemical Society96




Catalyst
Electrolytea
Purge gas
[Acetate]b (μM)
Faradaic efficiencyb





a Electrolyte concentrations were 0.1 M phosphate electrolyte, buffered at pH = 7.
b Uncertainty values represent the standard error obtained by linear regression of ion chromatography data.





Fe–Cu mixed oxide
H2PO4−
CO2
257 ± 15
76 ± 5%


Fe–Cu mixed oxide
H2PO4−
Ar
13 ± 35
8 ± 20%


Fe–Cu mixed oxide
HCO3−
CO2
142 ± 15
80 ± 8%


Fe–Cu mixed oxide
HCO3−
Ar
80 ± 15
48 ± 8%


Fe2O3 only
HCO3−
CO2
9 ± 35
2 ± 9%


CuO only
HCO3−
CO2
11 ± 35
7 ± 27%




Similar work where CuFeO2/CuO thin film electrodes fabricated by electrodeposition methods in dimethyl sulfoxide were also applied for PEC CO2 reduction in 2019.97 It was found that both CuO(111) and CuFeO2(101) possessed high crystallinity with an increase of deposition potential and annealing temperature. Also, the authors demonstrated that CuFeO2 presented higher crystallinity at more negative deposition potential, which was consistent with Choi's report.98 In addition, the different deposition potentials made various Cu/Fe molar ratios for CuO/CuFeO2 thin films (Table 3). At the same time, liquid products were tested by gas chromatography–mass spectroscopy (GC–MS). CuFeO2/CuO thin film electrodes could convert CO2 to methanol and ethanol at the applied potential between −0.50 to −0.80 V vs. SCE. Additionally, it can be observed that the highest concentration of methanol was obtained at −0.70 V vs. SCE, while the corresponding ethanol appears at −0.63 V vs. SCE. As mentioned in the above report, CO2 could be efficiently converted to formate at CuFeO2/CuO photocathodes in a CO2-purged 0.1 M bicarbonate electrolyte. Therefore, the different surface composition of the photocathode and electrolyte determined the type of products. Besides this, they also observed that the yield of the products relied on the molar ratio of Cu/Fe of thin film surfaces.
Table 3 Chemical composition of CuO/CuFeO2 thin film surface at various deposition potential for 1.5 h.a Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2019, International Journal of Electrochemical Science97





a CuO/CuFeO2 thin films were annealed at 580 °C for 30 min.





Deposition potential (V)
−0.45
−0.50
−0.60
−0.70
−0.80


Molar ratio of Cu/Fe on thin film surface
7.03
5.46
2.48
3.02
3.65






4.2.2 Elaborately designing the PEC cell for improved efficiency of PEC CO2 reduction. 
The design of the PEC cell in terms of shape and dimensions was also a key factor for improving PEC CO2 reduction abilities of CuO-based photocathodes. For example, Andresen et al. developed a range of CuO-based thin films as photocathodes in a continuous flow microfluidic PEC reactor for CO2 reduction.99 They demonstrated that the α-Fe2O3/CuO photoelectrode yielded the highest photocurrent density of −1.0 mA cm−2 at 0.3 V vs. RHE among the CuO, Cu2O, CuO–Cu2O and α-Fe2O3/CuO photocathodes, which was the result of a higher surface area and formation of a p–n junction between α-Fe2O3 and CuO. It can also be observed that the bilayer α-Fe2O3/CuO photocathode could give rise to formate and methanol, while other CuO-based photocathodes only formed formate (Fig. 19a). Also, a newly-designed continuous microfluidic PEC cell was used during the PEC CO2 reduction process. Surprisingly, it was found that a solar-to-fuel (STF) efficiency of 0.48% was obtained on the α-Fe2O3/CuO photocathodes under optimal conditions and the optimal flow rate was 0.08 mL min−1 (Fig. 19b and c). The continuous flow microfluidic PEC cell proven in this work can offer the ability to investigate the potential benefits of PEC CO2 reduction.
 Fig. 19  (a) Product concentration in 0.2 M NaHCO3 electrolyte as a function of photoelectrosynthesis time for CuO, Cu2O, CuO/Cu2O and α-Fe2O3/CuO photoelectrodes used in PECR1, and (b) product concentration in 0.2M NaHCO3 electrolyte as a function of flow rate in PECR2 for CuO, Cu2O, CuO/Cu2O and α-Fe2O3/CuO photoelectrodes after 1 h of PEC CO2 reduction experiment, (c) schematic representation of wired sandwich-type microfluidic PEC cell (PECR2). Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.99 

4.3 CuFeO2
CuFeO2 is a p-type Cu1+-containing oxide that becomes more and more attractive in terms of easy obtainment of the raw material, favorable band gap (1.5 eV), non-toxicity, and high stability. Moreover, CuFeO2 possesses a delafossite structure. In the crystal structure, Cu 3d orbitals combined with the O 2p orbitals are more covalent compared with typical metal–oxygen bonds in other oxides, promoting the charge carriers to move freely. This feature can improve the photocatalyst efficiency. Thus, CuFeO2 is supposed to have great application prospects in the field of photoelectrocatalysis. For example, Bocarsly and co-workers synthesized CuFeO2 photocathodes applied for PEC CO2 reduction.100 Unlike prior materials synthesized by an electrodeposition method,98 the authors prepared the Mg-doped CuFeO2 material by a straightforward high-temperature solid-state method. 0.05% Mg-doped CuFeO2 electrodes yielded a photocurrent density up to −1.0 mA cm−2 (Fig. 20a), which was mainly attributed to the improved conductivity of the material by addition of a Mg2+ dopant. At an applied potential of −0.4 V vs. SCE, the incident photon-to-current efficiency of the Mg-doped CuFeO2 photocathode could reach 14% at 340 nm. Simultaneously, the conduction band edge of the Mg-doped CuFeO2 photocathode was calculated to be −1.1 V vs. SCE (pH = 6.8), which is higher than CO2 reduction potentials (Fig. 20b). Thus, the p-type Mg-doped CuFeO2 electrodes were capable of reduction of CO2 to formate at an unparalleled underpotential without a cocatalyst.
 Fig. 20  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry of Mg-doped CuFeO2 using chopped light in 0.1 M NaHCO3 yields a photocurrent density up to −1.0 mA cm−2 (scan rate = 100 mV s−1). (b) Experimentally determined Mg-doped CuFeO2 conduction and valence band edges and thermodynamic redox potentials of CO2 reduction products on a potential diagram, depicting favorable energetics for photo-assisted CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission ref. 100, copyright, 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Top views of the TNNTs before heat treatment and (d) after calcination at 650 °C for 6 h. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Elsevier.101 
Nonetheless, hydrogen evolution still existed during the CO2 reduction process, limiting the faradaic efficiency. Besides this, the fast carrier recombination within CuFeO2 also greatly limits its practicability. To solve this problem, Zhang et al. built p–n CuFeO2/Nb-doped TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNNTs), heterojunction photocathodes for PEC reduction of CO2.101 In this study, the TNNTs exhibited similar semiconductive properties with TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNTs) but the TNNTs displayed high resistance to high temperature, which maintains a regular nanotube array structure after the calcination at 650 °C (Fig. 20c and d). TNNTs were coupled with p-type CuFeO2 to obtain composite photocathodes. The synthesized CuFeO2/TNNTs photocathode exerted high selectivity to ethanol (Fig. 21a and b). Based on the above results and reported literature, CuFeO2 and TNNTs mainly form a type II Z-scheme heterojunction (Fig. 21c). The photo-generated electrons in TNNTs can be recombined with holes by CuFeO2. Hence, the high-power photo-generated electrons generated by CuFeO2 can exhibit great reducibility and be enough to reduce CO2.
 Fig. 21  (a) Ethanol yields of CuFeO2/TNNTs with different coating amount at −0.4 V vs. SCE. (b) Liquid products at different applied potentials on CuFeO2/TNNTs with the coating amount of 1.8 g m−2. (c) The mechanism of photoelectrocatalytic reduction of CO2 on CuFeO2/TNNTs. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Elsevier.101 
4.4 CuBi2O4
CuBi2O4 is a p-type Cu-based oxide that contains Cu2+. From a structural point of view, CuBi2O4 has a tetragonal crystal structure that is composed of square planar Cu(II)O4 groups and trigonal Bi(III)O6 polyhedra.102 The band gap of CuBi2O4 is 1.5–1.8 eV. Thus, CuBi2O4 served as a good light absorber and has been employed as a photocathode for PEC water splitting and CO2 reduction.103,104 However, CuBi2O4 can only utilize photons with energies above ∼1.7 eV.103,105 Consequently, a photocurrent smaller than 1 mA cm−2 for water reduction is obtained on CuBi2O4. Intrinsic instability, low carrier mobility and apparent surface recombination may also be responsible.106,107 Thus, several attempts should be focused to improve the above drawbacks of CuBi2O4.
According to Fig. 1, the negative conduction band potential of CuBi2O4 is capable of CO2 reduction. The first investigation in 2017 also confirmed that CuBi2O4 has the activity of CO2 reduction. But the reduction products have not been explicitly identified.108 To identify the relevant product and assess its performance in PEC CO2 reduction, He et al. reported a nanoporous CuBi2O4 photocathode with a series of film thicknesses.109 They found that the CuBi2O4-4 min photocathode reaches a maximum photocurrent value (Fig. 22a). IMPS results demonstrated that the CuBi2O4-4 min photocathode possesses a faster charge transfer rate compared with other samples (Fig. 22b). Then, the Nyquist plot of IMPS further shows that the electron transfer time of the CuBi2O4-4 min photocathode is shortest among all the samples (Fig. 22c). Finally, only CO is detected over p-type CuBi2O4-4 min during PEC CO2 reduction (Fig. 22d). Even so, photocathode corrosion is still a major obstacle for high efficiency of CO2 reduction. Given this, their research group introduced a protective coating layer (TiO2) on CuBi2O4 photocathodes.110 The influence of a TiO2 protective layer on the activity and selectivity of CO2 reduction was also studied. The highest CO2 reduction product yield is obtained when decorating a thin TiO2 layer on the surface of CuBi2O4 photocathodes (Fig. 22e and f). This phenomenon may be attributed to the electrode/electrolyte interface and efficient separation of photogenerated electrons/holes caused by the CuBi2O4/TiO2 p–n junction. Moreover, with an increase in thickness of the TiO2 coating layer, the spacing between particles decreases, as shown in Fig. 22g. Due to the limited mass transport, the reactants are easier to exhaust when narrowing the gap. Besides this, the local pH, exposed active site and different electronic energy band diagram are also key factors for the difference in CO production selectivity.
 Fig. 22  (a) Transient photocurrents, (b) Nyquist and (c) Bode plots from IMPS measurements of CuBi2O4 films in 0.1 mol L−1 KHCO3 electrolyte. (d) PEC reduction of CO2 over the CuBi2O4-4 min photocathode under a bias voltage of 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl with light intensity of 1000 W m−2. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2019, Elsevier.109 (e) CO and H2 production yield, (f) CO/H2 yield ratio from PEC catalytic experiments over CuBi2O4, CuBi2O4/TiO2-1 and CuBi2O4/TiO2-2 samples. (g) Schematic diagram showing the mesostructure and reduction reaction process over (left) CuBi2O4/TiO2-1 and (right) CuBi2O4/TiO2-2. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Elsevier.110 
4.5 CuFe2O4
CuFe2O4 is also a p-type semiconductor with an inverse spinel structure, in which electron hopping can occur. The existence of a cation site can serve as the basic side for the CO2 adsorption in the CuFe2O4. These features make it attractive to be used as a photocathode. The p-type CuFe2O4 was first investigated as a photocathode for PEC CO2 reduction by Khan and co-workers in 2018.111 Compared with photocatalytic (PC) reduction of CO2, PEC CO2 reduction can reduce the electron/hole (e−/h+) recombination in the CuFe2O4 by applying a bias potential. They observed that methanol is the only product in the liquid phase. Moreover, methanol yield is higher in PEC systems than photocatalysis and electrocatalysis systems, implying the advantages of a photoelectric synergy effect. At −0.5 V vs. NHE, the faradaic efficiency was 62%, while the quantum efficiency was calculated to be only 14.4%. They explained that the formation of competitive gas products limited quantum efficiency during CO2 reduction. Further investigation should be done to improve the methanol yield in the future.
In order to further improve quantum efficiency, their group developed a hetero-structure composite of CdS–CuFe2O4 by ultrasound-assisted sol–gel methods.112 Compared to CuFe2O4, the CdS–CuFe2O4 photocatalyst presented a ∼6 times higher photocurrent (−0.35 V vs. NHE) under CO2 conditions. Product analysis showed that the CdS–CuFe2O4 catalyst can produce methanol selectivity with trace amounts of H2 and CO. The faradaic and quantum efficiencies were demonstrated to be 72% and 16.9%, respectively (Fig. 23a). Mechanism investigation revealed that the photogenerated electrons generated by CuFe2O4 can transfer to the conduction band (CB) of the CdS for CO2 reduction. The holes located in the valence band (VB) of CuFe2O4 promote water oxidation (Fig. 23b). In addition to this, graphene oxide (GO) with different GO content was also incorporated into copper ferrite (CuFe2O4) for PEC CO2 reduction in 2019.113 They found that the PEC activity for CO2 reduction can be improved when modifying with GO. In particular, a 5% GO–CuFe2O4 hybrid photocatalyst displayed the highest methanol yield, which increased by ∼90% compared with the CuFe2O4 (Fig. 23c). The improved performance could be attributed to inhibiting the charge recombination and ensuring the accessibility of free charge carriers to support the catalytic activity. The underlying mechanism is presented as follows. GO sheets can trap the photoinduced electrons from CuFe2O4, then GO could act as an active site for the reduction of CO2 (Fig. 23d), thus suppressing the e−/h+ recombination.
 Fig. 23  (a) Product yield for CdS, CuFe2O4 and CdS–CuFe2O4 in PEC reduction of CO2, (b) proposed mechanism of PEC reduction of CO2 over CdS–CuFe2O4 photocathode surface. Reproduced with permission ref. 112, copyright, 2019, Elsevier. (c) Products formed by GO, CuFe2O4 and CuFe2O4 with different wt % of GO at −0.4 V in 0.1 M NaHCO3 solution, (d) mechanism of PEC CO2 reduction on the surface of GO–CuFe2O4 electrode. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2019, American Chemical Society.113 
4.6 Other Cu-based oxide
Beyond that, most of the works focused on developing other p-type semiconducting Cu-based oxides as photocathodes for PEC reduction of CO2. For example, a new p-type metal–oxide semiconductor (Cu3Nb2O8) was developed by Ohno's group through a spin coating and metal organic decomposition method.114 In the report, they demonstrated that the band gap of Cu3Nb2O8 photocathodes was estimated to be 2.5 eV via extrapolation of the absorption band edge. Then, the conduction potential of p-type Cu3Nb2O8 was calculated to be −1.21 V vs. NHE at pH 7 according to the results of Mott–Schottky analysis. As shown in Fig. 24a, the conduction band edge of Cu3Nb2O8 photocathodes was located at a more negative potential compared with the redox potential of CO2, implying that the p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode was feasible for PEC reduction of CO2. Additionally, a strong cathodic photocurrent density of −0.18 mA cm−2 was reached for the p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode at −0.30 V vs. Ag/AgCl (Fig. 24b). Meanwhile, the authors also observed that the p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode presented a gradually decreased cathodic photocurrent with time at −0.20 V vs. Ag/AgCl (Fig. 24c). Interestingly, the cathodic photocurrent of p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode was recovered by thermal annealing in air (Fig. 24d). This phenomenon was usually ascribed to the recovered valence state of copper [from Cu (0) and Cu(I) to Cu(II) species]. In the process of PEC CO2 reduction, the valence state of copper varied from Cu(II) to Cu (0) and Cu(I) species, which could be confirmed by XPS measurement (Fig. 24e). CO was detected as the only reduction product and CO evolution increased with an increase in the applied potential. However, the faradaic efficiency was only 9% obtained by the calculation, suggesting that producing other chemical products or reducing the electrode itself consumed most of the cathodic photocurrent of the p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode. In addition, no other chemical products (such as formic acid, methane, formaldehyde, methanol and ethanol) were observed, as illustrated in Fig. 24f. Thus, it can be inferred that part of the cathodic photocurrent was used in photocorrosion or reduction of the p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode itself.
 Fig. 24  (a) Position of the conduction band and valence band of p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode together with the redox potential of various reduction products/CO2, (b) linear sweep voltammetry of p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode under “chopped” AM 1.5 G solar-simulated light irradiation. The inset shows a reproduction of a part of the same figure at a finer resolution. The electrolyte is CO2-bubbled aqueous NaHCO3 solution (pH 7.3) (c) chronoamperometry of p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode with applied potential at −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl under AM 1.5 G solar-simulated light illumination. (d) Chronoamperometry of p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode in 0.5M NaHCO3 bubbled with CO2 gas at −0.20 V vs. Ag/AgCl measured up to 3 cycles. The annealing was carried out by using a hot plate with the temperature kept at 823 K in air. (e) XPS spectra of Cu 2p of the p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode obtained before and after chronoamperometry measurement at −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl in CO2-bubbled NaHCO3 solution. (f) Photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO over p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode at different applied potential ranging between 0 V and −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2015, Elsevier.114 
To solve this problem, depositing the protection layer, electron collecting layer and metallic particles can relieve the photocorrosion issue as well as improving the CO2 conversion efficiency of the p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode in the future. As mentioned above, metal complex photocatalysts can realize the reduction of CO2 with a high selectivity for the products under visible light. Particularly, supramolecular photocatalysts acted as both redox photosensitizer and catalyst units possessing high selectivity, durability, and efficiency for CO2 reduction in aqueous solution or organic solvents under visible light conditions. In addition to this, a new p-type semiconductor, CuGaO2, has also been focused on for PEC CO2 reduction due to its more positive flat band potential. Ishitani et al. constructed a hybrid photocathode composed of CuGaO2 electrode materials with a Ru(II)–Re(I) supramolecular photocatalyst (RuRe/CuGaO2) for PEC conversion of CO2 in an aqueous electrolyte solution.30 It is reported that supramolecular photocatalysts consisted of both catalyst units and redox photosensitizer possessed high selectivity, durability, and efficiency in aqueous solutions or organic solvents during PEC reduction of CO2 process under visible light conditions. The more positive flat band position of the CuGaO2 photocathode compared to NiO would not cause a large loss of energy for delivering an electron to the excited state of the Ru(II) photosensitizer unit (E1/2 = +0.51 V vs. Ag/AgCl) through the interface, as shown in Fig. 25a. At an onset potential of +0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl, the RuRe/CuGaO2 electrode could produce CO. Table 4 displays the results of the PEC CO2 reactions. It could be found that the CuGaO2 electrode, the RuRe supramolecular photocatalyst, and a CO2 atmosphere were necessary for the PEC reduction of CO2. Also, the authors noted that an electrode modified with the single model complexes (Re or Ru) produced a much smaller amount of CO, implying that the charge transfer is extremely important from the reduced photosensitizer unit to the catalyst unit for CO2 reduction. Then, the RuRe/CuGaO2 photocathode coupled with the CoOx/TaON photoanode constructed the hybrid photoelectrochemical cell in a Z-scheme configuration (Fig. 25b).
 Fig. 25  (a) Reaction scheme of the reduction of CO2 by the RuRe/CuGaO2 hybrid photocathode, (b) schematic image of the hybrid photoelectrochemical cell in a Z-scheme configuration. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.30 
Table 4 Photoelectrochemical reactions using various electrodes under various conditions.a Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry30




Entry
Sample
Complex/nmol
Potentialb/V
CO/nmol (TONCO)
H2/nmol

F
red/%f





a The electrode was irradiation at λex > 460 nm using a 300 W Xe lamp for 15 h. A 50 mM aqueous solution of NaHCO3 was used as the electrolyte.
b 
Versus Ag/AgCl (sat. KCl).
c Under an Ar atmosphere.
d The electrode was prepared via immersion in solution of Re and Ru in sequence.
e 
                      Data from ref. 115 (irradiated for 12 h).
                    
f 
F
red: Faradaic efficiency for reduction reaction.
g n.d.: not detected.





1
RuRe/CuGaO2
7.9
−0.7
668 (85)
387
68


2
RuRe/CuGaO2
7.7
−0.3
966 (125)
622
81


3
RuRe/CuGaO2
9.3
−0.1
781 (84)
494
72


4c
RuRe/CuGaO2
8.3
−0.3
n.d.g
346
52


5
CuGaO2
—
−0.7
n.d.g
25
7


6
CuGaO2
—
−0.3
n.d.g
Trace
—


7
Ru/CuGaO2
9.6
−0.3
n.d.g
64
20


8
Re/CuGaO2
14.2
−0.3
n.d.g
25
13


9d
(Ru, Re)/CuGaO2
Re: 11.1, Ru: 4.4
−0.3
35 (3, based on Re)
31
34


10e
RuRe/NiO115
11.2
−0.7
361 (32)
36
64




5. Cu-Based chalcogenide
Apart from the above-described p-type Cu-contained oxide semiconductors, there are many p-type Cu-containing ternary or polynary chalcogenide semiconductors (like CuInS(Se)2, CuZnSnS4, etc.) employed in the area of PEC CO2 reduction. For Cu-based chalcogenides, the corresponding bandgap value is smaller than those of ZnS and CdS. However, in the absence of a CO2 reduction cocatalyst, no reduction product was produced for bare Cu-based chalcogenides, implying that the active center of CO2 reduction was the CO2 reduction cocatalyst.116 Various experimental phenomena indicate that Cu species of Cu-based chalcogenide is not the main active site for CO2 reduction. Usually, the active center of CO2 reduction is the cocatalyst or metal In (Se).
5.1 Cu2ZnSnS4
Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) is a promising p-type Cu+-containing sulfide semiconductor for PEC devices, which is comprised of abundant and relatively inexpensive elements. In addition, CZTS possesses a direct bandgap of 1.5 eV and a large optical absorption coefficient in the order of 104 cm−1. Hence, it can be capable of absorbing visible light. The first study utilizing a CZTS as a photocathode for PEC CO2 reduction was conducted in 2011 by Arai and co-workers, who proposed a Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) photocathode modified by a metal-complex electrocatalyst ([Ru{4,4′-di(1H-pyrrolyl-3-propylcarbonate)-2,2′-bipyridine}(CO)2]n for selective CO2 reduction to formate (HCOO−) in water.116 In this system, the authors emphasized that the Gibbs free energy (ΔG) between the conduction band minimum of semiconductors and the CO2 reduction potential of the metal-complex electrocatalysts is a significant factor for realizing such photocatalytic CO2 reduction (Fig. 26a). The performance of CZTS photocathodes was greatly improved by introducing a metal-complex electrocatalyst, especially, a metal complex with a phosphate ester ligand. Furthermore, they also found that the CO2 reduction activity was enhanced when inserting Se into CZTS photocathodes, which could be attributed to higher carrier mobility compared to bare CZTS photocathodes. Therefore, the sulfide semiconductor modified with a metal-complex electrocatalyst polymer could generate formate with high selectivity (>80%) under visible light irradiation.
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic energy diagram of a SC/MCE hybrid photocatalyst, (b) current–potential curves in 0.1 M NaHCO3 solution under chopped visible light irradiation (420 < l < 800 nm, 100 mW cm−2) for CZTS, CdS/CZTS and In2S3/CZTS electrodes. (c) Current–potential curves in 0.1 M NaHCO3 solution under chopped visible light irradiation (420 < l < 800 nm, 100 mW cm−2) for CZTS, CdS/CZTS and In2S3/CZTS electrodes. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.117 
Inspired by the above work, Ohno and co-workers explored Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) electrodes modified by different n-type buffer layers (CdS and In2S3) for efficient PEC CO2 reduction reactions.117 In this work, the CZTS electrode was fabricated by a sol–gel spin-coating method followed by depositing n-type buffer layers, such as CdS and In2S3 by the chemical bath deposition (CBD) method. Under visible light irradiation, the bare CZTS electrode generated a cathodic photocurrent density of −100 μA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE in CO2-saturated NaHCO3 solution. When decorating with n-type buffer layers (such as CdS and In2S3), the cathodic photocurrent was improved, which was due to the efficient charge carrier separation resulting from the formation of a p–n heterojunction (Fig. 26b). Furthermore, they also found that the CdS/CZTS and In2S3/CZTS electrodes were relatively stable with time (Fig. 26c). Besides this, bare CZTS, CdS/CZTS and In2S3/CZTS electrodes were examined for PEC CO2 reduction. It can be observed that CO evolution was increased after modifying with a CdS buffer layer and a faradaic efficiency of 7% was obtained by using the CdS/CZTS electrode, while the bare CZTS electrode preferred to generate H2. In contrast, a relatively larger amount of HCOOH was produced by the In2S3/CZTS electrode compared with that generated by the bare CZTS electrode (Table 5). Nevertheless, one problem is that the CO2 reduction reaction may occur in the In2S3 buffer layer or metal indium, since metal indium also displayed high activity for CO2 reduction.
Table 5 Photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction by using the CZTS based electrodea. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry117




Entry
Sample
CO2
Coulomb/C
H2
Faradaicc efficiency/%


CO
HCOOH
Total





a Irradiated at visible light (420 < λ < 800 nm, 100 mW cm−2) for 1 h in aqueous 0.1 M NaHCO3 solution at −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl.
b Under Ar-purged Na2SO4 aqueous solution.





1
CZTS
O
0.9
74.3
1.4
2.4
78.1


2
CZTS

χ



0.5
62.7
0
0
62.7


3
CdS/CZTS
O
1.5
75.0
7.4
1.1
83.5


4
In2S3/CZTS
O
1.0
72.0
3.5
4.6
80.1


5
Pt/CdS/CZTS
O
6.0
67.0
0
0
67.0


6
Pt/In2S3/CZTS
O
6.0
73.4
0
0.3
73.7




5.2 CuInS (Se)2
CuInS2 is another Cu-containing p-type semiconductor. The bandgap of CuInS2 is about 1.5 eV, which can utilize visible light fully and the photoelectric conversion efficiency can theoretically reach 28.5% in the visible light region. Given this, CuInS2 film as a photocathode was also explored for PEC CO2 reduction.118 To fabricate CuInS2 thin films, Yuan et al. deposited Cu–In alloy layers by using an electrodeposition method followed by sulfurization. The as-prepared p-CuInS2 thin film could be applied as the photocathode for the solar-driven PEC reduction of CO2 to methanol. It also maintained stability for 11 h. Even though the p-CuInS2 thin film possessed a lower overpotential of hydrogen evolution, the addition of pyridine could inhibit the hydrogen evolution reaction. After introducing pyridinium ion as the co-catalyst, the selectivity to methanol with a faradaic efficiency of 97% was produced at potential of −0.54 V vs. SCE. Furthermore, the p-CuInS2 thin film possessed a lower overpotential of hydrogen evolution. More remarkably, the addition of pyridine could also inhibit the hydrogen evolution reaction. In this work, however, the mechanism for the PEC reduction of CO2 was still unclear. Furthermore, although pyridine served as a cocatalyst capable of reducing the overpotential of CO2 reduction and restraining hydrogen evolution reactions, the low rate of CO2 reduction with the cocatalysis of pyridine impeded its development in the field of PEC CO2 reduction.
To solve the above-mentioned problem, Yuan et al. investigated the role of pyridine at a CuInS2 thin film electrode in PEC reduction of CO2 to methanol.119 In this study, they found that the molar ratio of Cu to In(Cu/In), crystal size, the applied bias and the coverage of pyridine at the CuInS2 thin electrode had a significant influence on methanol yield in the process of PEC CO2 reduction. More importantly, one reason for slowing down the reduction rate of CO2 was the mass transfer resistance derived from pyridine adsorption layers on CuInS2 photocathodes. Besides this, they also observed that the selectivity to methanol might be in connection with the electron configuration and electronegativity of active sites. The electron configuration with d10s0 and higher electronegativity of active sites were the most favorable features for the formation of methanol (Table 6).
Table 6 Effect of electron configuration of active sites on reduction products with the cocatalysis of pyridine. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry119




Electrode material
Active site
Electron configuration
Product




CuInS2
Cu(I)
3d104s0
Methanol


GaP
Ga(III)
3d104s0
Methanol


Pd
Pd(0)
4d105s0
Methanol


Pt
Pt(0)
5d96s1
Formic acid, formaldehyde, methanol, hydrogen


FeS2
Fe(II)
3d64s0
Formic acid, hydrogen


CdTe
Cd(II)
4d105s0
Formic acid




Even though the p-CuInS2 thin film electrode modified by pyridine can enhance the methanol yield, the photoelectric conversion efficiency of state-of-the-art CuInS2 was still far below its theoretical value of 28.5%, which might be due to fast charge recombination since graphene possesses a large specific surface area, unique electrical conductivity and high transparency. The same research group fabricated CuInS2 and CuInS2/graphene hybrid thin films in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) by one-step electrodeposition at 30 °C for PEC CO2 reduction.120 It could be observed that the photocurrent density of CuInS2/graphene hybrid thin film electrodes increased by 2-fold compared to the bare CuInS2 electrodes. Also, the better catalytic performance for PEC reduction of CO2 was achieved at the CuInS2/graphene hybrid thin films electrode in comparison with the CuInS2 electrode. Specifically speaking, the CuInS2/graphene hybrid thin film electrode can obtain higher methanol yield at the applied potential of −0.59 V vs. SCE when the concentration of pyridine was 10 mM and the pH of the electrolyte was 5.2. What is more, the CuInS2/graphene hybrid photocathode possessed a faster rate of methanol formation (about 1.4 times) than the CuInS2 photocathode, indicating that the hybrid nanocomposite improved the charge transfer capability when modifying with graphene.
To date, the CuInS2 thin films can be fabricated by methods including chemical bath deposition, co-evaporation, spray pyrolysis, sputtering and electrodeposition. However, these methods need expensive equipment. For this purpose, Wang et al. adopted a simple and low-cost sol–gel route to construct CuS/CuO/CuInS2 thin film for PEC CO2 reduction.121 In this system, methanol was the only liquid product. Besides this, the gas products such as H2 and CO were also detected. It can also be observed that the concentration of methanol increases with increasing molar ratio of In/Cu in the thin films. The improved catalytic performance of the film electrodes can be ascribed to the suppressed recombination of electron–hole pairs. Furthermore, CuS can easily transform to CuO during CO2 reduction, which leads to a higher catalytic activity for CuS/CuO/CuInS2 compared to CuS/CuInS2 and CuO/CuInS2 photocathodes.
In addition to CuInS2, copper indium gallium diselenides (Cu(In,Ga)Se2) (CIGS) is an effective p-type semiconductor material, which has a tunable bandgap of 1.0–1.7 eV and a high optical absorption coefficient (105 cm−1). The absorption range can come up to 1100 nm, which is superior to many main-stream semiconductors.122,123 Recently, CIGS was first applied in PEC CO2 reduction. Yu's group constructed a CIGS-based electrode by stacking Mo/CIGS/CdS/ZnO/AZO layer-by-layer (named as CIGS/CdS/ZnO/AZO photocathode), as shown in Fig. 27a.124 A high photocurrent density was achieved on the CIGS/CdS/ZnO/AZO photocathode, which is 4.8 mA cm−2 and 11.5 mA cm−2 at −0.2 and −0.7 V vs. RHE, respectively. The onset potential of the CIGS/CdS/ZnO/AZO photoelectrode was 0.41 V vs. RHE (Fig. 27b). More importantly, the products of CO2 reduction could be controlled by adjusting the bias. At −0.2 V vs. RHE, CIGS/CdS/ZnO/AZO photocathode could produce CO with the faradaic efficiency of 99.3% (Fig. 27c and d). Additionally, density functional calculations indicated that the CIGS/CdS/ZnO/AZO photocathode could generate CO most easily in comparison to other products like HCOOH and H2. When a larger voltage was applied, the multicomponent products like CO, H2, HCOOH and CH3OH could be produced. The bias-dependent property was due to the different adsorption energy of the CO2 reduction intermediate on the surface of the photoelectrode (Fig. 28). This work revealed that the bias determined the products of CO2 reduction.
 Fig. 27  (a) SEM image, (b) current–voltage (J–V) curves of CIGS, CIGS/CdS and CIGS/CdS/ZnO/AZO under simulated sunlight (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) in CO2 saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 electrolyte. (c) Faradaic efficiency of CO, HCOOH, H2 and CH3OH at different potential on CIGS photocathode, (d) summary of faradaic efficiency of CO2 reduction into CO on some state-of-the-art photocathodes. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Elsevier.124 
 Fig. 28  Schematic diagram showing the surface of AZO with CO2 adsorbed (a) before and (b) after relaxation. (c) Charge difference map of the AZO with CO2 adsorbed. Yellow and blue regions correspond to electronic charge gain and loss, respectively. (d) Two kinds of CO2 reduction process, (e) calculated free energy diagrams for CO2 reduction to CO and HCOOH. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Elsevier.124 
6. Cu-Based electrocatalyst coupled photocathodes
During CO2 reduction reactions, suitable electrocatalysts can lower the energetic barriers, especially for the multistep proton-assisted electron-transfer process. Among electrocatalysts, metal Cu-based electrocatalysts draw extensive attention due to high abundance, low toxicity and their capability of CO2 conversion into hydrocarbons. More importantly, Cu possesses the unique ability in generating C2 hydrocarbons compared to other metals.125 For Cu electrocatalysts, it possesses the medium adsorption strength for CO and the ability of C–C coupling, which would promote CO reduction to CH4, C2H4, C2H5OH and so on. Therefore, coupling Cu-based electrocatalysts with photocathodes would be a promising way for efficient PEC CO2 reduction reactions.
For instance, a photocathode composed of copper nanoparticles deposited on the TiO2-passivated InP nanopillar for PEC CO2 reduction was developed.126 Profiting from the surface cocatalytic effects of Cu, the as-prepared composite electrode (TiO2-passivated InP photocathode with Cu nanoparticles) improves the selectivity, which produced a methanol yield of up to eight times with a Faraday efficiency of 8.7% (Fig. 29a). Yang and co-workers exploited a synergistic catalytic effect on the Cu nanoparticles (Cu NPs) decorated with TiO2–Au nanotube photonic crystal multi-functional photocathodes for PEC CO2 reduction.127 In this system, the functions of Au-doped TiO2, TiO2 nanotube photonic crystal and Cu nanoparticles were a light harvester, optical channels, and a CO2 reduction electrocatalyst, respectively. Under simulated sunlight illumination, the reduction product was mainly formic acid with a selectivity of 98% and a Faradaic efficiency of 82.6% at potential of −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. More importantly, the yield ratio of formic acid could reach 1019.3 μmol L−1 cm−2 after 8 h reduction reaction, which was nearly 6.3 times higher than the traditional TiO2 nanotubes (Fig. 29b). Such promotion was ascribed to the synergistic effect on this multi-functional interface. First, the exceptional localized surface plasmon resonance derived from Au nanoparticles broadened the light absorption region to the visible region. Second, the photonic crystal layer structure improved the multi-reflection of the incident light. Finally, the specific catalytic effect of the electrocatalyst Cu nanoparticles enhanced the selectivity and activity of PEC CO2 reduction. The enhancement proportions of intrinsic Au nanoparticles, photonic crystal layer and Cu nanoparticles can be obtained by the calculation, which were 91%, 813% and 2028%, respectively. The results indicated that Cu nanoparticles played a great role in promoting PEC CO2 reduction and effectively controlling the generation of formic acid. Simultaneously, the detailed mechanism for the multi-functional synergistic action of Au nanoparticles, photonic crystal layer and Cu nanoparticles for PEC CO2 reduction was proposed (Fig. 29c). In particular, a surface band bending caused by Cu nanoparticles contributed to the electron–hole separation and Cu nanoparticles rendered the adsorption of CO2 through the formation of O–Cu. Then, the carbon atom of chemisorbed CO2 could react with a proton in the solution, resulting in the formation of HCOOads˙. Previous literature has reported that the formation of a stable intermediate was conducive to produce formic acid.128 Accordingly, the multi-functional synergic system enhanced the performance and selectivity of PEC CO2 reduction.
 Fig. 29  (a) Faradaic efficiency of methanol production over bare InP, InP/Cu, and InP/TiO2/Cu under 532 nm illumination in a CO2-saturated KCl solution for a 12 h, reproduced with permission ref. 126, copyright, 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Comparison of the yield ratios of formic acid on TiO2NT, TiO2NTPC, TiO2-AuNTPC, Cu@TiO2NT, Cu@TiO2–Au NTPC photocathodes under the PEC condition at the applied potential of −1.0 V for 1 h. (c) Schematic diagram for the synergy of the photonic crystal, Au NPs, and Cu NPs for CO2 reduction under light illumination. The right panel is the energy diagram of the composite photocathode and the mechanism of PEC CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2017, Elsevier.127 
Although many photocathodes have been applied in the field of CO2 reduction, much effort has been devoted to the conversion of CO2 into the 2e− reduced species (such as CO). It remained extremely challenging for the 8e− photoreduction of CO2 into methane (CH4), which was mainly attributed to the kinetic barrier relevant to the multiple protons coupled electron transfer (PCET) process.35 To address the bottleneck, Mi et al. reported a gallium nitride nanowire/Si solar cell photocathode combined with Cu as co-catalyst for the reduction of CO2 under simulated sunlight illumination.129 The composition of the hybrid photocathode is depicted in Fig. 30a. Then, a faradaic efficiency of 19% for CH4 was obtained by the Cu/GaN/n+–p Si photocathode with Cu as co-catalyst at −1.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl, which is more than 30 times higher compared with the 2e− reduced CO (0.6%) (Fig. 30b). It should be noted that the modification of Cu particles is necessary for CH4 generation.
 Fig. 30  (a) A representation of the Cu/GaN/n+–p Si photocathode. (b) The measured faradaic efficiency of products for different samples at −1.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 0.5M KHCO3 (pH ca. 8). Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Wiley Online Library.129 
7. Conclusion and outlook
To conclude, we have summarized the recent progress made on the most attractive Cu-based photocathodes, including Cu-based oxides, Cu-based chalcogenides and Cu-based electrocatalyst coupled photocathodes. Some progress has been made after a decade of research, as shown in Fig. 31. Through the discussions in this review, it is expected that newcomers to the field can obtain useful information about designing the Cu-based photocathodes for CO2 reduction. Table 7 summarises the relationship between the products and different Cu-based photocathodes. Note that the stability issue of photocathodes in aqueous electrolytes still exists. To this end, it is imperative to fundamentally understand the cause of instability. Firstly, these photocathodes need a stable chemical surface under illumination, namely, E(A+/A) < CBM < Ere or Eox < VBM < E(B−/B). Secondly, active substances should be avoid to direct contact with aqueous electrolytes. Doping and passivating the surface can improve the surface energy level. Adding a protection layer with appropriate thickness can also maintain the stability of Cu-based photocathodes. Simultaneously, the improvement in the selectivity of CO2 reduction, particularly, to C2 products still requires further research in the future.
 Fig. 31  Reported Faraday efficiency vs. stability for Cu-based photocathodes. aCNT represents carbon nanotube. bTiO2 NT@PDA-NcCu2O is TiO2 nanotube@polydopamine-Cu2O nanocubes. cFe2O3 NTs/CuO FCs denotes Fe2O3 nanotubes/CuO flower clusters. dAZO/ZnO/CdS/CIGS represents Al-doped ZnO/ZnO/CdS/[Cu(In, Ga)Se2]. eCu NPs/Au/TiO2 is Cu nanoparticles/Au/TiO2. fNt TiO2/Ns CuO denotes TiO2 nanotubes/CuO nanospheres. gGO/CuFe2O4 represents graphene oxide/CuFe2O4. 
Table 7 The relationship between the products and different Cu-based photocathodes




Photocathodes
Condition
Main products
Efficiency
Ref.




Cu2O/Al:ZnO/TiO2/Re(tBu-bipy)(CO)3Cl
2 mM Re(tBu-bipy)(CO)3Cl + 1.0 M MeOH, −1.73 V vs. Fc+/Fc, 5.5 h
CO
100%

76



Cu2O/TiO2–Cu+
0.3 M KHCO3, 0.3 V vs. RHE, 2 h
CH3OH
56.5

77



Cu2O/oligoaniline
0.1 M Na2SO4, −1.1 V vs. RHE
CH3OH, C2H5OH, HCOOH
—

78



Cu2O/Cu3(BTC)2
acetonitrile containing 0.1 tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate, −1.97 V V vs. Fc+/Fc, 9 h
CO
95%

28



Cu foil/Cu2O
0.1 M Na2CO3/NaHCO3, 0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 2 h
CH3OH
75%

80



Cu plates/Cu2O
0.1 M Na2CO3/NaHCO3, −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 3 h
CH3OH, C2H5OH, CH2O, C2H4O, CH3COCH3
—

81



Cu2O/CuO/Pb
0.1 M KOH, −1.6 V vs. RHE, 1 h
CH3OH, HCOOH
40.45%

74



Cu2O/TiO2−x/Nafion
0.1 M Na2SO4, 0.1 V vs. RHE, 2 h
CH3OH
—

85



TiO2/Au/Cu2O
0.5 M Na2SO4, 0.11 V vs. RHE
—
—

84



CuO/Cu2O
0.1 M Na2SO4, −0.2 V vs. SHE, 2 h
CH3OH
95%

90



CuO/Fe2O3
0.1 M KHCO3, −1.1 V vs. SCE, 6 h
CH3OH, C2H5OH
91.20%

93



Ti/TiO2/CuO
0.1 M K2SO4, NaHCO3, 0.2 V V vs. Ag/AgCl, −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 2 h
CH3OH
91%

94



97%


CuO/CuFeO2
0.1 M NaHCO3, −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 2 h
CH3COOH
80%

96



CuB2O4/TiO2
0.1 M KHCO3, 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
CO
—

110



CuFe2O4
0.1 M NaHCO3, −0.5 V vs. NHE
CH3OH
62%

111



CuFe2O4/CdS
0.1 M NaHCO3, −0.35 V vs. NHE
CH3OH
72%

112



CuFe2O4/graphene oxide
0.1 M NaHCO3, −0.4 V vs. NHE
CH3OH
90%

113



Cu3Nb2O8
0.1 M NaHCO3, −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl
CO
9%

114



CuGaO2/RuRe
50 Mm NaHCO3, −0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl
CO
81%

30



Cu2ZnSnS4/metal complex
0.1 M NaHCO3
HCOOH
—

116



Cu2ZnSnS4/CdS
0.1 M NaHCO3
CO
7%

117



Cu2ZnSnS4/InS
0.1 M NaHCO3
HCOOH
—


CuInS2/pyridine
−0.54 V vs. SCE
CH3OH
97%

119



Ai:ZnO/ZnO/CdS/(Cu(In, Ga)Se2)
0.1 M KHCO3, 0.2 V vs. RHE
CO
99.3%

124



InP/TiO2/Cu
0.5 M KCl, −0.6 V vs. NHE, 12h
CH3OH
8.7%

126



TiO2/Au/Cu
0.1 M Na2SO4, −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 8 h
HCOOH
82.6%

127



n+–p Si/GaN/Cu
0.5 M KHCO3, −1.4 V vs. RHE
CH4
19%

129





For Cu-based oxides, Cu-based binary oxides have relatively simple preparation methods and various nanostructures for different applications. However, severe photocorrosion issues limited further development. To this end, remarkable advancements have been focused on the stability issues, especially for Cu2O, such as depositing surface overlayers, forming heterojunctions and loading cocatalysts etc. Among them, only surface overlayers formed by ALD can maintain stability for 8 h. Unfortunately, the ALD technique is costly and difficult for large-scale applications. Besides this, the stable Cu2O/AZO/TiO2 photocathode is unbeneficial for CO2 reduction. Considering this, a facile method which exposes more active sites of CO2 reduction should be developed to improve the long-term stability of these photocathodes. In comparison with Cu-based binary oxides, the rate of photocorrosion of Cu-based ternary oxide is slower. However, more severe electron–hole recombination results in inferior photoelectrochemical performance. As a consequence, it would be necessary to develop effective strategies to improve electron–hole separation. It is important to note that a ternary oxide is better than a binary oxide because it provides more possibilities for structure and composition tuning.
Even though the Cu-containing chalcogenides have been applied in PEC CO2 reduction, the relevant research concentrates on loading with a cocatalyst. Hence, future efforts in preparing, optimizing, and understanding Cu-containing chalcogenides will be beneficial for constructing the photocathodes with high activity and selectivity. Stable Cu-based electrocatalysts are promising catalysts since they can be formed on the Cu-based photocathode by in situ methods. Therefore, coupling photocathodes with stable Cu-based electrocatalysts can not only improve their photostabilities but also provide new thoughts to improve the selectivity of products.
In the end, we hope that this review of Cu-based photocathodes will offer direction for designing Cu-based photocathodes with high activity and selectivity of CO2 reduction products, especially for CO2 products with higher added value.
Author contributions
K. W. designed the framework of the review and wrote the review. Y. M. looked up most of the papers and proposed some suggestions. Y. L. provided the methodology for the review. He proposed adding or deleting contents in each section of the review. W. Q., Q. W. and X. Y. checked the paper and proposed some suggestions. M. L., X. Q., J. L., and W. L. conceived the project, supervised and discussed the review. All the authors contributed to the review revisions.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22078368), and the Hunan Provincial Science and Technology Plan Project of China (no. 2017TP1001), Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (2020JJ5693). Project of Innovation-Driven Plan in Central South University (2017CX003), Hunan Provincial Innovation Foundation For Postgraduate (CX20200332). Open Sharing Fund for the Large-scale Instruments and Equipments of Central South University (CSUZC202019).
Notes and references
R. C. Armstrong, C. Wolfram, K. P. de Jong, R. Gross, N. S. Lewis, B. Boardman, A. J. Ragauskas, K. Ehrhardt-Martinez, G. Crabtree and M. V. Ramana, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15020 CrossRef .
L. Hammarström and S. Hammes-Schiffer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1859–1860 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kim, K. K. Sakimoto, D. Hong and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3259–3266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Michl, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 268–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, B. Peng and T. Peng, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7485–7527 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. J. Zhao and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11326–11353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Cardias, M. G. de Morais and J. A. V. Costa, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 267, 77–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, F. Kang, C. Hu, L. Wang, Z. Xu, D. Zheng, W. Gong, Y. Lu, Y. Ma and J. Wang, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1201–1206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Currie, S. Mottaghi-Tabar, Y. Zhuang and D. S. A. Simakov, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 12964–12980 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ferrah, A. R. Haines, R. P. Galhenage, J. P. Bruce, A. D. Babore, A. Hunt, I. Waluyo and J. C. Hemminger, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 6783–6802 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Guntern, J. R. Pankhurst, J. Vavra, M. Mensi, V. Mantella, P. Schouwink and R. Buonsanti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12632–12639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang and R. Buonsanti, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 13–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704649 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, M. Xu, T. Peng, C. Zhang, T. Li, I. Hussain, J. Wang and B. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Yin, X. Zheng, H. Ait Ahsaine, Y. Zhou, C. Dong, O. F. Mohammed, K. Takanabe and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1279–1286 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Kang, D. H. Nam, K. D. Yang, W. Joo, H. Kwak, H. H. Kim, S. H. Hong, K. T. Nam and Y. C. Joo, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8187–8196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, R. Long, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 771–805 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, H. L. Tan, C. Y. Toe, J. Scott, L. Wang, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1904717 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, S. Xue, J. Barber, Y. Zhou, J. Meng and X. Ke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4700–4734 RSC .
M. Halmann, Nature, 1978, 275, 115–116 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, W. Chen, D. Zhang, Y. Du, R. Amal, S. Qiao, J. Wu and Z. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5310–5349 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
P. Peerakiatkhajohn, J. H. Yun, H. Chen, M. Lyu, T. Butburee and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6405–6410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, H. Chen, G. Gao, T. Butburee, M. Lyu, S. Thaweesak, J.-H. Yun, A. Du, G. Liu and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, P. Chen, J. H. Yun, Y. Hu and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8500–8504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, X. Sui, J. Xu, H. Jing, C. Wu, H. Peng, J. Lu and H. Yin, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 247, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Rosser, C. D. Windle and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 7514–7518 CrossRef .
X. Deng, R. Li, S. Wu, L. Wang, J. Hu, J. Ma, W. Jiang, N. Zhang, X. Zheng, C. Gao, L. Wang, Q. Zhang, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10924–10929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Gurudayal, J. W. Beeman, J. Eichhorn, C. Towle, J. Bullock, H. Wang, A. Javey, N. Mathews and J. W. Ager, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1068–1077 RSC .
H. Kumagai, G. Sahara, K. Maeda, M. Higashi, R. Abe and O. Ishitani, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4242–4249 RSC .
H. Jung, S. Y. Lee, C. W. Lee, M. K. Cho, D. H. Won, C. Kim, H. S. Oh, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4624–4633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Gan, Q. Zhang, V. Reddu, Y. Peng, Z. Liu, X. Xia, C. Wang and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803151 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, J. Han, Y. Fu, Y. Deng, Y. Liu, Y. Yang, T. Wang and L. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander III, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, J. Cheng, X. Xuan, J. Zhou and K. Cen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 6344–6354 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, J. Cheng, X. Xuan, J. Zhou and K. Cen, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 322, 22–32 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, T. Wang, P. Zhang, Y. Wei, J. Zhao and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8840–8845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Q. Shen, J. Liu, N. Yang and G. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3161–3171 RSC .
H. Li, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401077 CrossRef .
B. Weng, W. Wei, Y. Yiliguma, H. Wu, A. M. Alenizi and G. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15353–15360 RSC .
S. K. Kuk, R. K. Singh, D. H. Nam, R. Singh, J. K. Lee and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3827–3832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Arai, S. Sato, T. Kajino and T. Morikawa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1274–1282 RSC .
S. Sato, T. Arai, T. Morikawa, K. Uemura, T. M. Suzuki, H. Tanaka and T. Kajino, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15240–15243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Magesh, E. S. Kim, H. J. Kang, M. Banu, J. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim and J. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2044–2049 RSC .
H. Pang, T. Masuda and J. Ye, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 127–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. U. Pawar, C. W. Kim, M.-T. Nguyen-Le and Y. S. Kang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 7431–7455 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu and E. A. Carter, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 6631–6669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan, C. Xia, F. Yang, J. Wang, H. Wang and Y. Lu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay3111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Yang, C. W. Lee, K. Jin, S. W. Im and K. T. Nam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 538–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Garza, A. T. Bell and M. Head-Gordon, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1490–1499 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Li, M.-J. Cheng and Q. Lu, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 49–65 CrossRef .
Q. Fan, M. Zhang, M. Jia, S. Liu, J. Qiu and Z. Sun, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 10, 280–301 CrossRef .
K. D. Yang, C. W. Lee, K. Jin, S. W. Im and K. T. Nam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 538–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hanselman, M. T. M. Koper and F. Calle-Vallejo, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1062–1067 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ledezma-Yanez, E. P. Gallent, M. T. Koper and F. Calle-Vallejo, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 90–94 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. i. Hori, in Modern aspects of electrochemistry, Springer,  2008, pp. 89–189 Search PubMed .
T.-T. Zhuang, Z.-Q. Liang, A. Seifitokaldani, Y. Li, P. De Luna, T. Burdyny, F. Che, F. Meng, Y. Min and R. Quintero-Bermudez, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff, X. Zhou, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7646–7659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schreier, J. Luo, P. Gao, T. Moehl, M. T. Mayer and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1938–1946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, X. Yu, S. Heissler, A. Nefedov, S. Colussi, J. Llorca, A. Trovarelli, Y. Wang and C. Woll, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 375–379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. S. Chaplin and A. A. Wragg, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2003, 33, 1107–1123 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen and L.-W. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, Z. Zheng, J. Spurgeon, B. S. Brunschwig and X. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2504–2517 RSC .
D. Bae, B. Seger, P. C. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1933–1954 RSC .
C. Y. Toe, Z. Zheng, H. Wu, J. Scott, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13613–13617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiao, W. A. Goddard, T. Cheng and Y. Liu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114(26), 6685–6688 CAS .
S. Chu, P. Ou, P. Ghamari, S. Vanka, B. Zhou, I. Shih, J. Song and Z. Mi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7869–7877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, J.-H. Yun, B. Luo, T. Butburee, P. Peerakiatkhajohn, S. Thaweesak, M. Xiao and L. Wang, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2017, 33, 1–22 CrossRef .
M. E. Aguirre, R. Zhou, A. J. Eugene, M. I. Guzman and M. A. Grela, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 485–493 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dubale, W.-N. Su, A. G. Tamirat, C.-J. Pan, B. A. Aragaw, H.-M. Chen, C.-H. Chen and B.-J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18383–18397 RSC .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Won, C. H. Choi, J. Chung and S. I. Woo, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158, 217–223 CrossRef .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673–8681 RSC .
M. Schreier, P. Gao, M. T. Mayer, J. Luo, T. Moehl, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 855–861 RSC .
K. Lee, S. Lee, H. Cho, S. Jeong, W. D. Kim, S. Lee and D. C. Lee, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 264–270 CrossRef .
E. Szaniawska, I. A. Rutkowska, M. Frik, A. Wadas, E. Seta, A. Krogul-Sobczak, K. Rajeshwar and P. J. Kulesza, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 265, 400–410 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Z. Zheng, C. Y. Toe, X. Wen, J. N. Hart, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5638–5646 RSC .
J. F. d. Brito, A. A. d. Silva, A. J. Cavalheiro and M. V. B. Zanoni, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2014, 9, 5961–5973 Search PubMed .
J. F. d. Brito, A. R. Araujo, K. Rajeshwar and M. V. B. Zanoni, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 264, 302–309 CrossRef .
X. Ba, L.-L. Yan, S. Huang, J. Yu, X.-J. Xia and Y. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24467–24478 CrossRef CAS .
E. Szaniawska, K. Bienkowski, I. A. Rutkowska, P. J. Kulesza and R. Solarska, Catal. Today, 2018, 300, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Li, C.-W. Tsao, M.-J. Fang, C.-C. Chen, C.-W. Liu and Y.-J. Hsu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 6843–6853 CrossRef CAS .
E. Szaniawska, K. Bienkowski, I. A. Rutkowska, P. J. Kulesza and R. Solarska, Catal. Today, 2018, 300, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
W. D. Zhang, B. Xu and L. C. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6383–6391 RSC .
E. Kecsenovity, B. Endrődi, Z. Pápa, K. Hernádi, K. Rajeshwar and C. Janáky, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3139–3147 RSC .
A. C. Cardiel, K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 9262–9270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ghadimkhani, N. R. de Tacconi, W. Chanmanee, C. Janaky and K. Rajeshwar, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1297–1299 RSC .
S. Somasundaram, C. R. N. Chenthamarakshan, N. R. d. Tacconi and K. Rajeshwar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 4661–4669 CrossRef CAS .
W. Septina, R. R. Prabhakar, R. Wick, T. Moehl and S. D. Tilley, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1735–1743 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, H. Wang, J. Xu, H. Jing, J. Zhang, H. Han and F. Lu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11748–11754 RSC .
J. F. d. Brito and M. V. B. Zanoni, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 318, 264–271 CrossRef .
J. F. d. Brito, F. F. Hudari and M. V. B. Zanoni, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 24, 81–88 CrossRef .
X. Yang, E. A. Fugate, Y. Mueanngern and L. R. Baker, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 177–180 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, L. Yang and C. Hao, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2019, 14, 8569–8578 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Read, Y. Park and K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kalamaras, J. Z. Y. Tan, M. Belekoukia, J. Xuan, M. M. Maroto-Valer and J. M. Andresen, Faraday Discuss., 2019, 215, 329–344 RSC .
J. Gu, A. Wuttig, J. W. Krizan, Y. Hu, Z. M. Detweiler, R. J. Cava and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12415–12422 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, H. Cao, Y. Lu, H. Zhang, G. Hou, Y. Tang and G. Zheng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 568, 198–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sharma, Z. Zhao, P. Sarker, B. A. Nail, J. Wang, M. N. Huda and F. E. Osterloh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2936–2942 RSC .
D. Kang, J. C. Hill, Y. Park and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4331–4340 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Hahn, V. C. Holmberg, B. A. Korgel and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6459–6466 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, A. Chemseddine, F. F. Abdi, R. van de Krol and S. P. Berglund, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12838–12847 RSC .
F. Wang, W. Septina, A. Chemseddine, F. F. Abdi, D. Friedrich, P. Bogdanoff, R. van de Krol, S. D. Tilley and S. P. Berglund, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15094–15103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Berglund, F. F. Abdi, P. Bogdanoff, A. Chemseddine, D. Friedrich and R. van de Krol, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4231–4242 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hossain, G. F. Samu, K. Gandha, S. Santhanagopalan, J. P. Liu, C. Janáky and K. Rajeshwar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 8252–8261 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Wang, A. R. Woldu, X. Zhang and T. He, Catal. Today, 2019, 335, 388–394 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Wang and T. He, Chemosphere, 2020, 264, 128508 CrossRef PubMed .
K. M. R. Karim, H. R. Ong, H. Abdullah, A. Yousuf, C. K. Cheng and M. M. R. Khan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 18185–18193 CrossRef .
M. Tarek, K. M. R. Karim, S. M. Sarkar, A. Deb, H. R. Ong, H. Abdullah, C. K. Cheng and M. M. R. Khan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 26271–26284 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. R. Karim, M. Tarek, H. R. Ong, H. Abdullah, A. Yousuf, C. K. Cheng and M. M. R. Khan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 58, 563–572 CrossRef .
S. Kamimura, N. Murakami, T. Tsubota and T. Ohno, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174–175, 471–476 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sahara, H. Kumagai, K. Maeda, N. Kaeffer, V. Artero, M. Higashi, R. Abe and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14152–14158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Arai, S. Tajima, S. Sato, K. Uemura, T. Morikawa and T. Kajino, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12664–12666 RSC .
S. Kamimura, Y. Sasaki, M. Kanaya, T. Tsubota and T. Ohno, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 112594–112601 RSC .
J. Yuan and C. Hao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 108, 170–174 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, L. Zheng and C. Hao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 39435–39438 RSC .
J. Yuan, P. Wang, C. Hao and G. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 193, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan and Y. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, E475–E479 CrossRef CAS .
R. Inguanta, P. Livreri, S. Piazza and C. Sunseri, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, K22–K25 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yokoyama, T. Minegishi, K. Maeda, M. Katayama, J. Kubota, A. Yamada, M. Konagai and K. Domen, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 851–853 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, J. Gong, Zi Ye, Y. Liu, X. Xiao and J. C. Yu, J. Catal., 2020, 384, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi and S. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 1985, 14, 1695–1698 CrossRef .
J. Qiu, G. Zeng, M. A. Ha, M. Ge, Y. Lin, M. Hettick, B. Hou, A. N. Alexandrova, A. Javey and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6177–6181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shen, J. Ma, X. Huang, N. Yang and G. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, P. Kang, M. T. Zhang, B. R. Stoner and T. J. Meyer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 813–817 RSC .
Y. Wang, S. Fan, B. AlOtaibi, Y. Wang, L. Li and Z. Mi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 8809–8813 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Keke Wang	Keke Wang is a Ph.D. student at the Central South University. She obtained her master's degree from the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University. Her research interests focus on the photoelectrode materials for solar-driven water splitting and CO2 reduction.
Yang Liu	Yang Liu is currently a lecturer at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, China. He received his master degree from Central South University in 2014. After that, he studied as a Ph.D. candidate at Central South Unversity from September 2014 to September 2016 and as a visiting student at University of Texas at Austin from September 2016 to September 2018. Then he obtained his Ph.D degree at Central South University in 2018. His current research interests include photoelectrochemistry and electrochemistry for water splitting and CO2 reduction.
Min Liu	Min Liu is currently a professor at the School of Physics and Electronics, Central South University, Hunan, China. He received his Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Electrical Engineering of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2010. He worked as a Research Fellow under the supervision of Prof. Kazuhito Hashimoto at the University of Tokyo from 2010 to 2013. Then, he went on with further study at the University of Toronto, Canada (Advisor: Professor Edward H. Sargent) from 2015 to 2017. His research interests are high performance catalytic materials and devices.
Xiaoqing Qiu	Xiaoqing Qiu received his Ph.D. degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008. He joined the Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology at the University of Tokyo (Prof. Hashimoto's group) as a NEDO researcher in 2009. He was promoted to a professor at Fuzhou University in 2012. He has been a full professor at the Central South University since 2016. His current research interests include nanomaterials, energy conversion materials and heterogeneous catalysis.
Wenzhang Li	Wenzhang Li received his B.S. degree and Ph.D. degree from Central South University, both in physical chemistry of metallurgy. He joined the faculty of Central South in January of 2012, where he is currently an associate professor in physical chemistry of metallurgy. His current research focuses on the design of semiconductor nanocrystals in electrocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic fields.
Jie Li	Jie Li is currently a professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, Hunan, China. She obtained her Ph.D. degree from Central South University in 2001. Her research interests include research methods for metallurgical physical chemistry and design and preparation techniques for new energy materials.

 	Fig. 1  The conduction band (blue squares) and valence band (green squares) energy levels relative to the NHE for a series of Cu-based semiconductors in solution at pH = 0.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction system: (a) photoanode-driven system, (b) photocathode-driven system, (c) photoanode/photocathode-driven system.	 

 	Fig. 3  Energy band diagram of a p-semiconductor photocathode and electron-transfer pathways during CO2 reduction in (a) the equilibration state, (b) the photochemical system, (c) the EC system, and (d) the PEC system. NHE = normal hydrogen electrode. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2017; Willey.46	 


Hydrogen	2H+ + 2e− → H2	0.000	2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−	−0.828
Carbon monoxide	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	−0.104	CO2 + H2O + 2e− → CO + 2OH−	−0.932
Methane	CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	0.169	CO2 + 6H2O + 8e− → CH4 + 8OH−	−0.659
Methanol	CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + 2H2O	0.016	CO2 + 5H2O + 6e− → CH3OH + 6OH−	−0.812
Formic acid/formate	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH	−0.171	CO2 + H2O + 2e− → HCOO− + OH−	−0.639
Ethylene	2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 + 4H2O	0.085	2CO2 + 8H2O + 12e− → C2H4 + 12OH−	−0.743
Ethane	2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 + 4H2O	0.144	2CO2 + 10H2O + 14e− → C2H6 + 14OH−	−0.685
Ethanol	2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O	0.084	2CO2 + 9H2O + 12e− → C2H5OH + 12OH	−0.744
Acetic acid/acetate	2CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH3COOH + 2H2O	0.098	2CO2 + 5H2O + 8e− → CH3COO− + 7OH−	−0.653

n-Propanol	3CO2 + 18H+ + 18e− → CH3CH2CH2OH + 5H2O	0.095	3CO2 + 13H2O + 18e− → CH3CH2CH2OH + 18OH−	−0.733

 	Fig. 4  The possible pathways of several different C2 and C3 products. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2019, American Chemical Society.59	 
TON = nproduct/ncatalyst	(1)
TOF = nproduct/(ncatalyst × t)	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)


η = [(Ja − Jb)/Ja] × 100%
	(6)

 	Fig. 5  Stability change of the photocathode (a) as its reduction potential (Φred) shifts down from above the CB of the p-type semiconductor to below E(H2O/H2). Similarly for the photoanode case (b). (c) Calculated reduction potential Φred (black bars) and oxidation potential Φox (red bars) relative to the NHE and the vacuum level for a series of semiconductors in solution at pH = 0. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.66	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction process involving protected Cu2O photocathodes and a Re-based molecular catalyst, (b) cathodic current density and CO evolution efficiency of the Cu2O photocathode under chopped light at a constant potential of −1.73 V vs. Fc+/Fc with 2 mM Re(tBu-bipy)(CO)3Cl and 7.5 M MeOH under CO2, (c) SEM micrographs of unprotected and protected Cu2O before and after polarization at −1.73 V under AM 1.5 G illumination, (d) representative GC traces from protected and unprotected Cu2O electrodes, (e) XRD analysis of Cu2O electrodes before and after CO2 reduction experiments. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.76	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration for PEC CO2 reduction in acetonitrile using a hybrid Cu-MOF/Cu2O photocathode and ultrafast transient absorption as a function of probe delay for Cu2O and Cu3(BTC)2/Cu2O (pump at 480 nm; probe at 630 nm). Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2019, American Chemical Society.28	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Flowchart of the synthesis process for TiO2/Cu2O and TiO2/ZnO/Cu2O multilayered photoelectrodes, (b) 3D elemental rendering images by TOF-SIMs, (c) time-resolved PL spectra acquired with an excitation wavelength of 405 nm for prepared Cu2O (black), TiO2/Cu2O (blue) and TiO2/ZnO/Cu2O (red) photoelectrodes. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.79	 

 	Fig. 9  Formation mechanism proposed for the products formic acid (CHOOH), methanol (CH3OH), ethanol (C2H5OH), formaldehyde (CH2O), acetaldehyde (C2H4O) and acetone (CH3COCH3) by means of CO2 photoelectrochemical reduction. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2015, Elsevier.81	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Energy-band diagrams of n-type and p-type Cu/Cu2O electrodes during CO2 reduction in the PEC system. (b) Faradaic efficiency for different conduction types and morphologies of Cu/Cu2O electrodes in the PEC CO2 reduction process. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2014, American Chemical Society.82	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Band structure of CuO/Cu2O before (left) and after (right) reaction. Reproduced with permission ref. 74, copyright, 2014, Elsevier. (b) Scheme of the fabricated p–n junction of FTO/Cu2O–TiO2−x/Nafion. Reproduced with permission ref. 85, copyright, 2018, Elsevier. (c) Synthetic procedures for preparation of TiO2–Au–Cu2O and TiO2–Cu2O. (d) I–V profiles collected on TiO2–Au–Cu2O-1.5 photocathodes under chopped AM 1.5 G illumination in N2-saturated or CO2-saturated electrolyte. (e) Proposed charge transfer mechanism for (A) TiO2–Cu2O and (B) TiO2–Au–Cu2O. (f) Time-resolved PL spectra for the relevant samples. (g) Nyquist plots of pure Cu2O, TiO2–Cu2O, and the three TiO2–Au–Cu2O electrodes. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2018, American Chemical Society.84	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic (not to scale) of protected Cu2O photoelectrode with covalently bound Re(bipy) CO2 reduction catalyst. (b) Photoelectrochemical performance under chopped, simulated sunlight of Cu2O photocathodes with (red) and without (blue) a mesoporous TiO2 layer on the surface, tested under CO2 with molecular Re catalyst covalently bound to the surface. Linear sweep at 10 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, American Chemical Society.60	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM images of the bare CNT nanonet. (b) CNT/Cu2O hybrid materials obtained at constant E = −0.25 V potential, Q = 200 mC. (c) With a short predeposition step at E = 0.35 V potential, Q = 200 mC. (d) Particle size distribution. (e and f) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images for the same samples shown in (b) and (c). (g) Long-term chronoamperometry data of a Cu2O and a CNT/Cu2O film with an identical Cu2O content (1 C), 0.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl, in CO2 saturated 0.1 m Na2SO4 solution. (h) GC–MS profiles registered using selective ion monitoring (SIM) for the sample after 7 h photoelectrolysis. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.88	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) CO and CH4. (b) H2 as a function of reaction time using TiO2 NRs as working electrode (WE), different cathodes as the counter electrode (CE), and saturated Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode (RE) under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 G and 0.75 V vs. RHE. (c) The calculated selectivity of carbonaceous products (SCP) by different cathodes as a function of reaction time. (d) SCP as a function of the reaction time using different electrodes by three electrode configurations in PEC CO2 reduction. (e) J–t curves during the reactions. (f) Schematic representation of the system for PEC reduction of CO2 to fuels. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Wiley Online Library.38	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of the two-step synthesis of CuO–Cu2O hybrid nanorod arrays for solar photoelectrosynthesis of CH3OH from CO2: (1) thermal growth of CuO nanorods on a Cu foil and (2) cathodic electrodeposition of Cu2O for selected time periods from a cupric lactate solution, pH 9 (a). Morphology/composition of a CuO–Cu2O nanorod is sketched on the right side of the panel (a) SEM images of thermally grown CuO nanorods before (b) and after Cu2O electrodeposition on them for 1 (c), 10 (d) and 30 min (e) respectively. (f) Energy band diagram of hybrid CuO–Cu2O nanorod arrays for solar photoelectrosynthesis of CH3OH from CO2. Semiconductor band edges and redox potentials are shown vs. the SHE ref. electrode. CB: conduction band; VB: valence band. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.90	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) SEM image of Fe2O3 NTs. (b) Cross-sectional view of (a) showing the self-assembling NTs. (c) SEM image of CuO FCs/Fe2O3 NTs. (d) TEM image of CuO FCs/Fe2O3 NTs. (e) Schematic strategy of the electrodes preparation. (f) Band-edge positions of Fe2O3 NTs, CuO FCs, and CuO FCs/Fe2O3 NTs in contrast to CO2/CH3OH and H2O/O2. (g) Faradaic efficiency of methanol and a current competition ratio (the inset map) of CuO FCs/Fe2O3 NTs changed with the bias potential during PEC CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.93	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Mechanism proposed for reducing CO2 to methanol, ethanol and acetone by photoelectrocatalysis using Ti/TiO2/CuO p–n junction semiconductor. (b) Products CH3OH (gray), C2H5OH (light gray) and CH3COCH3 (black) formed by photoelectrocatalytic CO2 reduction after 2 h of reaction in 0.10 mol L−1 NaHCO3 at pH 8 with varying temperatures and UV–Vis light (125 W) under a potential of (a) +0.20 V vs. Ag/AgCl and (c) −0.60 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (d) Diffuse reflectance analysis of TiO2 nanotubes (black line) and NtTiO2/NsCuO (red line) with the insert of band gap for TiO2 nanotubes (black line) and NtTiO2/NsCuO (red line) (e) EIS measurements in 5.0 × 10−3 mol L−1 Fe(CN)63−/4− redox probe (0.1 mol L−1 KCl) for the semiconductors NtTiO2/NsCuO (black curve), Ti/TiO2/CuO (red curve) and NtTiO2 (blue curve). Figure insert: Amplification of Nyquist plot; (f) C−2vs. E relation at 10 Hz in 0.1 mol L−1 phosphate buffer solution (pH7) for the semiconductors NtTiO2/NsCuO (black curve) and NtTiO2 (blue curve). (g) Schematic representation of the charge-transfer mechanism in p–n junction NtTiO2/NsCuO semiconductor under potential and UV-vis irradiation. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2018, Elsevier.95	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Concentration of acetate and formate in post-reaction electrolyte and (b) corresponding faradaic efficiencies following electrolysis on Fe–Cu oxide catalysts with various Fe:Cu atomic fractions. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2017, American Chemical Society.96	 


Fe–Cu mixed oxide	H2PO4−	CO2	257 ± 15	76 ± 5%
Fe–Cu mixed oxide	H2PO4−	Ar	13 ± 35	8 ± 20%
Fe–Cu mixed oxide	HCO3−	CO2	142 ± 15	80 ± 8%
Fe–Cu mixed oxide	HCO3−	Ar	80 ± 15	48 ± 8%
Fe2O3 only	HCO3−	CO2	9 ± 35	2 ± 9%
CuO only	HCO3−	CO2	11 ± 35	7 ± 27%

Deposition potential (V)	−0.45	−0.50	−0.60	−0.70	−0.80
Molar ratio of Cu/Fe on thin film surface	7.03	5.46	2.48	3.02	3.65

 	Fig. 19  (a) Product concentration in 0.2 M NaHCO3 electrolyte as a function of photoelectrosynthesis time for CuO, Cu2O, CuO/Cu2O and α-Fe2O3/CuO photoelectrodes used in PECR1, and (b) product concentration in 0.2M NaHCO3 electrolyte as a function of flow rate in PECR2 for CuO, Cu2O, CuO/Cu2O and α-Fe2O3/CuO photoelectrodes after 1 h of PEC CO2 reduction experiment, (c) schematic representation of wired sandwich-type microfluidic PEC cell (PECR2). Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.99	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry of Mg-doped CuFeO2 using chopped light in 0.1 M NaHCO3 yields a photocurrent density up to −1.0 mA cm−2 (scan rate = 100 mV s−1). (b) Experimentally determined Mg-doped CuFeO2 conduction and valence band edges and thermodynamic redox potentials of CO2 reduction products on a potential diagram, depicting favorable energetics for photo-assisted CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission ref. 100, copyright, 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Top views of the TNNTs before heat treatment and (d) after calcination at 650 °C for 6 h. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Elsevier.101	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Ethanol yields of CuFeO2/TNNTs with different coating amount at −0.4 V vs. SCE. (b) Liquid products at different applied potentials on CuFeO2/TNNTs with the coating amount of 1.8 g m−2. (c) The mechanism of photoelectrocatalytic reduction of CO2 on CuFeO2/TNNTs. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Elsevier.101	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Transient photocurrents, (b) Nyquist and (c) Bode plots from IMPS measurements of CuBi2O4 films in 0.1 mol L−1 KHCO3 electrolyte. (d) PEC reduction of CO2 over the CuBi2O4-4 min photocathode under a bias voltage of 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl with light intensity of 1000 W m−2. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2019, Elsevier.109 (e) CO and H2 production yield, (f) CO/H2 yield ratio from PEC catalytic experiments over CuBi2O4, CuBi2O4/TiO2-1 and CuBi2O4/TiO2-2 samples. (g) Schematic diagram showing the mesostructure and reduction reaction process over (left) CuBi2O4/TiO2-1 and (right) CuBi2O4/TiO2-2. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Elsevier.110	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Product yield for CdS, CuFe2O4 and CdS–CuFe2O4 in PEC reduction of CO2, (b) proposed mechanism of PEC reduction of CO2 over CdS–CuFe2O4 photocathode surface. Reproduced with permission ref. 112, copyright, 2019, Elsevier. (c) Products formed by GO, CuFe2O4 and CuFe2O4 with different wt % of GO at −0.4 V in 0.1 M NaHCO3 solution, (d) mechanism of PEC CO2 reduction on the surface of GO–CuFe2O4 electrode. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2019, American Chemical Society.113	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Position of the conduction band and valence band of p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode together with the redox potential of various reduction products/CO2, (b) linear sweep voltammetry of p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode under “chopped” AM 1.5 G solar-simulated light irradiation. The inset shows a reproduction of a part of the same figure at a finer resolution. The electrolyte is CO2-bubbled aqueous NaHCO3 solution (pH 7.3) (c) chronoamperometry of p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode with applied potential at −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl under AM 1.5 G solar-simulated light illumination. (d) Chronoamperometry of p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode in 0.5M NaHCO3 bubbled with CO2 gas at −0.20 V vs. Ag/AgCl measured up to 3 cycles. The annealing was carried out by using a hot plate with the temperature kept at 823 K in air. (e) XPS spectra of Cu 2p of the p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode obtained before and after chronoamperometry measurement at −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl in CO2-bubbled NaHCO3 solution. (f) Photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO over p-type Cu3Nb2O8 photocathode at different applied potential ranging between 0 V and −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2015, Elsevier.114	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Reaction scheme of the reduction of CO2 by the RuRe/CuGaO2 hybrid photocathode, (b) schematic image of the hybrid photoelectrochemical cell in a Z-scheme configuration. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.30	 


1	RuRe/CuGaO2	7.9	−0.7	668 (85)	387	68
2	RuRe/CuGaO2	7.7	−0.3	966 (125)	622	81
3	RuRe/CuGaO2	9.3	−0.1	781 (84)	494	72
4c	RuRe/CuGaO2	8.3	−0.3	n.d.g	346	52
5	CuGaO2	—	−0.7	n.d.g	25	7
6	CuGaO2	—	−0.3	n.d.g	Trace	—
7	Ru/CuGaO2	9.6	−0.3	n.d.g	64	20
8	Re/CuGaO2	14.2	−0.3	n.d.g	25	13
9d	(Ru, Re)/CuGaO2	Re: 11.1, Ru: 4.4	−0.3	35 (3, based on Re)	31	34
10e	RuRe/NiO115	11.2	−0.7	361 (32)	36	64

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic energy diagram of a SC/MCE hybrid photocatalyst, (b) current–potential curves in 0.1 M NaHCO3 solution under chopped visible light irradiation (420 < l < 800 nm, 100 mW cm−2) for CZTS, CdS/CZTS and In2S3/CZTS electrodes. (c) Current–potential curves in 0.1 M NaHCO3 solution under chopped visible light irradiation (420 < l < 800 nm, 100 mW cm−2) for CZTS, CdS/CZTS and In2S3/CZTS electrodes. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.117	 



1	CZTS	O	0.9	74.3	1.4	2.4	78.1
2	CZTS	
χ


	0.5	62.7	0	0	62.7
3	CdS/CZTS	O	1.5	75.0	7.4	1.1	83.5
4	In2S3/CZTS	O	1.0	72.0	3.5	4.6	80.1
5	Pt/CdS/CZTS	O	6.0	67.0	0	0	67.0
6	Pt/In2S3/CZTS	O	6.0	73.4	0	0.3	73.7

CuInS2	Cu(I)	3d104s0	Methanol
GaP	Ga(III)	3d104s0	Methanol
Pd	Pd(0)	4d105s0	Methanol
Pt	Pt(0)	5d96s1	Formic acid, formaldehyde, methanol, hydrogen
FeS2	Fe(II)	3d64s0	Formic acid, hydrogen
CdTe	Cd(II)	4d105s0	Formic acid

 	Fig. 27  (a) SEM image, (b) current–voltage (J–V) curves of CIGS, CIGS/CdS and CIGS/CdS/ZnO/AZO under simulated sunlight (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) in CO2 saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 electrolyte. (c) Faradaic efficiency of CO, HCOOH, H2 and CH3OH at different potential on CIGS photocathode, (d) summary of faradaic efficiency of CO2 reduction into CO on some state-of-the-art photocathodes. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Elsevier.124	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic diagram showing the surface of AZO with CO2 adsorbed (a) before and (b) after relaxation. (c) Charge difference map of the AZO with CO2 adsorbed. Yellow and blue regions correspond to electronic charge gain and loss, respectively. (d) Two kinds of CO2 reduction process, (e) calculated free energy diagrams for CO2 reduction to CO and HCOOH. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2020, Elsevier.124	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Faradaic efficiency of methanol production over bare InP, InP/Cu, and InP/TiO2/Cu under 532 nm illumination in a CO2-saturated KCl solution for a 12 h, reproduced with permission ref. 126, copyright, 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Comparison of the yield ratios of formic acid on TiO2NT, TiO2NTPC, TiO2-AuNTPC, Cu@TiO2NT, Cu@TiO2–Au NTPC photocathodes under the PEC condition at the applied potential of −1.0 V for 1 h. (c) Schematic diagram for the synergy of the photonic crystal, Au NPs, and Cu NPs for CO2 reduction under light illumination. The right panel is the energy diagram of the composite photocathode and the mechanism of PEC CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2017, Elsevier.127	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) A representation of the Cu/GaN/n+–p Si photocathode. (b) The measured faradaic efficiency of products for different samples at −1.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 0.5M KHCO3 (pH ca. 8). Reproduced with permission, copyright, 2016, Wiley Online Library.129	 

 	Fig. 31  Reported Faraday efficiency vs. stability for Cu-based photocathodes. aCNT represents carbon nanotube. bTiO2 NT@PDA-NcCu2O is TiO2 nanotube@polydopamine-Cu2O nanocubes. cFe2O3 NTs/CuO FCs denotes Fe2O3 nanotubes/CuO flower clusters. dAZO/ZnO/CdS/CIGS represents Al-doped ZnO/ZnO/CdS/[Cu(In, Ga)Se2]. eCu NPs/Au/TiO2 is Cu nanoparticles/Au/TiO2. fNt TiO2/Ns CuO denotes TiO2 nanotubes/CuO nanospheres. gGO/CuFe2O4 represents graphene oxide/CuFe2O4.	 

Cu2O/Al:ZnO/TiO2/Re(tBu-bipy)(CO)3Cl	2 mM Re(tBu-bipy)(CO)3Cl + 1.0 M MeOH, −1.73 V vs. Fc+/Fc, 5.5 h	CO	100%	
76

Cu2O/TiO2–Cu+	0.3 M KHCO3, 0.3 V vs. RHE, 2 h	CH3OH	56.5	
77

Cu2O/oligoaniline	0.1 M Na2SO4, −1.1 V vs. RHE	CH3OH, C2H5OH, HCOOH	—	
78

Cu2O/Cu3(BTC)2	acetonitrile containing 0.1 tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate, −1.97 V V vs. Fc+/Fc, 9 h	CO	95%	
28

Cu foil/Cu2O	0.1 M Na2CO3/NaHCO3, 0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 2 h	CH3OH	75%	
80

Cu plates/Cu2O	0.1 M Na2CO3/NaHCO3, −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 3 h	CH3OH, C2H5OH, CH2O, C2H4O, CH3COCH3	—	
81

Cu2O/CuO/Pb	0.1 M KOH, −1.6 V vs. RHE, 1 h	CH3OH, HCOOH	40.45%	
74

Cu2O/TiO2−x/Nafion	0.1 M Na2SO4, 0.1 V vs. RHE, 2 h	CH3OH	—	
85

TiO2/Au/Cu2O	0.5 M Na2SO4, 0.11 V vs. RHE	—	—	
84

CuO/Cu2O	0.1 M Na2SO4, −0.2 V vs. SHE, 2 h	CH3OH	95%	
90

CuO/Fe2O3	0.1 M KHCO3, −1.1 V vs. SCE, 6 h	CH3OH, C2H5OH	91.20%	
93

Ti/TiO2/CuO	0.1 M K2SO4, NaHCO3, 0.2 V V vs. Ag/AgCl, −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 2 h	CH3OH	91%	
94

97%
CuO/CuFeO2	0.1 M NaHCO3, −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 2 h	CH3COOH	80%	
96

CuB2O4/TiO2	0.1 M KHCO3, 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	CO	—	
110

CuFe2O4	0.1 M NaHCO3, −0.5 V vs. NHE	CH3OH	62%	
111

CuFe2O4/CdS	0.1 M NaHCO3, −0.35 V vs. NHE	CH3OH	72%	
112

CuFe2O4/graphene oxide	0.1 M NaHCO3, −0.4 V vs. NHE	CH3OH	90%	
113

Cu3Nb2O8	0.1 M NaHCO3, −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl	CO	9%	
114

CuGaO2/RuRe	50 Mm NaHCO3, −0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl	CO	81%	
30

Cu2ZnSnS4/metal complex	0.1 M NaHCO3	HCOOH	—	
116

Cu2ZnSnS4/CdS	0.1 M NaHCO3	CO	7%	
117

Cu2ZnSnS4/InS	0.1 M NaHCO3	HCOOH	—
CuInS2/pyridine	−0.54 V vs. SCE	CH3OH	97%	
119

Ai:ZnO/ZnO/CdS/(Cu(In, Ga)Se2)	0.1 M KHCO3, 0.2 V vs. RHE	CO	99.3%	
124

InP/TiO2/Cu	0.5 M KCl, −0.6 V vs. NHE, 12h	CH3OH	8.7%	
126

TiO2/Au/Cu	0.1 M Na2SO4, −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 8 h	HCOOH	82.6%	
127

n+–p Si/GaN/Cu	0.5 M KHCO3, −1.4 V vs. RHE	CH4	19%	
129


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
