Recent progress in inkjet-printed solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA03155C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA03155C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13873-13902Recent progress in inkjet-printed solar cells

        
          
            Santhosh Kumar 
            Karunakaran
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gowri Manohari 
            Arumugam
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Wentao 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sijie 
            Ge
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Saqib Nawaz 
            Khan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xianzhong 
            Lin
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Guowei 
            Yang
          
        
      ac
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou-510275, P. R. China. E-mail: linxzh8@mail.sysu.edu.cn
bSchool of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing-210096, P. R. China
cState Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, Nanotechnology Research Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou-510275, P. R. China
Received 
      24th March 2019
    , Accepted 13th May 2019First published on 13th May 2019AbstractIn the past few decades, the fabrication of solar cells has been considered as one of the most promising ways to meet the increasing energy demands to support the development of modern society as well as to control the environmental pollution caused by the combustion of fossil fuels. A number of different types of solar cells, such as silicon solar cells (Si), Cu-based chalcogenides (Cu(In,Ga)Se2/Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4) thin film solar cells (TFSC), dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC), organic solar cells (OSC), and perovskite solar cells (PVSC), have been implemented in the photovoltaic technology. However, the high manufacturing costs of solar cells is one of the major obstacles for their wide-scale application. In this regard, inkjet printing has attracted tremendous interest in both academic research and industrial applications among all the various kinds of fabrication techniques and is believed to be one of the most promising methods to meet these requirements. The great advantages of inkjet printing are that the process is contactless, maskless and has a high material utilization rate, and good scalability, and compatibility of the roll-to-roll process. Additionally, the maskless nature of inkjet printing allows for freedom of design, which enables multi-functional properties of solar cells (i.e., power source and artwork) to be realized. In this review, the recent advances in inkjet printing with the deposition of different layers of various types of solar cells are summarized in detail and prospectives for the future development of printed/flexible solar cells are covered.
1. Introduction
Satisfying the world's growing energy demand is one of the most significant challenges facing modern society. Due to the depletion of current energy resources, non-conventional and renewable energy sources are needed.1 Renewable energy is considered to be quickly replenished and is thus usually available in a never-ending supply, and it is considered as “clean” and “green”2 as it, in some way, comes from sunlight, wind, or water around the Earth. Hence, environmentally clean and safe renewable energy has attracted increasing attention from scientists and technologists. The usage of sunlight offers a conceivable alternative energy source around the world and could help solve many environmental problems. The primary renewable energy source is the manifestation of solar energy, which includes electricity generated from direct radiation from the sun. The quantity of solar energy flowing to the earth is vast and the amount of solar energy incident on earth in every year is: (i) equivalent to 160 times the energy stored in the world's proven reserves of fossil fuels and (ii) equivalent to more than 15000 times the world's annual use of fossil fuels, nuclear fuels, and hydropower.3
Numerous materials have been investigated for applications in solar cells, and have led to the development of many new and innovative classes of semiconductor devices, including crystalline silicon, amorphous silicon, and thin film polycrystalline materials, such as cadmium telluride (CdTe), copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS), dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC), organic solar cells (OSC), and perovskite solar cells (PVSCs). In solar cells, the choice of material depends on the potential conversion efficiency (PCE), which relates to the energy expected from the devices made from them. Most photovoltaic cells are currently deployed for large-scale power generation in centralized power stations or in ‘building-integrated photovoltaics’ (BIPVs).4
Deposition methods are essential for the fabrication of solar cells to get uniformity, more stability, and high efficiency. Many deposition methods are applicable for the fabrication of various layers of solar cells, such as spin-coating, screen-printing, gravure-printing and doctor blade.5,6 Among these, inkjet printing is a viable method to obtain layers of solar cells with low cost, utilizing easily changeable digital print patterns and low material consumption in a maskless and contact-free process. In recent years, inkjet printing has been employed for the deposition of micro and nanomaterials into functional arrangements of layer on various substrates.7–11 Moreover, it has been widely used in the field of electronics, including for thin film transistors (TFTs),12,13 sensors,14,15 electroluminescent displays,16 transparent electrodes,17 complementary ring oscillators,18 and solar cells.19,20 Inkjet printing permits the deposition of active material solutions on definite areas of the substrate, which may already have some other layers from different components, and this is an important advantage of this method.21,22 In addition, inkjet printing offers unmatched print resolutions of up to 5000 dots per inch (DPI) as the method relies on ejecting a single drop or drops of ink through very fine nozzles with diameters in the range of 20–100 μm.23 The main processing advantage of this method is its scalability from laboratory scale to larger scale without requiring contact with the substrate by functionally using the same equipment.24,25 However, there are some main challenges involved in using inkjet printing for the fabrication of solar cells, such as the development of printable ink and the durability of the print head.
In this review, we summarize and highlight the recent advances made in inkjet printing techniques for the fabrication of various functional layers in solar cells, with the recognition that this deposition technique can overcome the challenges existing in traditional fabrication processes. In the next section, we discuss inkjet-printing technology. Then, we discuss the recent developments in inkjet-printed solar cells with respect to environmental friendliness, cost-effectiveness, and roll-to-roll production. Hence, we present more about the fabrication of different layers for application in solar cells by using the inkjet printing method. Finally, we highlight the current challenges and outlook for the inkjet-printing technique for the fabrication of solar cells.
2. Inkjet-printing technology
Inkjet printing is a versatile deposition method for the fabrication of functional layers from homogeneous molecular or colloidal liquid phase inks. The operating principle is based on the ejection of inks in the form of droplets from a nozzle to give controlled properties and their precise deposition and fixation on a target substrate.26–30 The two most common approaches that have been employed in inkjet printing to date for the generation of ink droplets are: (i) continuous inkjet printing (CIP) and (ii) drop-on-demand (DOD) inkjet printing.26
2.1 Continuous inkjet printing (CIP)
CIP is nothing but an ejection of a non-stop flow of fluid through a nozzle, which then separates under the forces of surface tension. It makes use of Rayleigh instability to yield a continuous column of droplets, which are selectively steered to position them on a target substrate. In particular, when a fluid is ejected from the nozzle, it breaks down into small droplets that fall toward the substrate under the influence of gravity. While descending, the droplets pass through the nozzle, which imparts a small charge on each of the droplets. The charged droplets then pass between the deflection plates, which steer the direction of the droplets. Steering is done by the application of voltage to the ejected nozzle with respect to ground, as shown in the schematic diagram of Fig. 1(a).31 In CIP applications, a normal separation under the forces of surface tension is generally improved via balancing the flow at a suitable frequency, which is done by a piezoelectric transducer at the rear of the orifice. Consider a constant flow of ink drops aimed at a specific arrival spot with a specific end goal to obtain a printed design. The process is typically accomplished through initiating an electric charge on a portion of drops to enable them to avoid the primary axis of flow as they go through an electrostatic field. When no printing is required, the droplets are directed toward a reservoir, where the ink is collected and recycled potentially.32 Besides, the major advantage of this method is the absence of physical contact or critical spacing between the nozzle and substrate, which makes it suitable for printing on rough surfaces, curved surfaces, and surfaces sensitive to pressure. Also, this method is appropriate to print any material that is sufficiently fluid and conductive.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams for the two main inkjet-printing methods: (a) continuous inkjet printing (CIJ), (b) drop-on-demand (DOD) inkjet printing. 
2.2 Drop-on-demand (DOD) inkjet printing
Drop-on-demand inkjet printing is the most popular method because of its more modest extent and high placement accuracy. DOD inkjet printing enables the generation of a single drop based on requirements. Hence, it enables large material savings when compared to CIP. Consider a DOD system, either the print head moves or is accurately settles on the desired surface controlled by a computer program or the substrate motion. A series of events accumulates the ejection of liquid based on a regular pressure pulse from the printing nozzle. Furthermore, the pressure pulse is generated by a sudden contraction in the chamber volume, which forces the ink out of the nozzle, as shown in the schematic diagram of Fig. 1(b). This pressure pulse is generated by either one of two mechanisms: mechanical deformation of a piezoelectric transducer (PZT) or the collapse of thermal bubbles, which induces resistive localized heating in the ink chamber. According to these, DOD can be divided into piezoelectric DOD and thermal DOD printing.23
In thermal DOD inkjet printing, the ink is warmed locally to frame a quickly forming vapor bubble, which discharges a droplet of ink. Moreover, water is typically used as a solvent.33 Piezoelectric DOD depends on the arrangements of a few piezoelectric materials to yield an abrupt volume change and subsequently creates an acoustic pulse. The piezoelectric DOD is a basic level process and is suitable for an assortment of solvents.24 Currently, the majority of industries for the production of ceramic or functional materials use piezoelectric DOD technology instead of thermal DOD due to the following two main reasons: (i) it is difficult to generate vapor bubbles in a high vapor pressure fluid and (ii) the piezoelectric DOD printing system permits control over the drop size and velocity of any fluid through simple adjustments of the actuation pulse.27 In 2005, Reis et al. reported the formation of drops in the DOD at a typical frequency ranging between 1 and 20 kHz, which is considered as an enhanced frequency range when compared to Sweet's DOD system with a frequency of 2 kHz.26,34,35 Furthermore, the reported pressure pulse propagation and subsequent droplet generation are strongly influenced by resonance within the chamber behind the nozzle.
2.3 Properties of inks for inkjet printing
The properties of the ink play a significant role in inkjet-printing technology, which relies on the generation of stable droplets. Significant work on characterizing jettable inkjet printing has been published elsewhere.36 According to the authors of that report, some of the approaches need to be adopted for reporting the inkjet printing of new materials. Consequently, to aid reporting in this area, the authors formulated a dimensionless parameter of Z as an inverse of the Ohnesorg number (Oh) to characterize if a stable drop could be generated from the ink based on eqn (1). Additionally, they proposed a value of Z > 2 to represent a stable drop formation. This work was later extended by Reis and Derby via the numerical simulations of drop formation with a dimensionless parameter in the range of 10 > Z > 1.37 The Oh in-turn is generally related to two vital dimensionless parameters, namely the Reynolds number (Re) and Weber number (We). These two dimensionless parameters can incorporate all the parameters related to fluid flow properties. In particular, Re describes the competition between inertial forces and viscous forces within a fluid at the bounded surface based on eqn (2); whereas, We relates to the competition between the fluid inertia and surface tension, as shown in eqn (3). The Oh number simply combines these two works and reflects the relationship between the viscosity and surface tension, as represented in eqn (4). (1) (2)where, (3) (4)where, ‘η’ is the dynamic velocity, ‘ρ’ is the density, ‘γ’ is the surface tension, ‘a’ is the characteristic length, and ‘v’ is the velocity. Therefore, Z from eqn (1) can be used to express the relationship between surface tension and viscosity, as given in eqn (5). (5)
Hence, the jettability has a geometric dependence on the viscosity with a proportionate dependence on the surface tension. At low Z values, the viscosity prevails and prevents ejection of a droplet. When the surface tension dominates, the unstable drops accompany a large number of satellite drops with high Z values.
A minimum velocity has been found essential to trigger droplet ejection at the nozzle to overcome the fluid/air resistance and this velocity has been achieved in all fluids with We > 4.38,39 Another critical process based on the properties of ink and surfaces is the intended deposition of ink. It is critical that the drops land on the surface as a single drop with some degree of spreading, even though, certain ink drops will splash upon impact with the surface, which causes a breakdown of the main drops into a number of undesirable scattered satellite drops. Interestingly, the empirically verified parameter was first proposed by Stow and Hadfield and enables a first-hand prediction of the onset threshold for splashing based on the relation of f(R) < We1/2Re1/4, where f(R) is a function of surface roughness.40 Derby proposed a 2D Cartesian graph with Re and We as the x and y coordinates, respectively and provided a useful guide to develop suitable inks for DOD inkjet-printing systems.27
In addition, the success of inkjet printing depends on the processes that follow a successful landing of drops on a substrate. The interactions of the substrate and droplet can determine the drop spreading, coalescing, solidification, and ultimately film uniformity during drying processes, which lead to a continuous film formation. The interplay of the substrate and ink drop properties based on certain parameters, including the contact angle of a drop on a substrate and surface roughness, can determine the process of film formation.
Based on uniform film formation, an important “coffee-ring” effect has been cited often. This term describes a propensity of deposited solutes in the ink to migrate to the boundaries of printed features, resulting in layer non-uniformity. This is caused by a higher evaporation rate at a boundary line of droplets when compared to at its center, which induces a relative ink movement from the center of the droplet toward the droplet perimeter, thus leading to higher material deposition at the droplet boundary line. Tuning the printing parameters, such as delay time and drop spacing, can enable effective control of the printing quality. Moreover, the deposition temperature allows suppression of the coffee-ring effect effectively. Similarly, viscous fingering instabilities (Saffman–Taylor) can be caused by an uncontrollable ink flow on a substrate, resulting in dendrimer-like structures. The viscous fingering instability originates from a complex interplay between several parameters, such as the capillary, viscous, and gravitational forces, wet ability effects, and the underlying heterogeneous pore geometry, which can lead to preferential flow paths in ramified networks of fingering.41
3. Fabrication of different layers of solar cells via inkjet printing
To fabricate the different functional layers of solar cells with high performance by using inkjet printing, there are several key considerations required, including film quality and device durability. A high-quality pattern is a prerequisite for the construction of devices, since a uniform and high-resolution pattern can enhance the stabilities of devices. This method endows such devices with accurate multiple structures, a small feature size, and allow high-volume production. The maximum obtained efficiency of solar cells made by using inkjet printing are 20.6% for Si solar cells, 11.3% for CIGSSe-based solar cells, 5.72% for DSSC, 4.10% for OSCs, and 18.64% for PVSCs. In this section, the fabrication methods for various types of solar cells, including silicon (Si) solar cells, copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS)/copper zinc tin sulfide (CZTS) thin film solar cells (TFSCs), dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), organic solar cells (OSCs), and perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) by using inkjet printing are highlighted and reviewed.
3.1 Silicon solar cells
Si-based mono- and multi-crystalline (mc) solar cells have drawn considerable attention owing to their good photovoltaic performances and long-term stability.42–45 The maximum theoretical efficiency of a single-junction solar cell is about 29% based on the Shockley–Queisser limit, which defines the maximal output power as a function of the band gap in the solar cell.46 Moreover, Si remains the major material choice for photovoltaics because of its many desirable properties, such as abundance in nature, non-toxicity, and high and stable conversion efficiencies of fabricated devices, and it is expected to remain a long-term market leader for several decades more.45Fig. 2(a) shows a conventional device structure for a commercially available p-type silicon solar cell. It consists of a p-type silicon (Si)-wafer, n-doped emitter (phosphorus), textured surface with a coverage of ARC, silver (Ag) contact as a front electrode, usually in grid lines to collect the generated carriers, which are named as fingers, and aluminum (Al) as a rear contact form of Al–Si alloy, for the so-called back-surface field (BSF). Hence, it is named as an Al-BSF solar cell.
 Fig. 2  Common device structures for: (a) silicon solar cell, (b) chalcogenide-based thin film solar cell, (c) dye-sensitized solar cell, (d) organic solar cell, and (e) perovskite solar cell. 
The asymmetric nature of Si solar cells requires more processes for side-selective treatment to further improve the device performance. There are numerous techniques available for employing both sides of the wafer. Among these, inkjet printing is a more desirable technique to achieve this goal. Apart from unavoidable spectral losses due to the single-band-gap working principle, the efficiencies of conventional solar cells are mainly limited by their optical losses (i.e., shading) as well as recombination losses (material properties and surface passivation).47 In the past decades, two criteria have been generally employed as aims in the fabrication of solar cells: (i) to increase the energy conversion efficiency sunlight entering into the solar cell and (ii) to lower the overall production costs of solar cells as well as the modules. In the following sub-sections, the fabrication of different functional layers on Si solar cells using the inkjet printing technique (front metal grid, texture, emitter, back contact) are described.

3.1.1 Front metal grid. 
A typical conductive collector of the grid pattern is generally required on both sides of Si solar cells. Considering the photovoltaic industries, silver (Ag) is the most commonly used front metal grid in Si solar cells, and is generally deposited using a low-cost, reliable, and well-known screen-printing method.48 However, the yielded line widths are narrower than 80 μm, which have a high risk of line interruptions, resulting in an increase in the line resistance.49 The efficiencies of solar cells (η) are mainly dependent on the fill factor (FF), open circuit voltage (VOC), and short circuit current density (JSC). In addition, the FF is strongly related to the factors of line resistance as well as the contact resistance. The VOC is limited through doping of an emitter, which controls a specific contact resistivity (ρc), whereas JSC is reduced due to a shadow effect in the front metal grid, which depends on line width. Hence, the metallization processes are very crucial factors in the fabrication of high-performance solar cells.48 Moreover, conventional screen-printing pastes can provide line resistivity values three times higher than that of pure silver. The metal–semiconductor specific contact resistivity is around 5 mΩ cm2 for emitters with a sheet resistance of 30 Ω sq−1. In order to improve the conversion efficiencies of silicon solar cells, several metallization techniques have been investigated in recent years, such as aerosol jet printing, metal plating, dispensing, and inkjet printing.50–53 Among these techniques, inkjet printing is recognized as a potential alternative to the current screen-printing process for metalizing the front sides of silicon solar cells.54 Inkjet printing is a non-contact, low-cost, low material wastage, and mask-less technique. In particular, it allows reducing the thickness of Ag grids and greatly reduces the overall usage of silver when compared to conventional methodologies.55
Early in 1988, Teng et al. reported the metallization of a Ag collector for a silicon solar cell through an inkjet-printing approach by using Ag metallo-organic inks.56 They achieved a power conversion efficiency of about 8.08% with a fill factor as high as 79.3% without AR coating. Further, Curtis et al. investigated an atmospheric direct-write deposition technique for the deposition of metals, including Ag, Cu, and Ni.57 In addition, the metallization was inkjet-printed under a near vacuum deposition condition. Thick and highly conductive printed lines of Ag in air and Cu in N2 at 100–200 °C have been demonstrated to have a good adhesion to glass, Si, and printed circuit boards (PCBs). Ag grids have been inkjet-printed on Si solar cells and fired through a silicon nitride AR layer at 850 °C, resulting in an 8% efficiency. The multi-layer inkjet printing of etching ink followed by the production of Ag ink under milder conditions yielded an efficiency as high as 12%. It was also demonstrated that the new inks and multi-layer printing could improve the contacting process in Si photovoltaics and lead to better cell performance.
Martín et al. presented new inkjet technology to solve the window definition on solar cells with silver contacts by combining an inkjet printer and plating process.48 A non-cyanide-based plating process was developed for the deposition of silver on inkjet-printed metal fingers. Fig. 3 exhibits the line thicknesses of the silver grid on a textured surface obtained from silver ink with a weight concentration of 20%. From the figures, it can be observed that the deposition of drops of around 30 pl of solvent-based ink yielded a thickness of around 500 nm (bottom of the pyramid), while the thickness of the line from around 3 pl of a water-based ink was 60 nm. Moreover, the thickness of printed lines was around 1 μm for solvent-based inks with a silver concentration of 40% in weight and drop volume of around 30 pl. Generally, the resulting thickness from using water-based inks with 20% of silver in weight concentration is much lower than that from 1 μm. Hence, a plating process has to be done. A growth of around 5 μm thickness is more than enough because of its lower line resistivity as well as specific contact resistivity when compared to screen printing. The previously developed industrial inkjet printers exhibited line widths of 40 μm, a bit higher line resistivity values when compared to pure silver, and specific contact resistivity values below 1 mΩ cm2. The obtained growth of silver based on screen printing and photolithographically defined technologies is higher than that of 5 μm. By combining both techniques (seed definition of an inkjet printer and plating process) and solving the window definitions on the inkjet technology, the efficiency can rise to possibly around 0.35%. Subsequently, another report showed that a metallic grid from silver nano-ink could form a final layer for a solar front contact by using inkjet printing.58 A 40 wt% of Ag nanoparticles (NPs)-based conductive ink was used for the printing of a conductive grid pattern. A multiple pass printing approach was adopted to increase the thickness of printed lines and achieved a lower point-to-point resistance. To minimize the spreading and to point narrow lines, the substrate was heated at ∼100 °C. Moreover, a solar collector grid on a 6′′ × 6′′ silicon wafer was thermally sintered at 400 °C for 1 h to achieve a metallization. It was found that the printed Ag tracks showed less than 5% flaking or detachment and a conductivity of about ∼80 to 90% from bulk silver was achieved from the printed specimen. A line width of ∼75 μm was successfully achieved by using ∼7 pl droplets at 360 DPI. This approach promises improvements in cell efficiencies as well as improved cost effectiveness.
 Fig. 3  Thickness view of inkjet-printed silver lines on a textured wafer by using SEM for: (a) solvent-based ink (drop volume, 30 pl), (b) water-based ink (drop volume, 3 pl). Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2012, EUPVSEC. 
Jurk et al. reported inkjet-printable water-based inks, which they prepared by using new Ag NPs with the addition of nanoscale ZnO particles.59 In terms of Ag dissolution and precipitation, the mechanism for contact formation was compared with commercial glass containing thick film pastes. Interestingly, this method can be used to avoid the need for additional processing steps, including laser ablation, and opening the ARC prior to inkjet printing. In order to optimize the ARC etching and contact formation during firing, ZnO NPs were investigated as ink additives. By performing in situ contact resistivity measurements, the contact mechanism was explored. According to previous reports, Ag inks containing ZnO particles could realize a specific contact resistance below 10 mΩ cm2. By using a multi-pass inkjet printing and plating process, a front-side metallization of commercial micro-crystalline silicon (6 × 6 inch2) solar cells achieved an emitter resistance of 60 Ω sq−1 with an efficiency of 15.7%. Ongoing developments are mainly focused on achieving an increment in the solid content of ink to reduce the number of necessary printing cycles and to reach a sufficient metallization thickness through a number of industrially relevant printing processes without any additional plating required.


3.1.2 Texture. 
Texture plays a vital role in the performances of mc-Si solar cells as it can increase the absorption of incident light and consequently enhance the conversion efficiencies of solar cells. Currently, the most commonly used technique to obtain a normal texture is isotropic acidic etching in HF/HNO3/H2O solution for mc-Si solar cells. This texture has typically yielded a weighted reflection of between 26% and 29%.60 However, a lower reflection does not lead to a higher conversion efficiency due to the increase in surface roughness.61 Other proposed texturing schemes for industrial mc-solar cells are laser texturing, reactive on etching (RIE), and mechanical texturing.62,63 All of these schemes have exhibited improved reflections as well as improved electrical performances of solar cells. However, some issues remain for each of these schemes, including residual damage after the texturing process, the equipment cost, and application to large-scale devices. In recent years, inkjet printing has been employed in various patterning processes of solar cells.64 Even though, studies of its application in solar cell texturing are limited, some researchers have demonstrated applications of directly printed inkjet masks, but only for texturing Si solar cells.65,66
Borojevic and co-workers reported excellent performances of Si solar cells fabricated using inverted pyramids and v-grooves, but these texturing techniques have never been commercialized due to their complexity, sophistication, and the cost of the photolithographic-based patterning process.67 They did though demonstrate the successful formation and uniformity of textured structures across the surface of a wafer, as shown in Fig. 4. The average width of inverted pyramids and v-grooves is ∼75 mm, corresponding to a depth of ∼53 mm. Furthermore, the width of the pyramids is mainly dependent on the minimum possible spacing between the printed DEG droplets before they start to join on the substrate. In the case of v-grooves, the width is defined as the spacing between the printed lines. Further improvements in drop formation on a resin surface and a reduction in their diameter post-printing are required to reduce the drop/line spacing, and thus a reduction in the width of the pyramids and v-grooves. The printer used in this work allowed the substrate temperature to be raised to a maximum temperature of 60 °C. Moreover, the light-trapping potential (in the near band gap wavelength range) of inkjet-fabricated and double-sided perpendicular v-grooves was compared to that from double-sided random upright pyramids, which are routinely used in industry. Despite the excellent performances and achievements of solar cells fabricated by using inverted pyramids and v-grooves, these texturing approaches have remained to date as laboratory-made structures only when it comes to the design of high-efficiency commercial solar cells.68
 Fig. 4  SEM micrographs of inkjet-fabricated tiled inverted pyramids viewed from: (a) top, (b) at an angle; (c) v-grooves showing grooves on both sides and (d) under lower magnification. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Nievendick et al. reported an effective way to reduce reflection off Si solar cells via a honeycomb (HC) structure generated by etching the mask isotropically.66 In this study, a directly printed hexagonal inkjet mask yielded well-developed and defined etch pits for an HC texture with an average distance of 50.1 μm and a weighted reflection of 18.4%. The major advantages of the masking process were the simple handling, potentially fast process, and low cost. Lifetime measurements after emitter diffusion and application of the anti-reflection coating indicated the HC-texture had better passivation when compared to the 25.8% reflecting acidic texture reported in the literature.69 An overall efficiency gain of 0.6% was deduced as achievable when using an HC-texture instead of acidic texture.


3.1.3 Emitter. 
The usage of a selective emitter is a prominent feature of high-efficiency Si solar cells. The main advantage of this structure is the separation of the emitter design and metal contact region.70 Despite this, selective emitter structures have not yet been widely implemented in the industrial production of Si-solar cells. One of the main barriers is the increased processing complexity introduced in the patterning of a selective emitter structure on the surface of the solar cell. Si-solar cell structures fabricated by photolithographic patterning processes have been produced for high-efficiency solar cells. However, these processes are difficult, expensive, and are not suitable for the large-scale production of solar cells. Utama et al. demonstrated the formation of a damage-free selective emitter by using inkjet printing for direct replacement of the patterning step instead of photolithography.70 This simple and low-cost method was more effective than that of traditional photolithographic methods commonly employed in the production of high-efficiency solar cells. In this work, a batch of p-type Czochralski Si wafers (1 Ω cm) was textured in alkaline solution to produce random upright pyramids on both surfaces. The front surface of the wafers was diffused with phosphorus for the formation of a selective emitter with a sheet resistivity of ∼100 to 120 Ω sq−1, followed by the growth of ∼350 nm of SiO2 using an inkjet patterning method. Moreover, the patterned front fingers were diffused in a second furnace step at a diffusion rate of ∼5 Ω sq−1 in order to produce ohmic contacts on the metal/Si interface. A schematic diagram for the inkjet patterning method applied in the design of a simple front selective emitter solar cell is shown in Fig. 5. The SEM image displays the formation of inkjet-patterned lines on a random upright pyramid textured surface with a line width of approximately 35–40 μm. The current density–voltage (J–V) curve of the Si-solar cell achieved a high-efficiency value of 16.35%. The average fill factor (FF) (∼0.80) showed a significant improvement when compared to laser-doped solar cells with the same structure (FF of ∼0.75 to 0.77).71 This was mainly due to a lack of crystallographic damage or defects on the Si wafer, which would otherwise be introduced if a laser process were to be used. These effects are not found in inkjet-printed cells.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of a selective emitter solar cell structure fabricated using inkjet printing (not to scale); (b) SEM image of inkjet-patterned lines on a textured Si wafer; (c) J–V curve and cell parameters of the best initial inkjet selective emitter solar cell as measured in-house under 1-sun illumination at 25 °C; (d) comparison of the local ideality factor curve of an inkjet-processed cell with a laser-doped cell. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2008, EUPVSEC. 
Ryu et al. for the first time reported the creation of a boron-doped emitter for n-type solar cells using an inkjet-printing technique.72 The high-efficiency solar cells based on n-type silicon wafers have attracted much attention recently due to their superior electrical properties when compared to p-type Si wafers.73–75 However, n-type Si wafers have not been widely implemented in mainstream solar cell production due to the complexities of formation of boron-doped emitters and their passivation in mass production.76 In particular, the authors reported a novel and commercially viable method to create boron emitters by using an inkjet-printing method. Phosphorus diffusion was used on the rear to form a back-surface field in conjunction with a chemically grown oxide/silicon nitride (SiNx) stack on the front and back for surface passivation. Finally, they achieved high-performance n-type Si-solar cells with an efficiency of 19.0%, VOC of 644 mV, JSC of 38.6 mA cm−2, and FF of 76.3%.


3.1.4 Back contact. 
The rear localized aluminum-alloyed metal contacting schemes of silicon solar cells have been employed mostly in laser ablation77,78 and laser doping79,80 processes to pattern a dielectric layer before the alloying process of aluminum according to previous reports. Cui et al. reported the most contact schemes involved in the formation of localized aluminum-alloyed regions based on patterned AlOx or SiNx as passivating layers.81 They reported the inkjet patterning of AAO layers on a thermally-grown thin oxide layer into an array of holes, which could be used for the facilitation of localized rear metal contacts in p-type silicon surfaces. The AAO layers served as passivation surfaces and facilitated a small-area metal contact through their porosity, thus reducing etchant spreading in chemical patterning processes. Having a local rear metal contact through passivating dielectric layers can increase the efficiency of a silicon solar cell to over 20%.
Interdigitated back contact silicon heterojunction (IBC-SHJ) solar cells have the advantages of a high short-circuit current density (JSC) and open circuit voltage (VOC) due to their absence of shadowing loss coming from front grid electrodes and through the surface passivation of crystalline silicon via the larger band-gap hydrogenation in amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) layers.82 In practice, Kaneka and colleagues recently announced a world-record conversion efficiency of 26.3% in crystalline silicon solar cells with their IBC-SHJ cell.83 Moreover, Hideyuki et al. described a much improved inkjet-printing patterning accuracy for the fabrication of low cost and very thin IBC-SHJ cells.84 According to their simulation results, the performances of IBC-SHJ cells are primarily affected by the cell contact configurations, such as their widths, overlap width, and the gaps between the electrodes.85 The good performances of IBC-SHJ cells using inkjet printing under optimized conditions motivated the application of this method to the fabrication of flexible and free-standing IBC-SHJ cells on a 53 μm-thick Si substrate without any supporting plate. The thin cell had a low JSC due to its low EQE, especially in the longer wavelength over 900 nm, but a small absorption coefficient of c-Si, as shown in Fig. 6. It is well known that the JSC of thin Si cells can be improved by the formation of surface textures, which induce light trapping.86 For comparison, IBC-SHJ cells have also been fabricated using conventional photolithography on a 260 μm-thick c-Si substrate. The J–V characteristics and EQE spectra were measured with a black mask 1.0 cm2 in aperture area on the front under an AM1.5 global spectrum (100 mW cm2) at 25 °C.
 Fig. 6  (a) J–V curves and (b) EQE spectra for IBC-SHJ cells with different thicknesses. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2017, Institute of Physics, Science. 

3.2 CIGS/CZTS-based thin film solar cells
The thin film solar cell (TFSC) is a promising candidate for terrestrial as well as space applications, and it offers wide varieties of choices in both the design and fabrication of devices. If the requirements of the material are reduced, they have the potential for low-cost mass production. A variety of substrates (flexible or rigid, metal or non-metal) have been used for the deposition of different layers (contact, window, absorber, anti-reflection, etc.) by using diverse techniques (PVD, CVD, etc.). Moreover, TFSCs are mainly made from compound semiconductors with a direct band gap and high absorption coefficients. The main advantages of thin film solar cells are their low fabrication cost (due to the low energy for processing), the requirement for a lower quantity of materials, and the possibility of great flexibility. A TFSC is composed of multiple layers from different materials in a thin film form, as shown in Fig. 2(b). In general, such a solar cell consists of a substrate to hold the thin layers, a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) to draw the current to the outer circuit, a buffer layer (p- or n-type) to create a junction from an absorber layer with minimum absorption losses to drive the generated carriers to the electrode, an absorber layer (n- or p-type) to generate the carriers for absorbing light with minimal transmission or reflection losses, and a metal contact layer to act as a bottom electrode. Each material has different physical and chemical properties, which affect the overall performance of devices in one form or another.

3.2.1 Absorber layer. 
Chalcopyrite CIGS and Kesterite CZTS thin film solar cells have been intensively studied over the last few years and are considered as among the most promising absorber layers in TFSCs. Both materials are p-type semiconductors with a desirable absorption co-efficient (>104 cm−1) and direct band gap close to that of c-Si. The maximum power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of CIGS TFSCs based on a sputtering–selenization method and CZTS TFSCs based on hydrazine-based solution have reached up to 23.35% and 12.7%, respectively.87,88
Furthermore, numerous techniques have been demonstrated for the vacuum-based deposition of absorber layers in TFSCs, such as evaporation89,90 and sputtering.87,91 However, the high cost of vacuum-based fabrication processes represents a barrier to producing affordable commercial modules for the substitution of conventional fossil fuels as primary energy sources. To overcome this problem, efficient non-vacuum processes have been introduced for the deposition of the absorber layers. Several solution methods have already been reported in the past few decades, including dip-coating, spin-coating, screen-printing, spray pulverization, and doctor blading techniques,92–98 which are usually based on either nanoparticle or molecular ink precursors. Despite this, these solution methods have not yet been widely adapted for large-scale production because of their poor thickness control and wastage of a large quantity of inks.99 Zhang et al. reported the fabrication of CIGS absorbers by using a hydrazine-based solution process, with an efficiency of around 17.3%.100 However, the usage of hydrazine as a solvent is undesirable for mass production due to its toxic nature and explosive properties. Therefore, alternative inks have been formulated in order to avoid the above issues. On the contrary, inkjet printing is consider a viable alternative method due to its flexibility and adaptability for patterning on various substrates on a large scale at low-cost, with good uniformity and low raw material wastage.101
Wang et al. first reported the fabrication of chalcopyrite CuInxGa1−xSe2 TFSCs by using inkjet printing to improve the overall device performances (Glass/Mo/CuInGaSe2/CdS/ZnO/Ag).102 Air-stable inks were easily prepared by controlling the composition of low-cost metal salt precursors at a molecular level, while the viscosity of ink was adjusted to 5 cP through controlling the ratio of highly viscous ethylene glycol. In this work, a post-selenization process was employed to convert the precursor film into CIGS film in a quartz tubular furnace at 500 °C for 20 min under an atmosphere of Se vapor mixed with 4.2 sccm of H2 and 17 sccm of N2. The whole processes for the overall device fabrication and the photograph of the actual arrays of inkjet-printed CIGS solar cells are depicted in Fig. 7(a)–(d). The cross-sectional SEM image clearly shows a film stack with several layers, including an ∼600 nm top contact layer, 1.2 μm CIGS layer, and 200 nm of Mo as a back contact layer. It is interesting to note that a clear interface in the CIGS film, which separates the CIGS film into dual layers. A PCE of 5.04% with a JSC of 29.78 mA cm−2, VOC of 386 mV, and FF of 0.44% were achieved under 1 sun AM1.5G illumination. The lower PCE yield was due to the presence of a certain amount of residual carbons in the final film from the incomplete evaporation of the solvent and acetate anions, which limited the growth of large crystalline grains during selenization.
 Fig. 7  (a) Process sequence for the fabrication of CIGS solar cells; (b) top view of real devices; (c) cross-sectional view of SEM image of a CIGS full device; (d) J–V characteristic curves of a CIGS solar cell. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (e) Formation procedures of CIGS thin films in four steps; (f) photograph of molecular Cu–In–Ga ink; (g) contact angle between the molecular ink and Mo-coated glass substrate; (h) cross-sectional SEM image of a solar cell with an annealed CIGSSe thin film; (i) J–V curves of a CIGSSe solar cell with 11.3% efficiency. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Subsequently, Lin et al. (i.e., our group) developed a Cu–In–Ga precursor ink by the dissolution of copper(II) nitrate trihydrate, indium nitrate hydrate, and gallium nitrate hydrate with a certain ratio in a solvent mixture of 2-propanol and ethylene glycol (see Fig. 7(e)–(i)).103 The Cu–In–Ga precursor ink exhibited long-term stability in the air at room temperature. The wetting behavior between the ink and substrate plays an essential role in the formation of homogeneous films. The contact angle of Cu–In–Ga ink on Mo-coated soda lime glass was 27°, which was smaller than that of the previous work of the same group,104 which indicated the suitability of the wetting behavior for printing.7,8 Crack-free CIGSSe absorbers were prepared through annealing an inkjet-printed Cu–In–Ga nitrate precursor layer in a Se/H2S atmosphere. The cross-sectional SEM image showed the complete structure of the CIGSSe solar cell, whereas the CIGSSe absorber showed a double-layered structure with an approximately 0.63 μm-thick larger grain layer on top and a 0.33 μm-thick fine grain layer for the back contact. The CIGSSe solar cell with the Mo/CIGSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/Al:ZnO structure yielded a total area PCE of 11.3% with an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 541 mV, short-circuit current density (JSC) of 31.1 mA cm2, and a fill factor (FF) of 67.0%. This is also the highest reported PCE so far based on an inkjet-printed CIGSSe absorber. The EQE reached up to a maximum of 90%, which suggested a near loss-free collection of light-generated charge carriers at that wavelength with good carrier lifetimes at the interface as well as at the upper part of the absorber. At the same time, a poor infrared response in the EQE curve was probably caused by insufficient light absorption in the absorber layer of the CIGSSe. In other words, some factors, including rear surface (back contact) recombination, insufficient light absorption, and a low diffusion length can also contribute to the poor red response.105
Recently, Yadav et al. demonstrated inkjet printing with an aqueous precursor ink for the successful formation of a high-quality CIGSe2 absorber layer with controlled thickness and morphology.106 The precursor ink in aqueous medium and ink-jetting parameters were optimized to obtain stable drop formations and high-quality precursor films, respectively which were investigated through rheological studies and optical microscopy. The results suggested the achievement of a uniform coverage of a precursor CIG film with a drop spacing of 175 μm and pretreatment temperature of 150 °C. Based on a selenization process, a highly crystalline chalcopyrite CIGSe2 thin film with a single phase and dense morphology was obtained at atmospheric pressure. The CIGSe2-film-based solar cell device obtained from the non-vacuum inkjet route achieved a PCE of 4.0% (JSC = 25.7 mA cm−2, VOC = 324 mV, and FF = 48%) under an active device area of 4 × 4 mm2 without any antireflective coating. The lower performance of the solar cell device was due to the bi-layered structure of the CIGSe2 thin film absorber along with MoSe2 at the Mo–CIGSe2 interface.
Considering CZTS solar cells, our group reported the fabrication of Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ZnO:Al/Ni:Al grids based on inkjet-printed CZTSSe absorbers for the first time from DMSO-based Cu–Zn–Sn–S molecular precursor ink, and achieved a PCE of 6.4% under standard AM1.5 illumination without any antireflection coating.104 The solar cell performance was limited by a low fill factor, which was mainly due to the high series resistance of the device. However, the existence of secondary phases (CuS1−xSex, SnS) was also suspected, and a 400 nm-thick fine-grain layer was also observed between the larger grain CZTSSe absorber layer and Mo substrate. Later, the same group reported the effects of sodium (Na) on inkjet-printed CZTSSe absorbers and related solar cells.107 The Na was directly introduced into the CZTSSe absorber layer through the addition of various concentrations of NaF (from 0 M to 1.12 M) into Cu–Zn–Sn–S ink as a precursor and printed on a Mo-coated soda lime glass. The morphological images depicted the effects of the presence and absence of Na in the absorber layer of CZTS solar cells, as represented in Fig. 8. From the images, the presence of two larger grain layers and one fine grain layer can be seen in-between the multi-layered sandwich structure with the absence of NaF in the absorber precursor ink. On the other hand, the morphology changed to a double-layered structure with a single larger grain layer on top and a fine grain layer at the bottom in the presence of NaF.108 Moreover, VOC, JSC, and FF increased with the addition of NaF in the precursor inks. As a result, the PCE increased significantly from 1.7% to 6.4% with respect to the increase in the concentration of NaF. This study pointed out the potential for the usage of other metal salt precursors, such as metal acetates or nitrates, which were more effective than that of metal chlorides and also avoided the formation of NaCl in the resulting CZTSSe absorbers. Interestingly, the doping of Na even enhanced the device performance.
 Fig. 8  Cross-sectional SEM images of an annealed CZTSSe device with NaF: (a) 0 M showed a multi-layered structure; (b) 0.036 M showed a double-layer structure; (c) J–V characteristics and (d) EQE spectra for 0.072 M, 0.144 M, and 0.288 M CZTSSe solar cells. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Colina et al. demonstrated a precursor ink composed of metallic salts in DMSO, which was optimized in terms of the salt concentration and physical properties for the deposition of CZTS films onto molybdenum-coated soda lime glass substrates.109 Moreover, the influence of the drying temperature was studied in terms of the morphology and electrical performance of the solar cells. In this case, the highest drying temperature evaluated (280 °C) allowed a better crystallization of the absorber when the correct number of printing cycles was selected. In addition, a mixed sulfur–selenium kesterite phase was obtained regardless of the applied drying temperature. Also, it was possible to obtain absorbers that were completely crystallized, which improve their electrical response by tuning the number of printing cycles. Finally, the fabricated CZTSSe solar cells achieved a maximum PCE of 6.55% (JSC = 33 mA cm−2, VOC = 366 mV, and FF = 54%) without a metal grid or anti-reflection layer.


3.2.2 Buffer layer. 
The buffer layer forms a junction with the absorber layer while admitting a maximum amount of light into the junction region. The absorber layer has a primary function in heterojunction solar cells, and there is no photocurrent generation in the buffer layer.110 Commonly, materials such as Zn(O,S), CdS, and In2S3 are considered to be the most promising candidates for buffer layers in TFSCs because of their wide energy band-gap and n-type conductivity. There are many deposition techniques available for the deposition of a buffer layer, including chemical bath deposition (CBD), spin-coating, spray deposition, and inkjet printing. Among these, the inkjet-printing technique provides for highly localized deposition, the direct patterning (without lithography) of materials in an atmospheric environment, and good raw-material utilization.104 Moreover, it is a very attractive method for the implementation of advanced cell concepts, including micro-concentrator cells.111 However, there is only one report available based on an inkjet-printed buffer layer.
Wang et al. reported the deposition of In2S3 thin films by using two techniques (inkjet printing and spin-coating) with air-stable, low-cost molecular precursor inks, formed through the dissolution of indium nitrate and thiourea in an alcohol-based solvent with a certain ratio for a Cd-free buffer layer in chalcopyrite (CIGS)-based thin film solar cells.112 The J–V characteristics and EQEs of three of the best solar cells buffered with standard CdS, spin-coated In2S3, and inkjet-printed In2S3 are depicted in Fig. 9(a) and (b). The addition of thiourea into the precursor ink enhanced the crystallinity of the films as well as the cell performance. The successful implementation of inkjet printing and spin-coating for the deposition of the In2S3 buffer layer on CIGS thin film solar cells led to PCEs of 12.2% and 12.8%, respectively, which are comparable to the PCE of a solar cell with a standard CdS buffer.
 Fig. 9  (a) Comparison of dark and illuminated J–V characteristics; (b) EQEs of three of the best solar cells buffered with standard CdS, spin-coated In2S3, and inkjet-printed In2S3. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2016, EPJ Photovoltaics. (c) Microscopic image of 80 μm inkjet-printed Ag lines on AZO; (d) J–V curves for a device with inkjet-printed Ag contacts and a device with evaporated Ni/Al contacts without any heat treatment. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 


3.2.3 Front contact. 
The top-contact metallization is quite important because of the rather poor conductivity of AZO (<1500 S cm−1). To reduce the shadow loss and enable to use the monolithic interconnects, the front contacts must have a narrow width, accurate definition, scalability, and interconnection with blanket bus bars.114 Conventionally, the front metal grid has been deposited by using evaporation with the help of a shadow mask. To reduce the production cost of devices via reducing the wastage of raw materials, an alternative approach of inkjet printing was proposed by Hersh et al.113 They reported inkjet-printed Ag front contacts on AZO/i-ZnO/CdS/CIGS/Mo thin film photovoltaic cells. The printed Ag contacts were developed to replace the currently employed evaporated bi-layer contacts of Ni/Al. The CIGS device performances with the inkjet-printed front contact were similar to those with electron-beam-evaporated front contacts. The printed Ag lines at a substrate temperature of 200 °C yielded a line resistivity of 2.06 μΩ cm and a contact resistance of 8.2 ± 0.2 mΩ cm2 for Al:ZnO, which was higher than that of thermally evaporated contacts (6.93 ± 0.3 mΩ cm2). A microscopic image of a printed Ag line on an AZO layer is illustrated in Fig. 9(c) with an optimized line width of 35 μm. The JSC, FF, and overall PCE values for an inkjet-printed contact (11.4%) was lower than that of an evaporated contact (14.8%), as depicted in Fig. 9(d). Devices with inkjet-printed contacts at 120 °C did not perform well, predominately due to the poor conductivity of their lines and incomplete decomposition. However, these poor performances might be caused by the high contact resistance or residual solvent left in the line after printing. A reduction in deposition time could dramatically improve the efficiencies of printed devices. In addition, the stability of printed contacts was examined to determine their viabilities in commercial products.

3.3 Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted considerable attention in research fields because of their low manufacturing cost, environmentally friendly nature, and commercialization in photovoltaic markets.115,116 The main consideration for the commercialization of DSSCs is their stability, performance, production cost, and color, with them achieving high PCEs of up to 13%.117,118 Typically, a DSSC consists of different layers, such as a transparent conducting anode of TCO/FTO, an electron-transport layer, usually of titanium dioxide (TiO2) film, as a photoelectrode, a thin layer of platinum (Pt) or graphene as a counter electrode, and an electrolyte dye containing the iodide (I−)/tri-iodide (I3−) redox couple for photosensitization between two electrodes, which supplies the electrons back to the dye (Fig. 2(c)). In principle, the sunlight is harvested by the dye molecules and adsorbed on the TiO2 film, which is the major energy conversion process in DSSCs. Then, the photoexcited dye molecules are injected to provide the electrons into the conduction band of the TiO2 film.119

3.3.1 Photoelectrode. 
TiO2 thin films as photoelectrodes have attracted much attention for DSSCs because of their potential positive effects, such as low cost, non-toxicity, excellent thermal stability, and chemical inertness.120 Moreover, TiO2 has a wide band gap energy (3.2 eV, and absorbs only below 388 nm), which makes it invisible to most of the solar spectrum and reduces the recombination rates of photoinjected electrons. In the formation of TiO2 thin films, numerous methods have been investigated in the past decades, including spin-coating,121 sol–gel,122 doctor blade,123 screen-printing124 methods. A high-temperature curing process in the range of 450–500 °C is required to completely remove the large amounts of material from the deposited layers.125 Sometimes, the pastes can cause a significant cracking and peeling of the layers from the substrate. Furthermore, the above methods have some major limitations and the formation of the nanostructured metal-oxide layer within the DSSCs is still a challenging issue.124 Inkjet printing is one of the most convenient methods to overcome this issue and allows a direct deposition of a liquid on a substrate, resulting in a predetermined pattern or shape. Layer-by-layer printing is generally used to increase the thickness of films. Successful inkjet printing requires careful optimization of the ink and suitable substrate properties as well as the printing parameters.126 Drev et al.127 reported the development of a TiO2 ink based on Pechini's method and the inkjet-printed TiO2 layers were then used in the fabrication of a DSSC. The performances of the solar cell was evaluated and compared with TiO2 layers of DSSCs by using the doctor-blade method, as shown in Fig. 10. The evaluated maximum conversion efficiency under standard test conditions was 4.1% with a JSC of 9.5 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.7 V, and FF of 50.75. However, the efficiency was lower than that of TiO2 layers produced with doctor-blade techniques, with a PCE value of 4.8%. Because the grains of the TiO2 layer are not well connected together, there is poor adhesion with the TCO substrate, which contributes to a more pronounced recombination process, resulting in a lower conversion efficiency. This study suggested that a further improvement in inks was needed in order to confirm the appropriateness of the inkjet-printing technique in DSSCs.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication of a DSSC with an inkjet-printed TiO2 layer by using the doctor-blade technique. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (b) J–V characteristics of DSSCs assembled with TiO2 layers. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2010, EUPVSEC. 
Subsequently, Cherrington and co-workers reported the optimization of the critical parameters for TiO2 ink, including the particle size, pH, viscosity, and stability.126 Crack-free TiO2 thin films were printed on FTO glass and used as photoelectrodes in DSSCs. Moreover, the printed TiO2 films had a thickness of 2.57 μm after the annealing process and the J–V characteristics were used to evaluate the conversion efficiency of such a cell, which was about 3.50%. It displayed a better efficiency when compared to previously processed films fabricated by using the screen-printing method with a thickness of 5 μm and efficiency of 1.6%.128 The slightly higher efficiency was attributed to the higher roughness, which induces a higher dye uptake. However, the reported FF (0.49) of this study was quite low, but it could be further improved by post-treating the FTO substrates and porous TiO2 anodes with titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4).129 The processes used in this work aimed to aid manufacturing solar cells under ambient conditions and to find alternative methods for improving the cell efficiency. The developed ink in this work was binder-free and only incorporated with polyethylene glycol (PEG 400) as a humectant to enable printing. As a result, the TiO2 photoelectrode was annealed at 250 °C, which was significantly lower than that of the usual 450 °C. However, the resulting printed films had poor adhesion, and therefore further work needs to be conducted on the optimization of binders to produce durable films for low-temperature annealing.


3.3.2 Counter electrode. 
A counter electrode is one of the most critical features that influence the performances of DSSCs. It is catalytically active with an electrically conducting nature and exhibits a low overpotential for the rapid reduction of the redox couple to carry the generated photocurrents across the width of the solar cell.131 In particular, platinum (Pt) is the most commonly used counter electrode material in DSSCs due to its high catalytic activity, good stability, good adhesion, and superior transparency.132 However, it has a high material cost, which has motivated the development of cost-efficient deposition methods without compromising the optimum performance of cell operation.133 Özkan et al.134 successfully demonstrated the formation of catalytic platinum layers as counter electrodes in DSSCs using the inkjet-printing method as well as by traditional drop casting on an FTO substrate. The depositing of a Pt layer on an FTO substrate using inkjet printing without a mask plays a vital role in much of the printed electronics (Fig. 11). Here, Pt particles are isolated more on the inkjet-printed surface with distinctly smaller and uniform grains (∼10 nm). Similar catalytic performances have been obtained at R′CT = 1.2 Ω cm2 for drop-cast and R′CT = 1.6 Ω cm2 for inkjet-printing techniques at the same Pt loading and the corresponding PCEs of ηdrop-cast = 6.5% and ηprinted of 6.7% are also similar to each other. All the cells have high stabilities with similar efficiencies too, as proved from accelerated 1000 h aging tests under 1 sun illumination at 35 °C in an open circuit condition. The patterned counter electrode fabricated using the inkjet-printing technique had a higher transparency than that of the conventional drop-cast samples with the same platinum loading. These results highlight the potential of inkjet printing to realize precise patterns without material wastage, which was achieved from a controlled dispensing of the functional solution. Hence, this is considered a promising candidate for the fabrication of less expensive counter electrodes and bifacial DSSCs.
 Fig. 11  (a) Pt-patterned FTO-glass surface by the inkjet printing of 20 mM of a solution without any mask; (b) SEM image of the platinum catalyst on the FTO-glass surface by using inkjet printing; (c) J–V curves of DSSCs with inkjet-printed and drop-casted CEs. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 


3.3.3 Electrolyte solution. 
Ionic electrolyte solutions are filled in directly between the photoelectrode and counter electrode after the sealing of devices through two drilled holes for electrolyte insertion and for releasing the trapped air within the cell.135 However, it is difficult to fill up the required amounts of the electrolyte solution in the entire cell, and the filling amount needs to be larger than just that required for the active area to avoid an overlap between the filling holes and photoelectrode, which reduces the active area of a cell. This additional amount of electrolyte within the filling channel is undesirable for the cell performances and increases the dark current from the photoelectrode substrate.136 In another way, the electrolyte solution is directly deposited between two electrodes, followed by sealing of the cell without any holes in the substrate. Hashmi et al. successfully demonstrated a direct deposition of electrolyte solution on a DSSC device without holes and any new materials by using inkjet printing.137 Moreover, the new hole-free electrolyte filling method enhanced the efficiency and stability due to there being fewer components and preparation steps, while minimizing the amount of extra electrolyte in the cell. Fig. 12 represents the inkjet-printed electrolyte layers prepared by using a new sequence and the fabrication of a hole-free DSSC device with this printed electrolyte layer. The hole-free DSSC exhibited excellent performances, with a JSC of 14.9 ± 0.5 mA cm−2, VOC of 675 ± 3 mV, FF of 73.7 ± 0.4%, and enhanced efficiency of 7.4 ± 0.3% compared to the reference DSSC with an efficiency of 7.0 ± 0.2%.
 Fig. 12  (a) Device designs and fabrication sequences of a hole-free DSSC: (1) FTO-glass substrate cleaning, (2) sequential TiCl4 treatments, screen-printing, and sintering of nanocrystals and scattering of TiO2 particles, and dye sensitization, (3) thermal platinization on FTO-glass as a counter electrode, (4) inkjet printing of Z988-EL over sensitized photoelectrodes, (5) placement of Surlynspacer foil over the photoelectrode, (6) photoelectrode and counter electrode fusing at 130–135 °C; (b) front view of the hole-free DSSC with a printed electrolyte layer in which the electrolyte does not spread substantially around the electrode area (8 × 5 mm2) during the cell sealing process; (c) J–V curves of the best performing initial and 1120 h-aged DSSCs measured under 1 sunlight intensity. The active area of the cells was 0.17 cm2 defined by the aperture area of the black tape mask. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 

3.4 Organic solar cells (OSCs)
Organic solar cells (OSCs) have been attracting more attention for next-generation solar cells due to their flexibility, light weight, and compatibility with roll-to-roll production.138,139 The highest reported PCE of OSCs is ∼15.7%.140 Moreover, they have many advantages, such as a simple fabrication process, low manufacturing cost, low material usage, excellent mechanical properties, thermal budget, and high processing speed, which should allow them to have a major impact on the future photovoltaic market.92,141 Typically, OSCs have a multi-layered structure, including a glass substrate (low cost, with thermal and chemical durability), front electrode (ITO/FTO) deposited on top of a transparent substrate, HTL (PEDOT:PSS), photoactive layer (mixture of organic materials), ETL (TiO2/ZnO), and back electrode (Au/Al/Ag), as shown in Fig. 2(d). The HTL and ETL layers are located between the photoactive layer and either of the electrodes. Several solution deposition techniques have been employed for the large-scale production of OSCs, such as spin-coating, doctor-blading, spray-coating, screen-printing, and inkjet-printing techniques.139,142–148 Among these, spin coating and doctor blading are the most commonly used methods for the deposition of OSCs. Despite this, they are not ideal methods for exploring the production of OSCs due to the waste products, environmental pollution, difficulties in patterning, and absence of roll-to-roll production while preparing flexible solar cells.19 To overcome these issues, inkjet printing has been introduced because of its versatility, compatibility with roll-to-roll production for large-scale deposition, and adoption in the successful preparation of all layers of OSCs. The following sub-sections describe the deposition of different layers of OSCs by using the inkjet-printing method.

3.4.1 Front electrode. 
ITO is the most commonly used front electrode in OSCs. Aernouts et al. reported polymer/fullerene active layer-based OSCs (inkjet printing) with ITO (DC/RF magnetron sputtering) and yielded a PCE of 1.4%.149 Moreover, Cranton et al. demonstrated the formation of antimony-doped tin oxide (ATO) as a front electrode by using inkjet printing, followed by annealed with an excimer laser.150 However, it had a high sheet resistance ∼200 kΩ per square, which made it difficult to use in OSCs as an anode layer. Concomitantly, Kim and co-workers obtained an ITO electrode with a low sheet resistance of 202.7 Ω per square and average transmittance of 84.14% by the inkjet printing of ITO with nano-sized particles ink, followed by annealing at 450 °C through a rapid thermal process for cost-efficient OSCs.151 They achieved a PCE of 2.13% with a JSC = 8.47 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.57 V, and FF = 44%. However, the PCE and FF values decreased with the increase in the active area due to the high series resistance due to the inkjet-printed ITO films.152
Galagan and co-workers fabricated ITO-free OSCs with inkjet-printed current collecting grids, busbars, and a highly conducting composite anode of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS).153 The high processing cost and relatively low conductivity of ITO (60 Ω sq−1) on flexible substrates created a great demand for alternative TCEs for large area modules. Hence, it is essential to find alternative electrodes with good conductivity, high transmittance, and low cost.154,155 Interestingly, PEDOT:PSS is a promising material to replace ITO as it is highly transparent with an easy fabrication process from solution. However, the sheet resistance of PEDOT:PSS (100–200 Ω sq−1) is higher than that of ITO on flexible substrates.156,157 A combination of a silver (Ag) grid with PEDOT:PSS showed a higher conductivity with a semitransparent nature, which makes it suitable for the front electrode in flexible OSCs.158
Seok-In et al. demonstrated ITO-free flexible OSCs with an inkjet-printed composite transparent electrode of Ag grids with PEDOT:PSS.159 The obtained sheet resistance of 15.8 Ω per square and transmittance of 82.51% supported its excellent cell performance, such as a PCE of 2.292%, FF of 64.72%, JSC of 6.301 mA cm−2, and VOC of 0.562 V. These results suggested that the inkjet-printed Ag-based transparent electrode is an alternative for sputter-grown ITO electrodes and a promising material for printing-based electrodes for fully printed and flexible ITO-free OSCs. The achieved PCE was quite close to similar devices reported by another group.160
Subsequently, Huang et al. achieved a PCE of 2.34% for an OSC structure of glass/Ag-grids (IJP)/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Al with an area of 8 cm2.161 Initially, the PCE of ITO-free devices dramatically decreased from 1.93% to 0.17% with increasing the device area from 0.3 to 4 cm2 due to the larger sheet resistance of PEDOT:PSS. Therefore, the PEDOT:PSS (PH 1000) layer was reinforced with inkjet-printed Ag grids. The PCE of ITO-free cells with a device area of 4 cm2 increased to 2.47% with the optimum cell parameters. Moreover, the impacts of ITO and Ag-grid/PH1000-based devices were compared with the areas of 0.3, 4, and 8 cm2. These results suggested that both ITO and Ag-grid-based devices have similar PCEs of ≈3% with a small area of 0.8 cm2.
Sintering is an essential process in inkjet-printing technology and always follows the printing of Ag grids or other metals during TCE fabrication. This method can enhance the performances of OSCs, including the JSC and FF. Galagan and co-workers presented printed current collecting grids in OSCs fabricated with a photonic sintering process.162 In this study, the sintering was completed within seconds and yielded appropriate conductivities of the grids, which were more important for the roll-to-roll (R2R) process. The resistivity of Ag grids fabricated with a photonic sintering process of about 5 s was nearly identical to those done by oven sintering at 130 °C for 6 h (Fig. 13). It is hard to transform a thermal sintering process into roll-to-roll production, whereas the time scale of photonic sintering is in the right order of magnitude for the R2R process. In addition, photonic sintering was performed during printing, which limits the spreading of deposited silver ink during the process, as happens in the case of thermal sintering. The resulting sharper geometry of gridlines decreases the shadow losses in OPV devices and positively influences the device performances. In summary, the sintering process led to a major improvement in the adhesion of the Ag grid to the PET substrate. Moreover, the studies on laboratory and large-scale industrial processes suggested that the inkjet-printed Ag grid with a conductive polymer was a viable alternative for ITO-free OSCs.
 Fig. 13  (a) Typical cross-sectional profiles of inkjet-printed Ag lines after thermal and flash sintering on a glass substrate; (b) layout of OSCs; (c) the calculated electric potential field for current collecting grids by thermal sintering for about 10, 30, and 360 min at 360 °C as well as flash sintering for about 5 s. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 


3.4.2 Hole-transport layer. 
In the past decades, PEDOT:PSS has attracted more attention for photodiodes, capacitors, and HTLs in organic solar cells and LEDs.163–165 Inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS-based OSCs and the roles of the additives in device efficiency were reported by Eom et al.166 The surfactants of glycerol (6 wt%) and ethylene glycol butyl ether (EGBE) (0.2 wt%) as additives in the PEDOT:PSS inks helped improve the surface morphology with high conductivity and enhanced the PCE to 3.16% with a JSC of 9.593 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.595 V, and FF of 55.28% for the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF–Al device structure. Later, Steirer et al. reported the importance of the drop spacing and substrate temperature parameters on the performances of the PEDOT:PSS layer in OSCs by using inkjet printing.167 In this study, the better uniformity of PEDOT:PSS helped achieve a PCE of 3.31% with a drop spacing of 25 μm at a substrate temperature of 28 °C.
Subsequently, Garg and co-workers investigated the effects of various inkjet-printing parameters on the PEDOT:PSS layer for OSC devices.168 The parameters, including surface treatment of the substrate, drop spacing, substrate temperature (printing as well as annealing), strongly affected the formation of continuous PEDOT:PSS films. Moreover, C60BM has been typically used as an active layer in bulk heterojunction configurations, sandwiched between two electrodes (cathode and anode). The achieved PCE was 2.64% with optimized parameters, such as an ink viscosity of 5.65 cP, drop spacing of 30 μm, and thickness of 120 nm, for room temperature printing with annealing at 120 °C. These films exhibited a high transmittance of ∼89% with an electrical conductivity of 2 × 10−2 S cm−1. However, the observed PCE value was reasonably compared to the same device fabricated by spin-coated PEDOT:PSS.
In addition, the PEDOT:PSS had a very short lifetime due to its corrosive nature and hence represented a bottleneck to any commercial realization of these devices. In terms of the stability concern of OSCs, the development of alternative HTLs instead of PEDOT:PSS was investigated by the same group of Garg and co-workers.169 Nickel oxide (NiO) was found to be a better alternative choice for HTLs due to its p-type conductivity and desirable stability, and as it has almost the same properties with the previous HTL of PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 14). In this work, NiO thin films were successfully deposited on an ITO-coated glass substrate by using the inkjet-printing method with a controlled thickness of 18 nm. Good quality NiO thin films were obtained at a substrate temperature of 25 °C with a drop spacing of 50 μm and with the substrates treated with UVO before printing. The UV ozone treatment of NiO films improved the performances of devices, showing performances slightly better than those of the devices with spin-coated NiO films. An OSC of ITO/NiO(inkjet-printed)/P3HT:PC60BM/LiF/Al with surface treatment achieved a PCE of ∼2.60%.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of fabricated OSCs with NiO as an HTL by using inkjet printing; (b) geometry of an electrode with dotted squares, which represent the device area (3 × 3 mm2) and a glass substrate size of 1.0 inch2; (c) schematic energy band diagram of the device with NiO as an HTL and P3HT:PC60BM as an active layer; (d) J–V characteristics of P3HT:PC60BM organic solar cell devices fabricated with printed and spin-coated NiO films and heat treated at 400 °C (with and without UV–ozone treatment). Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2017, Nature. 


3.4.3 Photoactive layer. 
Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) are considered as the most prominent materials for photoactive layers in bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs). Hoth et al. early on reported the deposition of P3HT:PCBM as a photoactive layer on HTL by using inkjet printing and fabricated a device structure using glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM (IJP)/Ca–Ag.5 The impacts of the solvents used in the ink formulation on the morphological and interfacial properties of the inkjet-printed P3HT:PCBM films were investigated. Based on the newly developed solvent mixture, the authors demonstrated an inkjet-printed polymer:fullerene blend as a photoactive layer and achieved a PCE of ∼3%. The same group further investigated the highly efficient OSCs by adjusting the chemical properties of P3HT:PCBM as an inkjet–solvent mixture and achieved a new record PCE of 3.5% (Fig. 15).170,171 By using a combination of regioregular (RR)-96%-P3HT and an adapted solvent mixture of o-DCB/mesitylene to control drying and film formation, they achieved a suitable aggregation time with improved morphological properties of the active layer in inkjet-printed polymer:fullerene-based solar cells.
 Fig. 15  (a) Device structure of the solar cell (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM blend/Ca/Ag); (b) chemical structure of P3HT:PCBM; (c) J–V characteristics of different regioregular P3HT:PCBM devices based on tetralene (open symbols) or o-DCB/mesitylene (closed symbols) for inkjet-printed devices under AM 1.5 illumination with 100 mW cm−2; (d) atomic force microscopy images of 93%, 96%, and 98% regioregular P3HT:PCBM blend films deposited by inkjet printing from o-DCB/mesitylene. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Aernouts et al. controlled the viscosity and surface wetting inks by using different ratios of P3HT:PCBM in 1:1 tetralene:chlorobenzene (CB).149 A device of glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al had optimized properties with a smooth active layer and minimal surface roughness. Finally, the obtained PCE was 1.4% for continuous, pin-hole-free and smooth films in the device.
A combination of different solvent mixtures is critical for the formation of high-quality active layers by using the inkjet-printing method. Jaewook et al. reported the enhanced efficiency of inkjet-printed P3HT:PCBM-based OSCs by using chlorobenzene as a solvent, in which the vapor pressure, boiling point, and surface tension were considered as critical parameters for inkjet-printing technology.172 Chlorobenzene has a higher vapor pressure (8.8 at 20 °C mmHg) and lower boiling point (130 °C) when compared to o-dichlorobenzene/mesitylene, which vaporizes slowly. Moreover, o-dichlorobenzene has a high surface tension (37 dyn cm−1) and forms suppressed non-uniform films with a strong thickness variation in the μm scale within one printed area, thus exhibiting a dewetting behavior. In this study, the achieved PCE was 3.8% with a JSC of 9.05 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.68 V, and FF of 0.62 under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G simulated light illumination by using chlorobenzene as a solvent in the P3HT:PCBM active layer.
Later, Teichler et al.173 reported the screening of polymer:fullerene blends by using inkjet printing for OSCs. Poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCP-DTBT) and poly[(4,4′-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-dithieno(3,2-b;2′,3′-d)silole-)2,6-diyl-alt-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)-4,7-diyl] (PSBTBT) as two polymers as well as mono-PCBM and bis-PCBM as two fullerene derivatives were mixed into active materials with various concentrations, blend ratios, solvent ratios, and film thicknesses and their properties were investigated. The obtained maximum PCEs were 0.64% and 1.48% for 1:2 PSBTBT:mono-PCBM (190 nm) and 1:3.4 PCPDTBT:mono-PCBM (169 nm) systems, respectively, for a device structure of glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/LiF–Al. A small amount of material is essential to investigate the structural–property relationship between active compounds and their efficiency in OSCs by using inkjet-printed thin films.
Subsequently, Choulis and co-workers174 reported bulk heterojunction blends of low band gap conjugated polymers of poly[(4,40-bis(2-ethylhexyl)dithieno[3,2-b:20,30-d]silole)-2,6-diyl-alt-(4,7-bis(2-thienyl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)-5,50-diyl] (Si-PCPDTBT) as well as poly[N-90-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(40,70-di-2-thienyl-20,10,30-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) as electron donors with [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) as electron acceptors in inkjet-printed active layers of OSCs. In this study, they obtained a significant improvement in PCE from 3.01% to 3.86% based on Si-PCPDTBT:fullerene and PCDTBT:fullerene-based inkjet-printed OSVs through controlling the inkjet-printing processes (i.e., line merging and/or nozzle clogging, by using appropriate solvents and blend concentrations) when compared to a previous report using the same materials.
Eom et al. reported highly efficient and cost-effective OSCs with a normal device structure of glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF–Al and the inkjet-printing method was used for the deposition of HTL and a photoactive layer with different solvent systems.175 To optimize the solvent system for the photoactive layer, different high boiling point additives, such as 1,8-octanedithiol (ODT = 269 °C), o-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB = 179 °C), and chloronaphthalene (Cl-naph = 259 °C) were added into chlorobenzene (CB = 132 °C), whereas the PEDOT:PSS was mixed with glycerol and EGBE. These solvent engineering processes enabled the fabrication of a device with improved performances when compared to the devices without additives. The yielded high PCE was 3.7% (JSC = 10.68 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.628 V, FF = 55.27%) for a P3HT:PCBM system, which were attributed to the improved crystallinity with distinct phase separation morphology at the nanoscale due to the incorporation of an ODT additive.
Tuning the viscosity of non-halogenated solvents for inkjet-printed OSCs was investigated by Lamont et al.176 For inkjet printing, the limited solubility of polymer/fullerene blends in non-halogenated solvents causes ink formulations with low viscosities, which limits the usage of roll-to-roll compatible deposition processes. Lamont et al. modified the viscosity of ink by adding 1 wt% of polystyrene into the ink as a rheological modifier in non-halogenated inks.176 The differences in solvent compatibility of polystyrene/P3HT:PCBM ternary blends led to a phase separation upon layer drying, whereas the polystyrene created a layer–air interface, resulting in an isolated domain or network-like topology. An improved viscosity with better printing behavior were achieved through the small addition of polystyrene, which demonstrated its potential to overcome the limited viscosity resulting from typical halogenated free-ink formulations of semiconducting polymers.


3.4.4 Back electrode. 
The back electrode is the important final layer of inverted OSCs for completing the devices. This electrode is mostly processed by the evaporation method in small-scale laboratories, which are not feasible for the production of low-cost R2R for cells/modules.177 On the other hand, screen printing is a viable method for the ambient processing of back electrodes in both laboratory-scale cells and R2R-produced large-area cells/modules. However, it has a limited sintering time to yield a high conductivity and the majority of defects are caused by the interactions of the solvents in screen printing Ag ink with underlying PEDOT:PSS and the photoactive layers, which cause damaging effects on the photovoltaic properties.178 A significant increment in the thickness of the PEDOT:PSS layer can protect the underlying layers from the aggressive effects of solvents and avoid the mechanical stress from the screen-printing process.179 The reported PCE of inverted devices from screen-printed back electrodes is lower than that of devices based on evaporated back electrodes. To overcome the above issues, inkjet printing is considered as an alternative vacuum-free deposition method with non-contact and thinner underlying layers, which also have positive aspects in terms of the low cost of OSCs. Eom et al. first reported the usage of Ag ink for back electrodes by using an inkjet-printing method in OSCs with a normal/standard device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/ZnO/Ag.180 In this device, the ZnO acted as a buffer layer and was placed between the hydrophobic P3HT:PCBM layer and hydrophilic Ag electrode. The PCE increased from 0.150% to 0.209% via an increase in the annealing temperature from 130 °C to 150 °C. Nevertheless, the device had a very low short circuit current due to the poor conductivity of ZnO, which led to diffusion of the Ag electrode into the device.
Angmo et al. reported the applicability of inkjet printing in the ambient processes of Ag electrodes for inverted OSCs.178 The structure of the device they fabricated was glass/ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag. The device performances based on inkjet printing were similar to those from the back electrode fabricated using screen printing and evaporation methods with an 800 nm thickness PEDOT:PSS layer. Moreover, laser-beam-induced current (LBIC) imaging was used to investigate the impacts of the processing techniques on the current collection in these devices. The results revealed there was no solvent diffusion into the device with the inkjet method, whereas the solvents from the ink penetrated into the device based on the screen-printed back electrode, which consequently damaged the active layer. Furthermore, the usage of a full-layer back electrode led to a 25% increment in PCE when compared to grid patterning. However, the full-layer back electrode also required a higher amount of printing material consumption and it became non-transparent. Galagan and co-workers continued to investigate this work with different types of PEDOT:PSS HTL and Ag back electrodes deposited by either inkjet printing or evaporation.181 The thickness of the PEDOT:PSS layer is one of the main factors for determining the performances of devices. A thickness of 1200 nm was required for the PEDOT:PSS(EL-P5015) layer to avoid penetration of the solvents from the Ag ink. Alternatively, the thickness could be significantly decreased down to 40 nm by using an aqueous-based coating of PEDOT:PSS(S305) combined with either an inkjet- or screen-printing method. Decreasing the thickness of the PEDOT:PSS layer is a key way to reduce the manufacturing cost of OSCs. The combination of a thin PEDOT:PSS layer with an inkjet-printed Ag grid structure allows for the manufacturing of semi-transparent devices.
Ag nanowires (NWs) were used as top electrodes for semi-transparent OSCs with the structure of glass/ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/MoO3/Ag NWs by Lu et al.182 A highest PCE of 2.71% (VOC = 0.60 V, JSC = 8.44 mA cm−2, and FF = 54%) was achieved with the top electrode from 7 consecutive printing runs. Moreover, both the FF and JSC increased with increasing the printing time (3, 5, and 7), attributed to the increased conductivity of the Ag NW network. Additionally, a solvent treatment on the anode buffer layer during printing led to a decrement in the charge injection selectivity and an increment in the charge recombination at the anode interface, which revealed the solvent effects on the device performance. Maisch et al. reported the deposition of Ag NWs as both the top and bottom electrodes by using inkjet printing in semi-transparent OSCs with a device structure of glass/Ag NW/ZnO/PV2000:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag NW (Fig. 16).183 Ag NW ink, with an average length of 10 s of μm, was formulated based on high boiling alcohol, which allowed direct printing on PEDOT:PSS and prevented nozzle clogging without any pretreatment. A highest PCE of 4.3% was achieved from OSCs with inkjet-printed Ag NWs as both the front and back electrodes.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram of semi-transparent OSCs with Ag NW electrodes by inkjet printing; (b) specular transmittance of an encapsulated device (inset: photograph of a metal-grids-free semitransparent inkjet-printed cell); (c) cross-sectional SEM image of the device structure: glass/AgNW:ZnO/PV2000:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/AgNW (from bottom to top); (d) EQE of the device and (e) J–V characteristics of the cell during illumination by a sun simulator through a mask of 1 cm2 area (inset: J–V characteristics measured in the dark). Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 


3.4.5 All layers deposited by inkjet printing. 
According to previous sections, the inkjet-printing method has been widely used for the deposition of one or more layers of OSCs. Jung et al. first reported the fabrication of all-inkjet-printed and fully air-processed OSCs with a device structure of PEDOT:PSS/PCDTBT:PC70BM/ZnO/Ag.184 PCDTBT has a lower band gap with higher efficiency when compared to P3HT. First, the structure of OSCs (PEDOT:PSS/PCDTBT:PCBM/Al) was fabricated by tailoring the solvent in the active blend to obtain an optimized printability and morphology, and this achieved an efficiency of 5%. When replacing the Al with an all-inkjet-printed organic solar cell by enabling the Ag electrode, an average PCE of 2% was achieved. These results suggested that inkjet printing is an attractive printing technology for cost-effective and environmentally friendly PV cells on plastic/flexible substrates.
Eggenhuisen et al. further extended the above work from the laboratory scale to the industrial scale for compatible demonstrations of all-inkjet-printed OSCs and also printed all the layers from non-chlorinated solvents.185 Moreover, they utilized multiple-nozzle industrial print heads and demonstrated the freedom of shapes and designs. Furthermore, the inkjet-printed photoactive layers were obtained by using one of two active materials, such as P3HT:PC60BM or ActivInk PV2000 (Polyera Corporation). The inkjet printing of six functional layers was demonstrated with a device structure of Ag/PEDOT:PSS/ZnO/photoactive layer/PEDOT:PSS/Ag-layer. The achieved PCEs were 1.7% and 4.1% for P3HT:PCBM and PV2000 blends, respectively. All the layers were inkjet-printed using industrial-scale print heads (512 nozzles), which were compatible with R2R technology for a device area of over >1 cm2. Additionally, the inkjet printing allowed the fabrication of custom-designed solar cells with different artistic shapes, which could significantly expand the markets for solar cells. One typical example was the demonstration of a Christmas tree-shaped solar cell, as shown in Fig. 17.185
 Fig. 17  All inkjet-printed solar cells: (a–c) schematic representations of layers in a fully inkjet-printed OSC; (d) photograph of semitransparent all inkjet-printed cells. J–V curves of cells recorded under 1000 W cm−2 AM 1.5G for: (e) a P3HT:PCBM photo-active layer and multiple printed layers; (f) 0.038 cm2 active area and evaporated back electrode with inkjet-printed PV2000 photo-active layers and (g) 1 cm2 active area and up to 6 inkjet-printed layers. Organic solar cell with the shape of a Christmas tree. (h) Schematic representation of a printed layers layout; (i) photograph of a fully finished inkjet-printed OPV Christmas tree; (j) J–V curve recorded for a single device with a Christmas tree shape. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.5 Perovskite solar cells (PVSCs)
In the past decades, organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite solar cells have been considered as one of the most promising candidates in the field of photovoltaics.186 The PCEs of perovskite solar cells have been dramatically improved from 3.8% to over 23% over the past eight years.187,188 Despite this, the PVSCs commonly face several issues, including long-term stability under illumination, reproducibility during fabrication, particularly at large scale to industrial levels, and the device fabrication atmosphere for air and water sensitivity.189,190 Moreover, the active (perovskite) layers have been deposited by using a spin-coating method with a one-step or two-step approach.187,191–195 Unfortunately, it is hard with this method to prepare uniform thin films on a large scale with a low raw material utilization rate, which limit the commercialization of such PVSCs. Consequently, numerous deposition methods have been explored for the large-scale production of perovskite solar cells, such as vacuum deposition,196,197 spray-deposition,198 brush painting,199 doctor-blade coating,200 and inkjet printing.189,190,201–204 Among these, inkjet printing is a facile scalable approach with cost-effectiveness, high writing accuracy, and a near unity material utilization ratio.9,24 Typically, such PVSCs have multi-layered structures with six functional layers (Fig. 2(e)), including the substrate (glass); a bottom electrode, mostly of ITO/FTO, which acts as a transparent conducting electrode (TCE) and is deposited on top of a transparent substrate; an ETL (TiO2/ZnO); an active layer (perovskite); an HTL (polymers); and the most commonly used top electrodes of Au/Al/Ag, in which the metal choice is mainly dependent on the device configuration.23

3.5.1 Active layer, electron-transport layer, and top electrode. 
The organic–inorganic perovskite of MAPbI3 (CH3NH3PbI3) has emerged as a strong competitor in photovoltaic fields, and the reported highest PCE of cells using this is 23.2%.188 Wei et al. first reported the fabrication of planar PVSC by using an inkjet-printing technique, which incorporated nanocarbon as a hole-extraction layer.201 A power conversion efficiency of 11.60% by using mixed inks of carbon and CH3NH3I to transform PbI2 in an in situ chemical transformation led to a better crystallinity in the CH3NH3PbI3 thin film, with an improved interface quality. The J–V performances of solar cells fabricated by using mixed carbon/CH3NH3I ink were VOC = 0.95 V, JSC = 17.20 mA cm−2, and FF = 71%. Subsequently, Li and co-workers successfully deposited a perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 layer on a mesoscopic TiO2 film by using the inkjet-printing technique with different stable temperatures and ink compositions.189 They investigated the role of the substrate table temperature during printing and suggested that in situ heating treatment is necessary for printing. They also found that the usage of CH3NH3Cl as an additive in the precursor ink has a critical impact on the morphology and structure of printed perovskite films. Finally, they obtained a uniform perovskite layer on TiO2 thin films and achieved a PCE of 12.3% under standard AM 1.5G conditions by optimizing the substrate table temperature as well as the ink composition. This PCE was slightly higher than that of the reported value of mesoporous PVSCs prepared using spin coating.189
Hashmi et al. demonstrated the inkjet infiltration of a perovskite precursor ink for fabricating porous triple-layered HTM free-printed PVSCs with high stability and reproducibility.204 The fabricated device (glass/FTO/TiO2/ZrO2/CH3NH3PbI3/carbon) showed impressive photovoltaic performances. Interestingly, the device fabricated by inkjet printing with air-processed infiltrated perovskite ink exhibited a higher stability when subjected to a long-term light-soaking stability test. The achieved highest PCEs were 7.83% and 8.47% under forward and reverse bias scans, respectively. It is exceptionally stable under 1 sun illumination at 35 °C without any encapsulation. However, the PCE decreased insignificantly from 6.7% to 6.4% after a continuous illumination for about 1046 h. The same group further investigated the long-term stability of the above device under intense ultraviolet light soaking equivalent to 1.5 Sun UV light illumination.205 The device showed no performance degradation for 1002 h under UV light illumination in the air when applying the simple epoxy glue sealing of the cells.
Mathies and co-workers reported the fabrication of CH3NH3PbI3-based PVSCs fabricated by using a multi-pass inkjet printer.206 In this method, the thickness of the perovskite film and the crystal size of the CH3NH3PbI3-ink were controlled and the device achieved a higher PCE of 11.3%, which was strongly dependent on the post-processing treatment (vacuum annealing) after the printing process. Recently, the same group fabricated triple cation PVSCs by using 10% cesium in a mixed formamidinium/methylammonium lead iodide/bromide composite based on an inkjet-printing method, and this exhibited a higher temperature and moisture stability.207 By adjusting the drop spacing of the inkjet-printer cartridge, the thickness of the perovskite layer could be varied from 175 to 780 nm with a defined crystallite size, and the device achieved a maximum PCE of 12.9%. These results can proved the possibilities of obtaining high-efficiency PVSCs by using digital inkjet printing for next-generation photovoltaic applications. Furthermore, Bag et al. studied alkyl-ammonium cations for the photoactive layer of PVSCs by using desktop multi-channel inkjet printing.190 The structural and electronic properties could be tuned by varying the composition ratios of cations in the photoactive layer through the RGB color codes of a multi-channel inkjet printer. The reduced irreproducibility in perovskite formation during a sequential process with a 2:1 MA to FA device achieved the highest PCE of 11.1% with a VOC of 0.87 V, JSC of 18.77 mA cm−2, and FF of 68%.
To increase the uniformity and grain size of perovskite thin films, Li and co-workers reported an inkjet-manipulated method with droplet-wetting behavior on a mesoporous substrate, and the physical properties of precursor inks were then systematically investigated.208 They successfully achieved micro-scale crystalline grains of homogeneous PbI2-based PVSCs with a PCE of 18.64% for a small area (0.04 cm2) (Fig. 18). The obtained PCE was higher than that of a device based on a spin-coating method with a maximum PCE of 16.22%. More importantly, a PCE of 17.74% was obtained for a large area (2.02 cm2) PVSC. The enhanced performance was ascribed to the improved uniformity of the perovskite film morphology, the favorable perovskite crystallite orientation (>2 μm), and fewer grain boundaries.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of PVSC fabrication by using inkjet printing; (b) the optical images of a spotted array, linear arrangement, and thin film by inkjet printing; (c) device structure of a perovskite solar cell; (d) cross-sectional SEM of a complete photovoltaic device; (e) current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of inkjet-printing- and spin-coating-based PSCs; (f) J–V curve and incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra (inset) of the best PSC with inkjet printing. Reproduced with permission.208 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Furthermore, Li and co-workers reported the high performances of CH3NH3PbI3-based PVSCs by using a one-step inkjet-printing method with vacuum-assisted thermal annealing as a post-treatment (VTA) and an optimized solvent composition.209 The optimized annealing conditions (90 °C, 50 Pa, and 2 min) with pure-phase and high-quality perovskite films yielded the highest PCE of 17.04% for 0.04 cm2 (13.27% for 4.0 cm2) with negligible hysteresis (lower than 1.0%). The obtained PCE was much higher than that of a previously reported one by using an inkjet-printing (≤12.3% for 0.04 cm2) method. Efficient inkjet-printed chlorine-doped CH3NH3PbI3−xClx PVSCs under ambient conditions at low temperature (<90 °C) were reported by Gheno et al.210 Moreover, to investigate the impacts of chloride, bromide, or diiodooctane on the perovskite ink wetting properties, Owens–Wendt–Rabel and Kaelble models have been introduced. The usage of chlorine or bromide enhance the wettability of perovskite ink, which improves the impregnation of ink in porous materials. The achieved PCE was over 10% with an ETL of WOx.
Huckaba et al. demonstrated the deposition of both mesoporous TiO2 and perovskite layers by using an inkjet-printing method.211 The inkjet-printed quadruple-cation perovskite layer with Cs, formamidinium, methylammonium, and guanidinium on a TiO2 layer reached a PCE of around 12% with the champion cell having a PCE of 14.11%. This active layer exhibited a higher efficiency and stability when compared to MAPbI3/TiO2 films deposited by inkjet printing.
Xie et al. reported the preparation of transparent silver nanowires (AgNWs) as a top electrode for PVSCs by using inkjet printing.212 The introduction of AgNWs on the PC61BM layer exhibited low device performances with a low fill factor due to the mismatched functions of both layers as well as due to the solvent-assisted chemical corrosion of the AgNWs electrode by halogen anions. Hence, the introduction of a polyethyleneimine (PEI) thin layer in between the PC61BM and AgNWs electrode improved the device performances and stability, giving a higher PCE of 14.17%.
A summary of the device characteristics for inkjet-printed layers incorporated into various types of solar cells is given in Table 1.
Table 1 Device characteristics of inkjet-printed layers incorporated into various types of solar cells




Solar cells
Inkjet-printed layer
Device structure

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




Silicon solar cells
Front metal grid
Commercial Si-wafer
610.0
33.3
76.9
15.6

59



Emitter
Commercial Czochralski Si wafer
604.8
33.2
79.9
16.4

70



n-Type Czochralski Si wafer
644.0
38.6
76.4
19.0

72



BC-BJ Si solar cells
654.0
41.5
76.0
20.6

213



Back or rear contact
IBC-SHJ solar cells
663.0
33.8
70.5
15.8

84



Semiconducting TFSCs
Absorber layer
Glass/Mo/CIGS/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Ag
386.0
29.8
44.0
5.04

102



Glass/Mo/CIGS NPs/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Ag
501.0
23.9
54.0
6.5

99



Glass/Mo/CIGS/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Ag
541.0
31.1
67.0
11.3

103



Glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Ni–Al
431.0
34.6
42.8
6.4

107



Buffer layer
Glass/Mo/CIGS/In2S3/i-ZnO/AZO/Ni–Al
491.0
39.2
66.0
12.8

112



Front contact
Glass/Mo/CIGS/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Ag
612.0
28.8
64.3
11.4

113



DSSCs
Photoelectrode
FTO/TiO2/dyes/Pt/FTO
700.0
9.5
50.7
4.1

127



FTO/UV-assisted TiO2/dyes/Pt/FTO
690.0
13.1
64.0
5.72

214



FTO/UV-assisted TiO2/dyes/Pt/FTO
760.0
9.4
49.0
3.5

126



FTO/NiO/dyes/Pt/FTO
99.0
3.4
36.7
0.13

215



Counter electrode
FTO/TiO2/dyes/Pt/FTO
697.0
15.0
65.0
6.7

134



FTO/TiO2/dyes/graphene/FTO
640.0
7.4
62.0
3.0

216



Electrolyte
FTO/TiO2/dyes/Pt/FTO/electrolyte solution
677.0
15.3
74.0
7.7

137



OSCs
Front electrode
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Al
570.0
8.5
44.0
2.13

151



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Al
474.0
8.1
47.5
1.8

152



IZTO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Al
450.0
5.7
31.2
0.81

217



Foils/Ag-grids/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Li–Al
502.0
6.2
48.0
1.48

153



PET/Ag-grids/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al
562.0
6.3
64.7
2.29

159



Glass/Ag-grids/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al
510.0
10.4
36.8
1.96

160



PET/Ag-grids/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Al
620.0
7.0
66.0
2.34

161



Hole transport layer
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Li–Al
595.0
9.6
55.3
3.16

166



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Li–Al
560.0
11.2
44.3
2.64

168



ITO/NiO/P3HT:PCBM/Li–Al
601.0
8.7
50.8
2.60

169



Photoactive layer
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Ag
540.0
8.4
64.0
2.9

5



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Ag
537.0
10.1
64.0
3.5

170



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al
660.0
4.7
46.0
1.40

149



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF–Al
680.0
9.1
62.0
3.8

172



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCPDTBT:PCBM/LiF–Al
670.0
5.3
39.0
1.48

173



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF–Al
628.0
10.7
55.3
3.7

175



Back electrode
ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag
510.0
8.4
45.5
1.96

178



ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/MoO3/Ag NWs
600.0
8.4
54.0
2.71

182



Ag NWs/ZnO/PV2000:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag NWs
760.0
10.7
52.8
4.3

183



All-layers
Glass/PEDOT:PSS/PCDTBT:PCBM/ZnO/Ag
820.0
11.5
54.3
5.07

184



Ag/PEDOT:PSS/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT/Ag-layer
570.0
5.6
52.4
1.70

185



Ag/PEDOT:PSS/ZnO/PV2000:PCBM/PEDOT/Ag-grid
770.0
10.4
51.0
4.10

185



PVSCs
Active layer
FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C
950.0
17.2
71.0
11.6

201



FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
910.0
19.5
69.0
12.3

189



FTO/TiO2/ZrO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C
849.0
15.1
61.1
7.83

204



FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1000.0
18.4
56.0
11.3

206



FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1080.0
22.6
76.2
18.64

208



FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1080.0
22.71
69.6
17.04

209



FTO/WOx/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
744.0
22.1
65.0
10.7

210



Top electrode
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSS Na/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PC61BM/Ag NWs
1040.0
18.2
75.0
14.17

212






4. Conclusion and perspectives
Inkjet printing has exhibited unique advantages in the fabrication of solar cells over conventional vacuum or solution methods. For instance, it does not require any mask or template during printing, this with the absence of material wastage, which allows a considerable reduction cost in terms of device processing and material usage. As a promising method, inkjet printing has attracted increasing attention and has been applied in the fabrication of all kinds of solar cells. Tremendous progress has been made regarding the application of inkjet printing in the fabrication of solar cells, making it a viable deposition technique for both academic research and industrial applications. The technological developments in ink formulation, strategies, and the applications of inkjet printing for different layers of various types of solar cells have been successfully reviewed herein.
In silicon-based solar cells, inkjet printing has been extensively used for the deposition of a single functional layer, including front/back contacts, an assisted layer for achieving a light-trapping texture (inverted pyramid and honeycomb structures), and an emitter layer. The offset of tiled inverted pyramids needs to be a further optimization to allow reaching their light-trapping potential, and it can be achieved by the selection of different droplet displacements during printing. Moreover, a boron-doped emitter in conjunction with an ion-implanted phosphorus BS achieved low-cost and high-efficiency n-type Si solar cells for mass production by using the inkjet-printing technique. The fabrication of anodic aluminum oxide as a rear metal by using inkjet printing is desirable for patterning into an array of holes, and almost has the same performances as cell fabricated by conventional photolithography.
Although there are very few reports available on inkjet-printed chalcogenide (CIGS and CZTSSe)-based solar cells, the PCEs of CIGS solar cells based on inkjet-printed absorbers have reached up to 11%. One of the main reasons for the relatively low PCE is the poor infrared response in the EQE curve, caused by an insufficient light absorption of the thin CIGS absorber layer. A great challenge for further improving the PCE is thus mainly focused on increasing the thickness of the effective absorber layer (large grain layer) through optimizing the printing and post-annealing parameters. Other efforts are focused on band gap grading and introducing alkali element treatment, which is used in vacuum-processed CIGS solar cells. A Cd-free buffer layer of CIGS solar cells has also been realized by inkjet printing, and the device exhibited a comparable PCE to that of CIGS solar cells with CdS buffer. The application of inkjet printing to CZTSSe solar cells mainly focused on printing CZTS absorbers, and achieved a highest PCE of around 6% so far.
In DSSCs, ink developed as binder-free and only incorporating polyethylene glycol (PEG 400) as humectant enabled printing using an inkjet-printing method. However, the printed films had poor adhesion, and therefore further work needs to be done on the optimization of the binders to produce durable films with low-temperature annealing. The inkjet-printed Pt-CE pattern had higher transparency compared to conventional drop-cast samples with the same platinum loading but involved a wastage of some precursor solution in non-active regions of the substrate. With the improvement in the optical properties of CE along with its controlled tuning and the reduction of material costs during electrode fabrication, inkjet printing is a promising candidate for the fabrication of less expensive CEs and bifacial DSSCs.
For other types of solar cells, only one or two layers have been deposited by the inkjet-printing method, but all the layers of OSCs have been fabricated by inkjet printing in air with efficiencies of around 5%. Additionally, a PCE of about 4% has been achieved for ITO-free Christmas tree shaped OSCs with an area of over 1 cm2 based on fully inkjet-printed all-functional layers without any mask, which demonstrates the great advantage of freedom for designing solar cells in a cost-effective way. It also enables more functions of solar cells, such as decorations rather than just as power generation sources, which is interesting for some special applications.
Inkjet printing has also been applied in the fabrication of newly emerging PVSCs. Here, research is mainly focused on the printing of a perovskite active layer via optimizing the perovskite inks. The formation of defect-free uniform films, particularly in the planar structure of PVSCs, is still a challenging issue based on the inkjet-printing method due to the different crystallization kinetics of perovskites when compared to with the spin-coating method. Besides, the formation of a homogeneous perovskite layer with one-step printing is also a challenging task due to the different solubilities of CH3NH3I and PbI2. Therefore, careful solvent engineering of the ink formulation and careful control over the printing conditions are crucial for highly efficient and reproducible PVSCs.
Overall, the biggest challenge for the fabrication of solar cells by using inkjet printing is to formulate an ink with suitable viscosity, wettability, and long-term stability. Solvent engineering is required to screen out a desirable solvent or solvent mixture for a suitable ink formulation due to the differences in solubility. Nozzle clogging is another major hurdle to be overcome for the widespread application of inkjet printing because of the requirement of a narrow nozzle diameter in high-resolution printing. Additionally, plenty of time should be spent on optimization of the inkjet-printing parameters, including the head voltage, droplet spacing, printing resolution, and substrate heating temperature. A great deal of work remains to be done to facilitate the further advancements in inkjet printing for all kinds of solar cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.: 51702375).
References
S. Sinha, D. K. Nandi, S.-H. Kim and J. Heo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 176, 49–68 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press,  2003 Search PubMed .

          G. Boyle, Renewable energy: power for a sustainable future, Oxford University Press in association with the Open University,  1996 Search PubMed .
R. W. Miles, G. Zoppi and I. Forbes, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Hoth, S. A. Choulis, P. Schilinsky and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3973–3978 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 673–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6048–6058 RSC .
D. Tian, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5184–5209 RSC .
M. Kuang, L. Wang and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6950–6958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, B. Bao, M. He, H. Zhou and Y. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28086–28099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, W. Li, M. Qin, H. Zhou, X. Zhang, F. Li and Y. Song, Small, 2017, 13, 1503339 CrossRef PubMed .
P. F. Moonen, I. Yakimets and J. Huskens, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5526–5541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kang, W. H. Lee and K. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2302–2315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Scalisi, M. Paleari, A. Favetto, M. Stoppa, P. Ariano, P. Pandolfi and A. Chiolerio, Org. Electron., 2015, 18, 89–94 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Rim, S.-H. Bae, H. Chen, N. De Marco and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4415–4440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Kim, M. S. Onses, J. B. Lim, S. Nam, N. Oh, H. Kim, K. J. Yu, J. W. Lee, J.-H. Kim, S.-K. Kang, C. H. Lee, J. Lee, J. H. Shin, N. H. Kim, C. Leal, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 969–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9760–9774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kim, S. Jang, M. L. Geier, P. L. Prabhumirashi, M. C. Hersam and A. Dodabalapur, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3683–3687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, Q. Liang, Y. Zhang, H. Chi, Y. Shi and D. Fang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 11925–11934 RSC .
D. Stüwe, D. Mager, D. Biro and J. G. Korvink, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 599–626 CrossRef PubMed .
S. E. Shaheen, R. Radspinner, N. Peyghambarian and G. E. Jabbour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2996–2998 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, M. Biancardo, B. Winther-Jensen, H. Spanggard and J. Alstrup, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1058–1067 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, J. Yuan, S. Shen, M. Gao, A. S. R. Chesman, H. Yin, J. Cheng, Q. Zhang and D. Angmo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703704 CrossRef .
B.-J. de Gans, P. C. Duineveld and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 203–213 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tekin, B.-J. de Gans and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2627–2632 RSC .
O. A. Basaran, H. Gao and P. P. Bhat, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 2013, 45, 85–113 CrossRef .
B. Derby, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2010, 40, 395–414 CrossRef CAS .
B. Derby, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 31, 2543–2550 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wijshoff, Phys. Rep., 2010, 491, 77–177 CrossRef CAS .

          S. D. Hoath, Fundamentals of Inkjet Printing: The Science of Inkjet and Droplets, John Wiley & Sons, Germany,  2016 Search PubMed .
J. Alamán, R. Alicante, J. I. Peña and C. Sánchez-Somolinos, Materials, 2016, 9, 910 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Daly, T. S. Harrington, G. D. Martin and I. M. Hutchings, Int. J. Pharm., 2015, 494, 554–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sumaiya, K. Kardel and A. El-Shahat, Technologies, 2017, 5, 53 CrossRef .
N. Reis, C. Ainsley and B. Derby, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 094903 CrossRef .

          R. G. Sweet, Fluid droplet recorder, US Pat., US3596275A,  1971 .
J. E. Fromm, IBM J. Res. Dev., 1984, 28, 322–333 Search PubMed .
N. Reis and B. Derby, MRS Proc., 2011, 625, 117 CrossRef .

          P. C. Duineveld, M. M. d. Kok, M. Buechel, A. Sempel, K. A. H. Mutsaers, P. v. d. Weijer, I. G. J. Camps, T. v. d. Biggelaar, J.-E. J. M. Rubingh and E. I. Haskal, in International Symposium on Optical Science and Technology, SPIE,  2002, p. 9 Search PubMed .
C. D. Stow, M. G. Hadfield and J. M. Ziman, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser A, 1981, 373, 419–441 CrossRef .
D. Soltman and V. Subramanian, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2224–2231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Holtzman, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Binetti, in 7th IEEE International Conference on Group IV Photonics,  2010, pp. 189–191 Search PubMed .

          P. Mints, in 37th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  2011, pp. 003260–003263 Search PubMed .
N. Asim, K. Sopian, S. Ahmadi, K. Saeedfar, M. A. Alghoul, O. Saadatian and S. H. Zaidi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 5834–5847 CrossRef CAS .
A. Blakers, N. Zin, K. R. McIntosh and K. Fong, Energy Procedia, 2013, 33, 1–10 CrossRef .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
A. Richter, M. Hermle and S. W. Glunz, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 1184–1191 Search PubMed .

          J. Martín, A. Apraiz, J. P. Aguerre and J. C. Jimeno, in 27th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, MesseFrankfurt, Germany,  2012, pp. 1667–1672 Search PubMed .

          A. Mette, G. Emanuel, D. Erath, R. Preu and G. Willeke, in 21st European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Dresden, Germany,  2006, pp. 709–712 Search PubMed .
A. Mette, P. L. Richter, M. Hörteis and S. W. Glunz, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 621–627 CAS .

          M. F. A. M. v. Hest, S. E. Habas, J. M. Underwood, R. M. Pasquarelli, P. Hersh, A. Miedaner, C. J. Curtis and D. S. Ginley, in 35th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  2010, pp. 003626–003628 Search PubMed .
A. Lennon, Y. Yao and S. Wenham, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 1454–1468 Search PubMed .
M. Pospischil, M. Klawitter, M. Kuchler, J. Specht, H. Gentischer, R. Efinger, C. Kroner, M. Luegmair, M. König, M. Hörteis, C. Mohr, L. Wende, J. Lossen, M. Weiß, O. Doll, I. Koehler, R. Zengerle, F. Clement and D. Biro, Energy Procedia, 2013, 43, 111–116 CrossRef .
Y. T. Gizachew, L. Escoubas, J. J. Simon, M. Pasquinelli, J. Loiret, P. Y. Leguen, J. C. Jimeno, J. Martin, A. Apraiz and J. P. Aguerre, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, S70–S82 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong-Youn, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2010, 20, 125003 CrossRef .
K. F. Teng and R. W. Vest, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 1988, 9, 591–593 Search PubMed .

          C. J. Curtis, M. V. Hest, A. Miedaner, T. Kaydanova, L. Smith and D. S. Ginley, in IEEE 4th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conference,  2006, pp. 1392–1394 Search PubMed .

          R. Shankar, K. W. Whites, T. Chen, S. Liker and C. Tamarin, in IEEE Nanotechnology Materials and Devices Conference (NMDC2012),  2012, pp. 25–29 Search PubMed .
J. Robert, F. Marco, E. Markus, S. Jochen, U. Florian, W. Andreas and M. Alexander, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2015, 25, 125021 CrossRef .

          J. Rentsch, J. Ackermann, K. Birmann, H. Furtwängler, J. Haunschild, G. Kästner, R. Neubauer, J. Nievendick, A. Oltersdorf, S. Rein, A. Schütte, M. Zimmer and R. Preu, in 24th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Hamburg, Germany,  2009, pp. 1113–1117 Search PubMed .

          J. Nievendick, M. Demant, J. Haunschild, A. Krieg, F. M. M. Souren, S. Rein, M. Zimmer and J. Rentsch, in 35th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  2010, pp. 000447–000452 Search PubMed .
M. Abbott and J. Cotter, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2006, 14, 225–235 CAS .
S. H. Zaidi, D. S. Ruby and J. M. Gee, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2001, 48, 1200–1206 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Xiong and C. Liu, in 12th International Conference on Electronic Packaging Technology and High Density Packaging,  2011, pp. 205–210 Search PubMed .

          J. Nievendick, J. Specht, M. Zimmer, L. Zahner, W. Glover, D. Stuwe, D. Biro and J. Rentsch, in 26th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Hamburg,
Germany,  2011, pp. 1722–1725 Search PubMed .
J. Nievendick, J. Specht, M. Zimmer, L. Zahner, W. Glover, D. Stüwe and J. Rentsch, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2012, 6, 7–9 CrossRef CAS .
N. Borojevic, A. Lennon and S. Wenham, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Borojevic, A. Ho-Baillie, R. Utama, A. Lennon, M. Lenio, A. Karpour and S. Wenham, in 23rd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Valencia, Spain,  2008, pp. 1829–1832 Search PubMed .
J. Nievendick, M. Stocker, J. Specht, W. Glover, M. Zimmer and J. Rentsch, Energy Procedia, 2012, 27, 385–389 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Utama, A. Lennon, M. Lenio, N. Borojevic, A. Karpour, A. Ho-Baillie and S. Wenham, in 23rd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Valencia, Spain,  2008, pp. 1687–1690 Search PubMed .

          B. S. Tjahjono, J. H. Guo, Z. Hameiri, L. Mai, A. Sugianto, S. Wang and S. R. Wenham, in 22nd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Milan,  2007 Search PubMed .
K. Ryu, A. Upadhyaya, Y. Ok, M. H. Kang, V. Upadhyaya, L. Metin, H. Xu, A. Bhanap and A. Rohatgi, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2012, 33, 854–856 CAS .
S. W. Glunz, S. Rein, J. Y. Lee and W. Warta, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 2397–2404 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cuevas, M. J. Kerr, C. Samundsett, F. Ferrazza and G. Coletti, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 4952–4954 CrossRef CAS .
D. Macdonald and L. J. Geerligs, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 4061–4063 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Kopecek, J. Libal, A. Herguth, K. Peter, I. Röver, K. Wambach and B. Geerligs, in 21st European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Dresden, Germany,  2006, pp. 1264–1267 Search PubMed .
P. Engelhart, N.-P. Harder, R. Grischke, A. Merkle, R. Meyer and R. Brendel, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 237–243 CAS .
A. Knorz, M. Peters, A. Grohe, C. Harmel and R. Preu, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2009, 17, 127–136 CAS .
Z. Hameiri, L. Mai, A. Sproul and S. R. Wenham, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 222111 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, P. Han, H. Lu, H. Qian, L. Chen, Q. Meng, N. Tang, F. Gao, Y. Jiang, J. Wu, W. Wu, H. Zhu, J. Ji, Z. Shi, A. Sugianto, L. Mai, B. Hallam and S. Wenham, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 260–268 CAS .
J. Cui, A. To, Z. Li, J. Rodriguez and A. J. Lennon, Energy Procedia, 2013, 38, 691–700 CrossRef CAS .
K. Masuko, M. Shigematsu, T. Hashiguchi, D. Fujishima, M. Kai, N. Yoshimura, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Ichihashi, T. Mishima, N. Matsubara, T. Yamanishi, T. Takahama, M. Taguchi, E. Maruyama and S. Okamoto, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 1433–1435 Search PubMed .

          Kaneka and Corporation, New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO),  2016.
T. Hideyuki, N. Hiroshi, S. Kimihiko and K. Michio, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 56, 040308 CrossRef .
N. Hiroshi, S. Kimihiko, S. Aiko, K. Tetsuya and K. Michio, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 08KD17 CrossRef .
H. Sai, Y. Kanamori, K. Arafune, Y. Ohshita and M. Yamaguchi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 415–423 Search PubMed .
Solar Frontier Achieves World Record Thin-Film Solar Cell Efficiency of 23.35%, http://www.solar-frontier.com/eng/news/2019/<?pdb_no 0117?>0117<?pdb END?>_press.html.
W. Wang, M. T. Winkler, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301465 CrossRef .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 28–31 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shin, O. Gunawan, Y. Zhu, N. A. Bojarczuk, S. J. Chey and S. Guha, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 72–76 CAS .
G. Brammertz, M. Buffière, Y. Mevel, Y. Ren, A. E. Zaghi, N. Lenaers, Y. Mols, C. Koeble, J. Vleugels, M. Meuris and J. Poortmans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 013902 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Park, H. S. Jeon, J. W. Cho, Y. J. Hwang, K. S. Park, H. S. Shim, J. K. Song, Y. Cho, D.-W. Kim, J. Kim and B. K. Min, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27391–27396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Uhl, J. K. Katahara and H. W. Hillhouse, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 130–134 RSC .
B.-S. Lee, Y. Hwang, H. N. Pham, J. Y. Kim, M. H. Song and D.-K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15889–15896 RSC .
U. Berner, D. Colombara, J. de Wild, E. V. C. Robert, M. Schütze, F. Hergert, N. Valle, M. Widenmeyer and P. J. Dale, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24, 749–759 CAS .
W. Septina, M. Kurihara, S. Ikeda, Y. Nakajima, T. Hirano, Y. Kawasaki, T. Harada and M. Matsumura, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6472–6479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Hossain, M. Wang and K.-L. Choy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22497–22503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Barbé, J. Eid, E. Ahlswede, S. Spiering, M. Powalla, R. Agrawal and S. Del Gobbo, J. Nanoparticle Res., 2016, 18, 379 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, Y. Yang, D. Liu, S. C. Tse, W. Cao, Z. Feng, S. Chen and L. Qian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3674–3681 RSC .
D.-H. Lee, Y.-J. Chang, G. S. Herman and C.-H. Chang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 843–847 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y.-W. Su and C.-h. Chang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2616–2620 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, R. Klenk, L. Wang, T. Köhler, J. Albert, S. Fiechter, A. Ennaoui and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2037–2043 RSC .
X. Lin, J. Kavalakkatt, M. C. Lux-Steiner and A. Ennaoui, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500028 CrossRef PubMed .

          R. Klenk and H. W. Schock, in 12th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Amsterdam,  1994, pp. 1588–1591 Search PubMed .
B. S. Yadav, S. R. Dey and S. R. Dhage, Sol. Energy, 2019, 179, 363–370 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, V. E. Madhavan, J. Kavalakkatt, V. Hinrichs, I. Lauermann, M. C. Lux-Steiner, A. Ennaoui and R. Klenk, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 180, 373–380 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schnabel, M. Löw and E. Ahlswede, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 324–328 CrossRef CAS .
M. Colina, E. Bailo, B. Medina-Rodríguez, R. Kondrotas, Y. Sánchez-González, D. Sylla, M. Placidi, M. Blanes, F. Ramos, A. Cirera, A. Pérez Rodríguez and E. Saucedo, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 735, 2462–2470 CrossRef CAS .

          B. E. McCandless and S. S. Hegedus, in The Conference Record of the Twenty-Second IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference - 1991,  1991, vol. 962, pp. 967–972 Search PubMed .
M. Paire, L. Lombez, J.-F. Guillemoles and D. Lincot, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 034907 CrossRef .
L. Wang, X. Lin, A. Ennaoui, C. Wolf, M. C. Lux-Steiner and R. Klenk, EPJ Photovoltaics, 2016, 7, 70303 CrossRef .
P. A. Hersh, C. J. Curtis, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. J. Kreuder, R. Pasquarelli, A. Miedaner and D. S. Ginley, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 973–976 CAS .
K. Otte, L. Makhova, A. Braun and I. Konovalov, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 613–622 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissörtel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Baxter, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 020801 CrossRef .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Numata and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1443–1464 RSC .
K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Grätzel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 177, 347–414 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Ferreira, D. M. Sampaio, R. Suresh Babu and A. L. F. de Barros, Opt. Mater., 2018, 86, 239–246 CrossRef CAS .
L. Grinis, S. Kotlyar, S. Rühle, J. Grinblat and A. Zaban, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 282–288 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Kim, M. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, G. Lim, Y. S. Choi, N.-G. Park, K. Kim and W. I. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3668–3673 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Lee, C. Charbonneau and G. P. Demopoulos, J. Mater. Res., 2013, 28, 480–487 CrossRef CAS .
P. Calvert, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3299–3305 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cherrington, D. J. Hughes, S. Senthilarasu and V. Goodship, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 866–870 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Drev, M. Hočevar, M. Berginc, M. J. Fir, U. O. Krašovec and M. Topič, in 25th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition/5th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, Valencia, Spain,  2010, pp. 794–797 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Hagen, W. Schaffrath, P. Otschik and D. Haarer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1999, 56, 167–174 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cojocaru, C. Olivier, T. Toupance, E. Sellier and L. Hirsch, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13789–13799 RSC .
I. Bernacka-Wojcik, R. Senadeera, P. J. Wojcik, L. B. Silva, G. Doria, P. Baptista, H. Aguas, E. Fortunato and R. Martins, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1229–1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Papageorgiou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1421–1446 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hashmi, K. Miettunen, J. Halme, I. Asghar, H. Vahlman, T. Saukkonen, H. J. Zhu and P. Lund, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, H656–H661 CrossRef CAS .
G. Calogero, P. Calandra, A. Irrera, A. Sinopoli, I. Citro and G. Di Marco, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1838–1844 RSC .
M. Özkan, S. G. Hashmi, J. Halme, A. Karakoç, T. Sarikka, J. Paltakari and P. D. Lund, Org. Electron., 2017, 44, 159–167 CrossRef .
S. G. Hashmi, M. Ozkan, J. Halme, J. Paltakari and P. D. Lund, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 212–220 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, P. Liska, P. Comte, R. Charvet, P. Péchy, U. Bach, L. Schmidt-Mende, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Kay, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4351–4353 RSC .
S. G. Hashmi, M. Ozkan, J. Halme, K. D. Misic, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Paltakari, M. Grätzel and P. D. Lund, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 206–215 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Turak, T. Aytun and C. W. Ow-Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 253303 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
A. Facchetti, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 733–758 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, X. Wan, Y. Liu, Y. Zuo, Z. Li, G. He, G. Long, W. Ni, C. Li, X. Su and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16345–16351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mens, F. Demir, G. Van Assche, B. Van Mele, D. Vanderzande and P. Adriaensens, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 1037–1041 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Kang, Y.-J. Kang, S. Jung, M. Song, D.-G. Kim, C. Su Kim and S. H. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 103, 76–79 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Amb, M. R. Craig, U. Koldemir, J. Subbiah, K. R. Choudhury, S. A. Gevorgyan, M. Jørgensen, F. C. Krebs, F. So and J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1847–1853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, E. Zhou, S. Miyanishi, K. Hashimoto and K. Tajima, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4053–4058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, Z. Chen, A. Armin, S. Dong, R. Xia, H.-L. Yip, S. Shoaee, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700169 CrossRef .
S. Dong, K. Zhang, X. Liu, Q. Yin, H.-L. Yip, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aernouts, T. Aleksandrov, C. Girotto, J. Genoe and J. Poortmans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 033306 CrossRef .
W. M. Cranton, S. L. Wilson, R. Ranson, D. C. Koutsogeorgis, K. Chi, R. Hedgley, J. Scott, S. Lipiec, A. Spiller and S. Speakman, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 8534–8538 CrossRef CAS .
J.-A. Jeong, J. Lee, H. Kim, H.-K. Kim and S.-I. Na, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1840–1844 CrossRef CAS .
H.-K. Kim, I.-K. You, J. B. Koo and S.-H. Kim, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 211, 33–36 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Galagan, E. W. C. Coenen, S. Sabik, H. H. Gorter, M. Barink, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, R. Andriessen and P. W. M. Blom, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 104, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
N. Espinosa, R. García-Valverde, A. Urbina and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1293–1302 CrossRef CAS .
N. Espinosa, R. García-Valverde, A. Urbina, F. Lenzmann, M. Manceau, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 3–13 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ahlswede, W. Mühleisen, M. W. b. M. Wahi, J. Hanisch and M. Powalla, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 143307 CrossRef .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, J. Zou and A. K. Y. Jen, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1401–1407 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aernouts, P. Vanlaeke, W. Geens, J. Poortmans, P. Heremans, S. Borghs, R. Mertens, R. Andriessen and L. Leenders, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 22–25 CrossRef CAS .
N. Seok-In, P. Dong-Won, K. Seok-Soon, Y. Shi-Young, L. Kwanghee and L. Myong-Hoon, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2012, 27, 125002 CrossRef .
M. Neophytou, F. Hermerschmidt, A. Savva, E. Georgiou and S. A. Choulis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 193302 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Huang, F.-H. Hsu, H.-C. Cha, C.-M. Chuang, C.-S. Tsao and C.-Y. Chen, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 2809–2817 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Galagan, E. W. C. Coenen, R. Abbel, T. J. van Lammeren, S. Sabik, M. Barink, E. R. Meinders, R. Andriessen and P. W. M. Blom, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 38–46 CrossRef CAS .
G. Heywang and F. Jonas, Adv. Mater., 1992, 4, 116–118 CrossRef CAS .
S. Garreau, G. Louam, S. Lefrant, J. P. Buisson and G. Froyer, Synth. Met., 1999, 101, 312–313 CrossRef CAS .
L. Groenendaal, F. Jonas, D. Freitag, H. Pielartzik and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 481–494 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Eom, S. Senthilarasu, P. Uthirakumar, S. C. Yoon, J. Lim, C. Lee, H. S. Lim, J. Lee and S.-H. Lee, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 536–542 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Steirer, J. J. Berry, M. O. Reese, M. F. A. M. van Hest, A. Miedaner, M. W. Liberatore, R. T. Collins and D. S. Ginley, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2781–2786 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh, M. Katiyar and A. Garg, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 78677–78685 RSC .
A. Singh, S. K. Gupta and A. Garg, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1775 CrossRef PubMed .
C. N. Hoth, P. Schilinsky, S. A. Choulis and C. J. Brabec, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2806–2813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Hoth, S. A. Choulis, P. Schilinsky and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5398–5404 RSC .
J. Jaewook, K. Donghwan, L. Jongsun, L. Changjin and Y. Sung Cheol, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 05EB03 Search PubMed .
A. Teichler, R. Eckardt, S. Hoeppener, C. Friebe, J. Perelaer, A. Senes, M. Morana, C. J. Brabec and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 105–114 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hermerschmidt, P. Papagiorgis, A. Savva, C. Christodoulou, G. Itskos and S. A. Choulis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 130, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Eom, H. Park, S. H. Mujawar, S. C. Yoon, S.-S. Kim, S.-I. Na, S.-J. Kang, D. Khim, D.-Y. Kim and S.-H. Lee, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1516–1522 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Lamont, T. M. Eggenhuisen, M. J. J. Coenen, T. W. L. Slaats, R. Andriessen and P. Groen, Org. Electron., 2015, 17, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 761–768 CrossRef CAS .
D. Angmo, J. Sweelssen, R. Andriessen, Y. Galagan and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1230–1237 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, R. Søndergaard and M. Jørgensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1348–1353 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Eom, S. Senthilarasu, P. Uthirakumar, C.-H. Hong, Y.-S. Lee, J. Lim, S. C. Yoon, C. Lee and S.-H. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 564–570 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Galagan, S. Shanmugam, J. P. Teunissen, T. M. Eggenhuisen, A. F. K. V. Biezemans, T. Van Gijseghem, W. A. Groen and R. Andriessen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 130, 163–169 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, J. Lin, N. Wu, S. Nie, Q. Luo, C.-Q. Ma and Z. Cui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 093302 CrossRef .
P. Maisch, K. C. Tam, L. Lucera, H.-J. Egelhaaf, H. Scheiber, E. Maier and C. J. Brabec, Org. Electron., 2016, 38, 139–143 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung, A. Sou, K. Banger, D.-H. Ko, P. C. Y. Chow, C. R. McNeill and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400432 CrossRef .
T. M. Eggenhuisen, Y. Galagan, A. F. K. V. Biezemans, T. M. W. L. Slaats, W. P. Voorthuijzen, S. Kommeren, S. Shanmugam, J. P. Teunissen, A. Hadipour, W. J. H. Verhees, S. C. Veenstra, M. J. J. Coenen, J. Gilot, R. Andriessen and W. A. Groen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7255–7262 RSC .
M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Science, 2015, 350, 917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. Il Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
S.-G. Li, K.-J. Jiang, M.-J. Su, X.-P. Cui, J.-H. Huang, Q.-Q. Zhang, X.-Q. Zhou, L.-M. Yang and Y.-L. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9092–9097 RSC .
M. Bag, Z. Jiang, L. A. Renna, S. P. Jeong, V. M. Rotello and D. Venkataraman, Mater. Lett., 2016, 164, 472–475 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 8, 133 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619–2623 RSC .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Chen, H.-W. Kang, S.-Y. Hsiao, P.-F. Yang, K.-M. Chiang and H.-W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6647–6652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Barrows, A. J. Pearson, C. K. Kwak, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2944–2950 RSC .
J.-W. Lee, S.-I. Na and S.-S. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2017, 339, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, E. Peng, Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1544–1550 RSC .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13239–13243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Z. Jiang, M. Bag, L. A. Renna, S. P. Jeong, V. M. Rotello and D. Venkataraman,  2016, https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01386295.

          T. Makris, A. Mourtzikou, A. Rapsomanikis and E. Stathatos, Inkjet Printable Processes for Dye Sensitized and Perovskite Solar Cells and Modules Based on Advanced Nanocomposite Materials,  2017, pp. 363–381 Search PubMed .
S. G. Hashmi, D. Martineau, X. Li, M. Ozkan, A. Tiihonen, M. I. Dar, T. Sarikka, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Paltakari, P. D. Lund and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1600183 CrossRef .
S. G. Hashmi, A. Tiihonen, D. Martineau, M. Ozkan, P. Vivo, K. Kaunisto, V. Ulla, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4797–4802 RSC .
F. Mathies, T. Abzieher, A. Hochstuhl, K. Glaser, A. Colsmann, U. W. Paetzold, G. Hernandez-Sosa, U. Lemmer and A. Quintilla, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 19207–19213 RSC .
F. Mathies, H. Eggers, B. S. Richards, G. Hernandez-Sosa, U. Lemmer and U. W. Paetzold, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1834–1839 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, C. Liang, B. Bao, Y. Li, X. Hu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, F. Li, G. Shao and Y. Song, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, P. Li, H. Gu, Y. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Song, G. Shao, N. Mathews and G. Xing, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700217 CrossRef .
A. Gheno, Y. Huang, J. Bouclé, B. Ratier, A. Rolland, J. Even and S. Vedraine, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800191 CrossRef .

          A. Huckaba, Y. Lee, R. Xia, S. Paek, V. C. Bassetto, E. Oveisi, A. Lesch, S. Kinge, P. J. Dyson, H. Girault and M. K. Nazeeruddina,  2018,  DOI:10.26434/chemrxiv.7127066.
M. Xie, H. Lu, L. Zhang, J. Wang, Q. Luo, J. Lin, L. Ba, H. Liu, W. Shen, L. Shi and C.-Q. Ma, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700184 CrossRef .

          D. Stüwe, R. Keding, A. Salim, M. Jahn, R. Efinger, F. Clement, B. Thaidigsmann, J. G. Korvink, C. Tueshaus, S. Barth, O. Doll and D. Biro, in 29th European PV Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Amsterdam (NL),  2014 Search PubMed .
Y. Oh, S.-N. Lee, H.-K. Kim and J. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, H777–H781 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brisse, R. Faddoul, T. Bourgeteau, D. Tondelier, J. Leroy, S. Campidelli, T. Berthelot, B. Geffroy and B. Jousselme, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2369–2377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dodoo-Arhin, R. C. T. Howe, G. Hu, Y. Zhang, P. Hiralal, A. Bello, G. Amaratunga and T. Hasan, Carbon, 2016, 105, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S.-I. Na and H.-K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 424–432 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams for the two main inkjet-printing methods: (a) continuous inkjet printing (CIJ), (b) drop-on-demand (DOD) inkjet printing.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 2  Common device structures for: (a) silicon solar cell, (b) chalcogenide-based thin film solar cell, (c) dye-sensitized solar cell, (d) organic solar cell, and (e) perovskite solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 3  Thickness view of inkjet-printed silver lines on a textured wafer by using SEM for: (a) solvent-based ink (drop volume, 30 pl), (b) water-based ink (drop volume, 3 pl). Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2012, EUPVSEC.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM micrographs of inkjet-fabricated tiled inverted pyramids viewed from: (a) top, (b) at an angle; (c) v-grooves showing grooves on both sides and (d) under lower magnification. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of a selective emitter solar cell structure fabricated using inkjet printing (not to scale); (b) SEM image of inkjet-patterned lines on a textured Si wafer; (c) J–V curve and cell parameters of the best initial inkjet selective emitter solar cell as measured in-house under 1-sun illumination at 25 °C; (d) comparison of the local ideality factor curve of an inkjet-processed cell with a laser-doped cell. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2008, EUPVSEC.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) J–V curves and (b) EQE spectra for IBC-SHJ cells with different thicknesses. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2017, Institute of Physics, Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Process sequence for the fabrication of CIGS solar cells; (b) top view of real devices; (c) cross-sectional view of SEM image of a CIGS full device; (d) J–V characteristic curves of a CIGS solar cell. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (e) Formation procedures of CIGS thin films in four steps; (f) photograph of molecular Cu–In–Ga ink; (g) contact angle between the molecular ink and Mo-coated glass substrate; (h) cross-sectional SEM image of a solar cell with an annealed CIGSSe thin film; (i) J–V curves of a CIGSSe solar cell with 11.3% efficiency. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Cross-sectional SEM images of an annealed CZTSSe device with NaF: (a) 0 M showed a multi-layered structure; (b) 0.036 M showed a double-layer structure; (c) J–V characteristics and (d) EQE spectra for 0.072 M, 0.144 M, and 0.288 M CZTSSe solar cells. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Comparison of dark and illuminated J–V characteristics; (b) EQEs of three of the best solar cells buffered with standard CdS, spin-coated In2S3, and inkjet-printed In2S3. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2016, EPJ Photovoltaics. (c) Microscopic image of 80 μm inkjet-printed Ag lines on AZO; (d) J–V curves for a device with inkjet-printed Ag contacts and a device with evaporated Ni/Al contacts without any heat treatment. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication of a DSSC with an inkjet-printed TiO2 layer by using the doctor-blade technique. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (b) J–V characteristics of DSSCs assembled with TiO2 layers. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2010, EUPVSEC.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Pt-patterned FTO-glass surface by the inkjet printing of 20 mM of a solution without any mask; (b) SEM image of the platinum catalyst on the FTO-glass surface by using inkjet printing; (c) J–V curves of DSSCs with inkjet-printed and drop-casted CEs. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Device designs and fabrication sequences of a hole-free DSSC: (1) FTO-glass substrate cleaning, (2) sequential TiCl4 treatments, screen-printing, and sintering of nanocrystals and scattering of TiO2 particles, and dye sensitization, (3) thermal platinization on FTO-glass as a counter electrode, (4) inkjet printing of Z988-EL over sensitized photoelectrodes, (5) placement of Surlynspacer foil over the photoelectrode, (6) photoelectrode and counter electrode fusing at 130–135 °C; (b) front view of the hole-free DSSC with a printed electrolyte layer in which the electrolyte does not spread substantially around the electrode area (8 × 5 mm2) during the cell sealing process; (c) J–V curves of the best performing initial and 1120 h-aged DSSCs measured under 1 sunlight intensity. The active area of the cells was 0.17 cm2 defined by the aperture area of the black tape mask. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Typical cross-sectional profiles of inkjet-printed Ag lines after thermal and flash sintering on a glass substrate; (b) layout of OSCs; (c) the calculated electric potential field for current collecting grids by thermal sintering for about 10, 30, and 360 min at 360 °C as well as flash sintering for about 5 s. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of fabricated OSCs with NiO as an HTL by using inkjet printing; (b) geometry of an electrode with dotted squares, which represent the device area (3 × 3 mm2) and a glass substrate size of 1.0 inch2; (c) schematic energy band diagram of the device with NiO as an HTL and P3HT:PC60BM as an active layer; (d) J–V characteristics of P3HT:PC60BM organic solar cell devices fabricated with printed and spin-coated NiO films and heat treated at 400 °C (with and without UV–ozone treatment). Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2017, Nature.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Device structure of the solar cell (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM blend/Ca/Ag); (b) chemical structure of P3HT:PCBM; (c) J–V characteristics of different regioregular P3HT:PCBM devices based on tetralene (open symbols) or o-DCB/mesitylene (closed symbols) for inkjet-printed devices under AM 1.5 illumination with 100 mW cm−2; (d) atomic force microscopy images of 93%, 96%, and 98% regioregular P3HT:PCBM blend films deposited by inkjet printing from o-DCB/mesitylene. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram of semi-transparent OSCs with Ag NW electrodes by inkjet printing; (b) specular transmittance of an encapsulated device (inset: photograph of a metal-grids-free semitransparent inkjet-printed cell); (c) cross-sectional SEM image of the device structure: glass/AgNW:ZnO/PV2000:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/AgNW (from bottom to top); (d) EQE of the device and (e) J–V characteristics of the cell during illumination by a sun simulator through a mask of 1 cm2 area (inset: J–V characteristics measured in the dark). Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  All inkjet-printed solar cells: (a–c) schematic representations of layers in a fully inkjet-printed OSC; (d) photograph of semitransparent all inkjet-printed cells. J–V curves of cells recorded under 1000 W cm−2 AM 1.5G for: (e) a P3HT:PCBM photo-active layer and multiple printed layers; (f) 0.038 cm2 active area and evaporated back electrode with inkjet-printed PV2000 photo-active layers and (g) 1 cm2 active area and up to 6 inkjet-printed layers. Organic solar cell with the shape of a Christmas tree. (h) Schematic representation of a printed layers layout; (i) photograph of a fully finished inkjet-printed OPV Christmas tree; (j) J–V curve recorded for a single device with a Christmas tree shape. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of PVSC fabrication by using inkjet printing; (b) the optical images of a spotted array, linear arrangement, and thin film by inkjet printing; (c) device structure of a perovskite solar cell; (d) cross-sectional SEM of a complete photovoltaic device; (e) current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of inkjet-printing- and spin-coating-based PSCs; (f) J–V curve and incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra (inset) of the best PSC with inkjet printing. Reproduced with permission.208 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

Silicon solar cells	Front metal grid	Commercial Si-wafer	610.0	33.3	76.9	15.6	
59

Emitter	Commercial Czochralski Si wafer	604.8	33.2	79.9	16.4	
70

n-Type Czochralski Si wafer	644.0	38.6	76.4	19.0	
72

BC-BJ Si solar cells	654.0	41.5	76.0	20.6	
213

Back or rear contact	IBC-SHJ solar cells	663.0	33.8	70.5	15.8	
84

Semiconducting TFSCs	Absorber layer	Glass/Mo/CIGS/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Ag	386.0	29.8	44.0	5.04	
102

Glass/Mo/CIGS NPs/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Ag	501.0	23.9	54.0	6.5	
99

Glass/Mo/CIGS/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Ag	541.0	31.1	67.0	11.3	
103

Glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Ni–Al	431.0	34.6	42.8	6.4	
107

Buffer layer	Glass/Mo/CIGS/In2S3/i-ZnO/AZO/Ni–Al	491.0	39.2	66.0	12.8	
112

Front contact	Glass/Mo/CIGS/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Ag	612.0	28.8	64.3	11.4	
113

DSSCs	Photoelectrode	FTO/TiO2/dyes/Pt/FTO	700.0	9.5	50.7	4.1	
127

FTO/UV-assisted TiO2/dyes/Pt/FTO	690.0	13.1	64.0	5.72	
214

FTO/UV-assisted TiO2/dyes/Pt/FTO	760.0	9.4	49.0	3.5	
126

FTO/NiO/dyes/Pt/FTO	99.0	3.4	36.7	0.13	
215

Counter electrode	FTO/TiO2/dyes/Pt/FTO	697.0	15.0	65.0	6.7	
134

FTO/TiO2/dyes/graphene/FTO	640.0	7.4	62.0	3.0	
216

Electrolyte	FTO/TiO2/dyes/Pt/FTO/electrolyte solution	677.0	15.3	74.0	7.7	
137

OSCs	Front electrode	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Al	570.0	8.5	44.0	2.13	
151

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Al	474.0	8.1	47.5	1.8	
152

IZTO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Al	450.0	5.7	31.2	0.81	
217

Foils/Ag-grids/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Li–Al	502.0	6.2	48.0	1.48	
153

PET/Ag-grids/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al	562.0	6.3	64.7	2.29	
159

Glass/Ag-grids/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al	510.0	10.4	36.8	1.96	
160

PET/Ag-grids/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Al	620.0	7.0	66.0	2.34	
161

Hole transport layer	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Li–Al	595.0	9.6	55.3	3.16	
166

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Li–Al	560.0	11.2	44.3	2.64	
168

ITO/NiO/P3HT:PCBM/Li–Al	601.0	8.7	50.8	2.60	
169

Photoactive layer	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Ag	540.0	8.4	64.0	2.9	
5

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca–Ag	537.0	10.1	64.0	3.5	
170

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al	660.0	4.7	46.0	1.40	
149

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF–Al	680.0	9.1	62.0	3.8	
172

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCPDTBT:PCBM/LiF–Al	670.0	5.3	39.0	1.48	
173

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF–Al	628.0	10.7	55.3	3.7	
175

Back electrode	ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag	510.0	8.4	45.5	1.96	
178

ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/MoO3/Ag NWs	600.0	8.4	54.0	2.71	
182

Ag NWs/ZnO/PV2000:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag NWs	760.0	10.7	52.8	4.3	
183

All-layers	Glass/PEDOT:PSS/PCDTBT:PCBM/ZnO/Ag	820.0	11.5	54.3	5.07	
184

Ag/PEDOT:PSS/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT/Ag-layer	570.0	5.6	52.4	1.70	
185

Ag/PEDOT:PSS/ZnO/PV2000:PCBM/PEDOT/Ag-grid	770.0	10.4	51.0	4.10	
185

PVSCs	Active layer	FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C	950.0	17.2	71.0	11.6	
201

FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	910.0	19.5	69.0	12.3	
189

FTO/TiO2/ZrO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C	849.0	15.1	61.1	7.83	
204

FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1000.0	18.4	56.0	11.3	
206

FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1080.0	22.6	76.2	18.64	
208

FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1080.0	22.71	69.6	17.04	
209

FTO/WOx/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	744.0	22.1	65.0	10.7	
210

Top electrode	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSS Na/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PC61BM/Ag NWs	1040.0	18.2	75.0	14.17	
212


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
