Toward sustainable and systematic recycling of spent rechargeable batteries  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00297E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00297E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7239-7302Toward sustainable and systematic recycling of spent rechargeable batteries

        
          
            Xiaoxiao 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Li†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Ersha 
            Fan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Xue
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yifan 
            Bian
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Wu
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Renjie 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *ab
aBeijing Key Laboratory of Environmental Science and Engineering, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China. E-mail: chenrj@bit.edu.cn
bCollaborative Innovation Center of Electric Vehicles in Beijing, Beijing 100081, China
Received 
      12th June 2018
    First published on 20th August 2018AbstractEver-growing global energy needs and environmental damage have motivated the pursuit of sustainable energy sources and storage technologies. As attractive energy storage technologies to integrate renewable resources and electric transportation, rechargeable batteries, including lead–acid, nickel–metal hydride, nickel–cadmium, and lithium-ion batteries, are undergoing unprecedented rapid development. However, the intrinsic toxicity of rechargeable batteries arising from their use of toxic materials is potentially environmentally hazardous. Additionally, the massive production of batteries consumes numerous resources, some of which are scarce. It is therefore essential to consider battery recycling when developing battery systems. Here, we provide a systematic overview of rechargeable battery recycling from a sustainable perspective. We present state-of-the-art fundamental research and industrial technologies related to battery recycling, with a special focus on lithium-ion battery recycling. We introduce the concept of sustainability through a discussion of the life-cycle assessment of battery recycling. Considering the forecasted trend of a massive number of retired power batteries from the forecasted surge in electric vehicles, their repurposing and reuse are considered from economic, technical, environmental, and market perspectives. New opportunities, challenges, and future prospects for battery recycling are then summarized. A reinterpreted 3R strategy entailing redesign, reuse, and recycling is recommended for the future development of battery recycling.
Xiaoxiao Zhang
Dr Xiaoxiao Zhang completed her PhD under the supervision of Prof. Feng Wu at Beijing Institute of Technology in 2016 with her research majoring on the recycling of spent Li-ion batteries. Her research interests mainly focus on the recycling of spent rechargeable batteries and electrochemical energy storage and conversion technologies, with a main focus on Li-ion and Li–O2 batteries.
Li Li
Prof. Li Li has been working at Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT) since 2004 after graduation. Her research interests are electrochemical energy storage & conversion technology and recycling technique & life-cycle analysis for spent secondary batteries. As the principal investigator, Pro. Li successfully hosted the National Key Program for Basic Research of China, National High Tech 863 project, National Natural Science Foundation. She has authored/co-authored over 80 research papers and filed 20 patents and patent applications in China.
Ersha Fan
Ersha Fan is currently a PhD candidate at Beijing Institute of Technology. Her research interests focus on the recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and the synthesis of electrode materials for LIBs.
Qing Xue
Qing Xue is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Feng Wu at Beijing Institute of Technology, China. Her research interests are electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and potassium-ion batteries (PIBs), and the recycling of spent LIBs.
Yifan Bian
Yifan Bian received her master's degree in environmental engineering from Beijing Institute of Technology in 2017. Her research interests mainly focus on the recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and the synthesis of electrode materials for LIBs.
Feng Wu
Prof. Feng Wu is an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering, director of Green Energy Research Institute, and vice president of the China Battery Industry Association. His research interests are new electrode materials and electrolytes for green secondary batteries. As the chief scientist, he has hosted the National Key Program for Basic Research of China (973 projects) “Basic Research on New Rechargeable Batteries and Related Materials” since 2002. He has published over 500 papers and been awarded 45 patents. In 2012, he was awarded the IBA Research Award for outstanding research into battery material and systems for electric vehicles.
Renjie Chen
Renjie Chen is a professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT). His research focuses on electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology. He was a post-doctoral fellow at the Department of Chemistry at Tsinghua University and a visiting professor at the Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy at the University of Cambridge. As the principal investigator, Prof. Chen successfully hosted the National Key Research and Development Program of China, National Natural Science Foundation of China, and National High Tech. 863 project. He has (co-)authored 151 research papers and filed 47 patents and patent applications.
1. Introduction
Modern society faces both energy and environmental issues that can strongly affect human life and social development.1,2 The world energy consumption in 2017 was 586 quadrillion British thermal units (Btu, 1 quadrillion Btu = 293 TW h), of which renewable energy accounted for 13% (Fig. 1a). It is projected that the total world energy consumption will increase to 663 quadrillion Btu by 2030 and then to 736 quadrillion Btu by 2040.3 Although fossil fuels dominate the world's energy consumption now and will continue to do so in the near future, renewable energy is the fastest growing form of energy converted into electricity for use, and is predicted to rise from 78 to almost 130 quadrillion Btu over the period from 2017 to 2040.3 Among nonhydroelectric renewable energy sources, wind and solar are forecast to grow the most, reaching 2.5 and 1.4 trillion kW h in 2040, respectively (Fig. 1b and c).3 However, the use and development of renewable energy has two challenges from the perspectives of time and space. Namely, the generation of renewable energy is inherently intermittent, and has strong regional characteristics; that is, such power plants are typically built in remote areas. Therefore, advanced energy storage technologies are desperately needed to maximize the use of renewable energy.
 Fig. 1  (a) World energy consumption by source in 2017; percent share of renewable energy by source in 2017 (b) and 2040 (c), (a–c) reproduced from ref. 3 with permission from U.S. Energy Information Administration, Copyright 2017. (d) CO2, CO2-equivalent concentration, and AGGI from 1979 to the present (equivalent CO2 atmospheric amounts are derived with the relationship between CO2 concentrations and radiative forcing from all long-lived GHGs), reproduced from ref. 4 and 5 with permission from National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration, Copyright 2018. 
In the last few decades, the greenhouse effect has become the largest environmental issue facing the international community.1,2 According to the data collected by the National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration, the atmospheric abundance of carbon dioxide (CO2) has increased by 1.81 ppm per year on average over the period from 1979 to 2017, and this increase has been accelerating in recent years (Fig. 1d).4 The recent global CO2 abundance in May 2018 was 411.25 ppm, which was an increase by 1.6 ppm compared with the value measured in May 2017 (409.65 ppm).5 The Annual Greenhouse Gas Index (AGGI) is defined as the ratio of the total direct radiative forcing due to long-lived greenhouse gases (GHGs) for any year to that which was present in 1990, such that the AGGI of 1.41 in 2017 indicated an increase in total direct radiative forcing of 41% since 1990. Among the CO2 emission sectors, transportation has been the leading source of CO2 emission since 2000. It has been proved that electrified transportation using electricity generated from renewable energy has a great potential to lower GHG emissions.6 Thus, much effort has been expended to develop electric vehicles (EVs) and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs).
Because of their desirable features of flexible energy and power density, high energy efficiency, simple operation, and environmental friendliness, rechargeable batteries [e.g., lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), and lead (Pb)–acid, nickel–metal hydride (Ni–MH), and nickel–cadmium (Ni–Cd) batteries] are important for applications in electrified transportation and large-scale electricity grid energy storage.7–10 The total global battery market size is forecast to reach over $100 billion in 2025 with a compound annual growth rate of 10% between 2010 and 2025.11 Among the four types of rechargeable batteries currently available, Pb–acid batteries have the largest market share.12 The low cost and reliable performance of Pb–acid batteries are anticipated to drive their further growth in the future.
As the most popular technology for energy storage in applications ranging from consumer electronics to EV and grids, it is expected that the LIB global market will be worth over $32 billion by 2020, with it enjoying the highest growth rate of all rechargeable battery types (>10%).13 Energy storage systems (ESSs) and EVs are predicted to constitute more than 80% of the LIB market. In particular, according to the statistics, the global electric car (including EVs and PHEVs) stock surpassed two million in 2016 and three million in 2017.14,15 This high annual growth rate is influenced by the booming Chinese electric car market, with the USA following it (Fig. 2a and b).15 This number is projected to range between nine million and 20 million by 2020 and between 40 million and 70 million by 2025.14 Such huge demand for LIBs will bring about a corresponding large number of spent LIBs.16 Driven by the booming EV industry, the quantities of retired LIB packs will exponentially increase by 2050 (Fig. 2c). Optimistic, middle, and pessimistic results have been estimated from different data sources.17 In 2035, the forecast number of available end-of-life (EOL) vehicle batteries ranges from a pessimistic value of 1.38 million to an optimistic value of 6.76 million.
 Fig. 2  (a) Evolution of the global electric car (EV and PHEV) stock by country from 2010 to 2017; (b) new registrations of electric cars (EV and PHEV) by country from 2010 to 2017. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 14 and 15 with permission from International Energy Agency, Copyright 2017. (c) Optimistic view based on IEA (International Energy Agency), middle view based on industrial forecasts, and pessimistic view based on EIA (Energy Information Administration) of the number of total demand and available EOL LIBs. (Pessimistic view forecast of the EIA ends at 2035 and no growth was assumed after 2035.) Reproduced with permission from ref. 17 Copyright 2014. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. (d) Average prices of main metals in rechargeable batteries from 2010 to May 2018. (e) Evolution of average prices of Co during 2017. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 21 and 22 with permission from London Metal Exchange and InfoMine. Copyright 2018. 
Spent rechargeable batteries contain heavy metal elements, including nickel (Ni), cobalt (Co), and Pb, which are hazardous to human health and the environment if disposed of inappropriately.18–20 It is important to note that Ni, Co, and Pb are all classified as carcinogenic and mutagenic materials.18 In addition to heavy metals, the organic and strong acid/alkaline electrolytes of rechargeable batteries are also polluting. Co is considered strategically important because it is widely used in industry and by the military.18 Thus, it is the most valuable element among the main heavy metals used in rechargeable batteries and its price has increased markedly since 2016, with an average price of $55496 ton−1 in 2017.21,22 The latest average price of Co in May 2018 was $89940 ton−1, the maximum value by far. As an essential raw material for the synthesis of cathode materials of LIBs, the price of battery-grade lithium carbonate (Li2CO3) has nearly tripled over the last decade, reaching as high as $25100 ton−1 in China.23 The high content of Li in spent LIBs (2–7 wt%) can be considered as a Li resource. As calculated by Tarascon et al.,2 one ton of Li can be extracted from 28 tons of spent LIBs, which compares favorably with the consumption of conventional Li resources, like 250 tons of mineral or 750 tons of brine per ton of Li. Therefore, the recycling of spent rechargeable batteries is highly desirable and beneficial from both economic and environmental perspectives. Great effort has been made over the past decades to investigate the recycling of spent batteries using processes with high recovery efficiency, simple operation, low cost, and pollution-free features.24–33 However, with the continuous development of battery materials and technologies, as well as changes in the battery application market, the recycling of spent batteries is also facing new challenges.34–37
In this Review, we first briefly introduce the structure and composition of the four most common types of rechargeable batteries. Guided by the conventional recycling processes of the most widely used LIBs, the representative and latest technologies developed in the last two decades to recycle different components are discussed in detail. Having identified the similarities and differences between the recycling of Pb–acid batteries, Ni-based batteries, and LIBs, the latest research progress in the recycling of Pb–acid and Ni-based batteries is also discussed. The economic assessment of typical technologies runs through the discussion of the recycling processes. A summary of the existing battery recycling enterprises is presented, and the features of recycling technologies are highlighted for each enterprise. We then discuss the urgent need to assess the overall sustainability of certain battery recycling technology with the help of life-cycle assessment (LCA). As a future development trend, the concept of the second use of retired EV batteries is introduced, and its feasibility is analyzed from economic, technical, environmental, and market perspectives. The laws and regulations regarding battery recycling in the EU, USA, and China are briefly summarized. Finally, the future challenges and opportunities for battery recycling are considered.
2. Structure and composition of rechargeable batteries
Regardless of their chemistry, the four main types of rechargeable batteries share a similar structure and energy storage mechanism involving charge transfer reactions within the electrode materials, as illustrated in Fig. 3.38 The only difference between the batteries lies in their material composition and thus their electrochemical parameters.8 An LIB is a type of rechargeable battery in which lithium ions (Li+) move from the cathode to the anode during charging, and vice versa when discharging. Intercalated compounds are used as electrode materials in LIBs; usually lithium metal oxides, including LiCoO2 (LCO), LiNixCoyMnzO2 (NCM, x + y + z = 1), LiNixCoyAlzO2 (NCA, x + y + z = 1), LiMn2O4 (LMO), and lithium iron phosphate LiFePO4 (LFP) are as cathodes and graphite carbon materials as anodes.39–41 The electrolyte, which allows Li+ to move through the separator, is composed of soluble lithium salt and non-aqueous organic solvents.42,43 It should be noted that the choice and weight percent of electrode materials in LIBs vary considerably because of the different compositions needed to meet the demands of high energy density or high power density.8
 Fig. 3  Structure and composition of four types of rechargeable batteries and the importance of recycling. 
Pb–acid batteries have been used as energy storage devices for more than a century since they were first invented in 1859 by Planté.39 Pb–acid batteries still remain the main choice for automotive starting, lighting, and ignition applications because of their low cost and robust performance.13 Pb–acid batteries are composed of a lead dioxide (PbO2) cathode, sponge metallic Pb anode, fiberglass mat separator, and sulfuric acid (H2SO4) solution electrolyte. All of these components are contained in a case that is typically made of polypropylene. During discharge, the PbO2 cathode is reduced to lead sulfate (PbSO4), while the Pb anode is oxidized to PbSO4. During charging, the two reactions take place in the opposite direction. The specific energy of a Pb–acid battery is about 30 W h kg−1 with a nominal cell voltage of 2 V.10 PbSO4 is the main component in a spent Pb–acid battery paste, accounting for nearly 50% by weight. Lead oxides, including PbO and PbO2, together make up the remaining 50% of the paste.33
Ni–Cd batteries with an alkaline potassium hydroxide (KOH) electrolyte possess an energy density about double that of Pb–acid batteries. In Ni–Cd batteries, nickel hydroxyl oxide (NiOOH) is used as the cathode and Cd as the anode. During discharge, NiOOH is reduced to nickel hydroxide [Ni(OH)2] at the cathode, and Cd is oxidized to cadmium hydroxide [Cd(OH)2] at the anode.44 The nominal cell voltage of a Ni–Cd battery is 1.2 V.13 The advantages of Ni–Cd batteries include their fast discharging capability and tolerance to overcharging and discharging, but they suffer from the major drawback of a memory effect. Ni–MH batteries are related to Ni–Cd batteries but have a different anode material; instead of Cd, rare-earth metal hydrides are used as the anode, including a variety of valuable rare-earth elements, like lanthanum (La), niobium (Nb), and cerium (Ce).10,13 The electrolyte composition and cell voltage are the same as those of Ni–Cd batteries, but their energy density is about 40% higher than that of Ni–Cd batteries. During discharge, the NiOOH at the cathode is reduced to Ni(OH)2, which is the same reaction as that in Ni–Cd batteries; the rare-earth metal hydride at the anode is oxidized. When charged, the reactions are reversed.44 The two most valuable components in Ni-based batteries are Ni and rare-earth elements, with contents of ∼30% and ∼8–10%, respectively.
3. Recycling strategies of different battery types and components
The goal of recycling processes is to separate the components of spent batteries into different fractions that can be reintroduced into the production of useful materials. In addition, the scrap volume is decreased and the hazardous emissions are properly controlled.45 In the case of LIBs, because Co, Li, and Ni are precious metals that are important in many industrial applications, the recovery of these metals is the primary objective in the recycling of spent LIBs. Current recycling technologies can be classified into two main categories: pyrometallurgy based on high-temperature pyrolysis and hydrometallurgy based on low-temperature solution chemical reaction.2,25,31,32 Some representative recycling processes and technologies are illustrated in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Illustration of the complete recycling processes and technologies of LIBs as an example. 
3.1 Pretreatment
The LIB structure is complex with numerous components, so pretreatment processes are generally required to remove the case and to concentrate the valuable fraction, paving the way for subsequent pyrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical recycling.46–48 Because of the differences in treatment scale and research focus, the pretreatment processes used for laboratory and industrial applications are slightly different, as shown in Fig. 5. It is worth noting that safety concerns should be emphasized during pretreatment processes, especially in industrial applications.47,49,50 As Diekmann47 summarized, there are three main kinds of potential hazards in spent LIBs disposal, namely electrical, fire and explosion, and chemical hazards. These hazards cumulate greatly with a larger energy density and processing capacity. Therefore, a safe and effective separation of different components is the main goal of pretreatment.
 Fig. 5  Pretreatment processes and technologies of LIBs from perspectives of industrial scale and lab scale. 

3.1.1 Manual pretreatment. 
In laboratory-scale studies, because considerable effort has been devoted to the subsequent pyrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical recycling process, pretreatment is usually conducted by a simple routine practice. That is, the individual spent cells are dismantled manually with knives and saws, in a process conducted using relatively simple protective measures to address safety concerns, including wearing safety glasses, masks, and gloves.51,52 The main challenge lies in the separation of current collectors and active materials, because these are made with the requirement of long-lasting adhesion. Three kinds of separation methods are usually used depending on the properties of the current collectors and binders.
The first method is mechanical separation, which can roughly separate current collectors and active materials through crushing and screening.50,53–55 This method is often used in industry and will be discussed in detail in Section 3.1.2. The second method is to remove the adhesive binder by use of a solvent or calcination. Based on the similarity–intermiscibility theory, the organic polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) binder can easily dissolve in certain organic solvents, among which N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) is the most effective one for PVDF.56–58 However, the toxicity and high cost of NMP limit its use on a large scale. Greener solvents have been explored as an alternative to NMP. In particular, ionic liquids (ILs) are considered to be a promising candidate because of their numerous favorable features, including low vapor pressure, high thermal stability, and satisfactory solvating properties. ILs are generally composed of organic cations and inorganic or organic anions. It has been confirmed that ILs can aid waste recycling, such as in the dismantling of waste printed circuit boards.59–62 Based on previous explorations, Zeng and Li63 developed a new method using a heated IL to separate cathodes and aluminum (Al) current collectors. 1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([BMIm][BF4]) was chosen to verify the feasibility of their method because of its suitable viscosity and excellent hydrophilicity. The results showed that a peel-off rate of 99% could be obtained when the experiment was conducted at 180 °C for 25 min at 300 rpm. PVDF begins to decompose at ∼350 °C and this is completed at 600 °C.64,65 Therefore, calcination at a relatively low temperature range of 400–600 °C is preferred to burn off the PVDF binder. Almost no impurities are introduced into spent active materials after removing the PVDF binder by solvent dissolution. In contrast, a certain amount of F [in the form of lithium fluoride (LiF)] was found in the active materials after PVDF calcination, which was attributed to the reaction of released hydrofluoric acid (HF) with active materials.65–67 The third method to separate active materials involves the dissolution of current collectors. For example, Al foil can dissolve in alkaline solution, while the cathode active materials and PVDF binder remain unchanged.68 However, Al foil cannot be recycled directly in its metallic form using this method.65,69
The purity of active materials obtained by manual pretreatment is relatively high because other components can be removed as a whole. The pretreatment method can minimize the effects of other factors, such as impurities, on the fundamental research of novel recycling processes. However, manual pretreatment is not suitable for industrial applications because of the low processing yield.


3.1.2 Mechanical pretreatment. 
3.1.2.1 Dismantling and classification. 
For industrial applications where the amount of processing is huge and large volumes of battery packs are involved, mechanical treatments other than manual dismantling are feasible. In particular, when dealing with large LIB packs from EVs, preliminary dismantling to smaller modules or cells is recommended to avoid potential hazards. At present, because the architecture of packs from different manufacturers are quite different and a high voltage remains, most battery packs are dismantled manually by specialized technicians; however, this will be an inadequate approach to cope with the enormous quantity of spent battery packs anticipated in coming years70,71 and instead high-level equipment automation is urgently required to improve pretreatment efficiency in the future. Usually, recycling enterprises receive a mixture of spent batteries with different chemistries that require disposal. Some recycling processes are sensitive to the battery composition, which will have a negative effect on the recycling efficiency, so preliminary classification is recommended.50
3.1.2.2 Crushing. 
To decrease the volume of spent batteries and to concentrate the valuable components, a large number of small cells or modules obtained after sorting and dismantling are subjected to a crushing process, for which the potential hazards mentioned above can easily occur. During crushing, all the components are exposed, and the contact between the cathode and anode fragments can cause micro-short-circuits.47 Meanwhile, because of the violent friction and high-speed impact of crushing, this process can increase the temperature to as high as 300 °C.72 As a result, the electrolyte can easily decompose and volatilize to generate toxic gas, even HF if humidity is present. Diekmann et al.47 investigated the gas components released during crushing and showed that the electrolyte components, including solvents and salts, as well as the state of health (SOH) of spent LIBs greatly influenced the final released gas, as shown in Fig. 6a and b. Dimethyl carbonate (DMC), ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC), and CO2 were the main gas components released during crushing. The overall amount of these components released at a SOH of 80% was lower than the gas release of uncycled cells. This is because DMC and EMC are reduced to form a solid electrolyte interface (SEI) during cycling and lithium alkyl carbonates (ROCO2Li, where R is an organic group) are reduced with traces of water and CO2 to form Li2CO3. Li et al.49 found that DMC and tert-amylbenzene were the two dominant organic vapor compounds detected during dismantling, with emission quantities of 4.298 and 0.749 mg h−1, respectively, from one dismantled 18650 LIB cell. Usually, the gas emissions are collected and purified by an air filter (such as an alkaline solution or activated carbon) to avoid secondary pollution.
 Fig. 6  (a) Released gas concentration change during different phases of a discontinuous crushing process; (b) masses of the released gases of EMC, DMC, and CO2 from uncycled and cycled cells during crushing. Reprinted from ref. 47 Copyright 2016 The Author(s). Published by ECS. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License (CC BY, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) which permits unrestricted reuse of the work in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Mass percentage distribution of metallic components in each size fraction of an LIB pack: (c) LCO, (d) LFP, (e) mixed-metal cathode, and (f) LMO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
To minimize these hazards, deactivation or precautionary steps are carried out before or during crushing. Discharging in salt solution before crushing is used to remove the remaining energy and thus decrease the electrical hazard.49,64,69,73–75 The influence of the sodium chloride (NaCl) concentration and discharging time on the discharge efficiency of LIBs were investigated by Li and colleagues.49 They found that 10 wt% NaCl solution achieved a high discharge efficiency of ∼72% in a reasonable time of 358 min. Moreover, relatively high levels of Na, Al, and Fe were detected in the concentrated NaCl solution following discharge. In addition to discharging in advance, crushing can also be conducted in salt solution, namely via wet crushing, to lower the reactivity and toxic emission of spent cells.76 Compared with dry crushing, wet crushing has a higher safety performance but more impurities are present in the fine fractions because of the scouring action of the water flow. The other two alternatives to deactivate spent batteries are crushing under an inert atmosphere [nitrogen (N2) or CO2] or at low temperatures (liquid N2) to prevent the release and explosion of flammable gas components during the crushing of battery cells or modules.47,50,51
Crushing changes not only the particle size and distribution, but also the properties of electrode components.45,55,72 As revealed by Zhang et al.55 in their detailed surface analysis of Co-enriched crushed products of spent LIBs by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), the fine fraction of LCO and graphite was coated by an outer layer of organic compounds that originated from the decomposition of the electrolyte during crushing. Moreover, the similar organic coating on LCO and graphite influenced the subsequent separation process.72
3.1.2.3 Sieving. 
Sieving or screening is usually used as a preliminary process to separate and concentrate the metallic fraction of spent batteries. Multiple sorting sieves are available depending on the properties of components, roughly including the fine fraction (<1 mm) and coarse fraction (>1 mm).50,54,55,76,77 Sieving provides a basic overview of the valuable metal distribution among the various particle sizes in a crushed sample. Typically, the coarse fraction mainly contains plastic, separator, Al foil, and Cu foil, whereas the cathode and anode active materials dominate the fine fraction. Wang and Gaustad50 used more elaborate sorting sieves to separate the crushed components of four types of cathode batteries into five size fractions: ultrafine (<0.5 mm), fine (0.5–1 mm), mid (1–2.5 mm), coarse (2.5–6 mm), and the largest fraction (>6 mm) (Fig. 6c–f). They yielded a Co content of 82% in the ultrafine fraction, 68% in the fine fraction, and almost zero in the largest fraction in the case of batteries with an LCO cathode (Fig. 6c). They also calculated the economic value of each fraction in the four types of batteries. Although Co is the most valuable metal in terms of unit price of all the metals in LIBs, the potential recoverable value of Ni exceeds that of Co in mixed cathodes because of the higher content of Ni. In the case of LFP and LMO cathodes, Cu is the dominant valuable component in all fractions. The same researchers also found that the size fractions for different types of batteries showed a considerable variability in material concentration. Thus, sorting or classification by a cathode before pretreatment was suggested to decrease the uncertainty of the input materials and to improve the purity of the output products.
3.1.2.4 Separation. 
After crushing and sieving, the different components of spent LIBs have been separated and concentrated preliminarily. Then, based on their different physical characteristics, including thermal properties, density, magnetic characteristics, wettability, and electromagnetic behavior, a separation process is performed to further remove impurities.78
Thermal treatment, as discussed above in Section 3.1.1 on manual pretreatment, aims to remove the organic impurities in a fraction, including the binder, conductive carbon, and electrolytes. It should be noted that the calcination temperature and atmosphere strongly affect the pretreatment process and therefore must be controlled carefully. Calcination at too low a temperature (<600 °C) is insufficient to decompose organic impurities, while too high a temperature will oxidize the Al current collector to form aluminum oxide (Al2O3) on the surface of active materials, which is detrimental in the subsequent leaching process.65,79,80 Calcination in air has little effect on the structure of lithium transition metal oxides, while the oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+ occurs in spent LFP materials.81–83 By contrast, a vacuum or reducing thermal treatment atmosphere can lower the valence state of the transition metal ions in the cathode materials, which is beneficial to the subsequent leaching process.79,80 Sun and Qiu80 performed a detailed study of vacuum pyrolysis as a pretreatment for the recycling of spent LIBs. Their results showed that the cathode powder peeled completely from the Al foil under the optimal experimental conditions of 600 °C, a vacuum evaporation time of 30 min, and residual gas pressure of 1.0 kPa. The main components of the separated cathode powder were LCO and cobalt oxide (CoO). Instead of the cobalt(II,III) oxide (Co3O4) phase generally detected in spent cathodes, CoO was speculated to originate from the decomposition of LCO during the vacuum pyrolysis process. CoO dissolves more readily in acid solution than Co3O4. Reducing thermal treatment in a N2 atmosphere also lowers the valence state of metal elements, thus decreasing the amount of reducing agents needed during the subsequent leaching process.79 Thermal treatment has the advantage of being a simple operation, but air pollution and energy consumption should be taken into consideration in practice.
Mixtures with different sizes and densities will form different states of motion in certain separation media, which is the underlying principle of the gravity separation method.46,47,53,84 For different components with the same particle size after sieving, a sufficient density difference is crucial to achieve effective gravity separation. Among the components in spent LIBs, the low-density parts mainly consist of the separator, plastics, and Al foil. Air velocity is another major factor that affects the separation efficiency. For example, in the spouted bed elutriation process investigated by Bertuol et al.,84 the crushed fractions were separated at three different air velocities of 10.2–10.5 m s−1 for the first light fraction of polymers, Cu, and Al with smaller diameters, 10.6–13.0 m s−1 for the second fraction of Cu and Al with larger diameters, and 13.0–20.7 m s−1 for the third fraction of Al external casing. The overall loss in relation to the initial mass was only 3.3 wt%.
Based on the wettability difference between the cathode and anode—LCO is hydrophilic and graphite is hydrophobic—the separation of a cathode from an anode can be achieved through the flotation process.55,72,85 The only separation factor here is the different surface properties of the materials. Both LCO and graphite particles after crushing and sieving are coated by a layer of organic compounds (Fig. 7a), which comes from the decomposition of electrolytes during crushing, as discussed above.72 XPS analysis indicated that the surface layer mainly consisted of 75% organic compounds, 6% metal fluorides, 5% metal oxides, and 2% phosphates (Fig. 7b–c).72 The organic layer needs to be removed in advance to guarantee effective flotation separation.
 Fig. 7  (a) Structure schematic of the fine particles in crushed products of spent LIBs; C 1s (b) and F 1s (c) XPS spectrum of the fine crushed products; reprinted with permission from ref. 72 Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram for graphite and LCO separation by Fenton reagent-assisted flotation; (e) C 1s XPS spectrum of LCO particles during Fenton reaction; TEM images of LCO particles before (f) and after Fenton-modified flotation (g); reprinted with permission from ref. 86 Copyright 2016 Elsevier. EPMA analysis of element distribution on the crushed product and the materials after Fenton-modified flotation: (h) particle after Fenton treatment; (i) element distribution of Fe on the particle (h); (j) change rule of solution pH with time during the Fenton treatment; (k) comparison histogram between improved Fenton flotation and original Fenton flotation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. C 1s XPS spectrum of LCO powder before (l) and after 5 min grinding (m); (n) dry modification mechanism based on mechanical abrasion; (o) grinding flotation results of LiCoO2 concentrates with different grinding times; reprinted with permission from ref. 88 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
It was found that the separation of LCO and graphite by the flotation method was greatly enhanced in the presence of a Fenton reagent, which returned the original wettability of LCO and graphite (Fig. 7d).86 As shown in Fig. 7e, the C 1s spectrum of the sample after the use of Fenton reagent did not contain a peak from carbon black at 284.3 eV, and the intensity of the peaks originating from high oxidation states of carbon increased, indicating that the outer organic layer was oxidized and decomposed through reaction with the Fenton reagent. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of particles before and after modification (Fig. 7f and g) also confirmed the positive effect of the Fenton reagent. However, the separation efficiency of the Fenton-modified sample in flotation was not satisfactory. Further surface analysis by field-emission electron probe microanalysis showed that although the organic layer was decomposed, a new Fe-containing inorganic layer was formed after Fenton modification (Fig. 7h and i), which led to a similar hydrophobicity of all the particles and thus poor separation by flotation.87 Therefore, hydrochloric acid (HCl) was used to remove the iron hydroxide [Fe(OH)3] layer, and this improved Fenton-modified flotation approach resulted in a concentrate grade of 75% (Fig. 7j and k).
A simple grinding flotation method was developed by the same group.88 XPS analysis of the samples before and after grinding (Fig. 7l and m) showed that the content of graphite carbon on the surface increased substantially, while that of fluorinated functional groups decreased, indicating that graphite partly adhered to the LCO particles during the grinding process. A dry modification mechanism was proposed, in which LCO and graphite received different mechanical forces from the grinding media (Fig. 7n). The horizontal shear force and vertical rolling pressure broke the internal structure of graphite and exposed many new hydrophobic surfaces, whereas only part of the original surfaces of LCO was exposed. The enhanced wettability difference between LCO and graphite following grinding improved the concentrate grade of LCO and graphite to as high as 97.13% and 73.56%, respectively (Fig. 7o).88
Other separation methods using magnetic or electrostatic separation have been reported.46,73,77,78,89,90 In magnetic separation, magnetically susceptible materials, such as Fe and Co, can be separated through magnetic force. This method is usually used to remove nonmagnetic impurities, like plastics and separators.
3.1.2.5 Mechanochemical treatment. 
By definition, a mechanochemical (MC) reaction is a chemical reaction that is induced by mechanical energy. This coupling reaction includes mechanical breakage and the chemical behavior of mechanically stressed solids.91,92 High-energy milling, whether in a dry or wet medium, is the most widely used method to provide the mechanical force to induce chemical reaction. Various mill types are used, including ball, planetary, vibration, pin, and rolling mills. Planetary ball mills are particularly suited for MC reactions because of their high energy density, simple set-up and handling, and cleanability.91 MC reactions have been widely applied in mineral engineering, extractive metallurgy, chemical engineering, materials engineering, and waste management.93–95 The main mechanisms of MC reactions are a particle size decrease, specific surface area increase, and structure breakage.91,92 Specifically, in the recycling of spent batteries, MC reactions are usually used as a pretreatment to improve the recycling yield in two ways:96–98 the first is to break the crystal structure of cathode materials, which facilitates the subsequent leaching process so that it can occur even at room temperature (RT); the second is to react with other materials to form soluble compounds.
Zhang and co-workers verified the positive effect of the MC reaction in both cases. First, they investigated the influence of MC treatment on the room-temperature acid leaching of valuable metals from spent LiCo0.2Ni0.8O2.97 The MC process was conducted in a planetary mill with Al2O3 powder. The results showed that the spent crystalline LiCo0.2Ni0.8O2 was pulverized and became amorphous after 60 and 240 min, respectively. Accordingly, in the subsequent leaching process with nitric acid (HNO3), more than 90% of the Li, Ni, and Co were extracted at RT. In a later study, they used polyvinyl chloride (PVC) as a grinding aid with LCO in a planetary ball mill for 30 min, which gave amorphous lithium chloride (LiCl) and crystalline cobalt chloride (CoCl2) as the products of the MC reaction (Fig. 8a and b).96 Finally, the LiCl and CoCl2 were extracted in water at RT; the extraction yields reached over 90% for Co and nearly 100% for Li. PVC is an excellent chlorine atom donor with a high chlorine content. Meanwhile, the carbon derived from the PVC was found to reduce Co3+ in LCO into water-soluble Co2+ in CoCl2 during the MC reaction.
 Fig. 8  Effects of grinding aids on the MC reaction: (a) XRD patterns of LCO and PVC ground for different times; (b) FTIR of the individual samples and the mixture ground for 24 h and its washed sample; reprinted with permission from ref. 96 Copyright 2004 Elsevier. (c) Extraction of Co and Li from different samples (raw sample, pure LCO; activated sample, pure LCO after being ground; MC sample, LCO to Fe mass ratio of 1:1, grinding for 250 min at 650 rpm); (d) XRD patterns of the different samples; (e) SEM image of LCO after MC reduction with Fe; reprinted with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. This is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes. Molecular structure of EDTA (f) and its metal chelate (g); (h) XRD patterns of different samples (a: LCO and EDTA mixture before grinding, b: mixture after grinding, c: water leaching residue, d: recovered Co3O4 particle); reprinted with permission from ref. 100 Copyright 2016 Elsevier. Effects of PVC (i) and Fe dosage (j) on the conversion rates of Li, Co, and Cl (grinding for 12 h at 600 rpm with a ball-to-powder mass ratio of 50:1); (k) XRD patterns of various samples (LCO/PVC/Fe mixture before (a) and after (b) co-grinding, c: water leaching residue after calcination). Reprinted with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
According to previous studies, grinding aids play an important role in the MC process. The multiple elements in the electrode materials of LIBs provide more possibilities for the investigation of grinding aids. Guan et al.99 explored the feasibility of using metallic Fe powder as a grinding aid to improve the acid leaching of metal ions after the MC reaction (Fig. 8c–e). The influences of parameters like the Fe to LCO mass ratio, rotation speed, and MC reaction time on the leaching of Li and Co with HNO3 were investigated in detail, and an MC mechanism was proposed based on the results of X-ray diffraction (XRD), SEM, and XPS analyses. The results revealed that the crystal structure of LCO was converted to an amorphous state after the MC process, which enhanced the subsequent leaching of Li and Co. The greatly improved leaching of Co was mainly attributed to the MC reaction-induced reduction of its oxidation state from 3+ to 2+ by Fe. Grinding aids with a chelation capability were also investigated to convert lithium oxides to more soluble compounds. Wang et al.100 used ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) as a grinding aid that could chelate with Li and Co from LCO (Fig. 8f–h). Then, a simple water leaching process was used to leach Li and Co, which displayed leaching efficiencies of 99% and 98%, respectively. The reaction mechanism of EDTA and LCO during grinding was explained by the enhancement of the reactant activity, which facilitated the formation of stable and soluble Li–EDTA and Co–EDTA complexes. However, the high cost of EDTA hinders its large-scale use as a grinding agent. Thus, more economical grinding aids composed of PVC and Fe powder were explored by the same group to separate Li and Co from spent LCO cathodes (Fig. 8i–k).101 During grinding with PVC and Fe powder, Li reacted with PVC to form soluble LiCl, while Co remained as Co2O3 in the water leaching residue. Finally, the residue was calcined at 800 °C for 2 h in air to yield magnetic CoFe4O6. The combined grinding aids not only improved the water leaching process, but also selectively separated Co and Li simultaneously.
For the most part, the use of MC reactions is limited to the pretreatment before the leaching and disposal of spent lithium oxide cathodes. Actually, it is expected that MC reactions could play a more important role in dealing with spent LFP cathodes, which are difficult to dissolve in the traditional acid leaching process. Yang et al.102 recently developed an MC reaction as a pretreatment to selectively recycle Fe and Li from spent LFP batteries (Fig. 9). EDTA–2Na was used as a chelating grinding aid. The effects of various parameters during the MC pretreatment and acid leaching processes were systematically investigated, including the activation time, mass ratio of cathode powder to additive, acid concentration, solid-to-liquid (S/L) ratio, and leaching time. Analysis of the MC reaction mechanism using XRD and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analyses indicated that the P–O/PO4 bond/tetrahedral structures and the (311) plane of the LFP cathode were probably destroyed during MC activation, as shown in Fig. 9a and b. The degraded structure facilitated the subsequent acid leaching process, which was conducted at RT. Following MC reaction pretreatment, the leaching efficiencies of Fe and Li improved markedly to 97.67% and 94.29%, respectively, compared with 40% for Fe and 60% for Li in the case without the MC reaction (Fig. 9c). Finally, the Fe and Li species after leaching were recovered by selective precipitation as FePO4·2H2O and Li3PO4, respectively (Fig. 9d). After the whole process, 93.05% of the Fe and 82.55% of the Li were recovered from the spent LFP batteries. The above examples reveal that the MC reaction can lower the acid and energy consumption of leaching processes, and can improve the recovery selectivity of Li in LFP battery recycling. This research provides a closed-loop recycling process for spent LFP batteries that has great potential for industrial application.
 Fig. 9  (a) FTIR pattern of LFP for MC reaction at different grinding times; (b) XRD intensity of the lattice faces at different grinding times; (c) leaching efficiencies of Fe and Li from different samples (MC ground sample, grinding time = 5 h, mass ratio of LFP to EDTA–2Na = 3:1; leaching parameters: H3PO4 = 0.5 M, S/L ratio = 40 g L−1, leaching time = 1 h); (d) SEM images of the recycled FePO4·2H2O (inset: microstructure of FePO4·2H2O). Reprinted with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Because of its simplicity and economical use of solvents, mechanochemistry is considered practical and environmentally friendly for the recycling of spent batteries. It is worth noting that the high energy consumption of ball milling needs to be balanced with its productivity in the future development and application of this approach.
Most of the above-mentioned pretreatment methods are derived from the mining industry, for which the research methodology and equipment are mature and can be generalized for the recycling of spent batteries.78 Generally, because of the complexity of the battery composition and the limitation of each single method, a series of methods is used in combination to obtain optimal separation results.25

3.2 Pyrometallurgical processes
The pyrometallurgical process here refers to a single pyrolysis treatment of spent battery components. The products after pyrolysis fall into two main categories: electrode materials and alloys. The former involves the regeneration of spent cathodes after supplementation with a Li source, and will be discussed in Section 3.3.4. To form alloys, high temperatures of about 1000 °C are required. Co-, Fe-, and Ni-based alloys are the most common alloy products.103,104 Because of their high energy consumption and emission of hazardous gases, pyrometallurgical processes are not recommended for use in laboratory-scale research. In contrast, many recycling enterprises use the pyrometallurgical process because of its simplicity and high productivity.

In situ reduction pyrolysis is becoming a research hotspot in pyrometallurgical recycling.90,105–107 For instance, Xu et al.90 developed a novel and environmentally friendly roasting process to recycle Co and Li2CO3in situ. A mixture of LCO and graphite powder was directly calcined at 1000 °C under a N2 atmosphere for 30 min. Products including Co, Li2CO3, and graphite were formed. The feasibility of reaction between LCO and graphite was confirmed by thermodynamic analysis (Fig. 10a). The product mixture was separated by a wet magnetic separation process. In subsequent research, the feasibility of the in situ process for recycling spent LIBs with an LMO cathode was confirmed.106,107 The mixed electrode materials of LMO and graphite after mechanical separation were converted into MnO and Li2CO3in situ at 800 °C for 45 min under oxygen-free conditions. Subsequent water leaching of the residue recovered 91.3% of the Li in the battery as Li2CO3. Finally, the filter residue was burned in air to remove graphite, and Mn3O4 with a purity of 95.11% was obtained. The conversion mechanism of mixed LMO and graphite powder under enclosed vacuum conditions was proposed to entail a three-step collapse process of the cubic spinel LMO during which Li and O were released, and then Li2CO3 along with MnO were formed as products (Fig. 10b).106 The economic profitability of this process was assessed in a complex way, which included an analysis of the depreciation cost of equipment, electric power consumption, cost of equipment maintenance, water consumption, and labor costs. It required proper assumptions and efficient relevant data information. Assuming ten tons of spent 18650 LMO batteries are recycled per day, and the cost of factory construction and the revenue of the recovered Al, Cu, and Fe are excluded, the calculated collection and transportation cost and recycling cost were $4110 and $2368.65, respectively. Along with revenues of $8587, the profit was calculated to be $2108.35. The concept of in situ recycling developed in the above example was proved to be universal for other mixed cathodes of LCO and NCM (Fig. 10c). A deep understanding of the structure of electrode materials underlies this novel recycling process. Combined with the simplicity of calcination, this process shows great potential for industrial-scale application in the future.
 Fig. 10  (a) Relationship between ΔG and temperature for different possible reactions among LCO, C, CoO, and O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (b) Plausible pathways for the conversion of mixed powder from spent LiMn2O4 batteries under enclosed vacuum conditions; (c) integrated process of recycling Li2CO3 from different types of spent LIBs. (b) and (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 106 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Hydrometallurgical technologies
Compared with pyrometallurgical technologies, hydrometallurgical ones are considered to be more sustainable because of their features of limited waste emission and high metal selectivity, recycling efficiency, and content of value-added products.2,18,25 Although some challenges still exist, such as addressing the complex operation steps and waste water emission, it is agreed that hydrometallurgical technologies have a greater potential to realize sustainability than pyrometallurgical ones and will ultimately prevail in the recycling of spent batteries. The hydrometallurgical recycling process of spent LIBs usually entails low-temperature leaching, purification, and separation to obtain the final products.108

3.3.1 Leaching. 
As a standard and indispensable procedure in the hydrometallurgical recycling process, leaching is generally used to dissolve metals in the spent materials from the solid state into solution for further processing. Leaching can be considered as a pretreatment step before the subsequent purification and separation process. Therefore, the leaching efficiency strongly influences the overall recycling of metals.
There are two types of leaching processes, alkali leaching and acid leaching; the latter attracts more attention than the former because of its higher efficiency. Alkali leaching with an ammonia-based system [ammonia (NH3), ammonium carbonate ((NH4)2CO3), ammonium sulfate ((NH4)2SO4), ammonium chloride (NH4Cl), or other alkaline reagents] is relatively selective for specific elements, such as Ni, Co, and Li, because of the formation of stable metal ammonia complexes.109–111 Ku et al.110 used an alkali leaching system with NH3 and (NH4)2CO3 as the leaching reagents and ammonium sulfite [(NH4)2SO3] as the reducing agent to investigate the leaching behavior of Ni, Co, Mn, Al, and Cu. They found that Co and Cu were leached out completely as they can form stable Co(NH3)62+ and Cu(NH3)42+ complex ions. Ni leached out moderately, while Mn and Al hardly leached out at all. The unstable nature of Mn and Al in ammonia-based solution resulted in the formation of the corresponding Al2O3, MnCO3, and Mn oxides, as revealed in the XRD pattern of the leaching residue. Zheng and colleagues109 developed a different ammonia-based leaching system that used NH3 and (NH4)2SO4 act as the leaching solution and sodium sulfite (Na2SO3) as the reducing agent. Similarly, Co, Ni, and Li exhibited high leaching efficiencies of over 98.6%, whereas that of Mn was only 1.36%. (NH4)2Mn(SO3)2·H2O was found in the residue, which was explained by the reduction of Mn4+ into Mn2+ and subsequent precipitation. Study of the leaching kinetics indicated that the leaching process was controlled by a chemical reaction.
Unlike alkali leaching, acid leaching can dissolve almost all transition metal oxides into solution.112 The development of acids and reducing agents used in the acid leaching process is depicted in Fig. 11. In its early stage of research, acid leaching generally involved the use of strong inorganic acids, like HCl,113–116 H2SO4,45,69,117–121 and HNO3.122–125 Generally, excess acid is used in the leaching process to guarantee high efficiency, which thus results in a large amount of waste acid. Recently, Li et al.126 developed a selective leaching process using stoichiometric H2SO4 and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) as an oxidant to leach Li from spent LFP; Fe and P remained in the residue as FePO4. The leaching efficiencies of Li, Fe, and P in this process were 96.85%, 0.027%, and 1.95%, respectively. Then, 95.66% of the Li in the leaching solution was precipitated as Li3PO4 through reaction with Na3PO4. This novel method markedly lowered the amount of waste acid and provided a new approach to recycle LFP.
 Fig. 11  Development of leaching acids and reducing agents: acids (inorganic acids, including HCl,181 H2SO4,69 and HNO3;125 organic acids, including citric acid,128 ascorbic acid,52 oxalic acid,138 and formic acid;137 bioleaching with bacteria to produce inorganic acids141 and with fungi to produce organic acids143); reducing agents (inorganic compounds, including H2O2,155 NaHSO3,160 Na2SO3,179 and Na2S2O3;179 organic compounds including glucose158 and biomass;159 metallic current collectors, including Cu and Al162). Ref. 181 Copyright 1998 Elsevier; ref. 125 and 155 Copyright 2002 Elsevier; ref. 69 Copyright 2005 Elsevier; ref. 158 Copyright 2014 Elsevier; ref. 160 and 179 Copyright 2015 Elsevier; ref. 159 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society; ref. 162 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Given that leaching with strong inorganic acids could cause considerable secondary pollution, such as toxic gas emission (Cl2, SOx, and NOx) and waste acid solution, Li and co-workers52,127–132 proposed an environmentally friendly recycling process using organic acids, including citric acid, malic acid, and succinic acid, to replace the typically used acids without sacrificing the leaching efficiency. Organic acids have the advantage of biodegradability, making them easy to dispose of.133–137 Additionally, they usually possess chelating or complexing properties, which offers possibilities for the subsequent recycling process. For example, citric acid has a relatively strong acidity and chelating property and was the first organic acid applied in the acid leaching of spent LCO cathodes.128 High leaching efficiencies of more than 90% for Co and nearly 100% for Li were achieved under mild leaching conditions.
Based on the necessity of the redox reaction of metals, ascorbic acid, which can act as both a leaching and reducing agent, was investigated to simplify the leaching process.52 The optimum leaching conditions were determined to be an ascorbic acid concentration of 1.25 M, leaching temperature of 70 °C, leaching time of 20 min, and S/L ratio of 25 g L−1. Under these experimental conditions, as much as 94.8% of the Co and 98.5% of the Li were recovered at a relatively low temperature in a short time. Another attractive organic acid is oxalic acid (H2C2O4), which has a relatively strong acidity and reducibility. Oxalic acid can dissolve Li into solution and precipitate Co as oxalates because of their different solubilities, thus separating Li and Co directly through leaching.138–140
Apart from the acids used directly, bioleaching is another favorable method to produce acids (both inorganic and organic acids) for the leaching process.141–147 The principle of bioleaching involves microorganisms producing acids through metabolism to dissolve metals from spent materials.148–152 Certain kinds of bacteria and fungi possess the capability for use in bioleaching. For example, the chemolithotrophic and acidophilic Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans bacteria can use elemental sulfur and Fe2+ to produce H2SO4 and Fe3+ in the leaching medium.141,145 The fungus Aspergillus niger exhibited good potential for the production of a high concentration of organic acids and has been proven useful for the bioleaching of spent LIBs.143,144 At present, the bioleaching process is limited by its vulnerability to pollution and long period needed for microorganism culture. However, it might prove the most environmentally friendly method for the recycling of spent LIBs in the future.
There are also some other potential sources of acids. Recently, Liu and Zhang153 used PVC as a source of HCl through the dechlorination of PVC during subcritical water oxidation. The produced HCl then facilitated metal leaching at the same time. This co-treatment process of both spent LIBs and PVC achieved high leaching efficiencies of 98% for Li and 95% for Co. The concept of waste utilization to produce valuable materials has been applied in the regeneration of electrode materials as well.154
In addition to acids, reducing agents also play an important role in improving leaching efficiencies. This is because metals in lower valence states dissolve more readily. For instance, Co2+ is much more water soluble than Co3+. The types of reducing agents used include inorganic, organic, and metallic materials.117,155–168 H2O2 is the most commonly used reducing agent in the leaching process because of its low cost and high efficiency.117,155,156 However, H2O2 is unstable and easily decomposes during exposure to light and/or heat. Later, glucose was explored as an alternative green reducing agent to H2O2.54,157,158,163,169 Meng et al.169 speculated that glucose was oxidized to form monocarboxylic acids, including gluconic, tartaric, oxalic, and formic acids, which promoted the leaching of Co from LCO. Pagnanelli et al.158 found that postponing glucose addition during leaching with H2SO4 using glucose as a reducing agent improved the leaching efficiencies of Li and Co to 92% and 88%, respectively, compared with that obtained when glucose was added initially (60% for both metal ions). Analysis of the concentration changes of the glucose intermediates indicated that this was caused by the shift of the oxidative pathways at different leaching times. When glucose was added at the beginning of leaching, the intermediate arabic acid was formed and accumulated, making the oxidation a rate-limiting process. In contrast, if glucose was added after leaching for 2 h, the reductive intermediate glyoxylic acid was formed, which increased the reducibility of glucose. Joulié and co-workers162 recently examined the feasibility of Cu and Al current collectors as reducing agents in the leaching of NCM. Cu and Al were chosen because they are frequently found in spent cathode materials. The results showed that high leaching efficiencies of >90% were obtained with 1 M H2SO4 at 30 °C in the presence of Cu with an NCM/Cu ratio of 1:1.2 (w/w) or in the presence of Al with an NCM/Al ratio of 1:0.7 (w/w). These novel reducing agents showed environmentally friendly features, including a low energy demand and toxic gas emissions.
Early studies on leaching focused on finding the optimal conditions to achieve the highest leaching efficiency through orthogonal experimental design and single factor tests. The influences of the leaching parameters, including acid concentration, temperature, time, S/L ratio, and reducing agent content on the leaching efficiency of metal ions are compared in Fig. 12a–e. The specific leaching conditions and efficiencies of different leaching systems are summarized in Table 1. Although we chose citric acid as a representative organic acid, it should be noted that the value scope is generalizable for leaching with other organic acids. Generally, Li leaching is easier than that of other transition metals because of the free state of Li in the layered structure and the insoluble nature of Co3+.118 The leaching performance of H2SO4 is markedly improved when used with H2O2 as a reducing agent compared with that alone. A comparative analysis of inorganic and organic acids as well as bioleaching in terms of efficiency, environmental friendliness, cost, energy consumption, material consumption, and simple operation is also presented in Fig. 12f. All the leaching methods have obvious advantages and limitations. Inorganic acid leaching has advantages, including low material consumption, because of its high S/L ratio and low cost. Meanwhile, organic acid leaching and bioleaching are much superior to inorganic acid leaching with respect to environmental friendliness.
 Fig. 12  Effects of acid concentration (a), temperature (b), time (c), S/L ratio (d), and H2O2 content (e) on the leaching efficiencies of Co (or Co and Li in the H2O2 effect) using different acids; (f) comparison of organic acid leaching, inorganic acid leaching, and bioleaching in terms of the efficiency, cost, material consumption, operation, energy consumption, and environment. 
Table 1 Summary of acid leaching parameters investigated in the literature




Leaching reagents
Spent materials
Conditions (T, t, and S/L)
Efficiency (%)
Kinetics




4 M HCl181
LCO
80 °C, 1 h, 10 g L−1
Li = 99
—


Co = 99


4 M HCl113
LCO
80 °C, 2 h
Li = 97
—


Co = 99


4 M HCl182
NCA
90 °C, 18 h, 50 g L−1
Li = 100
—


Co/Ni/Al = 100


6 M HCl + H2O2 (mol(H2O2)/(Me) = 2)156
Mixed cathodes
60 °C, 2 h, 125 g L−1
Co/Ni/Mn = 95
—


4 M HCl114
Mixed cathodes
80 °C, 1 h, 20 g L−1
Li = 99
—


Co/Ni/Mn = 99


1 M HNO3 + 1.7 vol% H2O2124
LCO
75 °C, 1 h, 20 g L−1
Li = 95
Surface chemical reaction control: C2 = kt


Co = 95


3 M H2SO469
LCO
70 °C, 6 h, 200 g L−1
Li = 98
—


Co = 98


1 M H2SO4118
Mixed cathodes
95 °C, 4 h, 50 g L−1
Li = 93, Co = 66, Ni = 96, Mn = 50
Surface layer diffusion of the lixiviant control: (−ln(1 − X))2 = kt


2.5 M H2SO483
LFP
60 °C, 4 h, 100 g L−1
Li = 97
—


Fe = 98


2 M H2SO4 + 15 vol% H2O245
LCO
75 °C, 10 min, 50 g L−1
Li = 99
—


Co = 99


3 M H2SO4 + 3 wt% H2O2183
LCO/NiMH
70 °C, 5 h, 66.7 g L−1
Co/Ni = 90
—


6% (v/v) H2SO4 + 1 vol% H2O251
LCO
65 °C, 1 h, 33.3 g L−1
Li = 95
—


Co = 80


2 M H2SO4 + 5 vol% H2O2184
LCO
75 °C, 0.5 h, 100 g L−1
Li = 94
—


Co = 93


4% (v/v) H2SO4 + 1 vol% H2O268
LCO
40 °C, 1 h, 33.3 g L−1
Li = 100
—


Co = 97


2 M H2SO4 + 6 vol% H2O2185
LCO
60 °C, 1 h, 100 g L−1
Co = 99
—


4 M H2SO4 + 10 vol% H2O2186
LCO
85 °C, 2 h, 100 g L−1
Li = 96
—


Co = 95


2 M H2SO4 + 5 vol% H2O280
LCO
80 °C, 1 h, 50 g L−1
Li = 99
—


Co = 99


2 M H2SO4 + 2 vol% H2O2187
LCO
60 °C, 2 h, 33 g L−1
Li = 88
—


Co = 96


2 M H2SO4 + 5 vol% H2O2174
LCO
75 °C, 1 h, 100 g L−1
Li = 99
Li: chemical reaction control: 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = kt


Co = 70
Co: ash diffusion control: 1 − 3(1 − X)2/3 + 2(1 − X) = kt


2 M H2SO4 + 5 vol% H2O274
NCM
60 °C, 2 h, 100 g L−1
Li = 99
—


Li/Co/Ni/Mn = 99


1 M H2SO4 + 1 vol% H2O2180
NCM
40 °C, 1 h, 40 g L−1
Li/Co/Ni/Mn = 100
Revised cubic rate law; surface chemical reactions control


1.75 M HCl115
NCM
50 °C, 2 h, 20% (w/v)
Co/Mn = 99
—


2 M HCl116
LCO
60–80 °C, 1.5 h
Co/Li = 100
Li: diffusion control


Co: chemical reaction control at first, then a mixed mechanism


1 M H2SO4120
Mixed batteries
25 °C, 0.5 h, 180 g L−1, 3 leaching steps
Mn = 30, Ni = 70, Co = 70, Zn = 100
—


2 g per solid H2SO4 + 50% excess glucose157
LCO
90 °C, 4 h, 100 g L−1
Li = 97
—


Co = 98


2 M H2SO4 + 50 g L−1 glucose158 (glucose addition after 2 h leaching)
LCO
80 °C, 2 h, 35 g L−1
Li = 92
—


Co = 88


3 M H2SO4 + 0.4 g g−1 glucose (or sucrose)
LCO
95 °C, 2 h, 25 g L−1
Li = 96 (or 100), Co = 98 (or 96)




3 M H2SO4 + 0.25 M Na2S2O3164
LCO
90 °C, 3 h, 66.7 g L−1
Li = 100
—


Co = 100


1.34 M H2SO4 + 0.45 g g−1 Na2S2O5165
Mixed batteries
20 °C, 45 min, 10.9%
Mn = 94, Cd = 81, Zn = 99, Co = 96, Ni = 68
—


0.3 M H2SO4 + H2O2126
LFP
60 °C, 2 h, n(H2O2/Li) = 2.07, n(H2SO4/Li) = 0.57
Li = 97
—


Fe = 0.027


P = 1.95


1 M H2SO4 + 0.075 M NaHSO3160
Mixed cathodes
95 °C, 4 h, 20 g L−1
Li = 97, Co = 92, Ni = 96, Mn = 88
Surface layer diffusion of the lixiviant control: (−ln(1 − X))2 = kt


Subcritical water + PVC153
LCO
350 °C, 0.5 h, 16 g L−1, m(PVC/LCO) = 3:1
Li = 98
—


Co = 95


2% (v/v) H3PO4 + 2 vol% H2O2188
LCO
90 °C, 0.5 h, 8 g L−1
Li/Co > 95
—


1.5 M H3PO4 + 0.02 M glucose169
LCO
80 °C, 2 h, 20 g L−1
Li = 100
—


Co = 98


1.25 M citric acid + 1 vol% H2O2128
LCO
90 °C, 0.5 h, 20 g L−1
Li = 100
—


Co > 90


1.5 M DL-malic acid + 2 vol% H2O2127
LCO
90 °C, 40 min, 20 g L−1
Li = 100
—


Co > 90


1.25 M ascorbic acid52
LCO
70 °C, 20 min, 25 g L−1
Li = 99
—


Co = 95


1 M oxalic acid138
LCO
80 °C, 2 h, 50 g L−1
Li = 98
—


Co = 98


2 M citric acid + 2 vol% H2O2135
NCM
80 °C, 1.5 h, 33.3 g L−1
Li = 99, Co = 95, Ni = 97, Mn = 94
—


0.1 M citric acid + 0.02 M ascorbic acid136
LCO
80 °C, 6 h, 10 g L−1
Li = 100
—


Co = 80


1 M oxalic acid139
LCO
95 °C, 2.5 h, 15 g L−1
Li = 98
Chemical reaction control: 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = kt


Co = 97


3 M trichloroacetic acid + 4 vol% H2O2179
NCM
60 °C, 0.5 h, 50 g L−1
Li = 100, Co = 92, Ni = 93, Mn = 90
Surface chemical reaction control: −ln(1 − X) = ktn


2 M citric acid + 0.6 g g−1 H2O2
LCO
70 °C, 80 min, 50 g L−1
Li = 99, Co = 98
—


1.5 M citric acid + 0.4 g g−1 tea waste
90 °C, 2 h, 30 g L−1
Li = 98, Co = 96


1.5 M citric acid + 0.4 g g−1Phytolacca americana159
80 °C, 2 h, 40 g L−1
Li = 96, Co = 83


2 M tartaric acid + 4 vol% H2O2175
Mixed cathodes
70 °C, 0.5 h, 17 g L−1
Li = 99
Chemical reaction control: 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = kt


Co/Ni/Mn = 99


1.5 M succinic acid + 4 vol% H2O2130
LCO
70 °C, 40 min, 15 g L−1
Li > 96
Initial: chemical reaction control: 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = kt; beyond 20 min: diffusion control: 1 − 2/3X − (1 − X)2/3 = kt


Co = 100


0.1 M iminodiacetic acid + 0.02 M ascorbic acid
LCO
80 °C, 6 h, 2 g L−1
Li = 99, Co = 91
—


0.1 M maleic acid + 0.02 M ascorbic acid170
80 °C, 6 h, 2 g L−1
Li = 100, Co = 97


0.5 M glycine + 0.02 M ascorbic acid172
LCO
80 °C, 6 h, 2 g L−1
Co > 95
—


0.4 M tartaric acid + 0.02 M ascorbic acid161
LCO
80 °C, 5 h, 2 g L−1
Li = 100
—


Co = 97


2 M formic acid + 6 vol% H2O2137
NCM
60 °C, 2 h, 50 g L−1
Li = 100
Chemical reaction control: 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = kt


Co/Ni/Mn = 85


2 M citric acid + 1.25 vol% H2O2133
LCO
60 °C, 2 h, 30 g L−1
Li = 92
Product layer diffusion control


Co = 81


3.5 M acetic acid + 4 vol% H2O2177
NCM
60 °C, 1 h, 40 g L−1
Li = 100, Co = 94, Ni = 93, Mn = 96
Surface chemical reaction control: 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = kt


3 M acetic acid + 7.5 vol% H2O2176
LCMO
70 °C, 40 min, 20 g L−1
Li = 100, Co = 99, Mn = 100
Product layer diffusion control


2 M maleic acid + 2 mL H2O2132
NCM
70 °C, 1 h, 20 g L−1
Li/Ni/Co/Mn = 98
Diffusion control


1.5 M malic acid + 0.6 g g−1 grape seed167
LCO
80 °C, 3 h, 20 g L−1
Li = 99, Co = 92
Combination of surface chemical reaction and diffusion control




Now that the optimal leaching conditions have been well studied, researchers are shifting their focus to investigation of the leaching mechanisms, including the thermodynamics and kinetics aspects (Fig. 13). Thermodynamics research ranges from theoretical analysis to experimental testing.118,139,160,161,170–172 Specifically, the theoretical calculation of certain reactions can be used to explore reaction trends and possible leaching products. For instance, the Pourbaix diagrams, also known as Eh–pH diagrams (Eh: the voltage potential with respect to the standard hydrogen electrode), of M–H2O (M = Li, Ni, Co, and Mn) systems are useful to understand the stable regions of different phases in aqueous solutions.118 The Eh–pH diagram of the Co–H2O system showed that the Co3+ phase cannot dissolve in strong acid solutions until the redox potential reaches +1.84 V, indicating a reducing agent is needed to facilitate the leaching process. Similarly, spinel structures containing Mn(III) and Mn(IV) require a strong reducing condition and strong acid solution to form a soluble Mn(II) phase.118 On the other hand, the high bonding energy of Fe–P–O in the olivine-structured LFP material makes it hard to dissolve in strong acid solution even with a reducing agent.208 Theoretical calculation of the Gibbs free energy change (ΔrG) can predict the possible trends and products of different leaching reactions.139,171 The leaching mechanism can also be analyzed from a mechanistic viewpoint, which is based on an understanding of the crystal structure of electrode materials.173 Various characterization methods, like XRD, SEM, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, FTIR spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy have been used to confirm leaching reactions.160,161,170,172,174
 Fig. 13  Development of the thermodynamics and kinetics analysis of acid leaching: thermodynamics focuses on the leaching mechanism, including the metal leaching sequence,117 bioleaching mechanism,145 possible reaction and products calculation,52,118 and products identification136,160,174; kinetics focuses on determination of the rate-controlling step based on different equations, including shrinking-core,174 logarithmic rate law,160 and Avrami equation models,124,179 and the calculation of the activation energies of leaching. Ref. 124 Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science B.V.; ref. 52 Copyright 2012 Elsevier; ref. 174 Copyright 2013 Elsevier; ref. 136 Copyright 2014 Elsevier; ref. 118, 160 and 179 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
As for kinetics studies, four leaching models, namely the shrinking core,109,124,133,137,139,174–178 empirical,118,160,171 Avrami equation,179 and revised cubic rate law models,180 have been explored to analyze the leaching behavior of different metals. The leaching of metals from spent materials can be considered as a solid–liquid heterogeneous process involving a series of mass transfer, diffusion, and surface chemical reactions. Thus, based on the shrinking core model, the leaching rate can be assumed to be controlled by liquid film mass transfer (eqn (1)), surface chemical reaction (eqn (2)), or residue layer diffusion (eqn (3)):137 X = k1·t(1) 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = k2·t(2) 1 − 3(1 − X)2/3 + 2(1 − X) = k3·t(3)where X is the leaching efficiency of metals, t is the reaction time, and k1, k2, and k3 are the reaction rate constants and can be calculated from the slopes of the fitted lines. The leaching data obtained in most studies fit the surface chemical reaction-controlled model well. The relatively high activation energies for the leaching of metals can be calculated by the Arrhenius law (eqn (4)). lnk = lnA − Ea/RT(4)where k is the reaction rate constant, A is the pre-exponential factor, Ea is the apparent activation energy, R is the universal gas constant, and T is the absolute temperature. In some cases, the empirical (eqn (5)), Avrami equation (eqn (6)), or revised cubic rate law (eqn (7)) models fit leaching data better than the shrinking core model, implying a surface layer diffusion of the lixiviant or a surface chemical reaction-controlled process.118,171,179 (−ln(1 − X))2 = k·t(5) −ln(1 − X) = k·tn(6) (1 − X)1/3 = 1 − kt/r0ρ(7)where n is the suitable parameter, r0 is the radius of the particle at t = 0, and ρ is the density of the particle.


3.3.2 Solvent extraction. 
Solvent extraction is the process of using a two-phase system, normally organic and aqueous phases, to separate different metal ions by their uneven distribution in the two phases. The effectiveness of solvent extraction can be determined by the extraction yield and phase separation performance, and several factors are used to characterize these two performance indicators (Fig. 14). First is the distribution ratio (D), which is calculated as the ratio of the concentration of certain metal ions in the organic phase to that in the aqueous phase at equilibrium. A larger D value indicates a higher extraction yield of metal ions.189–191 The pH1/2 value and separation factor (SF) are used to determine the separation performance of different metal ions. The pH1/2 value is the equilibrium pH value when 50% of the metal ions are extracted, while the SF value between A and B is calculated according to the equation SF = DA/DB. Normally, the larger the ΔpH1/2 value (pH1/2(A)–pH1/2(B)), the better the separation performance between A and B metal ions.192 Regarding SF, generally, SF > 10 means a possible separation, SF > 100 indicates good separation, and SF > 1000 suggests excellent separation.189
 Fig. 14  Illustration of the solvent extraction process, mechanism analysis, and factors related to extraction, scrubbing, and stripping. 
In the recycling of spent batteries, solvent extraction is usually performed after leaching to separate certain metal ions or to remove impurities from the aqueous leaching solution.192,193 The most commonly used solvent extractants include bis-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272),51,184,194–200 di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA),135,190,194,201 and 2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (PC-88A),189,202 among which Cyanex 272 attracts the most attention because of its high selectivity for the separation of Co.183,185 PC-88A is used to extract Co and D2EHPA to extract Mn, whereas Li is difficult to extract from such mixed-metal leaching solution. During the extraction process, several parameters, including the extraction system, equilibrium pH, extractant concentration, organic/aqueous (O/A) ratio, saponification, temperature, and time, can affect the extraction performance (Fig. 14).
The experimental design needs to be optimized to find the best extraction conditions, as summarized in Table 2. Some basic conclusions can be drawn from these results. The extraction process is usually performed at room temperature and can be finished in a short time (within 30 min), which are both advantages of the solvent extraction method. Meanwhile, the pH of all the extraction experiments indicate that an acid solution is found at the equilibrium state. In a conventional extraction process, the extraction of a single metal is preferable to obtain a high-purity product. However, this usually requires multiple extraction stages because of the similar chemical properties of transition metal ions.196,202,203 Recently, Yang et al.204 developed a co-extraction and co-precipitation process to avoid the separation of metal ions. Almost 100% of the Mn, 99% of the Co, and 85% of the Ni were co-extracted and separated from Li using D2EHPA in kerosene. The optimal extraction conditions were investigated and are shown in Fig. 15a–d. After stripping and adjusting the element ratio, Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3(OH)2 precursors and the corresponding NCM cathode materials were obtained by co-precipitation and calcination. The remaining Li in the aqueous solution was precipitated as Li2CO3. This approach avoided the complicated separation of Ni, Co, and Mn, and provided a new idea for the extraction of multiple elements.
Table 2 Summary of solvent extraction parameters investigated in the literature




Extractant
Extracted element
Optimized condition
Stripping
Extraction yield (%)




0.90 M PC-88A181
Co(Li)
RT, pH = 6.7, O/A = 0.85, t = 0.5 h
2 M H2SO4, O/A = 5
Co = 100


0.3 M Cyanex 272117
Co(Li)

T = 50 °C, pH = 4.5, O/A = 1, t = 20 min
3 M H2SO4, O/A = 1
Co = 68, Li = 39; Al = 98


0.72 M Cyanex 27251
Co(Li)

T = 50 °C, pH = 5, O/A = 1, t = 20 min
2.5 M H2SO4, O/A = 5
Co = 88; Li = 33; Al = 100


65% saponified 1.5 M Cyanex 272184
Co(Li)
RT, pH = 5.35, O/A = 1.6, t = 10 min
5 M H2SO4, O/A = 5
Co = 85


15% Cyanex 272 + 3% isodecanol195
Co(Li)
RT, pH = 5, O/A = 1, t = 5 min
10% H2SO4, O/A = 1
Co = 99.9, Li = 7.9


65% saponified 48 vol% Cyanex 272 + 5 vol% TBP197
Co(Li)
RT, pH = 5, O/A = 2/3, t = 10 min
5 M H2SO4, O/A = 5
Co = 99.9, Li = 35.5


50% saponified 0.4 M Cyanex 272185
Co(Ni/Li)
RT, pH = 5.5–6.0, O/A = 2/1
2 M H2SO4, O/A = 11.7
Co = 95–98, Ni = 1


25 wt% P507186
Co(Ni/Li)
RT, pH = 4.15, O/A =1.5, t = 10 min
3 M H2SO4, O/A = 4
Co = 95, Ni < 5, Li < 5


10 wt% Acorga M5640; 10% saponified 1 M Cyanex27269
Cu; Co(Li)
RT, pH = 1.0, O/A = 1, t = 10 min; RT, pH = 5.5, O/A = 1, t = 1 min
2 M H2SO4, O/A = 1
Cu = 97; Co = 96


65% saponified D2EHPA + 5% TBP; Cyanex 272196
Mn; Co(Ni)
RT, O/A = 1, pH = 4, D2EHPA/Mn = 2; pH = 5–6, Cyanex/Co = 4
4 M H2SO4, O/A = 1

β
Mn/Co = 16; Co = 95%


Pure TBP; 10 vol% Alamine 336207
Cd; Co(Ni)
RT, O/A = 1, free acidity (HCl) = 5 M; free acidity = 4.1 M
0.5 M H2SO4, O/A = 1
Cd = 99.7; Co = 97.5, Ni = 2.9


7% Ionquest 801 + 2% Acorga M5640; 15% Cyanex 272192
Fe/Cu/Al; Co(Li/Ni)

T = 40 °C, pH = 4, O/A = 1/2; RT, pH = 5.5–6.0, O/A = 2
80 g L−1 H2SO4, O/A = 8
Fe/Cu/Al = 100; Co = 90


65% saponified D2EHPA + 10% TBP; Cyanex 272 + 10% TBP194
Mn/Cu/Al; Co(Ni/Li)
RT, pH = 4, O/A = 1, D2EHPA/Mn = 4; Cyanex/Co = 4
3 M H2SO4, O/A = 1/1.5
Mn/Cu/Al =90; Co = 99.9, Li = 10, Ni = 10


10 vol% Acorga M5640; 10 vol% PC-88A; 10 vol% PC88A + 5 vol% TOA202
Cu; Al; Co
RT, O/A = 1, t = 2 h, pH = 1.5–2.0(Cu), pH = 2.5–3.0(Al), pH = 5.5–6.0(Co)
3 M H2SO4, O/A = 1
Cu = 100; Al = 90; Co = 90


10 wt% Acorga M5640; 10% saponified 1 M Cyanex 272; 10% saponified 1 M Cyanex 272183
Cu; Co(Ni); Ni
RT, O/A = 1, pH = 1.5–1.7(Cu); pH = 5.1–5.3(Co); pH = 6.3–6.5(Ni)
2 M H2SO4, O/A = 1
Cu = 98.5; Co = 97; Ni = 96


70% saponified 20 vol% D2EHPA + 5% TBP135
Mn(Li)
RT, pH = 4, O/A = 1, t = 5 min
0.2 M H2SO4, O/A = 1
Mn = 95, Li < 2


15 vol% Co-D2EHPA + 5 vol% TBP201
Mn(Co/Li)
RT, pH = 3.5, O/A = 1/2, t = 5 min
0.1 M H2SO4, O/A = 2
Mn = 97.1


0.05 M Cyanex272 + 0.05 M PC-88A; Cyanex272 + PC-88A + EDTA205
Co/Mn(Li); Mn(Co)
RT, O/A = 1, t = 0.5 h, pH = 5.2; pH = 5
0.01 M H2SO4
SF(Mn/Co) = 712.7


25 vol% Versatic 10 acid + 20 vol% PC88A189
Mn(Co/Ni/Li)
RT, pH = 4.5, O/A = 1
0.5 M H2SO4, O/A = 2
Mn = 99.5, Co = 5.77, Ni = 0.83, Li = 0.33


0.43 M D2EHPA + 0.7 M Versatic 10 acid190
Mn(Co/Ni/Li)
RT, pH = 4.5, O/A = 1
0.5 M H2SO4, O/A = 2
Mn = 98.3, Co = 4.11, Ni = 1.06, Li = 0.25


0.23 M LIX 84I + 1.41 M Versatic 10 acid206
Ni(Mn/Co/Li)
RT, pH = 5, O/A = 1
3 M H2SO4, O/A = 1
Ni = 98.3, Co = 0.23, Mn = 0.15, Li = 0.19


40% D2EHPA in kerosene204
Mn/Co/Ni(Li)
RT, pH = 3.5, O/A = 1
0.5 M H2SO4
Ni = 85, Co = 99, Mn = 100


Cyanex 272 + 5% v/v TOA199
Co/Ni(Li)
RT, pH = 6.8–7.1, O/A = 1:0.77
H2SO4, pH = 5–6
Ni = 99.6, Co = 98.7


O/A = 1.5


L64 + Na2SO4 + H2O (PAN as extracting agent)193
Cu(Co)
pH = 6
0.33 M HNO3

β
Cu/Co = 322


30% Cyanex 272; 30% D2EHPA; 10% Cyanex 272203
Zn; Cd/Mn; Co
pH = 2.5, O/A = 2; pH = 2.7, O/A = 2; pH = 5.25, O/A = 0.5
1.2 M H2SO4, O/A = 2; O/A = 4; 0.4 M H2SO4, O/A = 2
Zn = 97, Cd = 77.4, Mn = 93.1, Co = 98.7


0.1 M Cyanex301191
Co(Li)
RT, pH = 7.2, O/A = 1
2 M H2SO4

B
Co/Li = 612


20% saponified D2EHPA; 30% saponified PC-88A121
Cu/Mn; Ni(Co)
pH = 2.6, O/A = 1; pH = 4.25, O/A = 1
—
Ni = 80.13


15% LIX 84 IC; 20% Cyanex 272200
Cu; Co(Li)
pH = 2, O/A = 1; pH = 4.8, O/A = 1
—
Cu = 99; Co = 98




 Fig. 15  Effects of (a) extraction time (40% D2EHPA, pH = 3.5, O/A = 1, RT); (b) vol% D2EHPA (pH = 3.5, 10 min, O/A = 1, RT); (c) pH value (40% D2EHPA, 10 min, O/A = 1, RT); and (d) O/A ratio (pH = 3.5, 10 min, 40% D2EHPA, RT) on the extraction of various metals from spent NCM materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. Metal pH isotherms with 7% Ionquest 801 in Shellsol D70 (e) and 7% Ionquest 801 and 2% Acorga M5640 in Shellsol D70 (f) (O/A = 1:2 at 22 °C) for the extraction of various metals from spent LIBs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 192 Copyright 2010 Elsevier. (g) Plot of equilibrium pH vs. logD (aqueous: 10.44 g L−1 Co and 1.77 g L−1 Li in sulfate medium; organic: 15% Cyanex 272 + 3% isodecanol in kerosene, mixing time = 300 s, O/A = 1); (h) plot of logD vs. log[H2A2] (H2A2: Cyanex 272 in dimeric form). Reprinted with permission from ref. 195 Copyright 2012 Elsevier. McCabe–Thiele diagram for extraction of Mn (i), and stripping of Mn (j) (O/A = 8, 5, 3, 2, 1, 0.5, and 0.3 at RT). Reprinted with permission from ref. 190 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
For a complex solution with multiple metal ions, mixtures of extractants are usually used instead of a single extractant. This is because metal extraction with higher selectivity can be achieved from the synergistic effects of multiple extractants. The synergistic enhancement coefficient R was calculated as R = Dmixture/(Da + Db).192,205,206 A value of R larger than 1 means the mixed system shows synergistic enhancement. Cheng et al.192 reported that Cu extraction was enhanced after the addition of Acorga M5640 (5-nonylsalicylaldoxime) to Ionquest 801 (2-ethyl-hexyl phosphoric acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester), as shown in Fig. 15e and f. These organic solutions play different roles in this mixed system, with Ionquest 801 acting as an extractant and Acorga M5640 as a synergist.
Interfacial chemical reactions are considered to be the main extraction mechanism, and involve the release of protons (H+) during the dissociation of acidic extractants at the O/A interface. Slope analysis, usually for the relationship of logD vs. pHe or logD vs. log[H2A2](org) (H2R2 is the dimeric form of the extractant), is commonly used to determine the number of reacted extractant molecules in the extraction process.189,195,197,198 For instance, during the extraction of Co with Cyanex 272, the slope of a plot of logD vs. pHe plot was 1.93, which indicated that two H+ were released with the extraction of each Co2+ into the organic phase (Fig. 15g). Based on the reaction equation, a plot of logD vs. log[H2A2](org) with a slope of 3 revealed that three molecules of dimeric Cyanex 272 solvated one Co2+ to form CoA2(HA)4 in the organic phase (Fig. 15h).195
To determine the required number of extraction or stripping stages, an O/A ratio isotherm, namely a McCabe–Thiele diagram, can be constructed.190,195,201 As shown in Fig. 15i and j, it can be predicted that three stages will be required for Mn extraction at an O/A ratio of 1, and two stages will be needed for Mn stripping from a loaded organic solution at an O/A ratio of 2.190 Following the extraction, there are two more necessary steps under normal conditions. One is the scrubbing step to remove the co-extracted impurities and the other is stripping to transfer the metal ions from the organic phase to aqueous solution for final treatment. H2SO4 is the most commonly used stripping agent.
Solvent extraction is widely used in industrial applications and can provide products with high purity, but it has the disadvantages of complex operation and high solvent cost. Although there is still much research to be done, current knowledge of the extraction of metals in different media is helpful for researchers investigating the extraction of transition metals within the acidic environment (mainly sulfate-based media) of spent LIB recycling. Future research should focus on the use of cheap solvents and the closed-loop utilization of solvents.


3.3.3 Chemical precipitation. 
Like solvent extraction, chemical precipitation is used to separate metal ions or remove impurities (Fig. 16).113,136 The separation mechanism of chemical precipitation relies on the different solubilities of metal compounds at certain pH. Generally, transition metal hydroxides and oxalates have much lower solubility compared with that of the corresponding lithium compounds. Meanwhile, impurity metal ions, like Fe3+, Al3+, and Cu2+, usually precipitate at a relatively lower pH (Fig. 16a).186,208,209 Thus, it is reasonable to remove impurities first to avoid co-precipitation contamination in the subsequent separation process. The transition metal ions are then precipitated, leaving Li+ in the solution to be recycled. Based on the different solubilities of compounds, the most commonly used precipitants include sodium hydroxide (NaOH), H2C2O4, ammonium oxalate [(NH4)2C2O4], sodium carbonate (Na2CO3), and sodium phosphate (Na3PO4), which can react with transition metal ions and Li+ to form insoluble precipitates of transition metal hydroxides, carbonates, or oxalates, and lithium carbonate, phosphate, or fluoride (Fig. 16b–d and Table 3).136,157,159,160,188,210–212 As well as the pH-related parameters discussed above, other parameters, such as the concentration of metal ions and the temperature, also affect the chemical precipitation process. For example, to maximize Li recovery and purity, the raffinate is concentrated to increase its Li+ concentration above 20 g L−1.187 Meanwhile, the precipitation of Li+ with saturated Na2CO3 solution is conducted at ∼90 °C, because the solubility of Li2CO3 in aqueous solution is inversely proportional to temperature.137,157,181,210 Some metal ions can selectively form particular precipitates. For instance, Ni2+ can react selectively with dimethylglyoxime (DMG, C4H8N2O2) to precipitate as a red solid Ni–DMG complex, which can then be dissolved in HCl solution to obtain DMG reagent in white powder solid form and Ni2+ solution (Fig. 16e).114,201 Mn2+ in the leaching solution can be precipitated selectively as manganese oxide (MnO2) through a redox reaction (eqn (8)) with potassium permanganate (KMnO4) at pH 2.114 Co2+ can be precipitated as Co2O3·H2O by an oxidative precipitation reaction (eqn (9) and (10)) with sodium hypochlorite (NaClO) at pH 3.182 3Mn2+ + 2MnO4− + 2H2O = 5MnO2 + 4H+(8) 2Co2+ + ClO− + 2H3O+ = 2Co3+ + Cl− + 3H2O(9) 2Co3+ + 6OH− = Co2O3·3H2O(10)
 Fig. 16  (a) pH values of the start and end of hydroxide precipitation for different metal ions. Reprinted from ref. 208 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) XRD patterns of the precipitated Li2CO3 and standard powder diffraction peaks of Li2CO3, and (c) SEM image of the precipitated Li2CO3. Adapted with permission from ref. 137 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) XRD patterns and digital images of recovered CoC2O4·2H2O and Li3PO4. Reprinted with permission from reference. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (e) XRD pattern and digital image of the DMG–Ni precipitate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 201 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. ΔG–pH curves of Ni (f), Co (g), and Mn (h) carbonates and hydroxides in solution: total metal ions concentration of 0.19 M, initial carbonate concentration of 0.19 M, initial ammonia concentration of 1.25 M. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215 Copyright 2013 Elsevier. (i) Theoretical log[Me]–pH curves in H2SO4 leaching solution at different pH, (j) theoretical log[Me]–pH curves and (k) metal precipitation efficiencies in citric acid leaching solution at different pH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214 Copyright 2013 Elsevier. 
Table 3 Summary of the chemical precipitation parameters investigated in the literature




Elements
Precipitates
Precipitants
pH
Ref.




Li
Li2CO3
Na2CO3
—

137, 157 and 187



LiF
NH4F
—

136



Li3PO4
H3PO4/Na3PO4
—

102, 159 and 188







Co
Co(OH)2
NaOH
10

114



CoCO3
Na2CO3
9–10

157 and 212



Co2O3·3H2O
NaClO
3

182



CoC2O4·2H2O
H2C2O4/(NH4)2C2O4
1.5, 2

136, 186 and 187







Ni
Ni(OH)2
NaOH
8,11

114 and 182



NiCO3
Na2CO3
9

160



NiC8H14N4O4
C4H8N2O2
5,9

114 and 201







Mn
Mn(OH)2
NaOH
12

114



MnCO3
Na2CO3
7.5

160



MnO2
KMnO4
2

114







Ni/Co/Mn co-precipitation
NixCoyMnz(OH)2
NaOH
11

73, 74 and 208





(NixCoyMnz)CO3
Na2CO3
7.5–8

213







Fe/Al/Cu impurities
Fe(OH)3
NaOH
3–6

113, 157, 186, 201 and 214



Al(OH)3


Cu(OH)2




The operating conditions used for chemical precipitation are generally determined by trial and error. However, the precipitation tendency of each metal ion can be obtained through theoretical simulation. Ma et al.215 simulated the precipitation properties of Ni, Co, and Mn in an OH−–NH3–CO32− system by calculating the ΔrG of all the precipitation reactions. The effects of pH, the initial metal concentration, carbonate concentration, and NH3 concentration on the precipitation process were investigated. For example, when the initial metal concentration was 0.19 M, the carbonate concentration was 0.19 M, and the NH3 concentration was 1.25 M, and the precipitation order of metal ions was Mn > Co > Ni, with the carbonate precipitation tendency being stronger than that of hydroxide precipitation (Fig. 16f–h). The same group also investigated the effect of the leaching solution system on chemical precipitation.214 When the leaching system contained a chelating agent like citric acid, the complexing effect of citric acid changed the precipitation properties of the metal ions, making them more difficult to separate by precipitation in a citric acid system than in an H2SO4 system (Fig. 16i–k).136,214 Another theoretical prediction method for chemical precipitation is the solid–liquid equilibrium (SLE) phase diagram. Cai and colleagues216 used an SLE phase diagram to optimize chemical precipitation in the recycling of LFP and LiCoxMn1−xO2. Specifically, the optimal amount of NaOH was determined from the SLE phase diagram to obtain both a high purity and high yield of precipitated FePO4 instead of the Fe(OH)3 impurity. The selective precipitation of cobalt sulfide (CoS) and manganese sulfide (MnS) can be realized by controlling the amount of sodium sulfide (Na2S). Hence, theoretical investigations can help to optimize precipitation reactions in a rational way instead of by trial and errors as used previously.
In its early stage of research, chemical precipitation only involved the separation of Co2+ and Li+, which are the main metal ions found in cathode materials. With the increasing application and market share of NCM and NCA cathodes, the leaching solution has now become more complicated, often containing multiple metal ions. Moreover, Ni, Co, and Mn possess similar chemical properties, so they often co-precipitate and are thus difficult to separate by ordinary chemical precipitation. The co-precipitation of Ni, Co, and Mn was thus developed to directly synthesize carbonate or hydroxide precursors as raw materials for the production of electrode materials.73,74,217 This approach can reintroduce all the transition metal ions in a leaching solution into the LIB production chain without the need for separation to produce electrode materials with high added value. The details of co-precipitation will be discussed later in Section 3.3.4. Chemical precipitation is widely used because of its simple operation and low cost. However, the operating conditions need to be precisely controlled to obtain the target products with high purity in the case of co-precipitation with other metal ions.


3.3.4 Other synthetic methods. 
In addition to the main chemical processes discussed above, other methods, such as electrodeposition, adsorption, and crystallization, have also been investigated for battery recycling.218–220 Electrodeposition uses two electrodes to supply energy to the leaching solution to induce redox reactions of the ions in the solution. Metallic films, alloys, and multilayers with specific structures and morphologies can be electrodeposited by controlling the pH, current density, and voltage.122,123,221–225 Electrodeposition has the advantage of achieving a high product purity because it does not introduce other impurities, but it has a high energy consumption because of the use of electricity.
Selective adsorption can also achieve the separation and recovery of metal ions. Most research focuses on the adsorption of Li+, because many metal oxides have high selectivity and adsorption capacity for Li+, and are referred to as lithium-ion sieves.210,226–228 The most promising lithium-ion sieve is manganese oxide derived from spinel lithium manganese oxide; its selective adsorption feature originates from the memory effect of the sites formed after Li extraction. Modification, including acid treatment and surface coating, can improve the adsorption capacity of the sieves.229
The solutions left after H2SO4 leaching or stripping can be crystallized to obtain crystals of sulfates.68,185 It was found that the purity grade of CoSO4·H2O crystals obtained by crystallization relied on the water evaporation rate; whereby higher evaporation rates of water led to contamination of the final solid with Al and Li. The optimal water evaporation rate determined after weighing the crystallization rate and purity of the product was 85%.68


3.3.5 Resynthesis of cathode materials and other high-value-added products. 
To satisfy the growing demand for high-energy and low-cost LIBs, a wide variety of cathode materials, in terms of the types and elements, are being developed and commercialized. As a result, the separation of multiple metal elements in the recycling process using an extraction or precipitation method is becoming much more complex.73,208 Great effort is being made to resynthesize new cathode materials to avoid the need for separation process and yo maximize the use of metals in spent materials. More importantly, from the viewpoints of economy and energy consumption, this kind of closed-loop recycling can lower the cost by producing high-value-added products and can also decrease the total cradle-to-gate energy consumption of LIBs according to LCA analysis.230,231 Heat treatment, co-precipitation, sol–gel, and relithiation are the main resynthesis methods, and the resynthesized cathode materials include LCO, LFP, and NCM. Based on the properties of different cathode materials, every resynthesis method has its own applications (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  Initial discharge capacities (at 0.1–0.2C with an upper potential of 4.2 or 4.3 V) of various cathodes (LCO, LFP, and NCM) resynthesized by different methods. 
The heat-treatment method involves the direct solid-state calcination of spent cathode materials like LCO and LFP with a simple elemental composition (Fig. 18).64,75,232–237 Song et al.64 showed that the resynthesized cathodes exhibited satisfactory electrochemical performance compared with that of commercial ones (Fig. 18a–c). In particular, the recycled LCO after calcination at 900 °C with a certain amount of Li2CO3 exhibited a discharge capacity of about 152.4 mA h g−1. The improved electrochemical properties are associated with the repair of the layered structure during the high-temperature calcination process. Zhang and co-workers234 continued to investigate the regeneration of LFP through the heat-treatment method. FePO4, Li3PO4, Fe2O3, and P2O5 existed as impurities in the sample before heat treatment. After pretreatment, the spent LFP cathode powder was directly heat treated at 150–800 °C for 1 h under Ar/H2. It was found that the LFP cathode regenerated at 650 °C displayed almost the same electrochemical performance at high discharge current as that of a new cathode (Fig. 18d–f). In a subsequent study by the same group, the performance of LFP cathodes was further improved by direct regeneration with Li2CO3, which could make up for the loss of Li during the calcination process (Fig. 18g–i).233 They also verified that 650 °C was the optimal calcination temperature. The discharge capacity and retention rate after 100 cycles were 140.4 mA h g−1 and 95.32%, respectively, which are comparable with the corresponding values for a middle-end LFP cathode. A pilot demonstration line of the recycling process was developed, as shown in Fig. 19.233 Processes with toxic emissions were conducted in a sealed environment. Impurities were the main concern in the direct calcination regeneration method, because they greatly influence the performance of cathode materials and thus need to be carefully controlled.
 Fig. 18  Heat regeneration of different cathodes: (a) XRD patterns of LCO after regeneration at different temperatures; (b) SEM image of LCO after regeneration at 900 °C; (c) cycling performances of LCO after regeneration at different temperatures (30 mA g−1, 3–4.3 V); reprinted from ref. 64 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) XRD patterns of LFP treated at different temperatures; (e) SEM image of LFP treated at 650 °C; (f) discharge capacities of LFP treated at different temperatures at 0.2C (2.5–4.2 V) and 1–5C (2.0–4.2 V); reprinted from ref. 234 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) XRD patterns of LFP regenerated at different temperatures; (h) SEM image of LFP regenerated at 650 °C; (i) cycle performances of LFP regenerated at different temperatures (0.2C, 2.5–4.2 V). Reprinted with permission from ref. 233 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
 Fig. 19  (a) Recycling process flow diagram of a soft package spent LFP battery; (b) a small-scale model line; (c) 20 A h soft package spent LFP battery after being used in an EV; five kinds of recycled by-products: (d) separator, (e) Al-plastic film, (f) plate lugs, (g) Cu foil, and (h) Al foil. Reprinted from ref. 234 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Because impurities easily form during inhomogeneous element diffusion, the resynthesis of NCM and NCA materials with multiple metal elements cannot be achieved by this calcination method. For this reason, sol–gel and co-precipitation are used to resynthesize materials containing multiple elements, of which the co-precipitation method is more suitable for large-scale applications than the sol–gel approach. Multiple metal ions can be mixed homogeneously at the molecular level using these chemical solution methods. Generally, co-precipitation is carried out in a hydroxide or carbonate system at the optimal pH of 11 or 8, respectively (Fig. 20).74,213,217,238–241 Wang et al.217 successfully resynthesized a high-performance Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3(OH)2 precursor from leaching solution by carefully controlling the co-precipitation reaction parameters. When the pH reached 11, almost no metal ions were left in the solution, indicating the complete hydroxide co-precipitation of Ni, Co, and Mn.208 The final LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 cathode material had a uniform size distribution and spherical shape (Fig. 20a and b). The electrochemical performance of this material was independently tested at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL). As shown in Fig. 20c, and it delivered an initial discharge capacity of 150 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and a capacity retention of about 88% after 100 cycles. The economic analysis of certain battery recycling processes can be conducted in a simple or complex way. The simple economic analysis is based on the material balance, which is usually carried out by two methods. Taking economic assessment of the co-precipitation recycling technology as an example, the first method is to calculate the cost of using the recovered materials versus virgin materials to synthesize NCM. The results showed that the cost of synthesis with virgin materials was $16635 ton−1. By comparison, the cost was only $6195 ton−1 with recovered materials, which indicated a large cost decrease of $10440 ton−1 could be realized by using recovered materials.208 The second method is cost-beneficial analysis to evaluate the profit of the recycling process. The calculated material cost of recycling one ton of spent NCM LIBs was $1419 ton−1. Meanwhile, the benefit of the recovered materials (over 90% from the resynthesized NCM) was $6432 ton−1, which brought about a profit of $5013 ton−1.73
 Fig. 20  SEM images of resynthesized LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 with NaOH co-precipitation at different magnifications (a and b); (c) independent testing result in ANL: cycle life test at 0.5C; reprinted with permission from ref. 217 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. SEM images of resynthesized LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 with Na2CO3 co-precipitation at different magnifications (d and e); (f) cycling performance of different samples (a: the resynthesized sample, b: the sample synthesized from pure compounds) at 1C (2.7–4.3 V). Reprinted with permission from ref. 213 Copyright 2012 Elsevier. 
Compared with the conventional co-precipitation method used to synthesize new cathode materials, the use of waste leachate for resynthesis requires more consideration. For instance, waste leachate normally contains Fe, Al, Cu, and Mg impurities, which need to be removed to a tolerance threshold level.213,238,242 It is believed that impurity concentrations in LIB cathode materials should be less than 100 ppm.73 However, trace amounts of Al, Cu, and Mg can improve the electrochemical performance. As revealed by Sa et al.,238 a small amount of Cu (2.5%) had a positive effect on the capacity retention of NCM materials (Fig. 21a–d). The mechanism underlying this improvement was speculated to originate from the occupation of Mn sites by Cu, which slightly changed the lattice parameters during Li insertion/extraction. Similarly, the threshold concentration of Mg impurity in leachate was explored by Weng and colleagues.213 They found that Mg was doped in Co sites and that Mg2+ in the resynthesized cathode material Li[(Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3)1−xMgx]O2 was beneficial to cycling performance when x ≤ 0.01 (C ≤ 360 mg L−1), as illustrated in Fig. 21e–h. In addition to the impurity issue, the concentration of transition metal ions in leachate (<1 M) is usually much lower than that used in the traditional co-precipitation synthesis of precursors (2 M), and thus needs to be concentrated by evaporation.217 Moreover, although Li in the leachate is theoretically not supposed to precipitate, its effect on the final products should be verified quantitatively. Given the comprehensive research discussed above, co-precipitation recycling technology exhibits great potential for industrial applications in terms of both performance and economy.
 Fig. 21  Impurity effects on the performance of resynthesized samples by the co-precipitation method: SEM images of LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 with 0% Cu (a), 2.5% Cu (b), and 5% Cu (c); (d) capacity retentions of LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 with 0, 2.5, and 5 atom% Cu (2C, 2.7–4.3 V); reprinted with permission from ref. 238 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. SEM images of Li[(Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3)1−xMgx]O2 with x = 0 (e), x = 0.01 (f), and x = 0.025 (g); (h) cycling performance of Li[(Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3)1−xMgx]O2 (x = 0, 0.01, 0.025) (2C, 2.7–4.3 V). Reprinted with permission from ref. 213 Copyright 2012 Elsevier. 
The sol–gel method is another universal approach to synthesize cathode materials. Because a chelation agent is essential in the sol–gel method, organic acid leaching solutions are feasible for this method, with the organic acids being directly used as the chelation agents.155,243–246 Different from co-precipitation, Li+ in the solution can all be reused as a Li source without separation, and the particle size of the resynthesized materials is usually smaller (in the range of 100–300 nm) than that obtained from co-precipitation. Citric acid is a commonly used chelating agent in conventional sol–gel synthesis, so it is natural to use citric acid as a leaching agent and then as a chelation agent in the following sol–gel resynthesis process. For example, Yao et al.244 used citric acid as both a leaching and sol–gel chelation agent in the recycling of spent NCM cathodes (Fig. 22a–c). Compared with those of freshly synthesized NCM, the resynthesized NCM cathodes showed a similar morphology and exhibited satisfactory performance, with an initial discharge capacity of 147.2 mA h g−1. Similar to the effects of Cu and Mg impurities discussed above, the positive effect of Al doping on the electrochemical performance of NCM was confirmed by Li and co-workers.245 Mixed spent cathode materials (LCO, NCM, and LMO) were leached with citric acid and H2O2. The sol–gel method was then used to resynthesize new NCM cathodes. A trace amount of Al was found in the resynthesized cathode, and was responsible for its better cycling performance compared with that of cathodes synthesized directly from chemical reagents. The mechanism underpinning this effect lies in the strong Al–O binding energy, which maintains the layered structure during the insertion/extraction of Li. The characteristics of the sol–gel method make it suitable for the fundamental research and modification of electrode materials, but not for large-scale material synthesis in industry.
 Fig. 22  SEM images of resynthesized (a) and fresh-synthesized samples (b) prepared by sol–gel method; (c) cycling performance of the resynthesized and fresh-synthesized samples at 1C (2.75–4.25 V). Reprinted from ref. 244 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Voltage profiles (d) and cycling discharge capacities (e) of as-purchased and electrochemically relithiated EOL LFP cathodes; (f) voltage profiles for as-purchased and chemically relithiated EOL LFP cathodes; (g) XRD patterns of as-purchased, EOL, and chemically relithiated LFP cathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 247 Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
The two general resynthesis methods discussed above are based on pure leaching solution; another type of method involves the relithiation of spent cathode powder without a leaching process. Relithiation can be achieved by electrochemical, chemical, and hydrothermal methods.247–250 Gaustad et al.247 demonstrated the refunctionalization of an EOL LFP cathode through chemical and electrochemical methods. The relithiated LFP recovered its original capacity of 150–155 mA h g−1 (Fig. 22d–g). The capacity fading mechanism of active Li+ loss underpins the relithiation method, making it feasible to resynthesize spent cathodes after regular service life.
Relithiation can also be achieved by the hydrothermal method, as investigated by Zhang and He.249 Spent LCO powder was dispersed in a concentrated LiOH solution and reacted hydrothermally at 80 °C under ultrasonic radiation for 6 h. The Li+ in the LiOH solution and the ultrasonic effect both facilitated the rearrangement of atoms and thus the recovery of the layered structure. The regenerated LCO showed improved electrochemical performance, with an initial discharge capacity of 133.5 mA h g−1 and a high capacity retention of 99.5% after 40 cycles. The relithiation method provides a possibility to regenerate electrode materials without breaking the whole structure. However, for spent cathodes with a destroyed structure, relithiation alone cannot completely restore the original structure, and thus a short annealing may be applied to improve the performance.250
In addition to spent cathodes, the large amount of cathode scraps generated during the battery production process cannot be neglected. Unlike spent cathode materials, electrode scraps have not been assembled into cells and have not been subjected to charge/discharge cycles, indicating that the scrap materials still possess a complete structure. Therefore, the emphasis of regenerating electrode scraps is on the separation of active materials from the current collectors followed by a subsequent regeneration treatment.58,65–67,251 Zhang and co-workers65 conducted a comprehensive investigation of NCM scrap regeneration with different separation methods (direct calcination, solvent dissolution, and basic solution dissolution) and calcination temperature (200–900 °C). The results showed that the scraps regenerated with solvent dissolution and heat treatment at 800 °C delivered the highest initial discharge capacity of 157.8 mA h g−1 at 0.2C. The variation of the electrochemical performance was attributed to the content of LiF originating from PVDF decomposition and the morphology change of particles during the separation and calcination processes. In another study, Song et al.66 regenerated LCO cathode scraps using the solvent method and heat treatment. Dimethylformamide (DMF) and ethanol were used to separate the active materials from the current collectors, and then low-temperature treatment at 250 °C was verified to be the optimal condition to improve the crystallinity of LCO. The regenerated LCO cathode exhibited an initial discharge capacity of 154.6 mA h g−1 and a capacity retention of 92.0% after 360 cycles.
The emerging resynthesis method has attracted much attention because of its various advantages, as discussed above. The main concern in resynthesis lies in whether or not the resynthesized cathodes are comparable with commercial materials in terms of cost and performance. With the wide application of transition metals in many industries, other high-value-added products have also been explored.252–261 For example, Perez et al.257,258 proposed a novel approach to resynthesize metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) from simulated LIB waste solution. MOFs are compounds consisting of metal ions or clusters coordinated to organic ligands to form one-, two-, or three-dimensional structures. MOFs show potential in many applications, such as catalysis, separation, gas storage, sensing, and purification.262–264 The transition metals Cu, Zn, and Co are the most commonly used metal components in MOFs. In this preliminary study, two organic ligands [1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid (BTC)] were tested to verify the feasibility of their approach. A simulated waste solution consisting of NiSO4·6H2O, MnSO4·6H2O, and CoSO4·6H2O in DMF was mixed with the ligand and solvothermally reacted at 120 °C for 2 days. A crystalline material with a regular shape was formed using BTC. In a further study, 1,4-benzenediphosphonic acid and 1,3,5-benzenetriphosphonic acid (BTP) were used to form phosphonate-derivative MOFs. It was found that 80% of the Mn was selectively precipitated after hydrothermal reaction at 150 °C with BTP. This novel concept provides a new direction for the design of recovered materials from spent LIBs.
Because of the multiple valence states of transition metals, they are often used as catalysts in many applications. Freitas et al.260 converted spent LCO cathodes into a mixture of Co3O4 and LCO, which exhibited a 90% photocatalytic discoloration efficiency of methylene blue dye after 10 h. The Co3O4 and LCO mixture could also be used as an anode for water electrolysis, as investigated by Garcia and colleagues.259 After calcination at 400 °C for 24 h, the regenerated mixture increased the current density of oxygen evolution to 1010 mA cm−2 with a concentration of Co3O4 and LCO of 10% w/w. These catalytic properties were attributed to the presence of Co3+ in both LCO and Co3O4. In a pioneering work by Hu et al.,265 Li0.50MnO2 was recovered in situ from a recycled Li–MnO2 battery, and then acted as an efficient catalyst for a Li–O2 battery. Tuning the electrochemical performance of transition metals to obtain catalysts is an appealing approach to maximize the value of products.

3.4 Recycling of anodes and electrolytes
It is generally accepted that the remaining components of batteries after removal of the cathode materials possess relatively lower values. Thus, less attention has been paid to the recycling of anode and electrolyte materials. However, the toxicity of electrolytes, limited Li element reserves, and the wide application of carbon materials mean that proactive thinking about the proper recycling of anodes and electrolytes is necessary before they enter the waste stream in large volumes.

3.4.1 Anode recycling. 
In a traditional battery recycling process, the anode is either destroyed by burning or remains as an after-filtration residue.266 The main valuable components of spent anodes are the graphite carbon material and Li residue. The Li residue in an anode mostly remains in the graphite lattice voids and SEI component in the form of Li2O, LiF, Li2CO3, ROCO2Li, and CH3OLi. Among these materials, Li2O, ROCO2Li, and CH3OLi are water soluble, whereas the others are almost insoluble in water.266–269 Based on this behavior, He et al.268 developed a leaching process with HCl to recycle Li in spent anode materials. They found that a high leaching efficiency of 84% could be achieved in deionized water, and the highest leaching efficiency of 99.4 wt% was obtained using 3 M HCl at 80 °C for 90 min. Moreover, the crystal structure of spent graphite was improved after acid leaching.
As a carbon material, spent anodes can also be modified for other purposes as a carbon source (Fig. 23a–g). Most studies have focused on the synthesis of graphene.270–273 For example, Chen and co-workers273 found that spent anode graphite can be used as a cheap candidate for the high-yield production of high-quality graphene. With the assistance of ultrasound, the exfoliation efficiency of the spent graphite was 3 to 11 times that of natural graphite, which was attributed to the decreased interlayer force after cycling. The conductivity of exfoliated graphene was as high as 9100 S m−1. This is a representative example showing a process of increasing the value of recycling by synthesizing high-value-added products.
 Fig. 23  Applications of recycled carbon anodes: (a) TEM image of the oxidized CNFs aqueous dispersion; (b) differential pulse voltammograms of hydroquinone and catechol with increasing concentrations from 6 μM to 70 μM (4 mV s−1, 50 mV pulse amplitude, and 20 ms pulse width); reprinted with permission from ref. 278 Copyright 2013 The Electrochemical Society. Digital image of a free-standing film of exfoliated graphene (c) and cross-sectional SEM of the film (d); reprinted from ref. 273 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Preparation diagram of Mg–MCMB composite; reprinted with permission from ref. 277 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (f) Phosphate removal rates from aqueous solutions by raw and Mg-enriched MCMB; reprinted with permission from ref. 276 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (g) Removal rates of Pb2+, Cd2+, and Ag+ by artificial graphite (AG) and MnO2-AG (adsorbent dose = 0.2 g L−1, concentration of metal ions = 50 mg L−1, contact time = 24 h, initial pH = 6.01). Reprinted with permission from ref. 275 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. SEM images (h) and electrochemical performance (i) of graphite after a subcritical CO2 assisted electrolyte extraction with acetonitrile addition as a co-solvent and subsequent thermal treatment; reprinted with permission from ref. 281 Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In a similar vein, Yao et al.274–277 conducted a series of studies investigating the use of spent anode carbon materials as an adsorbent for waste water treatment (Fig. 23e–g). They modified the surface of spent graphitized carbon with nanostructured Mg(OH)2 for use as an efficient adsorbent to remove phosphates from water. The resulting material showed the highest phosphate adsorption capacity achieved to date (588.4 mg g−1).277 After kinetic analysis with multiple models, a heterogeneous multilayer adsorption mechanism was proposed. Then, the same group prepared MnO2-modified graphite sorbents from spent LIBs for the treatment of waste water contaminated by the heavy metals Pb, Cd, and Ag.275 The MnO2 particles served as active sorption sites. Their results showed that the graphite adsorbent coated with ultrafine MnO2 particles exhibited high removal rates of 99.9%, 79.7%, and 99.8% for Pb2+, Cd2+, and Ag+, respectively.
Because of the damaged layered structure of graphite and the SEI component remaining after cycling, the regeneration of spent graphite as a new anode material for LIBs is generally not feasible, as the purity requirement for battery-grade graphite is higher than 99.9%.266,278 However, after proper modification, satisfactory electrochemical performance can be achieved.279,280 For instance, Nowak et al.281 recently revealed that the performance of spent graphite can be restored after the careful treatment with electrolytes (Fig. 23h and i). The effects of three different electrolyte extraction methods, namely thermal evaporation of the electrolyte, electrolyte extraction with subcritical liquid CO2 and acetonitrile, and electrolyte extraction with supercritical CO2 on anode recycling, were investigated. The results showed that the best electrochemical performance of the recycled graphite anode was obtained with electrolytes extracted with subcritical CO2 and acetonitrile. In contrast, supercritical CO2 at high pressure resulted in graphite with a lower crystallinity, which thus had an adverse effect on its performance as an anode.


3.4.2 Electrolyte recycling. 
The electrolyte in spent LIBs is another important source of Li. However, the volatile organic compounds and toxic lithium salts in electrolytes are severe threats to the environment and human health. Therefore, electrolytes should be recycled or disposed of carefully. However, as for anode materials, research on the recycling of LIB electrolytes is rare, for several reasons: (1) the majority of the electrolyte is adsorbed on the separator and active materials, which makes it difficult to extract and collect; (2) the electrolyte components are volatile, inflammable, and toxic, indicating that their recycling requires cautious operations that need to be conducted in a confined environment; (3) the electrolyte components are complex, including lithium salts, diverse organic solvents, and additives, making their separation and purification difficult. Despite these obstacles, steady progress on LIB electrolyte recycling has been made in recent years. The first method that is expected to be effective is solvent extraction, which was used to extract spent electrolytes in the pretreatment process in early research.282 However, the extraction yield was usually low and more impurities were introduced.
Consequently, researchers instead turned their focus to supercritical CO2 extraction, which possesses the following desirable advantages: (1) CO2 has a supercritical phase that is relatively easily available at a moderate critical pressure of 73.8 bar (7.38 MPa) and temperature of 31.1 °C; (2) supercritical CO2 has a large dissolving capacity for organic substances, especially non-polar ones, and electrolyte components are relatively tolerant to this operation; (3) CO2 can be easily separated from the extract and reused; (4) no further impurities are introduced and hazardous emission is avoided as well; (5) the extraction technology is mature.283 Grützke et al.284 pioneered work on the supercritical CO2 extraction of LIB electrolytes, which was conducted in a static autoclave with CO2 at the supercritical head pressure of helium. Electrolytes in commercial 18650 cells were extracted and analyzed by gas and ion chromatography. It was found that solvents, including EC, DMC, and EMC, could be extracted, whereas LiPF6 was barely recovered. Moreover, four aging products of diethyl carbonate (DEC), dimethyl-2,5-dioxahexane dicarboxylate, ethylmethyl-2,5-dioxahexane dicarboxylate, and diethyl-2,5-dioxahexane dicarboxylate were identified in the aged battery electrolytes, and the concentrations of these aging products were related to the aging temperature and SOH of the batteries. To improve the overall recovery rate and extraction of the conducting salts, Nowak and co-workers285 developed a flow-through method to extract LIB electrolytes with supercritical and liquid CO2 with the addition of different solvents. Their results showed that the linear carbonates (DMC and EMC) were extracted more effectively with liquid CO2, while a larger amount of cyclic carbonate (EC) was extracted with supercritical CO2 (Fig. 24a and b). The extraction of lithium conducting salts with pure supercritical or liquid CO2 was poor. These results could be attributed to the non-polar nature of the CO2 extraction medium. However, the addition of solvents to CO2 improved the extraction of all the components, especially LiPF6. The highest recovery rate of 89.1 ± 3.4 wt% was achieved using liquid CO2, additional solvents of acetonitrile and propylene carbonate (3:1), and an additional 20 minutes with liquid CO2 only (Fig. 24c and d).
 Fig. 24  (a) Time dependency of the amount of recovered electrolytes from commercial 18650 cells extracted with supercritical (300 bar, 40 °C) and liquid (60 bar, 25 °C) CO2; (b) compositions of the recovered electrolyte extracted with liquid CO2 at different times; (c) time dependency of the amount of recovered electrolytes extracted with liquid CO2 and 0.5 mL min−1 additional solvents; (d) compositions and amounts of the recovered electrolytes extracted with liquid CO2 and additional solvents for 30 min, and with a subsequent 20 min liquid CO2 extraction without any additional solvent; reprinted from ref. 285 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Chromatograms and composition of extracts with the course of pressure (e and f), temperature (g and h), and time (i and j) from carbonate mixture by supercritical CO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 287 Copyright 2016 The Authors. Published by ESG (http://www.electrochemsci.org). This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
Dai et al.286–288 also conducted a series of studies on the recovery of electrolytes using supercritical CO2 extraction. First, they confirmed through response surface methodology that the extraction pressure strongly affects the supercritical CO2 extraction of organic carbonate-based electrolytes. A high extraction yield of 85.07 + 0.36% was achieved using the mildest operating conditions of 23 MPa, 40 °C, and 45 min. LiPF6 was found to hydrolyze during the extraction and could not be recovered.286 In a follow-up study, they further investigated the inherent correlation between certain physical properties of carbonate-based electrolytes and their corresponding supercritical CO2 extraction behavior.287 Polarity was confirmed to be the dominant factor controlling the extraction process. The influence of pressure, temperature, and time on the extraction of different electrolyte components was explained by the polarity change of supercritical CO2, which will increase with decreasing temperature or rising pressure (Fig. 24e–j).
Based on previous research, Dai et al.288 developed a LIB electrolyte recycling process involving supercritical CO2 extraction, resin and molecular sieve purification, and component supplements (Fig. 25a). The four main organic components detected in the electrolyte extracts were EMC, DEC, EC, and vinylene carbonate (VC). The higher extraction yields of linear carbonates (EMC and DEC) than those of cyclic carbonates (VC and EC) could be explained by the polarity theory proposed in earlier research. The recovered electrolyte exhibited a high ionic conductivity of 0.19 mS cm−1 at 20 °C, and it could be reused in a Li/LCO half-cell, which delivered an initial discharge capacity of 115 mA h g−1 (Fig. 25b–d). Overall, major challenges still limit the industrial application of electrolyte recycling, and more in-depth research is needed, such as the further purification and separation of extracts to obtain the required substances.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic of reclaimed electrolytes from spent LIBs; (b) linear sweep voltammograms for commercial and reclaimed electrolytes with an Al electrode as the working electrode in a three-electrode configuration at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1; (c) Arrhenius plots of the ionic conductivity at different temperatures; (d) cycling performance combined with Coulombic efficiencies at 0.2C for commercial and reclaimed electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 288 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 

3.5 Pb–acid battery recycling
Similar to the recycling of spent LIBs, the recycling technologies of spent Pb–acid batteries can be mainly divided into two categories: pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy, in which pyrometallurgy includes direct and indirect smelting.32,33,289 Prior to the pyro- or hydrometallurgical process, pretreatment involving physical separation is usually performed. In this process, the spent Pb–acid batteries are dismantled into Pb waste and grids, H2SO4 waste, and plastic materials. The H2SO4 waste is sent to the acid plant for further purification. The remaining Pb waste is recycled as new Pb compounds for reuse in Pb–acid batteries.290 Most of these processes are similar to those used in spent LIB recycling. The main difference is that desulfurization and final refining processes are needed when dealing with spent Pb–acid batteries.291,292

3.5.1 Pyrometallurgical technologies. 
Direct smelting refers to the high-temperature treatment (>1000 °C) of spent Pb–acid batteries in a blast, electric, reverberatory, or rotary furnace without prior desulfurization. The Pb bullion obtained after smelting is usually subjected to a refining process to improve its purity. The decomposition of PbSO4 occurs during high-temperature smelting, which results in the emission of a large amount of SO2 but has a high energy consumption. Moreover, harmful Pb dust, ash, and other pollutants are also produced. As a result, the direct smelting method has gradually been replaced by the improved indirect smelting method.
Indirect smelting involves a desulfurization process before smelting to lower the SO2 emission.292,293 The desulfurization process is generally carried out at lower temperatures than that of smelting or in aqueous solutions by adding a desulfurization reagent. Qiu et al.292 developed a vacuum smelting process to recycle all the valuable materials, including grid, paste, and plastics, from spent Pb–acid batteries. The vacuum smelting of grids at 626.85 °C for 30 min yielded a Pb recovery ratio of 96.29% with a purity of 99.81%. Before the vacuum reduction of Pb pastes, the S content was decreased from 7.87 to 0.26 wt% through desulfurization with Na2CO3 solution. Vacuum reduction was then conducted at 726.85 °C for 90 min, giving a Pb bullion with a purity of 99.91%. Finally, the vacuum pyrolysis of plastics yielded more than 93 wt% liquid oils. This vacuum smelting process was highly efficient and released less pollutants than from direct smelting.
In addition, to obtain metallic Pb or Pb oxides for reuse in Pb–acid batteries, other high-value-added products have been considered as well. For example, ultrafine lead sulfide (PbS) powder was prepared through a combination of sulfurization and inert gas condensation.294 Initially, the optimal conditions to prepare the PbS powder were investigated using pure metallic Pb particles and S powder. This novel process was then successfully used to prepare PbS powder from spent Pb–acid batteries. A schematic of this preparation process is shown in Fig. 26a. The theoretical feasibilities of all the possible reactions were verified by calculating their standard ΔrG (Fig. 26b). The XRD and SEM results presented in Fig. 26c and d indicate uniformly dispersed PbS particles with a high purity were obtained. This work provides a new perspective to deal with the S in spent Pb–acid batteries.
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic illustration of ultrafine PbS powder preparation with forced flow inert gas. (b) Diagram of the relationship between the Standard Gibbs free energy changes and temperature of related possible reactions; SEM image (c) and XRD pattern (d) of the PbS ultrafine powder prepared from the Pb paste of Pb–acid batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 294 Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 


3.5.2 Hydrometallurgical technologies. 
Potential environmental pollutants, including SO2 and Pb-containing slag, and a high energy consumption hinder the future use of pyrometallurgical technologies. Hydrometallurgical technologies were then proposed to minimize Pb pollution and to obtain high-purity Pb (99.9%) without the need for smelting at high temperature.
Conventional hydrometallurgical processes start with desulfurization, which is identical to pyrometallurgical processes. In the desulfurization process, sulfur in the paste is converted to soluble sulfates by reacting with Na2CO3, NaOH, (NH4)2CO3, or NaC2O4 solutions.295–299 Then, sodium sulfate (Na2SO4) is obtained after crystallization. The insoluble product PbCO3, Pb(OH)2, or PbC2O4 is collected and converted to a Pb-containing solution through leaching. Pb and PbO in the paste readily dissolve in acid solution, while PbO2 needs to be reduced with a reducing agent.300,301 The leached Pb-rich solution is then subjected to cementation or electrolysis treatment to obtain Pb or Pb compounds. Finally, a refining process at low temperature is necessary to obtain battery-grade Pb products. Almost no Pb-containing gas or dust is emitted to the environment in this process. However, other problems appear, such as severe pollution from the toxic and corrosive hexafluorosilicic acid used to dissolve the Pb compounds and the high electricity consumption of the electrolysis process. As a result, hydrometallurgical processes are still in the research stage and are not yet commercially available. Sustainable recovery processes with lower cost and lower pollution urgently need to be developed, with some pioneering work showing promise.302–305
Recently, Yang and Kumar et al.300,301,306–315 developed a novel hydrometallurgical process that was systematically explored to extend its application prospects. This process entailed three essential steps: leaching, crystallization, and calcination (Fig. 27a). Trisodium citrate hydrate (C6H5Na3O7·2H2O) was used for desulfurization to form lead citrate hydrate [Pb(C6H6O7)·H2O] and Na2SO4.301,307–309,311 A non-toxic organic acid [citric acid monohydrate] (C6H8O7·H2O) or acetic acid (CH3COOH) and C6H5Na3O7·2H2O were explored as leaching and crystallization agents, respectively, with H2O2 used as a reducing agent when dealing with PbO2.301,308,309,311 Unlike conventional hydrometallurgical processes, the Pb was not dissolved in the leaching solution for the following electrowinning or cementation, but crystallized to form a Pb organic precursor. Then, the precursor was calcined between 300 °C and 450 °C to remove the organics, which themselves served as fuel. The decomposition produced a mixture of Pb and PbO.306,307,309–312 In early studies of desulfurization, it was found that a higher recovery efficiency of Pb citrate and simultaneous S removal from PbSO4 solution were achieved when C6H5Na3O7·2H2O and C6H8O7·H2O were used together rather than just C6H5Na3O7·2H2O alone.301
 Fig. 27  (a) Different leaching procedures of Pb pastes (Process I: leaching process with citric acid solution; Process II: leaching process with acetic acid solution); (b) comparison of XRD patterns of [Pb(C6H6O7)]·H2O from different Pb compounds (a: standard lead citrate in CSD, b: produced from PbO, c: produced from PbO2, and d: produced from PbSO4); (c) comparison of XRD patterns of Pb3(C6H5O7)2·2H2O from different Pb compounds (a: produced from PbO, b: produced from PbO2, and c: produced from PbSO4). (a and c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 308 Copyright 2013 Elsevier. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 306 Copyright 2012 Society of Chemical Industry. (d) Effects of volumetric percentage of O2 in O2/N2 mixture on mass percentage of components after Pb3(C6H5O7)2·2H2O calcination; (e) sketches of Pb3(C6H5O7)2·2H2O calcination theory model. (d and e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 310 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
In the pioneering citric acid/sodium citrate leaching–crystallization system, precursors from PbO and PbO2 were identical and identified as Pb(C6H6O7)·H2O, while the precursor from PbSO4 possessed a different structure and chemical formula of Pb3(C6H5O7)2·3H2O (Fig. 27b).306,308 The morphologies of the precursors were different as well. Precursors from PbO and PbO2 possessed larger sheet-like morphologies, while precursors from PbSO4 comprised irregular particles with a size range of 1–10 μm.306 Later, a more sustainable acetic acid–sodium citrate system was proposed.308 Different from the above system, the pure Pb citrate precursor Pb3(C6H5O7)2·3H2O was the only crystallized product when leaching PbO, PbO2, and PbSO4 individually (Fig. 27c). Moreover, acetic acid was proved to be more effective at aiding leaching of the Pb compounds than citric acid. In addition to the simultaneous leaching–crystallization system, Yang et al.295 also investigated a separate leaching and crystallization process using acetic acid alone. After desulphurization with (NH4)2CO3, the pastes were leached with acetic acid solution and H2O2 to produce Pb(CH3COO)2·3H2O in solution. The lead acetate precursor was crystallized from the solution upon the addition of acetic acid.
In the final calcination step, the composition and morphology of the products strongly depended on the calcination conditions, including the atmosphere, temperature, and precursor. For the Pb citrate precursor Pb(C6H6O7)·H2O, when calcined in a N2 atmosphere, spherical β-PbO particles with a diameter of 50–60 nm were the main product along with small amounts of Pb and C. When calcined in air for 20 min, β-PbO was still the major product along with small amounts of α-PbO and Pb, and the particle size was increased to 100–200 nm.312 For the Pb citrate precursor Pb3(C6H5O7)2·3H2O, Yang and colleagues investigated the influence of the O2 percentage in the O2/N2 mixed calcination atmosphere on the products and proposed a thermal decomposition model for the Pb3(C6H5O7)2·3H2O precursor (Fig. 27d and e).310 They found that the mass percentage of metallic Pb in the products increased along with the increased O2 percentage in the mixed gas atmosphere. However, the mesoporous carbon content decreased and the carbon skeleton structure was gradually damaged. When calcining the Pb acetate precursor Pb(CH3COO)2·3H2O in N2, the major phases of the products were α-PbO and β-PbO, with a small amount of Pb. The uniform spherical particle size was in the range of 200–400 nm. The composition remained the same when calcined in air, but the particle size increased. Apart from the major Pb-containing products, Yang and Kumar et al.303,313 also explored the possibility of obtaining other useful products from the precursors. For example, a hierarchical porous carbon material was produced by pyrolysis and a subsequent leaching treatment of the lead citrate precursors Pb3(C6H5O7)2·3H2O (Fig. 28).313 This hierarchical porous carbon exhibited excellent electrochemical performance as an anode material for LIBs.
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of functional carbon from Pb3(C6H5O7)2·3H2O precursors; secondary electron SEM image (b) and bright field TEM image (c) of the carbon derived from Pb3(C6H5O7)2·3H2O (500 °C); (d) cycling performance of the carbon sample carbonized at 500 °C. Reprinted from ref. 313 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another pioneering study on the hydrometallurgical recycling of spent Pb–acid batteries was conducted by Pan and Manthiram.316,317 A H2–PbO fuel cell was designed in which H2 gas was fed as the anode to undergo electro-oxidation and release electrons, and the refined PbO was dissolved in heated aqueous NaOH to form HPbO2− as the cathode (Fig. 29).317 The HPbO2− then combined with electrons and water to produce metallic Pb and OH−. High-purity metallic Pb (99.9992%) was obtained in a high yield of 99.5–99.8%. The overall reaction of the fuel cell is shown below, with Pb, water, and electricity as the products. H2 + PbO(s) = H2O + Pb(s) (E = 0.297 V)(11)
 Fig. 29  Schematic of the H2–PbO fuel cell: the Nafion 2030 membrane (DuPont) is an ion-selective, reinforced composite membrane designed to transport Na+ and water while blocking OH− and HPbO2−; the diffusion layer is a carbon paper (TGP-H-060, Toray) coated with carbon black (Vulcan 72 R, Cabot); the catalyst is carbon black-supported platinum nanoparticles (40 wt% Pt/C, Johnson Matthey). Reprinted with permission from ref. 317 Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. 
The same researchers also calculated the energy cost of this process and compared it with that of other existing processes. The results showed that this new process consumed only about a half or third of the energy of the pyrometallurgical or conventional hydrometallurgical process, respectively.
Because of their simple structure and element composition, the recycling of spent Pb–acid batteries is well established in practice. The obtained purities of the recycled Pb compounds are high enough for reuse in new Pb–acid batteries, making the recycling process economically valuable.290 The only concern is pollution control of the recycling process, because Pb is highly toxic to humans. Fundamental research investigating new recycling technologies with both economically competitive and environmentally friendly features is in progress.

3.6 Ni-Based battery recycling
The recycling technologies of spent Ni–MH and Ni–Cd batteries are almost identical to those of spent LIBs, including the two categories of pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes.31,318 The main difference is that the composition of Ni–MH batteries is more complex than that of LIBs because they contain rare-earth elements, such as La, Ce, neodymium (Nd), and samarium (Sm), which are in increasing demand.319–322 Traditional pyrometallurgical technology is focused on the recovery of high-value ferronickel, which plays an important role in stainless-steel production. After crushing and separation, the separator and binder can be removed.323 The remaining electrode materials are used to produce an alloy by reduction smelting. Depending on the target product, different alloys (ferronickel or Ni–Co alloys) can be obtained.324,325 The reduction smelting process is carried out in an electric arc furnace with melting aids. However, the pyrometallurgical process leads to the loss of rare-earth elements, which are transferred to the slag for use in roadbed construction. Hydrometallurgical processes are used to recover the individual rare-earth elements.326,327 Leaching is also the first step to dissolve the materials in solution, followed by precipitation, solvent extraction, electrochemistry, adsorption, or crystallization to recover the target elements.
The leaching process mainly uses inorganic acids, such as H2SO4, HNO3, and HCl.207,328–330 The most commonly used reagents to precipitate rare-earth elements include phosphoric acid, Na2SO4, and NaOH. After the rare-earth elements are recovered, other metals (such as Ni, Mn, Zn, and Co) can also be further precipitated using NaOH, NH4OH, or NH3 solution. D2EHPA, Cyanex 272, and TBP (tributyl phosphate) used in the recycling of spent LIBs are universal to the extraction of metal ions from Ni-based batteries.331–333 In particular, ILs have been explored to extract the rare-earth elements.334,335 For example, an extraction–scrubbing–stripping process using the low-cost IL trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium nitrate was developed to extract rare-earth elements from Ni or Co.335 The extraction yield of the rare-earth elements reached more than 99% with a purity of 99.9% in the loaded IL phase after scrubbing. Study of the extraction mechanism revealed that La3+ and Sm3+ were extracted as the anionic complexes [La(NO3)6]3− and [Sm(NO3)5]2−, respectively. Compared with conventional solvent extraction, ILs are non-volatile, less flammable, and have higher thermal stability, making them promising candidates for environmentally friendly recycling processes in the future.
3.7 Universal technologies and reagents for battery recycling
Despite the different goals of the stages in the recycling process, such as the separation process, which aims to effectively concentrate certain components, and the leaching process, which aims to dissolve powder material, the characteristics of some technologies can enable them to work in multiple recycling stages. For example, ultrasonic technology has been utilized in a variety of applications in battery recycling (Fig. 30).57,113,249,273,336–338 Ultrasonic waves can promote convective motion to increase the contact area between a solid and liquid, which benefits the leaching of solid particles (Fig. 30a and b).339 Similarly, ultrasonic agitation is more effective than conventional mechanical stirring for the acid leaching of multiple metals.337 Moreover, Zhang et al.338 developed an ultrasonic hydrothermal reaction for the regeneration of spent LCO materials. The effective regeneration was attributed to the production of free radicals and microstreaming by the cavitation effect, which promoted organic degradation and accelerated heat and mass transfer during the regeneration process, respectively (Fig. 30c and d). The unique cavitation effect of ultrasound, which is formed by rapid changes of pressure, can produce a tremendous amount of energy to facilitate particle disintegration and reaction. This can directly improve the peel-off efficiency of cathodes from Al current collectors and the exfoliation of graphite to obtain graphene sheets (Fig. 30e–j).57,273
 Fig. 30  Applications of ultrasound in battery recycling: (a) mechanism of ultrasonic-assisted leaching; (b) leaching efficiencies of Co and Li with H2SO4, HCl, and citric acid (90 W, 60 °C, and 5 h); reprinted with permission from ref. 339 Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (c) Mechanism of ultrasonic-assisted renovation; (d) XRD patterns of different samples (a: used LCO, b: regenerated LCO); reprinted with permission from ref. 338 Copyright 2014 The Authors. Published by ESG (http://www.electrochemsci.org). This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). (e) Mechanism of ultrasonic-assisted separation; (f) peel-off efficiency of cathode materials using different solvents under ultrasonic (60 °C, 240 W, 30 min, and S/L of 1:10 g mL−1); (g) SEM image of LCO peeled by ultrasonic cleaning; reprinted with permission from ref. 57 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (h) Illustration of the preparation of graphene with used graphite anode by liquid-phase exfoliation; (i) Raman spectra of used graphite anode and as-made graphene with different treatments; (j) TEM images of the obtained graphene sheets. Reprinted from ref. 273 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to certain technologies, some reagents are applicable to multiple recycling stages. For example, ILs are considered promising candidates in green separation and extraction recycling processes (Fig. 31). As discussed above, [BMIm][BF4] has been used to dissolve PVDF binder to improve the separation of cathode materials from Al current collectors (Fig. 31a).63 Trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium nitrate and chloride, and tricaprylmethylammonium chloride have been used for metal extraction.334Fig. 31b illustrates the effective removal of Co or Ni from the IL phases by scrubbing, as confirmed by the obvious color fading of the pink for Co and green for Ni.
 Fig. 31  (a) Peel-off rates of cathode materials and the recycled Al content and images of recycled Al foil under different retention times (error bars represent the standard errors of the mean for the three replicates; cathode at 0 min is the raw material); reprinted with permission from ref. 63 Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (b) La extraction with traces of Ni in the IL phase (A), scrubbing of the IL phase from (A) to obtain 99.9% pure La in the IL phase (B), extraction experiment with a neodymium iron mixture, where an iron precipitate was obtained (C), Sm extraction with traces of Co in the IL phase (D), scrubbing of the IL phase from (D) to obtain 99.9% pure Sm in the IL phase (E). Reprinted from ref. 334 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
CO2 in different states is another universal agent used in battery recycling. The application of liquid and supercritical CO2 in electrolyte recovery has been introduced before.283 Recently, it was found that the use of supercritical CO2 can markedly shorten the leaching time to 5 min and the amount of H2O2 to 4 vol% during the leaching of Co from spent LIBs, compared with the conventional leaching time of 60 min and the H2O2 amount of 8 vol%.340 Under the former conditions, a high leaching efficiency of more than 95 wt% was achieved. The improved mass transfer process under these supercritical conditions was responsible for the faster reaction kinetics of Co leaching. In another study by Hu et al.,105 carbonate water leaching was used to increase the solubility of Li2CO3, and then the filtrate was evaporated, with 84.7% of the Li preferentially recovered. High-pressure CO2 gas was injected during the water leaching, converting Li2CO3 into more soluble LiHCO3.
4. Practical applications in industry
Many industrial recycling processes have been developed over the last few decades to deal with the toxic and valuable components in spent batteries. The main recycling technologies include pyro- and hydrometallurgical methods, which can be used separately or combined together.24,341–345 The whole recycling process involves a combination of different steps, including deactivation, mechanical pretreatment, and pyro- or hydrometallurgical treatment. Generally, the different compositions and structures of spent batteries mean that they require individual processing techniques to avoid cross-contamination. For example, Pb–acid batteries are usually treated separately because of their mature recycling process and simple structure. LIBs and Ni-based batteries can be treated together because of their similar composition and structure. Initially, pyrometallurgical technology was used by most recycling companies because of its easy operation. During calcination, the burning of electrolytes and plastics can also provide energy. With the increasing demand for valuable metals, like Co, Li, and rare-earth elements, many enterprises are now investing in the installation of hydrometallurgy treatment units to optimize the recycling performance. The technology and features of battery recycling enterprises are summarized in Fig. 32 and Table 4; some typical processes are discussed in detail below.
 Fig. 32  (a) Flowchart of spent LIB recycling processes: the pyrometallurgical technology developed by Umicore and the hydrometallurgical technology developed by Retrive.346,347,353 (b) Flowchart of spent Ni-based battery recycling processes: the pyrometallurgical technology developed by Accurec.348 (c) Flowchart of spent Pb–acid battery recycling process: the pyrometallurgical technology developed by Campine.350,351 
Table 4 Summary of some battery recycling processes used by recycling enterprises all over the world




Company
Battery type
Process
Feature
Location




Retriev
All
Pyrometallurgy (Ni-based); hydrometallurgy (Li-based); mechanical process (Pb–acid)
Unique liquid N2 protection in the crusher
USA & Canada


Umicore
Li-Based, NiMH
Pyrometallurgy& hydrometallurgy
UHT technology; closed loop
Belgium


Batrec
Li-, Hg-based
Pyrometallurgy
Crushing under CO2 atmosphere
Switzerland


Accurec
All (except Pb and Hg)
Pyrometallurgy
Vacuum thermal recycling
German


Campine
Pb–acid
Pyrometallurgy
Full range of Pb products
Belgium


SNAM
Li-, Ni-based
Pyrometallurgy
Pyrolysis-distillation-refining
France


Inmetco
Li-, Ni-based
Pyrometallurgy
Direct-reduced iron process
USA


Recupyl
Li-, Zn-based
Hydrometallurgy
Crushing under inert gas atmosphere
France


Sony & Sumitomo
All rechargeable batteries
Pyrometallurgy
High-temperature calcination
Japan


Xstrata
Li-, Ni-based
Pyrometallurgy& hydrometallurgy
Batteries as secondary feedstock
Switzerland


GEM
Li-, Ni-based
hydrometallurgy
Closed loop
China


Brunp
Li-, Ni-based
Hydrometallurgy
Reverse product position design
China




Retriev Technologies (formerly Toxco Inc.), established in May 1984, is one of the leading and most diverse battery recycling enterprises in the world.346 Retriev Technologies uses advanced processing technology and equipment certified by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to recycle multiple types and sizes of batteries, including alkaline, Li-based, Ni-based, and Pb–acid batteries. Depending on the structure and components of the different battery types, there is a tailored process for each battery type to ensure that all of the valuable and toxic components are recovered and treated properly.
In the recycling of Li-based batteries, hydrometallurgical technologies are used to effectively recover valuable metals (Fig. 32a). First, large power battery packs from EVs or stationary applications go through a manual disassembly process, where the packs are carefully dismantled into separated cells. A proprietary cryogenic process is used to pretreat highly reactive Li-based batteries before further physical separation. Spent batteries are chilled to −200 °C in liquid N2 to ensure that Li maintains a relatively inert state. The separated cells are then fed to an automated crusher, which operates in a liquid solution to lower the reactivity of the batteries and prevent gas emission. Hazardous electrolytes are neutralized and three types of materials are produced: plastics, metal solids, and metal-enriched liquid. The plastic materials floating at the top can be recovered directly for disposal or recycling. The metal solids contain various amounts of Cu, Al, Ni, and Co depending on the chemistry of the spent LIBs and are used as raw materials to produce LCO for new battery electrodes. The metal-enriched solution is solidified for further metal purification. In particular, Li is precipitated using Na2CO3 to obtain Li2CO3.
There are two processing lines used to recycle spent Pb–acid batteries: an automated line and a manual line. The automated process is carried out in a high-impact enclosed crusher, which can effectively separate all the battery components. The manual disassembly line can provide complete Pb plates, which are preferred by some consumers. In addition to Pb products, the battery casing (plastic or steel) and H2SO4 are the other two components. Only H2SO4 is treated on-site by Retriev Technologies. The Pb products and battery casing are shipped to other secondary smelters to produce pure Pb for reuse in new Pb–acid batteries.
The recycling of Ni–MH and Ni–Cd batteries involves a pyrometallurgical process, in which the batteries are smelted to remove the plastic and separator materials. Cd ingots and ferronickel materials are obtained, and can be reused as raw materials in many applications, such as in construction and stainless-steel production. When dealing with large Ni–MH batteries from EVs, a manual disassembly process is necessary to ensure safe smelting.
Umicore provides recycling services for all sizes and types of spent LIB and Ni–MH batteries through its unique ultrahigh temperature (UHT) process combined with a state-of-the-art hydrometallurgical process (Fig. 32a).347 Compared with other pyrometallurgical recycling technologies, the UHT process possesses the following advantages: (1) it can safely treat different types of batteries with a large processing volume of 7000 metric tons per year; (2) the spent batteries are treated directly without any potentially hazardous pretreatment; (3) the environmental effect is controlled at a minimum level by using a gas cleaning system so there is almost zero waste emission. Meanwhile, the energy consumption is lowered by combustion of the battery components (electrolyte and plastics).
Two types of products are generated by the UHT process, namely an alloy containing the valuable metals Co, Ni, and Cu, and high-purity inert slags, which can be used as additives in the construction industry. In the subsequent hydrometallurgical process involving H2SO4 leaching, solvent extraction, and precipitation, the alloy is further purified and converted into new active cathode materials for rechargeable batteries.
Accurec provides recycling processes for nearly all commercially available battery types except Pb- and Hg-containing batteries. The core technology developed by Accurec is the vacuum thermal recycling (VTR) process, which separates different metals by distillation (Fig. 32b).348 Specifically, non-precious metals in the batteries generally have lower melting points and higher vapor pressures than those of precious metals, making them easy to extract by distillation. After sorting and classification, the batteries are fed into an impact mill. The electronics and plastic materials are removed by magnetic separation. The electrolytes are removed by pyrolysis. The remaining electrode materials are then heat treated under vacuum and condensed to obtain the target products. When dealing with spent Ni–Cd and Ni–MH batteries, the VTR process is used to extract the Cd, hydrocarbons, and electrolytes. The remaining metals are further treated to produce NiFe or NiCo alloys.
Batrec Industrie AG mainly uses a closed two-stage thermal pyrometallurgical process to recycle spent Ni-based batteries. For the recycling of LIBs, the company developed a special mechanical process that guarantees safe disposal and complete separation of the components contained in spent batteries.349 After sorting, the spent batteries are sent to a crusher, in which the batteries are crushed in a CO2 gas atmosphere and the released Li is neutralized. With the completion of the crushing and neutralization step, the protective atmosphere is collected and treated in a gas scrubber to minimize atmospheric pollution. The individual components of the batteries, such as the fine electrode materials, metals, and plastic, are separated in a subsequent mechanical separation process and then shipped to other recycling companies for further processing.
Campine developed a closed-loop pyrometallurgical process to convert spent Pb–acid batteries and other Pb-containing wastes into raw Pb materials, including a full range of Pb alloys and soft Pb (Fig. 32c).350,351 The process has three main steps: separation, reductive smelting, and refining. The batteries are first drained and the acid solution is neutralized. The batteries are then crushed and separated in a tank based on density differences. The Pb mixture, which mainly includes metallic Pb, Pb oxides, and Pb sulfate, is then fed into a furnace for smelting. Antimonial Pb or hard Pb is produced in this step. To obtain high-purity Pb, a refining process is necessary to remove impurities, like Cu, Sn, and As. During the whole recycling process, effective pollution control measures, including the treatment of gases and liquid emissions, are implemented to protect human health and prevent environmental pollution.
5. Life-cycle assessment of battery recycling
5.1 Definition and phases
The increased awareness of the importance of environmental protection associated with a certain product or service has inspired the development of methods to better understand and address this issue. One of the methods is LCA, which is also known as life-cycle analysis and cradle-to-grave analysis and which aims to assess the potential environmental effects associated with all the stages of a product's or service's life, from raw material acquisition through materials production, manufacture, use, repair and maintenance, recycling, to final disposal.352 LCA can assist in identifying opportunities to improve the environmental performance of products and services at various stages in their life cycle, and can help governments, industries, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) make more informed decisions. For practitioners of LCA, the ISO 14040 and ISO 14044 standards detail the requirements for conducting an LCA.
According to the above two standards, an LCA is carried out in four distinct phases, comprising goal and scope definition, inventory analysis, impact assessment, and interpretation. An LCA starts with a specific definition of the goal and scope of the study, which determine the depth and breadth of the LCA. The technical details of this step mainly include the functional unit, system boundaries, and any assumptions and limitations. The definition of the functional unit depends on the goal of the study and use stage. The results of different studies can be compared only if the functional units are consistent. In the specific analysis of a battery or recycling process, the commonly used functional units are per kilogram battery mass, per watt-hour capacity, and per kilometer vehicle driving range.353,354
The inventory analysis phase is an inventory of the input/output data with regard to the system being studied. This phase involves data collection and creating an inventory of flows from and to nature for a product or service system. Inventory flows include the inputs of energy and raw materials, and the outputs of the products, by-products, and wastes released to the environment.355 In practice, inventory analysis is conducted based on the separate unit processes that make up all of the life-cycle stages, and the final results are the sum of the unit processes.353,356,357
After the inventory analysis is the impact assessment, which aims to evaluate the potential environmental effects based on the inventory analysis results. This analysis consists of several aspects, like selection of the impact categories, indicators, and characterization models; the classification used to sort the inventory into specific impact categories; and the impact measurement. Many indicators are considered for the environmental impact assessment, such as energy consumption; GHG emissions; equivalent CO2 emissions, which is the amount of CO2 and other GHGs produced; acidification; gas emissions of species like NOx and SO2; eutrophication; toxicity; and carcinogens. Among these indicators, GHG emissions and energy consumption are the most important and commonly used for a battery LCA.6,358
Interpretation is the final phase of the LCA, in which the results of the life-cycle inventory and the life-cycle impact assessment are summarized. The conclusions of the interpretation can be used as guidelines for recommendations and decision making in conformity with the goal and scope of the study.
5.2 Life-cycle assessment of recycling processes
As a service, it is subjectively believed that recycling is beneficial to the environment. However, an LCA analysis is required to provide quantitative conclusions.359 Some LCA software tools and data sources have been commercialized and are available. For example, the GREET (Greenhouse gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy use in Transportation) software developed by ANL can be used to study energy consumption and pollutant emissions in the production, use, and disposal of vehicle and power source technologies, including different types of rechargeable batteries.360 The generalized boundary (cradle-to-grave, cradle-to-gate, or grave-to-cradle), process, and material/energy flow analysis for an LCA of a battery are shown in Fig. 33. Three important issues need to be addressed concerning an LCA of recycling processes. The first is the relative importance of battery recycling as a part of the whole life cycle of batteries, especially the positive effect of recycling on the production of batteries. The second issue is the impact comparison of different recycling processes. The last issue is the impact analysis of individual steps within a recycling process.
 Fig. 33  Generalized boundary, process, and material/energy flow analysis of an LCA of a battery. 
In the early stage of research, the lack of data for recycling process meant that most LCA studies of rechargeable batteries did not include the recycling stage (except for the relatively mature Pb–acid batteries).361–364 Generally, the scope of a battery LCA is from cradle to grave. However, many studies focus on cradle-to-gate assessments, which exclude the use and disposal stages.365–367 Among the four types of rechargeable battery technologies, LIBs with higher energy efficiency were assessed to have a lower impact on the environment.362,364,367 Pb–acid batteries were also reported to have a low energy consumption and low gas emissions because of their mature recycling technology and materials reuse in new Pb–acid batteries.357 As for the assessment of stages, materials extraction and processing were calculated to have the largest environmental impacts.365,366,368 However, it was also found that the use stage dominated the lifetime impacts when it was included in the assessment.361,363
Although the disposal stage is considered in some cradle-to-grave assessments, it is usually a simple treatment involving landfill or incineration.369–371 For the most part, by comparison with other stages of the battery lifetime, the contribution of disposal to the environmental impacts and energy consumption is minor (Fig. 34a).
 Fig. 34  (a) Global warming, photochemical smog, eutrophication, acidification, and ozone depletion of a 10 kW h PHEV battery life cycle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 370 Copyright 2010 Elsevier. (b) Inputs (exergy, MJ) necessary and allocated for the production chain of 1 kg LIB cathode material (Scenario A: starting from battery waste with Ni and Co recovery; Scenario B: from virgin resources). Reprinted with permission from ref. 230 Copyright 2009 Elsevier. (c) Resource use and environmental emissions of battery production and recycling (hydrometallurgy and pyrometallurgy) compared with virgin battery production for the LMO battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 231 Copyright 2015 IOP Publishing Ltd. Content from this work may be used under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 license. (d) Total estimated energy consumption (MJ kg−1 battery) of EV batteries made from virgin materials; with recycled cathode materials; with recycled Al; with recycled Cu; and with recycled cathode material, Cu, and Al by different recycling processes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 358 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e) GHG and SOx reductions for different cathode materials recovered from pyrometallurgical, indirect physical, and direct physical processes as compared with producing them from virgin materials. Reprinted from ref. 6 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Purchased energy intensity of each step of the hydrometallurgical recycling process per mass of recovered Co (f) and Li (g). (f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 129 Copyright 2013 Elsevier. (g) Reprinted with permission from ref. 377 This report is available, at no cost, at http://www.osti.gov/bridge. 
However, environmental impacts can be decreased substantially if a proper recycling process is used. Liu et al.368 conducted an LCA of Pb–acid batteries used in electric bicycles in China. Consistent with most studies, materials extraction and processing as well as the use stages had the largest environmental impacts within the lifetime of Pb–acid batteries. The results also showed that the EOL treatment stage, including materials recycling and the reuse of batteries could lower the total primary energy use by 17%. Moreover, a considerable decrease in the overall Chinese abiotic resource depletion potential was obtained as well, with decreases of 1558% for materials recycling and 176% for battery reuse. It should be noted that as much as 95% of the total Pb emissions were released during the EOL treatment stage, which accounted for about 90% of the total human toxicity potential. Therefore, proper management of the recycling process was recommended.
The EPA and the Department of Energy carried out an LCA of LIBs in EV and PHEV applications to identify the process (including materials extraction and processing, manufacturing, use, recycling, and disposal) that had the largest public health and environmental impacts.372 For the recycling stage impact assessment, three recycling technologies for LIBs (hydrometallurgical, pyrometallurgical, and direct recovery processes) were assessed based on a best-case scenario, with life-cycle inventory data primarily obtained from the relevant battery recyclers. The final data were the average of the three results; the individual impact of each process was not presented. Although the impacts varied markedly across the lifetime stages for all three battery chemistries, the materials extraction and use stages dominated in most of the impact categories. Recycling lowered the overall life-cycle impacts, especially in the categories of the ozone depletion potential, occupational cancer, and non-cancer hazards. This offset impact came from the use of recycled materials instead of virgin materials in the extraction and processing stage. The report also pointed out several opportunities to decrease the environmental impacts of LIBs in EV applications, among which recycling was identified as beneficial to lowering the environmental impact when battery manufacturers maximize the use of recycled materials in the production of new battery materials, thus forming a closed-loop materials flow.
Hao et al.373 conducted a grave-to-cradle LCA of recycling on the energy consumption and GHG emissions of EV production based on the predictions for China in 2025. The whole process was composed of three phases: (1) the recycling process, including vehicle dismantling, vehicle recycling, battery recycling, and tire recycling; (2) material recovery; and (3) vehicle production. A hydrometallurgical process was used to recycle the NCM battery. The calculated results showed that the GHG emissions from EV production could be lowered by 34% through recycling. Among all the recycling materials and processes, steel recovery in vehicle recycling and NCM cathode recovery in battery recycling were the two main contributors, providing 61% and 20% of the total decrease, respectively. Because the battery is an essential factor in the development of future EVs, it was suggested that there was huge growth potential for battery recycling.
When assessing a recycling process, one issue that remains is how to allocate the credit for the recycling; that is, whether it should be given to the lifetime of the battery or to the material itself.352 For Pb–acid batteries, it is reasonable to allocate the credit to the battery product, because almost 90% of the recycled materials are reused in new Pb–acid batteries. For LIBs, the situation is more complex because not all the components are recycled and only some of the recycled materials are reused as raw materials to produce new LIBs. It is the closed-loop process that indicates the value of recycling, which aims to minimize the energy consumption and toxic emissions associated with the primary production of raw materials.
To quantify this benefit of recycling to the production of batteries, Dewulf and co-workers230 conducted a detailed LCA comparison of a recycling scenario involving Co and Ni recycling and reuse in battery production and a production scenario with virgin materials. The recycling scenario included a smelting process developed by Umicore. Fig. 34b shows the requested inputs for the production chain to obtain 1 kg of LiMeO2 (Me = Ni, Mn, Co) for an LIB cathode. The two scenarios exhibited similar energy requirements for MnSO4 production as well as cathode material production. Conversely, considerable differences existed in the production of CoSO4 and NiSO4, with 96.9 MJ for the recycling scenario and 236.1 MJ for the production scenario, indicating that the recycling scenario saved 51% of the natural resource compared with that needed for the production scenario. Further research on the kind of natural resources that could be saved by recycling was conducted. It was found that fossil resources and nuclear energy consumption decreased by 45.3% and 57.2%, respectively, by recycling. This research proved the positive effects of recycling on the production of battery materials. Note that as the authors stated, the virgin mining process could not be totally replaced by recycling.
For an investigation of the comparison of different recycling processes, Tian et al.374 compared the environmental impacts of five recycling processes of Pb–acid batteries in China, namely the direct reverberatory furnace melting of the battery, the rotary furnace melting of the desulfurized lead paste, the QSL furnace, the citrate leaching process, and the alkaline leaching process, and evaluated them in seven categories. Their results indicated that the greenness of innovative processes, such as citric acid leaching and alkaline leaching, may not be greater than that of traditional processes, especially in terms of the indirect environmental impacts, which depended on the off-site emissions from the chemicals and energy consumption.
Hendrickson et al.231 used LCA and geographic information systems to assess the impacts of the EOL LIB recycling network in California. As part of this network, battery recycling processes (pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy) were analyzed in terms of resource use and environmental emissions (Fig. 34c) based on the material inputs, recycling processes, slag outputs for cement use, and materials recovered. The results showed that recycling could offset the impacts associated with LIB production. The pyrometallurgical recycling process could lower the primary energy demand and GHG emissions by 6–56% and 23%, respectively. When comparing the two main types of recycling technologies, hydrometallurgical recycling had advantages in terms of decreased electricity consumption and air pollutant formation, whereas pyrometallurgical recycling used less water than hydrometallurgy.
Dunn et al.358 examined the effects of three recycling processes on the cradle-to-gate energy consumption and GHG emissions of LMO batteries. As shown in Fig. 34d, all the recycling processes induced large decreases in energy consumption compared with that of virgin materials production, with the largest potential decrease of 48% determined for the direct recycling process. In their latest LCA research on recycling, different cathodes of LIBs and recycling technologies (pyrometallurgical, indirect physical, and direct physical processes) were considered, and more focus was paid to the environmental impacts assessment (GHG and SOx emissions).6 As illustrated in Fig. 34e, the direct recycling process had the greatest potential to lower both GHG and SOx emissions by 81–98% and 72–100%, respectively, when compared with those of virgin materials production. Pyrometallurgical recycling was only used to recover LCO cathodes, and the SOx decrease was particularly large (almost 100%). This was because of the huge amount of SOx emitted during the production of virgin Co materials. Moreover, the relative environmental benefits of EVs over internal combustion engine vehicles (ICEVs) was also addressed. Except for the fact that the batteries were charged by coal-derived electricity, EVs had lower petroleum consumption and GHG emissions compared with those of ICEVs. This series of studies confirmed the positive influence of recycling, which can mitigate LIB life-cycle impacts in terms of energy consumption and toxic gas emissions.
Assessment of a specific recycling technology depends on the cumulative effects of all the stages involved. Because of the limited data available for battery recycling (especially LIBs), only a few LCA studies to date have involved a detailed assessment of a specific recycling process.6,231,358,374–377 Dunn and colleagues377 conducted the first systematic analysis of the energy and materials flows of four LIB recycling technologies, namely hydrometallurgical, pyrometallurgical, intermediate physical, and direct physical processes. The energy consumption and CO2 emissions of every step in each recycling process were calculated and then the main contributing process was identified. For example, in the LCA of the hydrometallurgical process based on citric acid leaching displayed in Fig. 34f and g, high-temperature calcination was calculated to be the most energy-intensive step, and was also the main contributor to CO2 emissions because of the combustion of the graphite carbon and PVDF binder.
The above studies confirmed the environmental benefit of closed-loop recycling, even though the specific results varied between groups. This data discrepancy mainly originated from the different battery chemistries, data sources, assessment scopes and boundaries, and assumptions used.378 For now, energy consumption and GHG emissions are the main assessment indicators for battery recycling. However, other indicators cannot be neglected and need to be assessed selectively according to the goal of the study. More reliable results require sufficient precise data, which urgently need to be updated for LIB production and recycling.359
6. Second use of retired electric vehicle batteries
6.1 Motivation and definition
Electric transportation systems with EVs in full or hybrid forms are considered an important strategy to lower both our dependence on fossil energy and emissions of GHGs. The market share of EVs using LIBs as a power source has increased rapidly in the last decade. However, the prohibitively high cost of power batteries, currently making up approximately 50% of the vehicle cost, impedes further market penetration of EVs.379,380 Much effort, including developing low-cost materials for batteries and improving production efficiency and throughput, is therefore being expended in attempts to lower battery costs. With the increasing production and promotion of EVs as a green transportation choice, the quantities of retired LIB packs will exponentially increase by 2050, as discussed in the introduction section.17 In most cases, automotive manufacturers recommend battery retirement when the energy or power density drops to 70–80% of the original value, which is inappropriate for continued use in a vehicle.381,382 There are three options to deal with the retired batteries: remanufacturing, repurposing, and recycling (Fig. 35).383 The final decision depends on many factors, such as the performance and damage state of the batteries and the cost and benefit of the different choices. Because retired EV batteries still contain substantial electric energy after automotive use, a common belief is that additional value could be extracted by reusing them in other energy storage applications. Such reuse would mean that the high cost of the batteries could be shared by the secondary users and lowered through the extension of the total battery service lifetime. This post-application of retired EV batteries has been referred to as battery second use (B2U) or reuse.70,380
 Fig. 35  Illustration of various choices of retired EV batteries after first electric vehicle life and aspects of B2U analysis. 
B2U is an operational process that consists of acquiring a retired battery system from a vehicle, repurposing it, integrating it into a new battery system, and then deploying it into another application. To verify the feasibility of B2U, systematic studies have been conducted that mainly consider the aspects of economic,70,71,381,384–387 technical,70,71,385,388–392 environmental,393–398 and market feasibility.70,388,391,399–403
6.2 Second use of retired nickel–metal hydride batteries
The first research on B2U was conducted by ANL in the late 1990s to examine the B2U feasibility of retired Ni–MH batteries, which were the most promising EV batteries at the time.389 The performance test results were compared with those for Pb–acid batteries to assess competitiveness. Specifically, Ni–MH battery modules were first cycled to simulate EV usage. Their remaining capacity and power capability were then determined and adjusted to 30 or 45 W h kg−1, representing the standard and advanced performance of Pb–acid batteries, respectively.70 The life performances of these Ni–MH battery modules were tested in four simulated stationary storage applications: (1) utility load following; (2) utility frequency regulation and spinning reserve; (3) uninterruptible power sources (UPSs) for stand-by power and telecommunications applications; and (4) accelerated life testing. The final results showed that the performances of the simulated retired Ni–MH battery modules were at least as good as those of new Pb–acid batteries, demonstrating the technical feasibility of B2U in terms of performance.404
The second comprehensive study, conducted at Sandia National Laboratory in 2003, aimed to evaluate the economic and technical feasibility of B2U of Ni–MH batteries in stationary applications.70 A total of eight different stationary applications (transmission support, area regulation and spinning reserve, load leveling/energy arbitrage/transmission deferral, renewables firming, power reliability and peak shaving, light commercial load following, distributed node telecom backup power, and residential load following) for B2U were considered through a technical and economic feasibility analysis. Overall, the technical barriers were not the main concern and they could be overcome before practical implementation. Of the eight applications, four (transmission support, light commercial load following, distributed node telecommunications backup power, and residential load following) were identified as possible candidates for economically viable B2U of EV batteries.
Although the above two studies focused on Ni–MH batteries, many of the process-oriented results are considered broadly applicable to other battery chemistries, like the LIBs widely used in current EVs. This early research laid foundations for future B2U evaluation, especially in terms of technical and economic feasibility. With the booming development of EVs in the 2010s, it is forecasted that a substantial number of retired LIBs will become available by around 2030. Therefore, it is predicted that the B2U of LIBs will emerge as a research hotspot.
6.3 Economic feasibility analysis
Economic feasibility analysis involves a cost–benefit analysis. The costs associated with repurposing EV batteries into second stationary applications can be divided into two categories (Fig. 36a).70,381,387 The first is the repurposing cost, which refers to the cost of components unique to the reconfiguration of retired EV batteries and mainly consists of the cost of retired EV batteries, collecting, disassembling, sorting, testing, and reassembling the retired EV batteries. The second category refers to the cost components common to all energy storage applications of a given type, including the cost of the repurposed battery from the first category, operation and maintenance (O&M), and the balance of system (BOS). O&M mainly includes normal operation, routine and unscheduled maintenance, monitoring, and repair or replacement of damaged battery modules or packs. The BOS cost typically refers to the cost of all the non-battery equipment of an ESS, mainly including installation and startup, interface equipment, power conditioning systems and controls, accessories, facilities, and transportation. For second stationary applications with repurposed batteries to be economically viable, the cost of the repurposed batteries should be lower than the cost of a new battery, which decreases over time, as shown in Fig. 36b.385,400,405–410 Based on the conservative scenario assumption (an annual decrease in the cost of 6% after 2020) recently published by the Boston Consulting Group (BCG), the cost of a battery pack will decrease from $300 kW h−1 in 2015 to around $135 kW h−1 in 2030.407 Most of the predictions reach a consensus that $200 kW h−1 can be achieved in 2020.406–410 Therefore, a maximum allowable value for the repurposed battery selling price should be estimated and set. Furthermore, by subtracting the cost of repurposing from the selling price, the maximum achievable buying price for a retired battery can be obtained, which is also the value to the automotive battery owner.385
 Fig. 36  (a) Life-cycle cost components of an energy storage system (left) and cost breakdown for a repurposed battery (right). (b) Future battery pack price projections and targets by different authorities. Reproduced from ref. 406–410 with permission from CleanTechnica (Copyright 2012), The Boston Consulting Group (Copyright 2017), Navigant Research (Copyright 2013), U.S. Energy Information Administration (Copyright 2012), and Mckinsey (Copyright 2012). 
Cready et al.70 performed a systematic economic analysis to determine the feasibility of utilizing retired Ni–MH batteries after vehicle life in eight potential stationary applications. This analysis was based on a typical 12 V, 100 A h Ni–MH battery module. For the analysis of the cost of a repurposed battery, an estimated selling price of $145 kW h−1 was obtained based on the new battery cost set as $150 kW h−1. The cost for collecting, testing, and reconfiguration was broken down into various components, as summarized in Fig. 37a. The primary cost of the repurposed battery was the purchase price of the retired EV battery, which was over half the total cost. Labor cost was the second major cost, because the testing, disassembly, and reconfiguration of retired EV batteries needs specialized technicians and is a labor-intensive process. Nevertheless, the price of the repurposed batteries often accounted for a small proportion of the cost of the eight investigated ESSs. For example, when applying the repurposed batteries as transmission support, the BOS cost accounted for 56% of the total energy storage costs, O&M costs made up about 37%, and the battery accounted for only 7% (Fig. 37a). The benefits of B2U are related to the application type and lifetime. In this research, a second calendar life of five years was assumed for analysis, and half of the eight applications were considered economically feasible, as discussed above.
 Fig. 37  (a) Complete energy storage system life-cycle cost components for transmission support (left) and cost breakdown for repurposed EV batteries with a repurposed battery selling price of $147 kW h−1 (right); reproduced with permission from ref. 70. This report was prepared by Sandia National Laboratories and approved for public release; further dissemination unlimited. (b) Breakdown of total annual costs for the lowest (left) and highest (right) repurposed battery selling price of $44 and $180 kW h−1, respectively; reproduced with permission from ref. 71. This report is available at no cost from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory at http://www.nrel.gov/publications. (c) Cost share of the energy storage system with 500 kW peak power capability and 1 MW h storage capacity at a high-value cost (left) and low value cost (right) percentages; reproduced with permission from ref. 381. This report is generally available free via the U.S. Department of Energy Information Bridge (http://www.osti.gov/bridge). (d) Estimated energy storage application cost breakdown with repurposed batteries from Toyota Prius (left), Chevy Volt (middle), and Nissan Leaf (right). Reproduced from ref. 387 with permission from SAGE publications, Copyright 2012. 
In an earlier economic analysis of a plug-in EV B2U study by Neubauer et al.385 in 2012, the repurposed battery selling price was estimated to range from $38 to $132 kW h−1 based on a predicted new battery cost of $125–440 kW h−1. The repurposing cost was strongly affected by the module size and cell fault rate. It was found that the optimal module size decreased as the cell fault rate increased. Moreover, the replacement of faulty cells within modules was not recommended from an economics viewpoint, and a smaller module size (of the order of several kilowatt hours) was more economically favorable than a larger one. With a high repurposed battery selling price of $132 kW h−1 and low cell fault rate of 0.01%, the calculated repurposing cost was approximately $32 kW h−1. The potential benefits could be realized when using the repurposed batteries in a UPS ESS, which had an estimated payback of seven years. In a subsequent study in 2015, the calculated lowest and highest repurposed battery selling prices were $44 and $180 kW h−1, respectively, based on an updated new battery cost prediction of $150–250 kW h−1.71 It can be seen that the repurposed battery cost dominated the total system cost, followed by the labor cost (Fig. 37b).
Narula et al.381 explored the cost competitiveness of retired EV or hybrid EV LIBs for B2U in power grid applications. First, a selling price for the repurposed batteries was proposed based on the projected cost of new batteries in 2020. Then, when analyzing the potential benefits of energy storage applications, a second lifetime of five or ten years was assumed based on different application types. Individual applications as well as multiple applications were explored. According to the estimated new battery cost in 2020 of $360–440 kW h−1, a competitive price for a retired battery was assumed to be between $75 and $220 kW h−1 as the low and high cost boundary values, respectively. The unitary system costs breakdown in terms of USD per kilowatt hour and USD per kilowatt for ESSs with repurposed batteries were summarized. Then, the system costs for a given energy storage application with different power and energy capabilities were calculated. Fig. 37c presents the high and low estimated values of system cost for an ESS with a power capability of 500 kW and storage capacity of 1 MW h. From the analysis results of the five categories of applications, it was found that the cost distribution depended on the performance requirements of the different applications. Specifically, the cost of the retired batteries and transportation were the major components for applications requiring high energy performance. Meanwhile, the BOS and O&M costs dominated the system cost for applications requiring high power performance. The benefit analysis of individual applications showed that area regulation, transmission and distribution upgrade deferral, and electric service power quality were the most likely profitable applications of B2U.
Williams387 conducted an economic analysis on the basis of three actual vehicles: the Toyota Prius, Chevy Volt, and Nissan Leaf. The energy storage cost components of these three cases are summarized in Fig. 37d. The BOS cost was the major component in all cases, while repurposed batteries only accounted for 6–12% of the total cost. With the addition of value from B2U in stationary grid applications, the decrease in battery lease payments was calculated and a decrease of 22% was obtained as the baseline for the Chevy Volt.
Foster et al.17 explored the cost benefit of three potential applications after vehicle life: remanufacturing, repurposing, and recycling. Different from the above conclusion, remanufacturing, that is, the replacement of failed cells within the battery, was calculated to be economically feasible, decreasing the cost of a new battery by approximately 40%. Repurposing and recycling may be profitable as well provided that certain conditions are met. Research and development costs for new applications and the price of Li salts were crucial factors determining the economic feasibility of repurposing and recycling, respectively. It should be noted that many of the above conclusions were drawn on the basis of specific assumptions, which may change over time and space. Therefore, uncertainty exists and should be considered when dealing with certain types of retired batteries and application scenarios.411
6.4 Technical feasibility analysis
The whole second use process faces technical challenges, including assessment of a battery's performance in its first vehicle-based life, testing and verification of the battery SOH after vehicle life, prediction of its second use performance, safe disassembly of battery packs, testing of failed cells within the pack, verification of the battery size for repurposing, design of new battery management systems to interface with application scenarios, reconfiguring used batteries for second applications, and BOSs in the second use application.388,390,392,412–416 Predicting the performance of batteries in their second life is most challenging because it is strongly related to the current SOH and operational history during their life in the vehicle.71,393,417,418
Before disassembly, technicians can presort damaged packs through visual examination of any physical damage and/or leakage. Meanwhile, the battery chemistry and calendar life of vehicle use can be identified from the label information.70 Because of the high voltage and liquid coolant, the disassembly of battery packs is hazardous and requires skilled technicians, as well as specialized equipment. As for the determination of optimal battery size for repurposing, most studies tend to use the pack or module level.70,71,386,393,412 Because the cells within a battery pack are generally welded together, dismantling to the cell level is neither technically nor economically viable. Then, voltage and resistance tests are conducted to identify the damaged modules. The current SOH of retired batteries in terms of capacity and power capability can be determined through specific testing procedures, such as the “Technical specifications of performance test for smart grid energy storage batteries” (DB31/T817-2014, China) and “USABC Reference Performance Test.”70,415
Prediction of the remaining performance requires an understanding of the battery degradation. Neubauer et al.71,382 developed a general methodology and tools to predict battery degradation during the first automotive and second application lifetimes. Based on the Battery Lifetime Analysis and Simulation Tool for Vehicles (BLAST-V) model studies used to predict battery degradation in automobile life, it was found that driver patterns and climate have the greatest effects on battery degradation. Then, two different EVs, a midsize sedan battery EV with a 75-mile electric range (BEV75) and a midsize sedan PHEV with a 20-mile electric range (PHEV20), and three climate patterns (cold, moderate, and hot) were chosen and simulated. The prediction results from BLAST-V and the present value of throughput method showed that, compared with resistance growth, the capacity loss during vehicle life had a larger effect on the second use value. Meanwhile, it was found that the most important parameter to identify the remaining battery performance was the capacity loss related to the calendar effect (Q1), as shown in Fig. 38. Thus, the authors recommended a high-confidence identification strategy for Q1, which combined an in situ measurement of the remaining battery capacity while recording the battery temperature.
 Fig. 38  Predicted second use battery lifetimes of simulations as a function of the battery SOH parameters at the end of its automotive service. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. This report is available at no cost from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) at http://www.nrel.gov/publications. 
After determination of a targeted application scenario, certain numbers of modules were reassembled and integrated to meet the function demands for the intended second use. Note that a thorough knowledge of both the vehicle battery and stationary energy storage in terms of the functional requirements and system architectures greatly aids the system integration process (Tables 5 and 6). With this knowledge in mind, the overlap in system architectures and component interoperability can be identified, which can lower the cost of the integration process.391,399,404,419 Cready et al.70 also recommended the reuse of essential components. Necessary accessories and a management system were added based on the functional requirements. Finally, the integrated storage system was installed and tested for use. In summary, the technical feasibility of B2U still needs to be further evaluated comprehensively and quantitatively, particularly with respect to the ability to rapidly identify the feasibility of batteries at the cell, module, or pack level for repurposing and reuse in second applications.
Table 5 Comparison of the technical requirements of batteries in electric vehicles versus stationary applications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 391 Copyright 2015 IEEE




Parameters
1st life in EV
2nd life in stationary application




Nominal voltage level
∼400 V
∼800–1000 V


Operating hours for 10 years
∼16800 h (on)
Max. 87600 h (on)


Ambient temperatures
−40 to 60 °C (in operation)
10–35 °C (in operation)


C-Rates
2–3C (continuous); >5C (peak)
<0.5C (continuous); 0.5–2C (peak)


Thermal management concept
Active (air or liquid)
Passive (active air or liquid only for specific use cases with critical temperatures)


Vibrations
Typical for vehicles in motion
None


SOH
100%
70–90%




Table 6 Energy storage system requirements for various applications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 399 Copyright 2009 The Author




Application
Energy storage
Power
Duration
Frequency




Transmission support
<1 MW h
100 MW
10–100 s
1 month−1


Area regulation
2 MW h
10 MW (average); 20 MW (peak)
Continuous
Continuous


Spinning reserve
7.5 MW h
20 MW
15 min
1 month−1


Load leveling
50 MW h
10 MW
>5 h
100–200 days year−1


Energy arbitrage


Transmission deferral


Renewables firming
1–10 MW h
1 MW (average); 5 MW (peak)
1–10 h
10–20 days month−1


Power reliability,
3–4 MW h
1 MW (average); 2 MW (peak)
3–4 h
6 year−1 up to daily


Peak shaving


Light commercial load following
75–100 kW h
25 kW (average); 200 kW (peak)
3 h
Daily


Distributed node telecom backup power
25–50 kW h
5 kW
5–10 h
2 year−1


Residential load following
3–4 kW h
1 kW (average); 10 kW (peak)
3 h
Daily




6.5 Environmental feasibility analysis
Continued research has indicated that the value of B2U is not only in the reuse of battery cells to lower the initial price of the vehicle, but also that B2U has the potential to maximize an EV battery system over its lifetime, which can provide additional environmental benefits to the whole B2U system. It is rational that B2U can postpone the recycling process, which can lower the burden of final recycling and disposal.401 Compared with technical and economic analyses of B2U, relatively fewer environmental assessment studies have been conducted. Earlier research was mainly a rough calculation of the carbon reduction credits from energy storage. For example, Williams and Lipman386 estimated a modest carbon reduction value of ∼$12 year−1 in California if otherwise wasted wind energy was stored by the battery devices. A similar calculation was also conducted by Narula381 to verify the positive environmental effect of energy storage. Incidental benefits, including reduced fossil fuel use and air emissions (CO2 and NOx), can be obtained through energy storage. Energy use and GHG emissions are considered as the main indicators of the environmental assessment of B2U. Usually three scenarios are analyzed to address the environmental considerations corresponding to both first EV and second-life battery applications. The first scenario is the LCA of the reuse phase in the whole life cycle of an EV battery. The second one is the LCA comparison of EVs with and without a second-life application. The last one is to compare the LCA of B2U with that using other energy storage technologies (like a Pb–acid battery or natural gas) for the second-life application.
In recent research by Ahmadi and colleagues, a complete life cycle of EV batteries (cascaded scenario), including production, EV use, repurposing, second use in a stationary application, and recycling, was investigated.398 As many as six indicators were calculated in the LCA: global warming potential (GWP), particulate matter formation potential, freshwater eutrophication potential, photochemical oxidant formation potential, metal depletion potential, and fossil depletion potential. Within the phases of the cascaded scenario, it was concluded that the energy consumption of the use and reuse phases was much higher than that of the other phases (Fig. 39a). For the environmental impact analysis, the battery pack manufacturing phase generated the most GHG emissions (∼40%). The use and reuse phases were also the major contributors to the GHG emissions (Fig. 39b). Furthermore, the results were compared with those of a conventional scenario; that is, an ICEV for mobility use and a natural gas peaking power plant for a stationary application. The calculated results showed that the cascaded scenario had less environmental impact than the conventional scenario, except for the metal depletion potential indicator.
 Fig. 39  (a) LIB pack CED for phases of the battery pack life; (b) life-cycle impact assessment indicator of GWP results for 1 kW h of power delivered by the LIB pack cascaded use. Reprinted with permission from ref. 398 Copyright 2015 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. CED (c) and GWP (d) impacts of an EV LIB with cascading reuse. (The dotted line reflects the impact of the EV LIB life cycle with no reuse in a stationary application.) (e) Life-cycle CO2 emissions associated with the defined scenarios for 3 paths. Reprinted with permission from ref. 397 Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (f) CED of stationary energy storage system, comparing the base line LIB scenario to three scenarios of Pb–acid battery efficiency. (c, d, and f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 396 Copyright 2015 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
Richa et al. investigated the impact of the addition of reuse on the net environmental impacts. It was found that the reuse of a retired EV LIB in the stationary application could reduce the net cumulative energy demand (CED) and GWP by 15% compared with that without stationary use (Fig. 39c and d).396 Cicconi et al.395 used LCA to estimate the environmental impact of retired PHEV batteries in second smart-grid applications. Global warming, acidification, and eutrophication were chosen as the indicators. Compared with the original life cycle of an EV without B2U, an environmental gain of 25% was obtained after B2U. Another study conducted by Faria et al.420 also verified the environmental benefits of B2U in household energy storage for peak shaving and load shifting. Retired LIBs from Nissan Leaf EVs were used as the object. Four categories, including abiotic depletion, acidification, eutrophication, and global warming, were assessed. The results showed that the positive environmental impact was strongly related to the electricity generation mix. Sathre and co-workers394 analyzed the impact of the second-life use of retired plug-in EVs on the future energy system of California by 2050. The results suggested that the contribution of B2U to diurnal energy shifting was modest.
Ahmadi and colleagues393,397,398 systematically investigated the environmental feasibility of B2U through the LCA method. In a previous study, they compared the CO2 emission of three paths: path 1 was an ICEV for mobility with natural gas for peaking power, path 2 was a PHEV for mobility with natural gas for peaking power, and path 3 was a PHEV for mobility with repurposed batteries for peaking power (Fig. 39e).397 The recycling process was not considered in this study. A considerable decrease of CO2 emissions (56%) was achieved with B2U in path 3 compared with that of the other paths. Moreover, a new concept of charge efficiency fade (or energy efficiency fade) was introduced, which affects the reuse process much more than the vehicle use process. Taking charge efficiency fade into consideration, CO2 emissions will increase over time. Later, the authors improved on their previous study by using energy and GHG emissions as indicators for an environmental feasibility analysis.393 Similar positive effects of B2U in terms of energy and GHG emission decreases were confirmed. This series of studies indicated that B2U can be beneficial from the perspective of minimizing environmental effects.
In addition to the comparison of B2U and natural gas in stationary energy storage, other common technologies have also been considered. Richa and colleagues396 investigated the environmental feasibility of B2U compared with that of a new Pb–acid battery for stationary energy storage (Fig. 39f). It was estimated that a repurposed LIB outperformed a new Pb–acid battery, with a net decrease of 13% to 46% in CED and 12% to 46% in GWP. Because the above conclusions were circumstance-specific, they could not be compared between different cases. However, a common belief was confirmed that B2U can be beneficial to the environment if it is performed under certain conditions.
6.6 Market feasibility analysis
Market analysis of B2U mainly involves identification of the potential application markets. A proper business model also needs to be considered in practice after an application is determined. Application selection is closely related to the performance and cost of the repurposed battery, the technical requirements of the potential application, and the market size and competition (supply of repurposed batteries and demand for the relative application). A consensus has been reached that a substantial number of retired batteries from EVs will become available by 2030.
First though, repurposed batteries must find their right place in the energy storage market. Given their relatively poor performance in terms of energy and power density, as well as the large size of the battery pack and module, some advanced battery markets, such as consumer electronics and EVs, are not suitable for repurposed batteries. For applications dominated by Pb–acid batteries with relatively low performance requirements, the competition strongly depends on the price/performance ratio of repurposed batteries.71 It is widely accepted that stationary energy storage is the most promising application for repurposed batteries in the future.381,385,401,418,421–426 Eyer and Corey419 grouped the main 19 grid energy storage application scenarios into five categories: electric supply, ancillary services, grid system, end user/utility customer, and renewables integration. Preliminary cost–benefit calculations indicated that area regulation application, an ancillary service, had the largest potential benefit.386 However, based on the allocation analysis by Neubauer,71 high-value applications, such as area regulation and transportable transmission upgrade deferral, all have small market potential and fierce competition. A more plausible strategy would be to shift focus to the application scenario with the highest demand; that is, peak-shaving services. Neubauer71 suggested two cases for investigation: user-side behind-the-meter storage and peaker plant replacement, of which the latter was estimated to be the most promising scenario.
Based on the size of packs, stationary applications can be classified into large-scale applications (MW h, MW), such as load leveling for renewable energies, and small-scale applications (kW h, kW), such as residential/light commercial load leveling.393,399,418 Considering that the energy/power density of repurposed batteries is of the order of kW h kW−1, it seems more appropriate to use them in small-scale applications. Moreover, the construction of small applications is simpler and less risky than that of large ones, which could facilitate the initial implementation of B2U.384 Kootstra et al.416 investigated the operation feasibility of a photovoltaic grid stabilization system armed with a repurposed LIB pack. The calculation indicated that the peak demand of grid electricity could be lowered by over 70% with the battery pack, and the sudden fluctuations in photovoltaic output could also be stabilized. Similarly, Knowles and co-workers424 simulated the application of repurposed batteries as buffer packs for the home storage of solar power. It was verified that the use of repurposed batteries could increase the utilization of renewable energies. Aziz et al.422 developed a storage system consisting of five EVs, five used EV batteries (after one year of use in an EV), and a solar panel to support a building energy management system. Their test results indicated that this utilization strategy was viable by controlling the electrochemical performances of the EVs and used batteries and setting a peak cut threshold.
When implementing the second use of vehicle batteries in practice, the optimal business model needs to be identified.400,402,403 Klör et al.403 argued that there were three market forms that may be considered in B2U, including a closed market, an intermediary-based market, and an open market, as shown in Fig. 40. The closed market is led by the automotive or battery manufacturers, who are fully responsible for the repurposing of vehicle batteries. In the intermediary-based market, an intermediary collects retired batteries from car owners and repurposes the batteries for second use in other applications. The open market is a marketplace where buyers and sellers can negotiate directly over the repurposing and application of retired batteries. Based on the conceptual transaction cost analysis and empirical inquiries, the intermediary-based market led by automotive manufacturers was the most likely option for B2U. Another business model of battery lease was also preliminarily investigated. Lih et al.388 estimated a profit rate of 35% could be achieved when a 10 kW h LIB pack had a total service life of 15 years (three years of first use and 12 years of second use) under the battery lease model. Regardless of the business model, the B2U service should be customer-focused, including the car owners and buyers of the second application.400 The providers of B2U, whether intermediaries or automotive manufacturers, should make efforts to improve the cost–performance ratio of repurposed batteries and customers’ product experience.
 Fig. 40  Market forms and involved stakeholders for trading used EV batteries: (a) closed market of OEMs selling used EV batteries to customers; (b) intermediary-based market for scraping together EV battery suppliers and customers; (c) open market for bringing together EV battery suppliers and customers in a marketplace. Copyright 2015. Reprinted from ref. 403 with permission from Association for Information Systems, Atlanta, GA; 404-413-7444; http://www.aisnet.org. 
Besides fundamental research and simulation, many pilot demonstrations led by automotive manufacturers in cooperation with other related parties have been announced or are under way.427–436 As shown in Table 7, Sumitomo in collaboration with Nissan have developed and installed the world's first large-scale power storage system with used batteries from EVs.432 Daimler is working on the world's largest project of B2U for grid stabilization (13 MW h), which consists of 1000 battery systems from second-generation smart for two electric vehicles.435 GM, BMW, Ford, and Renault are all starting to explore the second use of batteries from their own EVs.429–431,433,434,436 In the second use of retired EV batteries, the primary concern is economic feasibility, which is still questionable because the remaining performance of retired batteries is currently unclear and the price of new batteries is changing. Most researchers are cautiously optimistic that B2U will be economically feasible, but further in-depth research is required to draw more convincing conclusions.
Table 7 Pilot demonstrations of B2U by related enterprises




Enterprise
Time
B2U application




EnerDel&Itochu427
2010
Battery-based energy storage system in new apartment complexes to help residents store energy for use at times of peak demand.


Duke Energy&Itochu428
2010
Stationary applications in homes, neighborhoods, and commercial buildings.


Ford429
2011
50 kW h for solar energy storage.


GM&ABB430
2012
5 repurposed Chevy Volt batteries with up to 50 kW h storage capacity for a microgrid backup system.


BMW&UC San Diego431
2013
Repurposed mini-E EV batteries for stationary energy storage (∼108 kW and 2–3 h of energy storage) integrated with a solar photovoltaic system.


4R Energy (Nissan&Sumimoto)432
2014
16 used EV batteries with 600 kW and 400 kW h storage capacity to smooth out fluctuations in energy output from a solar farm in Osaka.


BMW&Bosch433
2014
2600 battery modules from more than 100 EVs with a power capacity of 2 MW and a storage capacity of 2.8 MW h to stabilize the grid and reduce the impact of peak demand in Hamburg.


BMW&(PG&E)434
2016
Repurposed BMW i3 batteries as energy storage for home use.


Daimler&The Mobility House, GETEC, REMONDIS435
2016
1000 battery systems from smart fortwo EVs with a storage capacity of 13 MW h to even out fluctuations in the German power grid.


Renault&Powervault436
2017
Repurposed Renault EV batteries as home energy storage systems.




7. Laws and regulations
Mandatory laws and regulations are the first incentive for battery recycling. Developed countries, including the USA, EU members, and Japan, have already started to compile legislation on the recycling of used batteries. Different laws, regulations, and directives related to battery recycling have been enacted, revised, and updated to cope with battery development, as shown in Fig. 41. Generally, the laws and regulations are enacted from the perspective of the life-cycle management of batteries. Systematic legislations with clear responsibilities of relevant stakeholders are important for battery recycling.
 Fig. 41  Timeline and development of laws and regulations on battery recycling in the EU, USA, and China. 
The US legal system has contributions mainly from the federal, state, and local levels. The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) of 1976 is the principal federal law that governs the disposal of solid and hazardous waste, and has the main goals of protecting human health and the natural environment from the potential hazards of waste disposal and decreasing the amount of waste through source reduction and recycling. EPA regulates the treatment of solid and hazardous wastes under the RCRA. For example, the Universal Waste Rule set standards for the identification of universal waste, which mainly includes hazardous waste batteries, certain hazardous waste pesticides, and hazardous waste thermostats. Another federal law, The Mercury-Containing and Rechargeable Battery Management Act of 1996 (known as “The Battery Act”), also makes important advances in battery recycling, because it phases out the use of Hg in batteries and requires labeling to facilitate the collection, recycling, and disposal of spent small sealed Pb–acid batteries, Ni–Cd batteries, and certain other batteries. Most states have adopted the battery recycling regulations published by EPA and also enacted their own regulations that are at least as stringent as the federal regulations.437 For example, the California Rechargeable Battery Recycling Act of 2006 bans all household batteries from solid waste landfill disposal and requires retailers to take back rechargeable batteries for recycling at no cost to consumers. The New York State Rechargeable Battery Law of 2010 aims to maximize the removal of used rechargeable batteries from the solid waste stream by requiring battery manufacturers to take back and recycle used rechargeable batteries that are sold or disposed of in the state of New York.438 This law requires the shared responsibility for the collection and disposal of used rechargeable batteries from many stakeholders, including battery manufacturers, local retailers, and consumers. Retailers are required to accept used batteries from customers, and to conspicuously maintain collection boxes or other suitable receptacles that are convenient for consumers to safely deposit used rechargeable batteries. Battery manufacturers are responsible for arranging and financing the return and recycling of all used rechargeable batteries collected by retailers.
The first version of the European Council Directive on batteries and accumulators was 91/157/EEC, which required the disposal of many battery types, including alkaline, Pb–acid, Ni–Cd, Ni–MH, Li-based, and Hg-containing batteries, and LIBs.439 The Directive 2006/66/EC on waste batteries and accumulators (The Battery Directive) regulates the manufacture, collection, recycling, and disposal of used batteries and accumulators.440 The aim of this directive is to decrease the amount of hazardous substances used and to prohibit the marketing of batteries with more than 0.0005% Hg and 0.002% Cd by weight. Similar European directives parallel to the Battery Directive are the Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive (RoHS; Directive 2002/95/EC) and the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive (WEEE; Directive 2012/19/EC).441,442 RoHS requires the substitution of various heavy metals with other substances in new electrical and electronic equipment entering the market. WEEE aims to provide incentives to improve the design of electrical and electronic equipment to facilitate recycling. It initiates the reuse and recycling of used electrical and electronic equipment to decrease the amount of waste generated. Producers are responsible for recycling used electrical and electronic equipment free of charge.
China is one of the major countries producing batteries and EVs, and the Chinese government has enacted a complete legal system on batteries recycling, which is mainly divided into three levels: law; regulation; and specific technical policies, specifications, and guidelines.443 The Prevention of Environmental Pollution from Solid Waste Law supports the comprehensive utilization of resources, the full recovery and rational utilization of solid waste, and the adoption of economic and technological policies conducive to the comprehensive utilization of solid waste. The Technical Policy of Waste Battery Pollution Prevention is the first policy specifically related to the treatment of batteries. This policy is applicable to technical selection to prevent and control pollution in the whole recycling process, including in the classification, collection, transportation, comprehensive utilization, storage, and treatment of waste batteries, including Hg-containing, Ni–Cd, and Pb–acid batteries. The goal is to gradually decrease and eventually eliminate the use of Hg in primary battery production, and to collect and dispose of waste batteries in a safe, efficient, and low-cost manner. In response to the upcoming issue of the treatment of retired power batteries, the Technical Policy of Recovery and Utilization of Power Batteries for Electric Vehicles was developed. The purpose of this policy is to instruct relevant enterprises to rationally conduct the production and recovery of EV batteries, to clarify the main body responsible for the recovery of used batteries, and to implement an extended producer responsibility system.444
8. Opportunities, challenges, and future prospects
The recycling of spent rechargeable batteries has been extensively studied around the world, and great progress has been made in the last few decades. However, the growing energy demand for various applications forces researchers to continually develop new battery materials and systems. At the same time, with the development of society and the improvement of living standards, people's awareness of the importance of environmental protection has increased markedly. Therefore, continuous research is still needed to develop the most appropriate recycling technologies in response to the changing demand for recycling. Based on the existing experience and predicted future development of this field, a reinterpretation of the “reduce, reuse, recycle” (3R) strategy as “redesign, reuse, recycle” for battery recycling is proposed, along with a more comprehensive 3E assessment standard of “efficiency, economy, environment,” as shown in Fig. 42. Redesign and recycling represent the source and end treatment of batteries, respectively, and reuse refers to the second use of retired power batteries. This strategy faces the following challenges and opportunities:
 Fig. 42  Proposed “3R and 3E” strategy for battery recycling in the future. 
(1) Technical aspect: the pretreatment of large volumes of power batteries has great potential dangers, like short circuit and an explosion risk. In practice, there are almost no well-established processing lines for automatic disassembly, which are needed urgently for efficient and safe recycling in the future. Because of the complex composition of batteries, especially LIBs and Ni–MH batteries, multiple steps are necessary to obtain high-purity products; nevertheless, complicated operations have an associated large uncertainty. Considering most processes are designed for the separation of different metal elements, a simple recycling process with high recycling and separation rates is desirable. Meanwhile, the impurity level needs to be carefully controlled under a threshold value, which is particularly important for the regenerated materials used in new batteries.
(2) Economic aspect: economic benefit is the direct incentive for manufacturers to recycle spent batteries. The economic analysis is based on cost–benefit calculations. Clearly, decreasing the costs and increasing profits are the two ways to maximize economic benefits. The cost of a recycling process can be divided into fixed and variable costs, which mainly correspond to the used recycling technology and materials, respectively. Therefore, simple operational processes and low-cost materials are desirable. Meanwhile, the benefit of recycling can be increased by obtaining high yields of high-purity products or high-value-added products. In addition to the benefits from products, the positive environmental and social effects of recycling should also be quantitatively incorporated into the economic analysis.
(3) Environmental aspect: the environmental impact of a recycling process can be considered from two perspectives; namely, source control and end-treatment control. At present, recycling enterprises decrease environmental pollution by end-treatment processes, which require the installation of waste water and gas-treatment systems. However, based on the concept of sustainable development, it is strongly recommended that the pollution control strategy should be transferred from end treatment to source prevention. Specifically, for the materials used in the batteries, the use of non-toxic elements to replace toxic materials without sacrificing performance is desired.2,445 As for the recycling process, non-toxic reagents and recycling technologies with low emissions and energy consumption are preferred. As a last resort, end treatment should be used to minimize any pollution emission. At present, most recycling processes focus on the recovery of high-value electrode materials, even though the toxic electrolyte is the main source of environmental pollution. More attention should be paid to electrolyte treatment in the future. Evaluation of a certain recycling process depends on a reliable LCA. Greenness and economy need to be quantitatively calculated and balanced to determine an optimal recycling strategy.
(4) Design aspect: in the process of battery recycling, the mixing of different batteries can result in cross-contamination, which makes the subsequent separation and purification process extremely difficult. Therefore, a pre-screening process is recommended. A user-friendly design of batteries from the inside out would be conducive to their efficient pretreatment. For example, a uniform size and shape of a specific battery type are desirable for automatic dismantling. Clear and user-friendly labels of the battery type and composition should be presented in a prominent position on the batteries.290 The design of large battery packs should consider that a simple and easily disassembled structure can aid recycling.
(5) Market aspect: a complete and clear battery recycling industry chain needs to be established to define the responsibilities of each participant. In addition to mandatory measures, such as laws and regulations, economic incentives implemented by governments and enterprises can assist people to voluntarily recycle spent batteries. Recycling systems need to be established predominantly by governments, battery manufacturers, or automotive enterprises to cover the whole recycling process involving collection, transportation, recycling, and disposal. Well-functioning recycling systems, such as Bebat in Belgium and Call2Recycle in the USA, provide valuable references for the development of such systems in other countries.446,447
(6) Popularization aspect: a complete recycling process begins with collection, which cannot be achieved efficiently by recycling enterprises alone. Universal education on the benefits of recycling and the dangers of waste batteries could facilitate their recycling. Governments, enterprises, educational institutions, and NGOs should all contribute to raising people's awareness of recycling.
(7) Networking aspect: a massive data volume is essential to develop a proper recycling strategy. The more information that recycling enterprises have about waste batteries, the better they can optimize their parameters to achieve a higher recycling efficiency. With the development of artificial intelligence and the Internet of Things, it is conceivable that in the future, all batteries that are produced may be connected to the internet.448 Thus, a massive data volume on battery production and use stages could be stored, collected, and shared on certain platforms for use by recycling enterprises and other stakeholders. Such data would aid the identification and sorting stages of recycling. More importantly, when dealing with large power batteries for second use in stationary applications, data of the vehicle life of retired batteries are the basis of evaluation for repurposing. It is expected that no insurmountable technical barriers exist to accumulating such data; the biggest obstacle is the reluctance of manufacturers to share data.
9. Conclusions
Energy and environmental issues are inevitable challenges for human development. As important energy storage devices, rechargeable batteries play a vital role in helping to solve these two issues. Consequently, the production of rechargeable batteries is increasing at a high rate every year, and thus the fate of corresponding spent batteries needs to be settled urgently. The four types of rechargeable batteries are similar in structure but quite different in their materials chemistry, leading to different recycling situations. As the first commercial rechargeable battery, the recycling technologies of spent Pb–acid batteries are relatively simple and mature. The most noteworthy feature of Pb–acid battery recycling is that the Pb pollution must be controlled carefully and minimized to a safe threshold. Similar to Pb–acid batteries, the main material composition of Ni-based batteries is also simple, with Ni as the recycling focus. In addition, the recycling of rare-earth elements from Ni-based batteries is attracting more attention because of the increasing demand for these materials. The multiple types and sizes and complex chemical composition of LIBs complicate their recycling. No consensus has been reached on the optimal recycling process for LIBs because there is still much room for improvement of both pyro- and hydrometallurgical technologies. In addition to the most valuable cathode materials, more attention is now being paid to other components of batteries, including electrolytes and anodes.
When systematically evaluating a particular recycling technology with LCA, the factors of efficiency, economy, and environment should all be considered and balanced. With regard to the upcoming substantial number of retired power batteries from EVs, although great uncertainty still exists about the economics of B2U, most researchers are cautiously optimistic about the future development of this strategy. To achieve highly sustainable recycling, a shift to material and structure design from the source is desirable. The proposed “3R and 3E” strategy provides a novel perspective on battery recycling and guidance for the future direction of this field.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Program for Basic Research of China (2015CB251106), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51772030), the Joint Funds of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1564206), and Major Achievements Transformation Project for Central University in Beijing.
Notes and references
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef PubMed .
U.S. Energy Information Administration, International Energy Outlook 2017, https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/ieo/, accessed Jan 18, 2018.

          H. J. Butler and S. A. Montzka, National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration, https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/aggi/aggi.html, accessed June 8, 2018.

          E. Dlugokencky and P. Tans, NOAA/ESRL http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends, accessed June 8, 2018.
J. B. Dunn, L. Gaines, J. C. Kelly, C. James and K. G. Gallagher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 158–168 RSC .
Y. M. Chiang, Science, 2010, 330, 1485–1486 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Armand, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef PubMed .

          C. Pillot, 5th Israeli Power Sources Conference, 2015, https://wenku.baidu.com/view/0a82fd6049d7c1c708a1284ac850ad02de8007bd.html, accessed Jan 20, 2018.

          https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/lead-acid-battery-market, accessed Jan 10, 2018.
M. R. Palacín and A. de Guibert, Science, 2016, 351, 1253292 CrossRef PubMed .
International Energy Agency, Global EV Outlook 2017, http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/global-ev-outlook-2017.html, accessed Jan 2020, 2018.
Global Plug-in Vehicle Sales for 2017–Final Results, http://www.ev-volumes.com/country/total-world-plug-in-vehicle-volumes/, accessed Feb 10, 2018.
X. L. Zeng, J. H. Li and N. Singh, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 44, 1129–1165 CrossRef .
M. Foster, P. Isely, C. R. Standridge and M. M. Hasan, J. Ind. Eng. Manag., 2014, 7, 698–715 Search PubMed .
A. Chagnes and B. Pospiech, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2013, 88, 1191–1199 CrossRef .
H. Aral and A. Vecchio-Sadus, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2008, 70, 349–356 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Gottesfeld and A. K. Pokhrel, J. Occup. Environ. Hyg., 2011, 8, 520–532 CrossRef PubMed .
London Metal Exchange Home Page, https://www.lme.com/, accessed June 8, 2018.
Infomine Home Page, http://www.infomine.com/, accessed June 8, 2018.
Shanghai Metals Market New Energy Division Home Page, https://price.metal.com/prices/new-energy, accessed June 1, 2018.
A. M. Bernardes, D. C. R. Espinosa and J. A. S. Tenorio, J. Power Sources, 2004, 130, 291–298 CrossRef .
J. Xu, H. R. Thomas, R. W. Francis, K. R. Lum, J. Wang and B. Liang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 512–527 CrossRef .
D. C. R. Espinosa, A. M. Bernardes and J. A. S. Tenório, J. Power Sources, 2004, 135, 311–319 CrossRef .
W. Wang and Y. Wu, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2017, 127, 233–243 CrossRef .
M. Vanitha and N. Balasubramanian, Environ. Technol. Rev., 2013, 2, 101–115 CrossRef .
O. E. Bankole, J. Environ. Ecol., 2013, 4, 14–28 CrossRef .
J. Ordoñez, E. J. Gago and A. Girard, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 60, 195–205 CrossRef .
V. Innocenzi, N. M. Ippolito, I. De Michelis, M. Prisciandaro, F. Medici and F. Vegliò, J. Power Sources, 2017, 362, 202–218 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, H. Cao, X. Zhang, X. Lin, W. Zheng, G. Cao, Y. Sun and Y. Zhang, Waste Manag., 2017, 64, 190–201 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. Yang, X. Wu, Y. Hu, W. Yu, J. Wang, J. Dong, M. Li, S. Liang, J. Hu and R. V. Kumar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 61, 108–122 CrossRef .
B. K. Reck and T. E. Graedel, Science, 2012, 337, 690–695 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Sun, H. Cao, Y. Xiao, J. Sietsma, W. Jin, H. Agterhuis and Y. Yang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 21–40 CrossRef .
P. Frohlich, T. Lorenz, G. Martin, B. Brett and M. Bertau, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2544–2580 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zeng, R. Gong, W.-Q. Chen and J. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 1347–1358 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Scrosati, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 1623–1630 CrossRef .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4302 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11414–11443 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4418 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503–11618 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 7, 14–18 RSC .
S. M. Shin, N. H. Kim, J. S. Sohn, D. H. Yang and Y. H. Kim, Hydrometallurgy, 2005, 79, 172–181 CrossRef .
A. J. da Costa, J. F. Matos, A. M. Bernardes and I. L. Müller, Int. J. Miner. Process., 2015, 145, 77–82 CrossRef .
J. Diekmann, C. Hanisch, L. Froböse, G. Schälicke, T. Loellhoeffel, A.-S. Fölster and A. Kwade, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A6184–A6191 CrossRef .
M. Kaya, Waste Manag., 2016, 57, 64–90 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, G. Wang and Z. Xu, Waste Manag., 2016, 52, 221–227 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, G. Gaustad and C. W. Babbitt, Waste Manag., 2016, 51, 204–213 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Dorella and M. B. Mansur, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 210–215 CrossRef .
L. Li, J. Lu, Y. Ren, X. X. Zhang, R. J. Chen, F. Wu and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2012, 218, 21–27 CrossRef .

          S. Zhu, W. He, G. Li, X. Zhou, J. Huang and X. Zhang, Recovering Copper from Spent Lithium Ion Battery by a Mechanical Separation Process, Materials for Renewable Energy & Environment, Shanghai, China,  2011 Search PubMed .
F. Pagnanelli, E. Moscardini, P. Altimari, T. Abo Atia and L. Toro, Waste Manag., 2017, 60, 706–715 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhang, Y. He, F. Wang, L. Ge, X. Zhu and H. Li, Waste Manag., 2014, 34, 1051–1058 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Contestabile, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2001, 92, 65–69 CrossRef .
L. P. He, S. Y. Sun, X. F. Song and J. G. Yu, Waste Manag., 2015, 46, 523–528 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Xie, H. Cao, F. Nawaz and Y. Zhang, Waste Manag., 2014, 34, 1715–1724 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Huang, H. P. Wang, G. T. Wei, I. W. Sun, J. F. Huang and Y. W. Yang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 4761–4764 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Markiewicz, C. Jungnickel and H. P. H. Arp, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 6951–6958 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zeng, J. Li, H. Xie and L. Liu, Chemosphere, 2013, 93, 1288–1294 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhu, Y. Chen, L. Y. Wang and M. Zhou, Waste Manag., 2012, 32, 1914–1918 CrossRef PubMed .
X. L. Zeng and J. H. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 271, 50–56 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Nie, L. Xu, D. Song, J. Song, X. Shi, X. Wang, L. Zhang and Z. Yuan, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1276–1280 RSC .
X. Zhang, Q. Xue, L. Li, E. Fan, F. Wu and R. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 7041–7049 CrossRef .
D. Song, X. Wang, H. Nie, H. Shi, D. Wang, F. Guo, X. Shi and L. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 137–141 CrossRef .
D. Song, X. Wang, E. Zhou, P. Hou, F. Guo and L. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 232, 348–352 CrossRef .
D. A. Ferreira, L. M. Z. Prados, D. Majuste and M. B. Mansur, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 238–246 CrossRef .
J. Nan, D. Han and X. Zuo, J. Power Sources, 2005, 152, 278–284 CrossRef .

          E. Cready, J. Lippert, J. Pihl, I. Weinstock and P. Symons, Technical and Economic Feasibility of Applying Used EV Batteries in Stationary Applications, Sandia National Labs,  2003 Search PubMed .

          J. Neubauer, K. Smith, E. Wood and A. Pesaran, Identifying and Overcoming Critical Barriers to Widespread Second Use of PEV Batteries, National Renewable Energy Laboratory,  2015 Search PubMed .
T. Zhang, Y. Q. He, F. F. Wang, H. Li, C. L. Duan and C. B. Wu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 138, 21–27 CrossRef .
E. Gratz, Q. Sa, D. Apelian and Y. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 255–262 CrossRef .
S. Kim, D. Yang, K. Rhee and J. Sohn, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2014, 40, 2447–2456 CrossRef .
M. Lu, H. N. Zhang, B. C. Wang, X. D. Zheng and C. S. Dai, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2013, 8, 8201–8209 Search PubMed .
T. Zhang, Y. He, L. Ge, R. Fu, X. Zhang and Y. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 766–771 CrossRef .
D. Marinos and B. Mishra, J. Sustainable Metall., 2015, 1, 263–274 CrossRef .
S. Al-Thyabat, T. Nakamura, E. Shibata and A. Iizuka, Miner. Eng., 2013, 45, 4–17 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, G. Huang, S. Xu, Y. He and X. Liu, Hydrometallurgy, 2016, 165(Part 2), 390–396 CrossRef .
L. Sun and K. Qiu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 194, 378–384 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bian, Y. Sun, S. Li, Y. Tian, Z. Yang, X. Fan and W. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 134–140 CrossRef .
E. J. Shin, S. Kim, J. K. Noh, D. Byun, K. Y. Chung, H. S. Kim and B. W. Cho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11493–11502 RSC .
R. Zheng, L. Zhao, W. Wang, Y. Liu, Q. Ma, D. Mu, R. Li and C. Dai, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 43613–43625 RSC .
D. A. Bertuol, C. Toniasso, B. M. Jiménez, L. Meili, G. L. Dotto, E. H. Tanabe and M. L. Aguiar, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 627–632 CrossRef .
F. Wang, T. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Zhao, S. Wang, G. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Y. Feng, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 185, 646–652 CrossRef .
Y. He, T. Zhang, F. Wang, G. Zhang, W. Zhang and J. Wang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 143, 319–325 CrossRef .
J. Yu, Y. He, H. Li, W. Xie and T. Zhang, Powder Technol., 2017, 315, 139–146 CrossRef .
J. Yu, Y. He, Z. Ge, H. Li, W. Xie and S. Wang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 190, 45–52 CrossRef .
K. Huang, J. Li and Z. Xu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 8974–8978 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, G. Wang and Z. Xu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 302, 97–104 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Balaz, M. Achimovicova, M. Balaz, P. Billik, Z. Cherkezova-Zheleva, J. M. Criado, F. Delogu, E. Dutkova, E. Gaffet, F. J. Gotor, R. Kumar, I. Mitov, T. Rojac, M. Senna, A. Streletskii and K. Wieczorek-Ciurowa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7571–7637 RSC .
Z. Ou, J. Li and Z. Wang, Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts, 2015, 17, 1522–1530 RSC .
Z. Ou and J. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 51970–51976 RSC .
W. Yuan, J. Li, Q. Zhang and F. Saito, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 4109–4114 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yuan, J. Li, Q. Zhang and F. Saito, Powder Technol., 2012, 230, 63–66 CrossRef .
S. Saeki, J. Lee, Q. Zhang and F. Saito, Int. J. Miner. Process., 2004, 74, S373–S378 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, J. Lu, F. Saito, C. Nagata and Y. Ito, Adv. Powder Technol., 2000, 11, 353–359 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, Y. Li, X. Lou, J. Guan, Y. Li, X. Mai, H. Liu, C. X. Zhao, N. Wang, C. Yan, G. Gao, H. Yuan, J. Dai, R. Su and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 13790–13800 CrossRef .
J. Guan, Y. Li, Y. Guo, R. Su, G. Gao, H. Song, H. Yuan, B. Liang and Z. Guo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1026–1032 CrossRef .
M. M. Wang, C. C. Zhang and F. S. Zhang, Waste Manag., 2016, 51, 239–244 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Wang, C. C. Zhang and F. S. Zhang, Waste Manag., 2017, 67, 232–239 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, X. Zheng, H. Cao, C. Zhao, X. Lin, P. Ning, Y. Zhang, W. Jin and Z. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9972–9980 CrossRef .
O. A. Fouad, F. I. Farghaly and M. Bahgat, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2007, 78, 65–69 CrossRef .
M. Bahgat, F. E. Farghaly, S. M. A. Basir and O. A. Fouad, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2007, 183, 117–121 CrossRef .
J. Hu, J. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Chen and C. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 351, 192–199 CrossRef .
J. Xiao, J. Li and Z. Xu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 11960–11966 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xiao, J. Li and Z. Xu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 338, 124–131 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lv, Z. Wand, H. Cao, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1504–1521 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, W. Gao, X. Zhang, M. He, X. Lin, H. Cao, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Waste Manag., 2017, 60, 680–688 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ku, Y. Jung, M. Jo, S. Park, S. Kim, D. Yang, K. Rhee, E.-M. An, J. Sohn and K. Kwon, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 313, 138–146 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, N. Liu, F. Hu, L. Ye, Y. Xi and S. Yang, Waste Manag., 2018, 75, 469–476 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, C. Liu, H. Cao, X. Zheng, X. Lin, H. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Waste Manag., 2018, 75, 477–485 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, P. Shi, Z. Wang, Y. Chen and C. C. Chang, Chemosphere, 2009, 77, 1132–1136 CrossRef PubMed .
R. C. Wang, Y. C. Lin and S. H. Wu, Hydrometallurgy, 2009, 99, 194–201 CrossRef .
S. P. Barik, G. Prabaharan and L. Kumar, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 147, 37–43 CrossRef .
Z. Takacova, T. Havlik, F. Kukurugya and D. Orac, Hydrometallurgy, 2016, 163, 9–17 CrossRef .
D. P. Mantuano, G. Dorella, R. C. A. Elias and M. B. Mansur, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 1510–1518 CrossRef .
P. Meshram, B. D. Pandey and T. R. Mankhand, Waste Manag., 2015, 45, 306–313 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu, B. Shu and S. Yao, Adv. Chem. Eng. Sci., 2015, 5, 425–429 CrossRef .
K. Tanong, L. Coudert, G. Mercier and J.-F. Blais, J. Environ. Manage., 2016, 181, 95–107 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, R. Sun, J. Xu, Z. Chen and M. Kang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 85303–85311 RSC .
E. M. S. Barbieri, E. P. C. Lima, S. J. Cantarino, M. F. F. Lelis and M. Freitas, J. Power Sources, 2014, 269, 158–163 CrossRef .
E. M. S. Barbieri, E. P. C. Lima, M. F. F. Lelis and M. Freitas, J. Power Sources, 2014, 270, 158–165 CrossRef .
C. K. Lee and K. I. Rhee, Hydrometallurgy, 2003, 68, 5–10 CrossRef .
S. Castillo, F. Ansart, C. Laberty-Robert and J. Portal, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 247–254 CrossRef .
H. Li, S. Xing, Y. Liu, F. Li, H. Guo and G. Kuang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8017–8024 CrossRef .
L. Li, J. Ge, R. Chen, F. Wu, S. Chen and X. Zhang, Waste Manag., 2010, 30, 2615–2621 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, J. Ge, F. Wu, R. Chen, S. Chen and B. Wu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 176, 288–293 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, J. B. Dunn, X. X. Zhang, L. Gaines, R. J. Chen, F. Wu and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2013, 233, 180–189 CrossRef .
L. Li, W. Qu, X. Zhang, J. Lu, R. Chen, F. Wu and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 544–551 CrossRef .
L. Li, E. Fan, Y. Guan, X. Zhang, Q. Xue, L. Wei, F. Wu and R. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 5224–5233 CrossRef .
L. Li, Y. Bian, X. Zhang, Q. Xue, E. Fan, F. Wu and R. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2018, 377, 70–79 CrossRef .
R. Golmohammadzadeh, F. Rashchi and E. Vahidi, Waste Manag., 2017, 64, 244–254 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Pant and T. Dolker, Waste Manag., 2017, 60, 689–695 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen and T. Zhou, Waste Manage. Res., 2014, 32, 1083–1093 CrossRef PubMed .
G. P. Nayaka, J. Manjanna, K. V. Pai, R. Vadavi, S. J. Keny and V. S. Tripathi, Hydrometallurgy, 2015, 151, 73–77 CrossRef .
W. Gao, X. Zhang, X. Zheng, X. Lin, H. Cao, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 1662–1669 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Sun and K. Qiu, Waste Manag., 2012, 32, 1575–1582 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zeng, J. Li and B. Shen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 295, 112–118 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Bian, S. Xu, E. Fan, Q. Xue, Y. Guan, F. Wu, L. Li and R. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5959–5968 CrossRef .
D. Mishra, D. J. Kim, D. E. Ralph, J. G. Ahn and Y. H. Rhee, Waste Manag., 2008, 28, 333–338 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zeng, X. Deng, S. Luo, X. Luo and J. Zou, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 199, 164–169 CrossRef PubMed .
N. B. Horeh, S. M. Mousavi and S. A. Shojaosadati, J. Power Sources, 2016, 320, 257–266 CrossRef .
N. Bahaloo-Horeh and S. M. Mousavi, Waste Manag., 2017, 60, 666–679 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Xin, D. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Xia, F. Wu, S. Chen and L. Li, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 6163–6169 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Niu, Q. Huang, B. Xin, C. Qi, J. Hu, S. Chen and Y. Li, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2016, 91, 608–617 CrossRef .
L. Li, G. S. Zeng, S. L. Luo, X. R. Deng and Q. J. Xie, J. Korean Soc. Appl. Biol. Chem., 2013, 56, 187–192 CrossRef .
C. Cerruti, G. Curutchet and E. Donati, J. Biotechnol., 1998, 62, 209–219 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Rohwerder, T. Gehrke, K. Kinzler and W. Sand, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2003, 63, 239–248 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Willner, J. Kadukova, A. Fornalczyk and M. Saternus, Metalurgija, 2015, 54, 255–258 Search PubMed .
M. E. Hoque and O. J. Philip, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2011, 31, 57–66 CrossRef .
J. C. Lee and B. D. Pandey, Waste Manag., 2012, 32, 3–18 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liu and F. S. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 316, 19–25 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Meng, H. Cao, J. Hao, P. Ning, G. Xu and Z. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5797–5805 CrossRef .
C. K. Lee and K. I. Rhee, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 17–21 CrossRef .
J. Li, X. Li, Q. Hu, Z. Wang, J. Zheng, L. Wu and L. Zhang, Hydrometallurgy, 2009, 99, 7–12 CrossRef .
G. Granata, E. Moscardini, F. Pagnanelli, F. Trabucco and L. Toro, J. Power Sources, 2012, 206, 393–401 CrossRef .
F. Pagnanelli, E. Moscardini, G. Granata, S. Cerbelli, L. Agosta, A. Fieramosca and L. Toro, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2014, 20, 3201–3207 CrossRef .
X. Chen, C. Luo, J. Zhang, J. Kong and T. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 3104–3113 CrossRef .
P. Meshram, B. D. Pandey and T. R. Mankhand, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 281, 418–427 CrossRef .
G. P. Nayaka, K. V. Pai, G. Santhosh and J. Manjanna, Hydrometallurgy, 2016, 161, 54–57 CrossRef .
M. Joulié, E. Billy, R. Laucournet and D. Meyer, Hydrometallurgy, 2017, 169, 426–432 CrossRef .
X. Chen, B. Fan, L. Xu, T. Zhou and J. Kong, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 112, 3562–3570 CrossRef .
J. Wang, M. Chen, H. Chen, T. Luo and Z. Xu, Procedia Environ. Sci., 2012, 16, 443–450 CrossRef .
K. Tanong, L. Coudert, M. Chartier, G. Mercier and J. F. Blais, Environ. Technol., 2017, 1–13 Search PubMed .
N. Vieceli, C. A. Nogueira, C. Guimaraes, M. F. C. Pereira, F. O. Durao and F. Margarido, Waste Manag., 2018, 71, 350–361 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. Meng, P. Dong, J. Duan and Y. Lin, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.jiec.2018.05.004 .
X. Chen, C. Guo, H. Ma, J. Li, T. Zhou, L. Cao and D. Kang, Waste Manag., 2018, 75, 459–468 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Meng, Y. Zhang and P. Dong, Waste Manag., 2017, 64, 214–218 CrossRef PubMed .
G. P. Nayaka, K. V. Pai, J. Manjanna and S. J. Keny, Waste Manag., 2016, 51, 234–238 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Ma, C. Luo and T. Zhou, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 326, 77–86 CrossRef PubMed .
G. P. Nayaka, K. V. Pai, G. Santhosh and J. Manjanna, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2378–2383 CrossRef .
E. Billy, M. Joulie, R. Laucournet, A. Boulineau, E. De Vito and D. Meyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16424–16435 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Jha, A. Kumari, A. K. Jha, V. Kumar, J. Hait and B. D. Pandey, Waste Manag., 2013, 33, 1890–1897 CrossRef PubMed .
L. P. He, S. Sun, Y. Y. Mu, X. Song and J. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 5, 714–721 CrossRef .
S. Natarajan, A. B. Boricha and H. C. Bajaj, Waste Manag., 2018, 77, 455–465 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, J. Song, H. Cao, X. Lin, X. Zhang, X. Zheng, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 178, 833–845 CrossRef .
C. Sun, L. Xu, X. Chen, T. Qiu and T. Zhou, Waste Manage. Res., 2017, 36, 113–120 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Cao, Y. Xie, P. Ning, H. An, H. You and F. Nawaz, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015, 150, 186–195 CrossRef .
L. P. He, S. Y. Sun, X. F. Song and J. G. Yu, Waste Manag., 2017, 64, 171–181 CrossRef PubMed .
P. W. Zhang, T. Yokoyama, O. Itabashi, T. M. Suzuki and K. Inoue, Hydrometallurgy, 1998, 47, 259–271 CrossRef .
M. Joulié, R. Laucournet and E. Billy, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 551–555 CrossRef .
J. Nan, D. Han, M. Yang, M. Cui and X. Hou, Hydrometallurgy, 2006, 84, 75–80 CrossRef .
B. Swain, J. Jeong, J.-c. Lee, G.-H. Lee and J.-S. Sohn, J. Power Sources, 2007, 167, 536–544 CrossRef .
J. Kang, G. Senanayake, J. Sohn and S. M. Shin, Hydrometallurgy, 2010, 100, 168–171 CrossRef .
L. Chen, X. Tang, Y. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Zeng and Y. Zhang, Hydrometallurgy, 2011, 108, 80–86 CrossRef .
S. G. Zhu, W. Z. He, G. M. Li, X. Zhou, X. J. Zhang and J. W. Huang, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2012, 22, 2274–2281 CrossRef .
E. G. Pinna, M. C. Ruiz, M. W. Ojeda and M. H. Rodriguez, Hydrometallurgy, 2017, 167, 66–71 CrossRef .
S. H. Joo, S. M. Shin, D. Shin, C. Oh and J. P. Wang, Hydrometallurgy, 2015, 156, 136–141 CrossRef .
S. H. Joo, D. Shin, C. Oh, J. P. Wang and S. M. Shin, J. Power Sources, 2016, 305, 175–181 CrossRef .
R. Torkaman, M. Asadollahzadeh, M. Torab-Mostaedi and M. Ghanadi Maragheh, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 186, 318–325 CrossRef .
Y. Pranolo, W. Zhang and C. Y. Cheng, Hydrometallurgy, 2010, 102, 37–42 CrossRef .
D. d. S. Leite, P. L. G. Carvalho, L. R. de Lemos, A. B. Mageste and G. D. Rodrigues, Hydrometallurgy, 2017, 169, 245–252 CrossRef .
F. Pagnanelli, E. Moscardini, P. Altimari, T. Abo Atia and L. Toro, Waste Manag., 2016, 51, 214–221 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Jha, M. K. Jha, A. Kumari, S. K. Sahu, V. Kumar and B. D. Pandey, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 104, 160–166 CrossRef .
G. Granata, F. Pagnanelli, E. Moscardini, Z. Takacova, T. Havlik and L. Toro, J. Power Sources, 2012, 212, 205–211 CrossRef .
B. Swain, J. Jeong, J. C. Lee and G. H. Lee, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2008, 63, 360–369 CrossRef .
F. Wang, F. He, J. Zhao, N. Sui, L. Xu and H. Liu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 93, 8–14 CrossRef .
S. Virolainen, M. Fallah Fini, A. Laitinen and T. Sainio, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 179, 274–282 CrossRef .
D. Dutta, A. Kumari, R. Panda, S. Jha, D. Gupta, S. Goel and M. K. Jha, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 200, 327–334 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Y. Chen, T. Zhou, D. Liu, H. Hu and S. Fan, Waste Manag., 2015, 38, 349–356 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Suzuki, T. Nakamura, Y. Inoue, M. Niinae and J. Shibata, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 98, 396–401 CrossRef .
K. Tanong, L. H. Tran, G. Mercier and J. F. Blais, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 148, 233–244 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, S. Xu and Y. He, Waste Manag., 2017, 64, 219–227 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Zhao, X. Y. Shen, F. L. Deng, F. C. Wang, Y. Wu and H. Z. Liu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2011, 78, 345–351 CrossRef .
S. H. Joo, D. j. Shin, C. Oh, J. P. Wang, G. Senanayake and S. M. Shin, Hydrometallurgy, 2016, 159, 65–74 CrossRef .
A. Fernandes, J. C. Afonso and A. J. Bourdot Dutra, J. Power Sources, 2012, 220, 286–291 CrossRef .
H. Zou, E. Gratz, D. Apelian and Y. Wang, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1183–1191 RSC .
J. Kang, J. Sohn, H. Chang, G. Senanayake and S. M. Shin, Adv. Powder Technol., 2010, 21, 175–179 CrossRef .
X. Guo, X. Cao, G. Huang, Q. Tian and H. Sun, J. Environ. Manage., 2017, 198(Part 1), 84–89 CrossRef PubMed .
V. C. B. Pegoretti, P. V. M. Dixini, P. C. Smecellato, S. R. Biaggio and M. B. J. G. Freitas, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 86, 5–9 CrossRef .
J. Jandová, H. Vu and P. Dvořák, Hydrometallurgy, 2005, 77, 67–73 CrossRef .
Y. Weng, S. Xu, G. Huang and C. Jiang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 246–247, 163–172 CrossRef PubMed .
L. W. Ma, Z. R. Nie, X. L. Xi and X. G. Han, Hydrometallurgy, 2013, 136, 1–7 CrossRef .
L. Ma, Z. Nie, X. Xi and X. Li, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 108, 124–132 CrossRef .
G. Cai, K. Y. Fung, K. M. Ng and C. Wibowo, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 18245–18259 CrossRef .
Q. Sa, E. Gratz, M. He, W. Lu, D. Apelian and Y. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 140–145 CrossRef .
A. C. Sonoc, J. Jeswiet, N. Murayama and J. Shibata, Hydrometallurgy, 2018, 175, 133–143 CrossRef .
Q. Meng, Y. Zhang and P. Dong, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 180, 64–70 CrossRef .
H. Gomaa, M. A. Shenashen, H. Yamaguchi, A. S. Alamoudi and S. A. El-Safty, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 1841–1857 RSC .
M. B. J. G. Freitas, V. G. Celante and M. K. Pietre, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3309–3315 CrossRef .
E. M. Garcia, J. S. Santos, E. C. Pereira and M. B. J. G. Freitas, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 549–553 CrossRef .
V. G. Celante and M. B. J. G. Freitas, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2010, 40, 233–239 CrossRef .
C. Lupi, M. Pasquali and A. Dell'era, Waste Manag., 2005, 25, 215–220 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. Garcia, H. A. Tarôco, T. Matencio, R. Z. Domingues, J. A. F. dos Santos, R. V. Ferreira, E. Lorençon, D. Q. Lima and M. B. J. G. de Freitas, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2012, 42, 361–366 CrossRef .
J. Lemaire, L. Svecova, F. Lagallarde, R. Laucournet and P.-X. Thivel, Hydrometallurgy, 2014, 143, 1–11 CrossRef .
L. Wang, C. G. Meng and W. Ma, Colloids Surf., A, 2009, 334, 34–39 CrossRef .
L. Ma, Z. Nie, X. Xi, L. Zhao and B. Chen, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 995–1003 CrossRef .
L. Li, W. Qu, F. Liu, T. Zhao, X. Zhang, R. Chen and F. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 315, 59–65 CrossRef .
J. Dewulf, G. Van der Vorst, K. Denturck, H. Van Langenhove, W. Ghyoot, J. Tytgat and K. Vandeputte, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2010, 54, 229–234 CrossRef .
P. H. Thomas, K. Olga, S. Nihar, S. Roger and D. S. Corinne, Environ. Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 014011 CrossRef .
X. Song, T. Hu, C. Liang, H. L. Long, L. Zhou, W. Song, L. You, Z. S. Wu and J. W. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 4783–4790 RSC .
X. Li, J. Zhang, D. Song, J. Song and L. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 345, 78–84 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Q. Li, J. Song, D. Song, L. Zhang and X. Shi, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2500–2506 RSC .
S. Chen, T. He, Y. Lu, Y. Su, J. Tian, N. Li, G. Chen, L. Bao and F. Wu, J. Energy Storage, 2016, 8, 262–273 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Q. Hu, X. Li, Z. Wang and H. Guo, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2006, 16, 956–959 CrossRef .
Y. J. Liu, Q. Y. Hu, X. H. Li, H. J. Guo and Z. X. Wang, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2007, 17, s902–s906 CrossRef .
Q. Sa, J. A. Heelan, Y. Lu, D. Apelian and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20585–20590 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang and G. Xi, J. Electron. Mater., 2015, 45, 301–306 CrossRef .
L. Li, X. Zhang, R. Chen, T. Zhao, J. Lu, F. Wu and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 28–34 CrossRef .
R. Zheng, W. Wang, Y. Dai, Q. Ma, Y. Liu, D. Mu, R. Li, J. Ren and C. Dai, Green Energy Environ., 2017, 2, 42–50 CrossRef .
S. Krüger, C. Hanisch, A. Kwade, M. Winter and S. Nowak, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 726, 91–96 CrossRef .
L. Li, R. J. Chen, X. X. Zhang, F. Wu, J. Ge and M. Xie, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2012, 57, 4188–4194 CrossRef .
L. Yao, Y. Feng and G. Xi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 44107–44114 RSC .
L. Li, Y. Bian, X. Zhang, Y. Guan, E. Fan, F. Wu and R. Chen, Waste Manag., 2018, 71, 362–371 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yao, H. Yao, G. Xi and Y. Feng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 17947–17954 RSC .
M. J. Ganter, B. J. Landi, C. W. Babbitt, A. Anctil and G. Gaustad, J. Power Sources, 2014, 256, 274–280 CrossRef .
D. S. Kim, J. S. Sohn, C. K. Lee, J. H. Lee, K. S. Han and Y. I. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2004, 132, 145–149 CrossRef .
Z. M. Zhang, W. Z. He, G. M. Li, J. Xia, H. K. Hu and J. W. Huang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2014, 9, 3691–3700 Search PubMed .
Y. Shi, G. Chen and Z. Chen, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 851–862 RSC .
H. S. Kim and E. J. Shin, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2013, 34, 851–855 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, Z. Mei, F. Xu, Y. Yao, W. Zhang, W. Qi, Q. Song, Z. Gao and T. Zhao, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 2512–2519 CrossRef .
M. N. Moura, R. V. Barrada, J. R. Almeida, T. F. M. Moreira, M. A. Schettino, J. C. C. Freitas, S. A. D. Ferreira, M. F. F. Lelis and M. B. J. G. Freitas, Chemosphere, 2017, 182, 339–347 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Senćanski, D. Bajuk-Bogdanović, D. Majstorović, E. Tchernychova, J. Papan and M. Vujković, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 690–703 CrossRef .
L. Yao, Y. Xi, G. Xi and Y. Feng, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 680, 73–79 CrossRef .
L. Yang, G. Xi, T. Lou, X. Wang, J. Wang and Y. He, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 1897–1902 CrossRef .
E. Perez, M.-L. Andre, R. Navarro Amador, F. Hyvrard, J. Borrini, M. Carboni and D. Meyer, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 317, 617–621 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Perez, R. Navarro Amador, M. Carboni and D. Meyer, Mater. Lett., 2016, 167, 188–191 CrossRef .
E. M. Garcia, V. d. F. C. Lins, H. A. Tarôco, T. Matencio, R. Z. Domingues and J. A. F. dos Santos, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 16795–16799 CrossRef .
I. L. Santana, T. F. M. Moreira, M. F. F. Lelis and M. B. J. G. Freitas, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 190, 38–44 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, D. Song, L. Li, C. An, Y. Wang, L. Jiao and H. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2014, 252, 286–291 CrossRef .
P. Horcajada, R. Gref, T. Baati, P. K. Allan, G. Maurin, P. Couvreur, G. Férey, R. E. Morris and C. Serre, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1232–1268 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Li, R. J. Kuppler and H. C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1477–1504 RSC .
T. Zhang and W. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5982–5993 RSC .
Y. Hu, T. Zhang, F. Cheng, Q. Zhao, X. Han and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4338–4343 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Moradi and G. G. Botte, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2015, 46, 123–148 CrossRef .
S. Natarajan, D. Shanthana Lakshmi, H. C. Bajaj and D. N. Srivastava, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2538–2545 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, F. Li, H. Zhu, G. Li, J. Huang and W. He, Waste Manag., 2016, 51, 227–233 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Schauerman, M. J. Ganter, G. Gaustad, C. W. Babbitt, R. P. Raffaelle and B. J. Landi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12008–12015 RSC .
L. Zhao, X. Liu, C. Wan, X. Ye and F. Wu, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., 2018, 27, 875–880 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Xu, W. He, G. Li, J. Huang and H. Zhu, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2018, 44, 5075–5089 CrossRef .
S. Natarajan, S. Rao Ede, H. C. Bajaj and S. Kundu, Colloids Surf., A, 2018, 543, 98–108 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Y. Zhu, W. Peng, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5880–5885 RSC .
Y. Zhang, X. Guo, Y. Yao, F. Wu, C. Zhang and J. Lu, ACS Omega, 2016, 1, 417–423 CrossRef .
T. Zhao, Y. Yao, M. Wang, R. Chen, Y. Yu, F. Wu and C. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25369–25376 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Guo, Y. Yao, F. Wu, C. Zhang, R. Chen, J. Lu and K. Amine, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2905–2909 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Guo, F. Wu, Y. Yao, Y. Yuan, X. Bi, X. Luo, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, C. Zhang and K. Amine, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21315–21325 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Jiao, X. Zhu, X. Xiao, X. Zuo, J. Nan and L. Wang, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2013, 2, H27–H29 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, X. Li, D. Song, Y. Miao, J. Song and L. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 390, 38–44 CrossRef .
J. E. C. Sabisch, A. Anapolsky, G. Liu and A. M. Minor, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2018, 129, 129–134 CrossRef .
S. Rothermel, M. Evertz, J. Kasnatscheew, X. Qi, M. Grutzke, M. Winter and S. Nowak, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3473–3484 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Lain, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 736–738 CrossRef .
S. Nowak and M. Winter, Molecules, 2017, 22, 403–424 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Grützke, V. Kraft, W. Weber, C. Wendt, A. Friesen, S. Klamor, M. Winter and S. Nowak, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2014, 94, 216–222 CrossRef .
M. Grutzke, X. Monnighoff, F. Horsthemke, V. Kraft, M. Winter and S. Nowak, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 43209–43217 RSC .
Y. Liu, D. Mu, R. Zheng and C. Dai, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54525–54531 RSC .
Y. L. Liu, D. Y. Mu, Y. K. Dai, Q. X. Ma, R. J. Zheng and C. S. Dai, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2016, 11, 7594–7604 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, D. Mu, R. Li, Q. Ma, R. Zheng and C. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4181–4187 CrossRef .
M. Li, J. Liu and W. Han, Waste Manage. Res., 2016, 34, 298–306 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Gaines, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2014, 1–2, 2–7 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Hu, X. He, X. Zhu, R. V. Kumar, W. Yu, J. Wang, M. Li, S. Liang, J. Hu and X. Wu, Hydrometallurgy, 2016, 164, 83–89 CrossRef .
Y. Ma and K. Qiu, Waste Manag., 2015, 40, 151–156 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lin and K. Qiu, Waste Manag., 2011, 31, 1547–1552 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xia, L. Zhan and B. Xie, J. Power Sources, 2017, 341, 435–442 CrossRef .
X. Sun, J. Yang, W. Zhang, X. Zhu, Y. Hu, D. Yang, X. Yuan, W. Yu, J. Dong, H. Wang, L. Li, R. Vasant Kumar and S. Liang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 269, 565–576 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, L. Li, X. Sun, D. Yang, L. Gao, J. Liu, R. V. Kumar and J. Yang, Hydrometallurgy, 2012, 117–118, 24–31 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, J. Yang, L. Gao, J. Liu, D. Yang, X. Sun, W. Zhang, Q. Wang, L. Li, D. He and R. V. Kumar, Hydrometallurgy, 2013, 134–135, 47–53 CrossRef .
C. Ma, Y. Shu and H. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 94895–94902 RSC .
Y. Ma, J. Zhang, Y. Huang and J. Cao, Hydrometallurgy, 2018, 178, 146–150 CrossRef .
M. S. Sonmez and R. V. Kumar, Hydrometallurgy, 2009, 95, 53–60 CrossRef .
M. S. Sonmez and R. V. Kumar, Hydrometallurgy, 2009, 95, 82–86 CrossRef .
K. Liu, J. Yang, S. Liang, H. Hou, Y. Chen, J. Wang, B. Liu, K. Xiao, J. Hu and J. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 2235–2241 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hu, J. Yang, J. Hu, J. Wang, S. Liang, H. Hou, X. Wu, B. Liu, W. Yu, X. He and R. V. Kumar, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705294 CrossRef .
G. Fusillo, D. Rosestolato, F. Scura, S. Cattarin, L. Mattarozzi, P. Guerriero, A. Gambirasi, N. Brianese, P. Staiti, R. Guerriero and G. La Sala, J. Power Sources, 2018, 381, 127–135 CrossRef .
A. D. Ballantyne, J. P. Hallett, D. J. Riley, N. Shah and D. J. Payne, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2018, 5, 171368 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, R. V. Kumar and D. P. Singh, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2012, 87, 1480–1488 CrossRef .
J. Yang, X. Zhu and R. V. Kumar, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 131, 336–342 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, X. He, J. Yang, L. Gao, J. Liu, D. Yang, X. Sun, W. Zhang, Q. Wang and R. V. Kumar, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 250–251, 387–396 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Hu, X. Zhu, D. Yang, Q. Wang, J. Liu, R. V. Kumar and J. Yang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 1700–1708 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, J. Yang, W. Zhang, Y. Xie, J. Wang, X. Yuan, R. Vasant Kumar, S. Liang, J. Hu and X. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 304, 128–135 CrossRef .
D. Yang, J. Liu, Q. Wang, X. Yuan, X. Zhu, L. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Hu, X. Sun, R. V. Kumar and J. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 27–36 CrossRef .
L. Li, X. Zhu, D. Yang, L. Gao, J. Liu, R. V. Kumar and J. Yang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 203–204, 274–282 CrossRef PubMed .
X. He, X. Peng, Y. Zhu, C. Lai, C. Ducati and R. V. Kumar, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4637–4646 RSC .
W. Zhang, J. Yang, X. Zhu, X. Sun, W. Yu, Y. Hu, X. Yuan, J. Dong, J. Hu, S. Liang and R. V. Kumar, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2016, 91, 672–679 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, L. Li, J. Liu, V. K. Ramachandran and J. Yang, Environ. Eng. Manage. J., 2013, 12, 2175–2182 CrossRef .
J. Pan, C. Zhang, Y. Sun, Z. Wang and Y. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 19, 70–72 CrossRef .
J. Pan, Y. Sun, W. Li, J. Knight and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2178 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, X. Huang and D. Wang, Rare Met. Mater. Eng., 2015, 44, 73–78 CrossRef .
L. E. O. C. Rodrigues and M. B. Mansur, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3735–3741 CrossRef .
M. S. Gasser and M. I. Aly, Int. J. Miner. Process., 2013, 121, 31–38 CrossRef .
E. G. Polyakov and A. S. Sibilev, Metallurgist, 2015, 59, 368–373 CrossRef .
S. Sinha, Abhilash, P. Meshram and B. D. Pandey, Hydrometallurgy, 2016, 160, 47–59 CrossRef .
E. H. Tanabe, D. F. Schlemmer, M. L. Aguiar, G. L. Dotto and D. A. Bertuol, J. Environ. Manage., 2016, 171, 177–183 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lupi and D. Pilone, Waste Manag., 2002, 22, 871–874 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. S. Tenorio and D. C. R. Espinosa, J. Power Sources, 2002, 108, 70–73 CrossRef .
M. Petranikova, I. Herdzik-Koniecko, B.-M. Steenari and C. Ekberg, Hydrometallurgy, 2017, 171, 128–141 CrossRef .
P. Meshram, H. Somani, B. D. Pandey, T. R. Mankhand, H. Deveci and Abhilash, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 157, 322–332 CrossRef .
N. S. Randhawa, K. Gharami and M. Kumar, Hydrometallurgy, 2016, 165(Part 1), 191–198 CrossRef .
C. Hazotte, N. Leclerc, E. Meux and F. Lapicque, Hydrometallurgy, 2016, 162, 94–103 CrossRef .
E. Rudnik and M. Nikiel, Hydrometallurgy, 2007, 89, 61–71 CrossRef .
V. G. Lacerda, A. B. Mageste, I. J. B. Santos, L. H. M. da Silva and M. d. C. H. da Silva, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 908–913 CrossRef .
B. R. Reddy, D. N. Priya and K. H. Park, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2006, 50, 161–166 CrossRef .
B. R. Reddy and D. N. Priya, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 1428–1434 CrossRef .
K. Larsson and K. Binnemans, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4595–4603 RSC .
T. Vander Hoogerstraete and K. Binnemans, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 1594–1606 RSC .
F. Anjum, H. N. Bhatti and M. A. Ghauri, Hydrometallurgy, 2010, 100, 122–128 CrossRef .
M. Marafi and A. Stanislaus, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 9495–9501 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, W. He, G. Li, J. Xia, H. Hu, J. Huang and S. Zhang, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2014, 3, A58–A61 CrossRef .
L. Li, L. Zhai, X. Zhang, J. Lu, R. Chen, F. Wu and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 380–385 CrossRef .
D. A. Bertuol, C. M. Machado, M. L. Silva, C. O. Calgaro, G. L. Dotto and E. H. Tanabe, Waste Manag., 2016, 51, 245–251 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Georgi-Maschler, B. Friedrich, R. Weyhe, H. Heegn and M. Rutz, J. Power Sources, 2012, 207, 173–182 CrossRef .
P. Meshram, B. D. Pandey and T. R. Mankhand, Hydrometallurgy, 2014, 150, 192–208 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Y. Xie, X. Lin, H. Li and H. Cao, J. Mater. Cycles Waste Manage., 2013, 15, 420–430 CrossRef .
B. Swain, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 172, 388–403 CrossRef .
X. Zeng, J. Li and L. Liu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 52, 1759–1767 CrossRef .
Retriev Technologies Home Page, http://retrievtech.com/, accessed Jan 20, 2018.
Umicore Recycling Division Home Page, http://www.umicore.com/en/industries/recycling/, accessed Jan 20, 2018.
Accurec Battery Recycling Division Home Page, http://accurec.de/nimh, accessed Nov 10, 2017.
Batrec Recycling Services Division Home Page, http://www.batrec.ch/en/Recycling-Services, accessed Nov 20, 2017.
Campine Lead Division Home Page, http://www.campine.biz/index.php/lead/bul-process, accessed Nov 20, 2017.
L. Quirijnen, J. Power Sources, 1999, 78, 267–269 CrossRef .
R. E. Kirchain Jr, J. R. Gregory and E. A. Olivetti, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 693–697 CrossRef PubMed .

          L. Gaines, J. Sullivan, A. Burnham and I. Belharouak, Life-Cycle Analysis for Lithium-Ion Battery Production and Recycling, Argonne National Lab.,  2011 Search PubMed .
J. L. Sullivan and L. Gaines, Energy Convers. Manage., 2012, 58, 134–148 CrossRef .

          J. B. Dunn, C. James, L. Gaines, K. Gallagher, Q. Dai and J. C. Kelly, Material and Energy Flows in the Production of Cathode and Anode Materials for Lithium Ion Batteries, Argonne National Lab.,  2015 Search PubMed .
L. Gaines, J. Sullivan, A. Burnham and I. Belharouak, Transp. Res. Rec., 2011, 57–65 CrossRef .

          J. Sullivan and L. Gaines, A Review of Battery Life-Cycle Analysis: State of Knowledge and Critical Needs, Argonne National Lab.,  2010 Search PubMed .
J. B. Dunn, L. Gaines, J. Sullivan and M. Q. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 12704–12710 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Gaines, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 333–338 CrossRef .

          A. Burnham, M. Wang and Y. Wu, Development and Applications of GREET 2.7 – The Transportation Vehicle–Cycle Model, Argonne National Lab.,  2006 Search PubMed .
B. Li, X. Gao, J. Li and C. Yuan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 3047–3055 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yu, X. Wang, D. Wang, K. Huang, L. Wang, L. Bao and F. Wu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 229–230, 455–460 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hiremath, K. Derendorf and T. Vogt, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 4825–4833 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liang, J. Su, B. Xi, Y. Yu, D. Ji, Y. Sun, C. Cui and J. Zhu, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2017, 117(Part B), 285–293 CrossRef .
H. C. Kim, T. J. Wallington, R. Arsenault, C. Bae, S. Ahn and J. Lee, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 7715–7722 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. W. Ellingsen, G. Majeau-Bettez, B. Singh, A. K. Srivastava, L. O. Valoen and A. H. Stromman, J. Ind. Ecol., 2014, 18, 113–124 CrossRef .
G. Majeau-Bettez, T. R. Hawkins and A. H. Stromman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 4548–4554 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Liu, J. Sang, L. J. Chen, J. P. Tian, H. T. Zhang and G. O. Palma, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 108, 1149–1156 CrossRef .
G. P. Hammond and T. Hazeldine, Appl. Energy, 2015, 138, 559–571 CrossRef .
M. Zackrisson, L. Avellan and J. Orlenius, J. Cleaner Prod., 2010, 18, 1519–1529 CrossRef .
Z. Padashbarmchi, A. H. Hamidian, N. Khorasani, M. Kazemzad, A. McCabe and A. Halog, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2015, 34, 1740–1747 CrossRef .

          S. Amarakoon, J. Smith and B. Segal, Application of LCA to Nanoscale Technology: Li-ion Batteries for Electric Vehicles, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,  2013 Search PubMed .
H. Hao, Q. Qiao, Z. Liu and F. Zhao, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2017, 122, 114–125 CrossRef .
X. Tian, Y. Wu, P. Hou, S. Liang, S. Qu, M. Xu and T. Zuo, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 144, 142–148 CrossRef .
A. Boyden, V. K. Soo and M. Doolan, Procedia CIRP, 2016, 48, 188–193 CrossRef .
L. Unterreiner, V. Jülch and S. Reith, Energy Procedia, 2016, 99, 229–234 CrossRef .

          J. B. Dunn, L. Gaines, M. Barnes, J. L. Sullivan and M. Wang, Material and Energy Flows in the Materials Production, Assembly, and End-of-Life Stages of the Automotive Lithium-Ion Battery Life Cycle, Argonne National Lab.,  2014 Search PubMed .
L. A.-W. Ellingsen, C. R. Hung and A. H. Strømman, Transp. Res. D: Transp. Environ., 2017, 55, 82–90 CrossRef .
J. Neubauer and A. Pesaran, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10351–10358 CrossRef .

          J. Neubauer and A. Pesaran, PHEV/EV Li-Ion Battery Second-Use Project, National Renewable Energy Laboratory,  2010 Search PubMed .

          C. K. Narula, R. Martinez, O. Onar, M. R. Starke and G. Andrews, Economic Analysis of Deploying Used Batteries in Power Systems, Oak Ridge National Lab.,  2011 Search PubMed .
J. S. Neubauer, E. Wood and A. Pesaran, SAE Int. J. Mater. Manf., 2015, 8, 544–553 Search PubMed .
C. R. Standridge and M. M. Hasan, J. Ind. Eng. Manage., 2015, 8, 823–839 Search PubMed .
C. Heymans, S. B. Walker, S. B. Young and M. Fowler, Energy Policy, 2014, 71, 22–30 CrossRef .

          J. Neubauer, A. Pesaran, B. Williams, M. Ferry and J. Eyer, A Techno-Economic Analysis of Pev Battery Second Use: Repurposed-Battery Selling Price and Commercial and Industrial End-User Value, the 2012 SAE World Congress and Exhibition, 2012.
B. Williams and T. Lipman, Transp. Res. Rec., 2010, 2191, 59–66 CrossRef .
B. Williams, Transp. Res. Rec., 2012, 2287, 64–71 CrossRef .

          W.-C. Lih, Y. Jieh-Hwang, S. Fa-Hwa and L. Yu-Min, Second Use of Retired Lithium-Ion Battery Packs from Electric Vehicles: Technological Challenges, Cost Analysis and Optimal Business Model, 2012 International Symposium on Computer, Consumer and Control, 2012.

          N. Pinsky, Electric Vehicle battery 2nd use study, Argonne National Lab.,  1998 Search PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Wang and X. Tan, Energy Procedia, 2017, 105, 2843–2849 CrossRef .

          B. Gohla-Neudecker, M. Bowler and S. Mohr, Battery 2nd Life: Leveraging the Sustainability Potential of EVs and Renewable Energy Grid Integration, 2015 International Conference on Clean Electrical Power, 2015.

          N. Mukherjee and D. Strickland, Modular ESS with Second Life Batteries Operating in Grid Independent Mode, 2012 3rd IEEE International Symposium on Power Electronics for Distributed Generation Systems (PEDG), 2012.
L. Ahmadi, M. Fowler, S. B. Young, R. A. Fraser, B. Gaffney and S. B. Walker, Sustainable Energy Technol. Assess., 2014, 8, 9–17 CrossRef .
R. Sathre, C. D. Scown, O. Kavvada and T. P. Hendrickson, J. Power Sources, 2015, 288, 82–91 CrossRef .

          P. Cicconi, D. Landi, A. Morbidoni and M. Germani, Feasibility Analysis of Second Life Applications for Li-Ion Cells Used in Electric Powertrain Using Environmental Indicators, 2012 IEEE International Energy Conference and Exhibition, 2012.
K. Richa, C. W. Babbitt, N. G. Nenadic and G. Gaustad, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2015, 22, 66–81 CrossRef .
L. Ahmadi, A. Yip, M. Fowler, S. B. Young and R. A. Fraser, Sustainable Energy Technol. Assess., 2014, 6, 64–74 CrossRef .
L. Ahmadi, S. B. Young, M. Fowler, R. A. Fraser and M. A. Achachlouei, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2017, 22, 111–124 CrossRef .

          A. Burke, Performance, Charging, and Second-use Considerations for Lithium Batteries for Plug-in Electric Vehicles, Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California, Davis,  2009 Search PubMed .

          S. Bräuer, They Not Only Live Once – Towards Product-Service Systems for Repurposed Electric Vehicle Batteries, Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik 2016, Ilmenau,  2016 Search PubMed .

          E. N. Elkind, Reuse and Repower: How to Save Money and Clean the Grid with Second-Life Electric Vehicle Bateries, UCLA School of Law,  2014 Search PubMed .

          S. Bräuer, M. Monhof, B. Klör, F. Plenter, D. Beverungen and C. Siemen, Residential Energy Storage from Repurposed Electric Vehicle Batteries: Market Overview and Development of a Service-Centered Business Model, 2016 IEEE 18th Conference on Business Informatics, 2016.

          B. Klör, D. Beverungen, S. Bräuer, F. Plenter and M. Monhof, A Market for Trading Used Electric Vehicle Batteries – Theoretical Foundations and Information Systems, ECIS 2015 Completed Research Papers, 2015.

          M. Bowler, Battery Second Use: A Framework for Evaluating the Combination of Two Value Chains, Doctor of Philosophy PhD thesis, Clemson University,  2014 Search PubMed .
B. Nykvist and M. Nilsson, Nat. Clim. Change, 2015, 5, 329–332 CrossRef .
Tesla CEO Sees EV Batteries Soon Dropping to $200 per kW h, https://cleantechnica.com/2012/02/23/tesla-ceo-sees-ev-batteries-soon-dropping-to-200-per-kwh/, accessed Nov 10, 2017.

          H. Rubel, C. Pieper, J. Zenneck and Y. Sunak, How Batteries and Solar Power Are Disrupting Electricity Markets, The Boston Consulting Group, https://www.bcg.com/publications/2017/energy-environment-how-batteries-and-solar-power-are-disrupting-electricity-markets.aspx, accessed Nov 20, 2017.
The Lithium Ion Inflection Point, http://www.batterypoweronline.com/articles/the-lithium-ion-inflection-point/, accessed Nov 10, 2017.
EIA's AEO2012 includes analysis of breakthroughs in vehicle battery technology, https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=6930, accessed Nov 20, 2017.
Battery technology charges ahead, https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability-and-resource-productivity/our-insights/battery-technology-charges-ahead, accessed Jan 15, 2018.
S. Rohr, S. Müller, M. Baumann, M. Kerler, F. Ebert, D. Kaden and M. Lienkamp, Procedia Manuf., 2017, 8, 603–610 CrossRef .
M. Abdel-Monem, O. Hegazy, N. Omar, K. Trad, S. De Breucker, P. Van Den Bossche and J. Van Mierlo, Energies, 2016, 9, 889–914 CrossRef .

          M. Monhof, D. Beverungen, B. Klör and S. Bräuer, Extending Battery Management Systems for Making Informed Decisions on Battery Reuse, New Horizons in Design Science: Broadening the Research Agenda: 10th International Conference, DESRIST2015, Dublin, Ireland, May 20–22, 2015.

          A. Keeli and R. K. Sharma, Optimal Use of Second Life Battery for Peak Load Management and Improving the Life of the Battery, 2012 IEEE International Electric Vehicle Conference (IEVC), 2012.
Q. Liao, M. Mu, S. Zhao, L. Zhang, T. Jiang, J. Ye, X. Shen and G. Zhou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 18817–18823 CrossRef .
M. A. Kootstra, S. Tong and J. W. Park, Int. J. Energy Res., 2015, 39, 825–841 CrossRef .
V. V. Viswanathan and M. Kintner-Meyer, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 2011, 60, 2963–2970 Search PubMed .

          E. Martinez-Laserna, E. Sarasketa-Zabala, D. I. Stroe, M. Swierczynski, A. Warnecke, J. M. Timmermans, S. Goutam and P. Rodriguez, Evaluation of Lithium-Ion Battery Second Life Performance and Degradation, 2016 IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition, 2016.

          J. Eyer and G. Corey, Energy storage for the electricity grid: Benefits and market potential assessment guide, Sandia National Lab.,  2010 Search PubMed .
R. Faria, P. Marques, R. Garcia, P. Moura, F. Freire, J. Delgado and A. T. de Almeida, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 169–177 CrossRef .
S. Tong, T. Fung, M. P. Klein, D. A. Weisbach and J. W. Park, J. Energy Storage, 2017, 11, 200–210 CrossRef .
M. Aziz, T. Oda and T. Kashiwagi, Energy Procedia, 2015, 75, 1938–1943 CrossRef .
V. Alimisis and N. D. Hatziargyriou, IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, 2013, 4, 286–293 Search PubMed .
M. J. Knowles and A. Morris, Br. J. Appl. Sci. Technol., 2013, 4, 152–167 CrossRef .
S. J. Tong, A. Same, M. A. Kootstra and J. W. Park, Appl. Energy, 2013, 104, 740–750 CrossRef .

          G. Lacey, G. Putrus and A. Salim, The Use of Second Life Electric Vehicle Batteries for Grid Support, 2013 IEEE on EUROCON, 2013.
EnerDel to Supply Energy-Storage Batteries for Tokyo Apartment Complex, https://www.edmunds.com/autoobserver-archive/2010/01/enerdel-to-supply-energy-storage-batteries-for-tokyo-apartment-complex.html, accessed Jan 15, 2018.
Duke Energy, ITOCHU to look into EV battery reuse, http://www.elp.com/articles/2010/11/duke-energy-itochu-to-look-into-ev-battery-reuse.html, accessed Jan 15, 2018.
Used EV Batteries Will Help Power Ford's Michigan Assembly Plant, https://inhabitat.com/used-ev-batteries-will-help-power-fords-michigan-assembly-plant/, accessed Jan 15, 2018.
GM and ABB demonstrate microgrid backup with old VOLT batteries, http://gas2.org/2012/12/06/gm-and-abb-demonstrate-microgrid-backup-with-old-volt-batteries/, accessed Jan 15, 2018.
UC San Diego and BMW are giving new life to used electric vehicle batteries by storing up to 108kW of electricity for a few hours inside each battery, http://www.energy.ca.gov/research/energystorage/tour/ev_batteries/, accessed Jan 15, 2018.
World's First Large-Scale Power Storage System Made From Reused EV Batteries Completed in Japan, https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/worlds-first-large-scale-power-storage-system-made-from-reused-ev-batteries-completed-in-japan-244207751.html, accessed Jan 15, 2018.
BMW and Bosch open new 2.8 MW h energy storage facility built from batteries from over 100 electric cars, https://electrek.co/2016/09/22/bmw-bosch-energy-storage-facility-built-from-batteries-from-over-100-electric-cars/, accessed Jan 15, 2018.
BMW unveils new repurpose battery storage system and grid offset ‘ChargeForward’ solutions at EV29, https://electrek.co/2016/06/21/bmw-unveils-new-vehicle-to-grid-and-repurpose-system-for-i3-batteries-to-power-your-home/, accessed Jan 15, 2018.
World's largest 2nd-use battery storage is starting up, http://media.daimler.com/marsMediaSite/en/instance/ko/Worlds-largest-2nd-use-battery-storage-is-starting-up.xhtml?oid=13634457, accessed Jan 15, 2018.
Renault to repurpose EV batteries
into home energy storage systems, https://www.autocar.co.uk/car-news/industry/renault-repurpose-ev-batteries-home-energy-storage-systems, accessed Jan 15, 2018.

          https://www.call2recycle.org/recycling-laws-by-state/, accessed Oct 23, 2017.

          http://www.dec.ny.gov/docs/materials_minerals_pdf/batterylaw.pdf, accessed Oct 23, 2017.

          http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1519539973151&uri=CELEX:31991L0157, accessed Jan 10, 2018.

          http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1519529424476&uri=CELEX:32006L0066, accessed Jan 20, 2018.

          http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1519529701011&uri=CELEX:32002L0095, accessed Jan 10, 2018.

          http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1519529865071&uri=CELEX:52014SC0209, accessed Jan 10, 2018.
X. Zeng, J. Li, A. L. N. Stevels and L. Liu, J. Cleaner Prod., 2013, 51, 80–87 CrossRef .
J. Cao, B. Lu, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, G. Zhai, G. Zhou, B. Jiang and J. L. Schnoor, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 62, 882–894 CrossRef .
B. C. Melot and J. M. Tarascon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1226–1238 CrossRef PubMed .
Bebat Home Page, https://www.bebat.be/en, accessed Nov 10, 2017.
Call2Recycle Home Page, https://www.call2recycle.org/, accessed Nov 10, 2017.
F. Gu, B. Ma, J. Guo, P. A. Summers and P. Hall, Waste Manag., 2017, 68, 434–448 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† X. Zhang and L. Li contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Xiaoxiao Zhang
	Dr Xiaoxiao Zhang completed her PhD under the supervision of Prof. Feng Wu at Beijing Institute of Technology in 2016 with her research majoring on the recycling of spent Li-ion batteries. Her research interests mainly focus on the recycling of spent rechargeable batteries and electrochemical energy storage and conversion technologies, with a main focus on Li-ion and Li–O2 batteries.

Li Li
	Prof. Li Li has been working at Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT) since 2004 after graduation. Her research interests are electrochemical energy storage & conversion technology and recycling technique & life-cycle analysis for spent secondary batteries. As the principal investigator, Pro. Li successfully hosted the National Key Program for Basic Research of China, National High Tech 863 project, National Natural Science Foundation. She has authored/co-authored over 80 research papers and filed 20 patents and patent applications in China.

Ersha Fan
	Ersha Fan is currently a PhD candidate at Beijing Institute of Technology. Her research interests focus on the recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and the synthesis of electrode materials for LIBs.

Qing Xue
	Qing Xue is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Feng Wu at Beijing Institute of Technology, China. Her research interests are electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and potassium-ion batteries (PIBs), and the recycling of spent LIBs.

Yifan Bian
	Yifan Bian received her master's degree in environmental engineering from Beijing Institute of Technology in 2017. Her research interests mainly focus on the recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and the synthesis of electrode materials for LIBs.

Feng Wu
	Prof. Feng Wu is an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering, director of Green Energy Research Institute, and vice president of the China Battery Industry Association. His research interests are new electrode materials and electrolytes for green secondary batteries. As the chief scientist, he has hosted the National Key Program for Basic Research of China (973 projects) “Basic Research on New Rechargeable Batteries and Related Materials” since 2002. He has published over 500 papers and been awarded 45 patents. In 2012, he was awarded the IBA Research Award for outstanding research into battery material and systems for electric vehicles.

Renjie Chen
	Renjie Chen is a professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT). His research focuses on electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology. He was a post-doctoral fellow at the Department of Chemistry at Tsinghua University and a visiting professor at the Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy at the University of Cambridge. As the principal investigator, Prof. Chen successfully hosted the National Key Research and Development Program of China, National Natural Science Foundation of China, and National High Tech. 863 project. He has (co-)authored 151 research papers and filed 47 patents and patent applications.

 	Fig. 1  (a) World energy consumption by source in 2017; percent share of renewable energy by source in 2017 (b) and 2040 (c), (a–c) reproduced from ref. 3 with permission from U.S. Energy Information Administration, Copyright 2017. (d) CO2, CO2-equivalent concentration, and AGGI from 1979 to the present (equivalent CO2 atmospheric amounts are derived with the relationship between CO2 concentrations and radiative forcing from all long-lived GHGs), reproduced from ref. 4 and 5 with permission from National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Evolution of the global electric car (EV and PHEV) stock by country from 2010 to 2017; (b) new registrations of electric cars (EV and PHEV) by country from 2010 to 2017. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 14 and 15 with permission from International Energy Agency, Copyright 2017. (c) Optimistic view based on IEA (International Energy Agency), middle view based on industrial forecasts, and pessimistic view based on EIA (Energy Information Administration) of the number of total demand and available EOL LIBs. (Pessimistic view forecast of the EIA ends at 2035 and no growth was assumed after 2035.) Reproduced with permission from ref. 17 Copyright 2014. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. (d) Average prices of main metals in rechargeable batteries from 2010 to May 2018. (e) Evolution of average prices of Co during 2017. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 21 and 22 with permission from London Metal Exchange and InfoMine. Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structure and composition of four types of rechargeable batteries and the importance of recycling.	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of the complete recycling processes and technologies of LIBs as an example.	 

 	Fig. 5  Pretreatment processes and technologies of LIBs from perspectives of industrial scale and lab scale.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Released gas concentration change during different phases of a discontinuous crushing process; (b) masses of the released gases of EMC, DMC, and CO2 from uncycled and cycled cells during crushing. Reprinted from ref. 47 Copyright 2016 The Author(s). Published by ECS. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License (CC BY, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) which permits unrestricted reuse of the work in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Mass percentage distribution of metallic components in each size fraction of an LIB pack: (c) LCO, (d) LFP, (e) mixed-metal cathode, and (f) LMO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Structure schematic of the fine particles in crushed products of spent LIBs; C 1s (b) and F 1s (c) XPS spectrum of the fine crushed products; reprinted with permission from ref. 72 Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram for graphite and LCO separation by Fenton reagent-assisted flotation; (e) C 1s XPS spectrum of LCO particles during Fenton reaction; TEM images of LCO particles before (f) and after Fenton-modified flotation (g); reprinted with permission from ref. 86 Copyright 2016 Elsevier. EPMA analysis of element distribution on the crushed product and the materials after Fenton-modified flotation: (h) particle after Fenton treatment; (i) element distribution of Fe on the particle (h); (j) change rule of solution pH with time during the Fenton treatment; (k) comparison histogram between improved Fenton flotation and original Fenton flotation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. C 1s XPS spectrum of LCO powder before (l) and after 5 min grinding (m); (n) dry modification mechanism based on mechanical abrasion; (o) grinding flotation results of LiCoO2 concentrates with different grinding times; reprinted with permission from ref. 88 Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Effects of grinding aids on the MC reaction: (a) XRD patterns of LCO and PVC ground for different times; (b) FTIR of the individual samples and the mixture ground for 24 h and its washed sample; reprinted with permission from ref. 96 Copyright 2004 Elsevier. (c) Extraction of Co and Li from different samples (raw sample, pure LCO; activated sample, pure LCO after being ground; MC sample, LCO to Fe mass ratio of 1:1, grinding for 250 min at 650 rpm); (d) XRD patterns of the different samples; (e) SEM image of LCO after MC reduction with Fe; reprinted with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. This is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes. Molecular structure of EDTA (f) and its metal chelate (g); (h) XRD patterns of different samples (a: LCO and EDTA mixture before grinding, b: mixture after grinding, c: water leaching residue, d: recovered Co3O4 particle); reprinted with permission from ref. 100 Copyright 2016 Elsevier. Effects of PVC (i) and Fe dosage (j) on the conversion rates of Li, Co, and Cl (grinding for 12 h at 600 rpm with a ball-to-powder mass ratio of 50:1); (k) XRD patterns of various samples (LCO/PVC/Fe mixture before (a) and after (b) co-grinding, c: water leaching residue after calcination). Reprinted with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) FTIR pattern of LFP for MC reaction at different grinding times; (b) XRD intensity of the lattice faces at different grinding times; (c) leaching efficiencies of Fe and Li from different samples (MC ground sample, grinding time = 5 h, mass ratio of LFP to EDTA–2Na = 3:1; leaching parameters: H3PO4 = 0.5 M, S/L ratio = 40 g L−1, leaching time = 1 h); (d) SEM images of the recycled FePO4·2H2O (inset: microstructure of FePO4·2H2O). Reprinted with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Relationship between ΔG and temperature for different possible reactions among LCO, C, CoO, and O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (b) Plausible pathways for the conversion of mixed powder from spent LiMn2O4 batteries under enclosed vacuum conditions; (c) integrated process of recycling Li2CO3 from different types of spent LIBs. (b) and (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 106 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Development of leaching acids and reducing agents: acids (inorganic acids, including HCl,181 H2SO4,69 and HNO3;125 organic acids, including citric acid,128 ascorbic acid,52 oxalic acid,138 and formic acid;137 bioleaching with bacteria to produce inorganic acids141 and with fungi to produce organic acids143); reducing agents (inorganic compounds, including H2O2,155 NaHSO3,160 Na2SO3,179 and Na2S2O3;179 organic compounds including glucose158 and biomass;159 metallic current collectors, including Cu and Al162). Ref. 181 Copyright 1998 Elsevier; ref. 125 and 155 Copyright 2002 Elsevier; ref. 69 Copyright 2005 Elsevier; ref. 158 Copyright 2014 Elsevier; ref. 160 and 179 Copyright 2015 Elsevier; ref. 159 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society; ref. 162 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Effects of acid concentration (a), temperature (b), time (c), S/L ratio (d), and H2O2 content (e) on the leaching efficiencies of Co (or Co and Li in the H2O2 effect) using different acids; (f) comparison of organic acid leaching, inorganic acid leaching, and bioleaching in terms of the efficiency, cost, material consumption, operation, energy consumption, and environment.	 

4 M HCl181	LCO	80 °C, 1 h, 10 g L−1	Li = 99	—
Co = 99
4 M HCl113	LCO	80 °C, 2 h	Li = 97	—
Co = 99
4 M HCl182	NCA	90 °C, 18 h, 50 g L−1	Li = 100	—
Co/Ni/Al = 100
6 M HCl + H2O2 (mol(H2O2)/(Me) = 2)156	Mixed cathodes	60 °C, 2 h, 125 g L−1	Co/Ni/Mn = 95	—
4 M HCl114	Mixed cathodes	80 °C, 1 h, 20 g L−1	Li = 99	—
Co/Ni/Mn = 99
1 M HNO3 + 1.7 vol% H2O2124	LCO	75 °C, 1 h, 20 g L−1	Li = 95	Surface chemical reaction control: C2 = kt
Co = 95
3 M H2SO469	LCO	70 °C, 6 h, 200 g L−1	Li = 98	—
Co = 98
1 M H2SO4118	Mixed cathodes	95 °C, 4 h, 50 g L−1	Li = 93, Co = 66, Ni = 96, Mn = 50	Surface layer diffusion of the lixiviant control: (−ln(1 − X))2 = kt
2.5 M H2SO483	LFP	60 °C, 4 h, 100 g L−1	Li = 97	—
Fe = 98
2 M H2SO4 + 15 vol% H2O245	LCO	75 °C, 10 min, 50 g L−1	Li = 99	—
Co = 99
3 M H2SO4 + 3 wt% H2O2183	LCO/NiMH	70 °C, 5 h, 66.7 g L−1	Co/Ni = 90	—
6% (v/v) H2SO4 + 1 vol% H2O251	LCO	65 °C, 1 h, 33.3 g L−1	Li = 95	—
Co = 80
2 M H2SO4 + 5 vol% H2O2184	LCO	75 °C, 0.5 h, 100 g L−1	Li = 94	—
Co = 93
4% (v/v) H2SO4 + 1 vol% H2O268	LCO	40 °C, 1 h, 33.3 g L−1	Li = 100	—
Co = 97
2 M H2SO4 + 6 vol% H2O2185	LCO	60 °C, 1 h, 100 g L−1	Co = 99	—
4 M H2SO4 + 10 vol% H2O2186	LCO	85 °C, 2 h, 100 g L−1	Li = 96	—
Co = 95
2 M H2SO4 + 5 vol% H2O280	LCO	80 °C, 1 h, 50 g L−1	Li = 99	—
Co = 99
2 M H2SO4 + 2 vol% H2O2187	LCO	60 °C, 2 h, 33 g L−1	Li = 88	—
Co = 96
2 M H2SO4 + 5 vol% H2O2174	LCO	75 °C, 1 h, 100 g L−1	Li = 99	Li: chemical reaction control: 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = kt
Co = 70	Co: ash diffusion control: 1 − 3(1 − X)2/3 + 2(1 − X) = kt
2 M H2SO4 + 5 vol% H2O274	NCM	60 °C, 2 h, 100 g L−1	Li = 99	—
Li/Co/Ni/Mn = 99
1 M H2SO4 + 1 vol% H2O2180	NCM	40 °C, 1 h, 40 g L−1	Li/Co/Ni/Mn = 100	Revised cubic rate law; surface chemical reactions control
1.75 M HCl115	NCM	50 °C, 2 h, 20% (w/v)	Co/Mn = 99	—
2 M HCl116	LCO	60–80 °C, 1.5 h	Co/Li = 100	Li: diffusion control
Co: chemical reaction control at first, then a mixed mechanism
1 M H2SO4120	Mixed batteries	25 °C, 0.5 h, 180 g L−1, 3 leaching steps	Mn = 30, Ni = 70, Co = 70, Zn = 100	—
2 g per solid H2SO4 + 50% excess glucose157	LCO	90 °C, 4 h, 100 g L−1	Li = 97	—
Co = 98
2 M H2SO4 + 50 g L−1 glucose158 (glucose addition after 2 h leaching)	LCO	80 °C, 2 h, 35 g L−1	Li = 92	—
Co = 88
3 M H2SO4 + 0.4 g g−1 glucose (or sucrose)	LCO	95 °C, 2 h, 25 g L−1	Li = 96 (or 100), Co = 98 (or 96)	

3 M H2SO4 + 0.25 M Na2S2O3164	LCO	90 °C, 3 h, 66.7 g L−1	Li = 100	—
Co = 100
1.34 M H2SO4 + 0.45 g g−1 Na2S2O5165	Mixed batteries	20 °C, 45 min, 10.9%	Mn = 94, Cd = 81, Zn = 99, Co = 96, Ni = 68	—
0.3 M H2SO4 + H2O2126	LFP	60 °C, 2 h, n(H2O2/Li) = 2.07, n(H2SO4/Li) = 0.57	Li = 97	—
Fe = 0.027
P = 1.95
1 M H2SO4 + 0.075 M NaHSO3160	Mixed cathodes	95 °C, 4 h, 20 g L−1	Li = 97, Co = 92, Ni = 96, Mn = 88	Surface layer diffusion of the lixiviant control: (−ln(1 − X))2 = kt
Subcritical water + PVC153	LCO	350 °C, 0.5 h, 16 g L−1, m(PVC/LCO) = 3:1	Li = 98	—
Co = 95
2% (v/v) H3PO4 + 2 vol% H2O2188	LCO	90 °C, 0.5 h, 8 g L−1	Li/Co > 95	—
1.5 M H3PO4 + 0.02 M glucose169	LCO	80 °C, 2 h, 20 g L−1	Li = 100	—
Co = 98
1.25 M citric acid + 1 vol% H2O2128	LCO	90 °C, 0.5 h, 20 g L−1	Li = 100	—
Co > 90
1.5 M DL-malic acid + 2 vol% H2O2127	LCO	90 °C, 40 min, 20 g L−1	Li = 100	—
Co > 90
1.25 M ascorbic acid52	LCO	70 °C, 20 min, 25 g L−1	Li = 99	—
Co = 95
1 M oxalic acid138	LCO	80 °C, 2 h, 50 g L−1	Li = 98	—
Co = 98
2 M citric acid + 2 vol% H2O2135	NCM	80 °C, 1.5 h, 33.3 g L−1	Li = 99, Co = 95, Ni = 97, Mn = 94	—
0.1 M citric acid + 0.02 M ascorbic acid136	LCO	80 °C, 6 h, 10 g L−1	Li = 100	—
Co = 80
1 M oxalic acid139	LCO	95 °C, 2.5 h, 15 g L−1	Li = 98	Chemical reaction control: 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = kt
Co = 97
3 M trichloroacetic acid + 4 vol% H2O2179	NCM	60 °C, 0.5 h, 50 g L−1	Li = 100, Co = 92, Ni = 93, Mn = 90	Surface chemical reaction control: −ln(1 − X) = ktn
2 M citric acid + 0.6 g g−1 H2O2	LCO	70 °C, 80 min, 50 g L−1	Li = 99, Co = 98	—
1.5 M citric acid + 0.4 g g−1 tea waste	90 °C, 2 h, 30 g L−1	Li = 98, Co = 96
1.5 M citric acid + 0.4 g g−1Phytolacca americana159	80 °C, 2 h, 40 g L−1	Li = 96, Co = 83
2 M tartaric acid + 4 vol% H2O2175	Mixed cathodes	70 °C, 0.5 h, 17 g L−1	Li = 99	Chemical reaction control: 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = kt
Co/Ni/Mn = 99
1.5 M succinic acid + 4 vol% H2O2130	LCO	70 °C, 40 min, 15 g L−1	Li > 96	Initial: chemical reaction control: 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = kt; beyond 20 min: diffusion control: 1 − 2/3X − (1 − X)2/3 = kt
Co = 100
0.1 M iminodiacetic acid + 0.02 M ascorbic acid	LCO	80 °C, 6 h, 2 g L−1	Li = 99, Co = 91	—
0.1 M maleic acid + 0.02 M ascorbic acid170	80 °C, 6 h, 2 g L−1	Li = 100, Co = 97
0.5 M glycine + 0.02 M ascorbic acid172	LCO	80 °C, 6 h, 2 g L−1	Co > 95	—
0.4 M tartaric acid + 0.02 M ascorbic acid161	LCO	80 °C, 5 h, 2 g L−1	Li = 100	—
Co = 97
2 M formic acid + 6 vol% H2O2137	NCM	60 °C, 2 h, 50 g L−1	Li = 100	Chemical reaction control: 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = kt
Co/Ni/Mn = 85
2 M citric acid + 1.25 vol% H2O2133	LCO	60 °C, 2 h, 30 g L−1	Li = 92	Product layer diffusion control
Co = 81
3.5 M acetic acid + 4 vol% H2O2177	NCM	60 °C, 1 h, 40 g L−1	Li = 100, Co = 94, Ni = 93, Mn = 96	Surface chemical reaction control: 1 − (1 − X)1/3 = kt
3 M acetic acid + 7.5 vol% H2O2176	LCMO	70 °C, 40 min, 20 g L−1	Li = 100, Co = 99, Mn = 100	Product layer diffusion control
2 M maleic acid + 2 mL H2O2132	NCM	70 °C, 1 h, 20 g L−1	Li/Ni/Co/Mn = 98	Diffusion control
1.5 M malic acid + 0.6 g g−1 grape seed167	LCO	80 °C, 3 h, 20 g L−1	Li = 99, Co = 92	Combination of surface chemical reaction and diffusion control

 	Fig. 13  Development of the thermodynamics and kinetics analysis of acid leaching: thermodynamics focuses on the leaching mechanism, including the metal leaching sequence,117 bioleaching mechanism,145 possible reaction and products calculation,52,118 and products identification136,160,174; kinetics focuses on determination of the rate-controlling step based on different equations, including shrinking-core,174 logarithmic rate law,160 and Avrami equation models,124,179 and the calculation of the activation energies of leaching. Ref. 124 Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science B.V.; ref. 52 Copyright 2012 Elsevier; ref. 174 Copyright 2013 Elsevier; ref. 136 Copyright 2014 Elsevier; ref. 118, 160 and 179 Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 
X = k1·t	(1)
1 − (1 − X)1/3 = k2·t	(2)
1 − 3(1 − X)2/3 + 2(1 − X) = k3·t	(3)
lnk = lnA − Ea/RT	(4)
(−ln(1 − X))2 = k·t	(5)
−ln(1 − X) = k·tn	(6)
(1 − X)1/3 = 1 − kt/r0ρ	(7)

 	Fig. 14  Illustration of the solvent extraction process, mechanism analysis, and factors related to extraction, scrubbing, and stripping.	 

0.90 M PC-88A181	Co(Li)	RT, pH = 6.7, O/A = 0.85, t = 0.5 h	2 M H2SO4, O/A = 5	Co = 100
0.3 M Cyanex 272117	Co(Li)	
T = 50 °C, pH = 4.5, O/A = 1, t = 20 min	3 M H2SO4, O/A = 1	Co = 68, Li = 39; Al = 98
0.72 M Cyanex 27251	Co(Li)	
T = 50 °C, pH = 5, O/A = 1, t = 20 min	2.5 M H2SO4, O/A = 5	Co = 88; Li = 33; Al = 100
65% saponified 1.5 M Cyanex 272184	Co(Li)	RT, pH = 5.35, O/A = 1.6, t = 10 min	5 M H2SO4, O/A = 5	Co = 85
15% Cyanex 272 + 3% isodecanol195	Co(Li)	RT, pH = 5, O/A = 1, t = 5 min	10% H2SO4, O/A = 1	Co = 99.9, Li = 7.9
65% saponified 48 vol% Cyanex 272 + 5 vol% TBP197	Co(Li)	RT, pH = 5, O/A = 2/3, t = 10 min	5 M H2SO4, O/A = 5	Co = 99.9, Li = 35.5
50% saponified 0.4 M Cyanex 272185	Co(Ni/Li)	RT, pH = 5.5–6.0, O/A = 2/1	2 M H2SO4, O/A = 11.7	Co = 95–98, Ni = 1
25 wt% P507186	Co(Ni/Li)	RT, pH = 4.15, O/A =1.5, t = 10 min	3 M H2SO4, O/A = 4	Co = 95, Ni < 5, Li < 5
10 wt% Acorga M5640; 10% saponified 1 M Cyanex27269	Cu; Co(Li)	RT, pH = 1.0, O/A = 1, t = 10 min; RT, pH = 5.5, O/A = 1, t = 1 min	2 M H2SO4, O/A = 1	Cu = 97; Co = 96
65% saponified D2EHPA + 5% TBP; Cyanex 272196	Mn; Co(Ni)	RT, O/A = 1, pH = 4, D2EHPA/Mn = 2; pH = 5–6, Cyanex/Co = 4	4 M H2SO4, O/A = 1	
β
Mn/Co = 16; Co = 95%
Pure TBP; 10 vol% Alamine 336207	Cd; Co(Ni)	RT, O/A = 1, free acidity (HCl) = 5 M; free acidity = 4.1 M	0.5 M H2SO4, O/A = 1	Cd = 99.7; Co = 97.5, Ni = 2.9
7% Ionquest 801 + 2% Acorga M5640; 15% Cyanex 272192	Fe/Cu/Al; Co(Li/Ni)	
T = 40 °C, pH = 4, O/A = 1/2; RT, pH = 5.5–6.0, O/A = 2	80 g L−1 H2SO4, O/A = 8	Fe/Cu/Al = 100; Co = 90
65% saponified D2EHPA + 10% TBP; Cyanex 272 + 10% TBP194	Mn/Cu/Al; Co(Ni/Li)	RT, pH = 4, O/A = 1, D2EHPA/Mn = 4; Cyanex/Co = 4	3 M H2SO4, O/A = 1/1.5	Mn/Cu/Al =90; Co = 99.9, Li = 10, Ni = 10
10 vol% Acorga M5640; 10 vol% PC-88A; 10 vol% PC88A + 5 vol% TOA202	Cu; Al; Co	RT, O/A = 1, t = 2 h, pH = 1.5–2.0(Cu), pH = 2.5–3.0(Al), pH = 5.5–6.0(Co)	3 M H2SO4, O/A = 1	Cu = 100; Al = 90; Co = 90
10 wt% Acorga M5640; 10% saponified 1 M Cyanex 272; 10% saponified 1 M Cyanex 272183	Cu; Co(Ni); Ni	RT, O/A = 1, pH = 1.5–1.7(Cu); pH = 5.1–5.3(Co); pH = 6.3–6.5(Ni)	2 M H2SO4, O/A = 1	Cu = 98.5; Co = 97; Ni = 96
70% saponified 20 vol% D2EHPA + 5% TBP135	Mn(Li)	RT, pH = 4, O/A = 1, t = 5 min	0.2 M H2SO4, O/A = 1	Mn = 95, Li < 2
15 vol% Co-D2EHPA + 5 vol% TBP201	Mn(Co/Li)	RT, pH = 3.5, O/A = 1/2, t = 5 min	0.1 M H2SO4, O/A = 2	Mn = 97.1
0.05 M Cyanex272 + 0.05 M PC-88A; Cyanex272 + PC-88A + EDTA205	Co/Mn(Li); Mn(Co)	RT, O/A = 1, t = 0.5 h, pH = 5.2; pH = 5	0.01 M H2SO4	SF(Mn/Co) = 712.7
25 vol% Versatic 10 acid + 20 vol% PC88A189	Mn(Co/Ni/Li)	RT, pH = 4.5, O/A = 1	0.5 M H2SO4, O/A = 2	Mn = 99.5, Co = 5.77, Ni = 0.83, Li = 0.33
0.43 M D2EHPA + 0.7 M Versatic 10 acid190	Mn(Co/Ni/Li)	RT, pH = 4.5, O/A = 1	0.5 M H2SO4, O/A = 2	Mn = 98.3, Co = 4.11, Ni = 1.06, Li = 0.25
0.23 M LIX 84I + 1.41 M Versatic 10 acid206	Ni(Mn/Co/Li)	RT, pH = 5, O/A = 1	3 M H2SO4, O/A = 1	Ni = 98.3, Co = 0.23, Mn = 0.15, Li = 0.19
40% D2EHPA in kerosene204	Mn/Co/Ni(Li)	RT, pH = 3.5, O/A = 1	0.5 M H2SO4	Ni = 85, Co = 99, Mn = 100
Cyanex 272 + 5% v/v TOA199	Co/Ni(Li)	RT, pH = 6.8–7.1, O/A = 1:0.77	H2SO4, pH = 5–6	Ni = 99.6, Co = 98.7
O/A = 1.5
L64 + Na2SO4 + H2O (PAN as extracting agent)193	Cu(Co)	pH = 6	0.33 M HNO3	
β
Cu/Co = 322
30% Cyanex 272; 30% D2EHPA; 10% Cyanex 272203	Zn; Cd/Mn; Co	pH = 2.5, O/A = 2; pH = 2.7, O/A = 2; pH = 5.25, O/A = 0.5	1.2 M H2SO4, O/A = 2; O/A = 4; 0.4 M H2SO4, O/A = 2	Zn = 97, Cd = 77.4, Mn = 93.1, Co = 98.7
0.1 M Cyanex301191	Co(Li)	RT, pH = 7.2, O/A = 1	2 M H2SO4	
B
Co/Li = 612
20% saponified D2EHPA; 30% saponified PC-88A121	Cu/Mn; Ni(Co)	pH = 2.6, O/A = 1; pH = 4.25, O/A = 1	—	Ni = 80.13
15% LIX 84 IC; 20% Cyanex 272200	Cu; Co(Li)	pH = 2, O/A = 1; pH = 4.8, O/A = 1	—	Cu = 99; Co = 98

 	Fig. 15  Effects of (a) extraction time (40% D2EHPA, pH = 3.5, O/A = 1, RT); (b) vol% D2EHPA (pH = 3.5, 10 min, O/A = 1, RT); (c) pH value (40% D2EHPA, 10 min, O/A = 1, RT); and (d) O/A ratio (pH = 3.5, 10 min, 40% D2EHPA, RT) on the extraction of various metals from spent NCM materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. Metal pH isotherms with 7% Ionquest 801 in Shellsol D70 (e) and 7% Ionquest 801 and 2% Acorga M5640 in Shellsol D70 (f) (O/A = 1:2 at 22 °C) for the extraction of various metals from spent LIBs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 192 Copyright 2010 Elsevier. (g) Plot of equilibrium pH vs. logD (aqueous: 10.44 g L−1 Co and 1.77 g L−1 Li in sulfate medium; organic: 15% Cyanex 272 + 3% isodecanol in kerosene, mixing time = 300 s, O/A = 1); (h) plot of logD vs. log[H2A2] (H2A2: Cyanex 272 in dimeric form). Reprinted with permission from ref. 195 Copyright 2012 Elsevier. McCabe–Thiele diagram for extraction of Mn (i), and stripping of Mn (j) (O/A = 8, 5, 3, 2, 1, 0.5, and 0.3 at RT). Reprinted with permission from ref. 190 Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 
3Mn2+ + 2MnO4− + 2H2O = 5MnO2 + 4H+	(8)
2Co2+ + ClO− + 2H3O+ = 2Co3+ + Cl− + 3H2O	(9)
2Co3+ + 6OH− = Co2O3·3H2O	(10)

 	Fig. 16  (a) pH values of the start and end of hydroxide precipitation for different metal ions. Reprinted from ref. 208 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) XRD patterns of the precipitated Li2CO3 and standard powder diffraction peaks of Li2CO3, and (c) SEM image of the precipitated Li2CO3. Adapted with permission from ref. 137 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) XRD patterns and digital images of recovered CoC2O4·2H2O and Li3PO4. Reprinted with permission from reference. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (e) XRD pattern and digital image of the DMG–Ni precipitate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 201 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. ΔG–pH curves of Ni (f), Co (g), and Mn (h) carbonates and hydroxides in solution: total metal ions concentration of 0.19 M, initial carbonate concentration of 0.19 M, initial ammonia concentration of 1.25 M. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215 Copyright 2013 Elsevier. (i) Theoretical log[Me]–pH curves in H2SO4 leaching solution at different pH, (j) theoretical log[Me]–pH curves and (k) metal precipitation efficiencies in citric acid leaching solution at different pH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214 Copyright 2013 Elsevier.	 

Li	Li2CO3	Na2CO3	—	
137, 157 and 187

LiF	NH4F	—	
136

Li3PO4	H3PO4/Na3PO4	—	
102, 159 and 188



Co	Co(OH)2	NaOH	10	
114

CoCO3	Na2CO3	9–10	
157 and 212

Co2O3·3H2O	NaClO	3	
182

CoC2O4·2H2O	H2C2O4/(NH4)2C2O4	1.5, 2	
136, 186 and 187



Ni	Ni(OH)2	NaOH	8,11	
114 and 182

NiCO3	Na2CO3	9	
160

NiC8H14N4O4	C4H8N2O2	5,9	
114 and 201



Mn	Mn(OH)2	NaOH	12	
114

MnCO3	Na2CO3	7.5	
160

MnO2	KMnO4	2	
114



Ni/Co/Mn co-precipitation	NixCoyMnz(OH)2	NaOH	11	
73, 74 and 208


	(NixCoyMnz)CO3	Na2CO3	7.5–8	
213



Fe/Al/Cu impurities	Fe(OH)3	NaOH	3–6	
113, 157, 186, 201 and 214

Al(OH)3
Cu(OH)2

 	Fig. 17  Initial discharge capacities (at 0.1–0.2C with an upper potential of 4.2 or 4.3 V) of various cathodes (LCO, LFP, and NCM) resynthesized by different methods.	 

 	Fig. 18  Heat regeneration of different cathodes: (a) XRD patterns of LCO after regeneration at different temperatures; (b) SEM image of LCO after regeneration at 900 °C; (c) cycling performances of LCO after regeneration at different temperatures (30 mA g−1, 3–4.3 V); reprinted from ref. 64 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) XRD patterns of LFP treated at different temperatures; (e) SEM image of LFP treated at 650 °C; (f) discharge capacities of LFP treated at different temperatures at 0.2C (2.5–4.2 V) and 1–5C (2.0–4.2 V); reprinted from ref. 234 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) XRD patterns of LFP regenerated at different temperatures; (h) SEM image of LFP regenerated at 650 °C; (i) cycle performances of LFP regenerated at different temperatures (0.2C, 2.5–4.2 V). Reprinted with permission from ref. 233 Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Recycling process flow diagram of a soft package spent LFP battery; (b) a small-scale model line; (c) 20 A h soft package spent LFP battery after being used in an EV; five kinds of recycled by-products: (d) separator, (e) Al-plastic film, (f) plate lugs, (g) Cu foil, and (h) Al foil. Reprinted from ref. 234 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  SEM images of resynthesized LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 with NaOH co-precipitation at different magnifications (a and b); (c) independent testing result in ANL: cycle life test at 0.5C; reprinted with permission from ref. 217 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. SEM images of resynthesized LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 with Na2CO3 co-precipitation at different magnifications (d and e); (f) cycling performance of different samples (a: the resynthesized sample, b: the sample synthesized from pure compounds) at 1C (2.7–4.3 V). Reprinted with permission from ref. 213 Copyright 2012 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 21  Impurity effects on the performance of resynthesized samples by the co-precipitation method: SEM images of LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 with 0% Cu (a), 2.5% Cu (b), and 5% Cu (c); (d) capacity retentions of LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 with 0, 2.5, and 5 atom% Cu (2C, 2.7–4.3 V); reprinted with permission from ref. 238 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. SEM images of Li[(Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3)1−xMgx]O2 with x = 0 (e), x = 0.01 (f), and x = 0.025 (g); (h) cycling performance of Li[(Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3)1−xMgx]O2 (x = 0, 0.01, 0.025) (2C, 2.7–4.3 V). Reprinted with permission from ref. 213 Copyright 2012 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  SEM images of resynthesized (a) and fresh-synthesized samples (b) prepared by sol–gel method; (c) cycling performance of the resynthesized and fresh-synthesized samples at 1C (2.75–4.25 V). Reprinted from ref. 244 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Voltage profiles (d) and cycling discharge capacities (e) of as-purchased and electrochemically relithiated EOL LFP cathodes; (f) voltage profiles for as-purchased and chemically relithiated EOL LFP cathodes; (g) XRD patterns of as-purchased, EOL, and chemically relithiated LFP cathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 247 Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 23  Applications of recycled carbon anodes: (a) TEM image of the oxidized CNFs aqueous dispersion; (b) differential pulse voltammograms of hydroquinone and catechol with increasing concentrations from 6 μM to 70 μM (4 mV s−1, 50 mV pulse amplitude, and 20 ms pulse width); reprinted with permission from ref. 278 Copyright 2013 The Electrochemical Society. Digital image of a free-standing film of exfoliated graphene (c) and cross-sectional SEM of the film (d); reprinted from ref. 273 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Preparation diagram of Mg–MCMB composite; reprinted with permission from ref. 277 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (f) Phosphate removal rates from aqueous solutions by raw and Mg-enriched MCMB; reprinted with permission from ref. 276 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (g) Removal rates of Pb2+, Cd2+, and Ag+ by artificial graphite (AG) and MnO2-AG (adsorbent dose = 0.2 g L−1, concentration of metal ions = 50 mg L−1, contact time = 24 h, initial pH = 6.01). Reprinted with permission from ref. 275 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. SEM images (h) and electrochemical performance (i) of graphite after a subcritical CO2 assisted electrolyte extraction with acetonitrile addition as a co-solvent and subsequent thermal treatment; reprinted with permission from ref. 281 Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Time dependency of the amount of recovered electrolytes from commercial 18650 cells extracted with supercritical (300 bar, 40 °C) and liquid (60 bar, 25 °C) CO2; (b) compositions of the recovered electrolyte extracted with liquid CO2 at different times; (c) time dependency of the amount of recovered electrolytes extracted with liquid CO2 and 0.5 mL min−1 additional solvents; (d) compositions and amounts of the recovered electrolytes extracted with liquid CO2 and additional solvents for 30 min, and with a subsequent 20 min liquid CO2 extraction without any additional solvent; reprinted from ref. 285 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Chromatograms and composition of extracts with the course of pressure (e and f), temperature (g and h), and time (i and j) from carbonate mixture by supercritical CO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 287 Copyright 2016 The Authors. Published by ESG (http://www.electrochemsci.org). This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic of reclaimed electrolytes from spent LIBs; (b) linear sweep voltammograms for commercial and reclaimed electrolytes with an Al electrode as the working electrode in a three-electrode configuration at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1; (c) Arrhenius plots of the ionic conductivity at different temperatures; (d) cycling performance combined with Coulombic efficiencies at 0.2C for commercial and reclaimed electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 288 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic illustration of ultrafine PbS powder preparation with forced flow inert gas. (b) Diagram of the relationship between the Standard Gibbs free energy changes and temperature of related possible reactions; SEM image (c) and XRD pattern (d) of the PbS ultrafine powder prepared from the Pb paste of Pb–acid batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 294 Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Different leaching procedures of Pb pastes (Process I: leaching process with citric acid solution; Process II: leaching process with acetic acid solution); (b) comparison of XRD patterns of [Pb(C6H6O7)]·H2O from different Pb compounds (a: standard lead citrate in CSD, b: produced from PbO, c: produced from PbO2, and d: produced from PbSO4); (c) comparison of XRD patterns of Pb3(C6H5O7)2·2H2O from different Pb compounds (a: produced from PbO, b: produced from PbO2, and c: produced from PbSO4). (a and c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 308 Copyright 2013 Elsevier. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 306 Copyright 2012 Society of Chemical Industry. (d) Effects of volumetric percentage of O2 in O2/N2 mixture on mass percentage of components after Pb3(C6H5O7)2·2H2O calcination; (e) sketches of Pb3(C6H5O7)2·2H2O calcination theory model. (d and e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 310 Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of functional carbon from Pb3(C6H5O7)2·3H2O precursors; secondary electron SEM image (b) and bright field TEM image (c) of the carbon derived from Pb3(C6H5O7)2·3H2O (500 °C); (d) cycling performance of the carbon sample carbonized at 500 °C. Reprinted from ref. 313 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
H2 + PbO(s) = H2O + Pb(s) (E = 0.297 V)	(11)

 	Fig. 29  Schematic of the H2–PbO fuel cell: the Nafion 2030 membrane (DuPont) is an ion-selective, reinforced composite membrane designed to transport Na+ and water while blocking OH− and HPbO2−; the diffusion layer is a carbon paper (TGP-H-060, Toray) coated with carbon black (Vulcan 72 R, Cabot); the catalyst is carbon black-supported platinum nanoparticles (40 wt% Pt/C, Johnson Matthey). Reprinted with permission from ref. 317 Copyright 2013 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 30  Applications of ultrasound in battery recycling: (a) mechanism of ultrasonic-assisted leaching; (b) leaching efficiencies of Co and Li with H2SO4, HCl, and citric acid (90 W, 60 °C, and 5 h); reprinted with permission from ref. 339 Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (c) Mechanism of ultrasonic-assisted renovation; (d) XRD patterns of different samples (a: used LCO, b: regenerated LCO); reprinted with permission from ref. 338 Copyright 2014 The Authors. Published by ESG (http://www.electrochemsci.org). This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). (e) Mechanism of ultrasonic-assisted separation; (f) peel-off efficiency of cathode materials using different solvents under ultrasonic (60 °C, 240 W, 30 min, and S/L of 1:10 g mL−1); (g) SEM image of LCO peeled by ultrasonic cleaning; reprinted with permission from ref. 57 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (h) Illustration of the preparation of graphene with used graphite anode by liquid-phase exfoliation; (i) Raman spectra of used graphite anode and as-made graphene with different treatments; (j) TEM images of the obtained graphene sheets. Reprinted from ref. 273 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Peel-off rates of cathode materials and the recycled Al content and images of recycled Al foil under different retention times (error bars represent the standard errors of the mean for the three replicates; cathode at 0 min is the raw material); reprinted with permission from ref. 63 Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (b) La extraction with traces of Ni in the IL phase (A), scrubbing of the IL phase from (A) to obtain 99.9% pure La in the IL phase (B), extraction experiment with a neodymium iron mixture, where an iron precipitate was obtained (C), Sm extraction with traces of Co in the IL phase (D), scrubbing of the IL phase from (D) to obtain 99.9% pure Sm in the IL phase (E). Reprinted from ref. 334 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Flowchart of spent LIB recycling processes: the pyrometallurgical technology developed by Umicore and the hydrometallurgical technology developed by Retrive.346,347,353 (b) Flowchart of spent Ni-based battery recycling processes: the pyrometallurgical technology developed by Accurec.348 (c) Flowchart of spent Pb–acid battery recycling process: the pyrometallurgical technology developed by Campine.350,351	 

Retriev	All	Pyrometallurgy (Ni-based); hydrometallurgy (Li-based); mechanical process (Pb–acid)	Unique liquid N2 protection in the crusher	USA & Canada
Umicore	Li-Based, NiMH	Pyrometallurgy& hydrometallurgy	UHT technology; closed loop	Belgium
Batrec	Li-, Hg-based	Pyrometallurgy	Crushing under CO2 atmosphere	Switzerland
Accurec	All (except Pb and Hg)	Pyrometallurgy	Vacuum thermal recycling	German
Campine	Pb–acid	Pyrometallurgy	Full range of Pb products	Belgium
SNAM	Li-, Ni-based	Pyrometallurgy	Pyrolysis-distillation-refining	France
Inmetco	Li-, Ni-based	Pyrometallurgy	Direct-reduced iron process	USA
Recupyl	Li-, Zn-based	Hydrometallurgy	Crushing under inert gas atmosphere	France
Sony & Sumitomo	All rechargeable batteries	Pyrometallurgy	High-temperature calcination	Japan
Xstrata	Li-, Ni-based	Pyrometallurgy& hydrometallurgy	Batteries as secondary feedstock	Switzerland
GEM	Li-, Ni-based	hydrometallurgy	Closed loop	China
Brunp	Li-, Ni-based	Hydrometallurgy	Reverse product position design	China

 	Fig. 33  Generalized boundary, process, and material/energy flow analysis of an LCA of a battery.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Global warming, photochemical smog, eutrophication, acidification, and ozone depletion of a 10 kW h PHEV battery life cycle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 370 Copyright 2010 Elsevier. (b) Inputs (exergy, MJ) necessary and allocated for the production chain of 1 kg LIB cathode material (Scenario A: starting from battery waste with Ni and Co recovery; Scenario B: from virgin resources). Reprinted with permission from ref. 230 Copyright 2009 Elsevier. (c) Resource use and environmental emissions of battery production and recycling (hydrometallurgy and pyrometallurgy) compared with virgin battery production for the LMO battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 231 Copyright 2015 IOP Publishing Ltd. Content from this work may be used under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 license. (d) Total estimated energy consumption (MJ kg−1 battery) of EV batteries made from virgin materials; with recycled cathode materials; with recycled Al; with recycled Cu; and with recycled cathode material, Cu, and Al by different recycling processes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 358 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e) GHG and SOx reductions for different cathode materials recovered from pyrometallurgical, indirect physical, and direct physical processes as compared with producing them from virgin materials. Reprinted from ref. 6 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Purchased energy intensity of each step of the hydrometallurgical recycling process per mass of recovered Co (f) and Li (g). (f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 129 Copyright 2013 Elsevier. (g) Reprinted with permission from ref. 377 This report is available, at no cost, at http://www.osti.gov/bridge.	 

 	Fig. 35  Illustration of various choices of retired EV batteries after first electric vehicle life and aspects of B2U analysis.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Life-cycle cost components of an energy storage system (left) and cost breakdown for a repurposed battery (right). (b) Future battery pack price projections and targets by different authorities. Reproduced from ref. 406–410 with permission from CleanTechnica (Copyright 2012), The Boston Consulting Group (Copyright 2017), Navigant Research (Copyright 2013), U.S. Energy Information Administration (Copyright 2012), and Mckinsey (Copyright 2012).	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) Complete energy storage system life-cycle cost components for transmission support (left) and cost breakdown for repurposed EV batteries with a repurposed battery selling price of $147 kW h−1 (right); reproduced with permission from ref. 70. This report was prepared by Sandia National Laboratories and approved for public release; further dissemination unlimited. (b) Breakdown of total annual costs for the lowest (left) and highest (right) repurposed battery selling price of $44 and $180 kW h−1, respectively; reproduced with permission from ref. 71. This report is available at no cost from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory at http://www.nrel.gov/publications. (c) Cost share of the energy storage system with 500 kW peak power capability and 1 MW h storage capacity at a high-value cost (left) and low value cost (right) percentages; reproduced with permission from ref. 381. This report is generally available free via the U.S. Department of Energy Information Bridge (http://www.osti.gov/bridge). (d) Estimated energy storage application cost breakdown with repurposed batteries from Toyota Prius (left), Chevy Volt (middle), and Nissan Leaf (right). Reproduced from ref. 387 with permission from SAGE publications, Copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 38  Predicted second use battery lifetimes of simulations as a function of the battery SOH parameters at the end of its automotive service. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. This report is available at no cost from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) at http://www.nrel.gov/publications.	 

Nominal voltage level	∼400 V	∼800–1000 V
Operating hours for 10 years	∼16800 h (on)	Max. 87600 h (on)
Ambient temperatures	−40 to 60 °C (in operation)	10–35 °C (in operation)
C-Rates	2–3C (continuous); >5C (peak)	<0.5C (continuous); 0.5–2C (peak)
Thermal management concept	Active (air or liquid)	Passive (active air or liquid only for specific use cases with critical temperatures)
Vibrations	Typical for vehicles in motion	None
SOH	100%	70–90%

Transmission support	<1 MW h	100 MW	10–100 s	1 month−1
Area regulation	2 MW h	10 MW (average); 20 MW (peak)	Continuous	Continuous
Spinning reserve	7.5 MW h	20 MW	15 min	1 month−1
Load leveling	50 MW h	10 MW	>5 h	100–200 days year−1
Energy arbitrage
Transmission deferral
Renewables firming	1–10 MW h	1 MW (average); 5 MW (peak)	1–10 h	10–20 days month−1
Power reliability,	3–4 MW h	1 MW (average); 2 MW (peak)	3–4 h	6 year−1 up to daily
Peak shaving
Light commercial load following	75–100 kW h	25 kW (average); 200 kW (peak)	3 h	Daily
Distributed node telecom backup power	25–50 kW h	5 kW	5–10 h	2 year−1
Residential load following	3–4 kW h	1 kW (average); 10 kW (peak)	3 h	Daily

 	Fig. 39  (a) LIB pack CED for phases of the battery pack life; (b) life-cycle impact assessment indicator of GWP results for 1 kW h of power delivered by the LIB pack cascaded use. Reprinted with permission from ref. 398 Copyright 2015 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. CED (c) and GWP (d) impacts of an EV LIB with cascading reuse. (The dotted line reflects the impact of the EV LIB life cycle with no reuse in a stationary application.) (e) Life-cycle CO2 emissions associated with the defined scenarios for 3 paths. Reprinted with permission from ref. 397 Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (f) CED of stationary energy storage system, comparing the base line LIB scenario to three scenarios of Pb–acid battery efficiency. (c, d, and f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 396 Copyright 2015 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.	 

 	Fig. 40  Market forms and involved stakeholders for trading used EV batteries: (a) closed market of OEMs selling used EV batteries to customers; (b) intermediary-based market for scraping together EV battery suppliers and customers; (c) open market for bringing together EV battery suppliers and customers in a marketplace. Copyright 2015. Reprinted from ref. 403 with permission from Association for Information Systems, Atlanta, GA; 404-413-7444; http://www.aisnet.org.	 

EnerDel&Itochu427	2010	Battery-based energy storage system in new apartment complexes to help residents store energy for use at times of peak demand.
Duke Energy&Itochu428	2010	Stationary applications in homes, neighborhoods, and commercial buildings.
Ford429	2011	50 kW h for solar energy storage.
GM&ABB430	2012	5 repurposed Chevy Volt batteries with up to 50 kW h storage capacity for a microgrid backup system.
BMW&UC San Diego431	2013	Repurposed mini-E EV batteries for stationary energy storage (∼108 kW and 2–3 h of energy storage) integrated with a solar photovoltaic system.
4R Energy (Nissan&Sumimoto)432	2014	16 used EV batteries with 600 kW and 400 kW h storage capacity to smooth out fluctuations in energy output from a solar farm in Osaka.
BMW&Bosch433	2014	2600 battery modules from more than 100 EVs with a power capacity of 2 MW and a storage capacity of 2.8 MW h to stabilize the grid and reduce the impact of peak demand in Hamburg.
BMW&(PG&E)434	2016	Repurposed BMW i3 batteries as energy storage for home use.
Daimler&The Mobility House, GETEC, REMONDIS435	2016	1000 battery systems from smart fortwo EVs with a storage capacity of 13 MW h to even out fluctuations in the German power grid.
Renault&Powervault436	2017	Repurposed Renault EV batteries as home energy storage systems.

 	Fig. 41  Timeline and development of laws and regulations on battery recycling in the EU, USA, and China.	 

 	Fig. 42  Proposed “3R and 3E” strategy for battery recycling in the future.	 
Footnote
† X. Zhang and L. Li contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
