Retracted Article: Electrospun hybrid nanofibers of poly(vinylidene fluoride) and functionalized graphene oxide as a piezoelectric energy harvester   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE00033G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE00033G
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2469-2479Retracted Article: Electrospun hybrid nanofibers of poly(vinylidene fluoride) and functionalized graphene oxide as a piezoelectric energy harvester†

        
          
            Shivam 
            Tiwari
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Anupama 
            Gaur
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chandan 
            Kumar
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Pralay 
            Maiti
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi, 221005, India. E-mail: pmaiti.mst@itbhu.ac.in
bSchool of Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi, 221005, India
Received 
      8th January 2020
    , Accepted 13th March 2020First published on 13th March 2020AbstractA flexible, lightweight and efficient nanohybrid of poly(vinylidene fluoride) and functionalized graphene oxide is prepared through an optimized electrospinning process for energy harvesting. Nanohybrids yield good quality fibers upon the incorporation of functionalized graphene oxide. The addition of nanofillers leads to a decrease in the fibre diameter arising from better interaction of the nanoparticle with the polymer matrix. An electroactive phase of ∼88% is achieved upon the addition of nanoparticles which leads to better piezoelectric materials for energy harvesting applications. The transformation of the electroactive phases from the non-piezoelectric part is confirmed through spectroscopic and thermal studies. The developed scaffold is fabricated into a nanogenerator device for electro-mechanical responses. The fabricated device from the nanohybrid of PVDF and functionalized graphene oxide produces a better electromechanical response of 62 V (peak-to-peak) and 48.3 μW cm−2 power generation using finger tapping as compared to 20 V and 23.4 μW cm−2 power generation from pristine PVDF fibres. These devices have the capability to generate a considerable amount of power from various human body movements like walking, foot tapping and bending. These devices have been used to power LEDs from various real life waste mechanical resources like opening and closing of drawers and walking over door mats.
1. Introduction
Graphene, a two-dimensional planar sheet with sp2-carbon atoms closely packed in the form of a honeycomb lattice, has high electrical conductivity, a high surface area, high aspect ratio and higher Young's modulus.1–3 It provides better electrical, thermal, mechanical and shielding effects4–7 which enables it to be used in various applications like solar cells, super capacitors, transistors and biomedical applications because of its diverse nature and versatile properties.8–11 Apart from its numerous advantages, it has certain limitations such as weak absorption of light and low capacitance values12 which restricts its use in many areas especially in the energy sector. To overcome these limitations, some functionalization is performed on graphite sheets like addition of functional groups, oxidation of the sheets or further reducing it to enhance its properties.13 Oxidation of graphite improves its dispersion in an aqueous medium, while surface functionalization e.g. sulphonation leads to better hydrophilic properties and improves adherence properties which facilitates the deposition of metal oxides on its surface.14 To further add to its merits, graphene oxide is reinforced with the polymer matrix to form nanohybrids which show enhanced mechanical and electrical properties suitable in the fields of energy harvesting, sensors, energy storage etc.15–17 Energy harvesting has attracted much attention due to its continuous progress and advancement as it provides a battery-less solution by scavenging energy from waste mechanical energy like vibrations, and human motion thereby producing useable electrical energy.18 Piezoelectric based energy harvesting has some profound importance because of its scalability, cost-effectiveness and time saving features.19 A piezoelectric material produces electrical polarization upon the application of stress. These materials have the potential to convert mechanical vibrations or body movements to useful electrical power. Hence, these materials are used to prepare piezoelectric nanogenerators.20,21 Polymer based nanohybrids have been the most efficient material for energy harvesting due to their flexibility, and improved mechanical and thermal properties.22,23 Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) is an important piezoelectric polymer which has efficiently been used for energy harvesting.24–26 It possesses three important crystalline phases e.g. α, β and γ of which the α-phase is a non-polar, and a non-piezo phase whereas β and γ are the prominent electroactive phases because of their polar nature.27,28 Certain stimuli like mechanical stretching or poling transform the α-phase into electroactive phases which are appropriate for piezoelectric energy harvesting.29 Electrospinning is a versatile technique where the non-polar phase gets transformed into polar, electroactive phases by the combined effect of stretching and poling under a high potential.30 To induce electroactive phases in the polymer matrix, certain fillers such as nanoclay,31,32 reduced graphene oxide,33,34 ZnO,35 KNN,36 doped PZT, and BaTiO3 (ref. 37 and 38) and bio-fillers like fish scales are also incorporated into the polymer matrix.39 Graphene oxide based polymer nanohybrids also show the transformation of the non-piezo phase into electroactive phases.40,41 Due to its versatile nature including high electrical conductivity and wide applications, graphene oxide is a much explored material in the field of energy but detailed quantification and the use of the functionalized part of graphene oxide and its application in energy harvesting is not explored, especially considering the alignment of two dimensional graphene under a high potential gradient. However, the quest for new materials for energy generation is at the forefront of research worldwide and graphene with its superior properties (both in terms of electrical and mechanical) is a natural choice of materials as fillers to make electroactive materials suitable for energy generation from waste mechanical resources.
In this work, we have performed the functionalization of graphene oxide with polar sulphonated groups and used it as a filler for the PVDF matrix to prepare highly aligned scaffolds through electrospinning. Functionalization of graphene oxide leads to better dispersion in solvents followed by superior electrical properties. The effects of functionalization and process technology have been used for energy harvesting applications from waste mechanical energy. A miniature device has been fabricated using hybrid materials and its electromechanical response has been measured utilizing different human motions like finger tapping, bending, walking, foot tapping etc. The device has been used to generate power and powering of LEDs from waste mechanical energy like opening/closing of drawers and walking over door mats. The mechanism of the greater electroactive phase and high energy conversion has also been revealed.
2. Experimental
Materials
Polymeric beads of commercial grade SOLEF 6008 poly(vinylidene fluoride) is used for the experiments and is kindly supplied by Ausimont, Italy. PVDF used has a molecular weight of 2.7 × 105, density ∼1.98 g cc−1 and a PDI of 2.1. Dimethyl formamide (DMF) and acetone of spectroscopic grade are used and purchased from Merck, India. Graphene oxide (GO) and functionalized graphene oxide (GS) were synthesized in the laboratory.
Graphene oxide synthesis
GO is synthesized as reported in previous studies.11 Graphite flakes (3.0 g, 1 wt. equivalent) are added to a mixture of concentrated H2SO4 and H3PO4 taken in a ratio of 9:1. KMnO4 (18 g, 6 wt. equivalent) is added slowly to the mixture. The reaction temperature is maintained at 50 °C with continuous stirring of the mixture overnight. 30% H2O2 is added to the mixture in the presence of ice water to cool the mixture followed by centrifugation at 4000 rpm. A mixture of ethanol and dilute HCl is used to wash off the product until the pH of the media becomes ∼7. The product is dried at 70 °C for 2 days under ambient pressure.
Functionalized graphene oxide synthesis
The functionalization of graphene oxide is carried out as stated in the previous work.14 The prepared graphene oxide is sulfonated in the presence of ammonium sulfate. Graphene oxide and ammonium sulfate are dispersed in deionized water in a mass ratio of 1:5. The mixture is then sonicated for 45 minutes followed by drying. The dried sample is heated at 245 °C for around 1 hour to allow ammonium sulphate to decompose and form a –SO3H moiety in the graphene sheet. Henceforth, it will be termed as GS.
Nanofiber preparation
Viscous solutions of PVDF and graphene oxide (GO or GS) are prepared from the solution route. The concentration of the filler used is 1 wt% with respect to the polymer weight. The nanohybrids of PVDF and graphene oxide are developed in a DMF and acetone mixture in a ratio of 2:8 (v/v). The polymer and the filler are taken separately and mixed or dispersed in DMF/acetone at 60 °C under constant stirring followed by ultrasonication. Then, both the sonicated portions are mixed together under the same conditions and stirred until a homogeneous solution is developed. This solution is used for electrospinning in fiber preparation. The solution is transferred into a syringe of 0.8 mm diameter and is placed into a chamber for electrospinning. The collector of the electrospinning set up is covered with aluminium foil acting as a substrate. Electrospinning is performed at a flow rate of 0.75 ml h−1, 20 kV potential and by maintaining a distance between the collector and spinneret of 15 cm after carrying out certain optimizations. After the electrospinning, the prepared scaffold is vacuum dried at 50 °C overnight to remove the residual traces of solvent. The prepared scaffold is abbreviated as P, P-GO and P-GS for pure PVDF, PVDF and graphene oxide and PVDF and functionalized graphene oxide fibers, respectively.
Device fabrication
The prepared scaffold is placed between two pieces of aluminium foil and then electroding is performed using copper wires. Then, the prepared device pre-form is encapsulated using PDMS in a mould after degassing and keeping at 50 °C overnight to obtain the final device which is used for electromechanical measurements.
3. Characterization
Spectroscopic studies
UV-visible analysis is performed in the range 200–800 nm in the reflectance mode in a Jasco V-650 spectrophotometer. FTIR studies are performed using a Nicolet iS5 in the range 400–4000 cm−1 with a resolution of 4 cm−1 at room temperature.
Morphological investigation
The obtained scaffold is analysed using polarized optical microscopy (POM) Leitz Biomed to observe the fibrous nature. This characterization is performed in reflectance mode. To observe the morphology of the scaffold more precisely, a scanning electron microscope (Supra 40, Zeiss) is used. The samples are gold coated through sputtering to impart conductivity to the material.
Structural analysis
The structural changes in the nanohybrids are analyzed using X-ray diffraction (Rigaku Miniflex 600 X-ray). Characterization is performed using a Cu-Kα source with a wavelength of 0.154 nm and 40 kV and 20 mA voltage and current are applied to the generator. Scaffolds are placed on a quartz holder and are subjected to a scanning rate of 3° min−1. XPS was performed using a Thermo Fisher Scientific (K-alpha) system at room temperature to understand the functionalization. A Renishaw InVia Raman Microscope was used to perform Raman spectroscopy at a laser power 5% of 100 mW using a solid state diode laser of wavelength 532 nm.
Thermal and mechanical studies
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), Mettler 832, is used to examine the melting temperature (Tm) and heat of fusion (ΔH). The system is calibrated using indium prior to experiment. The samples are analyzed between 25 and 250 °C at a rate of 10° min−1. The thermal degradation of the pristine polymer and its nanohybrid is analyzed using a thermogravimetric analyser (TGA) (Mettler Toledo) in the range of 30–600 °C at a heating rate of 20° per minute. Tensile testing was performed using an Instron universal testing machine at a strain rate of 5 mm min−1.
Electromechanical response
The prepared device is subjected to external pressure to measure the voltage obtained using a Tektronix TBS 1072B digital storage oscilloscope. Power was also calculated using a variable resistance box. Capacitance storage was measured in terms of voltage using a Tektronix TBS 1072B digital storage oscilloscope. Initially stress was applied to the sample (charging) and after attaining the maximum voltage stress was removed (discharging) from the sample. The piezoelectric coefficients of the samples are measured using a Piezotest PM200. Dielectric measurements were performed using a Keysight E4990A from 20 Hz to 10 MHz at room temperature.
4. Results and discussion
Evidence of functionalization and its effect on structure and morphology
The schematic representation of the preparation method of graphene oxide (GO) and sulphonated graphene oxides (GS) is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). FTIR peaks at 1719 and 1580 cm−1 are observed for GO which are the characteristic peaks of the carbonyl group (>CO) and CC group, respectively, and a broad peak at 3426 cm−1 is seen for the hydroxyl group (ESI Fig. S2†). The peaks of GO become attenuated for the functionalized graphene oxide and new peaks at 1162, 1096 and 600 cm−1 are observed. The peaks at 1162 and 1096 cm−1 are attributed to the stretching vibration for SO while the 600 cm−1 peak signifies the presence of the C–S bond. An UV-vis peak at 271 nm is observed for GO due to n → π* transition while the peak shifts to 267 nm for GS and supports the functionalization of graphene oxide (ESI Fig. S3†). However, the functionalization is evident from the spectroscopic studies.13,14,42,43 The evidence of functionalization is also supported by the XPS spectra (ESI Fig. S4†). In the case of GS, a new peak at 167.38 eV corresponds to the binding energy of the S 2p region of the sulphate group attached with a GO sheet which is categorically absent in the case of GO. However, FTIR, UV-vis and XPS studies confirm the functionalization of GO to GS.44
The quality of nanofibers was optimized after embedding the functionalized GO in the PVDF matrix by controlling electrospinning parameters like flow rate, voltage, concentration of the solution, solvent ratio and distance between the collector and spinneret. 20 kV potential, 0.75 ml h−1 flow rate, 10 wt% solution, 15 cm drum to spinneret distance and the solvent ratio of 2:8 of DMF and acetone are found to be the optimized parameters to obtain good quality fibres (ESI Fig. S5†). The concentration of the fillers (GO and GS) incorporated with respect to the polymer was 1% which was chosen after optimization at different concentrations as shown in the ESI (Fig. S6†). Fig. 1a shows the optical image of pure PVDF and its hybrid nanofibers which exhibit better quality (no bead formation) in the presence of GO and GS. Well dispersed two dimensional GO/GS layers easily get charged during electrospinning (under high potential) which results in finer nanofibers in the hybrid system vis-à-vis in pure PVDF. Higher magnification images through SEM clearly indicate thinner nanofibers in the presence of GO/GS (Fig. 1b) while the thinnest and very ordered nanofibers are generated using functionalized GO as it is evident from the comparative histogram of the fibres (Fig. 1c). The EDS mapping and spectrum also confirm that the prepared scaffold had GO and GS incorporated into it which led to better fibre quality, with the detection of various elements that appeared after functionalization e.g. sulphur in P-GS (ESI Fig. S7†). The fibre diameters of 260 ± 5, 190 ± 4 and 150 ± 4 nm for pure PVDF, P-GO and P-GS, respectively, are generated through electrospinning. Addition of GO leads to an increase in the charge density in solutions which thereby produces higher elongation force in jets and a better quality fibre is obtained.45 Upon addition of functionalized graphene (GS) as a filler to the polymer matrix, even better fibres are obtained presumably due to the polar –SO3H moiety in the graphene sheets which leads to better dispersion and greater charge values, eventually producing finer quality fibres. This is to mention that the polar sulphonate group enhances the interaction between GS and PVDF through a dipolar interaction which causes better dispersion.14 However, the incorporation of a filler into the PVDF matrix leads to better interaction with the polymer and also increases electrostatic repulsion and coulombic force on the spinneret Taylor cone which leads to a decrease in fibre dimensions.15
 Fig. 1  (a) Optical images of the electrospun nanofibers indicated (P, P-GO and P-GS); (b) SEM micrographs of the prepared fibers; (c) fibre diameter distributions of P, P-GO and P-GS, obtained from SEM micrographs; and (d) UV-vis spectra of pristine PVDF and its nanohybrid fibres showing the absorption peak positions. 
The interaction between the filler and the polymer is also studied through UV-vis spectroscopy (Fig. 1d). The pristine PVDF does not show any characteristic peak in the spectra46 but on addition of the filler (GO) to the PVDF matrix, there appears a new peak at 275 nm for P-GO while the peak has been shifted to 270 nm for P-GS using functionalized GO as the filler. UV-vis spectra of pure graphene oxide (GO) and sulphonated graphene oxides (GS) are shown in ESI Fig. S2† and the red shifts of both the hybrids, as compared to that of the pure fillers, indicate a strong interaction between PVDF and GO/GS. This is to mention that a stronger interaction in hybrid systems leads to finer fibre dimensions through electrospinning as observed in morphological studies stated above.39
Better quality fibers are developed using two-dimensional fillers after certain optimization of the process parameters. Now, it is important to understand the structural change and to visualize the effect of GO/GS in the hybrids. The XRD pattern of PVDF fibres shows the β-phase along with a certain α-phase while significant conversion to the electroactive β-phase has clearly been observed in P-GO and P-GS (Fig. 2a). It is worth mentioning that the pure PVDF film shows only the α-phase which possess characteristic peaks at 17.6 (100), 18.5 (020), and 19.9 (110).29 PVDF nanofibers, prepared through electrospinning, show two peaks at 2θ values of 18.6° (020) and 20.5° (200/110), where the first peak is for the α-phase and the major peak occurs at 20.5° indicative of the β-phase. On contrary, the peak at 18.6° almost disappeared for P-GO and P-GS fibres suggesting a greater β-phase in the presence of the filler. XRD peaks are deconvoluted and the estimation of various phase fractions clearly indicate the greater electroactive phase in the hybrid fibres (Fig. 2b). Moreover, the content of the electroactive phase is maximized in P-GS, around 88% in comparison to 59 and 76% for pure PVDF and P-GO, respectively. The α-phase peak of PVDF gets transformed into the piezoelectric active phase while the β-phase peak gets shifted to 20.54° in the case of P-GO and 20.6° (200/110) for P-GS. The shifting and transformation of the peaks and phases as observed here are also reported in some other studies.47,48
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of the indicated fibres (inset shows the deconvoluted patterns of P); (b) phase fraction of the electrospun nanofibers calculated from the deconvolution of XRD peaks. α, β and γ represent the obtained phases; (c) FTIR spectra of P, P-GO and P-GS indicating the peaks of the obtained phases; (d) DSC thermograms of the indicated nanofibers showing the melting temperatures and phases of the prepared scaffolds; (e) TGA thermograms of P, P-GO and P-GS; and (f) schematic representation of the change in the fibre dimension and possible alignment of the nanofiber in the presence of fillers. 
The appearance of 839, 1070, 1172 and 1274 cm−1 peaks in the FTIR spectrum clearly indicates the presence of the electroactive β-phase and the 1234 cm−1 peak corresponds to the γ-phase (Fig. 2c).49 Interestingly, the intensity of both the electroactive phases (β + γ) is higher in hybrid fibres and even greater in P-GS vis-à-vis that in P-GO, which clearly supports greater electroactive phases in the functionalized graphene hybrid. The peaks at 615, 762, 794 and 974 cm−1 represent the α-phase whose intensity is quite prominent in ‘P’ (pure PVDF fibre) while the said peaks almost disappear for hybrid fibres especially for P-GS, conversely indicating the conversion of α-peaks into electroactive phases in the presence of GO/GS. Further, a new FTIR peak appears at 601 cm−1 only for P-GS, suggesting the presence of the C–S bond due to sulphonation group attachment in GS and subsequent P-GS. Other characteristic peaks for sulphonation presented in ESI Fig. S2† are due to O–H stretching vibration from the sulphonate group.48,49 Raman spectral characterization is performed (Fig. S8 ESI†) and suggests the incorporation of GO and GS due to the presence of two peaks at 1320 and 1535 cm−1 which are the D- and G-band of graphene oxide, respectively, while no peak is observed for the pure PVDF fibre. The Raman shift in nanohybrids as compared to that in graphene oxide indicates the strong interaction between PVDF and GO/GS. This result is in accordance with the literature report.39 Differential scanning calorimetry is another probe to distinguish various phases of crystalline forms arising from their distinct melting temperatures. From the DSC thermograms (Fig. 2d), it is observed that the pristine PVDF fibres show a broad melting peak at 178 °C which is a combined melting behavior of the α- and β-phase. On the other hand, P-GO shows two melting peaks at 168 and 173 °C for the β- and α-phase, respectively, whereas P-GS exhibits melting temperatures of 170 and 181 °C predominantly due to the melting behavior of β and γ- phases, respectively. The appearance of the γ-phase in P-GS, as evident from XRD studies, is also confirmed from thermal measurements. This is to mention that the melting temperatures follow the order of β < α < γ.31,45 However, sulphonated graphene oxide exclusively nucleates the electroactive phases in the PVDF matrix through electrospinning as opposed to pure PVDF and P-GO nanofibers and this phenomenon is supported through XRD, FTIR and DSC measurements. The greater content of the electroactive phase in P-GS is due to better interaction between the filler and the polymer matrix arising from the higher dipole in sulphonated graphene oxide in the presence of the polar –SO3H moiety in graphene layers. The piezoelectric coefficient (d33) values for P, P-GO and P-GS are −2 pC N−1, −5 pC N−1 and −9 pC N−1, respectively, measured at room temperature and the higher value of nanohybrids indicate their greater piezo responses. Thermal stability of materials is an important factor to be considered for the use of any device. Fig. 2e shows the thermal analysis of electrospun PVDF and its hybrid nanofibers. The thermal stability is measured under heat treatment and the temperature corresponding to 5% weight loss is considered as the degradation temperature. The degradation temperature for P is nearly 490 °C, whereas degradation temperatures of 430 and 410 °C are observed for P-GO and P-GS, respectively.50 The stress–strain curves support the enhanced mechanical properties (Young's modulus of 3.1, 30.2 and 86.1 MPa for P, P-GO and P-GS, respectively) with the addition of sulphonated graphene oxide leading to better fibre quality (ESI Fig. S9†). The comparative mechanical properties are presented in ESI Table S1† which corroborates the above observation as well. From the above discussion it is evident that the addition of a filler to the polymer matrix leads to better fiber quality, having reduced fibre dimensions. Based on the greater interaction between functionalized graphene and PVDF, a schematic has been presented in Fig. 2f showing thinner and strong fibres of P-GS as compared to pure PVDF and P-GO fibres. Much better alignment of fibres with a decrease in fibre dimensions occurs upon the embedment of functionalized graphene oxide in PVDF, which in turn, is suppose to enhance the piezoelectricity in nanohybrids.
Nanofiller induced piezoelectricity and its applications: the effect of functionalization
From the morphological, structural and thermal analysis, it is evident that the hybrid material prepared from PVDF and functionalized graphene oxide is suitable for piezoelectric energy harvesting. The incorporation of a filler, especially the sulphonated graphene oxide into the PVDF matrix enhances the electroactive phases while non-polar phases (α- and amorphous) get diminished to a higher level.
Now, the rise in electroactive phases provides a way for its application in the energy harvesting arena. A schematic representation of the fabricated device utilizing pure PVDF and hybrid scaffolds is shown in Fig. 3a. The devices consist of four parts; a polymer scaffold, aluminum foil as the substrate, copper wire as the electroding material and poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS) as the encapsulating material. PDMS encapsulation was performed as it provides better stability and uniformity to the device. The device is subjected to external pressure using different modes to measure its electromechanical responses. Fig. 3b shows the electromechanical response of the devices when subjected to external pressure via finger tapping. The amount of pressure applied on the device through finger tapping is ∼40 kPa which is calculated as in previous articles51 and is presented in the ESI† of this article. The output voltages (peak-to-peak) are 20.5, 45 and 62 V for the devices made of the P, P-GO and P-GS scaffold, respectively, as obtained from the finger tapping method. The nanohybrid of PVDF and sulphonated graphene oxide provides the highest output voltage as compared to P and P-GO. The output current is measured using a digital multimeter and the maximum current values obtained are 0.055, 0.86 and 2.1 μA for P, P-GO and P-GS, respectively. However, P-GO also produces a considerable amount of higher voltage as compared to the pristine PVDF scaffold while the better fibre formation is in P-GS, arising from the presence of the –SO3H moiety on graphene oxide which leads to better dispersion and greater interaction with the polymer matrix, resulting in the enhancement of the electromechanical response in terms of voltage. A piezoelectric material has the potential to convert mechanical energy to electrical response. The device undergoes deformation under the application of pressure which leads to the flow of charges back and forth between the electrodes at the top and bottom and, thus, electrical signal is produced in the external circuit. As a control, devices are fabricated out of electrospun poly(lactic acid) (PLA; non-piezoelectric) and pristine PDMS which do not exhibit any voltage generation under similar mechanical stress and thereby, eliminate the possibility of the triboelectric effect (ESI Fig. S10†). This in turn suggests the efficacy of hybrid PVDF scaffolds as a superior energy harvester. Electric polarization must be induced in the material under pressure which creates a potential difference between the electrodes. This leads to the generation of a positive voltage signal in the circuit. Further, a negative voltage signal is obtained when the stress is released and the charges move back to the electrodes. This is to mention that the in-built potential and the net charges generated diminish to zero under constant stress and the free charges are being balanced by the piezoelectric bound charges.18,52–54 A switching polarity test is carried out to confirm the output signal due to the piezoelectric properties of the fabricated device using reverse connection. Fig. S11 (ESI†) presents the polarity test being carried out at room temperature under similar conditions. It is obvious that the magnitude of the output voltage is similar with a change in polarity which substantiates that the output voltage generated is from the fabricated devices.55
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic view of the fabricated device using electrospun nanofibers; (b) output voltage response from the fabricated device using scaffolds and finger tapping mode; (c) power densities of the P, P-GO and P-GS measured as a function of applied load (resistance); (d) comparison of response obtained from instantaneous load on the prepared unimorph through a single hit, showing much better performance in the device made of P-GS; and (e) charging and discharging phenomenon of the device made of the P-GS scaffold. 
The power densities (Pd) for the devices are measured using the formula:Pd = V2/(RL × A)where, V is the output voltage generated on repeated hitting, RL is the load resistance across the device and A is the area of the device over which periodic stress is applied. The values for the power densities correspond to the data obtained for the output voltage across a variable load resistance (Fig. 3c). The maximum power density is found to be 48.3 μW cm−2 for the device made of the P-GS scaffold as compared to 33.7 and 23.4 μW cm−2 for P-GO and P, respectively. The power density and output voltage are higher than literature reported values. Alluri et al.19 reported a maximum output voltage and power density of 37.8 V and 6.3 μW cm−2 using a PVDF-activated carbon composite film. 6.8 μW cm−2 (11 V) and 4.41 μW cm−2 (4 V) were the output from the PVDF composite with a graphene + Ce3+ system and a composite bilayer film of PVDF-TrFE–GO through electrospinning, respectively.15,56 Much higher output power from the device using the functionalized graphene–PVDF hybrid is understood from the greater electroactive phase during electrospinning presumably due to better fibres arising from intense dipolar interactions. To get a clear view of the stability of the device, a unimorph has been prepared to compare the output voltage generated on application of instantaneous load through a single hit (Fig. 3d). From the response obtained from the unimorph, it can be observed that P-GS fibres produce a better output voltage (∼5 V peak-to-peak) on application of impulsive load as compared to pristine polymer fibres (∼1.8 V peak-to-peak). Importantly, the response time measured through the time after which the signal decays out is of major concern. For P-GS, the signal lasted around 75 ms as compared to pure PVDF, which is around 35 ms. This suggests that the prepared hybrid device is suitable for energy harvesting applications because of its better piezoelectric responses. Variation of the dielectric constant with applied frequency is measured at room temperature (Fig. S12†). The obtained dielectric constants are observed at 7.3, 16.2 and 21.3 for P, P-GO and P-GS, respectively. There is a substantial increase in dielectric values on incorporation of GO and GS due to the better electronic properties of GO and GS than pure PVDF.57 After obtaining a high output voltage and power density, the fabricated device is used for charging–discharging of a capacitor for storage purpose (Fig. 3e).There is substantial storage of charge under repeated application of pressure on the device which is followed by it reaching a saturation limit. The device was connected to a capacitor of capacitance of 1 μF attached to a rectifier circuit on a bread board. The maximum charge achieved in a 1 μF capacitor is ∼1.05 μC with repeated hitting using finger tapping and the time required to gain the maximum storage was around 30 seconds while the discharging phenomena occur in 35 seconds showing moderately high restoration of charge generated by the device. To confirm the storage capacity of the device it is subjected to higher capacitance as shown in the ESI (Fig. S13†). The output charges are found to be 2.09, 4.23 and 8.6 μC when the devices are associated with higher capacitances of 2.2, 4.7 and 10 μF, respectively, which in turn supports that the device is able to store charge substantially with variable capacitors. The device is quite stable mechanically under different force applications as seen from the cross sectional view of the device analyzed closely before and after force application without any rupture (Fig. S14†). The durability test of the device is also carried for 1000 seconds which suggests that the sample is stable in spite of repeated hitting for a longer period of time (ESI Fig. S15†).58
From these observations, it is evident that the hybrid scaffold especially the one using functionalized GO is appropriate for charge storage and can be a functional tool as an energy storage device. Apart from the finger tapping method, some other human movements are utilized to measure the electromechanical response of the device like foot tapping, and walking. Fig. 4a–c present the images and the corresponding output voltages and power densities from foot tapping, walking and bending phenomena, respectively. The output voltages (peak-to-peak) for foot tapping, walking and bending are ∼12, 8.2 and 6.5 V, respectively. The power densities are also calculated from these different modes across the load and are found to be 6.9, 5.2 and 3.6 μW cm−2 for foot tapping, walking and bending, respectively. Under the bending process, the amount of charge generated in the material is less as compared to that in foot tapping and walking methods because of the load applied onto the material which varies with the nature of human movements. A video has been provided in support of the observations (ESI Video SV1).†
 Fig. 4  Image of the method of measuring electromechanical responses and their corresponding output voltages and power densities from different human motions, (a) foot tapping, (b) walking, and (c) bending. 
At this juncture, it is confirmed that the addition of the functionalized nanoparticle to the PVDF leads to an increase in the amount of the electroactive phases which in turn enhances the electromechanical responses from the device. Some applications of the developed device have been examined using day to day activities, where there is waste mechanical energy. Fig. 5a–c show the application of the fabricated device in finger tapping, drawer pushing and walking over the door mat, respectively. Images of the different techniques used to power LEDs are provided for better understanding of various application processes to generate energy from waste mechanical energy. Finger tapping leads to glowing of 5 LEDs with bright illumination whereas drawer pushing and walking over door mats lead to glowing of a single LED with sufficient intensity (ESI Video SV2).† These observations open up a path to use these materials in real life applications where these devices are very useful in conserving the conventional source of energy and help, even in a minute quantity, to meet the severe energy crisis of modern days along with powering the biological implants.
 Fig. 5  Some practical applications of the fabricated devices in LED lighting from (power generations); (a) finger pressing, (b) drawer sliding, and (c) walking over the door mat. 
5. Conclusion
Electrospun nanohybrids of PVDF, graphene oxide and sulphonated graphene oxide have been processed through electrospinning after optimizing process parameters to obtain the best quality nanofibers. The consolidated nanofibers are achieved using functionalized graphene oxide as a two-dimensional filler. The electroactive phases have been found to be very high (88%) in functionalized nanofibers against meager values obtained for pure PVDF/P-GO scaffolds (59%). The appearance of electroactive phases is confirmed through a spectroscopic technique (FTIR) and two distinct melting temperatures of the β- and γ-phases in DSC thermograms. The thinner fibers for functionalized hybrids are revealed through SEM images and a model of the consolidated fibers is shown through a schematic diagram arising from greater interaction between sulphonated GO and polar PVDF chains through dipolar interactions. High piezoelectric phases of the scaffold from functionalized nanohybrids are utilized to fabricate energy harvesting devices with appropriate design to measure the electromechanical response from different human motions like finger tapping, foot tapping, walking and bending. The results show that the P-GS produced a significantly higher response (62 V and 48.3 μW cm−2 power density) in comparison with the pure PVDF scaffolds (20 V and 23.4 μW cm−2) and P-GO (45 V and 33.7 μW cm−2) arising from its better interaction with the polymer matrix. The generated power output is demonstrated to power 5 LEDs from finger tapping with high illumination intensity. Some of the common daily life applications, e.g. pulling drawers or walking over door mats, are also demonstrated to power LEDs utilizing waste mechanical energy and thereby exhibit tremendous potential for energy harvesting devices based on hybrid scaffolds from waste mechanical sources which become an effective tool for generating energy especially powering biological implants. The developed nanohybrid device with its high efficiency demonstrates its superior energy harvesting capability by utilizing waste mechanical resources.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the institute for providing a teaching assistantship. The authors also acknowledge DIC, IIT (BHU) for providing the required support in carrying out this work. The authors acknowledge Prof. Ranjan K. Singh, Department of Physics, Institute of Science, BHU for his kind support with Raman studies.
References
Y. Li, J. Z. Xu, L. Zhu, G. J. Zhong and Z. M. Li, Role of ion-dipole interactions in nucleation of gamma poly(vinylidene fluoride) in the presence of graphene oxide during melt crystallization, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 14951–14960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. B. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Graphene-based composite materials, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, A. K. Mishra, P. Khanra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Chemical functionalization of graphene and its applications, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 1061–1105 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Li, S. C. Tjong and R. K. Y. Li, Electrical conductivity and dielectric response of poly(vinylidene fluoride)-graphite nanoplatelet composites, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1912–1919 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Papageorgiou, I. A. Kinloch and R. J. Young, Mechanical properties of graphene and graphene-based nanocomposites, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 90, 75–127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, X. Huang, C. Wu and P. Jiang, Permittivity, thermal conductivity and thermal stability of poly(vinylidene fluoride)/graphene nanocomposites, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2011, 18, 478–484 CAS .
V. Eswaraiah, V. Sankaranarayanan and S. Ramaprabhu, Functionalized graphene-PVDF foam composites for EMI shielding, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2011, 296, 894–898 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Guo, G. H. Guai and C. M. Li, Graphene based materials: enhancing solar energy harvesting, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 448–452 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Graphene-Based Ultracapacitors, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Lemme, T. J. Echtermeyer, M. Baus and H. Kurz, A Graphene Field-Effect Device, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2007, 28, 282–284 CAS .
D. K. Patel, R. K. Singh, S. K. Singh, V. K. Aswal, D. Rana, B. Ray and P. Maiti, Graphene as a chain extender of polyurethanes for biomedical applications, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 58628–58640 RSC .
H. Chang and H. Wu, Graphene-based nanocomposites: preparation, functionalization, and energy and environmental applications, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3483 RSC .
D. He, Z. Kou, Y. Xiong, K. Cheng, X. Chen, M. Pan and S. Mu, Simultaneous sulfonation and reduction of graphene oxide as highly efficient supports for metal nanocatalysts, Carbon, 2014, 66, 312–319 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Patel, S. Senapati, P. Mourya, M. M. Singh, V. K. Aswal, B. Ray and P. Maiti, Functionalized Graphene Tagged Polyurethanes for Corrosion Inhibitor and Sustained Drug Delivery, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 3, 3351–3363 CrossRef CAS .
S. Garain, S. Jana, T. K. Sinha and D. Mandal, Design of in Situ Poled Ce3+-Doped Electrospun PVDF/Graphene Composite Nanofibers for Fabrication of Nanopressure Sensor and Ultrasensitive Acoustic Nanogenerator, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4532–4540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Graphene and graphene oxide: synthesis, properties, and applications, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cui, J. Gao, T. Xu, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, Polymer/Graphene Hybrids for Advanced Energy-Conversion and -Storage Materials, Chem.–Asian J., 2016, 11, 1151–1168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Bowen, H. A. Kim, P. M. Weaver and S. Dunn, Piezoelectric and ferroelectric materials and structures for energy harvesting applications, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 25–44 RSC .
N. R. Alluri, A. Chandrasekhar, J. H. Jeong and S. J. Kim, Enhanced electroactive β-phase of the sonication-process-derived PVDF-activated carbon composite film for efficient energy conversion and a battery-free acceleration sensor, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4833–4844 RSC .
H. S. Kim, J. H. Kim and J. Kim, A review of piezoelectric energy harvesting based on vibration, Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf., 2011, 12, 1129–1141 CrossRef .
I. Dakua and N. Afzulpurkar, Piezoelectric Energy Generation and Harvesting at the Nano-Scale: Materials and Devices, Nanomater. Nanotechnol., 2013, 3, 21 CrossRef .
S. Ansari and E. P. Giannelis, Functionalized graphene sheet-poly(vinylidene fluoride) conductive nanocomposites, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2009, 47, 888–897 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ramanathan, A. A. Abdala, S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, M. Herrera-Alonso, R. D. Piner, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, X. Chen, R. S. Ruoff, S. T. Nguyen, I. A. Aksay, R. K. Prud'Homme and L. C. Brinson, Functionalized graphene sheets for polymer nanocomposites, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 327–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chang, M. Dommer, C. Chang and L. Lin, Piezoelectric nanofibers for energy scavenging applications, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 356–371 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan and C. R. Bowen, Multiscale-structuring of polyvinylidene fluoride for energy harvesting: the impact of molecular-, micro- and macro-structure, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3091–3128 RSC .
L. M. Swallow, J. K. Luo, E. Siores, I. Patel and D. Dodds, A piezoelectric fibre composite based energy harvesting device for potential wearable applications, Smart Mater. Struct., 2008, 17(2), 025017 CrossRef .
P. Martins, A. C. Lopes and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Electroactive phases of poly(vinylidene fluoride): determination, processing and applications, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 683–706 CrossRef CAS .
O. Prakash, K. K. Jana, R. Jain, P. Shah, M. Manohar, V. K. Shahi and P. Maiti, Functionalized poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoro propylene) membrane for fuel cell, Polymer, 2018, 151, 261–268 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gaur, C. Kumar, S. Tiwari and P. Maiti, Efficient Energy Harvesting Using Processed Poly(vinylidene fluoride) Nanogenerator, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 17, 3019–3024 CrossRef .
A. Baji, Y. W. Mai, Q. Li and Y. Liu, Electrospinning induced ferroelectricity in poly(vinylidene fluoride) fibers, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3068–3071 RSC .
S. Tiwari, A. Gaur, C. Kumar and P. Maiti, Enhanced piezoelectric response in nanoclay induced electrospun PVDF nanofibers for energy harvesting, Energy, 2019, 171, 485–492 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gaur, C. Kumar, R. Shukla and P. Maiti, Induced Piezoelectricity in Poly(vinylidene fluoride) Hybrid as Efficient Energy Harvester, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 8278–8287 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kumar, A. Gaur, S. K. Rai and P. Maiti, Piezo devices using poly(vinylidene fluoride)/reduced graphene oxide hybrid for energy harvesting, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2017, 12, 174–181 CrossRef CAS .
A. Al-Saygh, D. Ponnamma, M. A. A. AlMaadeed, P. Poornima Vijayan, A. Karim and M. K. Hassan, Flexible pressure sensor based on PVDF nanocomposites containing reduced graphene oxide-titania hybrid nanolayers, Polymers, 2017, 9, 33 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Sorayani Bafqi, R. Bagherzadeh and M. Latifi, Fabrication of composite PVDF-ZnO nanofiber mats by electrospinning for energy
scavenging application with enhanced efficiency, J. Polym. Res., 2015, 22, 130 CrossRef .
V. Vivekananthan, N. R. Alluri, A. Chandrasekhar, Y. Purusothaman, A. Gupta and S. J. Kim, Zero-power consuming intruder identification system by enhanced piezoelectricity of K0.5Na0.5NbO3 using substitutional doping of BTO NPs, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(25), 7563–7571 RSC .
S. Hajra, M. Sahu, V. Purohit and R. N. P. Choudhary, Dielectric, conductivity and ferroelectric properties of lead-free electronic ceramic: 0.6 Bi (Fe0.98Ga0.02)O3-0.4 BaTiO3, Heliyon, 2019, 5(5), e01654 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sahu, S. K. Pradhan, S. Hajra, B. K. Panigrahi and R. N. P. Choudhary, Studies of structural, electrical, and excitation performance of electronic material: europium substituted 0.9 (Bi0.5Na0.5TiO3)–0.1 (PbZr0.48Ti0.52O3), Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2019, 125(3), 183 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kumar, A. Gaur, S. Tiwari, A. Biswas, S. K. Rai and P. Maiti, Bio-waste polymer hybrid as induced piezoelectric material with high energy harvesting efficiency, Compos. Commun., 2019, 11, 56–61 CrossRef .
R. K. Layek, S. Samanta, D. P. Chatterjee and A. K. Nandi, Physical and mechanical properties of poly(methyl methacrylate) -functionalized graphene/poly(vinylidine fluoride) nanocomposites: piezoelectric β polymorph formation, Polymer, 2010, 51, 5846–5856 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Zhang, S. L. Jiang, Y. Yu, Y. K. Zeng, G. Z. Zhang, Q. F. Zhang and J. G. He, Crystallization behavior and phase-transformation mechanism with the use of graphite nanosheets in poly(vinylidene fluoride) nanocomposites, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 125, E314–E319 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ali, Z. S. Khan, M. Jamil, Y. Khan, N. Ahmad and S. Ahmed, Simultaneous reduction and sulfonation of graphene oxide for efficient hole selectivity in polymer solar cells, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2018, 18, 599–610 CrossRef .
F. Li, X. Jiang, J. Zhao and S. Zhang, Graphene oxide: a promising nanomaterial for energy and environmental applications, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 488–515 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Shi, S. Wu and H. Zhou, Sulfonated graphene oxide: the new and effective material for synthesis of polystyrene-based nanocomposites, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2013, 9, 2061–2068 CrossRef .
M. M. Abolhasani, K. Shirvanimoghaddam and M. Naebe, PVDF/graphene composite nanofibers with enhanced piezoelectric performance for development of robust nanogenerators, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2017, 138, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
O. Prakash, K. K. Jana, M. Manohar, V. K. Shahi, S. A. Khan, D. Avasthi and P. Maiti, Fabrication of a low-cost functionalized poly(vinylidene fluoride) nanohybrid membrane for superior fuel cells, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3(5), 1269–1282 RSC .
V. K. Tiwari, A. K. Prasad, V. Singh, K. K. Jana, M. Misra, C. D. Prasad and P. Maiti, Nanoparticle and process induced super toughened piezoelectric hybrid materials: the effect of stretching on filled system, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 5595–5603 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gaur, R. Shukla, B. Kumar, A. Pal, S. Chatterji, R. Ranjan and P. Maiti, Processing and nanoclay induced piezoelectricity in poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoro propylene) nanohybrid for device application, Polymer, 2016, 97, 362–369 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Karan, D. Mandal and B. B. Khatua, Self-powered flexible Fe-doped RGO/PVDF nanocomposite: an excellent material for a piezoelectric energy harvester, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10655–10666 RSC .
S. Ayyaru and Y. H. Ahn, Application of sulfonic acid group functionalized graphene oxide to improve hydrophilicity, permeability, and antifouling of PVDF nanocomposite ultrafiltration membranes, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 525, 210–219 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maiti, S. Kumar Karan, J. Lee, A. Kumar Mishra, B. Bhusan Khatua and J. Kon Kim, Bio-waste onion skin as an innovative nature-driven piezoelectric material with high energy conversion efficiency, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 282–293 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chang, V. H. Tran, J. Wang, Y. K. Fuh and L. Lin, Direct-write piezoelectric polymeric nanogenerator with high energy conversion efficiency, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 726–731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Karan, R. Bera, S. Paria, A. K. Das, S. Maiti, A. Maitra and B. B. Khatua, An Approach to Design Highly Durable Piezoelectric Nanogenerator Based on Self-Poled PVDF/AlO-rGO Flexible Nanocomposite with High Power Density and Energy Conversion Efficiency, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–12 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Xu, N. Yao and Y. Shi, 1.6 V nanogenerator for mechanical energy harvesting using PZT nanofibers, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2133–2137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Ghosh and D. Mandal, Efficient natural piezoelectric nanogenerator: electricity generation from fish swim bladder, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 356–365 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bhavanasi, V. Kumar, K. Parida, J. Wang and P. S. Lee, Enhanced Piezoelectric Energy Harvesting Performance of Flexible PVDF-TrFE Bilayer Films with Graphene Oxide, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 521–529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Wankhade, S. Tiwari, A. Gaur and P. Maiti, PVDF–PZT nanohybrid based nanogenerator for energy harvesting applications, Energy Rep., 2020, 6, 358–364 CrossRef .
A. Gaur, S. Tiwari, C. Kumar and P. Maiti, Bio-based Piezoelectric Nanogenerator for Mechanical Energy Harvesting using Nanohybrid of Poly(vinylidene fluoride), Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 3200–3211 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se00033gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Optical images of the electrospun nanofibers indicated (P, P-GO and P-GS); (b) SEM micrographs of the prepared fibers; (c) fibre diameter distributions of P, P-GO and P-GS, obtained from SEM micrographs; and (d) UV-vis spectra of pristine PVDF and its nanohybrid fibres showing the absorption peak positions.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of the indicated fibres (inset shows the deconvoluted patterns of P); (b) phase fraction of the electrospun nanofibers calculated from the deconvolution of XRD peaks. α, β and γ represent the obtained phases; (c) FTIR spectra of P, P-GO and P-GS indicating the peaks of the obtained phases; (d) DSC thermograms of the indicated nanofibers showing the melting temperatures and phases of the prepared scaffolds; (e) TGA thermograms of P, P-GO and P-GS; and (f) schematic representation of the change in the fibre dimension and possible alignment of the nanofiber in the presence of fillers.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic view of the fabricated device using electrospun nanofibers; (b) output voltage response from the fabricated device using scaffolds and finger tapping mode; (c) power densities of the P, P-GO and P-GS measured as a function of applied load (resistance); (d) comparison of response obtained from instantaneous load on the prepared unimorph through a single hit, showing much better performance in the device made of P-GS; and (e) charging and discharging phenomenon of the device made of the P-GS scaffold.	 
Pd = V2/(RL × A)

 	Fig. 4  Image of the method of measuring electromechanical responses and their corresponding output voltages and power densities from different human motions, (a) foot tapping, (b) walking, and (c) bending.	 

 	Fig. 5  Some practical applications of the fabricated devices in LED lighting from (power generations); (a) finger pressing, (b) drawer sliding, and (c) walking over the door mat.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se00033g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
