Light-assisted electrochemical water-splitting at very low bias voltage using metal-free polythiophene as photocathode at high pH in a full-cell setup ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE03669H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE03669H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1335-1342Light-assisted electrochemical water-splitting at very low bias voltage using metal-free polythiophene as photocathode at high pH in a full-cell setup†

        
          
            Kouki 
            Oka
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Orie 
            Tsujimura
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Takeo 
            Suga
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hiroyuki 
            Nishide
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Bjorn 
            Winther-Jensen
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Applied Chemistry, Waseda University, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan. E-mail: nishide@waseda.jp
bDepartment of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan. E-mail: bjornwj@aoni.waseda.jp
Received 
      29th December 2017
    , Accepted 23rd March 2018First published on 4th April 2018AbstractWe report the use of polyterthiophenes (PTTh) as a rare, combined light-harvester and catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction at high pH. Illuminated PTTh in combination with a MnOx anode in a two-electrode setup exhibited stable water-splitting at a bias-potential of only 0.3 V at pH 12. This confirms that PTTh used as photocathode can produce photovoltages of at least 900 mV for the hydrogen evolution reaction at high pH and is therefore a suitable match for traditional water-oxidation catalysts such as MnOx, CoOx, and RuOx. Films of PTTh were fabricated using a novel, metal-free method where iodine vapor is used as oxidant; thus, previously observed interference from metal residuals was omitted and thereby a gravimetric photo electrocatalytic conversion rate of 330 mmol(H2) h−1 g−1 was achieved in phosphate buffer (pH 7) at 0 V vs. RHE. A striking property of this new strand of polythiophene was an “inverse” correlation (compared to that predicted using the Nernstian relationship) between the onset potential for the light-assisted water reduction reaction and pH: the potential (vs. RHE) required for a given current was more positive at higher pH, which is not observed for other (photo-) electrocatalytic materials, and indicates that the charge neutralization of PTTh (rather than the pH) guides the onset potential.

Broader context
In the quest for developing materials that can be a part of devices facilitating light-driven water-splitting, it is essential to find combinations of anode and cathode materials that operate in the same electrolyte environment, especially at the same pH. However, there are virtually no light-assisted cathode materials that operate at high pH. The ability of polyterthiophene, employed in this study, to facilitate the water reduction reaction under visible light irradiation at high pH in a full-cell setup with a photovoltage of at least 900 mV indicates a novel strand of light-assisted catalysts that can be matched to conventional anode materials such as MnOx and CoOx. The light-assisted hydrogen evolution on polyterthiophene developed in this work shows a non-Nernstian pH dependency, where the sufficient neutralization of the polymer is guiding the onset for catalytic activity. This aspect paves the way for developing new organic thiophene-based polymeric catalysts for water reduction, whose band position and band gap can be engineered to match various pH conditions.

Introduction
Photovoltaic energy and wind power have become economically viable for the production of electrical power. This is a very encouraging and necessary development and the total capacity of these renewable sources is increasing at a remarkable speed. However, approximately 75% of the world's energy consumption is in the form of fuels rather than electricity, and therefore methods to produce fuels from renewable sources are rapidly becoming a main topic of research. The concept of producing fuel, particularly in the form of hydrogen via water-splitting, directly from sunlight is a very appealing possibility, which would have significant environmental, economic, and geopolitical consequences if realized in a simple and cost-efficient manner.
Most research in this area has focused on inorganic materials as light-absorbers and catalysts for photochemical water-splitting, where significant progress has been achieved. Extensive investigation of a wide range and combinations of materials has covered both “pure” photocatalysts, where one material acts as both light-harvester and catalyst, and systems where a light-harvester is combined with a traditional catalyst such as Pt. The figure of merit used for comparing different catalysts and systems for hydrogen evolution is usually the gravimetric rate of the catalyst, expressed in mol(H2) h−1 g−1. For photocatalysts only acting on the cathodic side of the water-splitting reaction (where a bias or a sacrificial agent is added to achieve adequate oxidation reaction), recently, catalytic rates as high as 5–20 mmol(H2) h−1 g−1 have been reported using various material combinations.1–5 Very recently structural engineering of MoS2/TiO2 heterostructures has achieved record catalytic rates of 580 mmol h−1 g−1 (based only on the amount of MoS2) when using methanol as the sacrificial agent.6
For systems where complete light-driven water-splitting is achieved using combinations of photo-cathodes and photo-anodes via a “two photons per electron” strategy, remarkable progress has been reported in the last couple of years. Domen et al. reported a SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au BiVO4:Mo/Au system with a gravimetric rate of 2 mmol(H2) h−1 g−1,7 and Muhler et al. achieved a rate of 42 mmol(H2) h−1 g−1 by employing a RhxCr2−xO3/Ga2O3 system.8
There have been an increasing number of reports using organic materials for light-assisted hydrogen evolution in the literature. These cover the use of organic molecules as either light-harvesting materials and/or catalysts for the water reduction reaction. In a recent paper by Fonzo et al.,9 a bulk heterojunction design based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):PCBM was used as light-harvester combined with Pt as the catalyst for the reduction of protons to hydrogen. A photovoltage of approximately 500 mV was reported at pH 1.37. The employed MoO3 hole-conduction layer in the device showed degradation in the electrolyte and limited the lifetime to approximately 2 h. Similarly, Yu et al. used a conjugated macromolecular structure for light-harvesting but as a porous photocatalyst in combination with sacrificial agents (to achieve an anodic reaction).10 The presence of residual Pd from the polymerization process or the intentional addition of Pt significantly increased the rate up to approximately 8.6 mmol(H2) h−1 g−1. Cooper et al. used linear poly(p-phenylene) with various co-monomers (planarized fluorene, carbazole, dibenzo-[b,d]thiophene, or dibenzo-[b,d]thiophene sulfone) to extend the light absorption in to the visible range and employed these new copolymers as photocatalysts with sacrificial agents similar to the study by Yu et al.11 A maximum rate of 5.8 mmol(H2) h−1 g−1 was reported. No research into the effect of residual metallic catalyst from the polymerization process was performed by the authors in this study.
For achieving an efficient water-splitting device, it is evident that both anode and cathode must be able to function in the same electrolyte—in particular, at the same pH. Most anode materials for water oxidation, at low over-potential (MnOx, CoOx, etc.), exhibit optimum working conditions in alkaline media and it has been difficult to match this working environment in the development of cathode materials. Thus, hydrogen evolution catalysts—in particular light-assisted ones—that can operate efficiently at neutral and high pH are in high demand.
One strand of recent work on light-assisted water-splitting has focused on anode materials operating in the neutral pH range of 6–9 and these materials have, in some cases, been reported in full-cell experiments with platinum as the cathode for hydrogen evolution.12–15 The general construction of these anodes involves the combination of a traditional light-absorbing inorganic semiconductor with well-known water oxidation catalysts such as Co–Pi, FeOOH/NiOOH, or IrO2.12–15 Notably, these electrodes have been demonstrated to operate in water-splitting cells with bias potentials as low as 0.3 V (with Pt counter-electrode).14
To the best of our knowledge, similar reports on full-cell water-splitting evaluations, where the cathode side of the cell is light-assisted, have not been reported.
Recently, it has been discovered that the conjugated polymer polybithiophene (PBTh) exhibits significant photo-electrochemical catalytic activity for the hydrogen evolution reaction.16–18 Initially, vapor-phase polymerization (VPP) using Fe(III)-containing oxidants was used to produce thin films of PBTh and these exhibited photo-enhanced water reductions with negative over-potentials.16–18 Fortunately, polythiophenes investigated for photo-enhanced hydrogen evolution also exhibited stability over days of continuous use.9,17 The vapor phase polymerization with Fe(III) as the oxidant has been developed to produce homogeneous thin films of common conducting polymers such as polythiophenes and polypyrrole with high conductivities and good electrochemical properties.19–21 Unfortunately, the removal of iron species from the film after polymerization has proven to be difficult for both PEDOT and PBTh.17,22 When the conducting polymer films are intended for electrocatalytic materials, these impurities have proven to be a major issue, either enhancing or inhibiting the catalytic activity as compared to the conducting polymer itself.17,22 The unwanted activity of the Fe residuals also leads to significant reproducibility problems because the ease of removal of the impurities depends on the thickness, humidity (formation of FeO), etc.
Herein, we report an alternative polymerization method using iodine-vapor-assisted polymerization (IVP), which was developed and employed to produce metal-free polyterthiophene (PTTh) films. IVP-PTTh exhibits a non-Nernstian dependence of pH and thus, it facilitates light-assisted hydrogen evolution at high pH with high negative over-potential. This property is explored in full-cell experiments with MnOx as the anode material for a water-splitting device with low bias.
Experimental
Iodine-vapor-assisted polymerization (IVP) of terthiophene
PTTh films were polymerized after spin coating terthiophene (TTh) (from TCI) from a solution. Approximately 0.5 mL of the solution was spin coated onto a glassy carbon substrate (cleaned by UV–ozone) at 1500 rpm for 25 s. The TTh-coated sample was subsequently placed in a pre-heated chamber with iodine (from TCI), and it was heated and polymerized in an oven at a temperature of 90 °C for 1 h. The sample was subsequently removed and washed, and thereafter soaked overnight in acetonitrile. After soaking, the sample was rinsed once more and thereafter dried in air.
Substrates
Each substrate was sonicated in chloroform for 1 h, rinsed in acetone, and cleaned with UV–ozone prior to polymerization. Polymerization was performed as previously described, except for the replacement of glassy carbon with the appropriate substrate.
Preparation of MnOx films
MnOx films were prepared according to the procedures described in the literature (see ESI†). Ethylammonium nitrate (EAN) was first prepared by neutralizing ethylamine with dilute nitric acid, followed by the removal of water under reduced pressure using rotary evaporation at 70 °C for 2 h. Manganese oxide (MnOx) films were prepared via electrodeposition in a three-electrode electrochemical setup using EAN. The deposition electrolyte (50 mL in volume) contained 10 mM Mn(CH3COO)2 in a 1:9 water-to-EAN mixture. It was acidified slightly by adding 125 μL of 4.0 M HNO3 to obtain 10 mM excess acid. Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) conducting glass with an area of 5 cm × 3 cm was used as the substrate for film deposition (the area of deposition was 2.5 cm × 3.0 cm). The MnOx film was electrodeposited at 120 °C by applying a constant current density of 200 μA cm−2. The deposition was performed for 5 min. After deposition, the films were rinsed thoroughly with distilled water.
Full-cell testing
The full-cell testing was performed in a custom-built two-compartment “tandem” setup made from PVC. PTTh films on glassy carbon were used as the cathode and MnOx on FTO was used as the anode in a two-electrode configuration. The PTTh was used as the working electrode and MnOx used as both the counter and reference electrodes. Only PTTh was illuminated. An initial cyclic voltammetry (CV) scan was performed to verify photoelectrocatalysis before CA measurements were performed at different bias potentials. Light was only shone on the PTTh cathode. Subsequently, 5 mL gas chromatography (GC) injections into the gas chromatograph (GC-8A, SHIMADZU, MS-5A column, Ar carrier) were performed and the resulting hydrogen peak at 1.96 min was recorded. The rate of hydrogen production was calculated (Ar flow rate 5 mL min−1) from the area under the GC trace using an equipment-specific calibration curve. The hydrogen evolution rate was used for conversion to faradaic efficiency.
Electrolytes and pH
Phosphate solutions with different pH values were prepared using varying ratios of NaH2PO4 and Na2HPO4 dissolved in water. At pH 9, the solution was almost entirely Na2HPO4. Further, 10 mol L−1 of NaOH was added to increase the alkalinity to achieve the pH of 11, 12 and 13. The pH of each electrolyte solution was tested prior to the studies using a Mettler Toledo pH meter. Tests were performed at various pH values on the same PTTh film but a new area was utilized for each electrolyte. Ar was bubbled through the cell for 20 min prior to testing, and subsequently, the CV and CA tests were performed.
Electrochemical testing
A standard three-electrode setup was used for all the procedures except the full-cell experiments. Unless otherwise stated, the counter and reference electrodes used were glassy carbon and Ag/AgCl, respectively. An initial CV scan was performed for all the samples prior to testing to confirm the photoelectrocatalytic behavior. Illumination was provided by an Asahi Spectra Co. MAX-302 300 W Xe lamp with an equivalent power of 1.0 sun at the distance of the PTTh photocathode (5 cm).
Interaction between light and PTTh
CV and CA measurements of the glassy carbon PTTh films were performed under Ar (5 mL min−1) to assess the performance of the film. CA measurements were obtained by applying a potential of −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 1 h under illumination. GC measurements were conducted concurrent to the CA measurements. UV-Vis spectroscopy of the PTTh films polymerized on glass slides was performed on a Jasco V670 spectrophotometer to determine the absorbance.
Material characterization
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (accelerating voltage of 5 kV) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectra (accelerating voltage of 25 kV) were obtained using the HITACHI S-4500S SEM and HITACHI S-3000N SEM. X-ray diffraction (XRD) images were obtained using Rigaku RINT-Ultima.
A Renishaw inVia Reflex Raman system with a 532 nm and 785 nm diode laser was used for the Raman characterization.
The thickness of the polymer film was measured using a KLA Tencor.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, JPS-9010TR) with Mg K and Al K radiation was carried out. The electron binding energy of the XPS was referred to the C 1s peak at 284.6 eV. XPS intensities were calculated by integrating peak areas after background subtraction.
Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization (MALDI, AUTOFLEX (Bruker)) was performed on IVP-PTTh coated onto ITO substrate.
The resistance of the as-polymerized PTTh films was measured using a two-line setup. A 2.5 cm-wide glass-slide coated with two gold lines (2.5 cm apart) facilitated the direct measurement of resistance (using a multimeter) of the PTTh films, yielding the sheet resistance in ohm sq−1.
The resistance through PTTh film on glassy carbon was measured in a DC setup after removal of Iodine from the PTTh by washing in acetonitrile (before any electrochemical measurements). Gold-coated mylar was sandwiched with the PTTh coated glassy carbon between two glass slides. Care was taken to prevent any contact between edges of the glassy carbon and the gold. The I–V measurement showed a linear correlation, confirming ohmic conditions (Fig. S1, ESI†). The measurement was done in triplet for both coated and uncoated glassy carbon and the average resistance was 4.2 ohm cm2 for 75 nm thick PTTh films (after subtracting the average value for the uncoated glassy carbon substrates).
Results and discussion
Toward metal-free polymerization of terthiophene
The traditional electro-polymerization was first investigated in order to discover polymerization methods to produce metal-free polythiophene. However, despite several attempts with varying conditions, light-enhanced hydrogen evolution was never observed on the obtained polythiophene film. The formation of PTTh nanowalls has been reported, where the oxidant SO3 was derived from the decomposition of para-toluenesulphonic acid at elevated temperature.23 Unfortunately, the formation of PTTh nanowalls only occurred where there was a template in the form of a PBTh film produced with Fe(III) as the oxidant. When changing the polymerization parameters (see ESI†), a change in the ratio between PBTh film and PTTh nanowalls was possible and thereby, a larger fraction of PTTh nanowalls could be obtained (see S2a and S2b, ESI†). They were used for the testing of the photoelectrocatalytic activity toward the hydrogen evolution reaction on the PTTh nanowalls. The CVs under illumination (see S2c, ESI†) exhibited a significant increase in the catalytic current compared to the PBTh film without PTTh nanowalls. This result indicates that PTTh exhibits photoelectrocatalytic activity for the hydrogen evolution reaction and highlights the benefit in avoiding Fe(III) as the oxidant.
In order to further investigate the use of metal-free oxidants, a novel and simple polymerization procedure,24i.e., the IVP of TTh, was adopted. TTh was spin coated onto a glass or glassy carbon substrate from a solution and subsequently exposed to I2 vapor at 90 °C for 1 h in a closed container (see Fig. 1a). The high melting temperature of TTh (93 °C) prevented the evaporation of TTh prior to the polymerization. After polymerization, the oxidized PTTh formed a blue-black film on the substrate, which was reduced by removing excess oxidant using heat and/or washing in ethanol or acetonitrile (AN) (see Fig. 1a). The as-produced oxidized PTTh films exhibited conductivities of 3–5 S cm−1, which are within the normal range for oxidized PTTh.25 Similarly, the CV results (Fig. S3, ESI†) in AN demonstrated the redox behavior typical for polythiophenes.19
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the iodine-vapor-assisted polymerization procedure for TTh polymerization. The as-polymerized PTTh films are in the oxidized, conducting state, and are reduced during washing in ethanol or acetonitrile by the removal of excess I2 and I−. (b) SEM image of the optimized IVP-PTTh film, (spin coating TTh solution in chlorobenzene (40 mg mL−1) at 1500 rpm for 25 s prior to oxidation with I2 vapor). 
After the PTTh was reduced by washing in AN, the conductivity was measured (in the direction through the film) to 1.8 μS cm−1, which is in the expected range for reduced polythiophene.25
The possibility of oxidative damaged or incorporation of iodine species in the PTTh during the polymerization was investigated by XPS measurements (see Fig. 2 and Fig. S4, ESI†). The survey spectra (Fig. 2a) and the zoom-in of the I 3d region (Fig. S4b, ESI†) shows no significant peak for iodine and the atomic% of iodine was detected to 0.02%, which is close to the detection-limit for the instrument. The carbon and sulphur peaks showed no sign of higher oxidation states than expected for PTTh (see curve-fits in Fig. 2b and c) – i.e. no sign of over-oxidation or incorporation of iodine as part of the polymer structure was observed.
 Fig. 2  XPS measurements of IVP-PTTh coated on glassy carbon. (a) Survey spectra; (b) high-resolution of carbon 1s region with curvefit to only one carbon species plus the π–π* shake-up satellite; (c) high-resolution of sulphur 2p region with curvefit to the expected 1:2 ratio of 2p1/2 and 2p3/2. 
It should also be noted that no residual metal species (like Fe) was found in the PTTh films using XPS measurements or Raman spectroscopy (see Fig. S13, ESI†).
pH dependency of the hydrogen evolution reaction on IVP-PTTh
The electrocatalytic properties of the IVP-PTTh films were optimized by changing the solvent and monomer concentration (and thereby film thickness) of the casting solution (see S5–S7, ESI†). A significant dependency of solvent for the spin-coating solution was observed and SEM images (Fig. S6, ESI†) revealed that the choice of solvent resulted in films with different morphology, where smoother films exhibited better electro-catalytic properties. An SEM image of the optimized IVP-PTTh film is shown in Fig. 1b. It can be observed that the surface is not entirely smooth, but demonstrates surface features on the approximately 100 nm scale. It was not feasible to obtain perfectly smooth films. This is a consequence of the facile crystallization of TTh prior to polymerization, and that the morphology of the crystalline structure is maintained during the polymerization process (see below).
The amount of H2 was determined using GC, and its production on an optimized IVP-PTTh film under illumination could thus be calculated as 3.7 μmol h−1 cm−2 at pH 7 and 0 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) (i.e., −0.61 V vs. Ag/AgCl). This corresponds to a gravimetric rate of 330 mmol h−1 g−1, which is exceptionally high for photocatalytic materials1–5,7,8 and illustrates the immense potential of the PTTh material.
During the light-assisted catalysis at different pH values, it was observed that the IVP-PTTh had a non-Nernstian pH dependency with regard to water reduction (Fig. 3a). This surprising result obtained by varying pH values for the metal-free IVP-PTTh is in contrast to traditional inorganic catalysts such as Pt, Pd, Ir, and MoSx and also in contrast to previously reported PBTh polymerized with Fe(III)PTS as the oxidant, where a traditional Nernstian shift with pH was observed.17
 Fig. 3  (a) Cyclic voltammetry at 1 mV s−1 under illumination at different pH (forward sweeps). The current density is plotted against RHE; (b) current density under illumination at 0 V vs. RHE at different pH; (c) resistance of IVP-PTTh on an interdigitated Pt electrode at different pH; (d) cyclic voltammetry at 20 mV s−1 under illumination at higher pH. 

Fig. 3a shows the water reduction reaction under illumination at various pH values plotted against RHE to compensate for the Nernstian effect of pH on the hydrogen evolution reaction. The scan rate was maintained low (1 mV s−1) to suppress the capacitive effects, and the strength of the electrolyte was 0.1 M at all pH.
It can be observed from Fig. 3a that the onset potential of the photocatalytic reaction relative to RHE shifted to higher positive values at higher pH (where a traditional Nernstian dependency of pH would exhibit the same onset potential when plotted against RHE). The significance of the non-Nernstian behavior is illustrated in Fig. 3b, where the current density at 0 V vs. RHE is plotted at various pH for the metal-free IVP-PTTh compared to PBTh made with Fe(III) as oxidant (data collected from ref. 17). Fig. 3b exhibit a steep increase in current density at 0 V vs. RHE for the IVP-PTTh with increasingly higher pH, where a slight decrease in current densities is observed for PBTh as pH increases. This significantly underlines the advantages of IVP-PTTh when used at higher pH.
The light-assisted hydrogen evolution on PBTh has previously been shown to depend on the oxidation state of polythiophene26 in that the polythiophene must reach a state close to neutral before acting as the light-assisted electrocatalyst. This is not surprising as oxidized polythiophene domains act as electron traps for excited electrons, preventing electron transfer to the water reduction process. The redox reaction of polythiophene itself does not involve any proton-dependency17 and should thus be independent of pH. The results in Fig. 3a therefore suggest that the neutralization of the PTTh is more important for the onset of the hydrogen evolution reaction than the effect of pH, i.e., the neutralization effect “overrules” the expected Nernstian dependency of pH. When the potential sweep curves were plotted as measured (vs. Ag/AgCl, Fig. S8, ESI†), only a minor shift in the onset potential was observed (especially at higher pH), demonstrating that the water reduction reaction started at approximately similar potentials.
Notably, the conductivity and thereby the oxidation state of polythiophenes in contact with water have been reported to be dependent on the pH, in particular for PEDOT.27 Higher pH leads to lower oxidation state of polythiophenes and thus possibly easier charge neutralization. In order to investigate the pH as a possible factor influencing the neutralization of IVP-PTTh—and thereby the position of the onset potential—the resistance of the IVP-PTTh films at different pH values was measured in a separate experiment using an intercalating Pt electrode (Fig. 3c). The resistance of IVP-PTTh exhibits an increase with an increase in the pH, indicating that the polymer is more neutral at higher pH, and it is suggested that this contributes to the effect of pH observed in Fig. 3a, b and Fig. S8 (ESI†), making higher pH favorable for the water reduction on IVP-PTTh.
The significant effect at higher pH of the non-Nernstian behavior seen in Fig. 3a and b warrant a closer look at the possible reasons for this unusual phenomenon. Firstly, the potential of the excited state of PTTh is significantly below the E0 for the water reduction (i.e. at ∼−1.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl (independent of pH), where E0 at pH 12 is −0.91 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Please also see energy diagram in Fig. S9, ESI†), so the excited electrons already represent a significant “over-potential” which could help mask a pH dependence. Secondly, the neutralization of PTTh is crucial for the semi-conductor to exhibit a band-structure where the excited electrons are not instantly trapped in oxidized segments of the polymer. As mentioned above, this neutralization is more favourable in basic environment, which means that the onset potential of the water-reduction is increasing to more positive values at higher pH (thus opposite the expectation from a Nernstian system). The linear trend of the increase in current density at 0 V vs. RHE seen in Fig. 3b for IVP-PTTh suggests that, not only the onset potential has a non-Nernstian behaviour but also that, the rate of increase in current density is independent of pH (i.e. the concentration of protons). This leads to the third consideration, namely that water is the reactant on IVP-PTTh rather than protons. On the other hand, for PBTh from Fe(III)PTS as oxidant, where a ∼Nernstian behaviour is observed (Fig. 3b), it would imply that the residual Fe species not only participate in the charge-transfer pass but (also) in a catalytic mechanism with protons as reactants. Our ongoing investigation of other metal-free semi-conducting polymers which contains the thiophene motif is indeed suggesting that the derivation from Nernstian behavior is common for this group of materials and not a unique property of PTTh.
Many catalysts for the water oxidation reaction such as MnOx, CoOx, and NiOOH have a preferred operation at pH above 12. In order to explore the possibility of using IVP-PTTh in combination with these catalysts, the pH range of 11 to 13 was investigated. Fig. 3d shows that the onset potential of the water reduction reaction on IVP-PTTh under illumination is almost constant versus Ag/AgCl; thus, IVP-PTTh continues to be active at very high pH and the trend in onset potential observed at lower pH is maintained. However, at higher pH (i.e. pH > 11), a gradual decrease in the current is observed.
Full-cell water-splitting at high pH
The unique properties of the IVP-PTTh electrode render it very suitable for use in combination with traditional high-pH water-oxidation catalysts. A tandem electrochemical cell-setup (see Fig. S11, ESI†) was employed to explore the possibilities of achieving light-enhanced water-splitting at moderate applied bias. Electrodeposited MnOx on FTO (see S10, ESI†) was used as the catalyst for the water oxidation.

Fig. 4a shows the CV of the combined IVP-PTTh/MnOx cell in a two-electrode setup, where MnOx acts as both the counter and reference electrodes. The CV indicates that the main onset of water-splitting with (only) IVP-PTTh under illumination (1 sun) was at a bias voltage of approximately 1 V. However, when CA measurements were performed (Fig. 4b), stable currents were achieved at a bias potential of only 0.3 V and hydrogen evolution was confirmed using GC (Fig. 4c) (for longer-time CA measurements on IVP-PTTh; please see Fig. S5a for half-cell, pH 7 and S11b for full-cell, pH 12, ESI†). The faradaic efficiencies were calculated to be 82%, 84%, and 91% at 1.23 V, 1.0 V, and 0.3 V, respectively. The gravimetric rates of catalysis for IVP-PTTh under these conditions were calculated to be 24.4 mmol h−1 g−1 at the bias potential of 1.23 V, decreasing to 0.45 mmol h−1 g−1 at the bias potential of 0.3 V.
 Fig. 4  Measurements with a tandem cell at pH 12 (0.1 M sodium phosphate/sodium hydrogen–phosphate buffer) using IVP-PTTh (under illumination) and MnOx as cathode and anode, respectively (a) potential sweeps without and with illumination at 20 mV s−1. (b) CA measurements under illumination with various applied bias potentials (vs. MnOx) (c) GC traces of evolved H2 during the experiments in (b). 
The production of hydrogen at high faradaic efficiency at the bias potential of only 0.3 V is encouraging as it shows that the IVP-PTTh material is capable of providing a photovoltage of at least 900 mV at pH 12. Although the photocurrent at this potential is low, it enables the assumption that future optimization will lead to significant improvement of the photocurrents obtained. In organic polymeric semiconductors such as PTTh, the formation of excitons via light excitation is dominant in contrast to a more direct separation of charge observed in traditional inorganic semiconductors. The excitons must travel to a junction where the charge separation can occur in order to contribute to the overall function of the photoelectrocatalyst. In the present case, we assume that the junction is the interphase to water where the electrons can participate in the water reduction reaction and the holes can be transported to the electrode via PTTh (similar to the bulk heterojunction solar-cell). The maximum pass-way for excitons in polythiophenes is <10 nm,28 which means that ideal flat and dense PTTh films should reach optimal performance at a thickness of ∼10 nm and any additional thickness would only result in increased resistance. The optimal thickness found in the current work is ∼75 nm for film cast from chlorobenzene, which then implies that the IVP-PTTh films obtained are NOT flat and dense but rather have “features” that allows water to be close to more (than expected) possible photon absorption sites in the PTTh. This observation underlines that the 3D structure, porosity, and overall thickness of the PTTh layer become extremely significant for minimizing the average pass-length required for the excitons to reach the water interphase and for minimizing the ohmic resistance within the PTTh layer. Accordingly, the immediate tasks are, in principle, similar to the development achieved in the early years of bulk heterojunction solar-cell research.
Molecular ordering in IVP-PTTh
As mentioned above, this pH behavior of IVP-PTTh is different from the previously reported behavior of Fe(III)-PBTh. The difference may be due to the residual Fe species acting as the co-catalysts in the case of Fe(III)-VPP-PBTh; however, it may be an inherent property of IVP-PTTh and would thus highlight that IVP-PTTh is a different strand of polythiophene with particular properties.
Polythiophenes polymerized using electrochemical or oxidative polymerization with Fe(III) salts as the oxidant do not exhibit any form of ordering detectable by XRD.25,29 The terthiophene monomer, however, is well known to easily form highly-ordered, crystalline structures. The structure of TTh was reported by van Bolhuis et al.30 using single-crystal XRD measurements. It is monoclinic (a = 15.4 Å, b = 5.7 Å, and c = 26.1 Å) with the space group P21/c and has a lamellar packing of TTh molecules with a fishbone packing of neighboring molecules.29–32 By using I2 vapor as the oxidant on the already cast and solid terthiophene, there is a possibility that the obtained films may contain some degree of ordering and thereby have different characteristics. The XRD patterns of TTh films before and after polymerization are shown in Fig. 5a. The pattern of TTh before IVP is consistent with the literature reports,29–32 where it is anticipated that the angle between the TTh units is approximately 60° in the direction along the chain.
 Fig. 5  (a) XRD of TTh coated on a glass slide from 40 mg mL−1 AN solution (black trace) and IVP-PTTh on a glass slide (red trace). (b) UV-Vis absorbance of IVP-PTTh (red trace) and PTTh obtained via VPP using Fe(III)PTS (black trace). 
After polymerization, the long-range features i.e., the unit-cell distances corresponding to the length of the TTh (d001, ∼6° (2Θ)) and d100 (∼13° (2Θ)) disappear owing to the polymerization. A broadening of the d101 distance, (∼20° (2Θ)), assigned to the π-interaction29,30 occurs, which indicates that ordering remains in the polymerized PTTh but that the TTh segments have been twisted along their axis during the quasi solid-state polymerization to enable the bonding of neighboring segments along the growing chain. MALDI measurements (Fig. S12, ESI†) indeed indicated formation of longer chains in the IVP-PTTh, which would force such twisting of the TTh segments during the polymerization.
For P3HT, it has been reported that ordered agglomerates contain two additional absorption peaks at higher wavelengths (compared to P3HT in solution) owing to additional π-orbital overlap in the closely packed structure.33 The UV-Vis spectra of IVP-PTTh in Fig. 5b exhibit similar additional peaks (520 nm and 590 nm) as reported for the agglomerates of P3HT (when compared to PTTh from VPP with Fe(III)PTS as the oxidant), indicating a dense structure that can facilitate additional π-orbital overlap. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and UV-Vis observations are thus consistent and suggest that IVP-PTTh represents a new strand of PTTh, with particular characteristics.
The differences between “traditional” PTTh and the IVP-PTTh observed in XRD and UV-Vis in the form of more ordered structures of IVP-PTTh do not explain the differences mentioned above with regard to pH dependence—or otherwise—on the onset potential for the water reduction reaction. Raman spectroscopy (see Fig. S13, ESI†) also did not demonstrate any fundamental differences between PTTh produced using the two different methods.18 Further computational and experimental work is underway to clarify this issue.
Conclusions
A novel iodine-vapor-assisted polymerization method for PTTh was demonstrated where the resulting polymer exhibited photoelectrocatalytic activity toward water reduction with surprising “non-dependency” of the electrolyte pH. Thus, the onset potential for the water reduction reaction did not follow an expected Nernstian trend (in the pH range of 4.5 to 13) but the onset occurred when the PTTh polymer was sufficiently neutral as a consequence at the applied potential. The optimized metal-free IVP-PTTh film achieved a gravimetric photoelectrocatalytic conversion rate of 330 mmol(H2) h−1 g−1 in phosphate buffer at pH 7 and 0 V vs. RHE.
This unique behavior with regard to pH dependency was utilized to demonstrate photo-assisted water-splitting at pH 12 by applying a bias of only 0.3 V between the PTTh photo-cathode and a MnOx anode. Thus, there are various possibilities of combining the PTTh photo-cathode with traditional high pH anodes such as NiOOH, CoOx, and RuOx and with photo-anodes operating in the neutral-to-alkaline pH range.
The IVP-PTTh showed a higher degree of order and additional π-orbital interactions compared to conventional PTTh. However, whether these differences or the absence of metal residuals in the IVP-PTTh was responsible for the unexpected pH dependence could not yet be verified and will be further investigated.
The discovery that the onset potential for the light-assisted water reduction is largely dependent on the potential, where the PTTh polymer is sufficiently charge neutral, prompted research to evaluate if this is a property unique for IVP-PTTh. Our ongoing investigation of other metal-free semi-conducting polymers which contains the thiophene motif is indeed strongly suggesting that the derivation from Nernstian behavior (for the light-enhanced water-reduction) is common for this group of materials and that neutralization at higher potentials than PTTh, to facilitate even higher photovoltage than that observed for PTTh, is feasible.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by Grants-in-Aids for Scientific Research (16K05922 and 18H03921) and by the Top Global University Project from MEXT, Japan and the Research Institute for Science and Engineering, Waseda University. T. S. acknowledges the Grants-in-Aids for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas (New Polymeric Materials Based on Element Blocks, 15H00766 and 25102541). K. O. acknowledges the Leading Graduate Program in Science and Engineering, Waseda University, from MEXT, Japan.
Notes and references
H. Du, H. L. Guo, Y. N. Liu, X. Xie, K. Liang, X. Zhou, X. Wang and A. W. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4023–4030 CAS .
Q. Han, B. Wang, Y. Zhao, C. G. Hu and L. T. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11433–11437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Martin, K. P. Qiu, S. A. Shevlin, A. D. Handoko, X. W. Chen, Z. X. Guo and J. W. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9240–9245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, J. Liu, S. Lee, T. Zhang and D. D. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2292–2298 RSC .
W. Yao, C. Huang, N. Muradov and A. T-Raissi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 4710–4715 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, Z. Yang, K. Marcus, Z. Li, B. Luo, L. Zhou, X. Wang, Y. Du and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 106–114 CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Busser, B. Mei, P. Weide, P. C. K. Vesborg, K. Stührenberg, M. Bauer, X. Huang, M. G. Willinger, I. Chorkendorff, R. Schlögl and M. Muhler, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5530–5539 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fumagalli, S. Bellani, M. Schreier, S. Leonardi, H. C. Rojas, A. Ghadirzadeh, G. Tullii, A. Savoini, G. Marra, L. Meda, M. Grätzel, G. Lanzani, M. T. Mayer, M. R. Antognazza and F. Di Fonzo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2178–2187 CAS .
L. Li, Z. Cai, Q. Wu, W. Y. Lo, N. Zhang, L. X. Chen and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7681–7686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sprick, B. Bonillo, R. Clowes, P. Guiglion, N. J. Brownbill, B. J. Slater, F. Blanc, M. A. Zwijnenburg, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1792–1796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kim and K. S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Abe, M. Higashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11828–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ding, J. Shi, D. Wang, Z. Wang, N. Wang, G. Liu, F. Xiong and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4589–4595 RSC .
M. Bledowski, L. D. Wang, A. Ramakrishnan and R. Beranek, J. Mater. Res., 2013, 28, 411–417 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Ng, O. Winther-Jensen, B. Kolodziejczyk, C. A. Ohlin and B. Winther-Jensen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 18230–18234 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Ng, O. Winther-Jensen, C. A. Ohlin and B. Winther-Jensen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11358–11366 CAS .
C. H. Ng, C. A. Ohlin, S. Qiu, C. Sun and B. Winther-Jensen, Catal.: Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 3253–3262 CAS .
B. Winther-Jensen, J. Chen, K. West and G. Wallace, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 5930–5935 CrossRef CAS .
B. Winther-Jensen and K. West, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 4538–4543 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fabretto, M. Müller, K. Zuber and P. Murphy, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1846–1851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kerr, C. Pozo-Gonzalo, M. Forsyth and B. Winther-Jensen, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 154, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kolodziejczyk, O. Winther-Jensen, C. H. Ng, S. Lin, Q. Bao and B. Winther-Jensen, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 452–460 RSC .
M. W. A. MacLean, T. Kitao, T. Suga, M. Mizuno, S. Seki, T. Uemura and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 708–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Bayley, B. Winther-Jensen, D. R. MacFarlane, N. M. Rocher and M. Forsyth, React. Funct. Polym., 2008, 68, 1119–1126 CrossRef CAS ; 
          T. A. Skotheim, R. L. Eisenbaumer and J. R. Reynolds, Handb. Conduct. Polym., CRC Press–Marcel Dekker Inc., New York, 2nd edn,  1997 Search PubMed .
C. H. Ng, O. Winther-Jensen, C. A. Ohlin and B. Winther-Jensen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 886–894 CrossRef CAS .
B. Winther-Jensen and K. West, React. Funct. Polym., 2006, 66, 479–483 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tamai, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3417–3428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Schweicher, N. Paquay, C. Amato, R. Resel, M. Koini, S. Talvy, V. Lemaur, J. Cornil, Y. Geerts and G. Gbabode, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 3663–3672 CAS .
F. Vanbolhuis, H. Wynberg, E. E. Havinga, E. W. Meijer and E. G. J. Staring, Synth. Met., 1989, 30, 381–389 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meinardi, S. Blumstengel, M. Cerminara, G. Macchi and R. Tubino, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 35207 CrossRef .
B. Gombojav, N. Namsrai, T. Yoshinari, S. I. Nagasaka, H. Itoh and K. Koyama, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 2827–2832 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, G. Lu and X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1984–1990 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee03669hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Broader context
In the quest for developing materials that can be a part of devices facilitating light-driven water-splitting, it is essential to find combinations of anode and cathode materials that operate in the same electrolyte environment, especially at the same pH. However, there are virtually no light-assisted cathode materials that operate at high pH. The ability of polyterthiophene, employed in this study, to facilitate the water reduction reaction under visible light irradiation at high pH in a full-cell setup with a photovoltage of at least 900 mV indicates a novel strand of light-assisted catalysts that can be matched to conventional anode materials such as MnOx and CoOx. The light-assisted hydrogen evolution on polyterthiophene developed in this work shows a non-Nernstian pH dependency, where the sufficient neutralization of the polymer is guiding the onset for catalytic activity. This aspect paves the way for developing new organic thiophene-based polymeric catalysts for water reduction, whose band position and band gap can be engineered to match various pH conditions.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the iodine-vapor-assisted polymerization procedure for TTh polymerization. The as-polymerized PTTh films are in the oxidized, conducting state, and are reduced during washing in ethanol or acetonitrile by the removal of excess I2 and I−. (b) SEM image of the optimized IVP-PTTh film, (spin coating TTh solution in chlorobenzene (40 mg mL−1) at 1500 rpm for 25 s prior to oxidation with I2 vapor).	 

 	Fig. 2  XPS measurements of IVP-PTTh coated on glassy carbon. (a) Survey spectra; (b) high-resolution of carbon 1s region with curvefit to only one carbon species plus the π–π* shake-up satellite; (c) high-resolution of sulphur 2p region with curvefit to the expected 1:2 ratio of 2p1/2 and 2p3/2.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Cyclic voltammetry at 1 mV s−1 under illumination at different pH (forward sweeps). The current density is plotted against RHE; (b) current density under illumination at 0 V vs. RHE at different pH; (c) resistance of IVP-PTTh on an interdigitated Pt electrode at different pH; (d) cyclic voltammetry at 20 mV s−1 under illumination at higher pH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Measurements with a tandem cell at pH 12 (0.1 M sodium phosphate/sodium hydrogen–phosphate buffer) using IVP-PTTh (under illumination) and MnOx as cathode and anode, respectively (a) potential sweeps without and with illumination at 20 mV s−1. (b) CA measurements under illumination with various applied bias potentials (vs. MnOx) (c) GC traces of evolved H2 during the experiments in (b).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) XRD of TTh coated on a glass slide from 40 mg mL−1 AN solution (black trace) and IVP-PTTh on a glass slide (red trace). (b) UV-Vis absorbance of IVP-PTTh (red trace) and PTTh obtained via VPP using Fe(III)PTS (black trace).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee03669h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
