Addressing carrier extraction from optically-optimized nanopillar arrays for thin-film photovoltaics  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR05172G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR05172G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15707-15716Addressing carrier extraction from optically-optimized nanopillar arrays for thin-film photovoltaics

        
          
            Gil 
            Shalev
          
        
      
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering & the Ilse-Katz Institute for Nanoscale Science & Technology, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, POB 653, Beer-Sheva 8410501, Israel. E-mail: glshalev@bgu.ac.il
Received 
      16th July 2017
    , Accepted 4th October 2017First published on 5th October 2017AbstractDecorating the top surface of silicon solar cells with nanopillar arrays of subwavelength periodicity is a promising path toward low-cost thin-film photovoltaics with enhanced solar radiation absorption due to the inherent light trapping capabilities of nanopillar arrays. Common practice and knowledge for the efficient carrier extraction from the excited nanopillars is the formation of ultra-shallow radial p–n junctions that provide both short carrier collection lengths, and also ensure that the volume of the photo inactive emitter is as small as possible. In the current manuscript, both finite-difference time-domain simulations and three-dimensional device simulations are used to examine carrier extraction from nanopillar arrays that are geometrically optimized in terms of array periodicity and nanopillar diameter to provide maximum absorption of the solar spectrum. The discussion is limited to nanopillars with heights of 2 μm in line with what is currently available with leading top-down fabrication technologies for the formation of nanopillars with smooth sidewalls and radial uniformity. The examination considers both radial and axial homojunctions for various junction depths. It is shown that, contrary to common practice and knowledge, the ultra-shallow junctions are detrimental to the photovoltaic performance of such systems while the radial configuration with a junction depth of ∼50 nm is the most efficient. Furthermore, the open circuit voltage is highest for axial junctions with a junction depth of 100 nm. Also, it is shown that the axial junction is preferable in the low dopant concentration regime and that overall, the axial junction is less sensitive to variations in junction depth.
1. Introduction
Silicon-based photovoltaic technological development lags behind that of carbon-based technologies mainly due to the relatively high costs associated with the raw materials and their processing.1 For example, to maximize the absorption of solar radiation and to achieve an electrical grade that supports efficient carrier collection over the entire thickness of the cell, photovoltaic cells must have sufficient optical thickness. Thus, the commercial attractiveness of silicon-based photovoltaics can be improved by reducing both the amounts and the electrical quality of the silicon used in the construction of photovoltaic panels. The goal of creating low-cost, thin-film silicon photovoltaics with efficiencies that are competitive with that of bulk silicon can be achieved via the surface nanostructuring of solar cells with nanopillar arrays.
A potential solution to the above-mentioned challenges is the three-dimensional (3D) nanostructuring of surfaces with vertically-aligned silicon nanopillars, an architecture that provides both enhanced light absorption and more efficient carrier collection.2–21 Nanopillar arrays enhance absorption by light trapping, in which incident light undergoes multiple interactions with the nanopillar arrays, which effectively increases the optical length of the incident photon inside the silicon nanopillar. This increase in photon optical length is synonymous with an increase in the effective width of the absorber, and as such, it increases the probability of absorption. Recently, the optimal nanopillar geometry for the absorption of the solar spectrum was shown to require an array periodicity of about 500 nm and a nanopillar diameter of about 400 nm,22 where nanopillar heights of 20 μm ensure near unity absorption in the solar spectrum.23
The harvest of photogenerated carriers in nanopillars has been widely explored using either axial or radial geometry, which differ in terms of p–n junction orientation. In axial geometry, the p–n junction is located along the length of the pillar, whereas in the radial case, it is aligned from the center to the outer surface in the core–shell geometry. The radial junction configuration was shown to be preferable for photovoltaic applications because it allows shorter collection lengths that, in turn, support the use of materials with short diffusion lengths of the minority carrier.14,24 Furthermore, radial geometry was also shown to alleviate the extent of surface recombination,25 which is of paramount importance in 3D nanostructured surfaces with high volume-to-surface area ratios, where surface effects become significant. Kayes et al. developed a physical model for vertical nanorods with radial junctions. It was shown that in materials with low minority-carrier diffusion lengths, the radial nanorod arrays are more efficient than conventional planar devices due to the short collection lengths of the former, which promote the efficient collection of photogenerated carriers.26 LaPierre examined numerically the photovoltaic performance of GaAs NW solar cells.27 Christesen et al. studied the electrical properties of horizontally aligned silicon nanowires with diameters of ∼240 nm for various doping levels and uniform optical generation of charge carriers using finite-element modeling. It was shown that the open circuit voltage (Voc) of both axial and radial junctions can reach values of Voc > 0.7 V and that radial junctions are far less susceptible to surface recombination.25 Wong et al., who used simulations to examine the electrical properties of a Si nanopillar array thin-film solar cell, concluded that radial junctions are superior to their axial counterparts in terms of their power conversion efficiency (PCE) for a given set of parameters, such as doping concentration and minority carrier diffusion length. It was also shown that a thinner emitter must be used to obtain optimum performance.11 Wang et al. studied the electrical behavior of nanopillar and nanohole arrays with axial junctions using simulations and showed that a thin and highly doped emitter provides the optimum compromise in terms of short circuit current (Jsc) and Voc.28 Li et al. analytically modeled both nanopillar and nanohole arrays and concluded that increasing the junction depth in nanopillars leads to a decrease in efficiency.29
Bottom-up or top-down techniques are exploited to fabricate silicon micropillars and nanopillars. Investigations of the most popular bottom-up technique, vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth, demonstrated arrays with pillar heights of tens of microns.30–32 Top-down nanopillar fabrication approaches based on nanosphere lithography and dry or wet etching techniques have attracted attention due to their inherently low costs. Specifically, the fabrication of nanopillar arrays using nanosphere lithography and cryogenic inductively coupled plasma reactive-ion etching (ICP-RIE) facilitates the formation of homogeneous arrays with smooth nanopillar surfaces and whose dimensions are optimized to harvest the solar spectrum. However, the formation of such optimized, radially uniform and untapered nanopillar arrays is currently only possible with relatively small aspect ratios, a scenario that limits nanopillar height to only a few microns.3,8,14,16,19,33–38
It is commonly accepted for photovoltaic applications in general and specifically for photovoltaics based on nanopillar arrays (as reviewed above in references)11,28,29 that shallow junctions are necessary to support efficient emitter functionality.39,40 Namely, on the one hand, the emitter needs to be highly doped to support high Voc and low resistance, while on the other hand, it must occupy as small an area as possible since high emitter doping renders the emitter region photo inactive, which causes the value of Jsc to decrease. Among the silicon doping technologies available today, each results in a different junction depth, doping profile, junction abruptness, and surface impurity concentration. Based on the recent, comprehensive review of the subject by Elbersen et al.,41 the most widely used doping techniques are chemical vapor deposition (CVD), ion implantation, solid source dotation, monolayer doping, proximity doping and spin-on-dopant. Doping with the CVD, ion implantation and solid source dotation methods result in junction depths that exceed 100 nm. Hot-wire CVD and monolayer doping produce junction depths below 100 nm. Lastly, the proximity doping and spin-on-dopant techniques produce ultra-shallow junctions whose depths are anywhere from a minimum of about 10 nm to a maximum of a few dozen nanometers.
Herein lies the challenge: as stated above, to obtain maximal absorption of the solar spectrum, a nanopillar array must comprise nanopillars with diameters of ∼400 nm. Considering such a nanopillar in a radial diffused homojunction configuration, in which carrier collection is maximized, the junction depth of 100 nm implies that <24% of the nanopillar is photoactive. In other words, ∼75% of the nanopillar comprises a highly doped, degenerated emitter, and carrier generation is diminished by extensive Auger recombination. The importance of junction depth is further stressed when considering a thin-film solar cell that is composed of nanopillar arrays on top of a thin film substrate. In this case, the nanopillars themselves constitute a substantial part of the absorbing material. On the other hand, provided junction depths of 10 nm, 90% of the volume of the nanopillar is photoactive. This implies that although theoretically, the radial junction is efficient in terms of carrier collection and its capacity to alleviate the extent of surface recombination, the formation of shallow junctions is still mandatory. In contrast, 95% of the nanopillar is photoactive when considering an axial diffused homojunction with a corresponding junction depth of 100 nm (for a nanopillar height of, for example, 2 μm).
The current work examines the electrical performance of nanopillar arrays that are geometrically tailored to maximize the absorption of the solar spectrum (array periodicity of 500 nm and nanopillar diameter of 400 nm). To that end, finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations to solve the Maxwell equations and 3D device simulations to solve the Poisson and continuity equations are used. Also, the current technological limitations are accounted for: namely, the study considers relatively short nanopillars of 2 μm in height fabricated using a state-of-the-art top-down method into high quality nanopillar arrays (in terms of smoothness of surfaces, radial uniformity, etc.) with the above-stated periodicity and nanopillar diameter using ICP-RIE systems operating in a cryogenic mode. Specifically, the study examines the effect of homojunction depth (10 nm–100 nm) in both radial and axial configurations, in the process accounting for a range of absorber dopant concentrations and the respective minority carrier lifetimes. Importantly, surface recombination is a paramount effect in nanostructured surfaces. However, surface recombination for the specific nanopillar arrays described in the current manuscript (with axial junctions) was already addressed in a previous paper of ours,21 and surface recombination in radial configuration was described by others.25 It is shown that, in stark contrast to currently accepted common knowledge and practice, shallow junctions are detrimental to the photovoltaic performance of nanopillar arrays. Furthermore, it is shown that radial junctions with medium depths (∼50 nm) provide the best efficiency. Also, the current study demonstrates that for nanopillars with low dopant concentrations, the axial junction exhibits greater efficiency than the radial junction. Moreover, the examination shows that in general, the axial configuration is less susceptible to variations in junction depth. The results of the numerical simulations are presented and discussed below.
2. Methods
2.1. Numerical simulations
The 3D finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) optical simulations and the 3D electrical device simulations were performed with Advanced TCAD by Synopsis (Mountain View, CA, USA).

2.1.1. Three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain electromagnetic simulations. 
All the FDTD simulations are three-dimensional. The simulation box size was set to the size of the unit cell with a periodic boundary condition along the lateral dimensions and perfectly matching layers (PML) along the vertical axis at the bottom of the array. The PML boundary condition ensures that no reflections from the bottom interface are accounted for (no Fabry–Perot oscillations) and therefore light trapping is due to the excitation of nanopillar Mie modes. The periodic boundary condition was applied to plane wave excitation as normally incident. Both the magnetic and electric fields were copied directly from the periodic facet to the opposing one during field update. Since only real fields are updated in the FDTD loop, the simulation is faster than the sine-cosine method, where both the real and imaginary fields must be updated. For each run, absorption, reflection and transmission were calculated using sensors that were located above the device (reflection) and right at the bottom of the array (transmission). In addition, for each simulation the absorbed photon density and the power flux density were calculated at each mesh point. The calculations were performed for normally incident plane wave excitation in the spectrum range of 400–1100 nm in 10 nm steps. For efficient and accurate FDTD simulations, the maximum mesh cell size was kept smaller than 1/10th of the wavelength in silicon; namely, more than 10 nodes per wavelength. The optical constants of silicon were taken from the literature.42


2.1.2. Electrical simulations. 
The Poisson and continuity equations were solved for each mesh vertex together with the carrier generation profile that was calculated from the absorbed photon density of the nanopillar nested inside an array (the electrical simulations address the electrical performance of a single nanopillar nested in a nanopillar array). Bottom and top contacts defined the respective biasing as boundary conditions. The simulated devices comprised a degenerately phosphorus-doped emitter (n-type) and a boron-doped base (p-type). The absorbed photon density reflects the weighted absorption once the devices were subjected to solar spectral irradiance under Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM 1.5G) conditions (as performed in the optical part). The optical generation was calculated as follows: for excitation energy greater than or equal to the bandgap energy, the quantum efficiency was set to one, and otherwise, it was set to zero. In every simulation mesh point, the Poisson and the continuity equations were solved where doping dependent Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination, Auger recombination, bandgap renormalization for degenerately doped silicon and doping dependent mobility, were all accounted for. It was assumed that the starting material was standard Czochralski silicon, which was reflected in the selection of the following parameters. The rate of Auger recombination was calculated as follows:43 RAnet = (Cnn + Cpp)(np − ni,eff2),(1)where Cn and Cp were set to 2.9 × 10−31 cm6 s−1 and 1 × 10−31 cm6 s−1, respectively.44 The rate of SRH was calculated as follows:43 (2)where ni,eff is the effective intrinsic density (accounting for bandgap narrowing), n and p are the respective electron and hole carrier densities, τn and τp are the respective electron and hole lifetimes, and n1 and p1 are defined as: (3) (4)where Etrap, the difference between the defect level and the intrinsic level, was set to zero in the current case. The dependency of SRH on doping is reflected in the dependency of carrier lifetime on doping: (5)where NA,0 and ND,0 are the chemically active acceptor and donor concentrations, respectively. In the present case γ = 1, τmin = 0, Nref = 1016 cm−3 for both holes and electrons, and τmax = 10−5 seconds and 3 × 10−6 seconds for electrons and holes, respectively.

3. Results and discussion
It was recently demonstrated that the optimal geometry of nanopillar arrays for the absorption of the solar spectrum requires a nanopillar periodicity (P) of ∼500 nm and relatively wide nanopillars with diameters (D) of ∼400 nm.22 A comparison of FDTD calculations of the relative absorption (defined as the ratio between the total amount of absorbed photons divided by the total amount of incidence photons) of a square-tiled nanopillar array with P = 500 nm, D = 400 nm and a height (H) of 2 μm under normal incidence with the relative absorption spectrum of a thin film of the same height clearly showed that absorption by the nanopillar array was significantly enhanced relative to that of the unpatterned film (Fig. 1a). Note also the apparent ripples in the nanopillars absorption spectrum that are not evident in the thin film spectrum. The presence of the ripples becomes obvious once considering the potential mechanisms for mode excitation in the present system. Arrays composed of subwavelength structures on top of a substrate can potentially enhance light trapping beyond the Yablonovitch limit as these allow the excitation of various modes in addition to the conventional radiation modes. Namely, the subwavelength structures populate localized trapped modes (or Mie modes); the arrays provide scattering centers to the impinging illumination and/or diffract (the array is actually a diffraction grating) the impinging illumination and hence imparts additional momentum components that excite guided modes inside the substrate and/or inside the array itself; finally, hybridization of the various modes provides additional modes for excitation and therefore a more efficient trapping of the incoming radiation.45 The current work examines nanopillar arrays with no underlying substrate. Also, the PML boundary condition at the bottom of the nanopillars eliminates reflections from the bottom interface. These two conditions exclude the participation of both guided modes and Fabry–Perot modes and therefore the absorption of the arrays is governed solely by the excitation of Mie modes associated with the subwavelength structures. This resonating phenomenon concludes ripples in the absorption spectra that are not visible for the respective thin film. Fig. 1b presents the axial and radial electrical configurations for a junction depth of 100 nm and the simulated distribution of the power flux density upon illumination of the array with the full solar spectrum (AM 1.5G).
 Fig. 1  Absorption of solar radiation by nanopillar arrays. Three dimensional finite-difference time-domain simulated relative absorption under solar illumination (AM 1.5 global). (a) Absorption spectrum of a nanopillar array with a period of 0.5 μm and a pillar diameter of 400 nm with a height of 2 μm (in red). The absorption spectrum of a respective thin-film is shown (in black). (b) On the left/right a cross-section parallel/normal to the plane of incidence of three representative nanopillars in the array. The color code reflects the power flux density (W m−2) under simulated solar illumination (only TM polarization is shown). Images are for axial (left) and radial (right) junctions of 100 nm. Scale bars are 0.5 μm. 
The current study considered nanopillars that comprised a p-type absorber and an n-type emitter. Fig. 2a and b presents simulated current vs. voltage (I–V) curves for axial and radial junctions, respectively, with concentrations of acceptor impurity atoms (Na) inside the absorber of 1016 cm−3 and 1019 cm−3 and junction depths of 10 nm and 100 nm. Also, the examination considered the coupling of Na with the minority carrier diffusion lifetime (τn), as higher values of Na force shorter τn and shorter minority carrier diffusion lengths (Ln). In the current case, the Na values of 1016 cm−3 and 1019 cm−3 were set to τn values of 5 × 10−6 seconds and 10−8 seconds, respectively.46 The diffusion length is related to the carrier lifetime by the diffusivity (D) according to L = (Dτ)1/2. For electrons in p-type silicon, D is approximately 36 cm s−1. In this case, Na values of 1016 cm−3 and 1019 cm−3 imply Ln of ∼13 μm and ∼0.6 μm, respectively, which are substantially longer than the collection length provided by the radial junction (collection length in the radial case is approximately the radius of the nanopillar, which in the present case was 0.2 μm). However, in an axial junction with Na = 1019 cm−3, the collection length (roughly the height of the 2 μm nanopillar) is greater than Ln. These results elicit several acute observations. First, as shown in Fig. 2, nanopillars with radial junctions provided the highest short circuit currents (Jsc), whereas those with axial junctions yielded the highest open circuit voltage (Voc). Second, in terms of Na, in the axial configuration, a lower Na yielded a higher Jsc, whereas in the radial case, a higher Na yielded a higher Jsc. Third, note that overall, the radial junction was more susceptible to divergence in both Jsc and Voc due to variations in junction depth that are not present in the axial junction. Next the behaviors of Jsc and Voc are discussed in greater detail.
 Fig. 2  Current vs. voltage graphs of solar cells based on nanopillar arrays. Simulated current–voltage curves of a single nanopillar in an array under solar illumination (AM 1.5G) for junction depths (w) of 10 nm and 100 nm and densities of acceptor impurity atoms inside the absorber of 1016 cm−3 and 1019 cm−3, respectively, in (a) an axial junction (b) a radial junction. 

Fig. 3a and b shows Voc as a function of both Na and junction depth for axial and radial junctions, respectively. As noted above, to more realistically describe Voc dependence on Na, its dependency on τn was accounted for. First, note that for the full range of Na and for all junction depths, the Voc of the axial junction was considerably higher than that of the radial junction. The maximum Voc of the axial junction of 562 mV, calculated for the 100 nm junction, exceeded that of the radial junction by more than 80 mV (479 mV). Moreover, it was ∼60 mV higher than the highest calculated radial Voc (498 mV for a junction depth of 50 nm). This finding, that the Voc of the axial configuration exceeded that of the radial configuration, was a result of the smaller junction area of the former (according to the ideal Shockley diode equation, , where J0 is the diode saturation current and J0 ∝ A, where A is the junction area). The Voc of the axial nanopillar also exhibited a gentle maxima. As noted above, Voc is inversely proportional to the saturation current, such that an increase in Na and a decrease in τn imply a decrease and an increase in saturation currents, respectively. The maxima behavior of Voc in Fig. 3a was caused by the coupling of Na and τn and their combined effect on the saturation current. This signature behavior is less evident for the radial nanopillar because in radial junctions, Voc depends mostly on Na and is less sensitive to variations in τn due to the short collection lengths typical of radial geometries.
 Fig. 3  Open circuit voltage of axial and radial nanopillars. Voc of (a) an axial junction and (b) a radial junction as a function of Na and junction depth (w). 
Interestingly, increasing the doping concentrations causes the axial Voc values to diverge for the different junction depths, such that the larger the junction depth, the higher the value of Voc. The maximum divergence was >60 mV at the doping concentration of 1019 cm−3, and Voc values of 562 mV and 498 mV were obtained for the 100 nm and 10 nm junctions, respectively. In the radial nanopillar, a less acute divergence of 40 mV was obtained at a doping concentration of 1019 cm−3 with the maximum Voc computed for the 50 nm junction. This divergence in Voc for the various junction depths at high Na is understood when considering carrier recombination.
Note that the maximum Voc obtained in the current work is 562 mV for vertical axial nanopillars, whereas Christesen et al. reported Voc > 700 mV for horizontal axial NWs.25 This reflects the sharp distinction between the current work and the work performed by Christesen et al. The axial structures considered in the current work are vertical nanopillars with a height of 2 μm that are excited by the solar spectrum and with collection lengths of ∼2 μm. These nanopillar arrays provide a realistic mechanism for light trapping and absorption enhancement. On the other hand, the axial structures considered by Christesen et al. are horizontal NWs with homogeneous optical excitation and with collection lengths of few dozens of nanometers,25 and therefore the effect of light trapping is not considered at all (which will be very small as the horizontal NWs are with diameters of 240 nm). Furthermore, due to the small collection lengths considered by Christesen et al. the recombination currents are substantially smaller and therefore produce higher Voc (this is the same effect as obtaining high Voc in ultra-thin solar cells).

Fig. 4a and b presents the total number of Shockley–Reed–Hall (SRH) recombination events and Auger recombination events, respectively, for the axial nanopillar in both logarithmic and linear scales. Note that because the total number of SRH events is higher than the total number of Auger events, only SRH recombination events are discussed. Clearly, as shown in the logarithmic scale (Fig. 4a), for a small Na, the number of SRH recombination events was larger by about two orders of magnitude for the 100 nm junction depth. Nevertheless, the number of SRH events was relatively low, the effect on Voc was negligible, and therefore, the Voc values for the 10 nm and 100 nm junctions are literally identical at Na of 1016 cm−3. Fig. 4c presents the spatial distribution of SRH recombination for Na = 1016 cm−3, in which a larger number of SRH events was obtained for the junction depth of 100 nm than for the junction depth of 10 nm. However, as shown in the linear scale of Fig. 4a, as Na increased, the overall number of SRH events observed for the 10 nm junction exceeded the total number of SRH events recorded at the 100 nm junctions; for Na of 1019 cm−3, the total number of SRH events for the 10 nm junction exceeded that of the 100 nm junction by about 2 × 1018 events. The overall number of SRH events in the 10 nm junction was higher due to the short carrier lifetimes associated with a higher Na and to the longer carrier collection length of the nanopillar with the 10 nm junction. Therefore, for a high Na, which implies short carrier diffusion lengths, the difference between the carrier collection lengths of the nanopillars with junction depths of 10 nm and those with depths of 100 nm becomes critical. Moreover, as the collection length of the 100 nm junction depth was shorter, it elicited a higher Voc. This effect is responsible for the higher Voc calculated for the junction depth of 100 nm compared with that found for the junction depth of 10 nm for a doping concentration of 1019 cm−3 (Fig. 3a). Fig. 4d shows the SRH spatial distributions for Na = 1019 cm−3. First note that the great majority of the SRH events took place in the absorber rather than in the emitter, as at this doping concentration the minority carrier lifetimes in the emitter and in the absorber are comparable but the collection length of the absorber is longer and hence, a larger number of SRH events is recorded for the absorber. Finally, the larger red area in the absorber reflects a larger number of SRH events for the 10 nm junction compared with the 100 nm junction.
 Fig. 4  Shockley–Read–Hall and Auger recombination processes in an axial nanopillar. (a) Total numbers of SRH recombination events for different absorber doping concentrations and junction depths (w). (b) Total Auger recombination events for different absorber doping concentrations and junction depths. (c) Spatial distribution of SRH recombination events for Na of 1016 cm−3 with a junction depth of 10 nm (left) and 100 nm (right). (d) Spatial distribution of SRH recombination for Na of 1019 cm−3 with a junction depth of 10 nm (left) and 100 nm (right). 
Others observed that in axial nanopillars, the emitter must have a substantial dopant concentration to support high Voc and ohmic contact with the electrode, on the one hand, and it must also occupy as small a volume as possible, since it is photo inactive due to the high doping concentrations.11,39 In the present case, an interesting but different behavior is noted, namely, that a high Na with the correspondingly small τn elicits a higher Voc in nanopillars with larger junction depths. In the present work, this effect was translated into an increase of ∼13% in Voc, and no less important, it removes the requirement for a shallow junction.

Fig. 5a and b presents the numbers of SRH and Auger recombination events for the radial nanopillar, respectively. Both recombination mechanisms occurred in considerably higher numbers in the radial nanopillar than in the axial case (as expected, because the highly doped emitter in the former nanopillar covers a much greater volume than in the latter), a scenario that also results in an overall lower Voc for the radial nanopillar. Also, for the same reason, the greater the junction depth, the higher the numbers of SRH and Auger recombination events. Moreover, note that the highest radial Voc of 498 mV was calculated for Na of 1019 cm−3 and a junction depth of 50 nm (Fig. 3b), although junction depths of 30 nm and 10 nm suffer less from recombination. This finding is due to the combined effects of recombination and the physical area of the junction. For example, the 100 nm junction depth has the largest number of recombination events and the smallest junction area (∼1.2 μm2). On the other hand, the 10 nm junction depth has the fewest recombination events and the largest junction area (∼2.5 μm2). The optimal combination of number of recombination events and junction area was exhibited by the 50 nm junction depth and manifested as the highest Voc obtained for all the junction depths (see Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  Shockley–Read–Hall and Auger recombination processes in a radial nanopillar. (a) Total number of SRH recombination events for different absorber doping concentrations and junction depths (w). (b) Total number of Auger recombination events for different absorber doping concentrations and junction depths. (c) Left to right: Spatial distribution of SRH recombination events for Na of 1019 cm−3 with junction depths of 10 nm, 50 nm and 100 nm, respectively. Note that the 50 nm junction is optimal, as it provides the best trade-off between number of recombination events and junction area. 

Fig. 6a and b shows Jsc for axial and radial junctions for various junction depths and for different Na, respectively. Axial Jsc dependency on the junction depth was found to be small (about 4% between the largest and the smallest values of Jsc for a given doping concentration), such that the 10 nm and 100 nm junctions provided the largest and the smallest Jsc, respectively. The emitter was photo inactive due to the high dopant concentration, and because all the considered junction depths were significantly smaller than the nanopillar height, the overall effect of junction depth was minor. In addition, for a smaller doping concentration, Jsc was higher due to a higher τn. The Jsc of the radial nanopillars exhibited a more pronounced dependency on junction depth, such that the shallower the junction, the higher the Jsc. However, Jsc is not very sensitive to the doping concentration except at the smaller concentrations. Fig. 6c and d presents the effective power conversion efficiency (ePCE), defined ad hoc as a PCE with a filling factor (FF) of 1. The effect of the FF was not considered as it was not expected to generate further variation in the current study. First, note that radial nanopillars were more susceptible to variations in ePCE due to variations in junction depth. The highest ePCE of 14.4% was observed for radial nanopillars with junction depths of either 30 nm or 50 nm. Importantly, note that the radial nanopillar with the ultra-low junction depth of 10 nm had a lower efficiency; this, as explained above, was due to the behavior of the Voc. However, for nanopillars with lower Na (e.g., 1016 cm−3) and with the associated longer τn, the axial nanopillar had a substantially higher efficiency (10.5%) compared with that of the radial nanopillar (7%). Finally, in light of the currently mainstream ion implantation technologies, which provide junction depths of ∼100 nm, the ePCE values of the axial and radial configurations converge to about 12%, thus eliminating altogether the supposed advantages of the radial junction.
 Fig. 6  Short-circuit current and effective power conversion efficiency of axial and radial nanopillars. (a) Jsc of axial junction as a function of Na and junction depth (w). (b) Jsc of radial junction as function of Na and junction depth. (c) ePCE of axial junction. (d) ePCE of radial junction. 
4. Conclusions
The current study examines the photovoltaic performance of nanopillar arrays. The nanopillar dimensions were selected to ensure maximum absorption of the solar spectrum. The moderate height of the nanopillars was chosen to mirror the type of arrays that are currently being fabricated in state-of-the-art top-down approaches. Specifically, radial and axial junction configurations were considered, and the parameters Voc and Jsc were discussed as functions of absorber doping concentrations and minority carrier lifetimes. It is shown that ultra-shallow junction depths were detrimental to efficiency and that actually, the highest efficiency was calculated for a radial junction with a junction depth of ∼50 nm. Furthermore, it is shown that axial configuration is more resilient to variations in junction depth.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
N. S. Lewis, Research opportunities to advance solar energy utilization, Science, 2016, 351(6271), 353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, S. W. Boettcher, R. M. Briggs and J. Y. Baek, 
            et al., High-performance Si microwire photovoltaics, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 866 CAS .
P. R. Pudasaini, D. Elam and A. A. Ayon, Aluminum oxide passivated radial junction sub-micrometre pillar array textured silicon solar cells, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2013, 46(23), 235104 CrossRef .
H.-P. Wang, K.-Y. Lai, Y.-R. Lin, C.-A. Lin and J.-H. He, Periodic si nanopillar arrays fabricated by colloidal lithography and catalytic etching for broadband and omnidirectional elimination of Fresnel reflection, Langmuir, 2010, 26(15), 12855–12858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, S. Wu, K. Reinhardt, Y. Lu and S. Chen, Broadband light absorption enhancement in thin-film silicon solar cells, Nano Lett., 2010, 10(6), 2012–2018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Jia, M. Steglich, I. Sill and F. Falk, Coreshell heterojunction solar cells on silicon nanowire arrays, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 96(1), 226–230 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jia, A. Gawlik, J. Bergmann, B. Eisenhawer, S. Schonherr and G. Andra, 
            et al., Silicon nanowire solar cells with radial p-n heterojunction on crystalline silicon thin films: Light trapping properties, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2014, 4(1), 28–32 CrossRef .
O. Gunawan, K. Wang, B. Fallahazad, Y. Zhang, E. Tutuc and S. Guha, High performance wire-array silicon solar cells, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 307–312 CAS .
J. Li, H. Yu, S. M. Wong, G. Zhang, X. Sun and P. G. Q. Lo, 
            et al., Si nanopillar array optimization on Si thin films for solar energy harvesting, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 033102 CrossRef .
S. M. Wong, H. Y. Yu, J. S. Li, G. Zhang, P. Lo and D. L. Kwong, Design High-Efficiency Si Nanopillar-Array-Textured Thin-Film Solar Cell, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2010, 31(4), 335–337 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Wong, H. Y. Yu, J. S. Li, Y. L. Li, N. Singh and P. G. Q. Lo, 
            et al., Si nanopillar array surface-textured thin-film solar cell with radial p-n junction, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2011, 32(2), 176–178 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Yoon, Y. A. Yuwen, C. E. Kendrick, G. D. Barber, N. J. Podraza and J. M. Redwing, 
            et al., Enhanced conversion efficiencies for pillar array solar cells fabricated from crystalline silicon with short minority carrier diffusion lengths, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 213503 CrossRef .
E. C. Garnett and P. Yang, Silicon nanowire radial p-n junction solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(29), 9224–9225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Garnett and P. Yang, Light trapping in silicon nanowire solar cells, Nano Lett., 2010, 10(3), 1082–1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tsakalakos, J. Balch, J. Fronheiser, B. A. Korevaar, O. Sulima and J. Rand, Silicon nanowire solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91(23), 233117 CrossRef .
H. Li, R. Jia, C. Chen, Z. Xing, W. Ding and Y. Meng, 
            et al., Influence of nanowires length on performance of crystalline silicon solar cell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 151116 CrossRef .
T. Stelzner, M. Pietsch, G. Andrä, F. Falk, E. Ose and S. Christiansen, Silicon nanowire-based solar cells, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19(29), 295203 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Gharghi, On the design and applicability of nanowire solar cells using low-grade semiconductors, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111(3), 034501 CrossRef .
M. Gharghi, E. Fathi, B. Kante, S. Sivoththaman and X. Zhang, Heterojunction silicon microwire solar cells, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(12), 6278–6282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Schmitt, G. Brönstrup, G. Shalev, S. K. Srivastava, M. Y. Bashouti and G. H. Döhler, 
            et al., Probing photo-carrier collection efficiencies of individual silicon nanowire diodes on a wafer substrate, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7897–7902 RSC .
G. Shalev, S. W. Schmitt, H. Embrechts, G. Brönstrup and S. Christiansen, Enhanced photovoltaics inspired by the fovea centralis, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Shalev, S. Schmitt, G. Brönstrup and S. Christiansen, Maximizing the ultimate absorption efficiency of vertically-aligned semiconductor nanowire arrays with wires of a low absorption cross-section, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 801–809 CrossRef CAS .
H. Alaeian, A. C. Atre and J. A. Dionne, Optimized light absorption in Si wire array solar cells, J. Opt., 2012, 024006 CrossRef .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans and M. D. Kelzenberg, 
            et al., Photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution using Si microwire arrays, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(5), 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Christesen, X. Zhang, C. W. Pinion, T. A. Celano, C. J. Flynn and J. F. Cahoon, Design principles for photovoltaic devices based on Si nanowires with axial or radial p-n junctions, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(11), 6024–6029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Kayes, H. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Comparison of the device physics principles of planar and radial p-n junction nanorod solar cells, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97(11), 114302 CrossRef .
R. R. Lapierre, Numerical model of current-voltage characteristics and efficiency of GaAs nanowire solar cells, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109(034311), 034311 CrossRef .
F. Wang, H. Yu, J. Li, S. Wong, X. W. Sun and X. Wang, 
            et al., Design guideline of high efficiency crystalline Si thin film solar cell with nanohole array textured surface, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 084306 CrossRef .
H. Li, D. Lee and W. J. Yoo, Optoelectronic Performance of Radial-Junction Si nanopillar and nanohole solar cells, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2012, 59(9), 2368–2374 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Putnam, S. W. Boettcher, M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, J. M. Spurgeon and E. L. Warren, 
            et al., Si microwire-array solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3(8), 1037 Search PubMed .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam and E. L. Warren, 
            et al., Enhanced absorption and carrier collection in Si wire arrays for photovoltaic applications, Nat Mater., 2010, 9(3), 239–244 CAS .
B. M. Kayes, M. Filler, M. C. Putnam, M. D. Kelzenberg, N. S. Lewis and H. Atwater, Growth of vertically aligned Si wire arrays over large areas (>1 cm2) with Au and Cu catalysts, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91(10), 103110 CrossRef .
S. W. Schmitt, F. Schechtel, D. Amkreutz, M. Bashouti, S. K. Srivastava and B. Hoffmann, 
            et al., Nanowire arrays in multicrystalline silicon thin films on glass: a promising material for research and applications in nanotechnology, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(8), 4050–4054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Henry, S. Walavalkar, A. Homyk and A. Scherer, Alumina etch masks for fabrication of high-aspect-ratio silicon micropillars and nanopillars, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20(25), 255305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. L. Pey, C. H. Yip, E. Fitzgerald and D. Antoniadis, Vertically arrayed Si nanowire/nanorod-based core-shell p-n junction solar cells, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108(12), 1–6 Search PubMed .
H. P. Wang, K. Y. Lai, Y. R. Lin, C. A. Lin and J. H. He, Periodic Si nanopillar arrays fabricated by colloidal lithography and catalytic etching for broadband and omnidirectional elimination of fresnel reflection, Langmuir, 2010, 26(15), 12855–12858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dong, F. Liu, J. Liu, H. Zhang and M. Zhu, Realization of radial p-n junction silicon nanowire solar cell based on low-temperature and shallow phosphorus doping, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8(1), 544 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qu, L. Liao, R. Cheng, Y. Wang, Y. C. Lin and Y. Huang, 
            et al., Rational design and synthesis of freestanding photoelectric nanodevices as highly efficient photocatalysts, Nano Lett., 2010, 10(5), 1941–1949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Nelson, The physics of solar cells, Imperial College Press, London,  2004 Search PubMed .
J. C. Duran, G. Vennier and R. Weht, Optimization of the junction depth and doping of solar cell emitters, Sol. Cells, 1991, 31, 497–503 CrossRef CAS .
R. Elbersen, W. Vijselaar, R. M. Tiggelaar, H. Gardeniers and J. Huskens, Fabrication and Doping Methods for Silicon Nano- and Micropillar Arrays for Solar-Cell Applications: A Review, Adv. Mater., 2015, 1–16 Search PubMed .

          E. D. Palik, Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids, Academic,  1985 Search PubMed .

          S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, New York, 2nd edn,  1981 Search PubMed .
W. Lochmann and A. Haugt, Phonon-assited Auger recombination in Si with direct calculation of the overlap integrals, Solid State Commun., 1980, 35(5), 553–556 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and S. Fan, Light management for photovoltaics using high-index nanostructures, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13(5), 451–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Schröder, Carrier lifetimes in silicon, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1997, 44(1), 160–170 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
RAnet = (Cnn + Cpp)(np − ni,eff2),	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 1  Absorption of solar radiation by nanopillar arrays. Three dimensional finite-difference time-domain simulated relative absorption under solar illumination (AM 1.5 global). (a) Absorption spectrum of a nanopillar array with a period of 0.5 μm and a pillar diameter of 400 nm with a height of 2 μm (in red). The absorption spectrum of a respective thin-film is shown (in black). (b) On the left/right a cross-section parallel/normal to the plane of incidence of three representative nanopillars in the array. The color code reflects the power flux density (W m−2) under simulated solar illumination (only TM polarization is shown). Images are for axial (left) and radial (right) junctions of 100 nm. Scale bars are 0.5 μm.	 

 	Fig. 2  Current vs. voltage graphs of solar cells based on nanopillar arrays. Simulated current–voltage curves of a single nanopillar in an array under solar illumination (AM 1.5G) for junction depths (w) of 10 nm and 100 nm and densities of acceptor impurity atoms inside the absorber of 1016 cm−3 and 1019 cm−3, respectively, in (a) an axial junction (b) a radial junction.	 

 	Fig. 3  Open circuit voltage of axial and radial nanopillars. Voc of (a) an axial junction and (b) a radial junction as a function of Na and junction depth (w).	 

 	Fig. 4  Shockley–Read–Hall and Auger recombination processes in an axial nanopillar. (a) Total numbers of SRH recombination events for different absorber doping concentrations and junction depths (w). (b) Total Auger recombination events for different absorber doping concentrations and junction depths. (c) Spatial distribution of SRH recombination events for Na of 1016 cm−3 with a junction depth of 10 nm (left) and 100 nm (right). (d) Spatial distribution of SRH recombination for Na of 1019 cm−3 with a junction depth of 10 nm (left) and 100 nm (right).	 

 	Fig. 5  Shockley–Read–Hall and Auger recombination processes in a radial nanopillar. (a) Total number of SRH recombination events for different absorber doping concentrations and junction depths (w). (b) Total number of Auger recombination events for different absorber doping concentrations and junction depths. (c) Left to right: Spatial distribution of SRH recombination events for Na of 1019 cm−3 with junction depths of 10 nm, 50 nm and 100 nm, respectively. Note that the 50 nm junction is optimal, as it provides the best trade-off between number of recombination events and junction area.	 

 	Fig. 6  Short-circuit current and effective power conversion efficiency of axial and radial nanopillars. (a) Jsc of axial junction as a function of Na and junction depth (w). (b) Jsc of radial junction as function of Na and junction depth. (c) ePCE of axial junction. (d) ePCE of radial junction.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
