Organic semiconducting single crystals as solid-state sensors for ionizing radiation  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4FD00102H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4FD00102H
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2014, 174, 219-234Organic semiconducting single crystals as solid-state sensors for ionizing radiation

        
          
            Beatrice 
            Fraboni
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Andrea 
            Ciavatti
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Laura 
            Basiricò
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Alessandro 
            Fraleoni-Morgera
          
        
      bc
aDipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università di Bologna, viale Berti Pichat 6/2, Bologna, Italy. E-mail: beatrice.fraboni@unibo.it;  Fax: +39 051 2095113;   Tel: +39 051 2095806
bDipartimento di Ingegneria e Architettura, Università di Trieste – V. Valerio 10, Italy, 34100 Trieste, Italy
cElettra Sincrotrone Trieste S.C.p.A, Strada Statale 14, Km 163.5, Basovizza (TS), Italy
Received 
      9th May 2014
    , Accepted 24th June 2014First published on 26th June 2014AbstractSo far, organic semiconductors have been mainly proposed as detectors for ionizing radiation in the indirect conversion approach, i.e. as scintillators, which convert ionizing radiation into visible photons, or as photodiodes, which detect visible photons coming from a scintillator and convert them into an electrical signal. The direct conversion of ionizing radiation into an electrical signal within the same device is a more effective process than indirect conversion, since it improves the signal-to-noise ratio and it reduces the device response time. We report here the use of Organic Semiconducting Single Crystals (OSSCs) as intrinsic direct ionizing radiation detectors, thanks to their stability, good transport properties and large interaction volume. Ionizing radiation X-ray detectors, based on low-cost solution-grown OSSCs, are here shown to operate at room temperature, providing a stable linear response with increasing dose rate in the ambient atmosphere and in high radiation environments.
1 Introduction
The detection of ionization radiation (e.g. X-rays, electrons and alpha particles) is a constantly growing area of research thanks to its vast and numerous application fields, which span from astrophysics to nuclear power plants, to industrial and civil security and to medical imaging and diagnostics.
High energy photons (X- and gamma-rays) can be detected with two different categories of functional materials: scintillators and semiconductors. In both cases, the interaction with a high energy photon first induces primary excitations and ionization processes (ions and electrons) which, at a second stage, interact within the volume of the detection material and produce a majority of secondary excitations (electron–hole pairs), within a picosecond timeframe. The by-products of both the primary and secondary excitations are electron–hole pairs (excitons) that can be transduced into an output signal following different pathways in semiconductor detectors and in scintillators, described in more detail in the following.1
In a scintillator, the excitons transfer their energy to luminescent centers which are often intentionally introduced. These centers release the energy radiatively, and the resulting photons, typically in the visible wavelength range, escape the scintillator and are collected by a coupled photo-multiplier tube (PMT) or a photodiode to obtain an electrical signal associated to the incident radiation beam.
In a semiconductor detector (e.g. CdTe, SiC), an electric field is applied to dissociate the electron–hole pairs and to sweep the electrons and holes to the positive and negative electrodes, respectively. The resulting photocurrent is directly recorded as the output electrical signal associated to the high energy radiation particles. The direct conversion of ionizing radiation into an electrical signal within the same material, and thus within one single device, is a more effective process than indirect conversion, since it improves the signal-to-noise ratio and it reduces the device response time.
The material requirements for the two different detection mechanisms share some similarities: high stopping power to maximize the absorption efficiency of the incident radiation, high purity to minimize exciton trapping, and good uniformity to reduce scattering and good transparency, possibly coupled to the ability to grow the material into a large size to increase the interaction volume. For semiconductors, a high and balanced carrier mobility and a low intrinsic carrier density are essential to obtain a high sensitivity and a low background current. On the other hand, scintillators must have an efficient cascade energy transition series to achieve a high light emission yield.2
Among the novel materials which could push the boundaries of radiation detection further, organic π-conjugated small molecules and polymers are interesting emerging candidates, thanks to their potential to realize large area and flexible optoelectronic devices3 by cost effective printing methods,4 which is due to their processing from solution at room temperature. Moreover, by controlling the molecular structure and the π-electron conjugated chains, their luminescence and optoelectronic properties can be easily tuned. In fact, it is known that organic semiconductors can work as effective photodetectors, via the photoinduced generation of excitons which, within the material and in suitable conditions (presence of a local electron donor–electron acceptor interface usually formed at the interface between two different organic semiconducting materials), are able to split into free charge carriers that can be collected at the electrodes.8
For this reason, organic semiconductors are now seen as an attractive alternative to inorganic compounds for photon detection in the UV to the near infrared (NIR) region where, besides the vast field of organic photovoltaic devices,5 light pulse detectors for optical communications6 and digital flat-panel arrays for imaging applications7 have been proposed in the literature.8
In the UV-NIR range, very interesting values for the figures of merit such as the photo-conversion efficiency, speed and minimum detectable signal level have been reported,8 and even though the simultaneous attainment of all of these relevant parameters has been demonstrated in only a limited number of papers, real applications are within reach for this technology, where the best reported photo-responsivities outperform amorphous silicon-based devices. Such achievements have been obtained by overcoming a few major bottlenecks for organic electronic devices, such as current injection from contacts to reduce leakage currents, charge collection efficiency and the stability during exposure to air.8
Organic materials could also be viable candidates for the detection of higher energy photons (X- and gamma-rays), and they were first suggested for radiation detection in the early 1980s.9 However, the interest in these materials was mostly focused on their scintillating properties,1 possibly because the material requirements are particularly stringent in the case of direct detectors, as evidenced by the few reports present in the literature on radiation detection based on organic thin films,10–14 where stability, reproducibility and the attainment of good sensitivity (likely limited by the small interaction volume) are still open issues.
In this report we will discuss the very interesting and promising radiation detecting properties of a particular class of semiconducting organic materials: Organic Semiconducting Single Crystals (OSSCs).
We have recently reported how solution-grown OSSCs are ideal candidates to directly detect X-ray radiation (i.e. to directly convert an X-ray photon into an electron), thanks to their particular properties (which will be discussed in detail in the following paragraph), coupled to all the above mentioned advantages offered by organic conjugated materials.15 Moreover, being based on carbon, their low effective atomic number is similar to the average human tissue-equivalent Z value and makes them ideal candidates for radiotherapy and medical applications, which would benefit greatly from the improved accuracy of tissue-equivalent dosimeters. In fact, there are currently no low-cost, large-area detectors with tissue-equivalence response available.
It is noteworthy that, unlike organic photodiodes, OSSCs show direct and intrinsic charge photogeneration and collection processes with no need for the heterogeneous donor–acceptor material interface, which is usually employed to improve the collection efficiency in organic photodiodes and solar cells.
We will assess here the reproducible process of the conversion of X-ray photons into an electrical signal within OSSCs, and how this process allows the fabrication of stable radiation detectors which provide a linear response to an increasing X-ray dose. The observed performance indicates that OSSCs are very promising candidates for a novel generation of low-cost, real-time and room temperature-operated X-ray detectors.
2 Semiconductor-based direct detectors
The ability to detect high energy radiation such as X-rays, gamma-rays, and other uncharged and charged particles with solid-state semiconductor detectors has improved dramatically in the last 20 years thanks to two main factors: (i) the enormous advances in semiconductor science and technology, and (ii) the strong and increasing demand for high-performing solid-state radiation detectors.
High purity silicon and germanium were the first materials to be used as solid-state detectors, and are still widely employed thanks to their extremely good energy resolution (below 0.2%) which, however, can only be achieved at cryogenic temperatures. This prompted the development of novel compound semiconductors such as CdTe, SiC and CdZnTe which can offer excellent performance at room temperature, superior in a few aspects to Ge.
Nonetheless, the difficulty to grow large-size, high-quality crystals of these II–VI compound materials at a low cost is limiting their application in very high-tech and specific detectors, e.g. in satellites and as pioneering medical diagnostic tools. A non-negligible further drawback of these materials is their limited availability, and often their toxicity. These limitations have prompted the need to find alternative novel semiconducting materials.
The main requirements for a good solid state semiconductor detector are common to all semiconductors and are briefly detailed below:1,16
(a) High resistivity (>109 Ω cm) and low leakage current. Low leakage currents when an electric field is applied during operation are critical for low noise operation. The necessary high resistivity is achieved by using larger band gap materials (>1.5 eV) with low intrinsic carrier concentrations.
(b) A small enough band gap so that the electron–hole ionization energy is small (<5 eV). This ensures that the number of electron–hole pairs created is reasonably large and results in a higher signal to noise ratio.
(c) High atomic number (Z) and/or a large interaction volume for efficient radiation–atomic interactions. The cross-section for photoelectric absorption in a material of atomic number Z varies as Zn, where 4 < n < 5. For high-sensitivity and efficiency, large detector volumes are required to ensure that as many incident photons as possible have the opportunity to interact in the detector volume. A further related requirement is that the detector material must have a high density, although this is essentially guaranteed simply by the fact that a solid material is employed for the detector material in contrast to gas-based detectors.
(d) High intrinsic μτ product. The carrier drift length is given by μτE, where μ is the carrier mobility, τ is the carrier lifetime and E is the applied electric field. Charge collection is determined by which fraction of photo-generated electrons and holes effectively traverses the detector and reaches the electrodes.
(e) High-purity, homogeneous, defect-free materials, to ensure good charge transport properties, low leakage currents, and no conductive short circuits between the detector contacts.
(f) Electrodes which produce no defects, impurities or barriers to the charge collection process and which can be used effectively to apply a uniform electric field across the device. This requirement is also related to the need to avoid material polarization effects which may affect the time response of the detector.
(g) Surfaces should be highly resistive and stable over time to prevent increases in the surface leakage currents over the lifetime of the detector.
It is obvious that not all of the above requirements can be easily met by a single material, but the dramatic advancements in the organic semiconductor research field recently have stimulated studies on the potential application of organic semiconductors as solid-state detectors.
The first studies performed featured the neutron irradiation of polyacetylene and polythiophene films, which induced an increase in the film conductivity, linear with the irradiation dose but irreversible.17 To date, only a few examples of simple, direct detectors based on organic semiconductors have been reported, and they all refer to thin films based on organic semiconducting polymers11,12,14 and small molecules.13 When compared to silicon-based detectors, conjugated polymers, despite their lower carrier mobility and inferior radiation tolerance, exhibit the advantage that large areas can be covered and possibly nanostructured via wet-processing, thus increasing the detector’s active surface at a much lower cost.18
The already mentioned issue of the degradation of semiconducting polymers represents a practical problem for the fabrication of effective semiconducting polymer-based intrinsic, direct detectors. In fact, many of the above cited detectors base their operability on the measurement of the resistivity (conductivity) of the polymeric semiconductor, which increases (decreases) upon device exposure to the ionizing radiation, due to material degradation. This means that the above described devices are not able to perform for prolonged periods, neither to be repeatedly used with reproducible performance, hence resulting in detectors with a very short operative lifetime and, in the best possible case, as disposable devices.
A first step towards the solution of these problems was made recently, when semiconducting polymer-based drop-cast films with a thickness of approximately 10–20 μm (hence a rather thick film, to maximize X-ray attenuation) showed linearity up to dose rates of 60 mGy s−1.13,14 The sensitivity of these devices reached values of 100–400 nC mGy−1 cm−3, which are comparable to silicon devices. The time response of the X-ray photocurrent measured for the thin film devices was less than 150 ms, and encouragingly, no sign of radiation damage was observed for doses in excess of 10 Gy, although no information on the reproducibility of the results was reported.13,14
Though the authors of these reports do not always mention it explicitly, it has to be noted that in these devices the polymeric semiconductor thin films are always coupled to metallic electrodes or substrates, which are exposed to the ionizing radiation together with the organic layer. The importance and the role of the metallic electrodes and/or the substrate in the performance of these devices has been stressed in several dedicated works,6,7,13 since they act as the primary X-ray photo-conversion layers, producing secondary electrons which are injected into the organic thin film and thus produce the electrical signal output.
We have recently reported how solution-grown OSSCs are ideal candidates to directly detect X-ray radiation, as their particular properties overcome most of the major limitations inherent to organic materials discussed to date.15 Their long-range molecular packing order and lack of grain boundaries impart unique transport properties to all OSSCs such as high carrier mobilities (up to 40 cm2 V−1 s−1 (ref. 19)), transport anisotropy and long exciton diffusion lengths (up to 8 μm (ref. 20), as opposed to the few nanometers in organic thin films and blends used in photovoltaic and photodetecting devices8). These features, coupled with their high resistivity and low dark currents due to the relatively large band gap, are enhanced, in the case of solution-grown OSSCs, by the possibility of tuning the crystal dimensions up to mm3, as will be discussed in more detail in the next paragraph. Moreover, a notable unique property of OSSCs is that they can efficiently and intrinsically photo-convert X-ray photons into an electrical signal, without the need for the intervention of extra metal/substrate layers.15
3 Solution-grown organic semiconducting single crystals
The best-performing OSSCs are usually grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD), which involves the use of multi-zone heated tubes, in which a vapour of molecules is carried by a convenient inert gas onto a cold wall. However, due to the nature of this growth process, it is difficult to grow very large crystals.21 Crystal growth from the melt could represent an interesting alternative to CVD; nonetheless, although in some cases crystallization from the melt of OSSCs proved to be successful,22 stability problems (especially due to enhanced photo-oxidation rates at temperatures approaching the melting temperature) often limit the possibility of taking advantage of this crystallization technique for organic materials.
These problems may be overcome using growth from solution. This approach has a high versatility, with the capability to deliver very large (up to several cm3) and pure crystals, and with low energy requirements (i.e. no need for dramatic heating, cooling or vacuum) and ease of implementation. This latter point is worthy of particular attention, since it implies an extremely low cost, especially when large-area detectors are envisaged.
Solution growth has also been used to produce organic (not necessarily semiconducting) single crystals used as scintillators in ionizing radiation detectors,23 evidencing that this technique delivers crystals which are able to usefully interact with ionizing radiation. In addition, solution-grown OSSCs have repeatedly demonstrated good electronic quality.24 The possibility of growing OSSCs from solution offers not only exciting opportunities for performing fundamental studies, but, even more interestingly, paves the way for the practical application of these materials in electronic devices. In fact, it has been recently shown that it is possible to fabricate high-quality OSSCs via inkjet printing25 or shear-aided crystallization.26
We will report here on two different types of OSSCs which we have grown from solution: 4-hydroxycyanobenzene (4HCB) and 1,5-dinitronaphthalene (DNN), as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Optical microscopy images of (a) 4-hydroxycyanobenzene (4HCB) and (b) 1,5-dinitronaphthalene (DNN) organic single crystals. The images clearly show the different shapes of the crystals, i.e. the platelet shape of the 4HCB crystal and the needle-like shape of the DNN crystal. In the insets the chemical structures of the two molecules are reported. 
These two molecules have been chosen because they generate crystals with different geometries: platelets in the case of 4HCB and needles for DNN. Both types of crystals can be easily grown from widely available solvents/non-solvents (i.e. ethylic ether and/or petroleum ether for 4HCB27 and chloroform or benzonitrile for DNN), and their size can be controlled by varying parameters such as the solvent/non-solvent volume ratio or the organic molecule concentration in the starting solutions, reaching sizes of tens of mm3. This translates into a radiation interaction volume which is much larger than those typically accessible with polymer films (which are a few tens of micrometers thick at most).27 The as-obtained single crystals are very robust to physical manipulation (they can be easily moved and positioned on substrates, electrodes arrays, sample holders, etc.) and to environmental conditions (air, light, room temperature).
It is known that the low symmetry of organic molecules leads to anisotropically packed crystal structures, where the direction of the strongest π-orbital overlap usually coincides with the direction of the highest carrier mobility, thus also affecting the crystal transport properties.19,21,28 On one hand this asymmetry introduces difficulties for clearly understanding the transport behaviour of the organic crystal, but on the other hand it offers the possibility to investigate the correlation between the three-dimensional molecular stacking order of OSSCs and their known anisotropic electronic transport properties. In particular, in recent years, different mobilities have been measured along the three dimensions for micro or nanometer-sized organic single crystals, either vapour deposited19,21,28 or solution-grown.24,29–31
A complete characterization of several key electronic transport parameters of OSSCs can be carried out by means of Space Charge Limited Current (SCLC)21,29,31,32 and by Field Effect Transistor (FET) analyses.29,30
We have recently reported on the electrical characterization of solution-grown, macroscopic 4HCB single crystals, evidencing their good electronic transport properties and their clear anisotropic behaviour along the three crystallographic axes,29,31 and we will here focus our attention on the results obtained for DNN single crystals. Due to their needle-like shape, there is only one crystallographic direction which can be electrically accessed, and which coincides with the higher π-orbital overlap direction (visible by examining the DNN crystal structure33). The good electronic transport properties of DNN single crystals have been assessed by SCLC analysis, and a typical SCLC curve of a DNN crystal is shown in Fig. 2, together with a sketch of the electrical contact configuration. The intrinsic carrier mobility of the material is reported in Table 1, together with the average carrier mobility determined for the 4HCB crystals, also from SCLC analysis, along the three crystallographic directions.
 Fig. 2  Current vs. voltage curve, in the double-logarithmic scale, of a DNN crystal within the space-charge conduction regime. The inset shows the schematic layout of the electrical ohmic contacts on a DNN crystal. 
Table 1 Carrier mobility values reported in the literature29–31 for a 4HCB crystal along the three crystallographic axes, a, b and c, in comparison with the mobility value measured for a DNN crystal along its axis of growth (only one axis as it is needle-shaped)




Crystal

μ
SCLC (cm2 V−1 s−1)




4HCB a axis
(1.0 ± 0.5) × 10−1


4HCB b axis
(4 ± 2) × 10−2


4HCB c axis
(2.0 ± 0.5) × 10−5


DNN
(2.2 ± 0.8) × 10−3




Indeed, as shown in Table 1, the transport properties of 4HCB crystals reflect their anisotropic packing, and a clear difference in mobility values is found along the three axes. Charge carrier mobilities of 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 can be easily and routinely obtained along the a axis of the 4HCB solution-grown crystals, with very reproducible and stable results.31 While the anisotropic electrical response of OSSCs is extremely interesting from the point of view of fundamental studies, it poses the problem of properly aligning the crystals and the electrodes in order to select and control the appropriate carrier transport properties needed for specific device applications. Even if we have demonstrated how linearly polarized infrared analyses allow the fast, easy and reliable determination of the crystallographic orientation of OSSCs,34,35 it is important to investigate the X-ray photo-response of single crystals where the electronic transport axis is clearly identifiable. For this reason, needle-like crystals, such as DNN, could be of practical interest.
4 X-ray photo-response of OSSCs
After having assessed that solution-grown 4HCB and DNN OSSCs have appropriate volume sizes and electronic transport properties to grant the collection of photo-generated charge carriers, we performed a complete characterization of the electrical photo-response of the organic crystals under a molybdenum (Mo) tube X-ray broad spectrum with an accelerating voltage of 35 kV and a dose rate of 2.5–140 mGy s−1, All of the reported measurements were made in air at room temperature.

Fig. 3 reports for the first time the typical current–voltage and current–time curves measured for a DNN crystal exposed to an X-ray beam from a Mo tube (35 keV, 140 mG s−1), with two Ag electrodes evaporated at a distance of 45 μm, in the same configuration as reported in the inset of Fig. 2. The strong modification induced in the current, measured as a function of the applied voltage when the DNN crystal is exposed to the X-ray beam, due to the photo-induced generation of charge carriers, is visible in Fig. 3a. It is noteworthy that this sharp response was obtained with applied voltages as low as 2 V, a very small value for radiation detectors. Moreover, the “off” current recorded after the exposure to X-rays does not show significant hysteresis or degradation effects, and its value always lies below 500 pA, again a very good low value for radiation detection applications. A further positive feature of this device is that the current vs. time curve recorded under an on–off switching X-ray beam (Fig. 3b) clearly shows how repetitive exposures to X-rays do not alter the sensor photo-response in terms of ΔI = Ion − Ioff and the baseline current shift. Fig. 3c shows the virtually null effect of UV-Vis irradiation on the same crystal. It is hence evident that the physical processes generating the X-ray-induced photo-response do not have much in common with those responsible for the UV-IR detection in organic photodiodes or phototransistors.8
 Fig. 3  (a) Current–voltage curves of a DNN crystal with Ag contacts in the dark (blue solid triangles), under X-ray irradiation at 117 mGy s−1 (red circles), and again in the dark after X-ray irradiation (black empty stars). (b) Current–time curves of the DNN-based device recorded switching the X-ray beam on–off for two different applied bias voltages, i.e. 2 V and 5 V. (c) Current–voltage curve of the DNN-based device under UV-Vis irradiation (red solid circles) and in the dark (black open squares); the two curves overlap perfectly. 
Several DNN crystals were tested under X-ray dose rates ranging from 20 to 120 mGy s−1, at different bias voltages. The induced photocurrent values, ΔI = Ion − Ioff, are reported in Fig. 4a and b and demonstrate that the crystal response for an increasing X-ray dose rate is linear for each tested bias voltage, assessing that it is possible to effectively drive an OSSC detector even at a few bias volts. The detector sensitivity, defined as S = ΔI/D, where D is the radiation dose rate, was evaluated to be about 6 nC mGy−1 at 10 V.
 Fig. 4  (a) Current–time curve of the DNN-based device recorded by switching on–off the X-ray beam (dose rate of 78 mGy s−1) and sweeping the bias voltage after each cycle. (b) X-ray-induced current variation ΔI = Ion − Ioff for increasing dose rates at different bias voltages. (c) Detector sensitivity values for different bias voltages, calculated from a linear fit of the plots reported in (b). 
Similar results have been obtained for platelet-shaped 4HCB crystals, which showed a linear response to X-ray irradiation for bias values up to 500 V with X-ray photoinduced current variations (ΔI = Ion − Ioff) of up to ten nA.15 The radiation hardness of OSSCs, i.e. their tolerance to high doses of ionizing radiation, is surprisingly high. Fig. 5 shows the current vs. time curve of a 4HCB crystal, with an on–off switching 35 keV X-ray beam, before and after having received a total X-ray dose of about 2 kGy. The detector performance of the same 4HCB crystal was measured again after 1 month of storage in the dark and its photo-response, again for an on–off switching 35 keV X-ray beam, is notably not altered. It is noteworthy that the ΔI = Ion − Ioff value is quite stable both after strong irradiation and after prolonged aging, even if the baseline current obviously shifts a little, which is likely due to bulk radiation damage and/or degradation effects which could be located either within the crystal or at the electrodes.
 Fig. 5  Current–time curves recorded along the c axis (see inset) under an on–off switching X-ray beam (35 keV @ 150 mGy s−1) before (black dotted line) and after (red solid line) a total dose of 2.1 kGy; the blue dashed line indicates the same measure repeated after one month. 
To investigate the role and the effects of the molecular anisotropic packing in the X-ray photo-response of OSSCs, it is useful to compare the responses of the DNN molecule, that crystallizes in a needle-like shape, and of the platelet-shaped crystals obtained with 4HCB (Fig. 1). While DNN crystals allow us to sample only one crystal axis, the axis parallel to the strongest π-stacking and faster crystal growth rate, 4HCB crystals allow us to investigate their photo-response along all three crystallographic directions (inset of Fig. 5). As can be inferred from the measured mobility values, the tighter π-stacking axes are the two planar axes (labelled a and b) which possess good mobility, while the vertical axis c is characterized by a poorer π-stacking degree and by a much smaller mobility (Table 1).29–31
Quite surprisingly, a direct comparison between the X-ray-induced photocurrent of a 4HCB crystal in the vertical collection geometry (small electrode on the top and on the bottom of the crystal) and in the planar collection geometry (two small electrodes on the top crystal surface), in identical experimental conditions (i.e. the same electrode distance of 200 μm and the same X-ray irradiation conditions) shows that the X-ray sensitivity is smaller along the planar axes (7 vs. 24 nC Gy−1 at 10 V) despite the fact that the charge carrier mobility is about 3 order of magnitude higher than along the vertical axis (Fig. 6). Moreover, the sensitivity is comparable along the main π-stacking axis for both DNN and 4HCB crystals (approx. 7 nC Gy−1 @10 V), which is accessed in both types of crystal with a planar electrode geometry.
 Fig. 6  X-ray-induced current variation of a 4HCB crystal in the vertical geometry (a) and planar geometry (b) for different X-ray doses. (c) Sketch of the electric field distribution in the vertical and planar geometries. The hypothetical effect of polar environmental molecules at the crystal surface in the planar geometry is also shown. (d) Sensitivity values recorded for a 4HCB-based detector in the planar and vertical geometries for three different bias voltages, i.e. 10 V, 50 V and 100 V. 
These results (i.e., the crystal axes characterized by the strongest π-stacking, that generally coincide with the best current transport axes, show a poorer X-ray photo-response) suggest that the planar electrode configuration is less performing regardless of the crystal shape (either needle-like or platelet). Three main causes can be hypothesised for this behaviour.
(i) The better electrical transport properties along crystal axes with strong π-stacking may be a limiting factor with respect to the crystal’s sensitivity to X-rays, due to the higher off currents.
(ii) The electric field distribution in the vertical geometry is much more effective in collecting the photogenerated carriers that in the planar geometry (see Fig. 6c). In the vertical geometry the whole electrode area can actively collect the induced charge carriers, while only a thin region around the electrode edge is effective in the planar geometry, even if the exciton diffusion length in OSSCs has been recently assessed to be about 8 μm.20
(iii) The high polarizability of the π-electrons at the crystal surface, possibly further enhanced by the direct exposure to X-rays that are known to cause the ionization of organic molecules, may result in interactions with polar environment molecules (water etc.), that when adsorbed at the surface can affect the carrier density distribution or trapping states in the first monolayer below the surface, as sketched in Fig. 6c (an effect which is analogous to the operating principle of organic field effect transistors).

Fig. 7a and b give a better insight into the different ΔI (=Ion − Ioff) response along the vertical and planar axes. The ΔI clearly remains smaller along the planar axes even after strong irradiation or a month-long aging. These results suggest that either the crystal surface plays a minor role in these measurements or its interaction with the environment and atmosphere always induces the same effects even after the strong radiation-hardness and aging tests which could have significantly altered the surface chemistry, its charge state or its conductivity. The current–voltage curves measured on the two axes of the same crystal in the dark (i.e. when the X-ray beam is off) (Fig. 7c and d) follow the SCLC behaviour, typical of high resistivity semiconductors.32 However, it is noteworthy that under X-ray exposure the electrical response of our crystals along the vertical direction remains purely ohmic, while along the planar axes it follows the same SCLC behaviour found in the dark, even at higher voltages. This suggests that the electrically active traps which control the SCLC transport in the dark along the vertical axis play no major role when the crystal is probed under X-rays. From a wider perspective, it is remarkable that the strong 3D anisotropy in the carrier mobility does not affect the resulting X-ray photo-response and sensitivity, and that OSSCs can be reliably used as detectors along all three crystallographic directions, irrespective of the mobility value in the dark, as is verified by the good linear response to increasing the X-ray dose rate along both the planar and vertical axes (Fig. 7e and f). However, the device electrode geometry appears to play a major role in the performance of the radiation detector, with the vertical sandwich geometry being much higher performing than the planar geometry (as clearly shown in Fig. 8, which shows the X-ray sensitivity for the planar and vertical axes of a 4HCB crystal under a 35 keV X-ray beam). Further research is ongoing to better clarify this issue.36
 Fig. 7  X-ray-induced photocurrent response of a 4HCB-based detector as a function of the bias voltage, collected along the vertical (a) and the planar (b) crystal axes, before (black squares) and after (red circles) a total dose of 2.1 kGy of X-ray irradiation and after one month (blue triangles). (c and d) Current–voltage curves for the two axes in the dark (black squares) and under X-ray irradiation (dose rate of 170 mGy s−1). The lack of the ohmic–SCLC transition under irradiation is shown. (e and f) X-ray-induced current variation ΔI = Ion − Ioff for increasing the dose rates at different bias voltages along the two axes. 
 Fig. 8  Comparison between the sensitivity values at different bias voltages for a 4HCB-based detector under 35 keV X-ray irradiation in the planar (black circles) and vertical (red squares) electrode configuration. 
5 Conclusions and outlook
Organic materials can be a novel and smart alternative to traditional inorganic semiconducting solid-state radiation detectors due to their low cost, wide availability and the possibility of achieving novel functionalities such as flexibility or transparency. In particular, OSSCs are better performing than organic thin films thanks to the following particular properties: (a) low dark current due to the wide effective band gap; (b) high degree of packing order; (c) long exciton diffusion length; (d) good carrier mobility; (e) possibility to tune their volume up to mm3; (f) greater stability in air.
Solution-grown OSSCs based on different molecules can perform well as solid state radiation detectors, as we have shown for crystals based on the molecules 4HCB and DNN. The crystal shape and geometry does not affect the detector performance, since both needle-like (DNN) and platelet crystals (4HCB) have been successfully assessed as X-ray detectors. Even if the anisotropic packing of the molecule affects the electronic transport properties of the crystal, inducing a carrier mobility which can vary up to 4 orders of magnitude along the three crystal axes, it is noteworthy that all axes can be used for the effective detection of ionizing radiation, paving the way to unprecedented radiation detector architectures. Interestingly, in 4HCB crystals, the largest sensitivity is obtained in the vertical geometry, even if in this configuration the electrodes do not connect the crystal axis with the best molecular π-stacking and carrier mobility. Further work is ongoing to better understand this point and the photo-physical processes generating the X-ray-induced charge carriers, together with their transport and collection mechanisms within the organic semiconducting single crystal.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the European Community under the FP7-ICT Project “i-FLEXIS” (GA n. 611070).
References

          G. Knoll, Radiation Detection and Measurement, Wiley, 4th edn  2011 Search PubMed .
Q. Chen, T. Hajagos and Q. Pei, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2011, 107, 298 RSC .
H. Dong, H. Zhu, Q. Meng, X. Gong and W. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1754 RSC .
G. C. Schmidt, M. Bellmann, H. Kempa, M. Hambsch, K. Reuter, M. Stanel and A. C. Hübler, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2011, 1285 Search PubMed .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323 CrossRef CAS ; S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Agostinelli, M. Caironi and D. Natali, 
            et al.
          , J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 114508 CrossRef .
T. N. Ng, W. S. Wong, M. L. Chabinyc, S. Sambandan and R. A. Street, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 213303 CrossRef ; P. E. Keivanidis, N. C. Greenham and H. Sirringhaus, 
            et al.
          , Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 023304 CrossRef .
K.-J. Baeg, M. Binda, D. Natali, M. Caironi and Y.-Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4267 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; X. Gong, M. H. Tong, Y. J. Xia, W. Z. Cai, J. S. Moon, Y. Cao, G. Yu, C. L. Shieh, B. Nilsson and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2009, 325, 1665 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yoshino, S. Hayashi and Y. Inuishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 1982, 21, L569 CrossRef CAS ; K. Yoshino, S. Hayashi, G. Ishii and Y. Inuishi, Solid State Commun., 1983, 46, 405 CrossRef .
S. Graham, R. Friend, S. Fung and S. Moratti, Synth. Met., 1987, 84, 903 CrossRef .
P. Beckerle and H. Ströbele, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2000, 449, 302 CrossRef CAS .
F. Boroumand, M. Zhu, A. Dalton, J. Keddie, P. Sellin and J. Gutierrez, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 33509 CrossRef .
A. Intaniwet, J. Keddie, M. Shkunov and P. Sellin, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1903 CrossRef CAS ; A. Intaniwet, C. A. Mills, M. Shkunov, H. Thiem, J. L. Keddie and P. J. Sellin, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 064513 CrossRef .
A. Intaniwet, C. Mills, M. Shkunov, P. J. Sellin and J. L. Keddie, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 235502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fraboni, A. Ciavatti, F. Merlo, L. Pasquini, A. Cavallini, A. Quaranta, A. Bonfiglio and A. Fraleoni-Morgera, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. E. Schlesinger and R. B. James, Semiconductors for Room Temperature Nuclear Detector Applications, Academic Press, San Diego,  1995 Search PubMed .
M. A. Butler, D. S. Ginley and J. W. Bryson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, C327 CrossRef .
A. Fraleoni-Morgera, G. Palma and J. Plaisier, RCS Adv., 2013, 3, 15664 CAS ; Ph. Leclère, M. Surina, P. Brocorensa, M. Cavallini, F. Biscarini and R. Lazzaroni, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2013, 55, 16 Search PubMed .
V. Podzorov, E. Menard, A. Borissov, V. Kiryukhin, J. A. Rogers and M. E. Gershenson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 086602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Najafov, B. Lee, Q. Zhou, L. C. Feldman and V. Podzorov, Nat. Mater., 2009, 10, 938 Search PubMed .
N. Karl, J. Cryst. Growth, 1990, 99, 1009 CrossRef CAS ; B. de Boer, 
            et al.
          , Phys. Status Solidi A, 2004, 201, 1302 CrossRef .
K. Sankaranarayanan and P. Ramasamy, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 292, 445 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Zaitseva, 
            et al.
          , LLNL-JRNL-414904, 2009, 1 Search PubMed ; G. Hull, 
            et al.
          , IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2009, 56, 899 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. B. Mannsfeld, A. Sharei, S. Liu, M. E. Roberts, I. McCulloch, M. Heeney and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4044 CrossRef CAS ; S. K. Park, T. N. Jackson, J. E. Anthony and D. A. Mourey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 063514 CrossRef ; Q. Tang, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2947 CrossRef .
H. Minemawari, T. Yamada, H. Matsui, J. Tsutsumi, S. Haas, R. Chiba, R. Kumai and T. Hasegawa, Nature, 2011, 475, 364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Diao, B. C.-K. Tee, G. Giri, J. Xu, Do H. Kim, H. A. Becerril, R. M. Stoltenberg, T. H. Lee, G. Xue, S. C. B. Mannsfeld and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fraleoni-Morgera, L. Benevoli and B. Fraboni, J. Cryst. Growth, 2010, 312, 3466 CrossRef CAS .
C. Reese and Z. Bao, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 20 CrossRef CAS ; J. Lee, S. Roth and Y. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 25216 Search PubMed .
B. Fraboni, C. Femoni, I. Mencarelli, L. Setti, R. Di Pietro, A. Cavallini and A. Fraleoni-Morgera, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1835 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fraboni, R. DiPietro, A. Castaldini, A. Cavallini, A. Fraleoni-Morgera, L. Setti, I. Mencarelli and C. Femoni, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 974 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fraboni, A. Fraleoni-Morgera and A. Cavallini, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 10 CrossRef CAS .
D. Braga, N. Battaglini, A. Yassar, G. Horowitz, M. Campione, A. Sassella and A. Borghesi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 115205 CrossRef ; 
          M. Lampert and P. Mark, Current Injection in Solids, Academic Press, New York,  1970 Search PubMed .
J. Trotter, Acta Crystallogr., 1960, 13, 95 CrossRef CAS .
E. Capria, L. Benevoli, A. Perucchi, B. Fraboni, M. Tessarolo, S. Lupi and A. Fraleoni-Morgera, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 6781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fraleoni-Morgera, M. Tessarolo, A. Perucchi, L. Baldassarre, S. Lupi and B. Fraboni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2563 CAS .

          A. Ciavatti, E. Capria, A. Fraleoni-Morgera, G. Tromaba, D. Dreossi, P. Sellin, B. Fraboni 2014, submitted for publication.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Optical microscopy images of (a) 4-hydroxycyanobenzene (4HCB) and (b) 1,5-dinitronaphthalene (DNN) organic single crystals. The images clearly show the different shapes of the crystals, i.e. the platelet shape of the 4HCB crystal and the needle-like shape of the DNN crystal. In the insets the chemical structures of the two molecules are reported.	 

 	Fig. 2  Current vs. voltage curve, in the double-logarithmic scale, of a DNN crystal within the space-charge conduction regime. The inset shows the schematic layout of the electrical ohmic contacts on a DNN crystal.	 

4HCB a axis	(1.0 ± 0.5) × 10−1
4HCB b axis	(4 ± 2) × 10−2
4HCB c axis	(2.0 ± 0.5) × 10−5
DNN	(2.2 ± 0.8) × 10−3

 	Fig. 3  (a) Current–voltage curves of a DNN crystal with Ag contacts in the dark (blue solid triangles), under X-ray irradiation at 117 mGy s−1 (red circles), and again in the dark after X-ray irradiation (black empty stars). (b) Current–time curves of the DNN-based device recorded switching the X-ray beam on–off for two different applied bias voltages, i.e. 2 V and 5 V. (c) Current–voltage curve of the DNN-based device under UV-Vis irradiation (red solid circles) and in the dark (black open squares); the two curves overlap perfectly.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Current–time curve of the DNN-based device recorded by switching on–off the X-ray beam (dose rate of 78 mGy s−1) and sweeping the bias voltage after each cycle. (b) X-ray-induced current variation ΔI = Ion − Ioff for increasing dose rates at different bias voltages. (c) Detector sensitivity values for different bias voltages, calculated from a linear fit of the plots reported in (b).	 

 	Fig. 5  Current–time curves recorded along the c axis (see inset) under an on–off switching X-ray beam (35 keV @ 150 mGy s−1) before (black dotted line) and after (red solid line) a total dose of 2.1 kGy; the blue dashed line indicates the same measure repeated after one month.	 

 	Fig. 6  X-ray-induced current variation of a 4HCB crystal in the vertical geometry (a) and planar geometry (b) for different X-ray doses. (c) Sketch of the electric field distribution in the vertical and planar geometries. The hypothetical effect of polar environmental molecules at the crystal surface in the planar geometry is also shown. (d) Sensitivity values recorded for a 4HCB-based detector in the planar and vertical geometries for three different bias voltages, i.e. 10 V, 50 V and 100 V.	 

 	Fig. 7  X-ray-induced photocurrent response of a 4HCB-based detector as a function of the bias voltage, collected along the vertical (a) and the planar (b) crystal axes, before (black squares) and after (red circles) a total dose of 2.1 kGy of X-ray irradiation and after one month (blue triangles). (c and d) Current–voltage curves for the two axes in the dark (black squares) and under X-ray irradiation (dose rate of 170 mGy s−1). The lack of the ohmic–SCLC transition under irradiation is shown. (e and f) X-ray-induced current variation ΔI = Ion − Ioff for increasing the dose rates at different bias voltages along the two axes.	 

 	Fig. 8  Comparison between the sensitivity values at different bias voltages for a 4HCB-based detector under 35 keV X-ray irradiation in the planar (black circles) and vertical (red squares) electrode configuration.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
