Specific cation interactions as the cause of slow dynamics and hysteresis in dye and perovskite solar cells: a small-perturbation study   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP05851E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP05851E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 31033-31042Specific cation interactions as the cause of slow dynamics and hysteresis in dye and perovskite solar cells: a small-perturbation study†

        
          
            Lidia 
            Contreras
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jesús 
            Idígoras
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Anna 
            Todinova
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Manuel 
            Salado
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Samrana 
            Kazim
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shahzada 
            Ahmad
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Juan A. 
            Anta
          
        
      *a
aÁrea de Química Física, Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Sevilla, Spain. E-mail: jaidileo@upo.es; anta@upo.es
bAbengoa Research, C/Energía Solar no. 1, Campus Palmas Altas, 41014 Sevilla, Spain
Received 
      24th August 2016
    , Accepted 18th October 2016First published on 19th October 2016AbstractHysteresis is one of the most remarkable features of perovskite solar cells; however, it is also present in other kinds of devices such as dye-sensitized solar cells. Hysteresis is due to underlying slow dynamic processes that interfere with the process of charge separation which depends critically on the selective contacts used. In this work we focus on the low-frequency (0.1–10 Hz) dynamics using impedance and intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy and found that both perovskite solar cells (PSCs) and “viscous electrolyte containing” dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) can be described on the same fundamental grounds. By comparing different electrolyte compositions in DSSCs and both methylammonium and formamidinium-based PSCs, we find a connection between the polar nature of the cations and the low-frequency component of these solar cells. There is evidence that in both cases ion transport and specific chemical interactions with the TiO2 surface give rise to the slow dynamics and the hysteresis. This is mainly inferred from the slope of the capacitance vs. applied voltage which shows accumulation behavior for the formulations with higher dipole moments only.
Introduction
The field of photovoltaics has undergone a rapid progress in the last few years due to the advent of solar cells based on hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites (PSCs) with excellent photovoltaic properties.1–5 These materials have received significant interest from the research community due to their large absorption coefficient, direct band gap, high charge carrier mobility and long carrier diffusion lengths.6–8 As a result, since the first report of the perovskite material as a sensitizer in a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC, η = 3.8%),9 a significant improvement of the photovoltaic conversion efficiency has been achieved. Indeed, power conversion efficiencies higher than 20% have been reported,10–12 whereas the current certified record efficiency has been established as 22.0%. This remarkable development was possible due to intensive research focused on perovskite synthesis, device design and improvement in the long-term stability. However, in spite of different characterization techniques used to cast light on the fundamental working principles of PSCs, the origin and behavior of many physical processes are not yet completely understood.
One of these processes is the hysteresis found in the current–voltage characteristics (I–V curves). As a result of this hysteretic behavior, the real photovoltaic performance is difficult to be determined using the conventional I–V curve method. The shape of the curve dramatically depends on the scan rate, voltage sweep direction and pre-polarization time (poling).13–19 Thus, the output current while sweeping the voltage could lead to an overestimation or underestimation of the real efficiency. The hysteresis not only depends on the conditions under which the I–V curves are recorded, but also on other factors related to the device configuration such as the charge selective contacts (structural properties and the nature of n-contact and p-contact layers) and perovskite processing conditions (perovskite composition, crystal formation and deposition techniques).20–23 Additionally, rapid degradation and low stability have also been found for PSCs characterized by a pronounced hysteresis.16,24 Ferroelectric behavior,25–28 ionic migration,14,16,29,30 interfacial charge accumulation due to trapping–detrapping processes15,20,31 and structural changes32,33 of the perovskite material have been proposed in the literature as possible explanations for this phenomenon. However, recent papers point to the slow dynamic processes as the origin of hysteresis. In particular, dielectric relaxation and interfacial charge accumulation processes connected to ion migration, observed in the seconds–milliseconds time scale, have been pointed out as the decisive cause of the hysteresis.13,16,22,24,33–37
In this connection, it is interesting to stress that the hysteresis is also a feature of other kinds of solar cells, at is the case of DSSCs.38,39 Yang et al. proposed an equivalent circuit model to simulate the I–V curves of DSSCs and study the influence of delay times on the hysteresis.38 Yang related the large time constant of DSSCs to the large capacitance and the slow Nernstian ionic diffusion in the electrolyte. Sarker et al. developed a theoretical model whose numerical solution allowed estimating the hysteresis in I–V curves of DSSCs.39 The chemical capacitance of a TiO2 photoanode and the double layer capacitance at the substrate/electrolyte and counterelectrode/electrolyte interfaces were suggested as the determining factors of hysteresis in DSSCs. Nevertheless, this model does not consider the ion diffusion in the electrolyte.
In spite of the many papers that have hinted at the effect of ionic motion on the hysteresis, many points still remain obscure, such as the nature of the moving species and the specific effects produced by different contacts. In this respect it is important to stress that many reports are based on theoretical studies done in the bulk with no consideration of the effect of specific interactions between the mobile species causing the hysteresis and the chemical nature of the surface of the selective contact.
In this paper we provide a deeper insight into these hysteresis-determining factors in DSSCs and PSCs by using small-perturbation optoelectronic techniques. DSSCs containing a highly viscous room temperature ionic-liquid (RTIL) and large organic cations with low mobility serve as a good model for the processes occurring in the ionic lattice of the perovskite, because the functioning of a DSSC relies on efficient ionic motion in the liquid electrolyte. Hence, we study the influence of viscosity of the electrolyte solvent and the nature of the perovskite cations on the hysteretic behavior of both kinds of solar devices, with the intention of finding out the common features and the relevant differences. To perform this study, the viscosity of the electrolyte in DSSCs was controlled not only by mixing the RTIL with acetonitrile at various mixing ratios, but also by varying the device temperature up to 318 K (below the tetragonal to cubic transition reported for MAPBI6 perovskites). The analogies between DSSCs and PSCs studied by small-perturbation techniques have already been reported recently by us.40 However, in this paper we focus on the low-frequency component of both DSSCs and PSCs in order to determine the slow dynamic processes causing the hysteresis. Similar features in relation to the hysteresis have been found. In particular, pronounced hysteretic behavior was found for samples characterized by high dipole moment coupled with low ionic diffusion coefficient. Interestingly, we find that the slow dynamic processes are thermally-activated not only in PSCs, but also in DSSCs. The activation energies for the hysteresis-determining processes were extracted from the temperature dependence of the low-frequency components of impedance and intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IS and IMPS). Our results point to the joint effect of ionic migration and charge accumulation at the TiO2/electrolyte and TiO2/perovskite interfaces under the electrode polarization as the origin of hysteresis. In this regard, we have paid special attention to the known fact that different selective contacts in perovskite solar cells lead to different degrees of hysteresis.20 Given the observed behavior herein that DSSCs with a more polar solvent (higher RTIL/acetonitrile ratio) produce higher low-frequency capacitances, and PSCs based on formamidinium cations produce lower values, we speculate that one of the key factors behind the hysteresis is the chemical interaction between TiO2 and cations in the electrolyte or in the perovskite. These interactions can create energy barriers to the charge separation likely due to the modification of the space charge layer. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report where analogies between DSSCs and PSCs are discussed in terms of the hysteretic behavior, using simultaneously electrical and optical small-perturbation techniques to extract conclusions about the nature of the cations and their interaction with the substrate.
Experimental
Fabrication of dye-sensitized solar cells
The working electrodes were made using 12 μm thick films consisting of a layer of 8 μm of 20 nm TiO2 nanoparticles (18NR-T, Dyesol) and a layer of 4 μm of 400 nm TiO2 particles (18NR-AO, Dyesol) with an active surface area of 0.16 cm2. Prior to the deposition of the TiO2 paste, the conducting glass substrates (Pilkington-TEC15) were firstly cleaned in ultrasonic baths of detergents, deionized water, isopropanol and ethanol successively, and heated to 500 °C. Secondly, conducting glass substrates were immersed in a solution of TiCl4 (40 mM) for 30 minutes at 70 °C and heated to 500 °C. The TiO2 nanoparticle paste was deposited onto a conducting glass substrate using the screen printing technique. The TiO2 electrodes were gradually heated under air flow at 325 °C for 5 min, 375 °C for 5 min, 450 °C for 15 min and 500 °C for 15 min. The heated TiO2 electrodes were immersed again in a solution of TiCl4 (40 mM) at 70 °C for 30 min and heated again at 500 °C for 30 min. The dye solution was composed of 0.3 mM N719 and 0.3 mM chenodeoxycholic acid in ethanol. The counter-electrode was made by spreading a Platisol solution (Solaronix) onto a conducting glass substrate (Pilkington-TEC8), followed by heating at 390 °C for 15 minutes. Finally, the working- and counter-electrodes were sandwiched together using a thin thermoplastic frame (Surlyn, Solaronix). The cells were filled with electrolytes of varying composition with the aim of tuning the viscosity (see Table S1 in ESI†) through a hole previously made in the back of a platinized counter electrode. Then, the hole was sealed with a thermoplastic polymer and a cover slide glass.
Fabrication of perovskite solar cells
Perovskite solar cell devices were fabricated on FTO-coated glass (Pilkington-TEC15) patterned by laser etching. Prior to use, the substrates were cleaned using Hellmanex® solution and rinsed with deionized water and ethanol. Following this they were ultrasonicated in acetone, rinsed using 2-propanol and dried by using compressed air. The TiO2 compact layer was deposited by spray pyrolysis at 450 °C using a titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) precursor solution (75% in 2-propanol, Sigma Aldrich) using O2 as a carrier gas. The TiO2 blocking layer was then annealed for further 30 minutes at 450 °C for the formation of the anatase phase. Once the samples reach room temperature, a TiO2 mesoporous layer (Dyesol, 30NRD) was deposited by spin coating (4000 rpm for 30 s) and the samples were annealed at 450 °C. Subsequently the perovskite layer was deposited, pure methylammonium (MAPbI3) was deposited using a sequential method reported41 or a mixed cation perovskite MA0.6FA0.4PbI3 by using a one-step solvent engineering method.42 Homogeneous and free-pinhole perovskite layers were obtained (see ESI,† Fig. S1). Spiro-OMeTAD was then deposited as a hole transporting material, by dissolving 72.3 mg in 1 mL of chlorobenzene and using standard additives 17.5 μL of a lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (LiTFSI) stock solution (520 mg of LiTFSI in 1 mL of acetonitrile), 21.9 μL of a FK209 (tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)-cobalt(III)tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide)) stock solution (400 mg in 1 mL of acetonitrile) and 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP). Then 35 μL of HTM solution was dropped on the perovskite substrates of the solar cell samples described above and the samples were spin coated at 4000 rpm for 30 seconds. For the metallic cathode, 80 nm of gold was deposited by thermal evaporation at a vacuum level between 1 × 10−6 and 1 × 10−5 Torr. The perovskite devices show an active surface area of 0.49 cm2. All the solutions were prepared inside an argon glove box under controlled moisture and oxygen conditions (H2O level: <1 ppm and O2 level: <10 ppm).
Characterization of devices
The devices were characterized using two different light sources: (1) a solar simulator (ABET-Sun2000) with an AM 1.5G filter and (2) a green light emitting diode (LED, LUXEON). The light intensity was recorded using a reference solar cell with temperature output (Oriel, 91150). The current–voltage characteristics were determined by applying an external potential bias to the cell and measuring the photocurrent using an Autolab/PGSTAT302N potentiostat. The current–voltage characteristic was measured at different scan rates: 200, 100, 50 and 10 mV s−1 in the temperature range of 278–338 K. To avoid any degradation process related to the temperature, the measurements were carried out under a N2-atmosphere. For the time-dependent photocurrent measurements, the devices were kept in the dark at short-circuit conditions and then the sample was illuminated to measure Jsc with time. The illumination for the impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements was provided by a green LED over a wide range of DC light intensities. This allows for probing the devices at different positions of the Fermi level in the semiconductor. A response analyzer module (PGSTAT302N/FRA2, Autolab) was utilized to analyze the frequency response of the devices. To avoid voltage drop due to series resistance, IS measurements were performed at the open circuit potential, the Fermi level (related to the open-circuit voltage) being fixed by the DC illumination intensity. A 20 mV perturbation in the 106–10−2 Hz range was utilized to obtain the spectra. Intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) measurements were carried out by coupling the PGSTAT302N/FRA2 module to the LED. IMPS measurements were performed at short-circuit in the 105 to 10−2 Hz range with light perturbation corresponding to 10% of the DC background illumination intensity. Both the small-perturbation techniques (IS and IMPS) were carried out at different temperatures. NOVA 1.7 software was used to generate IS data. Z-view equivalent circuit modeling software (Scribner) was used to fit the IS spectra, including the distributed element DX11 (transmission line model) for the DSSC measurements.
Results and discussion
The power conversion efficiencies for different DSSCs and PSCs measured under standard conditions (1 sun – AM 1.5 illumination) were in the range of 0.7–7% and 11–13%, respectively. To test the reproducibility of the samples, three devices were characterized for each configuration, and no significant deviations were found between them (see ESI,† Table S2 and Fig. S2). Note that the large range of efficiencies obtained for DSSCs was a consequence of different electrolyte solvents employed in each DSSC configuration (Table S1, ESI†).

Fig. 1 and 2 show current–voltage characteristics of DSSCs and PSCs of varying composition measured by cyclic voltammetry. The measurement was started with a reverse scan (to short-circuit conditions) after waiting for 10 s at 1 V and 1.2 V for DSSCs and PSCs respectively, and was then continued with a forward scan (to open-circuit conditions). The measurements were performed with different scan rates (200, 100, 50 and 10 mV s−1) and in the temperature range of 278–338 K. In all cases, the photocurrent was normalized with respect to its value at −0.1 V.
 Fig. 1  Normalized (reference voltage: −0.1 V) current–voltage curves of DSSCs measured in the reverse scan (line) and forward scan (dash line) under a light intensity of 10 mW cm−2 using a green LED. The influence of hysteresis-determining factors is specifically shown: (A) scan rate, (B) temperature and (C) electrolyte solvent. 
 Fig. 2  Normalized (reference voltage: −0.1 V) current–voltage curves of PSCs measured in the reverse scan (line) and forward scan (dash line) under a light intensity of 10 mW cm−2 using a green LED. The influence of different determining factor-dependence on hysteresis is shown: (A) scan rate, (B) temperature and (C) perovskite composition. 
In order to quantify the hysteresis effect, we have defined the dimensionless hysteresis index (HI) in the following way:  where Jmp is the photocurrent at the maximum power point. As shown in Fig. 1, the following trends are observed. When a higher RTIL/ACN ratio, lower temperature and a faster scan rate were applied to the device, the hysteresis becomes more pronounced (higher HI) giving rise to significant differences in the I–V curves. In detail, this hysteretic behavior involves remarkable differences in the I–V curve measured in reverse and forward scans affecting not only the open-circuit photovoltage or the fill factor (the maximum power point) but also the short-circuit photocurrent as shown in Fig. S3A (see ESI†).
Considering that the I–V curves are based on the photocurrent measurement during the stepwise change in the applied bias voltage, long delay times at each applied potential, which correspond to slow scan rates, are necessary to reach the steady-state photocurrent. As it was also previously reported by X. Yang et al.,38 there is hysteresis at open-circuit conditions when short delay times are employed for the I–V curve characterization of DSSCs. In line with our results, higher Voc values were found in the reverse scan than in the forward scan. The hysteretic behavior has been attributed to the slow Nernstian diffusion of ions in the electrolyte.38 Therefore, it is expected that for smaller ionic diffusion coefficients, longer delay times (slower scan rates) are required to measure the steady-state photocurrent. Consequently, for a particular ionic diffusion coefficient, the faster the scan rate, the more pronounced hysteresis is found (Fig. 1A). In the same way, the higher the solvent electrolyte viscosity and the smaller the ionic diffusion coefficient, as it is expected for higher RTIL/ACN ratios and/or lower temperatures, more pronounced hysteresis at the same scan rate is also found (Fig. 1B and C). This behavior is in line with the time-dependent photocurrent density measurements as shown in Fig. S4 (see ESI†). Before reaching the steady-state photocurrent, a stronger exponential decay, attributed to the accumulated capacitive current, was found for the situations of stronger hysteresis (smaller ionic diffusion coefficients). Different capacitive elements were previously associated with the hysteresis found in different regions of the I–V curve.39
Analogous features were observed for PSCs. In analogy to DSSCs, the hysteretic behavior appears at open-circuit conditions, short-circuit conditions (see Fig. S3B in ESI†) and the maximum power point. Although no bumps are found for the scan rates and poling conditions explored, bumps have also been observed in PSCs before.16 For this reason, we found it more convenient to define the hysteresis index according to23  where J0.8·Voc is the photocurrent at 80% of Voc. (Note that this different definition of HI does not affect the discussion of the results.) In relation to the scan rate effect, the hysteresis between reverse and forward scans is more pronounced when faster scan rates were employed, whereas it tends to disappear at slow scan rates (Fig. 2A). Note that no significant difference appeared in the reverse scans, the forward scans being the most affected. As in DSSCs, higher efficiencies were expected in the reverse scan due to the higher Voc, Jsc and FF values. This hysteretic behavior could be related to the inevitable poling of a high positive voltage (1 V for DSSCs and 1.2 V for PSCs) carried out in the reverse scans as was proposed by Zou et al.18 This different response is expected as charge separation/collection depends on the voltage sweep direction.16,23,43 On the other hand, the same temperature dependence was also found in PSCs. As shown in Fig. 2B, the hysteresis is almost negligible at the highest temperature, 318 K, (below the orthorhombic-to-cubic transition of MAPbI3) and becomes more pronounced with decreasing temperature, which suggests that the hysteresis is a temperature-dependent process. Additionally, the temperature dependence not only affects the hysteretic behavior, but also the Voc. For both DSSC and PSC configurations, as it is expected from the general diode model,44,45 the lower the temperature the higher the Voc values. As shown in Fig. S5 (see ESI†), the temperature-dependent Voc can also be rationalized as a consequence of the behavior of the electron recombination resistances with respect to temperature. At higher temperatures electron acceptors (tri-iodides in DSSCs and holes in PSCs45) move faster and, consequently, the number of recombination events is likely to increase. Additionally, slower transport promotes the charge accumulation at the contact which is one of the origins of the hysteresis according to recent literature.14,16,29,30 In particular, this charge accumulation at the interface between the perovskite and the electron selective layer is intimately related to the ionic migration within the 3D framework created by vertex-shared PbI6 octahedra. In relation to these ionic migration processes, as shown in Fig. 2C, the cationic composition of the active layer appears to be critical. PSCs based on a mixture of the MA and FA cations exhibit an insignificant hysteresis effect with respect to PSCs based on pure MA.24,46,47
Bearing in mind that the hysteresis seems to be related to slow charge diffusion and interfacial charge accumulation, impedance spectroscopy and intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy measurements were performed to investigate the influence of different electronic and ionic processes. In Fig. 3, the complex impedance and capacitance-dependent frequency plots for DSSC and PSC configurations are shown.
 Fig. 3  Complex-impedance plots for different (A) DSSCs and (B) PSCs obtained under illumination at the open-circuit photovoltage of each cell at 1 Sun. The inset shows a blow-up of the intermediate frequency region to show the occurrence of a loop in the MAI/FAI system. Frequency-dependent capacitance for (C) DSSCs and (D) PSCs at 0.695 V and 0.910 V, respectively. 
As shown in Fig. 3A, the spectra are characterized by the three semicircles typically observed in DSSCs. As is well known,48–50 the high-frequency (Hf) semicircle, the closest one to the origin, is related to charge transfer at the platinum counter-electrode, the one at mid-frequencies (Mf) arises from electronic processes at the oxide/electrolyte interface and the semicircle appearing at low frequencies (Lf) reflects the diffusion of redox species in the electrolyte. It is important to mention that this semicircle appears only in the cells with the most viscous electrolytes (higher RTIL/ACN ratio), as a consequence of significant mass-transport limitation. However, PSCs show only two well-differentiated semicircles (Fig. 3B). Previous reports have mainly attributed the Hf semicircle to the electronic transport and recombination processes, whereas the Lf semicircle was attributed to the ionic diffusion and/or the interfacial charge accumulation between the perovskite and the electron selective layers.13,24,40,51,52 In addition a loop at intermediate frequencies appears for the mixed perovskite. The origin of this feature will be discussed below.
In order to study the general evolution of capacitive processes, Fig. 3C and D show the frequency-dependent capacitance for DSSCs and PSCs at 0.695 V and 0.910 V (values close to open-circuit conditions), respectively. Different plateaus are observed in succession, which are related to different polarization processes.20,23,24,52 In particular, the Mf and Hf plateaus for DSSCs and PSCs, which show capacitance values in the range of 10−4–10−5 F cm−2 and 10−6–10−7 F cm−2, were associated with the chemical capacitance of TiO2 and the dielectric polarization of the perovskite material in the bulk, respectively. However, Lf plateaus, with capacitance values in the range of 10−2–10−4 F cm−2, were previously attributed to the interfacial charge accumulation upon application of an external electrical field. Zarazua et al. found that interfacial charge accumulation could modify the space charge layer of the electron selective layer affecting the charge separation and/or recollection efficiency.53 Therefore, it is expected that the higher the Lf capacitance values are, the more pronounced the hysteresis, as can be easily confirmed by comparing with the data in Fig. 1C, 2C and 3C and D. Similar results were found in previous papers where the hysteresis was studied in relation to the selective contacts and the perovskite crystal size.20,23 It is important to stress that exactly the same rule holds for DSSCs, a feature that has not been reported before.
In order to make efficient PSCs, it is very important to understand the molecular origin of different hysteretic behavior observed. In this context, the analogies observed between DSSCs and PSCs can be very illuminating. As mentioned, hysteresis has been attributed to ionic migration. However some authors have assumed that the migration of the organic cations is the cause of the slow transport process causing the hysteresis,24 whereas others claim that halide ions and/or ion vacancies are the mobile species.36 Nevertheless, the results might also be related to the formation of TiO2/perovskite interfacial dipoles, which could induce an energetic barrier modifying electron extraction.18 Therefore, our results could be explained in terms of polarity. The differentiated dipole moments previously reported for MA+ and FA+ cations (2.28 and 0.21 D, respectively)54 can explain the lower Lf capacitance values found for MAI/FAI samples with respect to MAI samples and the smaller Lf semicircle in the complex-impedance plot (Fig. 3B), because MA+ cations are more likely to interact with the TiO2 surface than FA+ ones. Exactly the same effect can be inferred from the DSSC data bearing in mind the nature of RTIL (high polarity) with respect to ACN (low polarity).55 The highest Lf capacitance values found for Pyr100 could be related to the highest charge (cations) accumulation at the TiO2/electrolyte interface as a consequence of the generated interfacial dipoles. This assumption is confirmed by the trends observed in the chemical capacitance (extracted from the Mf feature) as a function of electrolyte composition (see Fig. S6 in ESI†). This effect is analogous to the typical result obtained in a DSSC when substances like Li+ or TBP are added to the electrolyte.56,57 These results point to the strong impact of the TiO2/electrolyte and TiO2/perovskite interface on the Lf capacitive response, which is in practice, and together with ion migration, the ultimate cause of hysteresis.
To cast more light on these phenomena and evaluate the effect of ionic diffusion on the hysteresis together with the interfacial charge accumulation upon the application of an external electrical field, we focused our attention on the Lf component. Bearing in mind the wide variety of equivalent circuits proposed to the IS fitting for PSCs, we have directly extracted the time constant (τ) of the Lf component from IS frequency plots, where the imaginary part of impedance (Z′′) is plotted versus frequency. The time constants were extracted as τ = 1/w, where w is the angular frequency which is related to the frequency as w = 2πf. Fig. 4 shows the IS frequency plots obtained for the DSSCs and PSCs at room temperature and the influence of different temperatures on the Lf component for Pyr75 and MAI/FAI devices.
 Fig. 4  IS frequency plots of the imaginary part for DSSCs and PSCs at different temperatures and compositions. 
As shown in Fig. 4, for both DSSCs and PSCs the Lf components appear in the range of 0.01–1 Hz and consequently, their characteristic time constants are in the time scale of seconds–milliseconds. Taking into account that they cannot be associated with recombination processes, which show up in the range of 10−2–10−3 s and 10−4–10−5 s for DSSCs and PCSs, respectively,40,51 we ascribe these slow dynamic processes to ionic-Warburg diffusion either in the bulk or in the vicinity of the contact surface. The ionic diffusion coefficient (Dn) from IS frequency plots was extracted as58  where τLF is the characteristic time constant of the Lf component and LD is the distance between working and counter-electrodes in DSSCs and the thickness of the active perovskite layer in PSCs. Values of 25 μm (spacer thickness) and 300 nm (thickness of the perovskite film) were assumed for this in DSSCs and PSCs, respectively. For DSSCs, the characteristic peak of this ion-induced Lf component shifts to smaller frequencies when the RTIL/ACN ratio increases or the temperature decreases (Fig. 4A and B). This behavior points to smaller ionic diffusion coefficients as a consequence of higher electrolyte viscosity as shown in Fig. S7A (see ESI†). Analogous results were obtained for PSCs. For MAI/FAI samples the Lf component appears at higher frequencies than for MAI samples, which suggests faster ionic transport within the perovskite layer. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. S7B (see ESI†), the same ionic diffusion temperature trend was found for both PSCs. It is also important to emphasize that there is no voltage dependence of the diffusion coefficient, in contrast to the electronic one, as reported before by our group.40
It is important to identify the mobile species that give rise to the low-frequency feature in the spectrum. In this respect, there is conflicting information in the literature. For instance, Bag et al. claimed that the motion of iodide anions is too fast to be captured by the low frequency region of the impedance spectrum, and that the ammonium cations are the mobile species.24 In contrast, based on theoretical calculations, Meloni and coworkers21 claimed that it is the iodides which migrate with the application of an external field. In our results we observe however that the “slow” process is much “faster” in the case of MAI/FAI samples with respect to MAI, hence producing lower hysteresis. As the organic component is the only difference between the two types of samples, this strongly suggests that the ionic diffusion coefficients extracted from the Lf component can be attributed to the cation movement, and not to the halides. Furthermore, the ionic diffusion coefficients extracted from the impedance are in the same range as those reported in the literature.24
The fact that transport is faster for the MAI/FAI samples is confirmed by IMPS. Fig. 5 shows the IMPS frequency plots for the PSCs studied at the two compositions and at different temperatures.
 Fig. 5  IMPS frequency plots of the imaginary part for both PSCs at different temperatures. 
IMPS has been extensively used to provide information about the electron transport processes in DSSCs.59 For these systems, the IMPS Nyquist plot is characterized by only one semicircle, whose characteristic time constant is related to the electron transport through the nanocrystalline mesoporous semiconductor. However, as shown in Fig. S8 (see ESI†), three semicircles were found for PSCs. As also shown in Fig. 5, the IMPS frequency plot shows three well-differentiated peaks in different frequency ranges, which point to three different charge transport processes characterized by different time constants. According to previous works,35,51 the two Hf components, which appear in the range of 104 Hz and 103 Hz are voltage-dependent, attributed to electron transport processes in the HTM or perovskite layer and mesoporous TiO2 network, respectively. Nevertheless, the Lf component, whose characteristic time constant appears in the seconds time scale (≈1 Hz), has been recently associated with the ionic movement.35 Focusing on this latter component, a lower ionic diffusion coefficient is expected for MAI samples, whose peak appears at lower frequencies as shown in Fig. 5A. This behavior is in line with the ionic diffusion coefficient extracted from IS for both PSC configurations (Fig. 4C).
In spite of the qualitative consistency shown by both small-perturbation techniques, larger characteristic time constants of the Lf component extracted from IS with respect to the ones extracted from IMPS were found as shown in Fig. S9 (see ESI†). To account for this difference, we have to bear in mind that a different kind of perturbation is applied in IS and IMPS measurements, which is electrical and optical, respectively. Additionally, IS and IMPS are carried out at open-circuit and short-circuit conditions, respectively. Nevertheless, the similar temperature dependence was found for this ion-induced Lf component extracted from IMPS. As shown in Fig. 5B, this characteristic peak shifts to higher frequencies when the temperature increases suggesting a faster charge diffusion coefficient. These results are in good agreement with the hysteresis indices found for different device configurations. In particular, hysteretic behavior has an inverse proportionality to the charge diffusion coefficients. They also reveal, as shown below, an Arrhenius-like dependence on the temperature.
In order to investigate the temperature dependence of the ionic diffusion coefficient, Arrhenius plots were elaborated from the low frequency data extracted from IS (Fig. 6). As linear plots are obtained in the semilogarithmic representation, it is demonstrated that the slow dynamics is thermally activated in all studied cases. This is consistent with both the ionic transport nature of the low frequency features and the interaction of these ions with the TiO2 surface, as hinted above. The activation energy (Ea) was extracted from the Arrhenius law, which relates in this case the low frequency component (τLF) and temperature according to  where A is the Arrhenius prefactor, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature and C is a constant. As shown in Fig. 6, the activation energies of the ionic diffusion processes for the most viscous electrolytes employed in DSSCs and for both PSC configurations were extracted plotting ln(T/τLF)−1versus 1000/T.
 Fig. 6  Arrhenius-like plot ln(T/τLF)−1versus 1000/T for Pyr75, Pyr100, MAI and MAI/FAI samples. τLF was extracted from the IS low-frequency component. 
By measuring the impedance spectra at different temperatures, activation energies of 21.2 and 30.1 kJ mol−1 were found for Pyr75 and Pyr100, respectively, whereas for PSCs, activation energies of 35.4 kJ mol−1 for MAI and 41.5 kJ mol−1 for MAI/FAI were obtained. These results indicate that the viscosity of the electrolyte solvent and the nature of the perovskite cation determine the temperature dependence of charge diffusion as well as surface accumulation and, consequently, the hysteretic behavior. In relation to the two perovskite compositions, higher activation energies for MAxFA1−xPbI3 (61 kJ mol−1) with respect to MAPbI3 (56 kJ mol−1) in the same low temperature range as we used (<320 K) were reported by M. Bag and coworkers.24 However, a better agreement with the activation energy values previously reported by Meloni (32.9 kJ mol−1)21 and Yuan (34.7 kJ mol−1)60 has been found for MAPbI3. The wide range of activation energies reported in the literature are a consequence of different perovskite configurations and characterization techniques employed,21 which could also explain the different activation energies extracted from IMPS (see Fig. S10 in ESI†). Although the IS and IMPS results are in general consistent, it must be pointed out that neither the absolute values of the diffusion coefficients nor the activation energies coincide between both techniques. As mentioned, this should be considered as a consequence of the different impact that either an electrical perturbation, as is the case of IS, or an optical one, as in IMPS, can produce on the perovskite. In fact, structural changes have been reported under illumination31 and the conductivity has been found to increase under illumination.53 In spite of these differences, it is a general result that in both cases the chemical composition of the active layer of the device and, in addition, the nature of the electron selective contact significantly determines the ion transport and surface accumulation, and hence the occurrence of hysteresis. Therefore, the two phenomena have to take place simultaneously to give rise to the hysteresis. This conclusion appears to be in line with recent theoretical models.61
To provide further evidence of the effect of the surface and the nature of the mobile species that gives rise to the low-frequency feature in the IS and IMPS spectra and the hysteresis, we have analyzed the variation of the low-frequency limit of the capacitance (Fig. 3C and D) with respect to photovoltage. The results are shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Low-frequency capacitance (Fig. 3D) with respect to open-circuit potential. The results obtained for the two perovskite compositions studied are shown. The labels indicate the slope in V−1 extracted from both datasets. 
According to Zarazua et al.53 accumulation of electrons at the TiO2 interface is evidenced by a (2kBT)−1 slope in the Cs–V semilogarithmic plot (19.2 V−1 at 298 K). We indeed observe a straight line with a slope close to this value for the cells made of pure MAI. In contrast, the mixed perovskite gives a much lower value. This result strongly suggests that an accumulation regime is taking place in the case of MAI as a consequence of the effective interaction of MA+ cations with the TiO2 surface, which compensates the surface accumulation of the majority carrier. This interaction almost does not occur when FA+ is present, on account of its lower dipole moment. A similar behavior was found for DSSCs (see Fig. S11 in ESI†), for which the cell with pyrrolidinium in the electrolyte also shows a slope close to the theoretical value of (2kBT)−1. Hence, it is the nature of the cation and its interaction with the surface that determine the low-frequency feature and the hysteresis. This seems to be in contradiction with the theoretical studies that point to halide anions as the reason of ionic motion and hysteresis. However, it has to be borne in mind that these studies are carried out in the bulk of the perovskite, while the processes that matter take place at the selective contact/perovskite interface. This is why perovskite devices made with different contacts, but with the same perovskite, show a very distinct hysteretic phenomenon, even with no apparent hysteresis found for certain contacts such as organic layers.20 The accumulation regime creates a surface dipole at the TiO2/perovskite interface that involves electrons and cations and affects the extraction of charge and hence the hysteresis. An analogous phenomenon has been described in polymer solar cells.62
Further evidence that there is charge accumulation in the case of MAI samples is the absence of the inductive loop in the impedance spectrum (see inset in Fig. 3B). According to Guerrero et al.52 good extraction of charges at the contacts appears to be related to the appearance of such an inductive component in the mid-frequency region of the spectrum. In the present study such a feature only appears for MAI/FAI samples suggesting better charge separation and/or charge extraction.
Conclusions
We have studied thoroughly the hysteretic phenomena occurring in the I–V curves of dye-sensitized solar cells as well as in perovskite solar cells by small-perturbation optoelectronic analysis, including both impedance spectroscopy and intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy. By studying the devices of various compositions and at different temperatures, we have found that the hysteresis in both kinds of solar cells can be rationalized on the same grounds, with a slow transport process, thermally activated and appearing in the low-frequency region of the spectra, being the cause of the hysteresis.
In this work a correlation between the polar nature of the electroactive species and the magnitude of the low-frequency limit of the capacitance is observed. This correlation, together with the previously reported results for different selective layers in perovskite solar cells, suggests that it is not only the slow transport in the bulk that causes the hysteresis, but also the specific interaction of electroactive species with the electron selective material, TiO2 in this case. By looking at the analogy with dye solar cells, it is inferred that for perovskite devices, the more prominent low-frequency feature and the stronger hysteresis found for pure methylammonium solar cells are due to the specific interaction of this cation with the TiO2 surface on account of it larger electric dipole. Hence, the nature of the cations and not halide ions is responsible for the rich slow dynamic characteristic of perovskite solar cells and the related hysteresis.
Finally, based on the variety of data collected, we further conclude that small-perturbation optoelectronic techniques prove to be very powerful tools to study solar cells due to their capability to separate processes occurring at very different frequency domains.
Acknowledgements
We thank Junta de Andalucía for providing financial support via grants FQM 1851 and FQM 2310. We thank Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad of Spain for offering support under a grant MAT2013-47192-C3-3-R.
References
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739 CAS .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, O. Inganäs, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400812 CrossRef .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Meet. Abstr., 2007, 8, 352 Search PubMed .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 805 Search PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dualeh, T. Moehl, N. Tétreault, J. Teuscher, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Unger, E. T. Hoke, C. D. Bailie, W. H. Nguyen, A. R. Bowring, T. Heumuller, M. G. Christoforo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3690 CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T. W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tress, M. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995 CAS .
B. C. O'Regan, P. R. F. Barnes, X. Li, C. Law, E. Palomares and J. M. Marin-Beloqui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5087 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zou and R. J. Holmes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1969 Search PubMed .
B. Chen, M. Yang, S. Priya and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, I. H. Jang, N. Ahn, M. Choi, A. Guerrero, J. Bisquert and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Meloni, T. Moehl, W. Tress, M. Franckevicius, M. Saliba, Y. H. Lee, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin and U. Rothlisberger, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sanchez, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, J. W. Lee, N. G. Park, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bag, L. A. Renna, R. Y. Adhikari, S. Karak, F. Liu, P. Lahti, T. P. Russell, M. T. Tuominen and D. Venkataraman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, R. S. Sanchez, L. Badia, G. Garcia-Belmonte, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler and A. Walsh, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 81506 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao, B. Yang and J. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6027 CAS .
J. Wei, Y. Zhao, H. Li, G. Li, J. Pan, D. Xu, Q. Zhao and D. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1969 Search PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Jena, H. W. Chen, A. Kogo, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9817 CAS .
R. Gottesman, L. Gouda, B. S. Kalanoor, E. Haltzi, S. Tirosh, E. Rosh-Hodesh, Y. Tischler, A. Zaban, C. Quarti and E. Mosconi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gottesman, E. Haltzi, L. Gouda, S. Tirosh, Y. Bouhadana, A. Zaban, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mosconi, C. Quarti, T. Ivanovska, G. Ruani and F. De Angelis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16137 RSC .
J. P. Correa-Baena, M. Anaya, G. Lozano, W. Tress, K. Domanski, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, T. J. Jacobsson, M. E. Calvo, A. Abate, H. Miguez and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Mater., 2016, 5, 1969 Search PubMed .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118 CAS .
D. Bryant, S. Wheeler, B. C. O'Regan, T. Watson, P. R. F. Barnes, D. Worsley and J. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3190 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, M. Yanagida and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 54 CAS .
S. Sarker, H. W. Seo, Y.-K. Jin, K.-S. Lee, M. Lee and D. M. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 493–499 CrossRef CAS .
A. Todinova, J. Idígoras, M. Salado, S. Kazim and J. A. Anta, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Ramos, M. Oliva-Ramirez, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel, A. R. Gonzalez-Elipe and S. Ahmad, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13291 CAS .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T. Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Ono, S. R. Raga, S. Wang, Y. Kato and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(17), 9074–9080 CAS .

          J. Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells, Published By Imperial College Press And Distributed By World Scientific Publishing Co.,  2003 Search PubMed .
W. L. Leong, Z. E. Ooi, D. Sabba, C. Yi, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Graetzel, J. Gordon, E. Katz and N. Mathews, Adv. Mater., 2016, 5, 1969 Search PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, E. Palomares, S. A. Haque and J. R. Durrant, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 034510 CrossRef .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 325 CrossRef CAS .
E. Guillen, J. Idigoras, T. Berger, J. A. Anta, C. Fernandez-Lorenzo, R. Alcantara, J. Navas and J. Martin-Calleja, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 207 RSC .
E. Guillén, F. J. Ramos, J. A. Anta and S. Ahmad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22913 Search PubMed .
A. Guerrero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, Y. S. Kang, T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8023 CAS .
I. Zarazua, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Idigoras, R. Tena-Zaera and J. A. Anta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 21513 RSC .
J. Idígoras, G. Burdziński, J. Karolczak, J. Kubicki, G. Oskam, J. A. Anta and M. Ziółek, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3931 Search PubMed .
S. R. Raga, E. M. Barea and F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9083 RSC .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, J. Chae, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Z. Xiao, A. Centrone and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1345 Search PubMed .
S. van Reenen, M. Kemerink and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Elumalai, A. Saha, C. Vijila, R. Jose, Z. Jie and S. Ramakrisha, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6831 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Electrolyte composition of DSSCs, SEM images of perovskite layers, photovoltaic parameters of different devices, current–voltage characteristics, time-dependent photocurrent density, fitting parameters as a function of voltage, the ionic diffusion coefficient, the IMPS spectrum, IS and IMPS time constants, Arrhenius-like plots and low-frequency capacitance as a function of voltage. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp05851eThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Normalized (reference voltage: −0.1 V) current–voltage curves of DSSCs measured in the reverse scan (line) and forward scan (dash line) under a light intensity of 10 mW cm−2 using a green LED. The influence of hysteresis-determining factors is specifically shown: (A) scan rate, (B) temperature and (C) electrolyte solvent.	 

 	Fig. 2  Normalized (reference voltage: −0.1 V) current–voltage curves of PSCs measured in the reverse scan (line) and forward scan (dash line) under a light intensity of 10 mW cm−2 using a green LED. The influence of different determining factor-dependence on hysteresis is shown: (A) scan rate, (B) temperature and (C) perovskite composition.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Complex-impedance plots for different (A) DSSCs and (B) PSCs obtained under illumination at the open-circuit photovoltage of each cell at 1 Sun. The inset shows a blow-up of the intermediate frequency region to show the occurrence of a loop in the MAI/FAI system. Frequency-dependent capacitance for (C) DSSCs and (D) PSCs at 0.695 V and 0.910 V, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  IS frequency plots of the imaginary part for DSSCs and PSCs at different temperatures and compositions.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  IMPS frequency plots of the imaginary part for both PSCs at different temperatures.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 6  Arrhenius-like plot ln(T/τLF)−1versus 1000/T for Pyr75, Pyr100, MAI and MAI/FAI samples. τLF was extracted from the IS low-frequency component.	 

 	Fig. 7  Low-frequency capacitance (Fig. 3D) with respect to open-circuit potential. The results obtained for the two perovskite compositions studied are shown. The labels indicate the slope in V−1 extracted from both datasets.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Electrolyte composition of DSSCs, SEM images of perovskite layers, photovoltaic parameters of different devices, current–voltage characteristics, time-dependent photocurrent density, fitting parameters as a function of voltage, the ionic diffusion coefficient, the IMPS spectrum, IS and IMPS time constants, Arrhenius-like plots and low-frequency capacitance as a function of voltage. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp05851e

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
