Weaving a magnificent world: 1D fibrous electrodes and devices for stretchable and wearable electronics  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC02524H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02524H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 14027-14052Weaving a magnificent world: 1D fibrous electrodes and devices for stretchable and wearable electronics

        
          
            Wenxiao 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jinlei 
            Miao
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xingwei 
            Zuo
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xueji 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Lijun 
            Qu
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Bio-Fibers and Eco-Textiles, Research Center for Intelligent and Wearable Technology, Collaborative Innovation Center for Eco-Textiles of Shandong Province, College of Textiles & Clothing, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, P. R. China. E-mail: jinlei.miao@qdu.edu.cn; lijunqu@qdu.edu.cn
bSchool of Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen University Health Science Center, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518060, P. R. China
Received 
      16th June 2022
    , Accepted 25th August 2022First published on 2nd September 2022AbstractEmerging soft electronics with excellent mechanical flexibility and conformability can integrate with the human body and clothes seamlessly compared with traditional rigid and bulky electronics. One-dimensional (1D) soft fibrous electronics are highly desirable due to their attractive properties such as lightweight, weaveability, stretchability as well as the ability to adapt frequent mechanical deformations during human activities. Moreover, 1D fibrous electronics have become one of the most important building blocks for weaving flexible and stretchable electronic devices, which holds great potential in practical wearable applications to weave a magnificent world. Here, the state-of-the-art advancement and development in 1D fibrous stretchable and wearable electronics are reviewed, including conductive material systems and structure design strategies, as well as their applications in wearable electronic devices such as conductive fibers, supercapacitors and batteries, and strain sensors. Finally, the critical consideration of the opportunities and challenges of 1D fibrous electrodes and devices for stretchable and wearable electronics are also presented.
Wenxiao Zhang
Wenxiao Zhang is currently an MS candidate at the School of Textile Engineering, Qingdao University. She received her BE degree in fashion design and engineering from Dezhou University, China, in 2020. Her research is on the development of multifunctional smart textiles.
Jinlei Miao
Jinlei Miao is currently an assistant professor at the Research Center for Intelligent and Wearable Technology, College of Textiles and Clothing, Qingdao University, China. He received his PhD degree from Tianjin Municipal Key Laboratory of Advanced Fiber and Energy Storage of TianGong University in 2018. His research interests include the fabrication of wearable electronics.
Xingwei Zuo
Xingwei Zuo is currently an MS candidate at the School of Textile Engineering, Qingdao University. She received her BE degree in textile engineering from Dalian Polytechnic University, China, in 2020. Her research is on the development of smart textiles.
Xueji Zhang
Xueji Zhang is the Vice President of Shenzhen University. He obtained his PhD from Wuhan University in 1994. He was a postdoc fellow at the National Institute of Chemistry, Slovenia, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zurich, and New Mexico State University from 1995 to 1999. He has worked at World Precision Instruments Inc. as Sr Scientist, Head of the Chemistry department, and Sr Vice President of Science since 1998. His research centers on electrochemistry, bioanalysis, micro/nanosensors, and biomedical instrumentation.
Lijun Qu
Lijun Qu is currently Professor of Textile Engineering at the Qingdao University. She received her BE degree (1985), MS degree (1991), and PhD (2005) in Textile Engineering/Materials from Donghua University, China. She was a visiting scholar at the ATO-DLO Research Institute in the Netherlands from 1996 to 1997. She is a member of the China Innovation Alliance of the Graphene Industry. Her research is on the application of graphene in the textiles field.
1. Introduction
In the 21st century, with the rapid development of electronic information technology and nanotechnology, smart wearable products have been constantly updated and improved and have rapidly entered all fields of human life.1 It has been widely used in health monitoring,2 electronic skin,3 biomedicine,4etc. Although traditional electronic devices based on metals and semiconductors have excellent electrical conductivity, their cold and hard properties greatly limit their application as flexible smart devices, and their bending resistance, durability, and flexibility are also poor. The device requires relatively high mechanical properties for comfort. In the past few decades, electronic terminal equipment has become smaller and smaller, and the requirements in terms of small size, comfort, and portability have led to the rapid development of wearable electronic products.5 At present, flexible electronic devices not only have the excellent performance of traditional rigid and bulky electronic devices but also exhibit high mechanical flexibility and stretchability, which can conform to the curved surface of a human body naturally and tightly. Among various types of wearable electronics, textile electronics that combine traditional textiles and electronic devices are an attractive option; thus, textile-based electronics are well-suited for advanced wearable electronics.6 These composite flexible electronic devices composed of textile materials and chemical materials are classified according to their textile substrates, which can be roughly divided into one-dimensional (1D) fiber substrates, 2D fabric substrates, and 3D textile substrates. The hierarchical weaveability of 1D fiber structures (fibrous: substances composed of continuous or discontinuous filaments, yarns: 1D structures of fibers or filaments) have led to 1D electronics and systems as ideal building blocks for advanced wearable applications.7,8 1D fiber-based electronics have the advantages of low price, light weight, and small size and are also suitable for the unique characteristics of wearable electronic devices, such as softness, elasticity, damage resistance, high air permeability, and high resistance to damage.9 Parts of clothing are often stretched and deformed during natural movements in everyday life, adding to the importance of stretchability in 1D electronics.10 It can also be woven into fabrics with tailored structures, which has a wider range of applications.11 Due to these advantages, 1D fiber-based electronic devices have developed rapidly. Compared with 2D film-based electronic devices, 1D fiber-based electronic devices are more widely used and are more flexible, elastic, and smaller in size. In particular, scalability overcomes the limitations of practical wearable devices.12 Although the current achievements of the emerging 1D flexible electronic devices are slow compared with the existing film-based 2D flexible electronic devices, related fields have been actively expanded, such as military clothing and equipment,13 biomedical antibacterial textiles,14 smart sports clothing,15 and personal electronic products.16,17 Based on the unique ductility, continuity, and wearing comfort of 1D filaments combined with electronics and nanotechnology, 1D stretchable electronic devices have unlimited development potential.18 Researchers have prepared a new type of flexible composite conductive fiber by innovatively designing the conductive fiber.19 It not only has the excellent mechanical properties of the matrix material but also has the outstanding electrical and optical functional properties of conductive functional materials,20 which greatly expands the research and application of flexible conductive fibers in the field of smart textiles.21,22 The research and development of flexible intelligent electronic products has certain guiding significance.23,24
This review mainly introduces the state-of-the-art achievements and developments of 1D fibrous stretchable electrodes and devices (Fig. 1). More specificity, 1D stretchable electronic devices are reviewed; their representative conductive materials and preparation process have been analyzed in-depth, and the applications of 1D flexible electronic devices are further described. Finally, the limitations and other existing problems in the manufacturability and practical application of fiber-like stretchable and wearable electronic devices are summarized, and the future research directions and development trends are predicted and prospected.
 Fig. 1  Application development timeline of one-dimensional fiber stretchable wearable electronics. 
2. Conductive materials
Due to the limited service-life of flexible electronic devices, they are inevitably damaged or lose function in the process of use, and a large number of flexible electronic devices become electronic waste. Such waste has caused considerable pollution of land, aquatic systems, air, and is hazardous to humans; thus, the waste management of electronic devices has also attracted considerable attention. Therefore, the search for recyclable materials suitable for wearable electronic products has become a hotspot for researchers. The selection of conductive materials should consider both conductive properties and degradability.
Conductive materials play a key role in achieving high electrical conductivity and mechanical stability of electronic devices.25,26 The selection of conductive materials should be based on conductive elements and elastic fiber matrices to enable electronic devices with the highest possible carrier mobility, good overall electrical properties, desirable mechanical properties, and ductility.27 In recent years, with the continuous progress of nanotechnology, the advantages of nanomaterials have become increasingly prominent.28 The commonly used conductive materials for the preparation of smart and flexible wearable electronic devices are mainly micro and nanomaterials, including carbon nanomaterials, metal nanomaterials, and conductive polymers. In addition to the abovementioned common nanoelectrode materials, 2D layered material nitrides (MXene) have also been widely used as a new nanomaterial in latest research.29 This section discusses the conductive nanomaterials most commonly used to fabricate 1D fibrous flexible electronic devices.30
2.1 Carbon nanomaterials
Carbon-based nanomaterials mainly include carbon black/particle/fiber, carbon nanotube (CNT), carbon nanofiber (CNFs), carbon aerogel, and graphene/graphene oxide/reduced graphene oxide, which are indispensable materials in nanoscience and technology.31 A variety of carbon-based nanomaterials with 1/2D structure are widely used in flexible stretchable and wearable electronics due to their unique electrical conductivity (∼104 S cm−1), excellent intrinsic carrier mobility (106 cm2 V−1 s−1), high flexibility, and excellent mechanical properties.32,33 Among them, CNTs and graphene are electrode materials with great potential in the field of wearable electronics.34
CNTs have a typical one-dimensional tubular structure, which is a coaxial circular tube composed of hexagonal carbon atoms.35 According to the number of layers of the tube wall, it is divided into single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) and multiwalled CNTs (MWCNTs).36 The structure of the CNTs determines its unique properties.
The stretchability of the 1D stretchable electrode can be further improved using high aspect ratio materials. Jamali et al. used a layer-by-layer solution coating method to apply poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)-methylammonium lead bromide (MAPbBr3) precursor solution on CNTs-based fibers,37 followed by annealing to form a radioactive layer, and then coating the silver nanowire dispersion to form the top contact (Fig. 2a). CNTs-based light-emitting fibers have been prepared using flexible and CNTs fibers as the core and an organic–inorganic emissive composite layer as the functional elements. Jiang et al. prepared a core/shell stretchable conductive fiber composite of a few-walled CNTs network coated on poly(m-phenylene isophthalamide) (FWNT/PMIA) (as shown in Fig. 2b), which was fabricated by a dip-coating method and an annealing process that greatly enhanced the interactions between the FWNT network and the PMIA core as well as within the FWNT network (Fig. 2c).38 Gao et al. fabricated a CNTs and polyurethane (PU) nanofiber composite helical yarn with electrical conductivity, ultrastretchability, and high stretch sensitivity.39 The synergy of the elastic PU molecules and the spring-like microgeometry endow the helical yarn with excellent stretchability, while the CNTs are stably winding-locked into the yarn through a simple twisting strategy, endowing it with good conductivity (Fig. 2d–f). Gao et al. developed a novel polyurethane polymer and a CNTs layer composite fiber core with high strain range (∼700%), high strength (∼17.6 MPa), high strain resolution, and large detection range (from 0.0075% to 400%) (Fig. 2g and h).40 In addition, low-frequency vibrations ranging from 0 to 40 Hz can also be detected, which cover most of the vibrations that occur in the body. A wearable intelligent health monitoring system has been developed using fiber mechanical sensors that can monitor 11 physiological signals related to health to predict and diagnose diseases (Fig. 2i and j).
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for the coaxially-coated light-emitting CNTs-based fiber.37 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) TEM image of FWNTs.38 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Scheme of the preparation of the FWNT/PMIA fiber. (d) CNTs/PU twisted yarn and (e) amplified image of a section. (f) The good conductivity of the helical CNTs/PU yarn demonstrated by liquid crystal display (LED) light during the stretching process.39 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic diagram of the fibrous strain sensor, including PU foundation, Ecoflex/CNT conductive layer, and Ecoflex encapsulation layer. (h) Cross-sectional optical microscope image of the fiber sensor. (i) Images and schematic illustrations of the vibration generation and detection system. (j) Photograph of spiral copper wire fiber in static (up) and vibrating state (down) states.40 Copyright © 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (k) Schematic description of the processes of graphene aerogel fiber. (l) The aerogel-directed smart fiber as a spun.42 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (m) Illustration of the yarn modified by the deposition of RGO, MnO2, and PPy.43 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Graphene is a kind of 2D carbon nanomaterial consisting of a hexagonal honeycomb lattice composed of carbon atoms with sp2 hybrid orbitals. Graphene has attracted gradually increasing attention in recent years due to its high carrier mobility, excellent Young's modulus, high conductivity, and light transmission.33,41 It has important application prospects in material science, energy, biomedicine, and so on, and is considered as a revolutionary material for the future.32 Li et al. proposed graphene fibers using the wet spinning technique, as shown in Fig. 2k.42 A temperature-regulating smart fiber based on graphene fiber with mechanical flexibility and self-cleaning property was developed by soaking phase change materials (Fig. 2l), which can adjust heat conversion and storage functions under multiple stimuli. The smart fiber has a self-cleaning superhydrophobic surface and external stimulation (electron/photon/heat) abilities, as well as reversible energy storage and conversion abilities. Huang et al. fabricated high-capacitance conductive yarns with hierarchical structures comprising deposited RGO, MnO2, and polypyrrole (PPy) (Fig. 2m).43 Using the twist spinning technique, pristine conductive yarns were continuously produced with a yield rate of 0.2 m s−1, which could be woven and knitted into clothes using industry-employed weaving and knitting machines. The resultant hierarchical structured yarns exhibit the uniform deposition of electrocapacitive materials and large ion accessible surface area, which is desirable for high-capacitance supercapacitors.
The main challenge in the large-scale use of CNTs and graphene is their poor dispersion in common solvents due to their non-polar structure. In addition, the high aspect ratio and strong van der Waals forces lead to the easy accumulation of CNTs, which can even form large aggregate. Therefore, the development of suitable solvents is very important for the preparation of high-performance CNTs-based conductive materials. The preparation of carbon nanotubes can cause serious water pollution, and because of its excellent adsorption capacity, it can easily adsorb heavy metal pollutants, non-metallic inorganic chemicals, organic pollutants, and organic chemical poisons. Recycling carbon nanotubes remains a major challenge due to the complicated modification process of CNTs, difficulty in removing impurities and catalysts, forcing researchers to focus on metal nanomaterials.44
2.2 Metallic nanomaterials
Low-dimensional structures of metals, such as nanowires or nanoparticles, are particularly attractive for fiber wearable electronics because of their very high conductivity.45 A metal nanowire is a 1D nanomaterial with a diameter of less than 100 nm and an aspect ratio of more than 100.46 Silver nanowires (AgNWs) and copper nanowires (CuNWs) are the main representative materials.47–49
Ma et al. report highly conductive stretchable fibers synthesized by the scalable wet-spinning process using flower-shaped silver nanoparticles with nanodisc-shaped petals (Ag nanoflowers) and polyurethane. Fig. 3a shows the conductivity of Ag–PU fibers cured at different temperatures as a function of the tensile strain.50Fig. 3b shows the true stress–strain behavior of Ag–PU fibers cured at different temperatures. Extraordinarily high electrical conductivity and enhanced mechanical strength were obtained by the combination of Ag nanoflowers and PU. Cheng et al. present a facile, cost-effective, and scalable method for manufacturing ultrastretchable composite fibers with a “twinning spring” configuration, i.e., cotton fibers twinning spirally around a polyurethane fiber.51 The composite fiber has an AgNWs conductivity of 4018 S cm−1 and its special structure allows conductivity up to 688 S cm−1 at 500% tensile strain. In Fig. 3c and d, the LED array made into DCY–AgNWs–PDMS worked properly up to 30% and remained fully stable after 1000 bending events and at 183 S cm−1 after 1000 stretching events at 200% strain.
 Fig. 3  (a and b) Electrical and mechanical properties of conductive stretchable fibers.50 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) LED arrays remained operational when bent; no obvious weakening of the light intensity was observed in the cyclic bending test. (d) LED arrays stayed operational when stretched to a strain of 30%.51 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) An example of Ni-EGaIn electronic tattoo with LED array.53 Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) Schematic showing the thermal drawing process for the production of long fibers. (g) Stress–strain curves of a fiber without and with an embedded liquid metal electrode. The inset shows a fiber that is randomly knotted. (h) SEM image of a fiber with a single liquid metal electrode. Scale bar: 200 μm.54 Copyright © 2020, the author(s). (i) Schematic setup and the main components for the coaxial wet-spinning process for producing LM sheath–core microfibers.55 
As the name implies, liquid metal refers to the metal that is liquid at room temperature or higher, which is also known as a low melting point metal. Gallium and bismuth liquid metals and their alloys are becoming new revolutionary materials as they are safe, non-toxic, and show excellent performance. Others such as mercury, cesium, and sodium–potassium alloy are also in the liquid state at room temperature; however, they are toxic, radioactive, or dangerous, and are greatly restricted in their applications.52 Target circuits, components, integrated circuits, and terminal functional devices are manufactured directly by printing on a variety of flexible, rigid substrates, and even human skin. The corresponding breakthrough is seen as promising to change the traditional electronic and integrated circuit manufacturing rules; the “what you see is what you get” mode of electronic direct writing will accelerate the advent of inclusive personalized electronic manufacturing era (Fig. 3e).53
Dong et al. demonstrated the scalable fabrication of microstructured stretchable triboelectric fibers with efficiencies comparable to planar systems.54 A thermal stretching process was used to create advanced elastomeric fibers that combine a microtextured surface with several liquid metal electrodes (Fig. 3f). The fiber exhibited high large deformation electrical output and could withstand strains up to 560% (Fig. 3h). Fig. 3g shows the recorded stress–strain curves of the fiber without and with one liquid metal channel. The two fiber designs displayed almost identical elastomeric features with fracture strain reaching up to 599 ± 73% and 557 ± 54%, and Young's modulus as low as 3.4 ± 0.6 MPa and 3.8 ± 0.3 MPa, respectively. Zheng et al. used a coaxial wet-spinning process for the continuous manufacture of intrinsically scalable, highly conductive but conductively stable liquid metal core microfiber.55 The microfiber could be stretched up to 1170%, and upon fully activating the conductive path, a very high conductivity of 4.35 × 104 S m−1 and resistance change of only 4% at 200% strain were realized, arising from both stretch-induced channel opening and stretching out of the tortuous serpentine conductive path of the percolating liquid metal network. Such microfibers can directly act as excellent self-powered wearable sensors to monitor human activity (Fig. 3i).
The metal nanomaterial conductive fiber with conductive properties close to that of pure metal is one of the best fiber with high conductivity and volume resistance of only 10−4–10−5 Ω cm. However, the conductive fiber cannot blend homogeneously, and the stability problems hamper the growth of metal nanometer materials in industrial development. Therefore, its further popularization and use are restricted. Currently, researchers are working to improve the stability of metal nanowires/nanoparticles and use them for flexible and wearable electronic applications. Besides the small size of the nanometal, the recycling cost is high; however, not recycling will cause harm to the earth's environment and human beings. Thus, great attention should be paid to the recycling and utilization of nanometal materials.
2.3 Conductive polymers
Compared with traditional rigid and non-degradable inorganic electronic materials such as silicon and metal, soft organic materials have obvious advantages and are playing an increasingly important role in wearable electronic products. Conductive polymer refers to the polymer material with a conjugated electron system in the carbon skeleton material, which can be have its own conductivity or is doped with other materials to achieve a unique conductive function. Due to its simple preparation process, good conductivity, and a series of good electrochemical advantages and mechanical characteristics, the conductive polymer shows the advantages of antistatic coating, light energy storage device battery, solar cell, light-emitting diode, display, sensor, etc.
Conductive polymer fibers are organic conductive fibers derived from conductive polymers by a direct spinning method. However, for conductive polymers, wet-spinning process, melting, and mixing preparation methods are used for composite conductive fiber, in situ adsorption polymerization is used for polyaniline and polythiophene deposition on the surface of the matrix fiber, while doped state conductive polymer liquid as a conductive layer is covered on the surface of the fiber to prepare conductive polymer fiber. Zhou et al. proposed a solution stretching and drying method, wherein the self-flexion structure of poly(3,4-vinyldioxythiophene)-polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) in the channel of the thermoplastic elastic body was obtained (Fig. 4a); thus, the coaxial conductive fiber could maintain stable conductive performance (<4% resistance change) and good tensile response performance (1766 tensile test cycles).56Fig. 4b shows the microstructure of the coaxial fiber. Zhu et al. developed a novel fiber-shaped hydrogen (H2) sensor by directly electrochemically growing a palladium (Pd) sensing layer on conductive PEDOT:PSS fiber electrode (Fig. 4c).57 This approach produced free-standing functional fiber (PEDOT:PSS@Pd) with the promising mechanical features of flexibility, light weight, knittability, high mechanical strength, and good H2 sensing performance at room temperature.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic presenting how prestrain-then-buckling strategy was applied to obtain a folded conductive polymer ribbon in a TPE channel. (b) Microstructure of the coaxial fiber.56 Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic illustration for the preparation of bare and Pd-coated PEDOT:PSS fibers via confined crosslinking and in situ electrodeposition, respectively.57 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (d) SEM images showing the surface morphologies of the BMX yarn containing 97.4 wt% MXene. (e) Specific areal capacitance of the BMX yarn electrodes from the GCD curves.68 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) Optical image of the extruded MG 9 and the SEM image of the inner structure of the extruded MG 9. (g) Tensile strength–strain curves.69 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic of the wet-spinning process for the MXene/GO fiber.59 Copyright © 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
However, due to the current conjugate structure in the conductive polymer main chain, the fiber macromolecular chain is rigid, difficult to spin, and some monomers have certain toxicity and even carcinogenic effects, which is a major disadvantage for the green production direction in the textile industry. For industrialization, its production and processing process is complicated, and most equipment can only be used for the production of a conductive polymer, resulting in a high preparation cost and making it more difficult to realize commercial applications.
2.4 MXene
MXene is a novel two-dimensional material prepared by stripping the MAX phase of layered ceramics.58–60 Ti3C2Tx MXene was the first MXene prepared and the most widely used MXene at present. It has excellent mechanical properties (Young's modulus ∼330 GPa) and specific capacitance (up to ∼1500 F cm−3).61–63 2D nanomaterials have been the subject of intensive research in recent years due to their excellent physical, chemical, and electronic properties.62,64,65 Potential applications range from supercapacitors, sensors, to transparent electrodes.66
The 2D multilayer MXene is an accordion-like, layered structure, and the single layer of MXene after etching and stripping is a translucent flake. Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets hybrid PEDOT:PSS stretchable conductive fibers with high conductivity were prepared by Zhang et al. using one-step wet-spinning method.67 Wang et al. reported MXene-based yarn-like supercapacitors (YSC), which produced flexibility and superior energy storage performance by employing a hyperbolic shrinkage method to firmly lock a single-layer MXene sheet in a helical yarn channel (Fig. 4d).68 The biscrolling MXene (BMX) with CNTs yarn with the highest MXene loading of 97.4 wt% exhibited the highest capacitance (Fig. 4e). Its specific capacitance values (volumetric, aerial, and gravimetric) exceed those of any freestanding fiber-shape electrode reported to date. Shin et al. used wet-spinning to fabricate MXene gel fibers (Fig. 4f).69 The tensile strength of the MXene fiber was 344 MPa, Young's modulus was 122 GPa, and conductivity was 12504 S cm−1 (Fig. 4g). In addition, they could be used to manufacture high-performance multiscale structures to realize the nanoscale potential of the MXene family.
Yang et al. prepared a wet spinning-assembly strategy for the continuous fabrication of MXene-based fibers through the synergistic effect between graphene oxide liquid crystals and MXene flakes (Fig. 4h).59 The MXene flakes are ordered between graphene oxide liquid crystal templates and assembled into hybrid fibers with the highest MXene mass ratio of 95% w/w. The supercapacitors constructed with integrated fibers obtained excellent overall fiber conductivity (2.9 × 104 S m−1) and superior bulk capacitance (586.4 F cm−3), surpassing those of neat reduced graphene fibers.
As a new functional material, MXene has potential application value in many fields, including energy storage materials, sensors, and catalysts, due to its unique structural, electronic, and chemical properties. Due to the harsh preparation conditions of MXene, it cannot be prepared at room temperature and pressure, and it is easy to be oxidized in air. At present, some of its properties can only be obtained through simulation and calculation. In the field of emerging functional materials, MXene faces both opportunities and challenges.
Compared with metal nanomaterials and conductive polymers, carbon nanomaterials own the advantages such as high conductance stability, low price and green production process. As a new two-dimensional material, MXene still needs to be further developed with respect to its preparation, performance improvement, and application. It is believed that MXene has greater advantages in intelligent electronic devices.
3. Preparation methods
With the continuous development of 1D fibrous stretchable and wearable electronics, various preparation methods for high performance devices are emerging. Conductive networks in preparing conductive fibers are designed and manufactured by melting mixing, solution dispersion, and surface decoration (surface spraying, printing, etc.). The preparation method of the conductive fiber is also crucial because the performance, stability, cost, efficiency, and other parameters of the electrode are determined by its preparation method.70 Typical manufacturing methods for 1D conductive yarns are conductive composites in the form of yarn based on conductive and elastomer materials, or coating a conductive material on the surface of polymer yarns.71 Also, the washable and durable properties of one-dimensional stretchable electronic devices are often achieved by adding a protective film, for example, silica gel film, with a fluorinated polymer as the main material waterproof coating. Three typical manufacturing strategies for 1D fibrous stretchable electronics will be introduced below.
3.1 Direct spinning methods
Integrated forming technology is a low cost and simple production technology, which means that the treated fiber material and the conductive material are mixed with each other in a certain way, or the conductive material is prepared by spinning alone. In the traditional spinning methods such as wet-spinning and dry-spinning, direct extraction of the mixture of the conductive material and the elastic matrix into the yarn form has been widely studied.
Wet-spinning has more spinneret holes, and the fiber structure is uniform with good quality. Seyedin et al. used stretchable wet-spinning technology to produce Ti3C2Tx–MXene/PU composite fibers with electrical conductivity and high tensile properties (Fig. 5a and b).72 When used as a strain sensor, the MXene/PU composite fibers show a high gauge factor of ∼12900 (∼238 at 50% strain) and a large sensing strain of ∼152%. The cyclic strain sensing performance was further improved by producing fibers with MXene/PU sheath and pure PU core using a coaxial wet-spinning process. The stress–strain curves showed three distinct behaviors (Fig. 5c) when the MXene loading was less than ∼9.1 wt% (Fig. 5d), i.e., an initial stiff response (region I), strain-induced softening (region II), and strain-induced hardening (region III). Using a commercial-scale knitting machine, MXene/PU fibers were knitted into a one-piece elbow sleeve, which can track various movements of the wearer's elbow.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the MXene/PU fiber spinning process. (b) Digital photograph of a ∼100 m long MXene/PU fiber at ∼9.1 wt% MXene spun using an IPA coagulation bath. (c) Schematic illustration of various stages of stress–strain curves for the MXene/PU fibers. (d) Stress–strain curves of the representative fibers.72 Copyright © 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process. (f) The characterization of the dry spun stretchable fiber conductor based on ultrathin AuNWs.73 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) The elastic regions of the fibers. SEM images of (h) the CNTs forest during twist insertion to form pristine yarns. (i) Pristine CNTs yarn; hybrid CNTs–graphene yarn: cross-section.74 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (j) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of multiscale disordered porous elastic fibers.75 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
A stretchable conductive yarn is also being developed for dry-spinning, which is commonly used in the large-scale industrial production of filament yarn. Zhao et al. developed stretchable conductive yarns with high conductivity and stretchability using a dry-spinning method and an ultrathin Au nanowires (AuNWs)-seeded electroless deposition strategy (Fig. 5e).73 The AuNWs were well mixed with a highly elastic styrene ethylene butylene styrene (SEBS) block copolymer to form AuNWs/SEBS stretchable yarns through the dry-spinning method. To achieve high stretchability, the yarns were pre-strained before the electroless deposition of the Au films, forming directional cracks and wrinkles along the axis of the deposited Au films (Fig. 5f). Based on the smoothening of wrinkles and self-repairing of cracks according to the applied strain, the electrical conductivity of the yarn was drastically improved to exceed 600% when the yarn was stretched under 380% strain (Fig. 5g).
The method of preparing nanofiber materials by electrospinning has the advantages of simple equipment, low cost of spinning, many kinds of spinnable materials, and controllable technology. It has become one of the main methods of preparing nanofiber materials effectively, and is also one of the most important academic and technical activities in the field of materials science technology in the recent decade. Foroughi et al. developed a novel method for producing high-performance two-component multiwalled CNTs/graphene yarns.74 Using electrospinning, graphene sheets were introduced into CNTs tubes using chemically transformed graphene dispersions as spinning solutions (Fig. 5h and i). The mechanical strength and elastic modulus of the yarn obtained were 140 MPa and 2.58 GPa, respectively. This novel all-carbon process was developed for the preparation of highly conductive CNTs/graphene hybrid yarns.
Hu et al. prepared an integrated intelligent garment with inherent self-measuring (i.e., strain and temperature sensing) and self-cooling capability using multiscale disordered porous elastic fibers as sensing units through microfluidic spinning technology (Fig. 5j).75
3.2 Fiber surface modification
The surface modification method refers to the preparation of conductive fibers by the surface treatment of synthetic fibers, including physical impregnation coating, spray coating, and copolymerization grafting, which coat conductive materials or form conductive films on the surface of fiber material matrix. Among them, the coating method uses deposition, printing, and other processes to attach a layer of metal particles, carbon-based materials, or polymer conductive composite materials on the fiber surface, forming a conductive coating fiber. Its preparation is simple and easy to control, and is the most commonly used method at present.
Dip-coating is a widely used technology to dissolve the base coating. The process is simple, fast, and cost-effective. In the dip-coating process, it is necessary not only to prepare a solution to be uniformly dispersed coating material, but also to ensure that the coating material is firmly fixed and not layered with the substrate. Wang et al. designed a stretchable manufacturing process to produce stretchable conductive yarns by repeatedly dipping SWCNTs on elastic PU/cotton core spinning surfaces (Fig. 6a).76 An elastic core was spun by wrapping cotton sheath yarn around a high elastic polyurethane silk and then through a well-dispersed solution of SWCNTs. By repeating the impregnation process on the elastic filaments, the electrical conductivity of the yarn prepared was improved. Fig. 6b shows the evolution of electrical resistance of the PU/cotton/CNTs yarn vs. immersion time. In addition, stretchable conductive yarns have up to 300% tensile strain and reliable long-term cycle stability of nearly 300000 cycles.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the self-developed fabrication process of the PU/cotton/CNTs yarn. (b) Evolution of the electrical resistance of the PU/cotton/CNTs yarn vs. immersion times.76 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) LED patterned lights response with different elongation of GP300@filament circuits. (d) Bionic superelastic conductive polyurethane filaments with worm-shape graphene microlayer.77 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Preparation and morphology of the CNTs/PU helical yarn. (f) CNTs network on PU nanofibers surface, and (g) high magnification of the CNTs network.39 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) The schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the conductive tendril. Scale bar for the SEM images = 400 μm.78 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (i) Proposed principle of reducing the length and width of the cracks to achieve low resistance change while stretching. It shows much more conductive pathways on the fiber. (j) Photograph of the gold film on the PDMS thin film and the conductive fiber prepared.79 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Sun et al. used dip-coating technology to deposit graphene coating with a worm structure on PU fiber bundle to prepare intelligent conductive fiber with high tensile and strain sensitivity (Fig. 6c and d).77 Such worm-shape filaments could be stretched up to 1010% with wide reversible electroresponse range (0 < ε < 815%), long-term durability (>4000 stretching/releasing cycles), good initial conductivity (σ0 = 124 S m−1), and high-quality factor (Q = 11.26). Gao et al. prepared PU nanofiber film by the electrostatic spinning method, then cut and twist the fiber film into PU fiber as the base of the conductive yarn, and prepared the fiber electrode with high tensile strength by spraying nanoconductive CNTs material closely with the fiber base (Fig. 6e).39 The microscopic structure of the CNTs/PU yarn showed that the CNTs cling on the fibers surface similar to vines on a tree trunk (Fig. 6f and g). Cheng et al. proposed a simple, cost-effective, and scalable method to fabricate ultrastretchable composite fibers with a “wound spring” structure; cotton fibers were helically wound around the polyurethane fibers, and the conductive fibers were made by impregnating AgNWs (Fig. 6h).78 The composite fiber showed a high conductivity of up to 4018 S cm−1, which could remain up to 688 S cm−1 under 500% tensile strain.
Methods such as electroplating, vacuum spraying, magnetron sputtering, chemical electrocoating sedimentation, and other methods are used for the fiber surface to form metal, metal compounds, conductive polymers, and other conductive layers. Zhang et al. proposed a novel and convenient preparation of high-performance stretchable conductive yarn based on the physical deposition of gold film (Fig. 6i).79 Stretchable conductive yarns were prepared by rolling Au/polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) film into a spiral structure. A simple rolling strategy was adopted to limit the crack elongation through the encapsulation effect of the spiral structure, and the crack control strategy was realized. In the process of yarn stretching, the size of the gold film crack was reduced and more conductive paths were effectively maintained. At 50% strain, the change in the resistance of the fiber was about 1.5, which is smaller than that of the film under the same strain (Fig. 6j).
The surface treatment method tends to construct a conductive layer on the surface of the fiber. Due to the large specific surface area of the fiber and the ease of building a continuous conductive path of the conductive functional material, it is easier to conduct the charge, and its conductive performance is generally better. But if repeated rubbing and washing with external force are used in the process, the conductive layer on the surface can easily fall off during bending and torsion due to the weak interfacial interactions, thus decreasing the conductive performance, stability, and durability. Besides, there are also defects, such as huge energy consumption of the electroplating method, complicated treatment of waste liquid, and difficult to achieve uniform and smooth fiber surface effect, which require subsequent processing and are not suitable for large-scale production. Furthermore, the equipment and energy costs are also high.
3.3 Structural approaches
The 1D fiber electronic devices made by immersion coating and integrated spinning have good conductivity and tensile properties, and can be used as good sensors. When it is applied to electronic devices such as conductive fibers, the conductive network will be changed by stretching, and the electrical properties will fluctuate seriously along with the strain, which cannot meet the requirements of stable conductive properties.30 Therefore, the structure can be designed by twisting, helix, folding, winding, and other methods, to avoid the reduction of yarn conductivity during the mechanical stretching process. The structural design not only has the inherent tensile properties of the original base material but also has advantage of the geometric deformation of its structure for higher tensile properties, thus effectively maintaining contact between the conductive materials in the yarn, thereby reducing the change in the yarn conductivity during the stretching process.
Zhang et al. developed a 1D stretchable electrode by designing an independent spring consisting of aligned MWCNTs (Fig. 7a).80 Independent spring-like electrodes were fabricated by over-twisting the aligned MWCNTs sheets. The spring-like electrode has more than 300% tensile capacity. The structure of CNTs arranged in a 1D electrode can also remain almost unchanged under strain since most of the applied strain is compensated by the deformation of the spring structure. At high tensile strains up to 100%, the resistance of the 1D electrode increased slightly from 0.19 to 0.25 Ω cm−1 and recovered to 0.20 Ω cm−1 after release (Fig. 7b). Woo et al. developed a PDMS coated polyfilament polyurethane-based helical conductive fiber (Fig. 7c).81 The stretchable spiral fibers exhibit significant electrical properties under tensile conditions, negligible electrical and mechanical hysteresis, and high electrical reliability under repeated deformation (10000 times tensile, 100% strain tensile) (Fig. 7d). According to the finite element analysis (Fig. 7e), the spiral fiber can maintain uniform stress distribution even under the condition of complete stretching because of its true spiral structure. Zhong et al. used the coil structure of CNTs-coated cotton thread in 1D stretchable electrodes in 1D energy harvesting devices (Fig. 7f).82 The CNTs-based conductive thread was coiled around a stretchable silicone wire substrate to form a helical structure. The fabricated 1D system could be stretched up to 25% based on the helical structure while maintaining the electrical property of the conductive thread electrode.
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM images of a fiber at different strains 0%, 50%, and 100%. (b) Evolution of resistances of the fiber during a stretching and releasing process with a strain of 100%.80 Copyright © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication process of the helical fiber-type interconnection. (d) Resistance changes of the PDMS-coated helical fiber with helical diameter 3 mm under 10000 stretching cycles from 0% to 100% applied strain with a frequency of 0.5 Hz. The inset graph shows the range of stretching numbers between 0 and 2500. (e) Optical images of PDMS-coated helical fiber with helical diameter 3 mm and the corresponding FEA results for the deformations and the distribution of von Mises stress in the helical fiber according to the various applied strains.81 Copyright © 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) Schematic diagram of an AFSS.82 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) Fabrication of the buckled electrodes. Inset: A cross section of the COCe fiber containing a 50 μm copper wire within an open slot. (h) Fabrication of the helical electrodes. Inset: A cross section of the COCe fiber integrating a 50 μm helical copper wire. (i) Different COCe fibers with buckled copper electrodes. (j) Different COCe fibers with helical copper electrodes. (k) The optical images of the GP microlayer of the GP300@filament under stretching.83 Copyright © 2022 Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. (l) Schematic diagram of preparing the worm-shape filaments.77 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (m) Steps in the fabrication of an NTSm@fiber. The circular arrow indicates the belt direction. (n) Illustration of the structure of a longitudinal section of an NTSm sheath, showing 2D hierarchical buckling.84 Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Marion et al. developed a buckling conductive structure and then stretched to create a wavy path for the wire contained in a hollow channel inside the elastomer fiber (Fig. 7g and i).83 First, using thermoplastic rubber poly SEBS and cyclic olefin copolymer elastomer (COCe) as raw materials, the prefabricated rod with a rectangular cross section and a rectangular hollow channel in the middle was prepared. Then, copper wire with a diameter of 50 μm was fed in the process of hot drawing by the thermal method. Finally, by adjusting the speed of the three rollers in the hot drawing process, the elastic fiber, which can control the excess metal length factor (ηMetal), was prepared by continuous stretching and relaxation of the covering layer. The second method is to use a torsional process to deform both the cladding layer and the metal wire to form a spiral fiber structure during hot drawing, resulting in the preparation of a controllable elastic fiber ηMetal (Fig. 7h and j). The yield and spiral copper wire fibers prepared by the two methods show a low average resistance of 1.87 × 10−8 ± 0.39 × 10−8 Ω m, and the resistance of the fibers increases slightly with the increase in ηMetal with the increase in the metal wire length.
By designing the structure of the conductive material on the fiber base, a highly tensile conductive yarn that not only has the essential tensile property but also can effectively maintain the electric conductivity can also be prepared. Inspired by the peristaltic behavior of arthropods, Sun et al. designed a caterpillar-like graphene coating on PU fibers by covering the polyurethane filaments with worm-like graphene microlayers (Fig. 7k).77 The worm-like filaments could stretched up to 1010% and have a wide range of reversible electrical responses, long term durability, good initial conductivity, and high-quality factors (Fig. 7l). Liu et al. developed highly stretchable core–sheath conductive yarns by creating buckled CNTs sheets on elastic wire substrate (Fig. 7m).84 The periodic hierarchical buckling structure of the CNTs sheets was realized by wrapping a MWCNTs sheath on a pre-stretched rubber wire core (Fig. 7n).
Although the encapsulation method is simple, the connection fastness, softness comfort, and durability between the fabricated 1D fibrous flexible electronic devices and textile materials were still a difficult problem.
The choice of the preparation method of one-dimensional fiber stretchable electronic devices largely determines their tensile properties. Due to the limitation of fibers and conductive materials, general preparation methods such as direct spinning cannot meet the requirements of tensile properties. Therefore, one-dimensional stretchable electronic devices gradually evolve into special structures such as spiral folds or are prepared by other preparation methods before structural design to obtain high tensile properties. The design of the structure allows the one-dimensional device to not only have excellent stretchability but also obtain a relatively stable electrical conductivity within a range due to the structural advantages. When stretched beyond a limited range, its electrical properties still face the same stability problem as other manufacturing methods, which is still something that needs to be worked out.
4. 1D stretchable electronic devices and applications
Compared with most existing 2D planar devices, 1D fibrous electronic devices are very suitable for a variety of complex structures. Its superior applicability enables 1D electronic devices to overcome the limitations of previous electronic devices in the field of wearable electronics. Modern science and technology combined with the unique extensibility, continuity, and wearing comfort of 1D fiber filaments have infinite development potential. Because of its unique linear structure, 1D fiber flexible electronic devices are widely used in various 1D electronic devices, such as energy storage devices, conductive fibers, and sensors. In this section, we will discuss the representative electronic devices based on 1D fibrous stretchable conductive fibers/yarns and their various applications.
4.1 Conductive fiber
Conductive fibers usually refer to fibers with resistivity less than 107 Ω cm at standard conditions (20 °C, 65% RH). Since the 1960s, conductive fibers have been developed to eliminate the electrostatic effects of fibers and fabrics. In the field of flexible intelligent wearables, conductive fibers play an important role, similar to the human nervous system, which is responsible for uploading and transmitting, and is an important part of flexible electronic devices.85 Conductive fibers can be used in a variety of sensors, capacitors, electronic components, for the development and integration of the driver, not only to meet the most basic stable electrical conductivity but also as flexible wearable textile materials with tensile resilience, comfort, stable signal transmission of flexible electronics, sensitivity, and durability of use.83,86,87
Medeiros et al. prepared a wireless power supply by omni-directional silk coils (OSCs).88 OSCs is a kind of retractable and lightweight power receiving coil, which can be easily sewn on any textile. It not only has the excellent applicability of one-dimensional electronic equipment but can also broaden the functional range of the device horizontally and longitudinally. Forming two-dimensional intelligent flexible electronic devices by weaving them is an important application method based on one-dimensional conductive yarns. Through magnetic resonance coupling, the safe wireless power supply of wearable electronic devices can be realized without affecting the comfort of users (Fig. 8a). It is composed of microfibers made of a new type of silk nanocarbon composite, which benefits from the stretchability of silk fibroin and the high conductivity of MWCNTs and chitin carbon nanosheets. In addition, OSCs show good stability in high humidity environment and mechanical deformation conditions, enabling them to carry out up to 50 standard machine cleaning cycles without performance degradation. Guan et al. prepared a multilayer porous AgNWs bacterial cellulose conductive fiber using the wet-spinning technique.89 The conductive fiber was synthesized by continuous wet-spinning at a speed of 20 m min−1 with a diameter of 53 μm, a conductivity of 1.3 × 104 S cm−1, a tensile strength of 198 MPa, and elongation at break of 3.0%. As shown in Fig. 8b and c, the hierarchical porous morphology with pores of different sizes as well as small diameters endow AgNWs-BC fibers with good compressibility and divergent electronic field. AgNWs-BC fiber was able to light an LED (Fig. 8d). Sun et al. designed a caterpillar-like graphene coating on PU fibers by covering polyurethane filaments with a worm-shaped graphene microlayer coating (Fig. 8e).77 The worm-like filaments stretch up to 1010% and have a wide range of reversible electroresponse range (0 < ε < 815%) (Fig. 8f), long-term durability (>4000 stretching/releasing cycles), good initial conductivity (σ0 = 124 S m−1), and high-quality factor (Q = 11.26). Remarkably, the worm-shaped filaments show distinctive strain-insensitive behavior (ΔR/R0 < 0.1) up to 220% strain. In addition, fibers used as circuits for LEDs have also been proven for practical applications (Fig. 8g). The worm-like fibers, with their unique strain-insensitive behavior, provide a direct approach to stretch the electronics. Liu et al. prepared stretchable carbon nanofiber sheets highly stretchable (up to 1320%) sheath core conductive fibers on stretchable rubber fiber cores.84 The resulting structure exhibited obvious short-period and long-period sheath buckling, reversibly dephasing in both the axial and band directions, resulting in 1000% tensile resistance change of less than 5%. The resistance of a coiled fiber reversibly changed by only 5.01% when stretched up to 3000% strain, providing a Q of 598 (Fig. 8h). Fig. 8i shows that both high linearity and high sensitivity can be obtained over a large strain range. Chen et al. prepared a high tensile fiber with high electrical conductivity consisting of a core fiber, an intermediate modified layer, and an outer eutectic gallium indium liquid metal layer.90 When stretched to 500% strain, the excellent conductivity of the fiber exceeded 103 S cm−1, which is superior to existing stretchable conductive fibers. As presented in Fig. 8j, the mobile phone could still be stably charged during the poly(phenylene ether) (PPE) fiber stretching. The fibers obtained by Lan et al. using wet-spinning technology were composed of MXene and CNTs embedded in PU, and their surface was formed by the spontaneous reduction of AuCl4 and MXene to form pebble-shaped AuCNs.91 The photograph in Fig. 8k and the SEM image in Fig. 8l show that the MCP fiber can be stretched and tied into a knot, implying its excellent mechanical stretchability. The increased content of CNTs in the fiber would cause an increase in the electrical conductivity (Fig. 8m). The fiber has high electrical conductivity and excellent durability under mechanical deformation. Shi et al. reported a display textile 6 meters long and 25 centimeters wide containing 5 × 105 electroluminescent units spaced about 800 microns apart.92 The braided conductive weft and luminescent warp fibers formed micron electroluminescent units at warp contact points. The luminance deviation between the electroluminescent units was less than 8% and remained stable even when the textile was bent, stretched, or pressed. This approach unifies the manufacture and function of electronic devices with textiles, and we expect woven fiber materials to shape the next generation of electronics.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram showing the MRC circuitry used to power e-textiles using OSCs. (b and c) Microstructure of AgNWs-BC fiber and AgNWs-BC/PDMS.88 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (d) Lighted LED hung by AgNWs-BC fiber and powered by a voltage of 2 V.89 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (e) The potential applications of strain-insensitive stretchy electronics. (f and g) Photographs of the LED using the GP0@filament and GP300@filament as the electronic circuits.77 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (h) Resistance change versus strain for coiled rubber@NTS19@fibers made by mandrel-free coiling (black circles) and by coiling a fiber on a rigid mandrel of similar diameter (red diamonds). (i) The strain dependence of capacitance and linear capacitance (per instantaneous length) of the NTS4@rubber@NTS3@fibers.84 Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (j) PPE fiber was used as the flexible and stretchable mobile phone-charging cable.90 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (k) Photographs of pristine and stretched MCP fiber. (l) SEM image of the MCP fiber with a knot. (m) The effect of CNTs contents on the stretchability and conductivity of CP fibers.91 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
4.2 1D capacitors and batteries
With the increasingly prominent environmental problems in the world and the depletion of fossil resources, the demand for electronic equipment in modern society is increasing. Energy storage devices such as supercapacitors and batteries have fast charging and discharging speed, high power density, and long cycle life.93 Flexible energy storage devices are those that remain stable under deformation conditions such as twisting, folding, compression, or stretching.58,94 Fiber-shaped flexible supercapacitors/batteries have the characteristics of small size, high flexibility, light weight, and high space efficiency, which can be used in portable or wearable electronic devices, and are an excellent flexible energy storage electronic device.95–97 On the one hand, these fibrous energy storage systems with diameters ranging from tens of microns to hundreds of microns can adapt to various deformations and operate stably in close contact with the human body.98 In addition, flexible 1D energy storage devices can be further woven into fabrics that are breathable, deformable, and highly designable.99,100
Huang et al. reported the fabrication of free-standing solid-state yarn batteries, wherein polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)-based gel electrolyte was coated on electrodeposited zinc (Zn) and nickel cobalt hydroxide (NCHO) without binder or separator (Fig. 9a).101 It had battery-level capacity and energy density, and supercapacitor-level power density, offering high specific capacity of 5 mA h cm−3 and energy densities of 0.12 mW h cm−2 and 8 mW h cm−3. Then, they fabricated an energy wrist band with four to five textile batteries connected in series (Fig. 9b). Besides weaveability and wearability, this charged energy wrist band successfully powered a watch, a set of light-emitting diodes, and a pulse sensor, demonstrating its promising potential in personalized wearable electronics and healthcare, and are considerably superior to nickel (Ni)//Zn battery, Ni//Fe battery, Li thin-film battery, and asymmetric supercapacitors (Fig. 9c).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of a self-contained solid-state yarn battery. (b) Woven energy wristband to power a watch (left), a set of LEDs (top right), and a pulse sensor (bottom right). (c) Ragone diagram comparing water batteries and asymmetric supercapacitors.101 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the fabrication of coaxial EDLC fibers based on carbon nanotube fibers and flakes as two electrodes. (e) SEM image of one EDLC fiber made into a knot. (f) Scans of several EDLC fabrics’ electron microscope image.102 Copyright © 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) GCD curves of the 1st and 4000th cycles. (h) Cycle performance of the graphene electrodes.18 Copyright © 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (i) Schematic illustration of the arrangement of MXene flakes and PEDOT:PSS chains within MxPy fibers. (j) Electrochemical performance of M7p3 fiber electrodes in a three-electrode system, M7p3 fibers at different operating potentials (5 mV−1) in the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves. (k) CV curves of M7p3 fibers at different scan rates.103 Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Chen et al. prepared coaxial fibrous flexible supercapacitors using CNTs fibers and CNTs films.102 CNTs fibers and CNTs films were prepared by the dry spinning of CNTs synthesized by chemical vapor deposition. Coaxial supercapacitors were assembled by immersing the CNTs fibers in the PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte, then wrapping the CNTs film around the CNTs fibers after drying, and immersing the electrolyte again to ensure that the electrode material was infiltrated into the electrolyte (Fig. 9d). The advantage of this coaxial structure was to increase the contact area between the two electrodes and reduce the internal resistance. The mass specific capacitance and energy density of the coaxial fiber flexible supercapacitor were 59 F g−1 and 1.88 W h kg−1, respectively. The fibrous flexible ultracapacitors could be bent and woven into a variety of structures, and there was little change in the electrochemical performance after knotting or weaving into textiles, as shown in Fig. 9e and f.
Zhang et al. prepared a composite of layered nanostructured graphene fibers and flexible electrodes that could be produced in large quantities.18 Because graphene sheets have good electrical conductivity, a more efficient conductive network was formed. Excellent electrochemical performance of the fibrous and flexible nanostructure material was achieved, with an areal capacitance of 48.83 mF cm−2, according to the galvanostatic charge/discharge analysis at a current density of 0.199 mA cm−2. The electrodes also showed a good cycle performance, with 91.2% of the original capacity retained after 4000 cycles (Fig. 9g and h). Such electrodes may provide new design opportunities for wearable electronics and energy storage applications.
Zhang et al. prepared an easily scalable one-step wet-spinning method to prepare highly conductive fibers using a mixture of Ti3C2Tx–MXene nanosheets and PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 9i).103 The recorded conductivity of the fibers produced by this method was ∼1489 S cm−1. The hybrid fiber at ∼70 wt% MXene had high volume capacitance (∼614.5 F cm−3 at 5 m V−1) and excellent rate performance (∼375.2 F cm−3 at 1000 m V−1). When assembled into an independent FSC, the energy density and power density of the device reached ∼7.13 W h cm−3 and ∼8249 mW cm−3, respectively (Fig. 9j and k). The excellent strength and flexibility of the hybrid fiber enabled it to be wrapped around the silicone elastomer fiber, achieving elastic fiber-shaped supercapacitors (FSC) with 96% capacitance retention when cyclically stretched to 100% strain. MXene/PEDOT:PSS hybrid fiber offers exciting application potential for wearable and portable electronic devices due to its versatility, easily customizable conductivity, and volume capacitance.
Recent studies found that the internal resistance of the fiber-based lithium-ion battery could decrease with the increase in length, and then gradually tends to be stable.104 The use of fiber current collectors with higher electrical conductivity is beneficial to reduce the internal resistance of fiber lithium-ion batteries. He et al. developed a continuous method for the high-efficiency loading of active materials for fibrous lithium-ion batteries, and obtained positive and negative fiber materials with high loading, uniform coating, and high-capacity matching.104 The positive electrode fiber and the negative electrode fiber covering the separator are further wound and assembled, and finally, the continuous preparation of high-performance fiber lithium-ion battery was realized. The energy density based on bulk mass exceeded 85 W h kg−1. At the same time, the fiber lithium-ion battery had good cycle stability. After 500 cycles, the capacity retention rate of the battery still reached 90.5%, and the coulombic efficiency was 99.8%. Further, through the textile method, a large-area battery fabric with high performance and high safety was obtained. Liao et al. of the same team developed a novel solution extrusion method, designing a single-unit industrial spinneret with three channels to extrude a three-phase composite consisting of electrolyte-encapsulated positive and negative electrodes.105 Component fiber batteries can be directly and continuously mass-fabricated full-fiber batteries in one step with a high productivity of over 250 m h−1. The all-fiber battery delivers a specific capacity of 86 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 and remains stable over 50 cycles with a coulombic efficiency of 93.6%. It can build an integrated textile that can harvest, store, and discharge energy. Then, a tent was fabricated, where the outer layer was composed of textile solar cells and the inner layer was composed of textile batteries. The tent could harvest energy from the sun during the day to charge the textile batteries on the inside. The method is simple and easy to implement, and the obtained flexible textile battery is stable, durable, and safe.
The flexible battery prepared based on 1D fibers not only has the characteristics of light weight, flexibility, and miniaturization, which meets the current demand for convenience and comfort of wearable electronic devices, but the 1D fiber base is also weaveable, which can utilize low-cost and high-efficiency textiles, while the technology enables large-scale production.
4.3 1D stretchable strain sensors
Various conductive yarns based on incorporated or coated conductive materials have high electrical conductivity and inherent tensile properties. The variation of the electrical properties of these yarns with strain makes them a promising wearable sensing device. Conductive fibers can be post-processed into a variety of electronic devices. In addition to the conductive fiber, other materials, post-processing, such as reducing materials or changing the structure of conductive yarns, can lead to other applications. Technically, the various 1D strain sensors can also respond to other mechanical deformations, such as pressure, bending, and torsional stimuli, because these mechanical deformations are closely related to each other.106,107 These mechanical deformations are not only more complex than linear strain deformations, but are also very important in the practical applications of commonly observed deformations, for example, in the study of joint and muscle movements.108 Strain-sensitive conductive network can convert external stimuli into electrical signals that are easy to read, which is the core component of wearable electronics. The 1D fibrous stretchable strain sensor has aroused extensive attention of the researchers because of its simple preparation, low production cost, mechanical flexibility and sensing ability.109
Chen et al. prepared a high tensile fiber PEE with high electrical conductivity, which consists of a core fiber, an intermediate modified layer, and an outer eutectic-gallium–indium liquid metal layer.90 It can be used as an intelligent wearable sensor due to its excellent stretching, sensitivity, and wide working range. The PPE fibers shown in Fig. 10a can be used as sensors to detect human behavior, including wrist, finger, elbow, and knee flexion. The stretchable conductive fiber shows excellent thermostability with a maximum operating temperature of nearly 250 °C. As shown in Fig. 10b and c, we fixed PPE fiber strain sensor on the back of the wrist to detect its response to the bending of the wrist. Chen et al. proposed ion-based conductive fibers by developing hollow fibers with specific microchannels and then filled them.110 In general, ILS-based fibers with linear microchannels have high strain sensitivity and rapid response to strain, pressure, and temperature. As shown in Fig. 10d–f, the fiber sensor based on ILS is successfully woven into gloves, demonstrating the ability to detect human sign language, gesture, and arm movement. Ning et al.111 developed highly flexible and stretchable 0.63 mm diameter conductive fibers by the orderly deposition of AgNWs/CNTs and encapsulation of PDMS onto stretchable spandex fibers. At the same time, it could be used as fiber-shaped triboelectric nanogenerators (F-TENgs), self-powered multifunctional sensors, and composite fibers that can convert mechanical stimuli into electrical signals without affecting the normal human body (Fig. 10g and h). Moreover, the F-TENGs can be easily integrated into traditional textiles to form tactile sensor arrays (Fig. 10i).
 Fig. 10  (a) The PPE fiber was used as sensors in detecting human motions. The photographs and corresponding signals of the (b) bending of wrist, (c) bending of elbow.90 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Digital photograph of the as-prepared smart glove to show that the SCFs are successfully woven into the fingers, redefined hand configuration, and the corresponding smart glove photographs for sign language letters S, C, U, and T. (e) The output relative resistance curves measured from each SCF when expressing the letters S, C, U, and T. (f) Resistance change of the SCFs on the smart glove for several hand gestures.110 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (g) The peak value of voltage of an F-TENG under different bending angles of the finger, including 30°, 60°, and 90°. The insets are schematics of the F-TENGs fixed on the finger. (h) Voltage output signals of the five F-TENGs that are fixed on the five fingers from the thumb to the little finger. (i) Photographs of an F-TENG-based tactile sensor array with a square-shaped acrylic plate or an acrylic plate in the shape of the H letter placed on its top. Their corresponding pressure distributions are shown on the tactile sensor array.111 Copyright © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (j) Three twisted fibers (235 μm diameter) create a sensor able to differentiate regions of touch along its length by self-capacitance.112 Copyright © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (k) Schematic illustration of the healthy subject. (l) Resistance responses of the smart insoles recorded as the healthy subject walked (normal gait). (m) Practical demonstration of the yarn pressure sensor as a tactile sensor. (n) Resistance response of each sensor while grabbing a magic cube with the tactile feedback glove.113 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (o) Schematics for dual tactile (pressure) and tension (stretch) sensing for a taekwondo suit.114 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
Christopher et al. prepared and characterized soft, stretchable capacitive sensors using hollow elastic fibers filled with liquid metal (LM).112 Twisting or lengthening the wound bundle increased the contact area between the fibers, thereby increasing the capacitance. In addition, the LM bundle could be filled with capacitive touch sensors along the length of the bundle using fibers filled with metal of different lengths (Fig. 10j). These sensors detect touch through the finger's self-capacitance, not through physical deformation. Because these fiber sensors are very soft and stretchable, and are small (∼200–800 μm in diameter), they can be used with artificial muscles, soft robots, and stretchable devices. They have higher detection limits than the most advanced sensors; however, they can measure a wide range of twists and strains, and have a favorable fiber shape that can fit a variety of complex surfaces. Tang et al. used 3D printing to create soft, porous pressure-sensing composites.113 Conductive and insulating carbon nanotubes were uniformly dispersed in a silicon elastomer solution to form printable inks for printing fiber sensors. Due to the microporous structure and adjustable conductive network, the printed silicon CNTs-based sensor exhibited adjustable (positive and negative) piezoresistive coefficients. The positive piezoresistive pressure sensor based on the spc−5 had high sensitivity (+0.096 kPa−1) and wide sensing range (0–175 kPa). Compared with negative piezoresistive pressure sensors, positive piezoresistive effects provide an ideal balance between sensitivity and operating range (Fig. 10k). The results clearly showed that the SPC pressure sensor-based smart insoles can recognize the pressure variation, gait phases, and speed (Fig. 10l). Also, the glove based on this can easily detect the force of different fingers when touching the Rubik's cube, indicating the potential application of sensors in robot skin monitoring and feedback control (Fig. 10m and n).
Ma proposed that “all in one” electronic textiles have dual tactile and tension stimulation responses.114 This dual response is made of composite fabric assembled with core sheath yarn and spacer fabric. A major challenge limiting this dual-sensor technology is the so-called “dual-solution phenomenon”, which occurs when the core sheath yarn exhibits a non-monotonic response along the stretch. We solved this challenge by coating the yarn with an insulating polyurethane layer before twisting. The results show that our electronic textiles have a wide deformation range (up to 90%), a wide pressure detection range (up to 110 kPa), good durability (∼100000 cycles), good hand washability, water vapor permeability, and air permeability. Our fabric-based sensing technology allows the precise monitoring of movement and form, illustrating its potential applications in taekwondo and robust physical training analysis (Fig. 10o).
The powerful self-healing function and environment-friendly degradability of hydrogels provide great help for the application and recycling of one-dimensional fiber sensors in complex scenes. Wang et al. prepared a highly stable and high-throughput information interaction artificial nerve fiber based on self-healing ionic hydrogel (SSIH) by simulating the structure and signal transmission function of myelinated axons.115 The prepared ionized hydrogel was able to self-heal rapidly within 10 min, with a tensile strain of more than 7000% and an electrical conductivity of 11.76 S cm−1 at 30 °C. It can work in extremely cold environments, such as polar regions or outer space (Fig. 11a). When the artificial nerve fiber is connected to a multifunctional robot, its application in real-time integrated signal transmission is demonstrated (Fig. 11b). Such gel-based biomimetic devices will bring biomimetic intelligent robots closer to simulated complex biological systems and provide a broader application scenario for robots to perform unmanned tasks in extreme conditions. In addition, the team proposed a stretchable, self-healing, and skin-mounted active sensor for multipoint muscle function monitoring (Fig. 11c).116 Based on the design of the self-healing electrode, a self-powered muscle model matching sensor was fabricated, with a maximum output of 78.44 V, low detection limit (0.2 mN), fast response time (1.03 ms), and long service life (105 consecutive tests without performance degradation). During arm muscle training movements, exercise intensity, and vertical muscle strength of biceps and triceps brachii were measured and recorded as electrical signals and elbow bending angles (Fig. 11d and e). Through the wireless transmission module, the generated data can provide effective online information for elderly health assessment, motor function assessment, rehabilitation training guidance, and show a great development prospect.
 Fig. 11  (a) SSANF is expected to work as a communication unit of BIR. The information interaction of SSANF helps transfer energy and message to the next part. (b) Energy delivery ability and fast recovery of SSANF. Scale bar: 3 cm.115 Copyright © 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Schematic illustration working process in a set of arm movements. The right inset was a picture-monitoring muscle strength. (d) Pictures of the TSAS adhered on the elbow. (e) Voltage curves when the elbow was at 30°, 60°, 90°, and 120°. Scale bar: 2 cm.116 Copyright © 2021, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to strain and pressure sensors, fiber materials can also be used as chemical sensors. Chemical fiber sensors are sensitive to a specific chemical and are immune to it. Zhu et al. developed a novel fiber type H2 sensor based on conductive PEDOT:PSS fiber electrode.57 This method produced independent functional fibers (PEDOT:PSS@Pd) that are flexible, lightweight, braided, have high mechanical strength, and good H2 sensing performance at room temperature. The PEDOT:PSS@Pd fiber sensor had a short response time of 4–34 (±6) s and 4–19 (±4) s, with good cyclic stability. In addition, the fiber optic sensor maintained good sensing behavior under different mechanical bending states, showing the potential of building wearable sensor devices to detect H2 leaks in a timely manner (Fig. 12a and b). Therefore, this study provides an intelligent design strategy for gas sensors based on fiber optics, provides an effective sensing platform, and is considered to promote the development of wearable electronics. Zhai et al. proposed a simple strategy to improve the sensitivity and stability of multifunctional pan-RGO–pan-I fibers (CPGPF) by in situ polymerization and ultrasound.117 CPGPF-based strain sensors have a wide operating range (0.1–150% strain), high sensitivity, good response stability, fast response time/recovery time (100 ms/100 ms), and good durability (up to 1000 cycles). These significant sensing behaviors were related to the special conductive network with a layered structure and the generation of layered cracks. Conductive CPGPF is a flexible and wearable strain sensor that can monitor human movements in real time, such as finger elbow bending, leg squatting, and head squatting, showing broad application prospects in human–computer interaction. The CPGPF sensors were employed to monitor NH3 on the basis of the chemical structure of PANI (Fig. 12c), and the response mechanism of CPGPF to NH3 is illustrated (Fig. 12d).
 Fig. 12  (a) Real-time sensing curves of the PEDOT:PSS@Pd fiber sensor toward various H2 concentrations. (b) Repeated sensing curves toward 1% H2.57 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (c) Schematic of the response mechanism of CPGPF sensors to NH3. (d) The real-time sensing response of CPGPF sensors under exposure to different NH3 concentrations from 10 to 500 ppm.117 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
Wang et al. used the MXene sensing layer deposited on the surface of spring-like helical core–sheath polyester yarns due to the capillarity effect and its intrinsic hydrophilic ability, and the resultant strain sensor and humidity sensor exhibited a wide detection range from 0.3 to 120% strain and 30–100% relative humidity (RH) detection owing to elastic core–sheath structures.32 The yarn sensor could also be an excellent humidity sensor because of the high specific area structure of the yarn and intrinsic hydrophilic properties of the MXene sensing layer.
The great demand for motion and biomechanical signal monitoring of high-performance strain sensors in various fields further promotes the development of 1D fibrous strain sensors. Apart from strain and pressure sensors, fiber-based materials can also function as chemical sensors. An ideal chemical sensor is sensitive to one particular chemical and immune or at least less sensitive to others. However, many of the above sensors are sensitive to several chemical stimuli including humidity rather than one specific chemical, which poses great difficulty in real application.
4.4 1D thermal management devices
1D stretchable fibers can be used not only in flexible conductors, energy-storage devices, sensing electronics, but also as a new type of wearable heater that helps the body stay warm in extreme environments such as cold.118 The 1D wearable heater has been actively developed using a variety of electrothermal materials, such as CNTs, graphene, and metal nanomaterials, for smart textiles and wearable applications.119 The electric heating efficiency and power consumption of the device mainly depend on the electric conductivity of the electric heating electrode; thus, the electrical performance of the 1D conductive electrode is the key parameter of the fiber heater.120 In addition, because the human body is usually covered, human movement is inevitably affected by external mechanical deformation such as stretching and bending, and its stretchability and conductivity largely determine the heating performance of the telescopic 1D heating device. One-dimensional stretchable electrodes for thermal management equipment applications are generally simple and prepared from direct fabrication methods, or the braided method is used to increase the device application area.
A continuous dyeing process was developed by He et al. for preparing polypyrrole-coated threads, which were winded into coiled structures. Due to the semiconducting performance and photothermal converting ability, the fiber-shaped sensor was sensitive to temperature change and NIR irradiation.121 As an example, four fiber-shaped sensors were independently weaved into the four fingerstalls of a glove. This special glove is convenient for recording the surface temperatures of the objects with irregular shapes. As shown in Fig. 13a, when a beaker filled with warm water was held by the modified gloved hand, the temperature at different positions was monitored by each sensor successfully and simultaneously. The temperature gradient was represented by the color change, in which the temperature at the ring finger-touched area is the highest (Fig. 13b). Advantages including extensible scalability and elegant simplicity offer great promise for generally applicable purposes. Wang et al. reported graphene fiber (GF) heaters with high stretchability, ultrafast electrothermal response, and very low operation voltage to access high temperature.122 The GF heaters were fabricated by the twist-spinning of thermally annealed graphene films, which significantly improved the fracture strain up to 70% with a toughness of 22.45 MJ m−3. Thermal treatment at ultrahigh temperature healed the structural defects of graphene, greatly improving the electrical conductivity to 6 × 105 S m−1. Because of the high electrical conductivity, GF heaters exhibit an ultrafast electrothermal response with heating rate of 571 °C s−1 and cooling rate of 891 °C s−1. In particular, the extraordinary mechanical and electrothermal properties enable GF heaters to be woven into applicable electrothermal fabrics (Fig. 13c). Cheng et al. devise a CuNWs-based composite fiber with a unique hierarchical structure (Fig. 13d).121 This fiber possesses not only excellent heating performance but also fantastic tolerance to mechanical impact, such as bending, twisting, and stretching. Further, these fibers could be weaved into a wearable heating fabric and smart personal heating management could be realized through an Android phone by integrating with a microcontroller unit. Two practical applications were demonstrated, including a heating kneepad for articular thermotherapy and a heating coat on an infant model for maintaining warmth (Fig. 13e). Zheng et al. reported a coaxial wet-spinning process for continuously fabricating intrinsically stretchable, highly conductive yet conductance-stable, and liquid metal sheath–core microfibers.55 The cyclic heating test was performed by repeatedly applying a DC voltage of 0.8 V, showing repeatable temperature changes between 48.1 °C and room temperature (24.2 °C). The temperature switching was rather fast, with the heating time of 6.5 s and cooling time of 9 s. They also embedded the LM sheath–core microfiber in an elastic spandex fabric glove. The microfibers could be easily woven into an everyday glove or fabric, acting as excellent Joule heaters, electro-thermo-chromic displays, and self-powered wearable sensors to monitor human activities. A new strategy by Cao et al. was developed to prepare MXene/2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxylradical (TEMPO) ((2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxylradical)-mediated oxidized cellulose nanofibrils (TOCNFs)) smart fibers and textiles with excellent responsiveness to multiple external stimuli (electrical/photonic/mechanical).124 The superior properties of the TOCNFs/Ti3C2 composite fibers and textiles have been demonstrated through photothermal and electrothermal functions in response to multiple external stimuli (photon/electron). Fig. 13f compares the photothermal performance of the composite fiber bundles under different NIR laser power densities, and the insets show the related thermal images obtained by an IR camera. The equilibrium temperature of the composite fiber bundles is readily controlled by regulating the NIR laser power densities. The maximum temperature of the composite fiber is regulated by varying the applied voltage (Fig. 13g). The Joule heating performance of the composite textile does not show any significant deterioration during the cycling process, demonstrating excellent electrothermal stability (Fig. 13h). A schematic diagram of the experimental set-up for the investigation of the electrothermal behaviors of the composite textile is illustrated in Fig. 13i. For experimental testing, the direct current (DC) voltage was provided by a power supply to both ends of the composite textiles through copper wires, and the temperature variation of the textile was recorded using a real-time IR thermal imaging camera.
 Fig. 13  (a) Photographs of a particular glove weaved with fiber-shaped sensors on four fingerstalls except thumb, sensor on the index finger is highlighted with a red mark. (b) The corresponding temperature distribution detected by a glove-based sensor, and the right histograms are exact temperature values measured by an infrared camera (oblique line) and fiber-shaped stretchable sensors (blank), respectively.121 Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Temperature profiles of Z-pattern under stepwise voltage from 0.9 to 4.7 V. Insets are optical and thermal images of Z-pattern fabric.122 Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) IR thermal image of a SHF (l = 4 cm, r = 0.5 mm) at original state (straight) under a constant voltage of 1.2 V. IR thermal image of SHF at bending state, SHF at twisting state, SHF at stretching (strain of 50%) state. (e) IR thermal image of the heating fabric under a dc voltage of 1.8 V and the photograph of a heating fabric.123 Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. (f) Temperature profiles of the 15 twisted single TOCNFs/Ti3C2-50% fibers under a stepwise NIR laser power density of 0.5–2.5 W cm−2. (g) IR images at 5, 10, 15, and 20 V. (h) Temperature–time curve of the TOCNFs/Ti3C2-50% textile with a woodpile structure under a 10 V input voltage for six cycles. (i) The diagram of the experimental set-up for TOCNFs/Ti3C2 textile/fiber electrothermal heaters.124 Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
5. Summary and outlook
Flexible intelligent wearable technology is a multidisciplinary and multidomain technology, and its development depends on the development of its key technologies (such as Internet technology, sensing technology, and display technology). At present, it is in a major historical period of rapid changes in information technology. The research on wearable electronics that can be directly integrated into common textiles or clothing has exploded and has great potential for use in all kinds of practical wearable devices. These wearable electronic devices strongly demand 1D fibrous electronic devices, which are lightweight, wearable, highly flexible, scalable, and suitable for the frequent mechanical deformation of human body when used in daily life. Therefore, 1D fibrous stretchable electronic devices that can maintain high performance under mechanical deformation are more promising in emerging wearable applications. The development of 1D fibrous electronics with high tensile and electrical properties is basically essential.
In this paper, 1D stretchable electronic devices are reviewed, their representative conductive materials and preparation process are deeply analyzed, and applications of 1D flexible electronic devices are further described. Through the study of these different flexible electronic devices, it is necessary to introduce a variety of nanoscale organic and inorganic materials and their hybrid materials to achieve high performance of one-dimensional scalable electrodes and electronic devices. It is very important to endow them with electrical functions on the surface or in a single stretchable fiber matrix.
While there has been significant progress in 1D stretchable electronic devices for wearable electronics, some challenges that have hindered their practical use remain. The development process of both, with excellent high tensile and stable electrical performance, is still facing great challenges. It is necessary to have extremely stable and flexible conductive materials and high tensile base materials. Meanwhile, the interfacial interactions between conductive materials and elastic fiber substrate also deserve attention as it affects the mechanical stability of flexible electronic devices under deformations. Also, because of the surface roughness of the fibers and the difficulty in achieving a high level of microfabrication on small surfaces and highly curved surfaces of fibers, they are still far from achieving the performance required for practical applications. Therefore, in order to realize the 1D fibrous flexible and wearable electronics, it is urgent to scientifically understand and optimize the hierarchical structure and interface characteristics of fibers. As far as materials are concerned, the various materials for 1D fibrous stretchable electronic devices should be extended to a wider range of materials, such as biocompatible, biodegradable, and environment-friendly materials, which do not pose any threat to humans or the environment. On the other hand, due to the mechanical properties and stability of 1D electronic devices, the current industrial knitting/weaving technology is difficult to be used in 1D fibrous stretchable and wearable electronic devices. So far, the research on 1D stretchable electronic devices in this field is mainly focused on the development of various basic electronic components. Therefore, the next step of 1D scalable electronic devices should be to realize advanced electronic devices such as memory devices based on 1D stretchable electronic devices and advanced multifunctional integrated electronic products. In order to successfully combine existing 1D stretchable electronic devices and overcome the current scientific obstacles in this field, it is necessary to have an in-depth understanding of the various mechanisms and basic principles involved in complex 1D fibrous stretchable, wearable electronics, and electronic systems.
Author contributions
The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
Financial support of this work was provided by Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province of China (ZR2018QEM004, ZR2020QE081), Shandong Province Key Research and Development Plan (Major scientific and technological innovation projects) (2019JZZY010340, 2019JZZY010335, 2019GGX102022), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation via grant No. 2020M671994, and National Natural Science Foundation of China (52203061).
References
J. Park, J. C. Hwang and G. G. Kim, 
            et al., Flexible electronics based on one-dimensional and two-dimensional hybrid nanomaterials, InfoMat, 2019, 2(1), 33–56 CrossRef .
X. W. Zuo, T. T. Fan and X. J. Zhang, Smart multi-responsive aramid aerogel fiber enabled self-powered fabrics, Nano Energy, 2022, 101, 107559 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, J. Shen and C. W. Yang, 
            et al., Mixed-dimensional MXene-hydrogel heterostructures for electronic skin sensors with ultrabroad working range, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6(48), eabb5367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lou, L. Wang and K. Jiang, 
            et al., Reviews of wearable healthcare systems: Materials, devices and system integration, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2020, 140, 100523 CrossRef .
W. Jayathilaka, K. Qi and Y. Qin, 
            et al., Significance of Nanomaterials in Wearables: A Review on Wearable Actuators and Sensors, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(7), e1805921 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Chen, Y. Li and M. Bick, 
            et al., Smart Textiles for Electricity Generation, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120(8), 3668–3720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fan, J. Miao and X. Liu, 
            et al., Biomimetic Hierarchically Silver Nanowire Interwoven MXene Mesh for Flexible Transparent Electrodes and Invisible Camouflage Electronics, Nano Lett., 2022, 22(2), 740–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Miao and Q. Fan, 
            et al., Smart Textile Based on 3D Stretchable Silver Nanowires/MXene Conductive Networks for Personal Healthcare and Thermal Management, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(47), 56607–56619 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zeng, L. Shu and Q. Li, 
            et al., Fiber-based wearable electronics: a review of materials, fabrication, devices, and applications, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(31), 5310–5336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma, J. Lee and D. Choi, 
            et al., Knitted fabrics made from highly conductive stretchable fibers, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(4), 1944–1951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gao, S. He and L. Qiu, 
            et al., Continuous dry–wet spinning of white, stretchable, and conductive fibers of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-4-hydroxybutyrate) and ATO@TiO2 nanoparticles for wearable e-textiles, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8(25), 8362–8367 RSC .
S. Lee, S. Shin and S. Lee, 
            et al., Ag Nanowire Reinforced Highly Stretchable Conductive Fibers for Wearable Electronics, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25(21), 3114–3121 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Duan and L.-J. Xu, Dual band wristband antenna with metal frame loaded for biomedical applications, Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., 2017, 59(9), 2155–2159 CrossRef .
F. Muhammad, I. Talha and V. Patricia, 
            et al., Thin-Film Flexible Wireless Pressure Sensor for Continuous Pressure Monitoring in Medical Applications, Sensors, 2020, 20(22), 6653 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Souri and D. Bhattacharyya, Highly Stretchable Multifunctional Wearable Devices Based on Conductive Cotton and Wool Fabrics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(24), 20845–20853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pacchierotti, S. Sinclair and M. Solazzi, 
            et al., Wearable Haptic Systems for the Fingertip and the Hand: Taxonomy, Review, and Perspectives, IEEE Trans. Hapt., 2017, 10(4), 580–600 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, F. Guo and Y. Hao, 
            et al., Helical nanofiber yarn enabling highly stretchable engineered microtissue, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116(19), 9245–9250 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and Q. Wang, Fibrous and flexible electrodes comprising hierarchical nanostructure graphene for supercapacitors, Micro Nano Lett., 2020, 15(14), 992–996 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, L. Wang and B. Guo, 
            et al., Interwoven Aligned Conductive Nanofiber Yarn/Hydrogel Composite Scaffolds for Engineered 3D Cardiac Anisotropy, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(6), 5646–5659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dong, X. Peng and Z. L. Wang, Fiber/Fabric-Based Piezoelectric and Triboelectric Nanogenerators for Flexible/Stretchable and Wearable Electronics and Artificial Intelligence, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(5), e1902549 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, H. Hu and T. Hua, 
            et al., Wearable strain sensing textile based on one-dimensional stretchable and weavable yarn sensors, Nano Res., 2018, 11(11), 5799–5811 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zou, D. Liu and J. Zhao, 
            et al., Ni Nanobuffer Layer Provides Light-Weight CNT/Cu Fibers with Superior Robustness, Conductivity, and Ampacity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(9), 8197–8204 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, R. Kumar and A. J. Bandodkar, 
            et al., Advanced Materials for Printed Wearable Electrochemical Devices: A Review, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 3(1), 1600260 CrossRef .
H. Teymourian, M. Parrilla and J. R. Sempionatto, 
            et al., Wearable Electrochemical Sensors for the Monitoring and Screening of Drugs, ACS Sens., 2020, 5(9), 2679–2700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yi, H. Ren and J. Shan, 
            et al., Wearable energy sources based on 2D materials, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47(9), 3152–3188 RSC .
W. Zhang, Z. Yin and A. Chun, 
            et al., Bridging Oriented Copper Nanowire-Graphene Composites for Solution-Processable, Annealing-Free, and Air-Stable Flexible Electrodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(3), 1733–1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, L. Wang and T. Ye, 
            et al., Stretchable Energy Storage Devices Based on Carbon Materials, Small, 2021, 17(48), e2005015 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Su, T. Fan and W. Y. Cui, 
            et al., Advanced electrospun nanofibrous materials for efficient oil/water separation, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2022,(5), 1–21 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Z. Zhou, MXene-based materials for electrochemical energy storage, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27(1), 73–85 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, Z. Zhai and Z. Song, 
            et al., Conductive and Elastic 3D Helical Fibers for Use in Washable and Wearable Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(10), e1907495 CrossRef .
M. a Farag, M. E-a, L. A. Alkandary and M. I. Alshatti, 
            et al., Congestive heart failure as a rare cause of unilateral breast edema: A case report & review of the literature, Egyptian J. Radiol. Nucl. Med., 2018, 49(3), 873–877 CrossRef .
L. Wang, M. Tian and Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Helical core-sheath elastic yarn-based dual strain/humidity sensors with MXene sensing layer, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55(14), 6187–6194 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, J. Jiang and F. Sun, 
            et al., Flexible wearable graphene/alginate composite non-woven fabric temperature sensor with high sensitivity and anti-interference, Cellulose, 2019, 27(4), 2369–2380 CrossRef .
C. You, W. Qin and Z. Yan, 
            et al., Highly improved water tolerance of hydrogel fibers with a carbon nanotube sheath for rotational, contractile and elongational actuation, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9(16), 10240–10250 RSC .
C. Wang, K. Xia and H. Wang, 
            et al., Advanced Carbon for Flexible and Wearable Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(9), e1801072 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Lu, P. V. Gulgunje and P. J. Arias-Monje, 
            et al., Structure, properties, and applications of polyacrylonitrile/carbon nanotube (CNT) fibers at low CNT loading, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2020, 60(9), 2143–2151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vida, N. Farnaz and L. W. Taylor, 
            et al., Perovskite-Carbon Nanotube Light-Emitting Fibers, Nano Lett., 2020, 20(5), 3178–3184 CrossRef .
J. Shujuan, Z. Hongbo and S. Shaoqing, 
            et al., Highly Stretchable Conductive Fibers from Few-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Coated on Poly(m-phenylene isophthalamide) Polymer Core/Shell Structures, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(10), 10252–10257 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gao, F. Guo and P. Cao, 
            et al., Winding-Locked Carbon Nanotubes/Polymer Nanofibers Helical Yarn for Ultrastretchable Conductor and Strain Sensor, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(3), 3442–3450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, Y. Fan and Q. Zhang, 
            et al., Ultra-Robust and Extensible Fibrous Mechanical Sensors for Wearable Smart Healthcare, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2107511 CrossRef .
L. Lu, C. Jiang and G. Hu, 
            et al., Flexible Noncontact Sensing for Human-Machine Interaction, Adv. Mater., 2021, e2100218 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, G. Hong and D. Dong, 
            et al., Multiresponsive Graphene-Aerogel-Directed Phase-Change Smart Fibers, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(30), e1801754 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yan, H. Hong and H. Yang, 
            et al., From industrially weavable and knittable highly conductive yarns to large wearable energy storage textiles, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(5), 4766–4775 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Peng, J. Zhou and X. Song, 
            et al., A Flexible Pressure Sensor with Ink Printed Porous Graphene for Continuous Cardiovascular Status Monitoring, Sensors, 2021, 21(2), 485 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, P. Swetha and Y. Zhu, Nanomaterial-Enabled Wearable Sensors for Healthcare, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7(1), 1700889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, S. Kang and J. Ma, 
            et al., High-Performance and Rapid-Response Electrical Heaters Based on Ultraflexible, Heat-Resistant, and Mechanically Strong Aramid Nanofiber/Ag Nanowire Nanocomposite Papers, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(7), 7578–7590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Miao, S. Chen and H. Liu, 
            et al., Low-temperature nanowelding ultrathin silver nanowire sandwiched between polydopamine-functionalized graphene and conjugated polymer for highly stable and flexible transparent electrodes, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 345, 260–270 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Guan, Z. M. Han and Y. Zhu, 
            et al., Bio-Inspired Lotus-Fiber-like Spiral Hydrogel Bacterial Cellulose Fibers, Nano Lett., 2021, 21(2), 952–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Z. Huang and T. Chen, 
            et al., Construction of 3D MXene/Silver nanowires aerogels reinforced polymer composites for extraordinary electromagnetic interference shielding and thermal conductivity, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131540 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rujun, K. Byeongguk and C. Suik, 
            et al., Extraordinarily High Conductivity of Stretchable Fibers of Polyurethane and Silver Nanoflowers, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(11), 10876–10886 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yin, W. Ranran and S. Jing, 
            et al., Highly conductive and ultrastretchable electric circuits from covered yarns and silver nanowires, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(4), 3887–3895 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, S. Yao and W. Rao, 
            et al., Transformable soft liquid metal micro/nanomaterials, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2019, 138, 1–35 CrossRef .
R. Guo, X. Sun and S. Yao, 
            et al., Semi-Liquid-Metal-(Ni-EGaIn)-Based Ultraconformable Electronic Tattoo, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4(8), 1900183 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dong, A. Leber and T. Das Gupta, 
            et al., High-efficiency super-elastic liquid metal based triboelectric fibers and textiles, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 3537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lijing, Z. Miaomiao and W. Baohu, 
            et al., Conductance-stable liquid metal sheath-core microfibers for stretchy smart fabrics and self-powered sensing, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7(22), eabg4041 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, G. Tian and G. Jin, 
            et al., Buckled Conductive Polymer Ribbons in Elastomer Channels as Stretchable Fiber Conductor, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30(5), 1907316 CrossRef .
Z. Zhu, C. Liu and F. Jiang, 
            et al., Flexible fiber-shaped hydrogen gas sensor via coupling palladium with conductive polymer gel fiber, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 411, 125008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fang, C. Lu and A. Chen, 
            et al., 2 D MXene-based Energy Storage Materials: Interfacial Structure Design and Functionalization, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13(6), 1409–1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, Z. Xu and B. Fang, 
            et al., MXene/graphene hybrid fibers for high performance flexible supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(42), 22113–22119 RSC .
Z. Li, D. Guo and D. Wang, 
            et al., Exploration of Metal/Ti3C2 MXene-derived composites as anode for high-performance zinc-ion supercapacitor, J. Power Sources, 2021, 506, 230197 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liao, X. Guo and P. Wan, 
            et al., Conductive MXene Nanocomposite Organohydrogel for Flexible, Healable, Low-Temperature Tolerant Strain Sensors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(39), 1904507 CrossRef .
W. Chen, L. X. Liu and H. B. Zhang, 
            et al., Flexible, Transparent, and Conductive Ti3C2Tx MXene-Silver Nanowire Films with Smart Acoustic Sensitivity for High-Performance Electromagnetic Interference Shielding, ACS Nano, 2020, 16643–16653 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fang, C. Lu and A. Chen, 
            et al., 2D MXene-based Energy Storage Materials: Interfacial Structure Design and Functionalization, ChemSusChem, 2019, 13(6), 1409–1419 CrossRef PubMed .
L. X. Liu, W. Chen and H. B. Zhang, 
            et al., Flexible and Multifunctional Silk Textiles with Biomimetic Leaf-Like MXene/Silver Nanowire Nanostructures for Electromagnetic Interference Shielding, Humidity Monitoring, and Self-Derived Hydrophobicity, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(44), 1905197 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, X. Wang and L. Yu, 
            et al., Two-Dimensional Ultrathin MXene Ceramic Nanosheets for Photothermal Conversion, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(1), 384–391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, Q. Song and B. Huang, 
            et al., Facile Fabrication of Densely Packed Ti3C2 MXene/Nanocellulose Composite Films for Enhancing Electromagnetic Interference Shielding and Electro-/Photothermal Performance, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(7), 12405–12417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Seyedin and Z. Gu, 
            et al., MXene: a potential candidate for yarn supercapacitors, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(47), 18604–18608 RSC .
Z. Wang, S. Qin and S. Seyedin, 
            et al., High-Performance Biscrolled MXene/Carbon Nanotube Yarn Supercapacitors, Small, 2018, 14(37), e1802225 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shin, W. Eom and K. H. Lee, 
            et al., Highly Electroconductive and Mechanically Strong Ti3C2Tx MXene Fibers Using a Deformable MXene Gel, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(2), 3320–3329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, H. Wang and W. Lu, 
            et al., Highly tough, stretchable and resilient hydrogels strengthened with molecular springs and their application as a wearable, flexible sensor, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 415, 128839 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Meng and Z. Zhang, 
            et al., Self-Actuating Electrocaloric Cooling Fibers, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(12), 1903902 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seyedin, S. Uzun and A. Levitt, 
            et al., MXene Composite and Coaxial Fibers with High Stretchability and Conductivity for Wearable Strain Sensing Textiles, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(12), 1910504 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, D. Dong and S. Gong, 
            et al., A Moss-Inspired Electroless Gold-Coating Strategy Toward Stretchable Fiber Conductors by Dry Spinning, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 5(1), 1800462 CrossRef .
J. Foroughi, G. M. Spinks and D. Antiohos, 
            et al., Highly Conductive Carbon Nanotube-Graphene Hybrid Yarn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24(37), 5859–5865 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, M. Tian and T. Xu, 
            et al., Multiscale Disordered Porous Fibers for Self-Sensing and Self-Cooling Integrated Smart Sportswear, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(1), 559–567 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Huang and J. Sun, 
            et al., Polyurethane/Cotton/Carbon Nanotubes Core-Spun Yarn as High Reliability Stretchable Strain Sensor for Human Motion Detection, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(37), 24837–24843 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fengqiang, T. Mingwei and S. Xuantong, 
            et al., Stretchable Conductive Fibers of Ultrahigh Tensile Strain and Stable Conductance Enabled by a Worm-Shaped Graphene Microlayer, Nano Lett., 2019, 19(9), 6592–6599 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cheng, R. Wang and K. H. Chan, 
            et al., A Biomimetic Conductive Tendril for Ultrastretchable and Integratable Electronics, Muscles, and Sensors, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(4), 3898–3907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, J. Lei and D. Qi, 
            et al., Stretchable Conductive Fibers Based on a Cracking Control Strategy for Wearable Electronics, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(29), 1801683 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, W. Bai and X. Cheng, 
            et al., Flexible and stretchable lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors based on electrically
conducting carbon nanotube fiber springs, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(52), 14564–14568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Woo, H. Lee and C. Yi, 
            et al., Ultrastretchable Helical Conductive Fibers Using Percolated Ag Nanoparticle Networks Encapsulated by Elastic Polymers with High Durability in Omnidirectional Deformations for Wearable Electronics, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(29), 1910026 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhong, Q. Zhong and Q. Hu, 
            et al., Stretchable Self-Powered Fiber-Based Strain Sensor, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25(12), 1798–1803 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Marion, N. Gupta and H. Cheung, 
            et al., Thermally Drawn Highly Conductive Fibers with Controlled Elasticity, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2201081 CrossRef .
Z. F. Liu, S. Fang and F. A. Moura, 
            et al., Hierarchically buckled sheath-core fibers for superelastic electronics, sensors, and muscles, Science, 2015, 349(6246), 400–404 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hua, Y. Shang and X. Li, 
            et al., Helical graphene oxide fibers as a stretchable sensor and an electrocapillary sucker, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(20), 10659–10668 RSC .
Z. Xu, Z. Liu and H. Sun, 
            et al., Highly electrically conductive Ag-doped graphene fibers as stretchable conductors, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(23), 3249–3253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Y. Zhao and J. Ren, 
            et al., An All-Solid-State Fiber-Shaped Aluminum-Air Battery with Flexibility, Stretchability, and High Electrochemical Performance, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(28), 7979–7982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sala De Medeiros, D. Goswami and D. Chanci, 
            et al., Washable, breathable, and stretchable e-textiles wirelessly powered by omniphobic silk-based coils, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106155 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guan, Y. Xie and H. Wu, 
            et al., Silver Nanowire-Bacterial Cellulose Composite Fiber-Based Sensor for Highly Sensitive Detection of Pressure and Proximity, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(11), 15428–15439 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Chen, H. Wang and R. Guo, 
            et al., Superelastic EGaIn Composite Fibers Sustaining 500% Tensile Strain with Superior Electrical Conductivity for Wearable Electronics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(5), 6112–6118 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lan, C. Jiang and Y. Yao, 
            et al., A stretchable and conductive fiber for multifunctional sensing and energy harvesting, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105954 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, Y. Zuo and P. Zhai, 
            et al., Large-area display textiles integrated with functional systems, Nature, 2021, 591(7849), 240–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, M. Tian and T. Raza, 
            et al., Soft robotic reinforced by carbon fiber skeleton with large deformation and enhanced blocking forces, Composites, Part B, 2021, 223, 109099 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, M. Li and Q. Fan, 
            et al., Smart-Fabric-Based Supercapacitor with Long-Term Durability and Waterproof Properties toward Wearable Applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(12), 14778–14785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Choi, K. M. Kim and K. J. Kim, 
            et al., Improvement of system capacitance via weavable superelastic biscrolled yarn supercapacitors, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Z. Li and X. Ye, 
            et al., Tendril-Inspired 900% Ultrastretching Fiber-Based Zn-Ion Batteries for Wearable Energy Textiles, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(14), 17110–17117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, T. Lv and H. Sun, 
            et al., Ultrastretchable and superior healable supercapacitors based on a double cross-linked hydrogel electrolyte, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, M. Tian and Z. Li, 
            et al., Robust sandwich micro-structure coating layer for wear-resistant conductive polyester fabrics, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 494, 969–976 CrossRef CAS .
H. Song, S.-Y. Jeon and Y. Jeong, Fabrication of a coaxial high performance fiber lithium-ion battery supported by a cotton yarn electrolyte reservoir, Carbon, 2019, 147, 441–450 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, J. Zhou and C. Bai, 
            et al., Zn/MnO2 battery chemistry
with dissolution-deposition mechanism, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 16, 100396 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, W. S. Ip and Y. Y. Lau, 
            et al., Weavable, Conductive Yarn-Based NiCo//Zn Textile Battery with High Energy Density and Rate Capability, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(9), 8953–8961 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Qiu and J. Ren, 
            et al., Novel electric double-layer capacitor with a coaxial fiber structure, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(44), 6436–6441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Seyedin and S. Qin, 
            et al., Highly Conductive Ti3 C2 Tx MXene Hybrid Fibers for Flexible and Elastic Fiber-Shaped Supercapacitors, Small, 2019, 15(8), e1804732 CrossRef PubMed .
J. He, C. Lu and H. Jiang, 
            et al., Scalable production of high-performing woven lithium-ion fibre batteries, Nature, 2021, 597(7874), 57–63 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liao, C. Wang and Y. Hong, 
            et al., Industrial scale production of fibre batteries by a solution-extrusion method, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2022, 17, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Liu, J. L. Miao and Q. Fan, Recent progress on smart fiber and textile based wearable strain sensors: materials, fabrications and applications, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2022, 4, 361–389 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, X. Xiao and W. Deng, 
            et al., Manipulating Relative Permittivity for High-Performance Wearable Triboelectric Nanogenerators, Nano Lett., 2020, 20(9), 6404–6411 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Liu and X. Qu, 
            et al., Ultra-Stretchable and Fast Self-Healing Ionic Hydrogel in Cryogenic Environments for Artificial Nerve Fiber, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2105416 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Qu and Q. Zheng, 
            et al., Stretchable, Self-Healing, and Skin-Mounted Active Sensor for Multipoint Muscle Function Assessment, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(6), 10130–10140 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, H. Liu and S. Liu, 
            et al., Transparent and Waterproof Ionic Liquid-Based Fibers for Highly Durable Multifunctional Sensors and Strain-Insensitive Stretchable Conductors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(4), 4305–4314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ning, K. Dong and R. Cheng, 
            et al., Flexible and Stretchable Fiber-Shaped Triboelectric Nanogenerators for Biomechanical Monitoring and Human-Interactive Sensing, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31(4), 2006679 CrossRef .
C. B. Cooper, K. Arutselvan and Y. Liu, 
            et al., Stretchable Capacitive Sensors of Torsion, Strain, and Touch Using Double Helix Liquid Metal Fibers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(20), 1605630 CrossRef .
Z. Tang, S. Jia and C. Zhou, 
            et al., 3D Printing of Highly Sensitive and Large-Measurement-Range Flexible Pressure Sensors with a Positive Piezoresistive Effect, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(25), 28669–28680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, J. Ouyang and T. Raza, 
            et al., Flexible all-textile dual tactile-tension sensors for monitoring athletic motion during taekwondo, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105941 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Liu and X. Qu, 
            et al., Ultra-Stretchable and Fast Self-Healing Ionic Hydrogel in Cryogenic Environments for Artificial Nerve Fiber, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2105416 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Qu and Q. Zheng, 
            et al., Stretchable, SelfHealing, and Skin-Mounted Active Sensor for Multipoint Muscle Function Assessment, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(6), 10130–10140 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhai, X. Li and Q. Xia, 
            et al., Multi-functional and flexible helical fiber sensor for micro-deformation detection, temperature sensing and ammonia gas monitoring, Composites, Part B, 2021, 211, 108621 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, Y. Chen and Z. H. Guo, 
            et al., Stretchable, Transparent, and Thermally Stable Triboelectric Nanogenerators Based on Solvent-Free Ion-Conducting Elastomer Electrodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(15), 1909252 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Jeong, S. Chen and J. Huo, 
            et al., Mechanically Stretchable and Electrically Insulating Thermal Elastomer Composite by Liquid Alloy Droplet Embedment, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 18257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liao, Q. Liao and Z. Zhang, 
            et al., A Highly Stretchable ZnO@Fiber-Based
Multifunctional Nanosensor for Strain/Temperature/UV Detection, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26(18), 3074–3081 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, Q. Gui and S. Liao, 
            et al., Coiled Fiber-Shaped Stretchable Thermal Sensors for Wearable Electronics, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1(8), 1600170 CrossRef .
R. Wang, Z. Xu and J. Zhuang, 
            et al., Highly Stretchable Graphene Fibers with Ultrafast Electrothermal Response for Low-Voltage Wearable Heaters, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3(2), 1600425 CrossRef .
Y. Cheng, H. Zhang and R. Wang, 
            et al., Highly Stretchable and Conductive Copper Nanowire Based Fibers with Hierarchical Structure for Wearable Heaters, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(48), 32925–32933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Cao, C. Ma and D. S. Mao, 
            et al., MXene-Reinforced Cellulose Nanofibril Inks for 3D-Printed Smart Fibres and Textiles, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(51), 1905898 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Wenxiao Zhang
	Wenxiao Zhang is currently an MS candidate at the School of Textile Engineering, Qingdao University. She received her BE degree in fashion design and engineering from Dezhou University, China, in 2020. Her research is on the development of multifunctional smart textiles.

Jinlei Miao
	Jinlei Miao is currently an assistant professor at the Research Center for Intelligent and Wearable Technology, College of Textiles and Clothing, Qingdao University, China. He received his PhD degree from Tianjin Municipal Key Laboratory of Advanced Fiber and Energy Storage of TianGong University in 2018. His research interests include the fabrication of wearable electronics.

Xingwei Zuo
	Xingwei Zuo is currently an MS candidate at the School of Textile Engineering, Qingdao University. She received her BE degree in textile engineering from Dalian Polytechnic University, China, in 2020. Her research is on the development of smart textiles.

Xueji Zhang
	Xueji Zhang is the Vice President of Shenzhen University. He obtained his PhD from Wuhan University in 1994. He was a postdoc fellow at the National Institute of Chemistry, Slovenia, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zurich, and New Mexico State University from 1995 to 1999. He has worked at World Precision Instruments Inc. as Sr Scientist, Head of the Chemistry department, and Sr Vice President of Science since 1998. His research centers on electrochemistry, bioanalysis, micro/nanosensors, and biomedical instrumentation.

Lijun Qu
	Lijun Qu is currently Professor of Textile Engineering at the Qingdao University. She received her BE degree (1985), MS degree (1991), and PhD (2005) in Textile Engineering/Materials from Donghua University, China. She was a visiting scholar at the ATO-DLO Research Institute in the Netherlands from 1996 to 1997. She is a member of the China Innovation Alliance of the Graphene Industry. Her research is on the application of graphene in the textiles field.

 	Fig. 1  Application development timeline of one-dimensional fiber stretchable wearable electronics.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for the coaxially-coated light-emitting CNTs-based fiber.37 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) TEM image of FWNTs.38 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Scheme of the preparation of the FWNT/PMIA fiber. (d) CNTs/PU twisted yarn and (e) amplified image of a section. (f) The good conductivity of the helical CNTs/PU yarn demonstrated by liquid crystal display (LED) light during the stretching process.39 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic diagram of the fibrous strain sensor, including PU foundation, Ecoflex/CNT conductive layer, and Ecoflex encapsulation layer. (h) Cross-sectional optical microscope image of the fiber sensor. (i) Images and schematic illustrations of the vibration generation and detection system. (j) Photograph of spiral copper wire fiber in static (up) and vibrating state (down) states.40 Copyright © 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (k) Schematic description of the processes of graphene aerogel fiber. (l) The aerogel-directed smart fiber as a spun.42 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (m) Illustration of the yarn modified by the deposition of RGO, MnO2, and PPy.43 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a and b) Electrical and mechanical properties of conductive stretchable fibers.50 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) LED arrays remained operational when bent; no obvious weakening of the light intensity was observed in the cyclic bending test. (d) LED arrays stayed operational when stretched to a strain of 30%.51 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) An example of Ni-EGaIn electronic tattoo with LED array.53 Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) Schematic showing the thermal drawing process for the production of long fibers. (g) Stress–strain curves of a fiber without and with an embedded liquid metal electrode. The inset shows a fiber that is randomly knotted. (h) SEM image of a fiber with a single liquid metal electrode. Scale bar: 200 μm.54 Copyright © 2020, the author(s). (i) Schematic setup and the main components for the coaxial wet-spinning process for producing LM sheath–core microfibers.55	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic presenting how prestrain-then-buckling strategy was applied to obtain a folded conductive polymer ribbon in a TPE channel. (b) Microstructure of the coaxial fiber.56 Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic illustration for the preparation of bare and Pd-coated PEDOT:PSS fibers via confined crosslinking and in situ electrodeposition, respectively.57 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (d) SEM images showing the surface morphologies of the BMX yarn containing 97.4 wt% MXene. (e) Specific areal capacitance of the BMX yarn electrodes from the GCD curves.68 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) Optical image of the extruded MG 9 and the SEM image of the inner structure of the extruded MG 9. (g) Tensile strength–strain curves.69 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic of the wet-spinning process for the MXene/GO fiber.59 Copyright © 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the MXene/PU fiber spinning process. (b) Digital photograph of a ∼100 m long MXene/PU fiber at ∼9.1 wt% MXene spun using an IPA coagulation bath. (c) Schematic illustration of various stages of stress–strain curves for the MXene/PU fibers. (d) Stress–strain curves of the representative fibers.72 Copyright © 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process. (f) The characterization of the dry spun stretchable fiber conductor based on ultrathin AuNWs.73 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) The elastic regions of the fibers. SEM images of (h) the CNTs forest during twist insertion to form pristine yarns. (i) Pristine CNTs yarn; hybrid CNTs–graphene yarn: cross-section.74 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (j) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of multiscale disordered porous elastic fibers.75 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the self-developed fabrication process of the PU/cotton/CNTs yarn. (b) Evolution of the electrical resistance of the PU/cotton/CNTs yarn vs. immersion times.76 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) LED patterned lights response with different elongation of GP300@filament circuits. (d) Bionic superelastic conductive polyurethane filaments with worm-shape graphene microlayer.77 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Preparation and morphology of the CNTs/PU helical yarn. (f) CNTs network on PU nanofibers surface, and (g) high magnification of the CNTs network.39 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) The schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the conductive tendril. Scale bar for the SEM images = 400 μm.78 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (i) Proposed principle of reducing the length and width of the cracks to achieve low resistance change while stretching. It shows much more conductive pathways on the fiber. (j) Photograph of the gold film on the PDMS thin film and the conductive fiber prepared.79 Copyright © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM images of a fiber at different strains 0%, 50%, and 100%. (b) Evolution of resistances of the fiber during a stretching and releasing process with a strain of 100%.80 Copyright © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication process of the helical fiber-type interconnection. (d) Resistance changes of the PDMS-coated helical fiber with helical diameter 3 mm under 10000 stretching cycles from 0% to 100% applied strain with a frequency of 0.5 Hz. The inset graph shows the range of stretching numbers between 0 and 2500. (e) Optical images of PDMS-coated helical fiber with helical diameter 3 mm and the corresponding FEA results for the deformations and the distribution of von Mises stress in the helical fiber according to the various applied strains.81 Copyright © 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) Schematic diagram of an AFSS.82 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) Fabrication of the buckled electrodes. Inset: A cross section of the COCe fiber containing a 50 μm copper wire within an open slot. (h) Fabrication of the helical electrodes. Inset: A cross section of the COCe fiber integrating a 50 μm helical copper wire. (i) Different COCe fibers with buckled copper electrodes. (j) Different COCe fibers with helical copper electrodes. (k) The optical images of the GP microlayer of the GP300@filament under stretching.83 Copyright © 2022 Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. (l) Schematic diagram of preparing the worm-shape filaments.77 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (m) Steps in the fabrication of an NTSm@fiber. The circular arrow indicates the belt direction. (n) Illustration of the structure of a longitudinal section of an NTSm sheath, showing 2D hierarchical buckling.84 Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram showing the MRC circuitry used to power e-textiles using OSCs. (b and c) Microstructure of AgNWs-BC fiber and AgNWs-BC/PDMS.88 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (d) Lighted LED hung by AgNWs-BC fiber and powered by a voltage of 2 V.89 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (e) The potential applications of strain-insensitive stretchy electronics. (f and g) Photographs of the LED using the GP0@filament and GP300@filament as the electronic circuits.77 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (h) Resistance change versus strain for coiled rubber@NTS19@fibers made by mandrel-free coiling (black circles) and by coiling a fiber on a rigid mandrel of similar diameter (red diamonds). (i) The strain dependence of capacitance and linear capacitance (per instantaneous length) of the NTS4@rubber@NTS3@fibers.84 Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (j) PPE fiber was used as the flexible and stretchable mobile phone-charging cable.90 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (k) Photographs of pristine and stretched MCP fiber. (l) SEM image of the MCP fiber with a knot. (m) The effect of CNTs contents on the stretchability and conductivity of CP fibers.91 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of a self-contained solid-state yarn battery. (b) Woven energy wristband to power a watch (left), a set of LEDs (top right), and a pulse sensor (bottom right). (c) Ragone diagram comparing water batteries and asymmetric supercapacitors.101 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the fabrication of coaxial EDLC fibers based on carbon nanotube fibers and flakes as two electrodes. (e) SEM image of one EDLC fiber made into a knot. (f) Scans of several EDLC fabrics’ electron microscope image.102 Copyright © 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) GCD curves of the 1st and 4000th cycles. (h) Cycle performance of the graphene electrodes.18 Copyright © 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (i) Schematic illustration of the arrangement of MXene flakes and PEDOT:PSS chains within MxPy fibers. (j) Electrochemical performance of M7p3 fiber electrodes in a three-electrode system, M7p3 fibers at different operating potentials (5 mV−1) in the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves. (k) CV curves of M7p3 fibers at different scan rates.103 Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The PPE fiber was used as sensors in detecting human motions. The photographs and corresponding signals of the (b) bending of wrist, (c) bending of elbow.90 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Digital photograph of the as-prepared smart glove to show that the SCFs are successfully woven into the fingers, redefined hand configuration, and the corresponding smart glove photographs for sign language letters S, C, U, and T. (e) The output relative resistance curves measured from each SCF when expressing the letters S, C, U, and T. (f) Resistance change of the SCFs on the smart glove for several hand gestures.110 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (g) The peak value of voltage of an F-TENG under different bending angles of the finger, including 30°, 60°, and 90°. The insets are schematics of the F-TENGs fixed on the finger. (h) Voltage output signals of the five F-TENGs that are fixed on the five fingers from the thumb to the little finger. (i) Photographs of an F-TENG-based tactile sensor array with a square-shaped acrylic plate or an acrylic plate in the shape of the H letter placed on its top. Their corresponding pressure distributions are shown on the tactile sensor array.111 Copyright © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (j) Three twisted fibers (235 μm diameter) create a sensor able to differentiate regions of touch along its length by self-capacitance.112 Copyright © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (k) Schematic illustration of the healthy subject. (l) Resistance responses of the smart insoles recorded as the healthy subject walked (normal gait). (m) Practical demonstration of the yarn pressure sensor as a tactile sensor. (n) Resistance response of each sensor while grabbing a magic cube with the tactile feedback glove.113 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (o) Schematics for dual tactile (pressure) and tension (stretch) sensing for a taekwondo suit.114 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) SSANF is expected to work as a communication unit of BIR. The information interaction of SSANF helps transfer energy and message to the next part. (b) Energy delivery ability and fast recovery of SSANF. Scale bar: 3 cm.115 Copyright © 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Schematic illustration working process in a set of arm movements. The right inset was a picture-monitoring muscle strength. (d) Pictures of the TSAS adhered on the elbow. (e) Voltage curves when the elbow was at 30°, 60°, 90°, and 120°. Scale bar: 2 cm.116 Copyright © 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Real-time sensing curves of the PEDOT:PSS@Pd fiber sensor toward various H2 concentrations. (b) Repeated sensing curves toward 1% H2.57 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (c) Schematic of the response mechanism of CPGPF sensors to NH3. (d) The real-time sensing response of CPGPF sensors under exposure to different NH3 concentrations from 10 to 500 ppm.117 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photographs of a particular glove weaved with fiber-shaped sensors on four fingerstalls except thumb, sensor on the index finger is highlighted with a red mark. (b) The corresponding temperature distribution detected by a glove-based sensor, and the right histograms are exact temperature values measured by an infrared camera (oblique line) and fiber-shaped stretchable sensors (blank), respectively.121 Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Temperature profiles of Z-pattern under stepwise voltage from 0.9 to 4.7 V. Insets are optical and thermal images of Z-pattern fabric.122 Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) IR thermal image of a SHF (l = 4 cm, r = 0.5 mm) at original state (straight) under a constant voltage of 1.2 V. IR thermal image of SHF at bending state, SHF at twisting state, SHF at stretching (strain of 50%) state. (e) IR thermal image of the heating fabric under a dc voltage of 1.8 V and the photograph of a heating fabric.123 Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. (f) Temperature profiles of the 15 twisted single TOCNFs/Ti3C2-50% fibers under a stepwise NIR laser power density of 0.5–2.5 W cm−2. (g) IR images at 5, 10, 15, and 20 V. (h) Temperature–time curve of the TOCNFs/Ti3C2-50% textile with a woodpile structure under a 10 V input voltage for six cycles. (i) The diagram of the experimental set-up for TOCNFs/Ti3C2 textile/fiber electrothermal heaters.124 Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
