Photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution using CdTe x S 1−x quantum dots as sensitizers on NiO photocathodes   - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0DT03567J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0DT03567J
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 696-704Photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution using CdTexS1−x quantum dots as sensitizers on NiO photocathodes†

        
          
            Elisabetta 
            Benazzi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Vito 
            Cristino
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rita 
            Boaretto
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Stefano 
            Caramori
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Mirco 
            Natali
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Via L. Borsari 46, 44121, Ferrara, Italy. E-mail: elisabetta.benazzi@unife.it; mirco.natali@unife.it
bCentro Interuniversitario per la Conversione Chimica dell'Energia Solare (SolarChem), sez. di Ferrara, Via L. Borsari 46, 44121, Ferrara, Italy
Received 
      14th October 2020
    , Accepted 7th December 2020First published on 7th December 2020AbstractThe design of active photocathodes for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is a crucial step in the development of dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells (DS-PECs) aimed at solar-assisted water splitting. In the present work, we report on the use of orange CdTexS1−x quantum dots (QDs) with an average diameter of ca. 3.5 nm, featuring different capping agents (MAA, MPA, and MSA) for the sensitization of electrodes based on nanostructured NiO. Photoelectrochemical characterization of the resulting NiO|QDs electrodes in the presence of [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]Cl2 as an irreversible electron acceptor elects MAA-capped QDs as the most active sample to achieve substantial photocurrent densities thanks to both improved surface coverage and injection ability. Functionalization of the NiO|QDs electrodes with either heterogeneous Pt or the molecular nickel bis(diphosphine) complex (1) as the hydrogen evolving catalysts (HECs) yields active photocathodes capable of promoting hydrogen evolution upon photoirradiation (maximum photocurrent densities of −16(±2) and −20(±1) μA·cm−2 for Pt and 1 HECs, respectively, at 0 V vs. NHE, 70–80% faradaic efficiency, maximum IPCE of ca. 0.2%). The photoelectrochemical activity is limited by the small surface concentration of the QD sensitizers on the NiO surface and the competitive light absorption by the NiO material which suggests that the match between dye adsorption and the available surface area is critical to achieving efficient hydrogen evolution by thiol-capped QDs.
Introduction
Solar-driven splitting of water is the key transformation in a non-carbon-based conversion of light into chemical energy. Through this means, an abundant and environmentally benign energy source can become a reality on a global scale.1 To achieve water splitting into molecular H2, a huge number of approaches have been investigated.2–5 Of particular interest is the employment of a dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cell (DS-PEC) in which a photocathode and a photoanode are connected together.6–10 The former is made of a p-type semiconductor, a light-harvesting photosensitizer (PS), and a hydrogen evolving catalyst (HEC). When paired with a photoanode for water oxidation, which is composed of an n-type semiconductor, a sensitizer (PS), and a water oxidation catalyst (WOC), the resulting system enables light-driven water splitting into H2 and O2. Both photoanodes and photocathodes are currently under active study as parts of a total solar-driven water-splitting system.11,12
Concerning the cathodic side, the use of dye-sensitized NiO photocathodes for photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation has attracted attention in recent years, following the investigations of p-type dye-sensitized solar cells (p-DSSCs), in which electrical energy serves as the product.13–22 In a photocathode for hydrogen evolution, light absorption by the PS triggers a series of electron transfer processes leading to a reduced HEC and an “oxidized” semiconductor, whose electron vacancy is filled by electrons coming from the (photo)anodic compartment.11,12 By repeating this electron transfer cascade a second time, activation of the HEC towards hydrogen evolution may be attained.
One of the most critical point in the design of a photocathode based on NiO is the correct choice of the light-harvesting unit (PS) in order to optimize its spectroscopic and redox properties as well as its attachment onto the semiconductor surface to couple sufficient surface coverage for efficient light harvesting to fast electron transfer kinetics. As an alternative to organic chromophores or metal complexes as light absorbers, semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) have recently emerged for the functionalization of NiO photocathodes, thanks to their tunable light absorption, large extinction coefficients over a broad spectral region, and rich surface binding features.23,24 To date, several methods have been attempted to prepare NiO photocathodes for photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution which include successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR),25–27 chemical bath deposition (CBD),28,29 electro/electrophoretic deposition,30,31 direct adsorption,32,33 and linker-assisted assembly.34,35 Among all, post-synthetic approaches usually provide photocathodes with the best photoelectrochemical performances.
We have recently reported on the preparation of mixed CdTe/CdS QDs (formula CdTexS1−x) and their application as photosensitizers in light-driven hydrogen evolution under homogeneous conditions in combination with a nickel bis(diphosphine) complex (1) as a catalyst and ascorbate as the sacrificial electron donor.36 Three different stabilizing agents were employed, namely mercaptopropionic acid (MPA), mercaptoacetic acid (MAA), and mercaptosuccinic acid (MSA).
Interestingly, the photocatalytic activity of the three-component system was found to be strongly dependent on the nanocrystal size and the capping agent used, with red-absorbing, MPA-capped QDs resulting in the best sample to achieve sustained hydrogen evolution upon prolonged irradiation.
We have now decided to employ these QDs as photosensitizing units for the preparation of photocathodes aimed at photoelectrochemical hydrogen production in combination with two different catalysts, namely heterogeneous Pt clusters and the nickel ‘Dubois’ catalyst 1 previously tested under homogeneous conditions (Scheme 1).36,37 NiO has been chosen as the p-type semiconductor as it represents the benchmark material for the preparation of photocathodes due to the well-established photoelectrochemical properties and the large variety of available synthetic methods.38 The results obtained show that CdTexS1−x QDs are competent sensitizers towards hydrogen production when attached onto NiO in the presence of a suitable HEC, although the low surface coverage by the QDs appears as one of the major limitations to the achievement of quantitative photon to electron conversion.
 Scheme 1  (a) General scheme of the operational mechanism of a dye-sensitized photocathode based on NiO with CdTexS1−x QDs and a HEC and (b) structural representation of the QDs employed and molecular structure of complex 1. 
Experimental section
Apparatus and procedures
All reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used as received. Milli-Q water was obtained using a Millipore apparatus, equipped with 0.22 μm filters. TEC 8 fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) conductive glass slides were obtained from Pilkington. Colloidal NiO and ZrO2 pastes were prepared by the following reported procedures.38,39MAA-, MPA-, and MSA-capped QDs and nickel complex 1, available from previous studies,36,37 were synthetized according to the literature.37,39
The UV-vis absorption spectra were measured using an Agilent Technologies Cary 300 spectrophotometer. The emission spectra were recorded using an Edinburgh Instruments FLS 920 spectrofluorometer. The emission lifetimes were acquired using a Picoquant Picoharp 300 time-correlated single photon counting at a 4 ps time resolution by using a 460 nm pulsed LED source. Fitting of the decay histogram was accomplished by a dedicated Fluofit program. SEM micrographs and EDS analysis were obtained using a scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM Jeol JSM 7600f) with an accelerating voltage of 15 kV.
Photoelectrochemical measurements were carried out using a PGSTAT 302N potentiostat in a three-electrode configuration, using an SCE and a Pt wire as the reference and counter electrodes, respectively. A LOT-Oriel solar simulator, equipped with an AM 1.5 G filter, was used as the illumination source, and set to a 0.1 W cm−2 power irradiance by means of a power meter (Newport 1918-C). Current–voltage and chronoamperometry curves under shuttered illumination were acquired by manually chopping the excitation source. IPCE was measured in a three-electrode configuration under the monochromatic illumination generated by an air-cooled Luxtel 175 W Xe lamp coupled to an Applied Photophysics monochromator. The photocurrent, recorded at the constant potential of 0 V vs. NHE, was acquired on an Eco Chemie PGSTAT 101 Potentiostat. Incident irradiance was measured with a calibrated silicon photodiode. Determination of the faradaic efficiency (FE) was performed through a generator-collector method, adapted from the literature.41 Briefly, the photocathode was illuminated under an applied bias, thus acting as an H2 generator. A Pt-covered FTO electrode, prepared by drop casting (one drop) of a 4.8 mM H2PtCl6 solution in ethanol followed by calcination at 450 °C for 15 minutes, was sandwiched onto the photocathode and used as the collector, i.e., the electrode at which the oxidation of the evolved H2 takes place. The sandwiched device was held together by 2 layers of unstretched parafilm (ca. 200 μm spacing), sealed under pressure at 50 °C for 60 s. The parafilm was designedly cut to form an L-shaped chamber to minimize H2 loss, while still allowing electrolyte access by capillary forces. Both the photocathode generator and the FTO-Pt collector were contacted using Cu tape (also covered by the parafilm layers), and connected to the two working electrodes of a bipotentiostat (PGSTAT 30), while an SCE and a Pt wire were used as the reference and counter electrodes, respectively. The generator electrode was held at a bias of 0 V vs. NHE, while the collector was biased at +0.4 V vs. NHE, which was identified as the optimum H2 oxidation potential (controlled by bubbling H2 gas in aqueous solution).
Preparation of the photoelectrodes
FTO cleaning was performed by sonicating the slides in Alconox® solution for 10 minutes and in 2-propanol for additional 10 minutes. The NiO paste was prepared by ball-milling of NiO nanoparticles (Inframat) with ethanol, acetic acid, terpineol, and ethyl cellulose.38 The paste was deposited by spin coating onto FTO electrodes (10 s at 1000 rpm, 20 s at 2000 rpm). After the deposition, the electrodes were heated up to 550 °C, following programmed temperature ramping: 25–120 °C (15 min), 120 °C (0 min), 120–450 °C (22 min), 450 °C (30 min), 450–550 °C (10 min), and 550 °C (20 min). Transparent ZrO2 films, used as blank samples for luminescence measurements, were obtained by doctor-blading of the ZrO2 paste,39 followed by calcination at 450 °C for 30 minutes. NiO|QD photoelectrodes were obtained by overnight soaking of the NiO films in aqueous solutions containing MPA-, MAA-, and MSA-capped QDs. NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt photocathodes were obtained by platinum deposition onto bare NiO electrodes followed by overnight soaking in the (MAA)QDs solutions. Platinum was deposited by adapting a reported procedure.42 Briefly, each bare NiO electrode was immersed in the platinizing solution (0.1 M H2PtCl6 in 0.1 M HCl, first neutralized using Na2CO3, then adjusted to pH 4 with glacial acetic acid) and the deposition of metallic Pt was obtained under illumination (LOT-Oriel solar simulator, 0.1 W cm−2) in the presence of a −0.2 V vs. SCE voltage bias. Photoelectrodeposition was performed for 20, 50, and 100 seconds. NiO|(MAA)QDs|1 photocathodes were prepared by overnight soaking the NiO|(MAA)QDs electrodes into a 1 mM solution of the nickel complex 1 in acetonitrile. Determination of the amount of QDs adsorbed on the NiO film was performed by desorbing the nanoparticles in 5 mL of 1 M NaOH followed by spectrophotometric analysis. Calibration of the spectrophotometric response (absorbance at 360 nm) was performed by diluting the as-synthesized QD solutions of known concentration in 1 M NaOH. The values herein reported are averaged over three different experiments.
Results and discussion
Characterization of NiO|QDs photoelectrodes

MPA-, MAA-, and MSA-capped CdTexS1−x QDs of ca. 3.5 nm diameter were prepared following a one-step procedure by refluxing a mixture of Cd2+/stabilizing agent/TeO32− in a 5/5/1 molar ratio in the presence of NaBH4 at pH 10.5.36,39 The HR-TEM and EDS characterizations of all the samples revealed the presence of a nanocrystalline material with a homogeneous distribution of Cd, Te, and S, consistent with the formation of nanoparticles characterized by a mixed CdS/CdTe phase.36,43,44 The absorption and emission spectra in the aqueous solution of MPA-, MAA-, and MSA-capped QDs used for the sensitization of NiO films are reported in Fig. 1. The absorption spectra display a band centred between 540–570 nm, characteristic of the excitonic transition and a tail at shorter wavelengths. The emission appears in the yellow portion of the visible spectrum and is attributable to direct exciton recombination. Luminescence quantum yields of 0.49, 0.20, and 0.32 and amplitude-weighted average lifetimes of 44, 17, and 36 ns were measured in aqueous solutions of MPA-, MAA-, and MSA-capped QDs, respectively.36
 Fig. 1  Normalized absorption (full lines) and emission (dashed lines) spectra in aqueous solution (pH 10.5) of the CdTexS1−x QDs used for the sensitization of NiO photolectrodes. 
NiO electrodes were prepared by spin coating of a NiO paste38 onto FTO glass slides (see Experimental section). Sensitization of NiO films to achieve NiO|QDs photoelectrodes was performed by overnight soaking the bare NiO slides into aqueous solutions containing MPA-, MAA-, and MSA-capped QDs (pH 10.5).‡ Direct attachment of the QDs onto the NiO surface is expected to occur either by covalent binding of the carboxylate functions45 or by electrostatic interactions, or most likely via a combination of both. Direct detection of the QD absorption patterns by spectrophotometry is, however, hampered by the strong contribution from the thick NiO film.§ This notwithstanding, convergent experiments confirm the successful functionalization of the NiO electrodes with the QDs. The EDS analysis of NiO|QDs photoelectrodes (Fig. S1–S3†) clearly reveal the presence of Cd, Te, and S atoms together with Ni, O, and Sn contributions from the NiO and FTO support.¶ Furthermore, a weak, yellow luminescence with maxima at 583, 584, and 608 nm for MPA-, MAA-, and MSA-capped QDs, respectively, is detected upon the excitation of the NiO|QDs photoelectrodes (Fig. S4†), which can be assigned, from the comparison with the luminescence in fluid solution (Fig. 1), to residual emission from the attached nanoparticles. This emission signal is indeed strongly quenched when compared to that of the corresponding ZrO2|QDs blank samples (Fig. S5†), consistent with the luminescence occurring in the NiO|QDs systems in competition with hole injection from the VB of the QDs to the VB of the NiO. This process is indeed expected to be favoured from a thermodynamic standpoint by ca. 0.5 eV considering the VB potential of the CdTexS1−x QDs (ca. +1.0 V vs. NHE)36 and the VB potential of NiO (+0.54 V vs. NHE).20 Interestingly, the comparison between the lifetimes of the QDs emission in ZrO2|QDs with that of NiO|QDs samples (Fig. S6–S8†) shows that hole injection takes place efficiently, with overall yields that depend on the nature of the QD used for the sensitization process. From these data, injection yields (Φinj) of 78%, 96%, and 94% can be estimated for MPA-, MAA-, and MSA-capped QDs, respectively. Considering the comparable VB potentials for all QDs,36 the improved injection ability by MAA-capped QDs with respect to both MPA and MSA analogues very likely stems from a larger electronic coupling. Finally, desorption of the attached QDs from the NiO surface by the treatment of the NiO|QDs electrodes with 1 M NaOH and the subsequent spectrophotometric analysis of the resulting solutions yield comparable spectral features for all the desorbed QD samples which match the absorption profile of the dilute solutions of pristine QDs under the same basic conditions. Importantly, this desorption procedure allows us to estimate the amount of QDs adsorbed on the NiO surface (Fig. S9†).37,48 This analysis yields a surface coverage of 0.6(±0.2), 2.9(±0.5), and 1.0(±0.2) nmol cm−2 for MPA-, MAA-, and MSA-capped QDs, respectively. Considering the similar size of the QDs here employed,36 the enhanced surface coverage by MAA-capped QDs with respect to both MPA and MSA analogues may partly arise from a reduced steric hindrance by the smaller capping agent. This might also provide an improved interaction between the QD and the NiO, thus enhancing the electronic coupling for the hole injection process, as previously envisioned.
The photoelectrochemical response of the NiO|QDs photoelectrodes was then examined in the presence of [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]Cl2 as an irreversible electron acceptor.49 Acetate buffer (0.1 M) at pH 4 was used as the supporting electrolyte. Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) and chronoamperometry (CA) at 0 V vs. NHE were measured under chopped irradiation at three different concentrations of cobalt-based electron acceptor (5, 10, and 20 mM). The best results in terms of photocurrent response were obtained by employing 10 mM [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]Cl2, identified as the best match between the inner filter effect exerted by the cobalt complex and the concentration-dependent diffusion of the electrolyte at the electrode interface.50 Under these conditions, a photocurrent is observed in all cases with an onset potential of ca. +0.4 V vs. NHE (Fig. 2a). This photocurrent can be ascribed to the occurrence of photoinduced electron transfer processes upon light absorption by the QDs involving hole injection from the QD VB into the NiO VB and the irreversible reduction of the sacrificial acceptor by electrons in the QD CB. Upon application of an external bias of 0 V vs. NHE, the highest maximum photocurrent densities were achieved with NiO|(MAA)QD electrodes (ca. −100 μA·cm−2), whereas lower values of −80 and −60 μA·cm−2 were recorded for NiO|(MSA)QDs and NiO|(MPA)QDs, respectively (Fig. 2b). Furthermore, albeit with lower photocurrent densities, a similar trend in terms of photoelectrochemical activity was also observed at both 5 mM and 20 mM [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]Cl2 (Fig. S10 and S11,† respectively).
 Fig. 2  (a) LSV (scan rate of 10 mV s−1), (b) CA at 0 V vs. NHE under chopped irradiation (100 mW cm−2), and (c) IPCE spectra of NiO|QDs electrodes recorded at 0 V vs. NHE in the presence of 10 mM [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]Cl2 as an irreversible electron acceptor (0.1 M acetate buffer at pH 4). 
Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra (Fig. 2c) were also measured for all samples in the presence of 10 mM [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]Cl2. In all cases, the profile of the photoaction spectra appreciably match the shape of the absorption spectra associated with the QDs (Fig. 1), thus confirming the actual involvement of the CdTexS1−x QD excited state in the photocurrent generation process. The measured conversion efficiencies display maximum values with MAA QDs, falling in the order of ca. 2% and 1% at 450 and 550 nm, respectively. The trend in IPCE among the different QDs well agrees with the one observed by LSV and CA analyses, with the MAA QDs showing higher conversion efficiencies than the MSA and MPA QDs.
Absorbed photon-to-current efficiency (APCE) values of 7.7%, 3.3%, and 2.9% were then estimated for NiO|(MPA)QDs, NiO|(MAA)QDs, and NiO|(MSA)QDs, respectively, from eqn (1), dividing the IPCE data by the light-harvesting efficiency (LHE). The latter was evaluated according to eqn (2), in which the absorbance (A) was calculated through the Lambert–Beer law (eqn (3)) using the surface concentration of the photoelectrode, Γ (mol cm−2), as determined via desorption experiments (see above), and the molar extinction coefficient, ε (mol−1 L−1 cm−1), of the QDs in aqueous solution.36,51 APCE = IPCE(λ)/LHE(λ) = Φinj·ηcc(1) LHE = 1 − 10−A(2) A = 1000·Γ·ε(3)
According to eqn (1), using the APCE values here obtained and the charge injection yields (Φinj) previously estimated, charge collection efficiencies (ηcc) of 9.9%, 3.3%, and 2.9% for NiO|(MPA)QDs, NiO|(MAA)QDs, and NiO|(MSA)QDs, respectively, can be extracted.8 The largest value observed for the NiO|(MPA)QDs photoelectrode well agrees with the lowest content of surface defects for MPA-capped QDs within the series36 and thus to the correspondingly reduced recombination channels.
Overall, the investigation of NiO|QD electrodes here performed in the presence of the sacrificial electron acceptor clearly reveals a systematic trend in the photoelectrochemical activity of the NiO|QDs photoelectrodes with the MAA-capped QDs showing the best performance followed by the MSA- and finally MPA-capped QDs. This can be attributed to both the largest sensitizer loading as well as to the highest hole injection efficiency in the Ni|(MAA)QD photoelectrodes when compared to both Ni|(MSA)QDs and Ni|(MPA)QDs samples. Interestingly, the observed trend in the photoelectrochemical activity is completely reversed with respect to the one found for light-driven hydrogen evolution by the same QDs under homogeneous conditions.36 This suggests that the ability of the herein synthesized CdTexS1−x QDs to promote photoinduced reactions strongly depends on the experimental conditions in which they are employed and that the performance of QDs under homogenous photocatalysis (mainly related to the content of surface defects within the nanocrystal),36,52 does not necessarily extend to the heterogeneous photoelectrochemical applications. As a matter of fact, although a larger charge collection efficiency is observed with Ni|(MPA)QDs than both Ni|(MAA)QDs and Ni|(MSA)QDs samples, surface coverage and injection yield have the most relevant role in determining photoelectrode response.
With these results in our hands, we then decided to test QD-sensitized NiO photoelectrodes towards photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution. For this purpose we employed only the best performing sample, namely Ni|(MAA)QDs photoelectrodes, in combination with two different hydrogen evolving catalysts, a material-based HEC, i.e., Pt metal clusters and a molecular-based HEC such as the nickel bis(diphosphine) complex 1. In these systems, (MAA)QD excitation and subsequent electron injection into the NiO VB will be followed by electron transfer from the QD CB to the catalyst. The latter, upon further electron accumulation, will be expected to promote proton reduction to dihydrogen (see Scheme 1a).
Photoelectrochemical hydrogen production
NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt electrodes were prepared by a two-step process involving the photoelectrodeposition42 of Pt metal islands onto bare NiO followed by the adsorption of the (MAA)QDs by overnight soaking into the corresponding aqueous solution. Three different Pt deposition times were considered (20, 50, and 100 s) before sensitization with MAA-capped QDs. Increasing the photoelectrodeposition time leads to a systematic reduction of the surface area available for QD binding, as confirmed by the desorption experiments of the resulting NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt electrodes in 1 M NaOH (Fig. S12†). A surface coverage of 1.8(±0.1), 1.3(±0.4), and 0.6(±0.2) nmol cm−2 by CdTexS1−x QDs was indeed measured for NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt electrodes prepared at 20, 50, and 100 s deposition time, respectively.
The simultaneous presence of both the Pt catalyst and the QD sensitizers on the NiO surface was then verified by the EDS analysis of the NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt electrodes at 20 and 50 s deposition times (Fig. S13 and S14†). The quantitative analysis of the Pt and Cd signals on NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt(20s) electrodes indicates an average Pt:Cd mass ratio of 1:2, corresponding to an average molar ratio of 1:3.2, whereas an average mass ratio of 1:1 between the two metals, corresponding to an average molar ratio of 1:1.6, was measured in the case of NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt(50s) electrodes. This confirms a larger Pt coverage in the latter sample, as expected in view of the longer deposition time. On the other hand, a deposition time of 100 s leads to the excessive coverage of the NiO surface by the catalytic Pt metal which largely inhibits the loading of the electrode surface with the CdTexS1−x QDs. As a matter of fact, the EDS analysis of NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt(100s) electrodes (Fig. S15†) reveals a Cd content below the detection limit of this analysis technique, consistent with the low surface coverage by CdTexS1−x QDs already inferred from the desorption experiments.
LSVs and CAs under chopped irradiation of the three different NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt photoelectrodes, corresponding to 20, 50, and 100 s photoelectrodeposition times are reported in Fig. 3. In all cases, appreciable photocurrents can be detected with onset potentials at ca. +0.2 V vs. NHE. The largest photocurrent densities (−18 μA cm−2 after 500 s CA) were measured for NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt prepared at 50 s photoelectrodeposition time (Fig. 3b). This most likely results in the best balance in terms of both sensitizer and catalyst functionalization of the NiO surface. Combined spectrophotometric and EDS experiments indeed suggest that their corresponding concentrations are apparently interrelated by an inverse relationship (longer photoelectrodeposition times lead to lower QDs coverage and vice versa). According to these data, the NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt(50s) sample was considered as the reference Pt-based photoelectrode for further comparative tests against the molecular catalyst 1.
 Fig. 3  (a) LSV (scan rate of 10 mV s−1) and (b) CA at 0 V vs. NHE under chopped irradiation (100 mW cm−2) of NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt electrodes prepared at different deposition times (0.1 M acetate buffer at pH 4). 
NiO|(MAA)QDs|1 photocathodes were prepared by overnight soaking NiO|(MAA)QDs electrodes into a 1 mM solution of the nickel complex 1 in acetonitrile. Effective functionalization of the QD-sensitized NiO electrode with the ‘DuBois’-type catalyst 1 was confirmed by EDS analysis of the resulting NiO|(MAA)QDs|1 sample which indicates the presence of P atoms from the diphosphine ligand of complex 1 (Fig. S16†). Treatment of NiO|(MAA)QDs|1 electrodes and NiO|1 analogues (without adsorbed QDs) in 1 M NaOH and subsequent spectrophotometric analysis of the resulting solutions were employed to estimate the amount of both QDs and complex 1 attached to the NiO surface after the adsorption process (Fig. S17†). This procedure yields a surface coverage of 1.0(±0.1) nmol cm−2 for CdTexS1−x QDs and 26.4(±0.8) nmol cm−2 for the nickel catalyst 1.
The LSV of the NiO|(MAA)QDs|1 electrode in acetate buffer (0.1 M) under chopped irradiation at pH 4 is depicted in Fig. 4a and compared with the same experiment involving NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt(50s) and NiO|(MAA)QDs. Both electrodes featuring a surface-attached catalyst show appreciable photocurrent densities starting at ca. +0.2 V vs. NHE, which are always larger than those of NiO|(MAA)QDs. This suggests that the use of a catalyst, either of molecular or polycrystalline nature, accelerates the charge transfer processes at the electrode/solution interface. Of course, the pivotal role of CdTexS1−x QDs as photosensitizing units has been verified by suitable blank experiments on NiO|Pt(50s) and NiO|1 electrodes (Fig. S18†) which show negligible photocurrent densities under chopped irradiation using the same experimental conditions. CA analyses of NiO|(MAA)QD|1, NiO|(MAA)QD|Pt(50s), and NiO|(MAA)QD photoelectrodes at a constant potential of 0 V vs. NHE are then compared in Fig. 4b over a time-window of ca. 1 h. Photocurrent densities of −20(±1) and −16(±2) μA cm−2 were attained using the nickel complex 1 and the Pt(50s), respectively, as the HECs, whereas lower photocurrent densities are achieved without added HEC (−3(±1) μA cm−2). The improved photoelectrochemical activity using catalyst 1 when compared to Pt metal very likely originates from a more balanced distribution of both sensitizer and catalyst on the NiO surface which is essential for efficient charge separation. The use of platinum clusters indeed partly hampers QD loading and may not allow to attain a sufficient coupling between the QD and the catalyst as that achievable by exploiting molecular moieties. Furthermore, the larger catalyst-to-sensitizer ratio attained with the nickel complex 1 as the HEC turns out to be beneficial in maintaining the stable photocurrent densities of ca. −20 μA cm−2 over time. In contrast, in the case of Pt as the HEC, a slow but progressive decrease of the overall photocurrent from ca. −18 to −14 μA cm−2 is observed along 50 min CA, which is mainly attributable to the increase of the background current, likely related to dark electrocatalysis by the Pt metal on the NiO surface.
 Fig. 4  (a) LSV (scan rate of 10 mV s−1) and (b) CA at 0 V vs. NHE under chopped irradiation (100 mW cm−2), (c) IPCE spectra of NiO|(MAA)QDs, NiO|(MAA)QDs|1, and NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt(50s) electrodes (0.1 M acetate buffer at pH 4). 
The IPCE spectra of NiO|(MAA)QD|Pt(50s), NiO|(MAA)QD|1, and NiO|(MAA)QD electrodes are reported in Fig. 4c. The nice match between the IPCE profiles and the absorption spectrum of the MAA-capped QDs is consistent with the charge injection by the excited CdTexS1−x QDs. Maximum conversion efficiencies of 0.2% and 0.1% at 450 and 550 nm, respectively, are achieved with the NiO|(MAA)QDs|1 electrode. As expected, the IPCE trend well agrees with the one outlined in both LSV and CA experiments (Fig. 4a and b). APCE values of 0.25% and 0.36% were then calculated for NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt(50s) and NiO|(MAA)QDs|1, respectively, using the same procedure reported above (see eqn (1)–(3)). Considering the hole injection yields by MAA-capped CdTexS1−x QDs (96%), charge collection efficiencies (ηcc) of 0.26% and 0.38% can be estimated for the Pt- and 1-based photoelectrodes, respectively.
LSV was then performed with both NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt(50s) and NiO|(MAA)QDs|1 electrodes at three different pH values, namely pH 1, 4, and 6 (Fig. S19†). For both samples, the onset of the photocurrent shifts towards negative values when the pH is increased with a slope of ca. −120 mV per pH unit (Fig. S20†). At the same time, the photocurrent densities measured decrease when moving from pH 1 to pH 4 and finally to pH 6. Both these trends are consistent with kinetically limiting irreversible hydrogen evolving reaction (HER) occurring at the electrode surface under irradiation.53 Hence, in order to assess whether the observed photocurrent enhancements are actually related to hydrogen evolution, faradaic efficiency (FE) determination was performed for both NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt(50s) and NiO|(MAA)QDs|1 electrodes and compared with that of the NiO|(MAA)QDs reference. A generator-collector method adapted from T. J. Meyer and co-workers41 was employed for this purpose. Hydrogen was produced with an FE of 70% and 80% in the case of NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt(50s) and NiO|(MAA)QDs|1, respectively (Fig. S21†), whereas only 5% FE for the HER was recorded in the absence of the catalyst (Fig. S22†).|| The reduced FE observed for the NiO|QDs sample without the attached catalyst suggests that the observed (low) photocurrent is mainly related to parasite reactions involving CdTexS1−x nanoparticles while, within the explored cases, the highest faradaic yield recorded with NiO|(MAA)QDs|1 confirms the better coupling between the light absorber and the catalyst, which translates into a higher number of profitable charge transfer events for the generation of hydrogen. These data thus fully support the successful strategy here adopted to couple QDs and suitable HECs onto NiO to promote hydrogen evolution.
A comparison of the photoelectrochemical results here obtained with those of related sensitized NiO photocathodes is reported in Table S1 of the ESI.† This comparison shows that both the NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt(50s) and NiO|(MAA)QDs|1 electrodes display superior performances in terms of both maximum photocurrent densities and stability over time with respect to NiO photocathodes featuring molecular chromophores in combination with molecular HECs.54 The improved photocurrents are related to faster charge transfer kinetics, whereas the enhanced stability over time very likely stems from the higher durability of the material-based sensitizers over the molecular counterparts under operative conditions. On the other hand, our photocathodes yield lower photocurrents than related NiO photocathodes based on QDs as sensitizers.15,24,45 Although different (more powerful) irradiation sources were used in those reports (see Table S1†),15,24,45 the failure to achieve improved photoelectrochemical performances under our conditions very likely originates from the nanomolar amount of light-absorbing species bound to NiO, combined with the competing light harvesting of the thick NiO substrate used to achieve a clearly measurable photoelectrochemical response. These cause reduced harvesting of the available photon flux which eventually affects the solar-to-hydrogen performance. Also, the competition between the QDs and the catalytic unit in terms of surface coverage, significant in the case of Pt as the HEC, potentially represents another limiting factor to the charge collection efficiency. Hence, the optimization of the QD uptake at the NiO surface as well as the identification of a favourable, pre-organized combination of sensitizer and catalyst thus appear as major requirements in order to promote improved solar-to-hydrogen conversion by NiO photoelectrodes sensitized with thiol-capped QDs.
Conclusions
In this work, we have employed three different CdTexS1−x QDs, featuring MPA, MAA, or MSA capping agents, as photosensitizers for the functionalization of NiO films. Photoelectrochemical characterization of the resulting NiO|QDs electrodes in the presence of a cobalt-based sacrificial electron acceptor shows that all the synthesized QDs are capable of promoting photoinduced electron transfer reactions at the electrode/solution interface with MAA-capped samples displaying improved performances than the parent MPA- and MSA-capped QDs. This is attributable to better surface coverage as well as to the improved hole injection kinetics in the former sample. When combined with suitable HECs such as Pt or a nickel bis(diphosphine) complex, the resulting electrodes behave as competent photocathodes for the generation of hydrogen yielding maximum photocurrent densities of −20(±1) and −16(±2) μA cm−2 with 1 and Pt HECs, respectively, at 0 V vs. NHE, with good stability upon irradiation cycles of the order of 1 hour, and with 70–80% faradaic efficiency. Photoaction spectra having maximum values of ca. 0.2% clearly demonstrate the sensitization effect of the QDs. In view of the recorded high injection quantum yields, relatively small photocurrent values mostly arise from the insufficient loading of the QDs on the NiO surface. Alternative deposition approaches are currently pursued in our lab aimed at improving surface coverage and photocurrent density.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank Mr Mattia Boni for the preliminary experiments, Dr John Mallows (University of Newcastle) for the advice on the preparation of Pt-covered FTO electrodes, and Mr Marco Carmosino (University of Ferrara) for assistance. Financial support from the University of Ferrara (FAR2019) and the Interreg Italy-Croatia PEPSEA (ID number 10047424) project is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Natali and F. Scandola, in Supramolecular artificial photosynthesis, Applied Photochemistry, ed. G. Bergamini and S. Silvi, Lecture Notes in Chemistry,  2016, vol. 92, pp. 1 Search PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 687 CrossRef CAS .
A. Agosti, M. Natali, L. Amirav and G. Bergamini, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef PubMed .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294 RSC .

          S. Caramori, F. Ronconi, R. Argazzi, S. Carli, R. Boaretto, E. Busatto and C. A. Bignozzi, in Solar Energy Conversion in Photoelectrochemical Devices, Applied Photochemistry, ed. G. Bergamini and S. Silvi, Lecture Notes in Chemistry,  2016, vol. 92, pp. 67 Search PubMed .
A. Orbelli Biroli, F. Tessore, G. Di Carlo, M. Pizzotti, E. Benazzi, F. Gentile, S. Berardi, C. A. Bignozzi, R. Argazzi, M. Natali, A. Sartorel and S. Caramori, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Benazzi, K. Rettenmaier, T. Berger, S. Caramori, S. Berardi, R. Argazzi, M. Prato and Z. Syrgiannis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, F. Li and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 760 RSC .
N. Xu, N. S. McCool and T. E. Mallouk, Nano Today, 2017, 14, 42 CrossRef .
E. Benazzi, J. Mallows, G. H. Summers, F. A. Black and E. A. Gibson, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 10409 RSC .
B. Liu, X. B. Li, Y. J. Gao, Z. J. Li, Q. Y. Meng, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1443 RSC .
P. Meng, M. Wang, Y. Yang, S. Zhang and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18852 RSC .
T. P. A. Ruberu, Y. Dong, A. Das and R. Eisenberg, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2255 CrossRef CAS .
S. Uehara, S. Sumikura, E. Suzuki and S. Mori, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 641 RSC .
A. Nattestad, A. J. Mozer, M. K. R. Fischer, Y. B. Cheng, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle and U. Bach, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zannotti, E. Benazzi, L. A. Stevens, M. Minicucci, L. Bruce, C. E. Snape, E. A. Gibson and R. Giovannetti, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7345 CrossRef CAS .
F. Odobel, L. Le Pleux, Y. Pellegrin and E. Blart, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nikolau, A. Charisiadis, G. Charalambidis, A. G. Coutsolelos and F. Odobel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21077 RSC .
E. Benazzi, G. H. Summers, F. A. Black, I. V. Sazanovich, I. P. Clark and E. A. Gibson, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2019, 377, 20180338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kang, K. Zhu, N. R. Neale and A. J. Frank, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10419 RSC .
H. Lv, C. Wang, G. Li, R. Burke, T. D. Krauss, Y. Gao and R. Eisenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 11297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, M. Wang, P. Chen, D. R. Gamelin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zewdu, J. N. Clifford, J. P. Hernandez and E. Palomares, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4633 RSC .
A. Braga, S. Giménez, I. Concina, A. Vomiero and I. Mora-Seró, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 454 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Sun, Y. Yu, H. Y. Pan, X. F. Gao, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Lee and Y. S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, T. Xu, D. Butterfield, M. J. Misner, D. Y. Ryu, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Brown and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zaban, O. I. Micic, B. A. Gregg and A. J. Nozik, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3153 CrossRef CAS .
J. Albero, J. N. Clifford and E. Palomares, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 263, 53 CrossRef .
D. F. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2299 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Pernik, K. Tvrdy, J. G. Radich and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13511 CrossRef CAS .
E. Benazzi, V. C. Coni, M. Boni, R. Mazzaro, V. Morandi and M. Natali, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 10212 RSC .
G. Bergamini and M. Natali, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 14653 RSC .
C. J. Wood, G. H. Summers, C. A. Clark, N. Kaeffer, M. Braeutigam, L. R. Carbone, L. D'Amario, K. Fan, Y. Farré, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, L. A. Stevens, C. D. J. Parmenter, M. W. Fay, A. La Torre, C. E. Snape, B. Dietzek, D. Dini, L. Hammarström, Y. Pellegrin, F. Odobel, L. Sun, V. Artero and E. A. Gibson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 10727 RSC .
F. Ronconi, M.-P. Santoni, F. Nastasi, G. Bruno, R. Argazzi, S. Berardi, S. Caramori, C. A. Bignozzi and S. Campagna, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 14109 RSC .
S. Wu, J. Dou, J. Zhang and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14573 RSC .
B. D. Sherman, M. V. Sheridan, C. J. Dares and T. J. Meyer, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 7076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kraeutler and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 4317 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qian, C. Dong, J. Weng and J. Ren, Small, 2006, 2, 747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ying, D. Li, S. Guo, S. Dong and J. Wang, PLoS One, 2008, 3, e2222 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dong, R. Wu, P. Jiang, G. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Wu and C. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2429 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sumikura, S. Mori, S. Shimizu, H. Usami and E. Suzuki, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 199, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Bearden, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1967, 39, 78 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Rosser, M. A. Gross, Y.-H. Lai and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4024 RSC .
J. Massin, S. Lyu, M. Pavone, A. B. Munoz-Garcia, B. Kauffmann, T. Toupance, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou, V. Artero and C. Olivier, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 12539 RSC .
J. Massin, M. Bräutigam, N. Kaeffer, N. Queyriaux, M. J. Field, F. H. Schacher, J. Popp, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou, B. Dietzek and V. Artero, Interface Focus, 2015, 5, 20140083 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yu, L. Qu, W. Guo and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2854 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, N. M. B. Cogan, R. Burke, Z. Hou, K. L. Sowers and T. D. Krauss, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 174707 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Miller, A. J. Bard, G. McLandon and J. Ferguson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 5336 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Dalle, J. Warnan, J. J. Leung, B. Reuillard, I. S. Karmel and E. Reisner, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 2752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM-EDS analyses, steady-state and time-resolved luminescence data, absorption spectra after desorption, additional LSV and CA experiments, faradaic efficiency determination. See DOI: 10.1039/D0DT03567J‡ The pH and QD concentration (2.6, 3.2, and 1.3 μM for MPA-, MAA-, and MSA-capped QDs, respectively) in the soaking bath are the ones we get from the synthetic protocol adopted.36,40 The amount of QDs on the NiO surface represents the maximum quantity attainable from overnight soaking after the adsorption equilibrium is established. Thus, the concentration of the soaking solution, besides being similar in all cases (i.e., in the μM range), has no remarkable influence on QD uptake.§ The use of transparent, thinner NiO films, prepared according to a reported sol–gel procedure,19,46 leads to negligible QDs uptake resulting in inefficient photoelectrochemical activity.¶ Signals from Te are expected at energies comparable to Sn.47 As a consequence they can be only detected when the contribution from the Sn signals is reduced, namely by probing portions of the electrodes displaying thicker NiO layers (Fig. S1c, S2c, and S3c†).|| We would like to point out that, due to the fast diffusion of hydrogen and the sealing imperfections of our thin layer cell setup, the FEs here estimated represent lower limiting values.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  (a) General scheme of the operational mechanism of a dye-sensitized photocathode based on NiO with CdTexS1−x QDs and a HEC and (b) structural representation of the QDs employed and molecular structure of complex 1.	 

 	Fig. 1  Normalized absorption (full lines) and emission (dashed lines) spectra in aqueous solution (pH 10.5) of the CdTexS1−x QDs used for the sensitization of NiO photolectrodes.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) LSV (scan rate of 10 mV s−1), (b) CA at 0 V vs. NHE under chopped irradiation (100 mW cm−2), and (c) IPCE spectra of NiO|QDs electrodes recorded at 0 V vs. NHE in the presence of 10 mM [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]Cl2 as an irreversible electron acceptor (0.1 M acetate buffer at pH 4).	 
APCE = IPCE(λ)/LHE(λ) = Φinj·ηcc	(1)
LHE = 1 − 10−A	(2)
A = 1000·Γ·ε	(3)

 	Fig. 3  (a) LSV (scan rate of 10 mV s−1) and (b) CA at 0 V vs. NHE under chopped irradiation (100 mW cm−2) of NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt electrodes prepared at different deposition times (0.1 M acetate buffer at pH 4).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) LSV (scan rate of 10 mV s−1) and (b) CA at 0 V vs. NHE under chopped irradiation (100 mW cm−2), (c) IPCE spectra of NiO|(MAA)QDs, NiO|(MAA)QDs|1, and NiO|(MAA)QDs|Pt(50s) electrodes (0.1 M acetate buffer at pH 4).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM-EDS analyses, steady-state and time-resolved luminescence data, absorption spectra after desorption, additional LSV and CA experiments, faradaic efficiency determination. See DOI: 10.1039/D0DT03567J
‡ The pH and QD concentration (2.6, 3.2, and 1.3 μM for MPA-, MAA-, and MSA-capped QDs, respectively) in the soaking bath are the ones we get from the synthetic protocol adopted.36,40 The amount of QDs on the NiO surface represents the maximum quantity attainable from overnight soaking after the adsorption equilibrium is established. Thus, the concentration of the soaking solution, besides being similar in all cases (i.e., in the μM range), has no remarkable influence on QD uptake.
§ The use of transparent, thinner NiO films, prepared according to a reported sol–gel procedure,19,46 leads to negligible QDs uptake resulting in inefficient photoelectrochemical activity.
¶ Signals from Te are expected at energies comparable to Sn.47 As a consequence they can be only detected when the contribution from the Sn signals is reduced, namely by probing portions of the electrodes displaying thicker NiO layers (Fig. S1c, S2c, and S3c†).
|| We would like to point out that, due to the fast diffusion of hydrogen and the sealing imperfections of our thin layer cell setup, the FEs here estimated represent lower limiting values.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
