Emerging conjugated polymers for heterogeneous photocatalytic chemical transformation   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CC02081A View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3CC02081A
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2023, Advance Article Emerging conjugated polymers for heterogeneous photocatalytic chemical transformation†
Hao Zhang

, 
Wenxin Wei

 and 
Kai A. I. Zhang

*
Department of Materials Science, Fudan University, Songhu Road 2005, Shanghai 200438, P. R. China. E-mail: kai_zhang@fudan.edu
Received 
28th April 2023
, Accepted 19th June 2023First published on 22nd June 2023AbstractIn recent decades, the efficient utilization of solar energy through heterogeneous photocatalytic chemical transformation has attracted much attention. As emerging metal-free, pure organic and heterogeneous photocatalysts, π-conjugated polymers (CPs) have been used in visible-light-driven chemical transformations due to their stability, high specific surface area, metal-free nature, and high structural designability. In this review, we summarize the synthesis protocols and design strategies for efficient CP-based photocatalysts based on the photocatalytic mechanisms. Then we highlight the key progress in light-driven chemical transformation using CPs developed by our group. Finally, we present the outlook and possible challenges for future progress of the field.Hao ZhangHao Zhang completed his undergraduate and masters studies at Fudan University in 2020. He joined Prof. Kai A. I. Zhang's research group in the following year. His research interests focus on the construction of conjugated polymers and their photocatalytic applications.Wenxin WeiWenxin Wei completed his doctoral training at MPIP in 2021 and received his PhD from Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz. He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Fudan University. His current research interests are focused on porous photocatalysts for photobiocatalysis.Kai A. I. ZhangKai A. I. Zhang received his PhD from the University of Cologne and partly from the University of Strathclyde. After working as a postdoctoral fellow at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, he joined the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in 2013 as an independent research group leader. In 2019, he joined as a full professor at Fudan University. His research interests include the development of organic porous materials, macromolecular photocatalysts and their applications in organic photoredox reactions, fine chemistry, photobiocatalysis, etc.
1. Introduction
Solar energy is a significant and abundant source of renewable energy that provides our planet with an immense amount of power. In fact, the amount of solar radiation that reaches the Earth in just one hour is greater than the total amount of energy consumed by humanity in a year.1 Despite its many advantages as an inexpensive, resourceful, and clean renewable energy source, there are great difficulties in the efficient utilization of solar energy due to its low energy density, diffuse nature, and uneven distribution. As a result, converting solar energy into chemical energy has become an attractive solution to the world's energy problems. Since the discovery of photocatalytic splitting of water on TiO2 electrodes under ultraviolet (UV) light in 1972, photocatalysis has become one of the most important tools for the utilization of solar energy. Over the past few decades, chemical and materials scientists have adopted various strategies to develop environment-friendly and efficient photocatalysts at a lower cost.1–3 Based on their solubility in photocatalytic chemical transformation, photocatalysts can be categorized as either homogeneous or heterogeneous.4 While homogeneous photocatalysts have demonstrated excellent catalytic efficiency and conversion rates, their poor stability, high toxicity, complex purification methods, and difficulty in recycling limit their large-scale application.
In recent years, researchers have devoted considerable effort to developing novel heterogeneous photocatalysts for practical applications. Among these, metal-free conjugated polymers have attracted special attention due to their flexible preparation methods, diverse structural compositions, and easily tunable properties. In 2009, Wang was the first to apply graphite carbon nitrides (g-C3N4) as metal-free conjugated semiconductor photocatalysts. Since then, g-C3N4 has been significantly developed for visible-light-driven water splitting, CO2 reduction, and chemical transformation. However, g-C3N4 compounds suffer from a narrow light absorption range and low charge separation efficiency, despite many strategies employed to ameliorate these shortcomings, such as doping, coordination, and defect engineering.5 In comparison, π-conjugated polymers with alternating single and double bonds have delocalized electrons and have become promising candidates for heterogeneous chemical transformations.
π-Conjugated polymers can be classified as covalent organic frameworks (COFs), conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs), covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs), and linear conjugated polymers (LCPs), depending on their structure and preparation method.6 COFs are typically prepared through the formation and breaking of thermodynamically reversible covalent bonds, resulting in an ordered, crystalline porous framework with a topological structure.7,8 Although extensively studied for photocatalytic chemical transformations, COFs are limited by their poor stability due to the weak, dynamic bonds connecting their structures.9–11 Furthermore, the crystalline structure of COFs is often destroyed after a photocatalytic reaction cycle, and scaling up their production under mild conditions remains a significant challenge. In contrast, CMPs, LCPs, and CTFs, which are controlled by kinetic synthesis, have been widely utilized in photocatalytic chemical conversions due to their exceptional thermodynamic and chemical stability, diverse synthesis methods, and relatively simple preparation.12,13
Conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs) are an emerging class of conjugated porous polymers typically composed of aromatic monomers linked by covalent bonds, giving them semiconductor properties and enabling the catalysts to expose more active sites.14 The chemical structure, electronic properties, and morphology of CMPs can be modulated from the molecular level by varying the sizes, configurations, and functional groups of the building blocks to meet the needs of different catalytic reactions. Thus far, CMPs have been utilized in a range of visible-light-mediated photocatalytic reactions, including water splitting,15,16 selective oxidation of sulfides,17 free radical polymerization,18–20 dehalogenation of haloketone derivatives,20 oxidation of benzyl amines,21,22 NADH/NAD+ regeneration,23,24 [2+2] ring formation,25 and enantioselective α-alkylation reactions.26 These examples highlight the broad applicability of CMPs in organic synthesis and their potential to address challenges in renewable energy production and sustainable chemistry.
Covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs) are a recently developed class of conjugated porous polymers that incorporate triazine functional groups within their backbone.27 They are produced under thermodynamically controlled conditions and exhibit superior crystallinity in comparison to other porous polymers such as conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs). In 2013, Brink and colleagues were the first to investigate the potential of CTFs as photocatalysts.28 Their study revealed that the electronic and optical properties of CTF-1 were affected by factors such as the number of stacked layers and aromatic rings. Over the last decade, CTFs have been increasingly employed as efficient and stable metal-free photocatalysts owing to their ordered structure, stable physicochemical properties, and tunable band structure. Notably, CTFs have been successfully utilized in a range of photocatalytic reactions, including water splitting,29 alcohol oxidation,30 nitro reduction,31 CO2 reduction,32 photosynthesis of hydrogen peroxide,33 phosphindole oxide reactions,34 etc.
Conjugated polymers are a promising class of materials for heterogeneous photocatalysis due to their semiconductor properties and adjustable structures at the molecular level.12 Among them, linear conjugated polymers (LCPs) have a one-dimensional skeleton, leading to well-defined structures and excellent solubility. In 1985, Yanagida and co-workers first used LCP poly(p-phenylene)s as a photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution. However, the application of LCPs in heterogeneous photocatalysis is limited due to their solubility in polar organic solvents. Despite this, LCPs have been studied for various visible-light-driven reactions, such as water splitting,35 dye degradation,36 etc.
With the multiple modifications of π-conjugated polymers for heterogeneous photocatalysis at the molecular level, many interesting results have been achieved in recent years. Therefore, a review describing the relationships between the structure and properties of π-conjugated polymers in photocatalytic chemical transformations is needed. This feature article aims to provide an overview of understanding how to design the structures of conjugated polymers for achieving enhanced photocatalytic chemical transformation efficiency and the key progress in light-driven chemical transformation using CPs developed by our group (Fig. 1). Based on an analysis of published literature and our contributions, an overview of metal-free photocatalyst research is presented.
 Fig. 1  Application of visible-light-driven chemical transformations using CP-based photocatalysts. 
2. Synthesis protocols of CPs
2.1 Synthesis methods of CMPs and LCPs
The solvothermal method represents the predominant approach for synthesizing CMPs and LCPs.14,37 Over time, a wide range of reactions have been employed in the synthesis of CMPs and LCPs, such as Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling, Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling, Yamamoto coupling, Heck coupling, Friedel–Crafts alkylation, Schiff base reaction, etc. By choosing suitable synthetic methods and adjusting the reaction parameters, the target CP-based photocatalysts with various building blocks can be constructed, reducing the restriction on functional groups of the monomer. With the emergence of novel reactions in CP synthesis, the repertoire of available building blocks has expanded from the initial phenyl units to encompass heterocyclic and polycyclic monomers possessing aromatic properties.
It is worth pointing out that the solvothermal methods, despite their widespread use, also possess disadvantages encompassing long reaction times, heavy metal residues and challenges associated with scaling up the preparation. Notably, a majority of the reported CMPs and LCPs have been synthesized through metal-catalyzed coupling reactions, with the Pd-catalyzed Suzuki–Miyaura and Sonogashira-Hagihara couplings being particularly prominent. During the polymerization process, the Pd catalysts may undergo reduction, leading to the formation of Pd clusters that become attached to the polymer structure. Remarkably, these residual Pd clusters can act as co-catalysts when employed in photocatalytic chemical transformations, thereby enhancing the overall photocatalytic efficiency.38,39
2.1 Synthesis methods of CTFs
Most CTF materials are typically synthesized through the cyclotrimerization of nitrile compounds with low reversibility. The kinetics-controlled polymerization process yields CTFs with an amorphous structure. The properties of CTFs can be significantly influenced by the chosen synthesis strategies. Different synthesis strategies have a great influence on the properties of CTFs. There are three main methods employed for the preparation of CTFs: ionothermal or superacid-catalyzed trimerization, condensation reactions and coupling methods.27
In 2008, Thomas and co-workers reported the first CTF material via trimerization at 400 °C in the presence of melt zinc chloride.40 Although higher temperatures can induce reversible trimerization and the formation of crystalline CTFs, the elevated temperatures may also lead to carbonization of the CTF materials. To address this issue, Wang and co-workers designed a NaCl–KCl–ZnCl2 eutectic salt system enabling the synthesis of highly crystalline CTFs at a lower melting point temperature of approximately 200 °C.41 The CTF-ES200 prepared using this method exhibited fewer structural defects and minimized undesired carbonization in the polymeric backbone. To date, only a limited number of crystalline CTFs have been successfully synthesized using the ionothermal method. The harsh reaction conditions and long reaction time hinder the large-scale preparation of CTFs. Furthermore, the residual metal within the backbones of CTFs may introduce uncertainty in subsequent photocatalytic applications.
The advancement of mild synthesis methods for CTFs is highly desirable in order to mitigate the carbonization issues caused by ionothermal methods. Inspired by Brønsted acid-catalyzed cyclotrimerization of nitrile monomers, Dai and co-workers firstly synthesized CTF using trifluoromethanesulfonic acid (TfOH) as an efficient catalyst under milder conditions (<100 °C).42 Similarly, Cooper et al. reported a similar method using TfOH as the catalyst to synthesize CTF materials at room temperature and through microwave-assisted reactions.43 The exploration of the synthesis of various CTFs using different monomers demonstrated the universality. Tang and co-workers further discovered that crystallinity of CTFs could be significantly influenced by microwave power. Specifically, increasing the microwave power from 20 W to 100 W resulted in enhanced crystallinity of the synthesized CTFs.44
Achieving high crystallinity in superacid-catalyzed CTFs has been a challenge. To address this, Dai and co-workers developed a tandem transformation method for the preparation of crystalline CTF-1.45 A microwave-assisted synthesis method was used to rapidly synthesize CTF with an AB-stacked structure. Subsequently, by annealing at 350 °C, the AB-stacked CTF-1 underwent a transformation into an AA-stacked structure with highly crystalline nature. Similarly, Xu and co-workers employed a microwave-assisted synthesis method to achieve the rapid synthesis of a layered CTF material.46 TfOH quickly absorbed the energy of the microwaves and transferred the energy to the monomers, leading to the formation of crystalline CTFs. The 2D CTF nanosheets were obtained through a subsequent ball milling process. This method enabled the synthesis of a crystalline CTF on the hundred-gram scale, which greatly facilitated the application of crystalline CTF materials.
Crystalline CTFs can also be synthesized using strong-base-catalyzed polycondensation reactions. Tan and co-workers achieved the construction of layered CTFs using Cs2O3-catalyzed amidine and aldehyde condensation under relatively mild reaction conditions (≤120 °C), thus avoiding the utilization of high temperatures and strong acids.47,48 To enhance the crystallinity of the CTFs, the same group decreased the nucleation rate of the crystals by controlling the droplet acceleration of the aldehyde monomer, which helped maintain the concentration at a low level.49 Additionally, they adopted a new method where aldehydes were replaced with slowly oxidizing alcohols in situ to control the number of crystal nuclei and improve the crystallinity of the resulting CTF-Cs.50 In the temperature range of 120–180 °C, the slow oxidation of the hydroxyl group delayed the nucleation rate, thus leading to improved crystallinity.
In addition to trimerization and condensation reactions, CTFs can also be directly constructed using monomers that possess triazine rings, avoiding the harsh reaction conditions such as high temperatures or strong acids and bases. Coupling reactions, including Yamamoto coupling, Suzuki coupling, Friedel–Crafts alkylation, etc., have been successfully employed in synthesizing CTFs. However, due to the irreversible process of these reactions, CTFs prepared using coupling methods were typically all amorphous structures.
3. Structure design of CPs for photocatalysis
The typical photocatalytic organic transformation process has been described in many reviews.5,51,52 Under light irradiation, the CP photocatalysts capture photons, leading to the generation of electrons and holes within the photocatalyst. The photogenerated charges subsequently separate and migrate to the surface of the photocatalyst or recombine. Finally, energy and electrons transfer between catalysts and substrates. Several factors affecting the catalytic performance, such as the band structure, charge separation and transfer, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)/lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of CPs, morphology and dispersity have been summarized based on the simplified photocatalytic process. In this section, we aim to provide a comprehensive overview of how to enhance the photocatalytic efficiency based on the photocatalytic mechanism.
3.1 Enhancement of light absorbance
To efficiently utilize solar energy, it is essential for the optical bandgap of CPs to be narrower than 3.18 eV to absorb visible light, which accounts for more than 50% of the energy radiated from the sun.1 Additionally, the redox ability of the catalysts needs to correspond to the redox potential of the substrates. The light absorbance ability can be modulated through pre-design of the photocatalyst structure.
3.1.1 Extension of conjugation. Extension of the conjugated structure can improve the delocalization degree of π-electrons, leading to a red-shift of light absorption. Zhang and co-workers synthesized a series of olefin-linked conjugated porous polymers via Knoevenagel condensation reaction using phenyl spacers.53 They discovered that the maximum adsorption wavelength was red-shifted, and the bandgap correspondingly narrowed with the increase of the number of phenyl spacers. Cooper et al. regulated the length of phenyl linkers between triazines and found that the optical band gap of CTFs decreased from 2.95 eV to 2.48 eV with a different number of phenyl spacers.54 However, when triethylamine was used as the sacrificial reagent for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, CTF-2 with two phenyl spacers showed the best performance due to the weakening driving force of oxidation with the increase of the number of phenyl spacers. Therefore, it is crucial to consider the light harvesting and redox ability comprehensively in the design of CP photocatalysts.
3.1.2 Incorporation of photosensitizers. The enhancement of light-harvesting ability in CPs can be achieved through the incorporation of photosensitive units such as BODIPY,55 Rose Bengal,56 and metal complexes.32 Sanchez and co-workers designed CMPBDP based on Bodipy, which had a strong absorption band at 550 nm.55 They subsequently constructed a hybrid structure by complexing BODIPY with ruthenium to broaden the absorbance of light. Similarly, Han et al. reported four kinds of CMPs containing metal phthalocyanine (MPc).57 The MSC-CMPS could efficiently generate singlet oxygen (1O2) under light at 700 nm wavelength. Fan and co-workers presented a covalent-bonding strategy to knit Ru–N2 into CTFs in situ for highly selective photoreduction of CO2. After introducing Ru, enhanced light absorption of the resulting CTF was observed, which was ascribed to the metal-to-ligand charge transfer process of the Ru unit at the absorption from 400 to 500 nm.32
3.2 Facilitation of charge separation and transfer
In the process of heterogeneous photocatalysis, photogenerated electrons and holes can react with substrates only when they migrate to the surface of the catalyst. However, due to the fast recombination rate of carriers (nanosecond level) and the slow reaction rate (microsecond level), less than 10% of the photogenerated carriers can participate in the reaction.58 Recent studies have demonstrated that the incorporation of electron-acceptor and electron-donor units can facilitate the directional migration of carriers due to the intramolecular polarization electric field, which could restrain the recombination of photogenerated charges. In this section, multiple methods for the facilitation of charge separation and transfer within CPs are discussed.
3.2.1 Incorporation of D–A units. Zhang and co-workers designed three CMPs with different electron affinity building blocks.59 They chose thiophene as the electron donor and benzothiadiazole (BT) as the electron acceptor to construct CMPs via Sonogashira cross-coupling. When utilized for photocatalytic oxidation of styrene, the CMP composed of triethynylbenzene and BT showed the best performance, indicating that the combination of a weak electron donor and a strong electron acceptor could promote the separation of photogenerated charges with maximum efficiency. Maji and co-workers reported the redox-active TPA-PQ, by assimilating an electron donor, tris(4-ethynylphenyl)amine (TPA), with an acceptor, phenanthraquinone (PQ), for visible-light driven CO2 reduction.60 To validate the importance of the donor–acceptor structure of TPA–PQ, they also synthesized TEB–PQ by replacing the donor moiety TPA by triethynylbenzene (TEB). As a result, TPA–PQ displayed a nearly eight-fold improvement of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction rate compared to TAE–PQ. Bojdys and co-workers in a systematic fashion explored D–A CTF photocatalysts where charge transfer was sufficiently strong to prevent the electron–hole recombination.61 The effect of weak D–A interactions on charge transfer was demonstrated by introducing aryl spacers around the electron-withdrawing triazine moiety. Photocatalytic experiments showed that strong D–A interactions and short pathways between the donor and acceptor moieties could prevent spontaneous electron–hole recombination.
3.2.2 Construction of D–π–A structure. The construction of a donor–π–acceptor (D–π–A) structure has been found to effectively increase the distance between the electron donor and acceptor. Bai and colleagues introduced an acetylene moiety as the π-bridge between D–A units to suppress backward charge recombination.62 Experimental investigations and density functional theory calculations have demonstrated that the electron migration distance of A-CTF-2 was longer, and the charge lifetime was increased, in comparison to the analogous structure lacking acetylene. Consequently, the photogenerated electrons and holes were more concentrated within A-CTF-2, resulting in higher activity for photocatalytic oxidative amine coupling. Similarly, Li and co-workers constructed a D–A–π-bridge-Rh structure of the CMP to achieve rapid intermolecular electron transfer.23 In the visible light-promoted NADH regeneration, DTS/Rh@CMP-1 exhibited a remarkably enhanced catalytic performance, yielding a reaction yield of 33% in 2 h, compared to the free [Cp*Rh(bpy)H2O]2+. Jiang and co-workers employed statistical copolymerization for the synthesis of donor–π–acceptor (D–π–A) conjugated microporous polymers.63 The photocatalytic performance of the CMPs was significantly influenced by the molar ratio of the donor to acceptor. The coplanarity of the polymer skeleton was improved by introducing benzene units as the π-bridge between the donor and acceptor, leading to enhanced electron transmission along the D–π–A polymer chains.
3.2.3 Formation of heterojunction structures. Heterojunction structures have been found to facilitate the separation and transport of photogenerated charges. Li et al. prepared CTF with an intramolecular heterojunction structure in which benzothiadiazole (BT) and thiophene (Th) functionalities were selectively incorporated as the electron-withdrawing and electron-donating units via continuous copolymerization (Fig. 2).64 In heterojunction CTF, electrons could transfer from the conduction band of CTF-Th to the conduction band of CTF-BT, thus achieving effective separation of photogenerated electrons and holes while suppressing recombination. The average fluorescence lifetimes and photocurrent measurements revealed stronger photo-induced electronic conductivity in heterojunction CTF. The photocatalytic performance was 4–6 times higher than that of single component CTFs. Similarly, Zhang and co-workers designed an organic/inorganic hybrid photocatalyst for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution.65 Specifically, they grew BT-based CMPs on graphene sheets via covalent bonds, and achieved photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rates of the CMP/graphene heterosystem twice that of bulk CMP. Yu and co-workers reported an easy strategy to construct S-scheme heterojunctions containing metal–organic frameworks (MOF-902) and a thiophene-based covalent triazine framework (CTF-Th).66 The S atom in CTF-Th served as an anchoring site for Ti atoms, leading to in situ growth of MOF-902 on the surface of CTF-Th. The in situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy density functional theory calculation exhibited fast charge transfer from MOF-902 to CTF-Th, thus delivering efficiently photocatalytic C3-acylation.
 Fig. 2  (a) Synthetic routes of CTF-BT/Th with heterostructures. (b) Photocurrent responses of all CTF materials as indicated. (c) Facilitated transfer pathway of photocatalytic electrons and holes within CTF-BT/Th. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. 

3.2.4 Improvement of planarity. Most reported D–A polymers have dihedral angles between the building units due to the steric hindrance and free rotation of the single bond, thereby suppressing the separation and transport of photogenerated charge. To address this issue, Wang and co-worker designed a fully coplanar donor–acceptor LCP containing double-stranded linking between donor and acceptor moieties.67 The electron donor and acceptor in PAE–S are connected by a single ether bond; in contrast, PAE–D contains two ether bonds between the donor and acceptor motifs. The lower activation energy of PAE–D implied that exciton splitting in PAE–D was much easier than that of single-ether bonded PAE–S. With this advantage, PAE–D exhibited approximately 2 times enhanced photocatalytic activity compared to PAE–S. Furthermore, they facilitated the charge carrier separation by increasing the π-conjugation and planarity of D units.68 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations revealed that more planarity was beneficial for the exciton dissociation. Therefore, P-2CN, with pyrene as the electron donor unit, showed an optimal photocatalytic performance. Wang and co-workers designed four LCPs containing different electron donor–acceptor moieties for minimization of the exciton binding energy by modulating the charge-transfer pathway.69 The construction of LCPs with high planarity and extended conjugation contributed to the decrease in Eb, leading to more efficient charge transportation.
3.2.5 Crystallinity and two-dimensional structures. In contrast to amorphous conjugated polymers, CPs with a crystalline structure show enhanced efficiency of π-electron separation and transportation due to the ordered structure and π–π stacking between layers. Ye and co-workers demonstrated that the crystalline COF-TfpBpy exhibited higher charge separation efficiency and reduced charge recombination compared to the amorphous one.70 Tan and co-workers employed an in situ oxidation strategy using alcohol monomers to control the nucleation rate during the polymerization, leading to a highly crystalline CTF-HUST-C1.50 The crystalline CTF-HUST-C1 showed lower impedance and more efficient charge transport in comparison. When used for photocatalytic water splitting, the hydrogen evolution rate (HER) of crystalline CTF-HUST-C1 was 3.5 times higher than that of the amorphous CTF under the same conditions.In two-dimensional layered conjugated polymers, photogenerated charges can directly and rapidly migrate to the surface of the photocatalysts and catalyze the chemical reaction, thereby reducing the recombination. Guo and co-workers used ionothermal methods assisted by a microwave to prepare layered-structure CTFs. The photogenerated charges in the layered structure CTF-o-M2 were efficiently separated and transported. Notably, the HER activity of CTF-o-M2 reached 7010 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light, and was seven times higher than that of CTFs prepared using conventional ionothermal methods. Likewise, Xu and co-workers successfully exfoliated bulk CTF into ultra-thin crystalline nanosheets using concentrated sulfuric acid.71 The CTF with a layered structure showed a stronger photocurrent signal and faster rates of hydrogen and oxygen production.

3.3 Modulation of the HOMO/LUMO level
The modulation of HOMO/LUMO levels plays a crucial role in chemical transformation induced by the transfer of photogenerated charges and energy between catalysts and substrates. In order to drive thermodynamic chemical reactions, the band positions of CPPs should correspond to the redox potentials of the substrates, then, the photogenerated electrons and holes are able to reduce and oxidize the electron acceptor and donor, respectively. Various strategies have been employed to regulate the HOMO/LUMO levels of CPs.
3.3.1 Hybridization of molecular levels. In contrast to small molecule photocatalysts, the HOMO/LUMO levels of CPs can be precisely adjusted by hybridizing the building blocks. For instance, Zhang and co-workers accomplished the precise adjustment of the HOMO/LUMO levels of CPs by incorporating varying proportions of the strong electron-withdrawing benzobisthiadiazole (BBT) units into the polymer backbone.72 As the proportion of BBT units increased, the redox driving force for the substrates of the resulting P-BBT-x (where x denotes the molar ratios of the phenyl unit to BBT) increased, leading to a narrower band gap. The P-BBT-10, which contained 10 mol% of BBT moieties, showed the photocatalytic performance for oxidative cyclization of N,N-dimethylanilines. Likewise, Li et al. reported a series of CMPs containing electron acceptor dibenzothiophene sulfone and benzothiadiazole, respectively, for photocatalytic nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) regeneration.73 The band structure of the polymers was significantly altered by regulating the ratio of the electron donor and acceptor. Under visible light irradiation, the NADH regeneration rate of DBTS-CMP1 reached 84% within 45 min.
3.3.2 Molecular design strategy. Transition-metal based photocatalyst redox potentials can be adjusted by modifying the central metal or ligands. Similarly, the HOMO/LUMO levels of CPs can be adjusted by altering the atoms within the building blocks. For this purpose, Zhang et al. reported a strategy for level regulation of the CPs by changing the chalcogene moieties in the electron acceptor.74 The poly(benzochalcogenadiazole) networks were constructed by using 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene as the crosslinker with benzochalcogenadiazole motifs. Among them, the B-BT containing sulfuric atom exhibited the longest-lived electron–hole pairs and the strongest oxidation activity of benzylamine under visible light irritation. Furthermore, in another study, the same authors introduced fluorine atoms onto the CMP backbone to prepare a dual active site for LUMO level modulation and molecular oxygen activation.75 After incorporating the fluorine atom onto the CTF backbone, the CMP-Th-Ph-F showed a lower LUMO orbital than that of CMP-Th-Ph without the F atom (Fig. 3). Meanwhile, N and F atoms on CMP-Th-Ph-F were both sites for oxygen activation. By utilizing the formation of benzothiazoles, CMP-Th-Ph-F demonstrated a remarkably enhanced photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 3  (a) Structures of CMP-Th-Ph and CMP-Th-Ph-F. (b) Calculated DOS profiles of CMPs. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2023. 

3.3.3 Substitution and spatial configuration. Zhang and co-workers presented a simple design strategy for fine alignment of the HOMO/LUMO levels of CMPs (Fig. 4).21 The CMPs were prepared by altering the substitution positions of the electron acceptor benzoxadiazole (BO) unit on the 1,3,5 1,2,4 and 1,2,4,5 positions of the centered phenyl unit. The oxidative coupling reaction of benzylamines was chosen to determine the photocatalytic activity of CMPs. Cooperated with the spin trap EPR experiments in which B-BO-1,3,5 showed the most intense signals, the photocatalytic efficiency of B-BO-1,3,5 was significantly higher than that of the others. The different photocatalytic activity could be attributed to the less distorted structure within B-BO-1,3,5. Further investigation of the influences on the catalytic performance caused by the altered configurations was made by Wang and Zhang et al.76 Because of the excellent photocatalytic performance, benzothiadiazole was used as an acceptor to construct CPs with different substitution positions. The decrease of π-conjugation system and weakness of the adsorption of CMPs were observed with the introduction of a twisted 3D structure, leading to a lower charge separation and transfer efficiency. According to cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements, the LUMO levels of CMPs increased with more content of 3D fragments.
 Fig. 4  (a) Geometry design principle of the HOMO/LUMO levels’ fine alignment of conjugated microporous poly(benzooxadiazole) networks by altering the substitution position on the 3D centre. (b) HOMO/LUMO levels of the CMPs and redox potentials of some substrates used in the photocatalytic reaction. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015. 

3.4 Morphology and dispersibility
Morphology and dispersibility are critical parameters for effective heterogeneous photocatalysis. The mass transfer during the photocatalytic process can be influenced by the morphology of the catalysts. Additionally, the dispersibility of the catalysts plays an important role in facilitating recycling while maintaining efficient catalysis. Thus, it is necessary to develop strategies for controlling the morphology and dispersibility of photocatalysts.
One approach to controlling the morphology involves using templates to synthesize hierarchical pore structures. For instance, Zhang et al. used silica microspheres as a template to synthesize CTF with interconnected hollow nanoholes under trifluoromethanesulfonic acid vapor.31 The resulting CTF with a hierarchical pore structure exhibited efficient photocatalytic performance for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol due to enhanced substrate diffusion and light reflection. Similarly, the use of SBA-15 as a template for preparing thiophene-containing CTF in the mesoporous pores of SBA-15, resulting in a specific surface area of 374 m2 g−1.30 By contrast the obtained CTF-Th without SBA-15 had a specific surface area of only 57 m2 g−1. Due to the high specific surface area and certain hydrophilicity of SBA-15, CTF-Th@SBA-15 exhibited a high photocatalytic performance for the degradation of organic dyes in the aqueous phase. Jin and co-workers fabricated morphologically controllable CTFs by a mild polycondensation reaction via the template method.77 The CTFs with a hollow-structure were developed and the shell thickness was conveniently tuned by varying the amount of the template. With the decrease of the shell thicknesses, the morphologies of CTFs transformed from a sphere to bowl.
In addition, switchable catalytic activities can be achieved by triggering changes in the catalyst's properties. For ideal artificial photocatalytic systems, the active site would be easily accessible for the substrate to ensure catalytic efficiency, however, the phase changes after the application of external stimulus, which is convenient for recycling. Zhang et al. designed an LCP photocatalyst with a reversible switch of hydrophilicity by amine binding CO2 in water (Fig. 5).36 The conjugated polymer P-BT-DEA with a tertiary amine was simply generated through post-modification of hydrophobic P-BT-Br with diethylamine (DEA). The hydrophilic CO2-assisted P-BT-DEA boosted the photocatalytic chemical transformation in aqueous solution. After the absorbed CO2 was removed through N2 treatment, P-BT-DEA became hydrophobic and formed a precipitation, which can be filtered out easily. In addition, the same group also reported light and temperature dual-responsive polymer nanogels, in which the photocatalytic sites were exposed when the temperature was lower than the lower critical solution temperature.78 In contrast, the temperature above 30 °C led to a shrinkage of the gel and inhibited the catalytic activity.
 Fig. 5  (a) The switchable hydrophilicity of the conjugated polymer photocatalyst controlled by the exchange of CO2/N2. (b) Photographs of P-BT-DEA in water. (c) Reversible zeta potential changes and pH change of P-BT-DEA in water upon CO2/N2 treatment. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. 
4. Key progress in the photocatalytic chemical transformation of the Zhang group
In the past decade, there has been growing interest in conjugated polymers as metal-free visible-light photocatalysts due to their specific structure–effect relationship, excellent absorption of visible light, stability, and recyclability. The efficient design of CP-photocatalysts can be achieved by understanding the mechanism of heterogeneous photocatalysis. This section aims to classify and summarize the reactions involved in CP-photocatalytic chemical transformations based on our group's research.
4.1 Oxidation
One of the most commonly reported photocatalytic organic transformations is oxidative reactions due to their simple reaction conditions. The interaction between photogenerated electrons and oxygen leads to the various reactive oxygen species (ROS), with singlet oxygen (1O2) and superoxide radicals (O2˙−) being the most important ROS involved in photocatalytic oxidation. Additionally, hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) also participate in some oxidation reactions. Our group has explored a variety of oxidation reactions, including oxidation of α-terpinene, selective oxidation of alcohols, selective oxidation of sulfides, selective oxidation of styrene, oxidative cyanation, and selective bromination.
4.1.1 Oxidation of α-terpinene. In 2012, our group discovered for the first time that CMPs can convert triplet oxygen (3O2) to singlet oxygen (1O2) under blue light, leading to the further oxidization of α-terpene to ascarid terpenes.26 To synthesize a series of CMPs based on benzothiadiazole, silica nanoparticles were used as a template through Sonogashira–Hagihara cross-coupling. According to the results of nitrogen adsorption and desorption, the BET surface area of CMP_X (X means the content of silica nanoparticles) was found to increase with the concentration of silica nanoparticles, with CMP_60 exhibiting the highest surface area of 550 m2 g−1. The photocatalytic conversion of α-terpinene was found to be related to porosity, with CMP_0, having the lowest surface area, giving the lowest conversion. On the other hand, CMP_60 conducted the reaction to near-complete conversion. Furthermore, our group integrated the CMP consisting of a weak electron donor benzene and fluorene and a strong electron acceptor benzothiadiazole onto polymerized high internal phase emulsions, achieving complete conversion of α-terpinene.79 Vilela and co-workers incorporated the dye molecule 4-difluoro-4-boron-3a,4-diazo-neodiene (BODIPY), which can efficiently produce 1O2, into the core structure of the CMP structure.80 Two BODIPY-based CMPs for the efficient catalytic oxidation of α-terpinene were synthesised using direct coupling and post-synthetic conversion, respectively.
4.1.2 Selective oxidation of alcohols. The selective conversion of alcohols to aldehydes and ketones has been a challenging task due to harsh reaction conditions that often lead to undesirable by-products and wastes. To overcome this issue, our group has developed a novel approach by incorporating thiophene (Th) into the CTF framework under a superacid catalytic solvent-free polymerization strategy for visible-light driven formation of aldehydes and ketones.30 Remarkably, a low HOMO level at +1.75 V vs. SCE was observed after the incorporation of Th units, indicating improved electronic properties. To further enhance the performance of the photocatalyst, mesoporous silica SBA-15 was used as a template to form a nanoreactor (Fig. 6). The resulting CTF-Th@SBA-15 exhibited comparable efficiency to the state-of-the-art metal or nonmetal photocatalysts. Furthermore, we successfully applied the CTF-Th@SBA-15 for the aqueous photocatalytic conversion of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural to a high value product of 2,5-diformylfuran with high efficiency and selectivity, and good reusability.81
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the CTF-Th@SBA-15 synthesis and selective oxidation of alcohols. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of CTF-Th@SBA-15. (d) Proposed mechanism of the selective oxidation of alcohols. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 

4.1.3 Selective oxidation of sulfides. Photocatalytic selective oxidation of sulfides under aerobic conditions is a promising alternative to traditional oxidation methods. Our group has successfully synthesized sulfoxides from the corresponding sulfides by utilizing BT-based CMP photocatalysts.82 Specifically, high surface area CMPs were prepared through the incorporation and removal of the tert-butyl carboxylate (Boc), resulting in an eight-fold increase in the surface area. The electronic properties of CMPs were further investigated by theoretical calculations, revealing that all CMPs exhibited similar HOMO levels, but the LUMO levels of BT-based B-CB2-BT were lower than the other two, and the electrons concentrated on the BT moieties in the excited state, indicating that the introduction of a BT unit can act as an electron acceptor, forming a D–A structure. The resulting CMPs efficiently oxidized sulfides to sulfoxides under visible-light in a continuous-flow system, avoiding the separation of the catalyst. Additionally, we described a new method to produce porous polymer nano-photocatalysts with excellent dispersibility.83 The photocatalytic nanoparticles were prepared based on classical polymer copolymerised with photo-active moieties, and different oxidative products copolymerized with photo-active moieties, and different oxidative products were obtained by varying the solvents, with reactions conducted in water favouring monoxide and reactions in acetonitrile favouring dioxide.Loh and co-workers reported a carbazole conjugated microporous polymer (C-CMP) by oxidative coupling polymerization.84 Compared with the 1,3,5-tris(9-carbazolyl)benzene (TCB) monomer, C-CMP showed enhanced absorption of visible light due to the extension of the π-conjugation, featuring an efficient visible photocatalyst. In the presence of visible light, C-CMP could efficiently convert molecular oxygen into ROS for the selective oxidation of sulphides. Similar carbazole-based CMPs were constructed by Zhang et al.85 A series of carbazole-triazole-based CMPs with D–A structures were synthesised. The photoelectric properties and aerobic catalytic efficiency were regulated by adjusting the distance and ratio between the electron donor and acceptor.

4.1.4 Selective oxidation of styrene. The conversion of styrene into high-value products is a crucial aspect for chemical industries. Photocatalytic oxidation of styrene has been mainly conducted using metal catalysts, which produce side products and are toxic. Our group has firstly reported the photocatalytic oxidative CC bond cleavage of styrene in an aqueous reaction medium using CMPs.59 Three building blocks with different electron affinities were selected to construct the CMPs. When utilized in the oxidation of styrene, the CMPs comprising triethynylbenzene and benzothiadiazole units (CMP-BBT) were shown to be more efficient than those comprising benzene–thiophene–benzothiadiazole (CMP-BThBT) and benzene–thiophene (CMP-BTh) units. It was found that the conversion of styrene was strongly solvent-dependent. In a nonpolar solvent such as hexane, the selectivity of benzaldehyde reached 81%; however, the conversion of styrene was only 7% after 18 h. When the solvent polarity further increased, the conversion of styrene reached 91% with a benzaldehyde yield of 86% (MeCN/H2O: v/v = 1/24).For the oxidation reaction, reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a different role during the photocatalytic oxidative process, resulting in different selectivity. Therefore, it is urgently needed to explore the precise control of selective oxidation of styrene under similar reaction conditions with the same photocatalyst. Switchable selective transformation of styrene has been achieved by activating or deactivating specific ROS using the same covalent triazine framework (CTF).86 Under the deactivation of photocatalytic H2O2, styrene was almost completely converted into benzaldehyde with 99% selectivity when catalase was employed as an H2O2 scavenger. In the presence of H2O2, bicarbonate was oxidized into peroxymonocarbonate, which acted as an epoxidation agent, further transforming styrene into styrene oxide with 76% selectivity (Fig. 7). This research provided a solution for the challenging selective transformations of organic compounds in pure water.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the CTF structures with integrated building blocks for the photocatalytic oxidation of styrene with switchable product selectivity. (b and c) Proposed mechanisms of (b) benzaldehyde by blocking the formation of H2O2 and (c) styrene oxide in the presence of NaHCO3. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2023. 

4.1.5 Oxidative cyanation. Oxidative cyanation of tertiary amines is an extraordinarily useful synthetic method to form α-aminonitriles, which can be further transformed into drugs and natural compounds. Our group designed a series of phenothiazine-based CMPs with fine molecular engineering for heterogeneous photocatalytic direct cyanation of tertiary amines.87 Photocatalytic charge separation within the CMPs was promoted via replacing the electron-donating group with an electron-withdrawing group. The CMP-PTZ-3 with a fluorine atom exhibited the strongest oxidizing character and the highest charge separation efficiency. Therefore, photocatalytic oxidative cyanation of tertiary amines conducted by CMP-PTZ-3 achieved the highest yield of over 90%.
4.1.6 Selective bromination. Bromination of organic compounds is very valuable because of its important role in chemistry and pharmaceutical synthesis. The photocatalytic aerobic bromination reaction using HBr as a bromine source and O2 as an oxidant has been achieved by employing microporous organic polymers containing conjugated building blocks.88 The MOP-1 was prepared via a Friedel–Crafts alkylation reaction using 4,7-diphenylbenzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (BT-Ph2) as photocatalytic units. The bromination conversion of trimethoxybenzene conducted by MOP-1 reached 90% under visible light irradiation.
4.2 Reduction
Photocatalytic reduction is another major photocatalytic organic transformation which occurs when photogenerated electrons directly interact with the substrates. Our group has investigated several reduction reactions, including dehalogenation of haloketones, reduction of aromatic nitro compounds, and photoreduction of CrVI into CrIII.
4.2.1 Dehalogenation of haloketones. In our study, we synthesized two CMPs, namely B2-FL2-BBT and B2-FL3 in which B2-FL3 did not contain the electron withdrawing BBT unit, using the high internal phase emulsion polymerization technique, for the purpose of photocatalytic dehalogenation reaction.89 The copolymerization of BBT was found to broaden the absorption of visible light and decreased the HOMO/LUMO levels. The photocatalytic dehalogenation efficiency of the CMPs was investigated by employing α-bromoacetophenones as a substrate under a 23 W white-light bulb, and B2-FL2-BBT demonstrated a notably higher efficiency than B2-FL3, with a yield of 93% in 4 hours. Zhang et al. developed a cyanation strategy to promote charge carrier separation in CMPs by incorporating cyano groups as electron-withdrawing units.20 The resulting CMPs with π-extended D–A conjugation structures gave them distinct efficiency in terms of charge separation and transfer. The cyano-functionalized CMPs showed superior photocatalytic efficiency in photocatalytic dehalogenation of chlorides compared to the cyano-free CMP.
4.2.2 Photoreduction of aromatic nitro compounds. To synthesize hierarchical pore CTFs catalysed by superacid vapor in the solid phase, uniform SiO2 nanoparticles were employed as a hard template for the photocatalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) to 4-aminophenol (4-AP).31 Compared to the bulk CTFs and ground CTFs, hollow CTFs demonstrated enhanced photocatalytic reduction activity under visible light irradiation, due to the increased light absorbance resulting from multiple light reflections in the pore and the more efficient mass transfer. Our group further realized reversible hydrophilicity change for photoreduction of 4-nitrophenol by incorporating a tertiary amine on the P-BT-DEA backbone.36 Upon treatment with CO2 gas in water, the DEA of the P-BT-DEA formed bicarbonate salt, leading to hydrophilicity. The bicarbonate salt can be eliminated through N2 treatment, resulting in precipitation of hydrophobic P-BT-DEA. The photoreduction of 4-NP was completed within 1 h in water, leading to a turnover frequency (TOF) of 22.95 h−1.
4.2.3 Photoreduction of CrVI. Hexavalent chromium (CrVI) can seriously damage the environment and human health. Photoreduction of CrVI is an environmentally friendly strategy that can convert CrVI into CrIII. Our group designed and synthesized water-compatible CMP nanoparticles for efficient photoreduction of CrVI in aqueous environments.90 The P-FL-BT2 was prepared by grafting vinyl-imidazolium onto the side chains of the poly(benzothia-diazolylfluorene) backbone. Under visible-light irradiation, P-FL-BT2 underwent transition to a long-lived triplet state, in which the vinyl group was activated and initiated intramolecular cross-linking to form porous P-FL-BT3. The photoreduction of CrVI conducted by P-FL-BT3 reached almost complete conversion within 120 min, which is comparable to that of some metal-based photocatalysts.
4.3 C–C coupling reaction
Photocatalytic C–C coupling reactions mediated by CPs offer an environmentally friendly and sustainable approach that avoids the need for precious metal catalysts. This section presents a review of the primary C–C coupling reaction reported by our research group.
Our group designed fixed-bed photoreactor CMP-coated glass fibers for continuous flow, photocatalytic enantioselective C–H functionalization.91 The photoreactor, consisting of glass fibers with a diameter of approximately 10 μm, was coated with a thin layer of catalyst (ca. 3.2 wt%) with a thickness of only ca. 80 nm. The fixed-bed photoreactor not only avoided the aggregation of catalyst and improved light utilization, but achieved both material economy and high efficiency. The photoreactor was used for the α-alkylation reaction of aldehydes, demonstrating satisfactory efficiency with a conversion rate of 96% and an enantioselectivity of 83%. To establish the general applicability and stability of the photoreactor, a series of α-alkylation reactions with various substrates and repeated experiments were conducted, all yielding high yield and enantioselectivities.
Stille cross-coupling reactions are a highly efficient tool for C–C bond formation and are commonly employed in the synthesis of pharmaceutical and aromatic compounds.92 However, the use of palladium catalysts is a critical issue associated with this reaction. To address this concern, our group developed a Pd catalyst-free protocol for visible-light-mediated photocatalytic formation of Stille-type aromatic C–C bonds using an azulene-based CMP as the photocatalyst under mild conditions. Under light irradiation, the aryl stannane was oxidised into an aryl radical, as demonstrated in the photocatalytic oxidative half reaction of aryl stannane. The photogenerated aryl radical subsequently reacted with the electron-activated aryl iodide, resulting in the formation of aromatic C–C bonds.
Direct C–H bond activation reactions are essential for organic synthesis. Traditional C–H bond activation reactions are catalysed by Pd, Ru or Ir complexes as homogeneous photocatalysts. The utilization of CP photocatalysts for this type of reaction has generated significant interest. Motivated by this, our group reported the design of three heterogeneous photocatalysts with precise control of the energy band structure and the redox potentials within the polymer for C–H activation reactions (Fig. 8). Porous aromatic frameworks (PAFs) were constructed using an electron acceptor of BT and three different electron donors named phenyl- (Ph), thienyl- (Th) and 3,4-ethylenedioxythienyl (EDOT) moieties via Sonogashira coupling.93 The optical and redox properties were precisely modulated by changing the electron donors. When used for the aza-Henry reaction that was dominated by photogenerated hole, 2-phenyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline was first oxidized into the cationic radical, in which PAF-BT(Ph)2 with the lowest HOMO level exhibited the best performance. When used for the direct arylation dominated by the photogenerated electron, bromobenzenediazonium tetrafluoroborate was first reduced into the aromatic radical, in which PAF-BT(EDOT)2 with the highest LUMO showed the best reactivity.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic presentation of the design of the PAF-based photocatalysts and the application in direct C–H bond activation. (b) Proposed reaction mechanisms of the C–H bond activation driven by the photogenerated electron or hole using PAF-BT as the photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
4.4 Cyclization and cycloaddition
Cyclization and cycloaddition reactions are essential synthetic methodologies for the preparation of biologically active molecules and natural compounds. These reactions have been traditionally catalyzed by transition metals, which have limitations such as high cost and toxicity. Consequently, visible-light-driven cyclization and cycloaddition reactions catalysed by CPs have received significant attention in recent years due to their green and sustainable nature.
Our group has achieved the visible-light-driven [2+2] cycloaddition of styrene derivatives using a pure organic photocatalyst based on the previously reported B-BT.25 This photocatalytic system exhibits excellent efficiency and selectivity in both homo-cycloaddition and unsymmetrical cycloaddition reactions. Mechanistic studies revealed that the reaction initiated with the photocatalytic oxidation of trans-anethole to form a cationic radical intermediate a, which subsequently undergoes a ring reaction with an equivalent olefin to form intermediate b. Finally, intermediate b can lose one electron through one of three pathways to form the desired product.
Moreover, we have successfully accomplished the highly challenging stereochemical [4+2] cycloaddition reaction, achieving high selectivity (>99%) within 4 h at room temperature.94 Our group employed a classic-polymer-based photocatalyst prepared using a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) network and photocatalytic unit of 4,7-diphenylbenzothiadiazole (cPMMA-BT-Ph2). The incorporation of BT-Ph2 into the PMMA network represented a novel, cost-effective, and scalable approach to preparing metal-free photocatalysts. Similar to the [2+2] cycloaddition reaction, the reaction proceeds by the photocatalytic oxidation of trans-anethole by the photocatalytic hole, which then reacted with isoprene to form the final product.
Tetrahydroquinoline represents a prevalent structural motif within a wide range of biologically active compounds and pharmacologically relevant agents. In this regard, the direct oxidative cyclization of N-methylanilines with maleimides, catalysed by transition metal-based catalysts, has been extensively investigated. However, the generation of metal residue remains a concern, and thus, metal-free photocatalysts have become highly desirable. Recently, our group has reported a series of CMPs with a precisely aligned band position for the photocatalytic synthesis of tetrahydroquinoline.72 In particular, the strong electron-withdrawing unit benzo[1,2-c;4,5-c′]bis[1,2,5]thiadiazole (BBT) was chosen as the electron acceptor. By increasing the percentages of BBT in the conjugated network, the absorbance of light shifted towards longer wavelengths, and the optical bandgaps narrowed. Among the CMPs investigated, the oxidative cyclization reaction catalysed by P-BBT-10 exhibited the highest yield of 82%, owing to the superior photogenerated O2˙− activity. This result could be attributed to the second highest redox potentials compared to P-BBT-50 and P-BBT-100. Notably, P-BBT-0 displayed a weak light-harvesting ability, which was a major limiting factor.
Benzophosphole oxide derivatives are known for their exceptional photophysical and electronic properties, making them attractive materials for various applications. Our group has synthesized an asymmetric covalent triazine framework (asy-CTF) with multiple donor–acceptor (D–A) domains using the 5-(4-cyanophenyl)thiophene-2-carbonitrile monomer (Fig. 9).95 The asy-CTF was composed of four D–A units with different HOMO/LUMO levels, resulting in multi-level energy transfer. Time-resolved emission spectra demonstrated that the asy-CTF exhibited new fluorescence peaks at 500–600 nm, which were absent in the symmetric CTF. The fluorescence quenching experiments with model molecules M1 and M4 confirmed the step-by-step energy transfer within the asy-CTF. The photocurrent measurements showed enhanced light-induced charge mobility in asy-CTF. To showcase the superior performance of asy-CTF, the photocatalytic formation of 1,2,3-triphenylphosphindole 1-oxide was chosen as a model reaction. The conversion of the substrate catalysed by asy-CTF reached 93% within 24 h, which was significantly higher than those of the symmetric CTF-Th (22%) and CTF-Th-Ph (63%).
 Fig. 9  (a) Structure of the repeating units in the asymmetric network asy-CTF with four different D–A domains (M1–M4) and the symmetric counterparts CTF-Th and CTF-Th-Ph. (b and c) Comparison of the time-resolved photoluminescence spectra of asy-CTF (b) and CTF-Th (c). (d) Proposed reaction mechanisms of photocatalytic benzophosphole oxide employing asy-CTF. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. 
Heterogeneous photocatalysts with nanostructures exhibit higher activity due to their large surface-to-volume ratio and exposed active sites. We have developed a confinement synthesis strategy for the preparation of CTF nanoparticles (Fig. 10). The uniform CTF was obtained through superacid-catalysed polymerization of a dinitrile monomer, which was encapsulated inside the silica shell. The sizes of CTF nanoparticles ranged from 80 to 550 nm and were modulated by varying the emulsifying parameters. In addition to controlling the morphology, the efficiency of photogenerated charge separation was regulated through copolymerization of different content BT units. When utilized as a photocatalyst for the oxidative [3+2] cycloaddition reaction to synthesize dibenzofuran derivatives, the CTF80 NPs showed an 8-fold increase in activity compared to the bulk CTF. This enhancement can be attributed to the more exposed active sites, which facilitated the photocatalytic cycloaddition. Among the copolymerized CTF, CTF-2BT exhibited the highest photocatalytic efficiency, with an 18- and 2.3-fold increase compared to the bulk and pristine CTF80 NPs, respectively. The superior activity was ascribed to the improved photoelectronic properties of CTF-2BT.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic presentation of the synthetic route for CTF nanoparticles in confinement. TEM images of (b) monomer and (c) CTF NPs confined in silica capsules. (d) Elemental map showing enriched contents of silicon and oxygen in the shell and carbon and sulfur in the core. (e–g) Different CTF-NP sizes of 80, 180, and 550 nm on average could be obtained. The inset in (e) shows the Tyndall effect of CTF80 in THF (0.01 mg mL−1). Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. 
4.5 Photodynamic therapy and photobiocatalysis
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a promising approach for eradicating bacteria, wherein non-toxic and pure organic CMP nanoparticles (CMP NPs) are used as PDT agents. Hence, we report the structural design of CMP NPs by doping the electron-withdrawing BT unit into the backbone of CMP, which originally only contained electron-donating thiophene units.96 The copolymerization of the BT moiety enhanced the photogenerated ROS activity. Under dark conditions, CMP NPs did not exhibit toxic effects on bacterial cells, thereby establishing CMPs as non-toxic PDT agents. Under visible-light irradiation, the inactivation efficiency of CMP NPs increased with increasing content of BT. Th-BT-100 as a PDT agent exhibited about 95% cell death after 120 min of visible light irradiation.
Photobiocatalysis has emerged as a novel tool for the synthesis of high value products by integrating enzyme catalysis selectivity under mild conditions and the excellent activity of photocatalysis for visible-light-driven chemical transformation. The regeneration of redox mediators is an essential step for enzyme catalysis. As around 80% of oxidoreductases require nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) as redox mediators to sustain the reaction, NAD+/NADH is considered one of the most crucial cofactors. Since enzyme catalysis often takes place in water, our group designed a water-compatible CMP hydrogel via stable ionic complexation.97 The prepared CMP exhibited a strong swelling in water and could absorb 470 times its own weight in water. P-BT-GX exhibited excellent efficiency of photo-oxidation of NADH due to its hydrophilicity and similarity to biological matrices. Upon 2 hours of light irradiation, the conversion of NADH catalysed by P-BT-G41 with a higher swelling ratio reached more than 99%, while that catalysed by P-BT-G0 and P-BT-G9 had marginal efficiencies.
The photocatalytic regeneration of NAD+/NADH using visible light as the energy source has been widely explored in various photobiocatalytic systems, such as those employing organic dyes, carbon quantum dots, covalent organic frameworks, metal–organic frameworks, and conjugated microporous polymers. However, the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) as by-products during photocatalysis can cause rapid degradation of the enzymes and consequently limit the potential of photobiocatalysis. To overcome this limitation, our research group has developed a core–shell nano-photoreactor for photo-regeneration NAD+/NADH, which can be used for enzyme catalysis.98 Specifically, as shown in (Fig. 11), the organo-silica core of the photoreactor effectively catalyses the cofactor transformation, while photogenerated ROS could deactivate when going through the non-photoactive shell. When utilized in photo-enzyme cascade reactions, the core–shell nano-photoreactor successfully regenerated the NAD+; the oxidized NAD+ subsequently was used for the enzyme reactions, with production of the reductive NADH. The process can be run more than 10 times, highlighting the potential of the photo-enzyme catalytic cascade reaction system in achieving stable performance.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the enzyme and photocatalyst combination system. (b and c) Core (red line) and core–shell (blue line) nano-photoreactor combine with the enzyme (b) glycerol dehydrogenase and (c) glucose dehydrogenase to recover NAD+ and NADH by alternately adding reagents (glycerol and glucose) and light in the dark. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. 
5. Conclusion and outlook
Developing and utilizing solar energy through a photocatalytic strategy is an effective solution to energy and environment issues. Since the first report of conjugated polymers as photocatalysts for organic transformations, tremendous developments of CPs have been made for the photocatalytic application. Based on the photocatalytic mechanism, the modulation of light absorbance, charge separation and transfer, the HOMO/LUMO level has been optimized for achieving enhanced catalytic efficiency based on the design of molecular structure and morphology. Depending on the tuneable structure, clear structure–property relationship, and good stability, CPs have been widely studied for photocatalytic chemical transformation.
Our team's research has made important contributions to heterogeneous photocatalytic chemical transformations using CPs: in terms of designing a strategy according to the mechanisms of the photocatalytic chemical transformations though CPs, we have reported the synthesis of efficient CP catalysts by incorporating D–A units, hybridization of the molecular level, and nano-confinement synthesis. What is more, we successfully achieved the challenging catalytic synthesis of high value-added products using CPs and the reaction types have been expanded to oxidation, reduction, C–C coupling, cyclization and cycloaddition and photo-enzyme tandem systems. The system of how to explore the reaction mechanism catalysed by CPs using different sacrificial reagents was proposed and improved. There is no doubt that the exploration of CP-driven photocatalytic chemical transformation is in a period of rapid development. Based on the understanding of interaction mechanisms within the photocatalytic process, researchers can design and synthesize CP-based photocatalysts for more complex reactions with higher performance in the future.
However, there are still certain challenges that require further solving. Some suggestions and predictions are proposed for future progression of the field: (1) faced with more and more CP-based photocatalysts, machine learning is needed for an in-depth investigation. (2) With the advantage of structural designability, the exploration of new monomers with specific functions, new reactions for synthesizing CPs, cheap and environmentally friendly methods for preparing CP-based photocatalysts should undergo rapid development. (3) The extension of more complex and higher value-added chemical reactions catalysed by CPs should be studied in depth. (4) How to achieve the combination between photocatalysis and enzyme catalysis and synthesize biologically active molecules still remains a question. (5) Last but not least, the photocatalytic chemical transformations are still under laboratory conditions, and large-scale but low-cost productions are very much needed.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
AcknowledgementsThe authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 52173198) for financial support in collection and writting.
Notes and referencesD. Ravelli, M. Fagnoni and A. Albini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 97–113 RSC .H. Lu, J. Tournet, K. Dastafkan, Y. Liu, Y. H. Ng, S. K. Karuturi, C. Zhao and Z. Yin, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 10271–10366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Xiao, X. Liu, L. Pan, C. Shi, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 12256–12283 CrossRef CAS .Z. Qian and K. A. I. Zhang, Solar RRL, 2020, 5, 2000489–2200512 CrossRef .L. Yang, Y. Peng, X. Luo, Y. Dan, J. Ye, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2147–2172 RSC .Z. Zhang, J. Jia, Y. Zhi, S. Ma and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 2444–2490 RSC .R. Liu, K. T. Tan, Y. Gong, Y. Chen, Z. Li, S. Xie, T. He, Z. Lu, H. Yang and D. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 120–242 RSC .K. Geng, T. He, R. Liu, S. Dalapati, K. T. Tan, Z. Li, S. Tao, Y. Gong, Q. Jiang and D. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8814–8933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Wang, Z. Jia, Y. Bai, X. Wang, S. E. Hodgkiss, L. Chen, S. Y. Chong, X. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Xu, F. Feng, J. W. Ward and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11131–11138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X.-T. Li, J. Zou, T.-H. Wang, H.-C. Ma, G.-J. Chen and Y.-B. Dong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6521–6526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. R. Ren, B. Bai, Q. Zhang, Q. Hao, Y. Guo, L. J. Wan and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 2488–2494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Dai and B. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 24–52 RSC .R. Li, J. Byun, W. Huang, C. Ayed, L. Wang and K. A. I. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4735–4750 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Lee and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 2171–2214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Wang, Y. Wan, Y. Ding, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Xiong, X. Wu, J. Yang and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702428–1702436 CrossRef PubMed .R. S. Sprick, J. X. Jiang, B. Bonillo, S. Ren, T. Ratvijitvech, P. Guiglion, M. A. Zwijnenburg, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3265–3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Li, X. Ma, F. Zhang, X. Dong and X. Lang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120514–120523 CrossRef CAS .Z. J. Wang, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 3559–3562 RSC .S. Dadashi-Silab, F. Lorandi, M. J. DiTucci, M. Sun, G. Szczepaniak, T. Liu and K. Matyjaszewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 9630–9638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Zhang, J. Deng, Z. Fang, D. Lan, Y. Liao, X. Zhou and Q. Liu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 7151–7159 RSC .Z. J. Wang, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6265–6270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Xu, X. Li, H. Hao, X. Dong, W. Sheng and X. Lang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 285, 119796–119806 CrossRef CAS .X. Wu, S. Wang, J. Fang, H. Chen, H. Liu and R. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 38895–38904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhu, P. Xu, X. Zhang and D. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 1377–1414 RSC .R. Li, B. C. Ma, W. Huang, L. Wang, D. Wang, H. Lu, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3097–3101 CrossRef CAS .K. Zhang, D. Kopetzki, P. H. Seeberger, M. Antonietti and F. Vilela, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1432–1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Qian, Z. J. Wang and K. A. I. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 1909–1926 CrossRef CAS .K. Sakaushi, G. Nickerl, H. C. Kandpal, L. Cano-Cortés, T. Gemming, J. Eckert, S. Kaskel and J. van den Brink, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2977–2981 CrossRef CAS .C. B. Meier, R. Clowes, E. Berardo, K. E. Jelfs, M. A. Zwijnenburg, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8830–8838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Huang, B. C. Ma, H. Lu, R. Li, L. Wang, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5438–5442 CrossRef CAS .W. Huang, Z. J. Wang, B. C. Ma, S. Ghasimi, D. Gehrig, F. Laquai, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7555–7559 RSC .L. Wang, L. Wang, S. Yuan, L. Song, H. Ren, Y. Xu, M. He, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Huang, T. Wei, J. Zhang, Y. Himeda and Z. Fan, Appl. Catal. B, 2023, 322, 122803–122815 Search PubMed .C. Wu, Z. Teng, C. Yang, F. Chen, H. B. Yang, L. Wang, H. Xu, B. Liu, G. Zheng and Q. Han, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2110266–2110275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Huang, J. Byun, I. Rorich, C. Ramanan, P. W. M. Blom, H. Lu, D. Wang, L. Caire da Silva, R. Li, L. Wang, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2018, 57, 8316–8320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Bai, C. Li, L. Liu, Y. Yamaguchi, M. Bahri, H. Yang, A. Gardner, M. A. Zwijnenburg, N. D. Browning, A. J. Cowan, A. Kudo, A. I. Cooper and R. S. Sprick, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202201299 CAS .J. Byun, W. Huang, D. Wang, R. Li and K. A. I. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2967–2971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Wang, H. Li, H. Huang, X. Cao, X. Chen and D. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 2031–2080 RSC .M. Sachs, H. Cha, J. Kosco, C. M. Aitchison, L. Francas, S. Corby, C. L. Chiang, A. A. Wilson, R. Godin, A. Fahey-Williams, A. I. Cooper, R. S. Sprick, I. McCulloch and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 14574–14587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Kosco, M. Sachs, R. Godin, M. Kirkus, L. Francas, M. Bidwell, M. Qureshi, D. Anjum, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802181–1802188 CrossRef .P. Kuhn, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3450–3453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. A. Lan, M. Wu, Z. Fang, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202201482 CAS .X. Zhu, C. Tian, S. M. Mahurin, S. H. Chai, C. Wang, S. Brown, G. M. Veith, H. Luo, H. Liu and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10478–10484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Ren, M. J. Bojdys, R. Dawson, A. Laybourn, Y. Z. Khimyak, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2357–2361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Xie, S. A. Shevlin, Q. Ruan, S. J. A. Moniz, Y. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Li, C. C. Lau, Z. X. Guo and J. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1617–1624 RSC .Z. Yang, H. Chen, S. Wang, W. Guo, T. Wang, X. Suo, D. E. Jiang, X. Zhu, I. Popovs and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6856–6860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Sun, Y. Liang and Y. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202113926 CAS .K. Wang, L. M. Yang, X. Wang, L. Guo, G. Cheng, C. Zhang, S. Jin, B. Tan and A. Cooper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14149–14153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Sun, X. Wang, X. Wang and B. Tan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202117668 CAS .M. Liu, K. Jiang, X. Ding, S. Wang, C. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Zhan, G. Cheng, B. Li, H. Chen, S. Jin and B. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1807865 CrossRef PubMed .M. Liu, Q. Huang, S. Wang, Z. Li, B. Li, S. Jin and B. Tan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11968–11972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Byun and K. A. I. Zhang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 15–31 RSC .M. Neumann, S. Fuldner, B. Konig and K. Zeitler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 951–954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Bi, Z.-A. Lan, S. Paasch, W. Zhang, Y. He, C. Zhang, F. Liu, D. Wu, X. Zhuang, E. Brunner, X. Wang and F. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703146–1703154 CrossRef .C. B. Meier, R. S. Sprick, A. Monti, P. Guiglion, J.-S. M. Lee, M. A. Zwijnenburg and A. I. Cooper, Polymer, 2017, 126, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .S. Bandyopadhyay, A. G. Anil, A. James and A. Patra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27669–27678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J.-X. Jiang, Y. Li, X. Wu, J. Xiao, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 8779–8783 CrossRef CAS .X. Ding and B. H. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6536–6539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Ma, T. J. Miao and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 5777–5794 RSC .C. Ayed, L. Caire da Silva, D. Wang and K. A. I. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22145–22151 RSC .S. Barman, A. Singh, F. A. Rahimi and T. K. Maji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 16284–16292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. S. Kochergin, D. Schwarz, A. Acharjya, A. Ichangi, R. Kulkarni, P. Eliasova, J. Vacek, J. Schmidt, A. Thomas and M. J. Bojdys, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14188–14192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Lan, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, Q. Li, J. Wang, Q. Zhang and G. Bai, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 7429–7441 CrossRef CAS .C. Shu, C. Han, X. Yang, C. Zhang, Y. Chen, S. Ren, F. Wang, F. Huang and J. X. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2008498 CrossRef PubMed .W. Huang, Q. He, Y. Hu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 8676–8680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Qian, Y. Yan, Z. Liang, X. Zhuang and K. A. I. Zhang, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 7379–7383 RSC .Z. Gao, Y. Jian, S. Yang, Q. Xie, C. J. Ross Mcfadzean, B. Wei, J. Tang, J. Yuan, C. Pan and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, e202304173,  DOI:10.1002/anie.202304173 .Z. A. Lan, M. Wu, Z. Fang, X. Chi, X. Chen, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 16355–16359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Chi, Z. A. Lan, Q. Chen, X. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., In. Ed., 2023, 62, e2023037 CrossRef PubMed .Z. A. Lan, G. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, K. A. I. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10236–10240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Kou, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, L. Ye, Y. Huang, B. Jia, H. Li, J. Ren, Y. Deng, J. Chen, Y. Zhou, K. Lei, L. Wang, W. Liu, H. Huang and T. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202200413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Wang, H. Zhang, W. Luo, T. Sun and Y. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 25381–25390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. J. Wang, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 2576–2582 CrossRef CAS .F. Lan, Q. Wang, H. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, B. Huang, H. Liu, J. Liu and R. Li, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 12976–12986 CrossRef CAS .Z. J. Wang, K. Garth, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3459–3464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Li, J. Yin, H. Zhang and K. A. I. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2023, 15, 2825–2831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Yang, B. C. Ma, L. Zhang, S. Lin, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester, K. A. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9202–9206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Wang, G. Cheng, L. Guo, B. Tan and S. Jin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904781–1904789 CrossRef CAS .C. T. J. Ferguson, N. Huber, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10567–10571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Zhang, Z. Vobecka, K. Tauer, M. Antonietti and F. Vilela, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11158–11160 RSC .J. M. Tobin, J. Liu, H. Hayes, M. Demleitner, D. Ellis, V. Arrighi, Z. Xu and F. Vilela, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 6662–6670 RSC .C. Ayed, W. Huang, G. Kizilsavas, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, ChemPhotoChem, 2020, 4, 571–576 CrossRef CAS .Z. J. Wang, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8177–8180 RSC .C. T. J. Ferguson, N. Huber, T. Kuckhoff, K. A. I. Zhang and K. Landfester, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1072–1076 RSC .C. Su, R. Tandiana, B. Tian, A. Sengupta, W. Tang, J. Su and K. P. Loh, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3594–3599 CrossRef CAS .J. Luo, J. Lu and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15154–15161 RSC .C. Ayed, J. Yin, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202216159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Li, W. Zhang, S. Yang, F. Chen, C. Pan, J. Tang, K. A. I. Zhang and G. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 408, 127261–127269 CrossRef CAS .R. Li, Z. J. Wang, L. Wang, B. C. Ma, S. Ghasimi, H. Lu, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1113–1121 CrossRef CAS .Z. J. Wang, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18720–18724 RSC .S. Ghasimi, S. Prescher, Z. J. Wang, K. Landfester, J. Yuan and K. A. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14549–14553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Huang, B. C. Ma, D. Wang, Z. J. Wang, R. Li, L. Wang, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3792–3797 RSC .S. Ghasimi, S. A. Bretschneider, W. Huang, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700101 CrossRef PubMed .N. Huber and K. A. I. Zhang, Eur. Polym. J., 2020, 140, 110060–110069 CrossRef CAS .N. Huber, R. Li, C. T. J. Ferguson, D. W. Gehrig, C. Ramanan, P. W. M. Blom, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 2092–2099 RSC .W. Huang, N. Huber, S. Jiang, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18368–18373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. C. Ma, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 5112–5118 RSC .J. Byun, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3381–3387 CrossRef CAS .W. Wei, F. Mazzotta, I. Lieberwirth, K. Landfester, C. T. J. Ferguson and K. A. I. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 7320–7326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Footnote† We would like to dedicate this paper to the memory of Prof. Kai Zhang, who unfortunately passed away just during the revision of the manuscript. Kai played an essential role in the research described here and he is truly missed.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Hao Zhang	Hao Zhang completed his undergraduate and masters studies at Fudan University in 2020. He joined Prof. Kai A. I. Zhang's research group in the following year. His research interests focus on the construction of conjugated polymers and their photocatalytic applications.
Wenxin Wei	Wenxin Wei completed his doctoral training at MPIP in 2021 and received his PhD from Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz. He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Fudan University. His current research interests are focused on porous photocatalysts for photobiocatalysis.
Kai A. I. Zhang	Kai A. I. Zhang received his PhD from the University of Cologne and partly from the University of Strathclyde. After working as a postdoctoral fellow at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, he joined the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in 2013 as an independent research group leader. In 2019, he joined as a full professor at Fudan University. His research interests include the development of organic porous materials, macromolecular photocatalysts and their applications in organic photoredox reactions, fine chemistry, photobiocatalysis, etc.

 	Fig. 1  Application of visible-light-driven chemical transformations using CP-based photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Synthetic routes of CTF-BT/Th with heterostructures. (b) Photocurrent responses of all CTF materials as indicated. (c) Facilitated transfer pathway of photocatalytic electrons and holes within CTF-BT/Th. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Structures of CMP-Th-Ph and CMP-Th-Ph-F. (b) Calculated DOS profiles of CMPs. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2023.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Geometry design principle of the HOMO/LUMO levels’ fine alignment of conjugated microporous poly(benzooxadiazole) networks by altering the substitution position on the 3D centre. (b) HOMO/LUMO levels of the CMPs and redox potentials of some substrates used in the photocatalytic reaction. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The switchable hydrophilicity of the conjugated polymer photocatalyst controlled by the exchange of CO2/N2. (b) Photographs of P-BT-DEA in water. (c) Reversible zeta potential changes and pH change of P-BT-DEA in water upon CO2/N2 treatment. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the CTF-Th@SBA-15 synthesis and selective oxidation of alcohols. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of CTF-Th@SBA-15. (d) Proposed mechanism of the selective oxidation of alcohols. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the CTF structures with integrated building blocks for the photocatalytic oxidation of styrene with switchable product selectivity. (b and c) Proposed mechanisms of (b) benzaldehyde by blocking the formation of H2O2 and (c) styrene oxide in the presence of NaHCO3. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2023.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic presentation of the design of the PAF-based photocatalysts and the application in direct C–H bond activation. (b) Proposed reaction mechanisms of the C–H bond activation driven by the photogenerated electron or hole using PAF-BT as the photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Structure of the repeating units in the asymmetric network asy-CTF with four different D–A domains (M1–M4) and the symmetric counterparts CTF-Th and CTF-Th-Ph. (b and c) Comparison of the time-resolved photoluminescence spectra of asy-CTF (b) and CTF-Th (c). (d) Proposed reaction mechanisms of photocatalytic benzophosphole oxide employing asy-CTF. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic presentation of the synthetic route for CTF nanoparticles in confinement. TEM images of (b) monomer and (c) CTF NPs confined in silica capsules. (d) Elemental map showing enriched contents of silicon and oxygen in the shell and carbon and sulfur in the core. (e–g) Different CTF-NP sizes of 80, 180, and 550 nm on average could be obtained. The inset in (e) shows the Tyndall effect of CTF80 in THF (0.01 mg mL−1). Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the enzyme and photocatalyst combination system. (b and c) Core (red line) and core–shell (blue line) nano-photoreactor combine with the enzyme (b) glycerol dehydrogenase and (c) glucose dehydrogenase to recover NAD+ and NADH by alternately adding reagents (glycerol and glucose) and light in the dark. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022.	 
Footnote
† We would like to dedicate this paper to the memory of Prof. Kai Zhang, who unfortunately passed away just during the revision of the manuscript. Kai played an essential role in the research described here and he is truly missed.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
