Well-ordered nanohybrids and nanoporous materials from gyroid block copolymer templates  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CS00424H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CS00424H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1974-2018Well-ordered nanohybrids and nanoporous materials from gyroid block copolymer templates

        
          
            Han-Yu 
            Hsueh
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Cheng-Thai 
            Yao
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Rong-Ming 
            Ho
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical Engineering, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 30013, Republic of China. E-mail: rmho@mx.nthu.edu.tw
Received 
      26th November 2014
    First published on 27th January 2015AbstractThe design of nanostructured materials and their corresponding morphologies has attracted intense attention because of their effectiveness in tuning electronic, optical, magnetic, and catalytic properties, as well as mechanical properties. Although many technologies have been explored to fabricate nanostructured materials, templated synthesis is one of the most important approaches to fabricate nanostructured materials with precisely controlled structures and morphologies from their constituent components. In this review article, we aim to highlight the use of the self-assembly of block copolymers as an emerging and powerful tool to fabricate well-defined nanomaterials with precise control over the structural dimensions and shape, as well as over the composition and corresponding spatial arrangement. After providing a brief introduction to the synthesis of regular porous materials, including silica- and carbon-based mesoporous materials, the review focuses on the fabrication of well-ordered nanoporous polymers from the selfassembly of degradable block copolymers, in particular with gyroid-forming network morphologies, as templates for the syntheses of various materials with different entities. We highlight the principles of different templated syntheses, from the fundamentals to their practical uses in the fabrication of nanohybrids and nanoporous materials; moreover, we provide an introduction to templates, precursors, solvents, and processing. Finally, some recent examples using block copolymer structure-directed nanomaterials for applications, such as solar cells, catalysis, and drug delivery, are presented. In particular, by taking advantage of the “well-ordered” structural characteristics of the gyroid texture, the properties and applications of 3D regular nanostructures, such as the photonic behavior and optical properties of gyroid-forming nanostructures, as well as of gyroid-forming metamaterials, will be emphasized. Special attention is also given to present new developments and future perspectives in this field.
Han-Yu Hsueh
Dr Han-Yu Hsueh received his bachelor's degree from the Department of Chemical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University (Taiwan) in 2005. Afterward he moved to Department of Material Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University for graduate study and received MS degree in 2007. In 2011, he received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from National Tsing Hua University (Taiwan) under the supervision of Professor Rong-Ming Ho. Now, he is a visiting scientist in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, University of Massachusetts Amherst (USA) with Professor Alfred J. Crosby, and his current researches focus on biomimetic mechanical properties from block copolymers.
Cheng-Thai Yao
Mr Cheng-Thai Yao received his BS degree from the Department of Chemical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University (Taiwan) in 2014. He joined the research group of Professor Rong-Ming Ho for undergraduate research project, and continues his research to pursue the PhD degree. His current research is focused on the fabrication of various nanohybrids and nanoporous materials based on the templating of block copolymers for applications.
Rong-Ming Ho
Dr Rong-Ming Ho received his PhD degree from the Institute of Polymer Science, University of Akron (USA) in 1995 under the supervision of Prof. Stephen Z. D. Cheng. He then moved to Minneapolis and worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Minnesota (USA) with Profs. Christopher W. Macosko and Frank S. Bates. Currently, he is a distinguished professor in NTHU. His current researches focus on supramolecular and block copolymer self-assembly, nanopatterning technologies via integration of top-down and bottom-up methods, and hybridization via block copolymer templating.
1. Introduction
The use of manufacturing processes using prepared templates, also called templated synthesis or casting, is an ancient (over 6000 years) skill. The oldest surviving casting example is believed to be a copper frog cast in Mesopotamia probably around 3200 BC. After thousands of years of evolution for manufacturing technology as part of people's livelihood, templated synthesis is now well developed for extended applications from the manufacture of old coins to food shaping. In a templated synthesis, a liquid or a fluid material is poured into a prepared mold containing a hollow cavity of the desired shape and is then allowed to solidify. The solid part is then taken out after removal of the template to complete the process. Taking the manufacture of traditional Chinese yellow cake as an example (Fig. 1), at first, a mold/pan with a chosen shape is prepared, and then all the ingredients are mixed well and poured into the preheated pan. Any sweet filling (e.g. sweetened red bean paste) can be added according to one's taste into the inner of the yellow cakes. After heating for several minutes and then lifting up the lid slightly, delicious Chinese yellow cakes with fancy shapes and various flavors are ready for consumption. Another famous example of templated synthesis is the fabrication of sculptures. By templated synthesis/casting, complicated and delicate sculptures with fine details, made with different materials such as wax, iron, or copper, can be manufactured on a large scale. In other words, templated synthesis can be used for making products with complex shapes and diverse components that would be difficult to produce by other approaches. Yet, in contrast to the production of yellow cakes, how one fills the templates with the precursors for template synthesis, in particular for delicate textures, is critical to achieving the manufacturing goals. Over time, the ancient templated technology has been developed to form various tools and vessels essential to human life and culture. In addition to using for the necessities of life, the ancient skill was also used for human culture inheritance. One of the most famous examples is “Pâte de verre” – one of the lost wax processes. Pâte de verre is a well-developed and famous artistic skill used in the creation of traditional Taiwan glass art (i.e., Liuli).1 The process involved several complex processes per creation, including casting a wax sculpture in plaster (Fig. 2a), melting out that wax (Fig. 2b), and then adding glass ingredients to the leftover negative space (Fig. 2c). Further steps involved breaking the plaster covering and then taking out the raw blank (Fig. 2d). After inspecting any changes to the detail of the raw blank, a beautiful and flickering Liuli art with incredible details could be created (Fig. 2e).
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the manufacture of traditional Chinese yellow cakes. 
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the lost wax process (i.e., Pâte de verre) for traditional Taiwan Liuli. (a) A model is made of completely combustible materials (e.g., wax). (b) The model is mounted onto a base and positioned within a plaster cylinder. (c) The investment is dried and then burned out in an oven to cure the mold and to remove all traces of the model. Then, glass ingredients are added into the leftover negative space. (d) After brief cooling, the plaster covering is broken to release the raw blank. (e) A beautiful and flickering Liuli art is thus created. Reproduced from ref. 1 with permission from Copyright, Liuligongfang. 
Now in modern times, the development of materials has entered a new era—that of using nanoscale materials. Nanoscale materials are defined as those materials whose structural elements, such as clusters, crystallites or molecules, have dimensions in the 1 nm to 100 nm range. The exploration of nanomaterials in both academia and industry has been remarkable over the past decade, and has been driven by variations in their fundamental properties and potential applications. Materials can range from an “infinitely extended” solid (bulk) to a particle in a material consisting of a countable number of atoms, whose physical and chemical properties display special characteristics resulting from the confinement of electrons within a tiny space (in nanoscale materials). In particular, the most important nanomaterial systems are nanohybrids and nanoporous materials. Nanohybrids and nanoporous materials, whose properties depend on their individual components and morphologies, as well as on the corresponding interfaces, are potentially critical next-generation materials due to their excellent material characteristics, including optical, electrical, magnetic and catalytic properties, as well as their demonstrated mechanical properties. In particular, the syntheses of nanostructured materials with precisely controlled structures and morphologies have become the critical aims of extensive research over the last few years. Nanomaterials with a well-ordered texture not only give homogeneous properties for further applications, but can also provide novel and surprising properties due to their periodic and regular structures. However, it is still a challenge to fabricate materials in the nanoscale with well-ordered architectures in large-size monoliths or in large-area continuous films for device designs in modern applications.
In general, there are two approaches in the fabrication of nanomaterials: top-down and bottom-up methods.2 The top-down methods for processing nanostructured materials involve starting with a solid bulk and obtaining nanostructures via structural decomposition. For example, attrition and milling are typical top-down methods to obtain nanoparticles. It is well known that top-down methods can be used for the fabrication of complex and defined nanomaterials. However, the biggest problem with the top-down approach is the imperfection of the surface structure. For example, the most famous and convenient top-down method—lithography—can result in significant crystallographic damage to the processed materials, in which additional defects are even introduced.3 In addition, the size of the nanostructured materials produced from top-down methods is still limited, and the process is time consuming. Another approach is to use self-assembly to create ordered bulk or thin films via a bottom-up method.4 Nature already uses self-assembling materials for nanostructures, such as the components of living cells. The bottom-up method refers to the building of materials from the bottom up, through an atom-by-atom, molecule-by-molecule, or cluster-by-cluster approach. Most biological systems also exhibit hierarchy and at least one distinct structural feature that lies within each length scale at the molecular, microscopic, nanoscopic (mesoscopic), and macroscopic regimes. Several levels of structures can be distinguished in proteins, bones, shells, and so on. For instance, the primary structure of the sequence of amino acid groups along the polypeptide chain in proteins can be developed into various secondary structural motifs, such as coils, sheets, and ribbons.5 The motifs are packed together to form a distinctive shape: the tertiary structure. Although nanomaterials from bottom-up methods promise a better chance to obtain nanoscale materials, it is not easy to obtain nanomaterials with a precisely controlled chemical composition and structural order.
One easy way to fulfill the requirements for the fabrication of well-ordered nanomaterials is to acquire them through templated synthesis—an ancient technique combining bottom-up and/or top-down approaches. However, the above-mentioned ancient templated synthesis/casting techniques are constrained to a large size and have limitations in the centimeter range. However, if the templated synthesis could be scaled down to the nanometer scale, the ancient technique—i.e., templated synthesis—should be able to create new applications from fabricating nanomaterials, leading to a new development of modern technologies. As a result, more and more approaches with respect to templated synthesis for the fabrication of well-ordered nanomaterials have been created, leading to a growing development of nanoscale templates (molds). Porous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) as a template was the subject of the first attempt to scale down the templated synthesis to the submicrometer range for producing wire arrays.6 Furthermore, Kyotani and co-workers were the first to fabricate microporous carbons using ultra-stable zeolite Y (USY) as a template, achieving a templated synthesis in the nanoscale.7 In 1998, Göltner and co-workers first proposed the concept termed as nanocasting for the fabrication of mesoporous materials.8 A mesoporous silica monolith with interconnective mesochannels was used as a template in a “two-step” templated synthesis (nanocasting) to prepare mesoporous polymeric networks with a well-ordered nanostructure from pre-made silica templates. From then on, templated synthesis has attracted increasing attention and has become one of the most important approaches for the synthesis of well-ordered nanohybrids and nanostructured materials, especially nanoporous materials. As a result, various templated syntheses utilizing the deposition of desired materials into pre-prepared well-ordered templates (so-called hard templates), such as AAO,9 arrays of colloidal crystals,10 mesoporous silica (MCM materials),11 and mesoporous carbon,12,13 have been fully developed to fabricate well-ordered nanomaterials with pre-defined sizes and shapes, as well as order. In addition, to create well-ordered nanoarrays from nanoparticles and nanorods, templated synthesis can also be used for making complex shapes in the nanoscale that cannot be prepared or fabricated by other methods.
Another form of templates can be used, namely soft templates, are usually amphiphilic molecules known as surfactants, which contain both hydrophilic and hydrophobic domains. In polar solvents, these surfactants can be co-assembled with precursors into supramolecular structures with various morphologies by altering certain variables (such as temperature, pressure, and surfactant concentration), leading to the resultant nanohybrid materials without the need for pre-forming the templates from a “one-step” templated synthesis. After removal of the amphiphilic molecules by calcination, inorganic porous materials with well-defined textures, such as silica- and carbon-based mesoporous materials with well-ordered structures, can be produced. Those well-ordered inorganic porous materials are suitable as templates for further templated syntheses. As mentioned above, a variety of well-ordered nanostructured materials can be fabricated through templated synthesis by using hard or soft templates; however, a majority of the well-defined templates are composed of inorganic materials (i.e., inorganic templates). As a result, it is still a challenge to remove the inorganic templates completely without causing damage to the filling materials when the fillers possess similar intrinsic properties to the matrix. For example, it is well known that almost all ceramic materials can be easily removed by wet chemical etching with hot sodium hydroxide (NaOH) or hydrofluoric acid (HF).14 However, it is difficult to selectively remove silica template (matrix) without damaging the ceramic fillers. Also, removal of the templates often involves the use of strong chemicals like HF, which is understandably undesirable. As a result, it is necessary to develop other templates (i.e., organic templates) to make the process of removing the templates easier to carry out. Note that organic materials can be degraded through ozone decomposition, UV degradation, reactive ion etching, and calcination. When seeking templates with easily degradable properties for templated synthesis but sufficient mechanical strength, nanoporous polymeric materials would be suitable candidates as templates. They would also make it much easier to create a monolith of nanomaterials with a large area, especially in the thin-film state, due to the easy processing of the polymeric materials. The development of manufacturing hybrid and porous materials with different templates is illustrated in Fig. 3; this shows that templated synthesis was created thousands of years ago and has been scaled down over many years, even reaching down to the nanometer scale in recent decades.
 Fig. 3  Summary of the development of the manufacturing of hybrid and porous materials with different templates. 
In recent decades, block copolymers (BCPs) have been extensively investigated because of their ability to self-assemble into one-, two-, and three-dimensional (1D, 2D, and 3D) periodic nanostructures with a readily adjustable size, depending on their constituent compositions and molecular weights.15–17 By taking advantage of the degradable character of BCPs, nanoporous polymeric materials with well-ordered structures can be prepared by the preferential removal of the constituent components in BCPs through: ozonolysis,18,19 UV degradation,20 and reactive ion etching.21 As a result, chemically degradable BCPs have drawn intense attention for the preparation of nanoporous polymers. Also, polylactide-containing BCPs such as polystyrene-b-poly(D,L-lactide) (PS-PLA)22 and polystyrene-b-poly(L-lactide) (PS-PLLA)23 are highly suitable for the fabrication of nanoporous polymers because of the unstable character of the ester group in the polylactides, which can be hydrolytically degenerated. Most interestingly, nanoporous polymers with well-ordered nanochannels can be used as organic templates (in particular, polymeric templates) for templated synthesis. In this review, we review the development of template-based synthetic strategies using BCP as templates through different templated approaches, including the sol–gel reaction,24–26 electrochemical deposition,27–32 electroless plating,33–37 and atomic layer deposition (ALD).38,39 Chemical reactions can be carried out within the well-defined nanochannels of BCP templates for the fabrication of nanostructured inorganic materials to give nanohybrids with well-ordered structures.
For the fabrication of 3D nanohybrids with complex-ordered structures and self-supporting nanoporous materials, a double gyroid (DG) (composed of a matrix and two continuous interpenetrating, but independent networks in 3D space) from the self-assembly of BCPs is especially appealing. The basic shape of the gyroid is a three-fold junction of three arms, in which each arm is connected to another set of three arms that are each themselves rotated to form a 3D network.40,41 After selective degradation of the minor phase, the DG nanostructure can be exploited to create fully interconnected nanochannels, leading to a great potential for the fabrication of inorganic network nanostructures from different templated synthesis, as illustrated in Fig. 4 For templated electroplating, the fabrication of metal-based and ceramic-based nanomaterials, and even semi-conductive nanomaterials with gyroid-forming morphologies, is feasible, while the templates can be easily deposited on conductive substrates. In contrast to the templated electroplating, templated electroless plating is not necessary to apply the electric field for the reduction of metal ions, giving the formation of a variety of metallic materials through nucleation and growth processes, and also providing the feasibility to fabricate micrometer particles with nanoporous textures and multibranched metallic materials. The templated sol–gel reaction is a very comprehensive method for fabricating a variety of ceramic nanomaterials, because of the sophisticated development in sol–gel science (with many recipes now available for the sol–gel reaction). In the case of templated ALD, with an appropriate control of the diffusion problem for the precursors, it is highly possible to fabricate tubular and even core–shell textures, due to the controllable deposition rate from the reaction cycles. Consequently, free-standing, well-ordered nanoporous inorganics with specific functions for a broad range of appealing applications can be fabricated after removal of the polymer matrix from the fabricated organic–inorganic nanohybrids due to its self-supporting character.
 Fig. 4  Degradable BCPs with well-ordered nanostructures for the fabrication of functional materials via different templated syntheses, including atom layer deposition, electroless plating, sol–gel reaction, and electrochemical deposition. 
In this review, recent progress in the fabrication of nanohybrids and nanoporous materials employing BCPs as structure-directed agents is described, and the corresponding applications in photonics, optoelectronics, energy storage, catalysis, separation, and drug delivery will be highlighted. The review will begin with an introduction to the syntheses and characterization of nanoscale templates with well-ordered textures, in particular silica- and carbon-based mesoporous structures (Section 2). Subsequently, we present the thermodynamics of BCP self-assembly and demonstrate the temperature and composition windows to find the DG phase (Section 3). In particular, we introduce an approach to effectively create a DG from a specific helical phase (H* phase) in the self-assembly of BCP comprising chiral entities (i.e., chiral BCP (BCP*)).42,43 Moreover, by taking advantage of the degradable characteristics of polylactide-containing polymers, well-ordered nanoporous polymeric materials with regular nanochannels can be fabricated and can serve as templates for subsequent templated syntheses. We highlight the principles of the templated sol–gel reaction, electrochemical deposition, electroless plating, and atomic layer deposition, from the fundamentals right through to the practical uses in the synthesis of well-ordered nanohybrids from polymers, ceramics, and metals, and the corresponding nanoporous materials (Section 4). Furthermore, in Section 4, discrepancies in the templated approaches and fabricated nanomaterials will be discussed. Recent progress on applications using the nanohybrids and nanoporous materials fabricated from the templated syntheses will be presented, such as dye-sensitized solar cells,27,39,44 energy storage,30–32 catalysis,26 drug delivery,45 antireflection,25 and surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS).46 In particular, we will focus on the specific applications, including photonic (optical) crystals,47–50 metamaterials,29,51–54 and energy absorption,55,56 based on the well-ordered and regular nanostructures (i.e., gyroid-forming nanostructured materials) (Section 5). At the end of this review, special attention will be given to present new developments and to outline future perspective in this field.
Despite these rapid advances, a long-term goal for the preparation of well-ordered nanohybrids and nanoporous materials remains the development of procedures that provide for a rational design of tailor-made structural nanopores and for the incorporation of customized functionalities, while still retaining sufficient framework stability. Another long standing challenge is to understand the confinement principles of BCP-directed templated syntheses, even right down to the molecular level. In addition, from an application point of view, the development of simple and scalable procedures for the construction of well-ordered porous materials with hierarchical structures at different organization levels is particularly appealing in many cases, since hierarchical pores are expected to synergistically exhibit the advantage of each class of pores. The final goal is to merge concepts and tools from different methodologies and complex components together for the development of well-ordered nanohybrids and nanoporous materials with innovative properties for targeting selected applications. These useful properties result from the effects of size and shape in the nanoscale, and due to the order and controlled orientation from the forming arrays, as well as the nanomaterials possessing appealing functions and complexity from their well-ordered structures and morphologies.
2. Templates for nanostructured materials
In the past few decades, tremendous efforts have been made towards the development of synthetic strategies for nanomaterials with well-defined size, shape and spatial arrangement of the constituent components. As described in Section 1, the synthesis of nanomaterials using templates is one of the most convenient and effective methods, in particular for manufacturing well-ordered nanostructured materials. On the basis of the approaches taken to achieve templated synthesis, the utilized templates can be classified into hard or soft templates, where templated synthesis by the deposition of desired materials into pre-prepared templates is referred to as hard templating, and using amphiphilic molecules containing both hydrophilic and hydrophobic domains as templates for directing synthesis is referred to as soft templating. In contrast to the use of soft templates, such as surfactants as structure-directed agents, hard templating is straightforward, and usually involves the following steps: (1) preparation of the template, (2) directed synthesis of the target materials by using the template, and (3) removal of the template. As a result, by taking advantage of the directed synthesis from pre-formed templates, it is much easier to control the templated morphologies and also the fabrication of ordered nanomaterials with orientation control in a large area (namely, it is an effective approach toward achieving a high degree of synthetic control). There are many excellent reviews with respect to the fabrication of hard templates.57,58 In this review article, we focus on the introduction of well-ordered nanostructured materials using hard templates for templated synthesis. For the synthesis of target materials, synthetic strategies based on physical templates include a variety of methods, such as surface coating and channel replication. By contrast, for the use of chemical templates, the synthesis is templated through chemical transformations, including the addition, substitution, and elimination of chemical species. As a result, nearly all kinds of materials can be utilized—from metals, semiconductors and ceramics to polymers—to form hierarchical nanostructures as templates. For removal of the template after synthesis, both physical methods, including dissolution, and chemical methods including calcination and etching, can be applied according to the nature of the templates, as long as the physical and chemical properties of the resultant materials can be preserved. As a result, how to obtain well-defined nanoporous materials as templates is the first issue. In this section, the fabrication of templates will be introduced in accordance with their forming textures in dimension (Section 2.1 for zero-dimensional (0D) nanoparticles, 1D nanotubes, and 2D patterns; Section 2.2 for 3D textures, including non-ordered and ordered network structures). Moreover, on the basis of the chemical properties of the templates, the fabricated templates are simply divided into inorganic and organic templates. Special attention for the fabrication of inorganic templates will be focused on silica-based and carbon-based mesoporous materials (Sections 2.3 and 2.4, respectively). The fabrication of organic templates, in particular polymer templates, will be comprehensively reviewed in Section 3.
2.1 0D, 1D, and 2D nanostructures as templates
For hard templating, numerous materials and structures have been widely developed as templates. We can sort the templates into: 0D nanoparticles, 1D nanotubes, nanowires, 2D membranes, and 3D hierarchical nanostructures, in accordance with their dimensional textures. The synthetic strategy of utilizing 0D nanoparticles as templates is to prepare colloidal nanoparticles as scaffolds first, and then to coat the resultant materials on the surface of nanoparticle. After removal of the templates by calcination or chemical etching, hollow and spherical nanoparticles can be obtained. In general, materials with 0D spherical nanoparticles as templates can be divided into silicon oxide and polymers. Stöber and co-workers first demonstrated that mono-dispersed silica particles with a uniform shape and size in the range of 50 to 2000 nm diameter can be fabricated under a sol–gel reaction with tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) as the precursor.59 During the sol–gel reaction process, the alkyl silicates are easily hydrolyzed and condensed to silicic acid with the ammonia in alcoholic solvents. Ammonia is used as a morphological catalyst to form the spherical silicon oxide. Subsequently, uniform spherical silica with a smaller size ranging from 10 nm to 40 nm can be made by tuning the hydrolysis rate by adding basic amino acid L-lysine.60 Mono-dispersed polymer nanoparticles can also be used as colloidal templates, such as polystyrene (PS)61 and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA).62,63 Those nanoparticles are ordinarily made by emulsion polymerization, and the particle size is in the range of 100 nm to several microns. The emulsion of the monomers in solvent and polymerization are initiated by free radicals with the surfactants and aggregate to form the spherical shape. The characteristics and applications of mono-dispersed nanoparticles with a uniform shape have been widely discussed in a number of excellent reviews, such as the one by Xia and co-workers.64 With 0D nanoparticles as templates, the following step is the fabrication of nanohybrids by either physical or chemical approaches. The physical approaches can be classified according to the surface coatings on individual particles, coatings on colloidal assemblies, and channel replication in hollow or porous particles.65 For chemical approaches, the approach can be divided into four steps: isomerization, substitution, addition, and elimination. After the fabrication of nanohybrids and removal of the templates, hollow micro- and nanostructures with a spherical shape can be manufactured under templated synthesis. Caruso and co-workers reported that hollow silica and silica–polymer spheres can be synthesized by assembling silica nanoparticles and polymers on the surface of colloidal templates, followed by removal of the templates using calcination or exposure to solvents. Fig. 5a and b show 0D nanoparticles coated with SiO2–poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDADMAC) layers and hollow silica spheres fabricated by calcination.66 There are numerous articles published with respect to this approach, and several review articles excellently cover it.65,67,68 In the field of 1D nanostructures as templates, zinc oxide (ZnO) nanowires and carbon nanotubes are commonly used as templates to synthesize other nanomaterials. Also, the fabrication of other 1D templates has been reported.69 Generally, ZnO nanowires are fabricated via a vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) approach and catalyzed by gold.70 With the VLS approach, a liquid alloy droplet composed of a metal catalyst element and a nanowires element can be formed. There have been numerous articles published recently which outline the applications and characteristics of ZnO.71–75 For the use of carbon nanotubes, they are tube-like nanostructures with a tunable thickness of the wall. On the basis of different thicknesses, carbon nanotubes can be divided into multi-walled and single-walled nanotubes. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes were characterized in 1991 at an atom-based resolution as having a concentric arrangement of numerous cylinders with diameters up to 100 nm.76 Afterwards, single-walled nanotubes were also synthesized and showed the simplest geometry rolled up with one single grapheme sheet.77,78 Owing to the diverse uses of carbon-based materials, several articles about carbon nanotubes have been published.79,80 With 1D nanotubes and nanowires as templates, templated synthesis can be utilized to produce 1D nanostructures based on different materials. Gösele and co-workers reported that, using ZnO nanowires as templates, ultra-long single-crystal ZnAl2O4 spinel nanotubes could be synthesized by a spinel-forming interfacial solid-state reaction. Ajayan and co-workers demonstrated that V2O5 nanotubes could be synthesized with carbon nanotubes as templates (Fig. 5c and d).81 By annealing a mixture of carbon nanotubes and V2O5 powder in air above the melting point of the powder, crystalline sheets of layer-like V2O5 could be grown on the outside layer of nanotubes. After removal of the carbon nanotubes, V2O5 nanotubes could be obtained. Also, the fabrication of nanotubes of SiO2, Al2O3 and MoO3 using carbon nanotubes as templates can be achieved.82 For 2D nanomaterials as templates, track-etched polymeric membranes and anodic aluminum oxide membranes (AAO) are all available as scaffolds to synthesize nanomaterials through templated syntheses. In the early years in this field, microporous and nanoporous polymeric membranes were fabricated for commercial uses in filtration by the track-etch method.83 Here, materials such as polycarbonate or polyester film were bombarded with ions to randomly cause damage tracks through the polymeric films. Afterwards, the tracks on the polymeric membranes were chemically etched to form a cylindrical shape with a size in the range of 10 nm to 2000 nm. However, the random tracks on the polymeric membranes could result in shortcomings, such as heterogeneity and non-uniform dimensions. As a result, AAO membranes made by the anodization of aluminum metal are now more frequently used as templates to synthesize 1D nanotubes or nanowires, due to the uniform cylindrical shape and tunable diameter. AAO membranes are usually made by electrochemical reaction with the aluminum metal.9 Masuda and co-workers reported a two-step anodization approach to synthesize well-ordered AAO membranes.84 High purity aluminum is dipped in the electropolishing solution to form a smooth and shiny aluminum after removal of the aluminum oxide on the surface. Subsequently, the next step is anodization of the aluminum in an acidic electrolyte solution, and then placing in chromate solution to remove the barrier oxide layer. Afterwards, the aluminum is immersed in acidic electrolyte condition once again for the second anodization. After removal of the aluminum, AAO membranes with cylindrical and uniform pores arranged hexagonally in high regularity can be obtained. By adjusting the anodization conditions, the pore diameter, inter-pore distance, pore aspect ratio, thickness of membrane, pore density, and corresponding porosity can be well controlled.9,85,86 As a result, AAO membranes as templates are very suited to manufacturing numerous and versatile nanomaterials for different templated syntheses and have been widely exploited for applications in various fields.87 Martin and co-workers reported that nanomaterials including polymers, metal, and semiconductors can be synthesized using AAO membranes as templates, giving the desired mono-dispersed nanocylinders with a uniform size. Fig. 5e and f show the SEM images of the AAO template used and Au nanofibers fabricated by a templated synthesis.6,88
 Fig. 5  TEM images of (a) PS nanoparticles coated with one SiO2–PDADMAC multilayer, (b) hollow silica spheres fabricated by calcination using PS nanoparticles as templates, (c) carbon nanotubes coated with V2O5, (d) V2O5 nanotubes fabricated by calcination using carbon nanotubes coated with V2O5 as templates, (e) AAO membranes as templates. And (f) SEM image of Au nanofibers fabricated from AAO membrane. Reproduced from (a), (b) ref. 66 with permission from Copyright 1994; (e), (f) ref. 6 from Copyright 1994, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (c), (d) from ref. 82 with permission from Copyright 1997, Materials Research Society. 
2.2 3D nanoporous materials
As described in Section 2.1, 0D nanoparticles, 1D nanowires, nanotubes, and 2D nanostructures have been widely studied. However, the limited specific area reduces their development in applications such as catalysis, drug delivery, and separation. In the classification of nanomaterials, 3D nanoporous materials show the higher porosity and have a larger specific surface area compared to the others. Due to this superiority, 3D nanoporous materials attract tremendous attention for scientists. With the successful results of fabricating 0D, 1D, and 2D nanostructures via templating, scientists have started to focus on the fabrication of 3D nanoporous materials. The 3D nanoporous materials can be divided into disordered and well-ordered nanostructures. For the fabrication of disordered 3D nanoporous materials, many approaches have been discussed. In particular, disordered bicontinuous nanoporous materials can be produced by templating. This class of porous material has been investigated rather extensively, and carries many of the advantages of the ordered morphologies without the constraints associated with aligning cylinders or hitting the restricted regions where the ordered morphologies are found from the self-assembly. A comprehensive introduction, in particular covering the ones produced from the self-assembly of block copolymers, is given in Section 3.3. In contrast to disordered 3D nanoporous materials, well-ordered 3D nanoporous materials possess the benefits of uniform pore size and high isotropic percolation due to their ordered periodicities. By taking advantage of their well-defined texture, ordered 3D nanoporous materials show great superiority in optical applications, in which the interactions of an incident electromagnetic wave, such as visible light, and the ordered structure give rise to specific and unique optical activities, such as destructive and constructive interference, and corresponding photonic properties. For the fabrication of well-ordered 3D nanoporous materials, there are two types of templates: organic and inorganic templates. There are many approaches to manufacture organic templates, in particular polymer templates from both top-down and bottom-up methods. One of the most popular methods is to acquire the well-ordered polymer templates from the self-assembly of block copolymers, and for this, a comprehensive introduction with respect to the fabrication of polymer templates from degradable block copolymers is given in Section 3. In contrast to organic templates, inorganic templates are usually made of silicon and carbon. There have been many comprehensive reviews carried out in recent years.89–94 In fact, silica-based and carbon-based porous materials have made a tremendous contribution to this field. The fabrication of silica-based and carbon-based porous materials is described in detail in Sections 2.3 and 2.4, respectively. It is also noted that ordered 3D nanoporous materials can be fabricated by an inverse-opal approach. In nature, opal is a colorful gemstone made from silicon oxide. The structure of opal is formed by a periodic arrangement of spherical silicon oxide with cubic-close-packing, and the brilliant color is attributed to the photonic effect with well-ordered structures. In addition to using soft or hard templating processes to synthesize the well-ordered 3D nanoporous templates, colloidal nanoparticle arraying, like with gemstone opal, can also be used to give well-ordered 3D nanoporous materials as templates. In this synthetic strategy, one of the advantages of the arrangement of spherical nanoparticle to form the well-ordered 3D template is that numerous templates can be made by tuning the size and choosing the species of the colloidal nanoparticles. Basically, spherical nanoparticles need to be prepared first for this process. As mentioned in Section 2.1, mono-dispersed colloidal silica, PS, PMMA and p(St-MMA-AA) can be synthesized by the Stöber method. Subsequently, mono-dispersed nanoparticles may assemble in a close-packed arrangement, giving 3D colloidal templates. Several methods of arraying to the 3D structures, including centrifugation, sedimentation of a suspension of colloidal spheres, filtration, vertical deposition, and assembly in confinement, have been widely reported and many excellent reviews have been published.64,95–98 After successfully manufacturing well-ordered 3D colloidal templates, the next step is the templated synthesis. Under templated synthesis, the precursor materials can be filled into the interstitial space between the colloidal nanoparticles, which thus act as templates. After chemical or physical transformation from the precursors to the resultant products, well-ordered 3D nanoporous materials, which are also termed inverse opals, can be obtained.99 With well-ordered 3D nanostructures, nanomaterials made by colloidal templates find uses in numerous applications, including in sensors, batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, catalysis, sorption, thermal insulation, surfaces with special wetting properties, and in photonic devices, especially.100
2.3 Silica-based mesoporous materials
Silica-based mesoporous materials have been the subject of great research endeavors since Mobil Oil Company successfully synthesized MCM-41 in 1992.11 MCM-41 can be easily synthesized under “hydrothermal conditions” in the presence of a TEOS surfactant cation, giving a 2D hexagonal mesostructure with a uniform pore size, as shown in Fig. 6a; where the pore size of MCM-41 is in the range of 4 nm to 6 nm and the pore wall thickness is approximately 1 nm. Furthermore, SBA-15 also plays an important role in the 2D hexagonal mesostructure.101,102 SBA-15 is synthesized in acidic conditions at low temperature (35 °C to 80 °C) using poly(alkylene oxide) triblock copolymers (e.g., poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) containing BCPs) as a structure-directing agent. SBA-15 materials have a very wide range of uniform pore sizes from 4.6 nm to 30 nm and a corresponding pore wall thickness of 3.1 nm to 6.4 nm. Fig. 7 shows the representative TEM and SEM images of SBA fabricated by using PEO-containing BCPs for templated synthesis. With the thicker pore wall, SBA-15 shows a better thermal and hydrothermal stability than MCM-41. Apart from the 2-D mesostructure, numerous 3D cubic silica-based mesoporous materials have also been made. Among those mesoporous silica materials, MCM-48 is the earliest 3D cubic mesoporous structure with bicontinuous mesochannels, which is defined as a double gyroid with a space group of Iad. In addition, both KIT-6 and FDU-5 silica-based nanomaterials with the gyroidal mesostructure can be fabricated. Afterwards, SBA-n, KIT-n, AMS-n, and FDU-n series silica mesoporous materials with a cubic structure were consecutively synthesized.103–105 SBA-1 and SBA-6 with 3D cubic (symmetry Pmn) mesoporous structures are composed of a cationic surfactant under acidic or basic conditions. Moreover, body-centered cubic SBA-16 silica mesostructure with Imm symmetry and FDU-12, KIT-12 with a cubic (Fmm) mesoporous structure can also be synthesized. Owing to their rigid structures with pores, the silica-based materials are very suitable for use as hard templates for templated syntheses. Moreover, silica mesoporous materials with hydroxyl groups on the wall and versatile morphologies are very suitable for modification to enable their use in numerous applications.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of MCM-41 materials. (b) Schematic illustration of: (1) the surfactant-templating mechanism, and (2) the cooperative self-assembling mechanism for the formation of ordered mesoporous silica. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from Copyright 1992, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of SBA-15 mesoporous silica fabricated using PEO-containing BCPs for templated synthesis after calcination. (b) Corresponding TEM image in a high magnification showing the hexagonal texture of the mesoporous silica. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Copyright 1998, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
As described above, a variety of ordered mesoporous silicate materials with various structures can be fabricated using the surfactant templating process.91 In fact, surfactant templating is the soft templating, which was defined previously as a method to acquire stable and specific structures formed by organic molecules or surfactants arranging by themselves via non-covalence intermolecular interactions. A variety of soft templates, including cationic, anionic and non-ionic surfactants, as well as mixed surfactant systems, such as cationic–cationic, cationic–anionic, and non-ionic mixed surfactant systems, have been utilized to synthesize highly ordered mesoporous materials. An evaporation induced self-assembly (EISA) process is typically involved in the surfactant templating process for the synthesis of mesoporous materials with ordered textures and controlled orientation. This route is especially suitable for the fabrication of silica-based mesoporous materials, because of its easy control of the hydrolysis and condensation rates by adjusting the reaction parameters, such as the pH value and temperature. After removal of the surfactants, well-defined mesoporous materials with unique structures can be fabricated. There are many excellent reviews on the use of surfactant templating for the synthesis of ordered mesoporous materials.94,106–109 Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) is a linear copolymer that can be prepared using different ratios of its constituent monomers, and lactic and glycolic acids. Depending on the ratio of lactide to glycolide used for the polymerization, different forms of PLGA can be obtained. Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) is also known as polyethylene glycol (PEG) or polyoxyethylene (POE), depending on its molecular weight. Among all the biomaterials, the application of biodegradable PLGA has become one of the most attractive polymeric candidates to fabricate biomaterial devices and for tissue engineering applications, including in drug delivery and bone scaffolds.110–113 The most common technique using PLGA-containing polymers for the preparation of nanostructures, especially for nanoparticles, is the emulsification-solvent evaporation approach. This technique allows the encapsulation of hydrophobic drugs and consists in dissolving the polymer as well as the compound in an organic solvent (e.g., dichloromethane).114 As a result, it is also highly feasible to use PLGA-containing polymers as soft templates.
Herein, we aim to give a concise introduction to the formation mechanism of ordered mesoporous materials, in particular for mesoporous silica, from this approach. The general idea of using an amphiphilic molecule as a template is based on the fact that such a system can simultaneously form a hybrid surfactant/silica interface and can self-assemble into stable and regular superstructures.115 A mechanism is initially proposed for the synthesis of mesoporous silica using high-concentration template molecules (Fig. 6b(1)), where the surfactant phase is formed before the interaction with inorganic precursors (e.g., TEOS), while the cooperative self-assembly process occurs even in a solution with a low concentration of surfactants (Fig. 6b(2)). Surfactants commonly used in the synthesis of the ordered mesoporous silica are frequently classified on the basis of the nature of the interaction between the polar group of the surfactant and the hydrolyzed silica precursor. A cationic surfactant is an efficient directing agent, due to the strong ionic interaction between its cationic head group and the negatively charged silica precursor under basic conditions. After the successful synthesis of ordered mesoporous silica using a quaternary cationic surfactant, e.g., CnH2n+1N(CH3)3Br, various silica-based mesostructures have been synthesized using gemini, bolaform, and fluorinated surfactants. Stabilization of the hybrid interface can also be achieved through the formation of H-bonds between silicic acid and the ether oxygen of a polyethylene oxide (PEO) chain of nonionic surfactants. The higher molecular weight and the wide variability in size, as well as the composition of surfactants, including commercial oligomeric acid alkyl-PEO, alkyl-phenol-PEO, sorbitan ester, and PEO-based BCPs, provide an opportunity to tune the accessible pore size in a large range and in a wide variety of mesopore structures.
2.4 Carbon-based mesoporous materials
Carbon-based mesoporous materials have been widely studied because of their versatile and powerful properties, such as hydrophobicity, high corrosion resistance, and superior thermal and mechanical stabilities. Consequently, carbon-based mesoporous materials have been used in applications such as gas separation, water purification, and as catalyst supports and electrodes for electrochemical double layer capacitors, as well as in fuel cells. In the early years, carbon-based mesoporous materials with disordered structures were manufactured through controlling the pyrolysis of carbon precursors. For homogeneous properties in practical applications, carbon-based mesoporous materials with controlled surface properties and structural ordering were required. One easy approach to fabricate well-ordered porous carbon is by using porous materials with ordered and specific morphologies as templates, which is in effect hard templating, as described previously. Over the last ten years, many kinds of rigid and newly designed inorganic templates with well-defined structures have been employed in an attempt to synthesize carbons with uniform pore sizes and shapes. A variety of inorganic materials, including silica nanoparticles, zeolites, AAO membranes, and silica-based mesoporous materials, have been used as templates. As a result, well-defined carbon-based mesoporous materials with uniform pore sizes and shapes can be synthesized by using well-defined silica-based mesoporous materials as templates.89,92 Ryoo and co-workers successfully fabricated ordered carbon-based mesoporous materials labeled as “CMK series” by using silica-based mesoporous materials (i.e., MCM-48) as hard templates.12Fig. 8 shows the process, which utilizes silica-based nanomaterials MCM-48 as a template and sucrose as the carbon source to manufacture carbon-based nanomaterials through templated synthesis. The sucrose is filled into the pores of the MCM-48 mesoporous silica in an acidic aqueous solution, followed by carbonization through appropriate thermal treatments. With sulfuric acid as the catalyst, the sucrose can be converted to carbon. Subsequently, the silica template is removed by dissolution in basic NaOH solution with ethanol.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of templated synthesis using silica as a template: (a) MCM-48 mesoporous silica is used as a template, (b) formation of nanohybrids after completing carbonization within the mesoporous silica, and (c) fabricated CMK-1 after removal of the silica template. (d) Corresponding TEM image of the fabricated CMK-1. Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from Copyright 1999, American Chemical Society. 
Although mesoporous carbon materials with high-order structures can be successfully fabricated, many obstacles and disadvantages are encountered when the mesoporous carbon materials are synthesized via hard templating. For instance, not only are the pores of the mesoporous carbon synthesized from the hard templating usually wider than the pores with silica templates, but also the templating process is too expensive and complex. Due to these shortcomings, an easier and low-cost method to fabricate carbon-based mesoporous materials has been developed. By combining the self-assembly of BCPs and carbonation of carbon precursors, carbon-based mesoporous materials can be directly fabricated. Zhao and co-workers reported on a new approach to synthesize ordered and rigid mesoporous carbon using amphiphilic triblock copolymers for solvent evaporation induced self-assembly, as illustrated in Fig. 9. The synthesis is carried out using amphiphilic triblock copolymers, poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly(propylene oxide)-b-poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO–PPO–PEO),and a low-molecular weight phenol polymer and formaldehyde as the precursors for the formation of well-ordered structures with specific morphologies via EISA.13 As shown, the mechanism for forming the well-ordered mesoporous carbon relies on the hydrogen bond interaction between the hydroxyl group of the resol and the PEO–PPO–PEO for self-assembly. The thermopolymerization of resol at low temperatures in the presence of the triblock copolymer can yield a rigid zeolite-like hydrocarbon network with three-connected benzene rings, resulting from the covalent bonding formation, giving the polymers the required stability to direct the transformation to homologous carbon frameworks by carbonization under nitrogen. After the thermopolymerization, the surfactants can be removed by solvent-extraction-assisted oxidation or heating under nitrogen, leading to the formation of well-defined mesoporous polymers with large uniform mesopores, surface areas, and pore volumes for the subsequent carbonization. Furthermore, the mesostructures can be synthesized from 2D hexagonal (p6m), to 3D caged cubic (Imm) with a triblock copolymer (e.g., F127 (EO106PO70 EO106)), or a lamellar morphology with a triblock copolymer (e.g., P123 (EO20PO70 EO20)) by simply adjusting the mass ratio of the polymer precursors and the amphiphilic surfactants or by choosing different surfactants. Consequently, ordered mesoporous carbon with similar structures to the parent polymers and with high surface areas, as well as uniform pores, can be obtained after calcination.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of ordered mesoporous carbon via the evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA) approach. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from Copyright 2005, John Wiley and Sons. 
3. Nanoporous materials from block copolymer self-assembly
Self-assembly is a spontaneous association of molecules under equilibrium conditions into stable, well-defined aggregates by secondary interactions (i.e., non-covalent forces). In 1985, Lehn reported that supramolecular chemistry is based on molecular interactions, that is, the associations of two or more chemical entities and their corresponding intermolecular forces.116 Molecular interactions are essential in biological systems, such as for an enzyme or a receptor binding to a substrate, the self-assembly of protein complexes, the intermolecular reading of genetic code, neurotransmitter-induced signals, and cellular recognitions. By manipulating the energetic and stereochemical features of the non-covalent forces within a defined molecular architecture, the designed receptor molecules are capable of binding substrate species strongly and selectively, thus forming well-defined structures with specific functions. In 2002, Whitesides described self-assembly as a process in which either separated or linked components can autonomously form ordered aggregates without human intervention.4 Self-assembly can be carried out with components having sizes from the molecular (i.e., crystals) to macroscopic levels (i.e., weather systems), providing tractable conditions for many applications and intense research investigations.117 Self-assembly occurs when molecules interact with one another through a balance of attractive and repulsive interactions. In comparison with thermal energies, these interactions are usually weak and non-covalent, such as van der Waal forces, Coulomb interactions, hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen bonding, and relatively weak covalent bonding (coordination bonding). Among the self-assembly of synthetic molecules, the self-assembly of BCPs has been extensively studied, because of their fascinating phase behaviors and nanostructured phases. In this section, we give a brief introduction to the self-assembly of BCPs in bulk (Section 3.1) and in the thin-film state (Section 3.2). Special attention will be paid to the self-assembly of chiral BCPs (i.e., BCP*s consisting of chiral polymers as building blocks). Owing to the chirality effect on BCP self-assembly, a metastable helical phase can be formed, giving a wide range for the formation of DG in the phase diagram of BCPs*, which is attributed to the easy path for the order-order transition from a two-dimensional to a three-dimensional (network) structure. Because of the unique morphological texture of the DG, with well-defined, interconnected, and self-supporting characters, DG can be used as a perfect texture for the fabrication of nanoporous materials. After the introduction of BCP self-assembly, we focus on the fabrication of nanoporous polymers from different approaches using BCP self-assembly. The approaches will be simply divided by the fabrication of nanoporous polymers using solvents for the dissolution of the constituent components to create the pore structures or for evaporation-induced pore formation in BCP systems (Section 3.3), using degradable BCPs for structure formation, followed by degeneration of the constituent components in BCP to give well-ordered nanoporous textures (Section 3.4).
3.1 General principles of block copolymer self-assembly
BCPs comprising chemically distinct polymer chains covalently linked together are promising for the design of nanostructures. Owing to their mutual repulsive forces, dissimilar blocks tend to segregate into different domains. Also, the chemically connected polymer chains are stretched away from each other to reduce the interfacial energy. Therefore, area minimization at the interface (i.e., via an inter-material dividing surface) of two blocks occurs in order to attain a lower enthalpy.15 However, this is unfavorable for the entropic penalty, since the polymer chains prefer a random coil shape. Accordingly, nanoscale structures of microphase separation can be formed from the self-assembly of BCPs, because the size of the segregated microdomains is limited by the constraint of the chemical linkage of the blocks with nanoscale chain dimensions. The resulting microphase-separated nanostructure is thus the consequence of a balance between the enthalpy of the interfacial area and the entropy of the polymer chains.
Considering these competing effects, self-organized periodic microstructures can emerge on a nanoscopic scale. Various nanostructures can be observed, depending on the relative volume ratio between the blocks, the sequences of the copolymer and the architecture of the polymer chains, as well as on the persistence lengths of the blocks. In the case of a non-crystalline flexible coil AB diblock copolymer, the composition of the AB diblock (i.e., the volume fraction of block A (fvA)) controls the geometry of the nanostructures. In Fig. 10, for nearly symmetric diblocks (fvA ∼ 0.5), a lamellar phase forms. For moderate compositional asymmetries, a complex bicontinuous phase with a cubic symmetry, known as a double gyroid (DG) phase, has been observed, in which the minority component forms dispersive microdomains, consisting of two interweaving threefold coordinated networks.16,17 However, at a higher compositional asymmetry, the minority component forms hexagonally packed cylinders, and then the spheres are arranged on a body-centered cubic lattice (i.e., in a sphere). Eventually, as fvA becomes closer to 0 or 1, a homogeneous phase is obtained. As a result, self-assembled 1D, 2D, and 3D periodic nanostructures that are lamellae, DG, cylinders, or spheres in bulk have been demonstrated within the full composition range. Consequently, BCP microphase separation for sizes from tens to hundreds of nanometers is applicable to many appealing nanotechnologies. These variable textures of microphase-separated nanostructures can be easily tailored by the molecular engineering of synthetic BCPs, and appear to have promise in applications in nanotechnologies, especially in thin-film technologies such as nanoporous membranes, templates for the fabrication of inorganic materials in various shapes, organic–inorganic hybrids, and in nanopatterned masks for high density information storage media.
 Fig. 10  The four ordered morphologies for the BCP melts, spheres (S), cylinders (C), DG, and lamellae (L), are controlled by the composition fvA and the product of the segment–segment interaction parameter and degree of polymerization (χN). Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from Copyright 2005, Materials Research Society. 
Note that the self-assembled phases of BCPs can be affected by the interplay of the diverse secondary interactions (i.e., the non-covalent bonding forces), such as hydrogen bonding, ionic bonding, electrostatic forces, solvophobic interactions, and amphiphilicity. Recently, by taking advantage of the chirality effect on BCP self-assembly, Ho and co-workers demonstrated the fabrication of fascinating helical nanostructures with an ordered packing in bulk for the first time. BCPs comprising chiral entities, denoted as chiral BCPs (BCP*s), were designed to fabricate nanostructured materials with a helical sense from self-assembly.42 A helical phase (denoted as H* to distinguish its P622 symmetry from that of the normal hexagonally packed cylinder phase, denoted as C with P6/mmm symmetry) was discovered in the self-assembly of PS-PLLA BCPs* (Fig. 11a).118,119 As shown in Fig. 11b, the helical phase exhibits interdigitated PLLA helical microdomains in a PS matrix. To truly acquire the H* phase, systematic studies on the phase diagram of PS-PLLA BCPs* are essential. A series of PS-PLLA BCPs* with different compositions (i.e., varying volume fractions of PLLA blocks) were synthesized to establish the BCP* phase diagram. Except for the typical microphase-separated morphologies, such as spheres, cylinders, lamellae, H* phases are also observed with fvPLLA = 0.31–0.38 in the PS-PLLA BCPs*, whereas no such morphology is found in the racemic PS-PLA BCPs, reflecting the effect of chirality on BCP self-assembly.43 Also, the formation of the H* phase depends not only on the composition of the PS-PLLA BCPs* but also on their corresponding molecular weight. Instead of an H* phase, a typical DG phase is obtained in low-molecular-weight PS-PLLA BCPs* with fvPLLA = 0.35. Consequently, a phase diagram of the PS-rich PS-PLLA BCPs* with molecular-weight and composition dependence is suggested (Fig. 11c).43
 Fig. 11  (a) Bright-field TEM micrographs of a self-assembled twisted morphology in the PS-PLLA bulk sample with fvPLLA = 0.34. (b) Schematic H* phase in which the helices are packed in a hexagonal lattice with an interdigitated character. (c) Phase diagram of the PS-PLLA BCPs* with respect to the segregation strength and composition. Reproduced from (a) ref. 118 with permission from Copyright 2004; (b) ref. 119 with permission from Copyright 2009; (c) ref. 43 with permission from Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The chirality effect not only gives rise to the formation of helical chains (i.e., an intramolecular effect) but also induces the formation of partially ordered microdomains (i.e., intermolecular interaction). The driving force for the formation of the partially ordered microdomain is attributed to the mutual interaction of the chiral polymer chains with a helical conformation (namely, chiral interactions). The chiral PLLA chain with a helical conformation and long persistence length provides a specific geometrical property (i.e., helical steric hindrance) for self-assembly. In the self-assembly of BCPs, the incompatibility between chemically connected PLLA and the PS blocks gives rise to a strongly repulsive force, which reinforces the stretching of the polymer chains and stabilizes the helical conformation. This is similar to the transferred mechanism from a molecular chirality to a hierarchical chirality in the self-assembly of chiral lipid bilayer molecules. The chirality effect is considered to be the main ingredient for the formation of helical phases. Based on energetic considerations, the helical steric hindrance gives rise to the twisting and shifting of the bilayer-like nanostructure, so as to create a helical curvature at the interface. Furthermore, the chirality effect is enhanced by the introduction of the incompatible PS block, which intensifies with the helical steric hindrance effect and promotes the formation of helical microdomains. As a result, twisting and shifting at the microphase-separated interface is initiated by the helical steric hindrance and is amplified by the incompatible PS block and the further organization of the partially ordered microdomains due to the chiral interaction, ultimately leading to development of the helical microdomains. The suggested twisting and shifting mechanism in the self-assembly of the BCPs* was further evidenced by circular dichroism (CD) and fluorescence experiments. A series of polylactide-containing BCPs with an achiral perylene moiety as a chemical junction was synthesized, and then examined by CD and fluorescence experiments. Significant induced CD (ICD) signals and a bathochromic shift of the fluorescence emission for the achiral perylene moiety as a chemical junction of the BCPs* was found only when the concentration of the BCPs* in toluene solution was higher than the critical micelle concentration. As a result, it is suggested that the optical activity of the ICD for the perylene moiety as a chemical junction in the BCP* can be directed by the helicity of the chiral entity in the polylactide-containing BCP*. The twisting and shifting mechanism thus leads to formation of the H* phase in the enantiomeric polylactide-containing BCPs* from self-assembly and also decides the handedness of forming an H* phase by stacking the chiral polymer chains in a preferred direction along the central axis of the nanohelix, giving the nanohelix a preferential handedness. Accordingly, homochiral evolution from molecular chirality to phase chirality can be demonstrated in the self-assembly of the enantiomeric polylactide-containing BCPs* via the twisting and shifting mechanism.120
Most interestingly, phase transition from the H* phase to other stable phases can be found after long-term annealing. Indeed, thermally induced phase transitions between equilibrium morphologies in BCP self-assembly are well known by varying the χ value (1/T) at an essentially constant BCP composition. A metastable perforated layered phase can also be transformed into stable phases through thermal annealing,121 revealing that the metastability of these self-assembled phases is promising in morphological manipulation. Similar to the transitions in the perforated layered phase, phase transitions from the H* phase to the stable cylinder phase were found after long-term thermal annealing, suggesting that the formation of an H* phase involves a long-lived metastable phase.119 Also, apart from the phase transition upon thermal annealing, the formation of the DG phase from the H* phase can also be achieved by controlling the solvent evaporation through a nucleation and growth process.122 As shown in Fig. 12a, a duplex phase containing PLLA helices (see the lower right in Fig. 12a) and PLLA G networks (see the upper left in Fig. 12a) in a PS matrix can be found under TEM observation. The relative geometric arrangement in the 3D space of the H* phase and DG phase is illustrated in Fig. 12b. The geometries of (110)H* → (211)G and (100)H* → (220)G, resulting from the phase transition with the corresponding length scale and unit cell, can thus be well-defined by investigations.123 Note that the formation of the DG phase is usually limited to a narrow composition region in a weakly segregated condition. The formation of the DG in the intermediate and the strong segregation result from the H* through an order-order transition at which the H* in the PS-PLLA is a metastable phase, and appears in a relatively wide region in an intermediate to strong segregation, due to the slow kinetics associated with long, highly entangled chains. By taking advantage of the H* → DG, the DG-forming temperature window can be enlarged in the phase diagram of PS-PLLA, due to the formation of the H*. As a result, the reasons why the DG-forming region can be enlarged by the formation of H* need to be elucidated. At the microscopic level, the packing energy of the polymer chains strongly depends on the rigidity of the chain conformation, which is related to its persistence length. As the persistence length of the polymer chain increases, the packing energy decreases. As calculated from theoretical predictions, the persistence length of the chiral PLLA chain (11.9 angstroms) is larger than that of the racemic PLA chain (10.6 angstroms).124 The larger persistence length for the chiral PLLA chain is attributed to the formation of a helical chain conformation for a chiral polymer chain. Consequently, a self-assembled phase with a lower packing energy can be achieved, due to the highly oriented chains at the interface that lower the packing enthalpy (step 1 in Fig. 12c). Moreover, the packing frustration can be alleviated, resulting from the longer persistence length of the PLLA helical chain conformation than the racemic polymer that can sustain excessive stretching for PLLA blocks oriented towards the center of DG nodes without chain stretching to reduce the entropic penalty (step 3 in Fig. 12c). At the mesoscopic level, we speculate that H* can serve as a stepping stone with a helical twisting locus due to matching of the geometric dimensions (step 2 in Fig. 12c). For the order-order transition from hexagonally packed cylinders (HC) to DG, the transition is initiated by the formation of one fivefold junction that pinches off, thus breaking a cylinder and leaving a threefold junction (i.e., interconnection of the middle cylinder with the neighboring three cylinder). The two free ends of the cylinder are highly unfavorable and quickly form two fourfold junctions that then each break off producing a threefold junction.125 As the process repeats, HC evolves into DG. By contrast, in the case of the order–order transition from H* to DG, the formation of H* facilitates the easier interconnection from a 2D to a 3D network, due to the 2D geometry having a helical twisting locus, which is similar to the reduction of the activation energy barrier by catalysts. Also, the helical locus not only provides a lower packing enthalpy due to the enhancement of the incompatibility between the PS and PLLA polymer chains, but it also incurs a lower entropic penalty, due to the convenient chain packing without extension of the polymer chain, thus providing an easy path for interconnecting 2D arrays to 3D networks to form the DG phase. As a result, by taking advantage of the easy path for H* → DG, the DG-forming temperature window in the phase diagram can be enlarged, due to the lower Gibbs free energy with the helical conformation, thermodynamically, and the lower energy barrier for the H* → DG, kinetically. Consequently, a wide region for the formation of DG can be found in the phase diagram of the BCPs*, suggesting that the helical phase (H*) from the self-assembly of BCPs* can serve as a stepping stone for the formation of the DG, due to it creating an easy path for the order–order transition from a two-dimensional to three-dimensional (network) structure.
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM micrograph of a PS-PLLA solution-cast sample from an intermediate evaporation. (b) Relative geometric arrangement in the 3D space of the helix H* phase and DG phase. (c) Illustration of the suggested Gibbs free energy versus the transition path from H* and HC to DG. Reproduced from (a) ref. 122 with permission from Copyright 2010; (b) ref. 43 with permission from Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Self-assembly of block copolymer thin films
Well-defined nanostructured phases can be tailored by the molecular engineering of synthetic BCPs to obtain promising features for applications in nanotechnologies. To extend their applications, nanostructured thin films with controllable orientation and thickness over a large area are required. Accordingly, different approaches for controlling the orientation of microphase-separated nanostructures from the self-assembly of BCPs have been developed. These approaches include solvent evaporation,126 solvent annealing,127 the application of shear fields,128 the application of electric fields,129 the use of temperature gradients,130 epitaxial crystallization,131 chemical patterning of the surface,132–136 and graphoepitaxy.137,138 Solvent field (that is, solvent evaporation or solvent annealing) has proven to be a very simple, highly effective method to manipulate the orientation and lateral ordering of BCP microdomains in the thin-film state. Libera and co-workers126 were the first to demonstrate the effect of solvent evaporation on the orientation of cylindrical microdomains normal to the film surface in a range of different BCP thin films. Slow solvent extraction rates lead to a parallel alignment of the cylindrical microdomains in BCP thin films. Upon fast drying, a perpendicular orientation of the cylinders can be observed.139 The microphase separation is initiated from the air surface, at which the formed morphology adopts a perpendicular orientation due to permeation considerations, in particular due to the permeation of solvent at the surface. Following the nucleation of a microphase separation, the solvent molecules are evaporated through the higher permeation microdomains to create a solvent concentration gradient within the film. The development of a perpendicular morphology continuously proceeds from the free surface, due to the epitaxy-like growth through the entire film. The solvent concentration gradient will be subtle under conditions in which the solvent is allowed to evaporate relatively fast. However, eventually, straight perpendicular cylinders in the films will be formed from the top to the bottom in the direction of the maximum solvent concentration gradient. In contrast to the kinetics approach described above, which results in metastable thin-film morphologies, the phase behaviors of thin-film BCPs have been extensively studied to achieve thermodynamic equilibrium morphologies that can avoid the need for a phase transformation in further thermal treatments. The phase behavior of BCPs in thin films is known to deviate from the bulk behavior, since it is influenced by the interfacial interactions (with the substrate and/or air surface) of the block components and the thickness confinement of the thin film (i.e., the commensuration of the interdomain spacing of the nanostructures).140 Magerle and co-workers presented a thermodynamic phase diagram for a cylinder-forming polystyrene-b-polybutadiene-b-polystyrene (SBS) triblock copolymer in thin films.141 The TappingMode™ scanning force microscopy (TM-SFM) phase images of two annealed SBS films with different initial film thicknesses are shown in Fig. 13a and b. With experiments and by computer simulations based on dynamic density functional theory (DDFT), the phase behavior in the thin film of cylinder-forming BCP can be seen to be dominated by surface reconstructions, and it can be seen that the morphologies change as a function of the gradually changing film thickness. Deviations from the bulk structure, such as a wetting layer, perforated lamellae, and lamellae are identified after surface reconstructions, and result from the interplay between the surface fields and confinement effects (Fig. 13c).
 Fig. 13  (a, b) Tapping-mode scanning force microscopy phase images of thin SBS films on Si substrates after annealing in chloroform vapor. The contour lines calculated from the corresponding height images are superimposed. (c) Schematic height profile of the phase images shown in (a, b). (d) Simulation of an SBS BCP film in one large simulation box of [352 × 32 × H(x)] grid points with increasing film thickness H(x). Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from Copyright 2002, American Physical Society. 
The substrate surface energy and surface chemistry are important parameters for controlling BCP thin film self-assembly, both with regard to nanostructure stability and nanostructure orientation. Preferential surfaces are wetted by the preferred block, whereas neutral surfaces encourage the presence of all blocks at the surface. For the substrate effects, the substrate surface energy/chemistry effect can be generally viewed as a field that propagates from the substrate surface into the film. The propagation distance depends on the relative strength of the field (i.e., the strength of the interactions between the substrate and polymer film), the competing interactions from the air surface, and the energetics of the equilibrium bulk morphology. By contrast, the surface preferentiality at the air surface is a similar field effect (i.e., air surface effects) to that emanating from the substrate surface, with preferential and neutral interactions affecting both the orientation and stability of the nanostructure. Because the air surface is a “soft” interface, surface preferentiality is partially governed by the surface tensions of the copolymer blocks, with the lower surface tension block preferentially segregating to the free surface. Additionally, this surface property can be tuned by thermal annealing. For example, an effectively neutral air surface can be created in the PS-PMMA system by annealing films between ≈170 °C to 230 °C, where the block surface tensions are approximately equal. Unfortunately, many copolymers contain blocks with very dissimilar surface tensions or blocks that are susceptible to thermal degradation. For these systems, solvent annealing provides an attractive alternative to thermal annealing. Moreover, BCP thin films are typically subjected to a significant degree of confinement, with film thicknesses comparable to the interdomain spacing of nanostructures. Because the stretching or compression of polymer chains due to confinement is energetically unfavorable, BCPs self-assemble into morphologies that relieve the stretching/compression or that mitigate the entropic penalty with favorable enthalpic interactions at the substrate or at the free surface. Two major categories of confinement can be defined for substrate-supported BCP thin films: hard confinement, which describes a film confined between two rigid interfaces, and soft confinement, which refers to a film where one interface (air surface) is in direct contact with the atmosphere. Therefore, controlling the surface and thickness effects on the self-assembly of BCP thin films can become a critical issue to obtain a BCP thin film with aligned nanostructures. Gopalan and co-workers demonstrated the induction of perpendicularly oriented cylinders in polystyrene-b-poly(methyl methacrylate) (PS-PMMA) BCP films thicker than 100 nm by thermally annealing on a substrate modified with a random copolymer to give a neutral substrate for induced orientation.142 The effects of the BCP film thickness, the annealing temperature, and the composition of the substrate-modifying random copolymer on the morphology of PMMA cylinder-forming PS-PMMA were studied. For BCP films thicker than 100 nm (e.g., 300 nm), the fabrication of perpendicular PMMA cylinders is highly dependent upon both the substrate-modifying random copolymer and the annealing temperature, as these two parameters control the interactions of the BCP with the substrate and the free surface, respectively. As shown in Fig. 14a, perpendicular cylinders in thicker films can be generated on the top surface when the BCP film thickness is increased to ∼300 nm and thermally annealed on a modified substrate. The cross-sectional TEM images show that the perpendicular cylinders propagate through the entire 300 nm, and even through 500 nm thick films, as shown in Fig. 14b and c, respectively. Also, as the BCP film is thicker than 300 nm (e.g., 500 nm), nucleation and growth of the microdomains proceed independently from each interface.
 Fig. 14  (a) Top view SEM image of a PS-PMMA film (∼300 nm thickness) etched by O2 plasma. Cross-sectional TEM image of PS-PMMA films with thicknesses of (b) 300 nm, and (c) 500 nm. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
In addition, to control the orientation of cylinder nanostructures, the long-range order of the cylinder arrays in the thin films of BCPs can also be important for applications that require addressability. Uncontrolled processes usually give rise to locally well-defined nanostructures, but grains of the microdomains are usually small and randomly arranged on the surface. Among the several plausible routes to enhance the lateral order in thin films of BCPs, annealing in solvent vapors has been shown to be effective in enhancing the lateral order over very large areas.127,143 Russell and co-workers127,143 investigated the thin-film morphologies of polystyrene-b-poly(ethylene oxide) (PS-PEO) and polystyrene-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PS-P4VP) after annealing in solvent vapors over different amounts of time. With increasing annealing time, the lateral ordering of the cylindrical nanostructures could be significantly increased. Consequently, BCP thin films with a hexagonal ordering of the cylindrical nanostructures could be achieved by vapor annealing. In our previous studies, the preparation of perpendicular PLLA cylinders in PS-PLLA thin film was achieved by controlling the evaporation rate of the solvent and the selectivity of the solvent with constituent blocks of the PS-PLLA (i.e., via a kinetics approach).23 In contrast to the kinetics approach, we also demonstrated a new thermodynamic method for the formation of well-defined nanostructured thin films from self-assembled PS-PLLA on Si wafers with a functionalized SiO2 surface. Large, well-ordered, perpendicular PLLA cylinders in PS-PLLA thin films could be formed using the functionalized substrate created by a two-step surface functionalization with PS-OH, followed by PLLA-OH.144 Moreover, thermal annealing at high temperature could yield a neutral air surface, rendering perpendicular PLLA cylinders that could stand sub-micrometers from the air surface. Consequently, the neutral substrate could be used to enable the fabrication of truly film-spanning perpendicular cylinders in films using high temperature thermal treatment (Fig. 15a). In addition, the perpendicular cylinders could be laterally ordered by further increasing the annealing temperature. Furthermore, we also demonstrated the fabrication of well-defined DG nanostructures with controlled thicknesses of ∼200 nm.145 We showed that a neutral substrate could be prepared using a two-step grafting procedure through thermal annealing, under which PS-OH could be grafted onto a SiO2 surface, followed by the grafting of PLLA-OH. As a result, the controlled ordering of BCP DG thin films on a neutral substrate can be achieved by solvent annealing. A thin-film sample with a thermodynamically stable DG morphology will be formed using a non-preferential solvent. Consequently, DG thin film with the (211)DG plane parallel to the air surface and also to the functionalized substrate can be obtained, as shown in Fig. 15b. Moreover, nanoporous gyroid PS can be simply obtained by the hydrolysis of PLLA in the PS-PLLA thin film, as evidenced by FESEM (Fig. 16a), reflecting the open-cell character with the characteristic plane of the (211)DG at the surface of the thin film. The average orientation of the microdomains in the PS-PLLA DG thin film was further identified using GISAXS. Fig. 16b shows the 2D GISAXS pattern from the thin film after hydrolysis. It was found that the diffraction peaks appearing along the αf axis at around 2θf = 0.12°, 0.16°, 0.18°, and 0.21° match with the {121} diffraction spots, confirming that the DG thin film indeed develops with an oriented (211)DG plane parallel to the air surface and also to the functionalized substrate. Consequently, nanoporous polymer thin films with well-ordered bicontinuous nanopores and an open-cell character can be obtained and used as templates for the synthesis of various well-ordered nanohybrids and nanoporous materials, giving rise to appealing applications in nanotechnology.
 Fig. 15  TEM images of a cross-sectional (a) cylinder-forming PS-PLLA thin film with a thickness of 400 nm, and (b) a gyroid-forming PS-PLLA thin film with an initial thickness of 200 nm on SiO2 functionalized with PS-OH and PLLA-OH. Inset shows the tapping-mode SPM top-view height image of (b), indicating the gyroid nanostructure with the (211) plane parallel to the air and the substrate. Reproduced from (a) ref. 144 with permission from Copyright 2013; (b) ref. 145 with permission from Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 16  (a) FESEM and (b) 2D GISAXS pattern of PS-PLLA thin film with an initial thickness of 200 nm on a functionalized SiO2 substrate treated in 1,2-dichloroethane vapor after hydrolysis. The insets show the enlarged area of the FESEM image. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Nanoporous polymers from block copolymers
For applications in nanosciences and nanotechnologies, polymeric materials comprising two or more phases assembled in nanoscale structures play an important role in the development of new materials with novel properties. Among the varieties of phase morphologies from the assembled polymers, the 3D bicontinuous structure is the most distinctive arrangement, where each phase is independently continuous. If one of the phases is removed, the resultant material can be used to create nanoporous materials with 3D interconnected nanochannel with high porosity and a large specific surface area. Such nanoporous materials are key to many applications, for example, catalysis, separation technology, drug delivery, electronic devices, and energy storage (see Sections 4 and 5 for details). Accordingly, there is a strong motivation to develop new or improved strategies for the fabrication of nanoporous materials, in particular with well-defined pore sizes and shapes, and that is the major reason for the use of BCPs. For this purpose, interpenetrating 3D polymeric bicontinuous microemulsions with a characteristic length of around 100 nm through the ternary blends of two homopolymers and a diblock copolymer were developed. The phenomenon of the formation of bicontinuous microemulsions via blending was first discovered in mixtures of oil and water stabilized by surfactants.146 Bates and co-workers first demonstrated the existence of bicontinuous microemulsions in the BCP blends of polyethylene/poly(ethylene-alt-propylene)/poly(ethylene-b-ethylene-alt-propylene) (PE/PEP/PE–PEP blends).147 They found that the capture of a polymeric bicontinuous microemulsion in a solid form is straightforward in principle, provided that the bicontinuous microemulsions channel intersects a solidification transition of one of the components in the blends. Subsequently, through a judicious selection of blending components, 3D continuous networks comprising a polymeric bicontinuous microemulsion were formed, and then could be removed by selective chemical or thermal means, giving a nanoporous polymer.148 Similarly, a bicontinuous microemulsion in polystyrene/polyisoprene/polystyrene-b-polyisoprene (PS/PI/PS–PI) blends could be obtained, and then trapped by vitrification of the PS domains. The resultant material was exposed to S2Cl2 vapor to cross-link the PI domain, and then the PS homopolymer was removed by extraction with hexane (Fig. 17a). As shown in Fig. 17b and c, a distinctive bicontinuous microemulsion structure can be retained and imprinted into the pore structure. As evidenced by nitrogen sorption measurements with a single peak centered at a pore diameter of 43 nm, the formed pore texture is continuous and uniform. Note that the copolymer is insoluble in the extracting solvent, and thus the PS block of the copolymer remains as a coating along the pore wall. As a result, polymeric bicontinuous microemulsion systems can be used as a nanocasting template, especially for the PE/PEP/PE–PEP system, because of its superior environmental resistance. Note that the choice of bicontinuous microemulsion systems as templates should be determined by several factors. First, that the polymers can be synthesized by a straightforward anionic polymerization/hydrogenation procedure and are stable indefinitely under ambient conditions. Also, the semicrystalline nature of PE should allow the bicontinuous microemulsion morphology to be captured in a solid material. Meanwhile, to convert a solidified bicontinuous microemulsion into a nanoporous material, the disparity in solubility between PE and PEP can be exploited to remove the latter from the structure. The remaining PE comprising the nanoporous material melts above around 100 °C and is insoluble in any liquid below 70 °C, providing sufficient robustness to the material for infiltration and conversion of the templated synthesis in the pores.149
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of nanoporous material from a polymeric bicontinuous microemulsion precursor: selective cross-linking of one domain A with the subsequent removal of the other domain (homopolymer B) by solvent dissolution. SEM images of the nanoporous PI from the bicontinuous microemulsion sample under two different magnifications: (b) ×10000; (c) ×50000. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. 
Note that this type of nanoporous medium carries many of the advantages of the ordered morphologies (e.g., bicontinuous) without the constraints associated with aligning cylinders or hitting the restricted regions where the gyroid is found. Also, it is possible to obtain superior properties in practical applications; for instance, the short-range order of disorder bicontinuous nanoporous materials can be exploited as amorphous photonic crystals to give properties useful in photonic applications, such as broadband reflection and scattering enhanced light absorption, as well as high reflectance with angle independence.150 Although nanoporous polymers with short-range order can be easily formed through BCP blending followed by the solvation process for pore formation, the structures with only a short-range order might limit their applications. To acquire well-ordered nanoporous polymers with a higher long-range order, Russell and co-workers developed a strategy to generate nanoporous thin films by the solvent-induced reconstruction of BCP films. By simply swelling the prepared BCP films with well-ordered microdomains (e.g., cylinders) using a preferential solvent at a temperature below the glass transition temperature of the matrix block, nanoporous polymeric films with long-range order can be formed.151 They used PS-PMMA as a model material to demonstrate the solvent-induced reconstruction process, as shown in Fig. 18a, in which the film thickness effectively increases because of the migration of the PMMA block to the surface. Pore formation without degeneration of the PMMA block implies that the PMMA chains are drawn to the film surface, up the sides of the pores (Fig. 18b).
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the swelling of a BCP thin film with thickness t and period λ to a thickness t′ using a solvent that is selective for the minor component. This opens pores in the film with a diameter d. Re-annealing the film reverses the process. (b) SEM image of the porous polystyrene film produced via annealing, then rinsed in acetic acid. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from Copyright 2004, John Wiley and Sons. 
Moreover, an interesting approach to create nanoporous polymers through the use of solvents was proposed by Abetz and co-workers. Instead of the induced orientation by solvent evaporation, the formation of a superstructure of a solution-cast BCP film was subjected to a non-solvent-induced phase separation before reaching the dried state, a procedure that is well-known as “phase inversion” in the field of membrane science.152 Note that the membranes used today are mainly manufactured by an isothermal phase-inversion process. However, in the process developed by Abetz and co-workers, a concentrated polymer solution (typical polymer concentration ranging from 12 wt% to 25 wt%) is immersed in a non-solvent bath, and a solvent-non-solvent exchange leads to their phase separation. The polymer-rich phase forms the porous matrix, while the polymer-poor phase gives rise to the pores. The formation of a dense surface with a porous structure beneath is favored by a significant concentration of a highly volatile solvent in the casting solution. When the phase-inversion process is carried out with a BCP, the porous structure can be formed as usual by a liquid–liquid demixing process. The surface can then further self-assemble into a well-ordered structure, as is typical for BCPs. After removal of the asymmetric film from the precipitation bath and then after drying, the self-assembled ordered textures are integrally supported by a mechanically stable and highly porous substructure. The critical parameters for control of the process are the composition of the casting solution, the evaporation time before precipitation, and the nature of the precipitation bath. Polystyrene-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PS-P4VP) was used as the starting material. It is well known that PS-P2VP belongs to the class of non-ionic amphiphilic systems. P4VP is a hydrophilic polymer that dissolves only in dimethyl formamide (DMF), in lower alcohols, and in aqueous mineralic acids. On the other hand, the hydrophobic PS may be dissolved in a number of organic solvents, such as toluene, tetrahydrofurane (THF), or chloroform. As a result, the membrane-casting solvent is composed of DMF and THF. The addition of THF typically leads to membranes with a tighter or pore-free surface. Owing to the high evaporation rate of THF before immersion in the non-solvent (water), the polymer is enriched at the film surface. Also, the non-ordered graded porous structure typical for phase-inversion membranes is covered by a layer of 200–300 nm thickness of well-ordered cylindrical pores perpendicular to the film surface (Fig. 19a and b). This asymmetric morphology is a direct consequence of the combination of two different processes: conventional non-solvent-induced phase separation and the self-assembly of BCPs. This work opens a new and facile way to generate porous materials with a cylindrical nanoporous thin film on the top of a macroporous texture that would be suitable for use in separating membranes.
 Fig. 19  SEM images of (a) the cross-sectional view and (b) the top-view of the asymmetric PS-P4VP film. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Copyright 2007, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Similar to solvent evaporation-induced reconstruction, Steinhart, Wang, and co-workers fabricated nanoporous BCP nanorods by a so-called swelling-induced morphology reconstruction from PS-P2VP nanorods.153 PS-P2VP nanorods were prepared through thermal annealing, using AAO as the templates. Subsequently, several washing steps involving centrifugation, removal of the supernatant solution, redispersion, another washing step with aqueous KOH solution, and washing steps with deionized water, were performed. The section across a PS-P2VP nanorod contains a dark circular rim of P2VP initially segregated on the AAO pore walls, surrounding the P2VP cylindrical microdomains and nonhexagonal coordination (Fig. 20a). The minor component (P2VP) preferentially segregates to the pore walls of the AAO hard template, forming cylinders parallel to the long axes of the PS-P2VP nanorods. Ethanol is a polar but nonacidic solvent that selectively swells the P2VP cylindrical microdomains. The pyridyl groups are not ionized and can only interact with the solvent molecules via hydrogen bonds. The rate at which morphology reconstruction takes place depends on the swelling temperature, exposure time, and the nature of the swelling agent. Non-equilibrium morphologies can be retained through quenching the morphology reconstruction process at the intermediate stage. The collapse of the swollen chains (i.e., the P2VP chains) after drying leads to the formation of complex nanoscale architectures, as shown in Fig. 20b. This approach may develop the feasibility for the design of nanoporous polymeric nanorods, including those aligned in arrays and in the form of powders, which could in turn be used as templates in further hybridization processes.
 Fig. 20  (a) TEM image of an as-released nanorod consisting of a cylinder-forming PS-P2VP after staining the P2VP with iodine. The inset shows the TEM image of an ultrathin slice containing a section across a PS-P2VP nanorod. (b) TEM image of nanorods consisting of cylinder-forming PS-P2VP after exposure to an acidic environment. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
3.4 Nanoporous templates from degradable block copolymers
Well-ordered nanoporous polymers can be fabricated by using solvents for dissolution of the constituent components to create the pore structures or for evaporation-induced pore formation in BCP systems, as described above. The control of the intrinsic texture for a porous structure or for pore texture formation and the corresponding orientation, in particular in the thin-film state, may require dedicated approaches or processing. Moreover, the formation of well-defined 3D textures or porous textures remains challenging using BCP as structure-directing materials, since they strongly relies on the well-controlled kinetics process for microphase separation from sophisticated phase behaviors. Another approach is to use self-assembled morphologies directly from degradable BCPs, and then, by taking advantage of the degradable character, well-defined nanoporous polymers with various pore textures can be prepared, providing excellent templates for fabricating well-defined nanostructured materials through the templating process. Although, this approach will require additional efforts in searching appropriate methods for the removal of the degradable component, it is a much easier method to obtain a monolith or thin-film samples as precursors for the fabrication of well-defined nanoporous polymers with controlled shape and size, as well as the correct corresponding orientation. BCPs with aliphatic polyester blocks have attracted extensive attention in the preparation of nanoporous polymers, as the polyesters can be selectively degraded, particularly by hydrolysis due to the unstable character of the ester group. Accordingly, polyester-containing copolymers can form nanoporous materials by hydrolysis of the polyester blocks. Among these, polylactide-containing BCPs (such as PS-PLA and PS-PLLA) have drawn intense attention because the hydrolytic properties of polylactides and the reasonably high glass transition of the PS make the BCPs highly suited for the fabrication of nanoporous polymers.22,23 The polylactides in the BCPs can be hydrolyzed in a base mixture of methanol, sodium hydroxide, and water at 65 °C (below the Tg of PS and above the Tg of PLA or PLLA). In this condition, the main-chain of PLA or PLLA is easily cleaved, and, furthermore, PS is both insoluble and inert. After the hydrolytic process, the sample is washed with water and methanol, and then dried under vacuum at room temperature. The fabrication of polymeric bulk monoliths with regular nanochannels can be achieved by the hydrolysis of PLA in the PS-PLA bulk state, as demonstrated by Hillmyer and co-workers.22 Moreover, an interesting approach has been proposed for the preparation of robust nanoporous polymers with sub-10 nm pores from a microphase-separated bicontinuous PLA by combining polymerization-induced phase separation with in situ BCP formation and polymerization of a mixture of multifunctional monomers in the presence of a macromolecular chain transfer agent (macro-CTA) that is initially soluble in the monomer mixture but incompatible with the emergent cross-linked polymer.154 Because of the reversible addition-fragmentation chain transfer polymerization process, which allows for linear increases in the molar mass, the majority of the growing BCPs will reach the point of becoming incompatible in the polymerizing monomer medium and will then microphase-separate over a small time interval. As a result, a homogeneous cross-linked, mechanically robust, and nanostructured composite can be fabricated. Namely, the developed bicontinuous morphology is the result of the balance of microphase separation of the mixture into continuous domains of the degradable polymers and the emergent cross-linked polymers (i.e., from cross-linking polymerization induced microphase separation). Consequently, by taking advantage of a chemically degradable block as the macro-CTA, nanoporous monoliths with precise control over pore size distribution and mechanical integrity can be generated (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Schematic depiction of nanoporous monolith generation by a controlled polymerization-induced microphase separation process. (a) A macro-CTA containing the degradable polymer (yellow) is dissolved in the mixture (light blue) of a monomer and a cross-linker. (b) Reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer copolymerization allows controlled growth of chains (dark blue) generating a BCP structure. (c) At a critical conversion, microphase separation occurs over a small time interval and cross-linking arrests the emergent bicontinuous structure with a nanoscopic length scale. (d) Removal of the degradable polymer produces percolating nanopores in a cross-linked and mechanically robust matrix. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Following the successful procedure for the hydrolysis of PLA, perpendicular cylinder-23 and gyroid-forming145 nanochannels in PS-PLLA thin films can also be simply obtained by hydrolysis. Fig. 22a shows a cylinder-forming PS-PLLA thin film after hydrolysis, where the cylindrical nanochannels in the hydrolyzed thin film actually span through the entire thickness of the films, as evidenced by the cross-sectional view in the FESEM image. Also, a characteristic gyroid-forming plane of the (211)G at the surface of the nanoporous PS thin film with an open-cell character can be obtained by the hydrolysis of PLLA in PS-PLLA, reflecting the successful fabrication of nanoporous gyroid PS thin films (Fig. 22b). Note that the gyroid structure is the most appealing morphology among all the nanostructures from the self-assembly of BCPs. Because of its unique texture within a matrix and two continuous networks in 3D space, materials with a gyroid-forming nanostructure have many practical applications. After selective degeneration of the minor phase in the polymer matrix, the materials can generate gyroid-forming interconnected nanochannels with high porosity and large specific surface area. Moreover, with control of the molecular weight for the BCPs used, the porosity and specific surface area of the nanoporous gyroid polymers can be adjusted, providing a platform technology for the fabrication of nanoporous polymers with a well-defined texture and controllable pore size, as well as a controlled orientation of the corresponding pore texture.
 Fig. 22  (a) Cross-sectional view of the FESEM micrographs of spin-coated PS-PLLA (fvPLLA = 0.26) thin films with cylinder-forming nanochannels on a silicon wafer after hydrolysis. (b) FESEM micrographs of a PS-PLLA thin film (fvPLLA = 0.39) with gyroid-forming nanochannels on a functionalized SiO2 substrate after hydrolysis for 30 min. The inset show the enlarged area of the FESEM image in (b). Reproduced from (a) ref. 23 with permission from Copyright 2005, Elsevier B.V and (b) ref. 145 with permission from Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the hydrolysis of polylactide-containing BCPs, many methods, such as the ozonolysis of polybutadiene-containing18 and PI-containing BCPs33,155 and the UV degradation of PMMA-containing BCPs,20 have been successfully developed for the formation of well-ordered nanoporous polymers, in particular in the thin-film state, in which the BCP can interact with a specific reagent to degenerate the sacrificial block for the formation of well-defined nanoporous polymers. Because ozone can attack the carbon–carbon double bonds predominantly, leading to the degeneration of PB or PI chains after ozone treatment, Register and co-workers first demonstrated ozone-degradable copolymer thin films with well-ordered spherical nanostructure for the nanolithography mask.18 Here, after a standard reactive ion etching (RIE) process, the spherical patterns could be transferred directly to the underlying silicon nitride layer, and periodic arrays of holes were produced on the silicon nitride-coated silicon wafer. Fig. 23a shows an illustration of the manufacturing procedure, where nanoporous PS from PS–PB and PS–PI can be obtained after ozonization, and then used as a mask. In the protocol for preparing holes in a SiN substrate, a PS–PI or PS–PB BCP is spin-coated on a silicon nitride substrate and subsequently annealed. Consequently, the monolayers of BCPs form spherical inclusions of the PB block. After the ozonization process, the spherical BCP transfers to regular spherical voids in the PS matrix, hence leading to variations in the effective total thickness of the copolymer mask. The regions underneath the empty spheres are protected by a thinner PS mask than the rest of the area. Therefore, during the RIE process, the remaining region is still protected to produce holes in the silicon nitride. Fig. 23b shows a TEM image of a PB spherical microdomain monolayer after ozonization, where the empty spheres appear lighter than the PS matrix, and Fig. 23c demonstrates the formation of hexagonal arrays of holes fabricated in silicon nitride from a copolymer film. To show the utility of the techniques for more practical lithographic processes, they further used a spherical-phase PS–PI, and spin-coated and processed the polymer films on a thick wafer. This technique allows one to depth-profile copolymer films with around 10 nm depth resolution. According to the film-processing steps discussed in their results, PI blocks behave similar to PB blocks. The PI blocks also wet the air and silicon nitride interfaces, and any selective processing performed on PS–PB films can also be performed on PS–PI films. The PI block can be etched after ozone degradation to act as a mask with a periodic arrangement of nanopores, as shown in Fig. 23d. Subsequently, RIE with fluorocarbon-based plasma can be used, resulting in an anisotropic etching of the silicon nitride substrate. Fig. 23e shows a SEM micrograph of periodic arrays of holes in a silicon nitride-covered silicon wafer fabricated. As a result, successful pattern transfer to silicon nitride is possible, because the etching rate of silicon nitride is faster than PS under the RIE conditions used above, resulting in the fabrication of nanostructures with an aspect ratio of around 1. Furthermore, if the etching rate of the substrate is increased relative to the rate of the polymer mask, the fabrication of features with higher aspect ratios would be possible for optoelectronics applications. This work opened up a new research area usually referred to as block copolymer lithography.
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of the manufacturing procedure with RIE. TEM images of (b) a spherical monolayer PS–PB film before RIE. The lighter regions are the PB domains that were degraded and removed by ozone. (c) Hexagonally ordered arrays of holes in silicon nitride after RIE. (d) SEM images of a partially etched PS–PI BCP film, showing the ozonated monolayer film of spherical microdomains. After the continuous PS matrix at the top was taken off, the empty PI domains were exposed (as holes) and appear darker in the micrograph. (e) SEM micrograph of ordered arrays of holes on silicon nitride. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Copyright 1997, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
PMMA is a well-known negative photoresist material, due to its ease of degeneration by ultraviolet (UV) or electron beam irradiation via a chain scission reaction. In general, the typical energy required for degradation of PMMA is low, commonly around 3.4 J cm−2. Russell and co-workers fabricated a well-ordered nanoporous PS thin film by combination of UV-degradable polymers and BCP self-assembly.20 The PS-PMMA thin film with ordered perpendicular PMMA cylinders in a PS matrix could be obtained by thermal annealing on a neutral substrate. Although cross-linking, chain-scission, and the oxidation of PS may take place simultaneously during UV exposure, under precisely controlled conditions, the cross-linking of PS dominates, while the degeneration of PMMA occurs. Therefore, after UV irradiation (25 J cm−2), the PMMA microdomains can be removed, and PS microdomains can be cross-linked in the meantime, giving well-ordered nanoporous polymers, as shown in Fig. 24a. The pores formed can go through the entire film from the top to the bottom, as shown in the cross-sectional view (Fig. 24b).
 Fig. 24  FESEM images of (a) the top-view and (b) the cross-sectional view of the cylindrical PS template obtained after removal of the PMMA with UV degradation. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from Copyright 2000, John Wiley and Sons. 
Recently, polymers composed of inorganic components (such as PDMS) have been extensively investigated because of their potential applications as etch-resistant materials for dry etching processes. The silicon-containing polymers can form a thin layer of silicon oxide under oxygen plasma treatment, which can resist further etching more than the other types of polymers that only contain C, H, N, and O atoms. As demonstrated by Thomas and co-workers, porous and relief ceramic nanostructures can be fabricated from the self-assembly of gyroid-forming BCP precursors through a one-step, low-temperature technique.19 The materials are triblock copolymers of the type ABA, where A is PI and B is poly(pentamethyldisilylstyrene) [P(PMDSS)]. After stronger oxidation conditions (i.e., UV-ozone) are applied for the oxidizing process, the PI is removed and the silicon in the P(PMDSS) can be converted to silicon oxycarbide, giving neither a nanoporous texture or nanorelief (3D connected strut networks), depending solely on the volume fraction of the hydrocarbon block relative to the silicon-containing block in the BCP precursor. The ceramic that forms after oxidation preferably exhibits high-temperature chemical and dimensional stability. Note that a range of pore sizes and specific areas can be obtained by varying the molecular weight to form a well-ordered nanoporous texture and nanorelief structures, thus presenting opportunities for use in separation, high-temperature catalysis applications, and low dielectric constant and photonic bandgap materials.
Afterwards, while the use of degradable BCPs has been commonly exploited for the fabrication of nanoporous polymers, the utilization of nanoporous thin films from BCP self-assembly in lithographic arenas (i.e., BCP lithography) has become a promising technology due to its potential to overcome the limitations of line definition and resolution in nano-microelectronic mechanical system (nano-MEMS) fabrication, and, in addition, is a focus of this review article for templated syntheses. As a result, the relevant work on BCP lithography is briefly summarized below. With the combination of BCP self-assembly and lithography, well-defined 2D and 3D nanostructured devices can be fabricated. To produce patterns useful for nanolithography, a value of χN considerably greater than the minimum is typically used to minimize intermixing, and this leads to a sharp interface between the blocks at which the interface width scales have a value of χ−0.5. The total free energy per chain associated with the microphase separation, including both interfacial and strain contributions, can be expressed as a function of χ and N, so that the equilibrium period of the nanoscale patterns can be determined.156 The majority of work on 2D device fabrication using BCPs is based on BCP microdomain (or micelle) patterns formed by using a BCP thin film to serve the same function for a resist pattern produced by conventional exposure and development processes. In the conventional patterning process, the resist pattern is transferred to a functional material, and then the resulting structure can be planarized using a polished dielectric. 2D posts, holes, and lines at specific locations can be made by directing the self-assembly of BCPs through lithographically defined, sparse chemical and/or topographical templates. PS-PMMA, PS-PDMS, and PS-b-poly(tertbutylacrylate) are common materials for BCP lithography. Fig. 25a shows a magnetic 2D metallic pattern using a cylinder-forming PS-PMMA on a sparse chemical template.157 Various 2D patterns beyond gratings and close packed dots can be achieved by utilizing diverse combinations of BCP architectures, compositions, molecular weights, blending, and annealing conditions guided by different template features. In addition to the conventional hexagonal arrays, square arrays can also be achieved by using polyisoprene-b-polystyrene-b-polyferrocenyldimethylsilane (PI–PS–PFDMS) triblock terpolymer–homopolymer blends (Fig. 25b)158 or hydrogen-bonded diblock copolymers (Fig. 25c).159 Also, archimedean tiling patterns can be fabricated by using a 3-miktoarm star terpolymer.160Fig. 25d shows serpentine patterns from post-templated PS-PDMS cylinders of 35 nm pitch.161 Chemical patterns have been used to produce a range of bends and junctions in the perpendicular lamellae of PS-PMMA135 and in in-plane cylinders or rows of spheres of PS-poly(tertbutylacrylate).162 Furthermore, following the concept of planarization, 3D devices can be constructed layer by layer through a sequence of steps, each of which forms 2D BCP patterns, which can be further transferred into a functional material via etching or additive processes. The sequential processing of 2D BCP patterns can build multiple stacks of nanostructures with the same or different morphologies, with various orientations or registrations between the layers. This strategy can create 3D microdomain arrays with non-periodic structuring along the vertical direction. By contrast, each layer of 3D structures fabricated by casting and assembling thick BCP films contains microdomains with the same morphology and usually a common orientation. Stacking methods can be categorized into two types: self-alignment of an upper layer of microdomains by a lower layer, and an orientation-independent stacking approach. Such templated self-assembly schemes provide a wide variety of device-oriented patterns.
 Fig. 25  BCP lithography. (a) A magnetic 2D metallic pattern using a cylindrical PS-PMMA on a sparse chemical template. (b) Templated square post array of a PI–PS–PFDMS triblock terpolymer/PS homopolymer blend on a double-post template and within the trenches. (c) Square hole arrays from blends of PEO–P(S-r-HS) and PMMA–P(S-r-P4VP), in which the polymer assembly is mediated by hydrogen bonding between polyhydroxystyrene and P4VP. (d) Non-periodic structures can be enforced by a template. Serpentine patterns from templated PS-PDMS cylinders (Pitch = 35 nm) guided by posts, which are shown as bright dots. Reproduced from (a) ref. 157 and (c) ref. 159 with permission from Copyright 2008, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (b) ref. 158 with permission from Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 161 with permission from Copyright 2010, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Also, well-ordered PS cylinders with a perpendicular orientation from the PS-PDMS thin films can be fabricated by spin-coating, and then transferred onto grids. A freestanding nanoporous thin film (namely, the silicon oxy carbide thin film with cylinder-forming nanochannels) can be directly fabricated via oxygen plasma treatment, and closely placed onto various polymeric substrates. This nanoporous film could be used as an etch-resistant and reusable mask for pattern transfer into underlying polymeric substrates to directly generate nanoporous polymeric materials. Most importantly, this silicon oxy carbide mask can be repeatedly used because of its robust properties and high etching selectivity under the oxygen RIE. Consequently, as demonstrated, topographic thin films of PS, PMMA, and polycarbonate can be obtained, providing an efficient method of nanofabrication to create topographic polymeric nanopatterns.163 Furthermore, nanoring structures from PS-PDMS have also been demonstrated by a combination of BCP self-assembly and a swelling-induced process.164 First, a spin-coated PS-PDMS with a random orientation of cylindrical PDMS nanostructures thin film is prepared. After a series of procedures, including solvent annealing, dodecane immersion (surface reconstruction), CF4 reactive ion etching, and O2 plasma, the core–shell cylinder PS-PDMS thin films can be obtained. The intrinsic aspect ratio of their nanorings is about 0.6; therefore, it is reasonable to suggest the formation of nanorings (namely, low-aspect-ratio nano-objects) has occurred. Therefore, this approach provides a simple route for creating core–shell cylinder nanostructured thin films that can be used as a template for fabricating inorganic oxide nanoring arrays. Moreover, using the unique features of nanorings as a mask for the patterning of magnetic thin films is appealing for data storage applications.
4. Nanohybrids and nanoporous materials from templated synthesis
One of the approaches to fabricate polymer-based nanohybrids is to combine the self-assembly of hydrophilic BCPs and the hybridization of inorganic fillers. For instance, Gutmann and co-workers demonstrated that hexagonally packed TiO2 dots in a polymer matrix can be formed using PS-PEO as a template for a one-step hybridization process through spin coating a solution with a TiO2 precursor and PS-PEO, in which the precursor can be selectively incorporated into the self-assembled PEO microdomains.165 Also, the fabrication of periodic TiO2 nanorods templated by PS-P4VP was demonstrated by Shipp and co-workers.166 PS-P4VP thin films with P4VP cylinders perpendicular to the substrate were used as templates for the sol–gel reaction of TiO2 precursors in the P4VP microdomains. In contrast to the fabrication of low-dimensional nanostructures, such as nanodots and nanorods, 3D complex nanostructures can also be prepared through this approach. Wiesner and co-workers reported the first use of BCPs for the synthesis of highly ordered metal oxide nanohybrids containing multiple layers, in which ABC triblock terpolymers, namely polyisoprene-b-polystyrene-b-poly(ethylene oxide) (PI–PS–PEO, ISO), were used as templates to coordinate the nanoparticles (NPs). The phase behaviors of several ISO-oxide nanohybrids were investigated, spanning a large range of compositions along the fI = fS isopleth, using aluminosilicate and niobia sols to obtain complex morphologies, including core–shell hexagonal cylinders, core–shell gyroids, three-domain lamellae, and core–shell inverse-hexagonal cylinders, giving a variety of nanostructures as templates.167 Moreover, Wiesner and co-workers demonstrated the co-assembly of niobia NPs with ISO triblock terpolymers to give multiple network morphologies with inorganic network structures, including alternating DG or single gyroid (SG) (spacing group: I4132), Fddd, and Fdm. The alternating DG phase at low NP loadings co-assembles to the phases with Fddd or Fdm symmetry (centrosymmetric) at higher loadings. After calcination to remove the polymer matrix, nanoporous ceramic networks could be fabricated.168 Similar approaches can also be used for the fabrication of ordered nanoporous carbon. For instance, the metal- and halogen-free synthesis of gyroid-forming nanoporous carbon was fabricated by using phenol formaldehyde resols as carbon precursors for co-assembling with the ISO triblock terpolymers.169 Although well-defined nanohybrids with various structures and sizes can be successfully synthesized from hydrophilic BCPs (i.e., soft templating), those approaches generally involve a multistep process and, most critically, it is not easy to produce nanohybrids with high load-bearing capacity for inorganic fillers. The reason for this is that after removal of the polymer matrix, it is difficult for the inorganic fillers to connect with each other to form self-supporting nanostructure. Also, the phase behaviors of the mixtures of the BCP template and the precursors or NPs vary with the composition, and thus the controlled order and orientation of forming nanostructured phases, in particular in a thin-film state, is a challenging task.
Therefore, pre-made nanoporous BCPs as templates for templated synthesis (i.e., hard templating) have been developed. The fully-developed nanochannels from prepared BCP templates can provide enough space for a high loading of inorganic fillers, thus giving free-standing and well-defined inorganic nanostructure after removal of the matrix, and also a controlled order and orientation can be achieved before the templated syntheses. Most importantly, there are many syntheses available using pre-made templates as nanoreactors for controlled reactions. In this section, we focus on the templated syntheses that use nanoporous polymeric materials from degradable BCPs, in particular with a gyroid-forming texture, for the fabrication of well-defined nanomaterials. The principles of the various templated syntheses, including the sol–gel reaction (Section 4.1), electrochemical deposition (Section 4.2), electroless plating (Section 4.3), and atomic layer deposition (Section 4.4), from the fundamentals to their practical uses in the synthesis of various nanohybrids and nanoporous materials, are presented.
For a successful templated synthesis, several conditions including pore size, morphology, and density of pores, as well as the intrinsic properties of the templates, should be considered and must meet certain requirements. First, the templates have to be compatible with the processing conditions. For example, suitable solvents should be used to prevent the swelling and deformation of polymeric templates. Also, the pore walls of the templates should be wetted by the depositing materials or solution in the pore-filling process. The pore-filling process can be considered as a simple templated method for reshaping materials—a physical approach without a chemical reaction—or as the first step for the subsequent templated synthesis (templated chemical reactions). Although various precursors, such as medicines, metal salts, metal alkoxides, and organic monomers, can be filled into the nanochannels to form nanohybrids, the pre-existing air is usually hard to remove and can become the diffusion barrier. To solve this problem, capillary force, also called capillary attraction or capillarity, is used to release the pre-existing air, leading to a successful pore-filling process. Capillary forces result from the interaction of the liquid, gas, and solid surfaces, at the interface between them. In a liquid phase, molecules are held together through cohesive forces. In the bulk of a liquid, the cohesive forces between one molecule and the surrounding molecules are balanced. Nevertheless, for the same molecule at the edge of the liquid, the cohesive forces with other liquid molecules are larger than the interaction with air molecules. Therefore, the liquid molecules at the interface are pulled together towards the liquid. Capillary forces come from the three forces from the three contact phases: liquid, solid and vapor (air), trying simultaneously to minimize the contact area between the three phases. As mentioned above, capillary forces are critical at the nanoscale. The liquid–air interface at a narrow hydrophobic structure causes an air block, preventing the liquid from entering the nanochannels. As a result, thermal treatment or the addition of surfactants (i.e., alcohols for BCP templating) is a suitable approach to minimize the free surface between the liquid and air, leading to successful pore-filling for the subsequent templated synthesis (i.e., a chemical templated approach). For example, Russell and co-workers developed an effective and convenient approach for fabricating templated carbon nanotubes. They combined polymer solution wetting and poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN) carbonization techniques to generate carbon nanotubes.170 Recently, we also fabricated graphite-like nanotubes using a solvent-annealing process from poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN) pore-filling AAO templates (Fig. 26a). The molecular orientation of anisotropic PAN chains was induced by solvent annealing via capillary filling to achieve an appropriate molecular packing for carbonization. Consequently, hundred-nanometer-sized carbon nanotubes were formed after carbonation. Importantly, carbon nanotubes with a graphite-like structure and high crystallinity could be fabricated for the further fabrication of a core–shell cylinder texture via multiple pore-filling processes (Fig. 26b).171 Furthermore, in addition to inorganic templates (i.e., AAO template), we developed organic templates (i.e., a nanoporous PS template) for templated syntheses. In terms of the pore-filling process for the hydrophobic PS template and suitable solvents for the precursors, acyclic alcohols are usually used as surfactants for the pore-filling process by capillary force (i.e., wetting) and as solvents for a variety of templated chemical reaction (see below for details).
 Fig. 26  (a) The experimental route for the formation of graphite-like nanotubes prepared from the carbonization of PAN in AAO template via solvent annealing for pore filling. (b) HRTEM image showing that the carbon nanotubes have multilayer structures, and that the growth direction of the layers aligns along the axis of the AAO pores. Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
4.1 Templated sol–gel reactions
The sol–gel reaction is a wet-chemical technique which is widely used in science and engineering. Precursors, such as metal alkoxides and metal salts, are used to form a chemical solution (sol) for the subsequent gelation process. After hydrolysis, followed by a condensation reaction, the transparent solution starts to become an integrated network (gel) of either network polymers or discrete colloidal particles. A considerable number of useful ceramic oxides, including the oxides of Al, Si, Ti, Zn, and Zr, can be synthesized through the sol–gel reaction.172 By using nanoporous PS from PS-PLLA as a template for the sol–gel reaction, various nanostructured ceramics can be fabricated after removal of the PS. We first demonstrated the fabrication of well-defined PS–SiO2 helical nanohybrids and inorganic helical nanostructures via the templated sol–gel reaction. Here, by taking advantage of the controlled self-assembly of BCP*, PS-PLLA, an H* phase could be formed. Subsequently, 3D helical nanochannels could be fabricated after hydrolysis of the PLLA block in the self-assembled H* phase. With execution of the sol–gel reaction within the helical nanochannels, the fabrication of 3D ordered helical nanohybrids, PS–SiO2, was achieved (Fig. 27a).24 After degeneration of the PS matrix by UV exposure, the structure of the SiO2 nanohelices can be clearly visualized. Most interestingly, the templated sol–gel reaction can also be used to fabricate complex nanostructured materials, especially gyroid-forming ceramic networks. With the use of gyroid-forming PS-PLLA, continuous nanochannels with a 3D well-defined structure can be successfully prepared and used as a template for sol–gel reactions.25Fig. 27b displays the reconstructed 3D images from electron tomography (i.e., 3D TEM) of the gyroid-forming SiO2 networks in the PS matrix. 3D TEM is a powerful tool that enables researchers to directly visualize 3D nanostructured materials in real space; recently, this imaging technology has been extensively applied in the research arenas of soft matter, in particular block copolymers.173,174 The microsections of the PS–SiO2 gyroid nanohybrids were collected on copper grids covered by a polyvinyl formal membrane. For image alignment to reconstruct the 3D images, fiducial gold markers (10 nm diameter, purchased from Polysciences, Inc.) were used and homogeneously distributed onto the microsections with the right amount of markers. Subsequently, a series of TEM projection images at different tilt angles (i.e., from −70° to + 70°) were collected for the reconstruction to form 3D images. Fig. 27b shows the reconstructed 3D image of the gyroid-forming PS–SiO2 structure with a pair of continuous, interpenetrating but independent SiO2 networks (green and red) in the PS matrix (the inset of Fig. 27b). After removal of the PS matrix, gyroid-forming SiO2 networks can be prepared. The porosity of the nanoporous gyroid SiO2 materials was determined as 66% from nitrogen adsorption experiments, and the interfacial area per gram was calculated as 790 m2 g−1.
 Fig. 27  (a) FESEM micrograph of amorphous SiO2 nanohelices synthesized from the PS-PLLA with H* phase, followed by the hydrolysis, templated sol–gel reaction, and removal of the polymer template by UV. (b) Reconstructed 3D images of PS–SiO2 gyroid-forming nanohybrids. Inset shows the gyroid-forming SiO2 with two identical networks (green and red). Reproduced from (a) ref. 24 with permission from Copyright 2009; (b) ref. 25 with permission from Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
For successful pore-filling in templated synthesis, the critical step is retarding the reaction rate of hydrolysis to alleviate the problem of forming large gelled aggregates, which would result in blocking of the nanochannels. However, transition metal alkoxides with the chemical formula M(OR)x, such as Ti(OR)4 and Zr(OR)4, are usually unstable and highly reactive. Unlike the precursors of SiO2, the pore filling of those transition metal alkoxide precursors will be blocked for templated synthesis when exposed to moisture, heat, or light. Consequently, precisely fabricating well-defined polymer–ceramic nanohybrids from those transition metal alkoxide remains a challenge. To fabricate well-ordered polymer–ceramic gyroid nanohybrids from the templated synthesis of reactive transition metal alkoxides, controlled factors, such as pH value, temperature, and the solvent used for the templated sol–gel reaction, should be justified, as illustrated in Fig. 28.26 Metal alkoxides with the chemical formula of M(OR)x are the precursors. To avoid blocking in the pore-filling process and to achieve a successful templated synthesis, the rates of the pore-filling process and sol–gel reaction should be balanced, whereby the pore filling should be performed before the growth of oversized gels. As a result, an acid-catalyzed sol–gel reaction is usually carried out (pH value below 4) for yielding primarily linear polymers with minor randomly branched polymers, whereas oversized gels are formed at high pH value (Fig. 28a). Under acid-catalyzed conditions, OR groups can be easily protonated first by H+ ions, so that the metal M becomes electrophilic, and thus more susceptible to be attacked by H2O to form hydrolyzed species, i.e., M(OH)z(OR)x−z. Subsequently, condensation occurs from those hydrolyzed species. It is noted that, for the acid-catalyzed sol–gel reaction, OH groups are preferentially generated at the end of chain, leading to the formation of linear polymer chains. By contrast, non-spinnable sols or branched clusters might be grown in base-catalyzed sol–gel reactions, resulting in the formation of oversized gels that block the pore-filling process. Nevertheless, incomplete pore filling was found when the templated process was carried out at room temperature, even under acid-catalyzed conditions, indicating that the sol–gel reaction is still too fast to achieve a successful pore filling for templated reactions, due to the growth of oversized gels (Fig. 28b).
 Fig. 28  Schematic illustration for the creation of well-defined bicontinuous ceramics from a templated sol–gel reaction: (a) the templated sol–gel reaction under acid-catalyzed or base-catalyzed precursor solutions; (b) acid-catalyzed sol–gel reactions performed at different temperatures; (c) the acid-catalyzed sol–gel reaction performed in acyclic alcohols with different polarities at low temperature; (d) acid-catalyzed sol–gel reaction performed by using different chelating agents in acyclic alcohols with strong polarity (i.e., methanol) at low temperature; (e) polymer–ceramic gyroid nanohybrids resulting from the acid-catalyzed sol–gel reaction performed using suitable chelating agents (i.e., DEA) in methanol at low temperature. After a specific calcination process, nanostructured ceramics with high crystalline can be successfully fabricated. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
To reduce the reaction rate in order to form linear polymer chains for pore filling, the sol–gel reaction is therefore carried out at low temperatures (under 10 °C). In general, metal alkoxides are often dissolved in solvents before hydrolysis, because the dilution process is able to lower the reaction rates of hydrolysis and condensation for a stabilized solution. Also, by using solvents with a lower polar character for the sol–gel reaction, a coordination expansion of the reactive transition metal may occur through alkoxy bridging, because of the higher coordination number of the transition metal, which can stabilize the sols via a reduction of the reaction rate. Usually, non-polar solvents, such as dioxane and tetrahydrofuran, are used. Nevertheless, these non-polar solvents can dissolve the PS templates. Therefore, considering the pore-filling process for a hydrophobic PS template and suitable solvents for the metal alkoxides, acyclic alcohols can be used as surfactants for the pore-filling process by capillary force (i.e., wetting) and as solvents for the templated sol–gel reaction. For the formation of stable sols, solvents with weaker polarity are required for the sol–gel reaction. Therefore, propanol is used for the templated sol–gel reaction. Here, even though the suggested templated reaction can be successfully achieved, a gyroid-like morphology with a distorted structure is found after the sol–gel reaction (Fig. 28c), reflecting that although the dissolution problem for the PS template can be alleviated by using propanol as solvent, the template is still swollen by propanol, resulting in distortion of the templated morphology. To reduce the degree of swelling of the PS template, acyclic alcohols with a stronger polarity, such as methanol, are thus used for the templated reaction. Nevertheless, it is inevitable to encounter problems with the fast hydrolysis and condensation rates of transition metal alkoxides, due to the increase in polarity, and as precipitation may occur immediately. Moreover, it is difficult to slow down the sol–gel reaction, even with a high loading of methanol under a relatively moisture-free environment (for instance, in a glove box). To form linear polymer chains for the pore-filling process, an acid chelating agent (i.e., acetylacetone) should be used. Here, a tautomeric equilibrium between the keto and enol forms occur for acetylacetone in acyclic alcohol solvents, and the PS template can be swollen by the keto form, resulting in a distorted structure of the gyroid-like nanostructure (Fig. 28d). To alleviate the swelling problem, a base chelating agent (i.e., diethanolamine (DEA)) is thus used. It is noted that DEA acts as a weak base, like other organic amines. As a result, the loading content of DEA should be balanced by the introduction of acid catalysts to maintain the required pH (pH < 4) for the linear step polymerization of metal alkoxides under acidic conditions; a higher molar concentration of HCl(aq) should be used for the templated reaction. Consequently, well-defined bicontinuous ceramic gyroid-forming networks in a polymeric matrix (polymer–ceramic gyroid nanohybrids) can be successfully fabricated via an acid-catalyzed sol–gel reaction by using a suitable chelating agent in methanol under low-temperature conditions. Furthermore, a calcination process can be performed to remove the polymer template, so as to prepare nanoporous gyroid ceramics with a crystalline phase (Fig. 28e). To alleviate the crystallization effect on the templated morphology and the distortion from the thermal expansion and cooling shrinkage, a specific thermal treatment needs to be performed. As a result, free-standing, nanoporous gyroid ceramics with a high crystallinity can be successfully fabricated (Fig. 29a). It is noted that one of the well-known characteristics of nanostructured TiO2 is its photocatalytic properties for organic components in viruses, bacteria, fungi, algae, and cancer cells, which can be totally degraded and mineralized to CO2, H2O, and harmless inorganic anions. The corresponding photocatalytic efficiency is strongly dependent upon the surface area and the porosity of the TiO2. On this basis, we demonstrated the photocatalytic efficiency of nanoporous gyroid TiO2 by the decomposition of dye molecules. Nanoporous gyroid TiO2 with a self-supporting nanostructure and controlled crystalline phase was synthesized from the templated sol–gel reaction. Commercial P25 TiO2 photocatalysts were used for comparison, and methylene blue (MB) was used as a pollutant to examine the photocatalytic activity of the gyroid TiO2. As found from the degradation trend experiments, the decomposition rate of the MB became significant after introducing the TiO2 photocatalysts into the MB solution, giving a first-order kinetics decomposition reaction (Fig. 29b). It was obvious that use of the nanoporous gyroid TiO2 for the decomposition of the MB gave rise to a significant increase in the photocatalytic efficiency (about two times higher than for commercial P25 TiO2 powders). In contrast to the commercial P25 TiO2 powders, the high efficiency of the nanoporous gyroid TiO2 was attributed to its bicontinuous nanostructure with an extremely high surface area and high porosity, facilitating the adsorption of solution contaminants and effective utilization of UV light.
 Fig. 29  (a) FESEM micrograph of bicontinuous TiO2 networks from the PS–TiO2 gyroid nanohybrids after removal of the PS matrix by calcination. The inset shows the photograph of centimeter-sized nanoporous TiO2 bulks. (b) Comparison of the photodecomposition rate of the MB in the presence of: bicontinuous TiO2 (■); commercial P25 TiO2 powders (●); and blank tests (material without TiO2 (▼)). Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
4.2 Templated electrochemical deposition
Electroplating deposition is a plating process that uses electrical current to reduce the cations of a desired material from a solution to coat a conductive object with a thin layer of the materials, such as metals, semi-conductive ceramics, and conjugated polymers. To electrochemically deposit materials inside the nanochannels of a polymer template, the working electrode is usually coated by the polymer template; the counter and the reference electrodes are placed in the plating bath, connected to an external source of current. Both components are immersed in a solution referred to as an electrolyte, containing one or more dissolved salts (usually metallic ions) and other ions that allow the flow of electricity. A rectifier supplies a direct current to the anode, oxidizing the materials to release ions into the electrolyte solution. At the cathode, the dissolved (pre-selected) ions in the electrolyte solution are reduced at the interface between the solution and the cathode. To fill the nanochannels completely, the surface of the polymer template covering on the working electrode should be accessible to the plating bath. However, diffusion of chemicals in the template may become difficult for thicker polymer templates with non-ordered structures, resulting in many defects or dead areas. Therefore, for polymer templates with anisotropic structures, such as 1D cylinders and 2D lamellae, proper alignment prior to templated electroplating deposition is required. Russell and co-workers successfully fabricated metallic nanowires using BCP templates with aligned cylinder nanochannels for electroplating deposition.175
For polymer templates with well-defined 3D isotropic nanochannels, such as gyroid- and diamond-forming nanochannels, it is much easier to obtain nanohybrid materials with homogeneous properties via templated electroplating deposition without any pre-alignment. Steiner, Snaith, and co-workers demonstrated excellent work in the first successful application of a gyroid-forming TiO2 network in a hybrid bulk hetero junction solar cell. TiO2 was deposited into the 10 nm wide nanochannels of a self-assembled, selectively degradable poly(4-fluorostyrene)-b-poly(D,L-lactide) (PFS-PLA) film via the anodic oxidative hydrolysis of aqueous TiCl3 in a standard three-electrode electrochemical cell (Fig. 30).27,44 The gyroid-forming nanoporous polymer template was prepared on conductive fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates for the electrochemical deposition of TiO2. Therefore, free-standing TiO2 networks with ordered pores could be synthesized and prepared after removal of the template, and the free-standing TiO2 was shown to be an ideal template for the uniform infiltration of an organic hole transporting material for further solar cell applications. Indeed, the solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell is one of the most promising nanotechnology-based nanohybrid photovoltaic systems, and has drawn widespread attention for fabricating nanoscale semiconductor materials with an extremely large internal surface area. For a solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell, light is harvested in a monolayer of the dye, so a large surface area to volume ratio of the metal oxide is required to give the system sufficient dye density for complete light absorption. A gyroid-forming phase, consisting of two interwoven continuous networks of the minority block dispersed in a matrix phase of the majority block, may provide a monodisperse pore diameter in which all the nanochannels and struts are fully interconnected, while the continuous networks may be degenerated. These attributes are conceptually ideal for the fabrication of nanohybrid solar cells, where the open, uniformly sized pores can enable effective infiltration of an organic phase. Also, the pre-defined and monodisperse length scale enables optimized charge generation and collection through the 3D pathways.
 Fig. 30  Schematic representation of TiO2 networks via templated electrochemical deposition for hybrid solar cells: (a) self-assembly of PFS-b-PLA on FTO glass, (b) nanoporous PFS template after selective removal of the PLA networks, (c) free-standing gyroid network array after removing the PFS template, (d) back-filling of the array with a solid state hole transporting material and capping with a suitable counter electrode to form a bicontinuous bulk heterojunction solar cell architecture. (e) SEM fracture cross-section images of the bicontinuous TiO2. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
The performances of dye-sensitized solar cells from various nanostructured TiO2, including NPs, cylinders, and gyroid-forming networks were examined by Steiner, Snaith, and co-workers.44 Cylinder- (Fig. 31a) and gyroid-forming TiO2 nanostructures (Fig. 31b) were prepared from the self-assembly of PFS-PLA, followed by hydrolysis of the PLA for the templated electrochemical deposition of TiO2 and for the calcinations. Also, NP-based nanoporous TiO2 films were fabricated using a doctor blade coating of a TiO2 paste (20 nm NPs) onto compact TiO2-coated FTO glass (Fig. 31c). A ruthenium complex dye, termed N719, was used to demonstrate the performance of these three nanostructured TiO2 materials for liquid electrolyte dye-sensitized solar cells. Fig. 31d shows the absorption spectra of the N719 sensitized TiO2 before cell construction. Both the spectra of the cylinder- and gyroid-forming TiO2 nanostructures show vertical offsets, caused by scattering in the nanostructured TiO2. The spectral responses of the fabricated liquid electrolyte dye-sensitized solar cells are shown in Fig. 31e. At low illumination intensities (∼0.1 mW cm−2), the NPs film shows the highest peak external quantum efficiency of 34% compared to 28% for the gyroid-forming nanostructure. The cell composed of a cylinder-forming TiO2 (i.e., the cylinder cell) produces a peak external quantum efficiency of just 9%. Fig. 31f shows the current–voltage curves for the cells under simulated AM 1.5 illumination at 100 mW cm−2. The gyroid, NP, and the cylinder cells have power conversion efficiencies of 3.0%, 2.7%, and 1.1%, respectively. As a result, the 1D cylinder system exhibits enhanced charge transport and a significantly inhibited charge recombination, compared to an equivalent 3D network (i.e., an aggregation of TiO2 NPs and gyroid-forming networks). However, the lack of structural integrity results in a much reduced internal surface area compared to the conceptually ideal structure, and the resulting photocurrent and efficiency generated from the solar cells are thus significantly less than with the 3D gyroid devices.
 Fig. 31  SEM images of nanostructured morphologies viewed from the cross-sectional perspectives. (a) Standing cylinder-forming TiO2. (b) Gyroid-forming networks. (c) Sintered NP mesoporous layer. (d) Absorption spectra after sensitization with N719 (inset). (e) Spectral response of liquid electrolyte dye-sensitized solar cells. (f) Current–voltage curves under simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (full lines) and in the dark (dashed lines). The solar cell characteristics are for 1.2 μm thick cylinder-forming (solid red box), 1.2 μm thick gyroid-forming (solid black triangle), and 1.4 μm thick NP (solid blue circle) TiO2 nanostructures. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Utilizing similar approaches, Steiner and co-workers further demonstrated the fabrication of gyroid-forming V2O5 on the 10 nm length scale by an electrochemical deposition from PFS-PLA to give a significant enhancement of the electrochromic performance.30 Full porosity extending across both film interfaces is a crucial requirement for successful replication of the polymer scaffold by electroplating. This requires the prevention of preferential wetting of the substrate by PFS or PLA, in order to achieve a non-porous PFS wetting layer on substrates. The anodic deposition of V2O5 into the polymer template was performed at a constant potential of 1.5 V versus Ag/AgCl from a 1:1 mixture of deionized water and ethanol containing 1 m VOSO4·xH2O. The low surface tension of ethanol enables infiltration of the hydrophobic PFS pores by the electrolyte. The gradual growth of vanadia, progressing from the FTO surface through the porous gyroid network, is stopped after 120 s before reaching the free surface of the template to yield 1.1 ± 0.1 μm thick films. After removal of the PFS template, a highly periodic V2O5 replica can be fabricated. Because of the specific characters of the gyroid-forming structure, the devices surpass previous inorganic electrochromic materials in all relevant parameters: the switching speed, coloration contrast, and the composite coloration efficiency.30,31 V2O5 forming a bicontinuous gyroid structure on the 10 nm scale can be used to fabricate supercapacitors, yielding devices with a promising combination of high power and energy densities (Fig. 32a). To demonstrate their performance in energy storage, gyroid-forming V2O5 networks were used to fabricate supercapacitors. A highly conducting room temperature ionic liquid (RTIL), triethylsulfonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide, was chosen as the electrolyte. RTILs are molten salts with a melting point close to or below room temperature. They are composed of bulky organic cations and smaller anions that only loosely associate. Nonflammable RTIL gels have already been used as electrolytes in supercapacitors, enabling flexibility, safe operation, and a large electrochemical window (the electrochemical potential range over which the electrolyte is neither reduced nor oxidized at the electrodes). Lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI) was used as the lithium salt since it has the same anion as the RTIL. The supercapacitor was assembled with a pair of electrodes made of FTO-coated glass sheets, each coated with approximately 1 μm thick gyroid-forming V2O5. Electrochemical testing was performed using supercapacitor devices prepared by sandwiching a precut thermoplastic gasket as a spacer between laterally offset electrodes, thus obviating the need for a separator and enabling an observation of the color change of both electrodes (inset of Fig. 32a and b). The electrochemical properties of such supercapacitors with templated and non-templated electrodes were studied by cyclic voltammetry at a sweep rate of 50 mV s−1 for voltage sweeps between −1 V and 1 V and from −0.5 V to 0.5 V. In the potential range from −0.5 V to 0.5 V, both V2O5 materials exhibit nearly rectangular CV traces, indicating good capacitive characteristics for the devices. In the −1 V to 1 V potential range, supercapacitors with the lithium salt containing electrolyte show pseudocapacitive redox peaks. The capacitive current density of the gyroid-forming V2O5 (Fig. 32c) is much higher compared to the significantly thicker and denser non-templated V2O5 film. This is important as supercapacitor charge storage offers a number of desirable properties when compared with conventional batteries, including charging within seconds, long-term cycling stability, and the ability to deliver up to ten times more power. These features are used not only in high power demanding applications, such as power buffers and power saving units, but also in energy recovery. Whereas, charge storage through non-faradaic means is fairly straightforward, a variety of distinct chemical options are available for charge storage through faradaic or redox-type reactions. The results presented here illustrate the benefits of applying a gyroid-forming V2O5 in a combined electrochromic and electrochemical energy storage device.
 Fig. 32  (a) Cross-sectional scanning electron micrograph of a mesoporous gyroid V2O5 film on a FTO substrate. Inset shows the photograph of a fully transparent electrochromical supercapacitor consisting of an oxidized yellow top electrode, a laterally offset green/gray bottom electrode in the reduced state, and a thermoplastic gasket spacer. (b) Schematic illustration of a supercapacitor design based on two laterally offset gyroid-forming electrodes. (c) CV of supercapacitors made with gyroid-forming V2O5 electrode films, where a is the CV cycled with an RTIL electrolyte containing lithium salt and (b) is the CV using Li-free RTIL as the electrolyte, displaying an electric double-layer response. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to semi-conductive ceramics (e.g., TiO2 and V2O5), templated electrochemical deposition can be applied for the fabrication of gyroid-forming metals (e.g., Ni and Au).28,29,31,32 Steiner and co-workers demonstrated the manufacture of a highly interconnected, nanotubular NiO gyroid structure from PS-PLA. The replication of nanoporous polymeric materials with gyroid-forming nanochannels into Ni by electrochemical deposition, followed by the thermal conversion into a hollow nanoscale Kirkendall effect (NKE) NiO network (nanotubular array) for the development of the ultimate material for ion intercalation is shown in Fig. 33.32 As a naturally abundant and low-cost semiconductor, NiO is widely used in electrochromic windows, batteries, supercapacitors, and sensors. While these applications benefit from an interconnected, 3D NiO nanostructure with a combination of a highly specific surface area and good electric conductivity, the interplay of the structural parameters with device performance is perhaps best visualized by the increased coloration contrast and fast switching behavior of electrochromic devices. Cathodic templated Ni deposition is performed at a constant potential of −1.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl at 50 °C using a commercial Ni plating solution (bright finish, Alfa Aesar). The Ni deposition rate is 0.288 mg C−1, which corresponds to 85.4 nm (mC mm−2)−1 for a templated film. Also, a 3D Au metamaterial can be successfully created via a templated electrochemical deposition from ISO triblock terpolymers for chiral optical metamaterials.29 The deposition consists of a nucleation and a deposition step. The nucleation step consists of 1 to 3 cyclic voltammetry scans between 0 V and −1.2 V at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. NiO samples exhibit anodic coloration at +0.55 V and cathodic bleaching at −0.55 V. These potentials were chosen to avoid gas evolution, which occurs at higher potentials, and which could cause a strong increase in the current in the cyclic voltammograms. The nanotubular NiO structures exhibit good long-term cycle stability, giving rise to a pair of well-pronounced redox peaks. The nanostructure formation of NiO on the 10 nm length scale leads to a significant enhancement in electrochromic performance for all the relevant parameters, i.e., the switching speed, coloration contrast, and the composite coloration efficiency. Compared to planar NiO, devices with a nanotubular gyroid morphology combine a high coloration contrast with a high coloration efficiency.
 Fig. 33  Preparation of a bicontinuous NiO nanotubular array. (a) Schematic illustration of the six preparation steps: (1) synthesis of PS-PLA. (2) Formation of gyroid phase after thermal annealing. The blue interconnected PLA networks are surrounded by a red PS matrix. (3) Hydrolysis of PLA block. (4) Templated electrochemical deposition of Ni. (5) Removal of the PS matrix to form a free-standing Ni replica. (6) Thermal oxidation based on the NKE results in a porous NiO nanotubular array with a gyroid morphology. Cross-sectional SEM micrographs of (b) the nanoporous PS template, (c) the partially replicated template, (d) the free-standing Ni networks, and (e) the NiO nanotube arrays. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
4.3 Templated electroless plating
Electroless plating is a chemical deposition process which depends on the catalytic reduction process of metal ions in an aqueous solution containing a chemical reducing agent. Unlike electrochemical deposition, the process of electroless plating is not necessary to pass an electric current through the solution to form a deposit. With the correct pre-plate catalyst (generally, palladium (Pd)), metal ions can be reduced by the reducing agent, such that solid metal clusters are deposited on non-conductive surfaces without any flux-density and power supply issues. In traditional electroless plating, sensitizing and activating are also carried out. A sensitizing treatment is used to produce gels to enhance adhesion between the metal coatings and substrates. An activating process is carried out for the formation of catalytic sites to initiate the subsequent electroless plating. Brinke, Loos, and co-workers demonstrated the fabrication of Ni nanofoams by using supramolecular PS-P4VP(pentadecylphenol, PDP) complexes with gyroid-forming nanochannels as templates. The complete dissolution of PDP from the complex with the major P4VP(PDP) component forming the matrix resulted in an open network structure with struts consisting of a PS core and a P4VP corona for the subsequent electroless deposition of Ni.34 Moreover, supramolecular complexes of poly(tert-butoxystyrene)-b-polystyrene-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PtBOS–PS–P4VP) triblock terpolymers and PDP were used to self-assemble into core–shell gyroid structures, with the core channels formed by the hydrogen-bonded P4VP(PDP) complexes. After removing PDP by washing, well-ordered nanoporous films were used as templates for electroless Ni plating.35 However, the gels from the sensitizing treatment can block the nanochannels of the polymer templates during BCP templating, resulting in unfilled nanochannels in the depths of the templates. A new approach was thus developed in our laboratory to create free-standing metallic nanoporous materials using gyroid-forming nanoporous PS for templated electroless plating, followed by removal of the template.36 Without any sensitizing treatment, activation and metal reduction can be carried out in one pot with the templated electroless plating. Metallic materials possessing autocatalytic properties, including Fe, Co, Ni, Pt, Pd, Au, and Ag, are good candidates for this templated electroless plating. However, as Ni materials, in particular with nanostructured structures, are very important catalytic materials and are widely used in science and industry, templated electroless Ni plating was carried out first in our laboratory to demonstrate the feasibility of this approach for the fabrication of well-defined metallic networks.
The nanoporous PS templates were soaked in an aqueous Pd+2 solution mixed with acyclic alcohols (i.e., methanol or ethanol), as shown in Fig. 34a. The acyclic alcohol was used to promote the wetting tendency of the activating solution into the PS templates through capillary force. After washing gently with a solution of acyclic alcohol–H2O to remove any redundant Pd+2 covering the sample surfaces, the pore-filled templates with the Pd+2 solution were then immersed into a freshly prepared Ni bath at room temperature. Consequently, nucleation of the Pd clusters was initialized, at which point the Pd+2 ions are reduced to Pd clusters by reducing agents (i.e., hydrazinium hydroxide). Note that the concentration of the activating solution prepared here is quite dilute and any redundant Pd+2 covering the sample surface is just washed out. As a result, only a small amount of Pd clusters could be generated within the PS templates (Fig. 34b). Accordingly, Ni+2 is reduced to Ni at the catalytic sites of the Pd clusters. By taking advantage of the self-catalytic behavior of electroless plating for the automatically continuous process of Ni formation, the reduced Ni serves as the new nucleus for the subsequent Ni reductions so that the Ni deposition process continues until the nanochannels are fully filled (Fig. 34c). Thereby, a well-ordered metallic gyroid-forming nanostructure with high crystallinity in a PS matrix is synthesized. After removal of the matrix, free-standing, gyroid-forming nanoporous metals can be successfully fabricated to give precisely controlled architectures with high porosity and surface area (Fig. 34d).
 Fig. 34  Schematic illustration of the mechanism of templated electroless plating for the generation of Ni from PS-PLLA templating: (a) nanoporous PS template pores filled with Pd + 2; (b) the nucleation of Pd clusters is initialized and Pd + 2 ions are reduced to Pd clusters by hydrazinium hydroxide; (c) nucleation and growth of Ni from the Pd clusters within the PS template. (d) Low-magnification SEM image of the gyroid-forming nanoporous Ni. The insets show the TEM image of the PS–Ni gyroid nanohybrids without staining and a photograph of the centimeter-sized nanoporous gyroid Ni bulks. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons. 
Furthermore, a variety of well-defined metallic nanostructures, such as metallic NPs, metallic branches, ordered nanoporous metallic particles, and gyroid-forming metallic networks, can be synthesized by controlling the nucleation and growth process (i.e., via the seeding growth approach) (Fig. 35).37 The seeding growth approach usually involves two steps: synthesis of the seeds (nuclei) and growth of the seeds. In contrast to the classical seeding growth process, the templated seeding growth for the synthesis of nanostructured Au provides the advantages of simple operation and an easy control of the size and shape of Au without the need for any surfactants or additional ions, such as Ag ions (Ag+). The initial Au seeds can be formed after reduction of the Au ions (Au+3) by strong reducing agents (i.e., hydrazinium hydroxide). The seeding density of Au can be easily adjusted by controlling the concentration of Au ions, in which the seeding density of Au increases with the initial concentration of Au ions. To achieve a successful templating, it is necessary to introduce the metal ions in advance to of the metal deposition. Therefore, weak reducing agents (i.e., DEA) are used for the growth process. Following the growth of Au nanostructures, a continuous reduction of Au ions can be homogeneously conducted with a reduction in time. Consequently, Au branches, ordered nanoporous Au particles, and gyroid-forming Au networks, can be gradually developed in a polymer matrix. Note that Au networks synthesized by the templated seeding growth approach retain defects, because it is difficult to completely fill the pores due to diffusion limitations. For a 3D architecture with gyroid-forming networks, electrochemical deposition is a feasible method to obtain well-ordered Au with long-range order by the deposition of Au in a gyroid-forming polymer template. By contrast, the advantage of the templated seeding growth approach is its ability to fabricate well-ordered branched Au and ordered nanoporous metallic particles, which can be hardly synthesized by other approaches.
 Fig. 35  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of well-defined nanostructured Au from BCP as a template: (a) PS-PLLA–gyroid phase (skeleton of gyroid-forming structure with two identical networks (green and red)); (b) gyroid-forming nanoporous PS template after removal of the PLLA network; (c) PS–Au nanohybrids from the controlled nucleation and growth of Au within the polymer template via a seeding growth approach; (d) nanostructured Au after removal of the PS template. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. 
To broaden the applications of gyroid-forming metallic materials, we demonstrated Au multibranches with gyroid-forming structures as bulks or continuous thin films for surface plasmon resonance (SPR)37 and for surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) applications.46 As shown in Fig. 36a and b, the embryonic form of gyroid-forming nanostructures with three-fold symmetry can extend from the top of the surface to give a hierarchical texture with well-defined Au multibranches implanting into the PS matrix (i.e., making it a 3D SERS-active substrate). Fig. 36c shows the experimental and simulated results for the gyroid-forming Au multibranches. Because of the highly-branched morphologies of the gyroid-forming structure, the ensemble absorption of the gyroid-forming Au multibranches appear as a shoulder peak ranging from 600 nm to 800 nm. Also, the profile of the simulation results is similar to that of the experimental results. Note that nanostructured Au with a highly branched morphology that absorbs and scatters in the near-infrared region (NIR, 760–1400 nm), the so-called optical window, can exhibit a strong enhancement of an electromagnetic field, leading to SERS for biomedical applications. Moreover, the PS–Au nanohybrids (i.e., well-defined Au multibranches in a PS matrix) can be easily fabricated for device design, due to easy processing of the polymeric materials. Based on device design, we suggest an effective method to create a 3D SERS-active substrate using a gyroid-forming nanoporous polymer as a template for templated electroless plating, leading to the formation of Au multibranches with sharp tips and corners for reliable SERS devices.46 To evaluate the performance of Au multibranches for SERS, a crystal violet (CV) solution was used as a probe molecule. Owing to the high specific surface area for the absorption of chemicals, the gyroid-forming SERS-active substrate with an increased number of tips and corners gives superior detecting performance. In comparison with the 2D SERS-active substrate, the SERS efficiency of the 3D SERS-active substrate composed of Au multibranches is significantly enhanced by the larger number of hotspots, as shown in Fig. 36d. The average enhancement factor of the 3D SERS-active substrate with Au multibranches is estimated to be approximately 4.6 × 108 at 532 nm. Therefore, a superior SERS detection sensitivity with high reproducibility and stability using a SERS-active substrate with gyroid-forming Au multibranches was successfully fabricated. These polymer–metal nanohybrids allow the fabrication of polymer-based SERS-active devices with mechanical robustness and chemical stability to provide protection from the surrounding environments.
 Fig. 36  The band structures of (a) FESEM images of the top-view of 3D gyroid-forming Au multibranches. (b) The corresponding cross-sectional view. The inset shows the photograph of the centimeter-sized 3D SERS-active substrate. (c) UV-Vis absorption spectra (blank squares) and FDTD simulation (solid lines) of multibranched Au in the PS template with a thickness of 200 nm via the templated seeding growth approach. (d) SERS spectra of 10−8 M CV adsorbed on 3D (red line) and 2D (black line) SERS-active substrates with Au multibranches and the CV bulk from the casting of 10−1 M CV (blue line) on a quartz substrate as the reference. The Raman shift at 1589 cm−1 (I1589) is labeled with a star. Reproduced from (a)–(c) ref. 37 with permission from Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons; (d) ref. 46 with permission from Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.4 Other templated approaches
As mentioned above, well-defined nanoporous ceramics and metals can be synthesized via a templated sol–gel reaction, electrochemical deposition, and electroless plating. However, it is difficult to control the reaction process to form complex morphologies, such as nanotubes, with tunable thickness. For this purpose, an atomic layer deposition (ALD) process was developed to fabricate nanomaterials with adjustable thickness. Wang and co-workers prepared highly porous (porosity up to 90%) 3D networks of interconnected metal oxide nanotubes by the ALD of metal oxides (Al2O3 and TiO2) onto swelling-induced nanoporous BCP templates.38 They demonstrated that the minority domains in amphiphilic BCPs (i.e., PS-P2VP) can be swollen by selective solvents, yielding a continuous nanoporous template after solvent evaporation. The nanoporous BCP template is then subjected to the ALD of metal oxides, yielding a conformal thin layer of oxides that tightly adheres to the BCP framework. The BCP component is then burned off and converted to void spaces with a likewise continuous morphology, whereas the coating oxide layer survives and maintains the integrity of the film (Fig. 37a). Although the Al2O3 nanotube networks were not well-ordered structures, their continuous pore systems with high porosity (∼70–90%) and ultrathin tube walls (around 3 nm) led to significantly improved humidity-sensing performance. The Al2O3 network shows a significantly higher current than others in the relative humidity range of 30–90%, because the larger porosity facilitates faster diffusion and consequently enhances the adsorption of more moisture onto the Al2O3 tube surface. Compared to other nanostructure-based sensors, the Al2O3 nanotube networks show a faster response time and recovery time, which is attributed to the highly porous and interconnected nanotube network structures.
 Fig. 37  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) the interconnected metal oxide (i.e., Al2O3 or TiO2) nanotubes fabricated by ALD onto templates of swelling-induced porous PS-P2VP BCPs. The insets from the top to bottom are the magnified SEM images of the positions near the upper surface, in the middle, and near the bottom of the cross section, respectively, and (b) well-defined ZnO networks after removal of the polymer template, followed by calcination. Reproduced from (a) ref. 38 with permission from Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 39 with permission from Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
Although the amphiphilic BCPs after solvent evaporation provide an easy way to obtain nanoporous polymer templates, their nanochannels in the polymer matrix are not well defined, resulting in disordered inorganic replicas. Steiner and co-workers reported a method for the robust and reliable synthesis of fully crystalline 3D well-defined ZnO networks using the ALD of ZnO into a nanoporous template from PS–PI.39 Several-micrometer-thick layers of nanoporous ZnO networks with a strut width of 30 nm could be synthesized by carefully optimizing the ALD processing conditions. ALD deposition into polymer templates requires careful selection of the deposition temperature. The ALD deposition window for ZnO is 80–150 °C, delimited by the minimum precursor reaction temperature and the precursor desorption from the template walls. Two types of exposure methods were explored: continuous flow and stop-flow methods, leading to a successful replication of the ZnO networks, as shown in (Fig. 37b). ZnO is a direct semiconductor with a wide bandgap of 3.37 eV. In its thin-film form, it is used as a transparent semi-conductive electrode for optoelectronic and solar cell applications. To demonstrate the potential application of the ALD-generated nanoporous ZnO layer for hybrid photovoltaics, a worm-like ZnO layer was deposited onto a conductive pre-patterned ITO substrate and then infiltrated with P3HT polymer. Although gyroid-forming ZnO networks can be fabricated by templated ALD, 3D worm-like ZnO networks were chosen here because of the better control over film thickness and uniformity, for demonstration of the optoelectronic efficiency. The increased effective surface area in the nanoporous layer increases exciton dissociation at the ZnO/P3HT interface and hence increases the photocurrent. Also, Steiner reported an interesting process for fabricating nanostructured calcite (CaCO3) single crystals with the gyroid morphology.176 In the reported process, single-crystal formation occurred via an amorphous precursor phase that infiltrated the nanoporous polymer network, faithfully replicating its 30 nm features. The method provided a strategy of using BCP self-assembly for the manufacture of tunable nanoporous bicontinuous ceramic films through direct crystal growth (Fig. 38a). The crystallization of CaCO3 in association with the prepared BCP films was carried out using the ammonium carbonate diffusion method, wherein the substrate was immersed in a solution of calcium chloride and exposed to ammonium carbonate vapor. Methanol (20 vol%) was added to the solution to facilitate its infiltration into the gyroid structure, which otherwise exhibited a hydrophobic behavior. The use of BCP templates therefore represents a significant step forward in developing a general strategy for synthesizing crystals with complex forms, where the overall size of the crystal, and the geometry and periodicity of their internal structures, are all controllable features (Fig. 38b).
 Fig. 38  (a) Schematic representation of the templated crystallization process. PS-b-PI self-assembles into a polymer film with a DG microphase. After removal of the bicontinuous PI networks (red and orange) from the PS matrix (blue), calcite crystals nucleate (scenario A) on the surface of or inside (scenario B) the polymer film and grow into the porous networks, leading to a gyroid-patterned single crystal, which is visible after removing the PS matrix. (b) Examples of the replication of a DG (bicontinuous networks) and a SG (just a single network) are shown. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Copyright 2009, John Wiley and Sons. 
5. Applications of well-ordered nanostructured materials
From the materials chemistry perspective, a common approach to address the current limitations in applications is to generate advanced materials with specific properties, or with combinations of specific properties, with architectures in the nanometer length scale. Precise compositional and morphological control down to the nanometer length scale in 3D space may lead to breakthroughs on many material applications. Network morphologies, such as gyroid-forming materials with 3D well-ordered structures in the nanoscale, are especially appealing for these purposes; as demonstrated in the previous section, where gyroid-forming materials from BCP templating could give stable, homogeneous, and isotropic materials, and thus could give rise to promising properties for use in many applications. For instance, as briefly mentioned in Section 4, gyroid-forming nanohybrids and nanoporous materials can be applied in optoelectronics (e.g., solar cells), energy storage, catalysis, and sensing, because of their homogeneous structures with high porosity and large specific surface area. For instance, in comparison with non-ordered network nanostructures of anatase TiO2 for solar cell applications, ordered TiO2 nanostructures, such as gyroid-forming nanostructures, possess superior performance, due to their better accessibility from their ordered pores with a high surface area and superior diffusion ability for the absorption of dyes.177 Moreover, nanoporous gyroid materials can be further surface-functionalized to extend their applications in many fields. For instance, biocompatible gyroid-forming nanoporous materials are suitable for use as a container in applications such as drug delivery, due to the precise control of pore size.45 As demonstrated in our laboratory, a poly(2-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA)-functionalized nanoporous gyroid SiO2 with double stimuli-responsive PDMAEMA brushes grafted on the surface of SiO2 could be fabricated. By taking advantage of the responses of the PDMAEMA to pH and temperature, their pore features could be well controlled by stretching and re-coiling. Because of the high porosity, open-cell character of the 3D network morphology with the uniform pore size and biocompatibility of SiO2, the functionalized nanoporous gyroid SiO2 can improve the therapeutic efficiency and specificity by being used as a the free-standing environment-selective delivery system. By controlling the pH or temperature, different releasing behavior can be observed in the cumulative release profiles of riboflavin-loaded PDMAEMA-functionalized nanoporous gyroid SiO2 in response to different environments. The as-designed system can provide new insights into stimuli-responsive polymers with respect to the corresponding controlled release behavior, with the drug release studies being closely consistent with the nanoporous materials containing grafted stimulus responsive polymers. Namely, gyroid-forming nanoporous materials have great potential to be functional materials, based on their homogeneously structural characters (e.g., uniform nanopores with high porosity and large specific surface area). Most importantly, a gyroid is a well-ordered structure with specific structural characters (i.e., well-ordered 3D networks) that give it novel optical and photonic characteristics, as well as useful mechanical properties with the free-standing structure. In the following section, we particularly focus on the properties and applications of 3D regular (i.e., gyroid-forming) nanostructured materials taking advantage of the “well-ordered” structural characteristics of the forming texture.
5.1 Photonic behaviors and optical properties of gyroid-forming nanostructures
Coloring in nature mostly comes from the inherent colors of materials, but sometimes it has a purely physical origin, such as diffraction or the interference of light, and this is called structural color. Over millions of years biological systems have developed delicately arranged architectures to produce striking optical effects. One of the most famous examples is the dazzling green color in the wings of some specific butterfly species, as shown in Fig. 39a, from two families in particular: Papilionidae and Lycaenidae, which result from complicated nanostructures at sub-micrometer scale, where which regular arrays of ornate chitin “single gyroid (SG, I4132)” sprout at their wings' surfaces.178 The butterflies have developed the thermodynamically favored double gyroid (DG, Iad) precursors as a route to form SG nanostructures, providing significant optical efficiency. Prum and co-workers showed that the cell plasma membrane and the smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) membrane in the butterfly wings interact to form a pair of parallel lipid-bilayer membranes, separated by the cellular cytoplasm. The two parallel lipid-bilayer membranes of the developing scale cell form a core–shell alternating DG morphology, which can be observed in the ABC triblock copolymer melts.179,180 By exploiting the inherent biological differentiation between the intracellular and extracellular volumes of a cell, the lipid-bilayer membranes of developing butterfly photonic scale cells define the unique pentacontinuous volumes of a core–shell DG (this should be a core–shell alternating DG) structure of the form ABCB′A′, in which A is the extracellular space, B is the plasma membrane, C is the cell's cytoplasmic volume, B′ is the SER membrane, and A′ is the intra-SER space (Fig. 39b and insets). Following the development of the ABCB′A′ core–shell alternating gyroid structure (Fig. 39c-I), chitin is deposited and polymerized in the extracellular space (A) that is now within the peripheral outline of the scale cell. This extracellular space forms the core of one of the gyroid networks (Fig. 39c, red), which is enclosed by the plasma membrane (Fig. 39c-II, black). As the cell dies, the cellular cytoplasm and the membranes (BCB′A′ blocks of the core–shell alternating gyroid) are replaced with air, leaving behind a SG network of chitin (A) in air (Fig. 39c-III). The developmental model proposes that the butterfly scale cells exploit the energetics of cubic membrane folding commonly seen in lipid-bilayer membranes of cellular organelles to develop the SG photonic nanostructures that are used in social and sexual communication. This 3D periodicity potentially manipulates light in all directions, so that a bright color is reflected over a broad angle. It is intuitive to ask the question as to why nature needs to develop such a complicated process in morphological evolution to simply structure color. The answer is straightforward and simple; only SG is able to provide a complete photonic bandgap for the reflection of light (see below for details), but the formation of SG from block copolymers is usually DG and not SG, because DG is the most stable phase thermodynamically, in which one is right-handed and the other is left-handed, hence these co-continuous networks do not give a cubic phase but rather a chiral one.
 Fig. 39  (a) Light micrograph of the dorsal wing cover scales of the Parides sesostris (Papilionidae). (Scale bar: 100 μm.) (b) TEM cross-section of a ventral wing scale cell, depicting the complex infolding of the plasma membrane and the SER membrane. The developing nanostructure shows the diagnostic motif of two concentric rings roughly in a triangular lattice. The yellow and red boxes highlight the areas revealing different sections through the (110) plane of a polarized (ABCB′A′) pentacontinuous core–shell alternating gyroid (the color insets). (Scale bar: 1 μm.) The inset shows a colored model of a core–shell alternating gyroid of the ABCB′A′ form. (c) 3D model of the development of a photonic butterfly wing scale cell. (I) Unit-cell volume rendering of the core–shell alternating gyroid model structure of the form ABCB′A′. Color of each component from inset in A. (II) SG composed of cell plasma membrane (black) surrounding extracellular space (red). (III) As the scale cell dies, the cellular cytoplasm and membranes (BCB′A′ blocks of the core–shell alternating gyroid) are replaced with air, leaving behind a SG core–shell network of chitin (red) in air. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Copyright 2010, National Academy of Sciences. 
In addition to the DG and SG morphologies, different well-ordered 3D network structures with interesting textures, including double primitive (DP, Im3m), double diamond (DD, Pn3m), single primitive (SP, Pm3m), and single diamond (SD, Fd3m), can also be found in BCP self-assembling systems. As mentioned above, the DG structure is found in a variety of BCPs, ABC terpolymer systems,181 and BCP–BCP and BCP–homopolymer blending systems.182 The DP structure has been documented in a polymer–ceramic precursor composite,183 and the DD morphology has been observed in a miktoarm star copolymer system of styrene and isoprene.184 To realize the photonic behaviors from the well-defined cubic networks, Thomas and co-workers calculated the bandgaps of these periodic bi- and tricontinuous cubic structures using the plane-wave method for solving Maxwell's equations.47 It is interesting to realize that the double networks (e.g., DG networks) possess no complete gaps (a pseudo-gap) for the parameter space studied, as shown in Fig. 40a. By contrast, the single network members, including SG, SD, and SP, possess a wide range of parameters for complete photonic gaps in the frequency domain between the lower set of bands and the upper (Fig. 40b–d). This shows that the increase in the symmetry of the multi-network system destroys the photonic properties of the system. Design guidelines for obtaining robust photonic bandgaps in the well-ordered 3D network morphologies have been given in the form of gap maps for a range of volume fractions and dielectric contrasts. The double network structures can be tailored such that the two networks become chemically distinct, thus decreasing the symmetry and yielding a possible pathway for forming the single, 3D morphologies at optical length scales, such as the smart butterfly developing its unique morphological evolution wing structure. Note that the networks and matrix are both 3D periodic and continuous structures. If one type of domain is removed (e.g., extracted via etching or hydrolysis) and the other component is a rigid material, the remaining structure would be free standing, giving the feasibility of using it as a template. A controlled dielectric contrast could be achieved in such photonic materials by etching and/or back filling, making these structures very desirable for large 3D photonic devices.
 Fig. 40  The band structures of: (a) DG structure with 38% volume fraction, showing an incomplete photonic bandgap (i.e., a pseudo-gap), (b) SG structure with 17% volume fraction, (c) SD structure with 42% volume fraction, and (d) SP structure with 33% volume fraction. The dielectric contrast is given by ε1 = 1.0, ε2 = 13.0. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Copyright 2002, American Physical Society. 
Biomimicking the biological photonic structures of butterfly wings, scientists have made a big effort to fabricate SG-forming materials in artificial manufacturing. For instance, Corkery and co-workers used natural butterfly wings as templates to fabricate micrometer-sized SG artificial replica by filling the porous templates with wax-like materials, followed by the dissolution of the chitin.49 Turner and co-workers used laser beams to write intricate photonic crystals with a micrometer-sized SG texture into commercial light-polymerizable photoresist materials.48 Recently, we suggested a simple approach for the preparation of nanomaterials with butterfly-like photonic properties by network shifting (i.e., utilizing a physical method instead of a chemical approach like the butterfly does) to break the inversion symmetry between the two coherent networks in the DG structure, giving nanomaterials with single gyroid-like scattering and photonic properties.50 As described in the previous section, gyroid-forming inorganic networks can be fabricated via a templated sol–gel reaction or by templated electroless plating using a nanoporous PS template with gyroid-forming nanochannels. The TEM image of a typical 〈211〉 projection of the DG-forming nanohybrids with a “double wave” pattern can be identified and is shown in Fig. 41a. After thermal treatment at high temperatures (greater than the Tg of the PS matrix) or removal of PS, the two independent SG-forming inorganic networks can be reallocated (i.e., shifted) to form network materials with SG-like optical properties. To trace the morphological evolution and to find any corresponding phase transition behavior, temperature-resolved SAXS experiments from 30 °C to 180 °C were carried out (Fig. 41d). A new reflection at the low q region can be found once the temperature is above the Tg of the PS matrix. The new reflection is at the relative q value of  compared to the second reflection at . On the basis of the scattering results, the thermal treatment results in a phase transformation to a new structure with the reflections at the relative q values of , marked by dotted arrows in Fig. 41e. It is noted that the network morphology after softening or removing the PS matrix will exhibit a variety of geometric dispositions due to the set of small arbitrary shifts with various directions and magnitudes between the two networks in a given DG grain. The overall network shifting will be nearly random due to the various constraints on coherent shifting. Consequently, the applied network shifting will break the inversion symmetry of the DG phase, resulting in two incoherent SG networks. The network pairs will have various registrations, varying from grain to grain, leading to a nanomaterial with SG-like scattering properties. Also, TEM observations were carried out to examine the morphologies of the nanohybrids after the thermal treatment, and show that the “double wave” pattern (Fig. 41a) of the DG structure transforms to a variety of unusual patterns, such as a honeycomb-like pattern (Fig. 41b). The patterns such as the honeycomb-like pattern are attributed to the shifting of the two inorganic networks in the polymer matrix, as indicated by the repositioning of the tripods marked with the red and green colors. An approximate 〈111〉 projection can also be found where the two networks are shifted with respect to the original DG structure (Fig. 41c).
 Fig. 41  (a) TEM micrographs of the 〈211〉 projection of polymer–ceramic nanohybrids before and (b) after thermal treatment. Two separated ceramic networks marked by the red and green tripods in the polymer matrix can be recognized. The insets show the enlarged areas of the corresponding micrographs. (c) The corresponding TEM micrograph of the 〈111〉 projection of (b). (d) Temperature-resolved 1D SAXS profiles of the nanohybrids, and (e) the corresponding variation of the 1D SAXS profiles. The reflections of the nanohybrids before and after the thermal treatment are marked with solid and dotted arrows, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
To examine the feasibility of exploiting this nanoporous material with SG-like properties for optical applications, the corresponding dispersion relations (band structure) w(k) were simulated using the software package Lumerical Solutions based on the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method. Owing to the high refractive index of the TiO2 material for photonic applications, the band structures were calculated for the DG, namely a perturbed DG with a specific shift, and SG comprised of TiO2–air with a refractive index of 2.5 surrounded by air (Fig. 42). For the DG, consistent with earlier work, no complete photonic bandgap is observed (Fig. 42a). By contrast, a partial photonic bandgap, as indicated by the arrow in Fig. 42b, opens between the 3rd and 4th bands at the gamma point for the perturbed DG morphology, resulting from a network shift of 42 nm along the 〈110〉 direction, reflecting the effect of the specific displacement on the band diagram. A complete gap can be found for a SG in the range of 0.585c/a < ω/2π < 0.623c/a, corresponding to the ultraviolet region, as shown in Fig. 42c (c is the speed of light and a is lattice parameter determined as 100 nm). Accordingly, one can expect that a structure composed of randomly shifted bicontinuous gyroid-forming networks would exhibit unique nanophotonic behaviors. In other words, we suggest a simple method for the preparation of new material systems by a random network shifting from materials with high symmetry (i.e., supergroup symmetry) to lower symmetry (i.e., subgroup symmetry), giving unique properties. The mechanism of network shifting could be applied in other registered bicontinuous cubic networks through a supergroup/subgroup transformation; for example, from coherent network structures to incoherent networks, such as double diamond (DD, Pnm) to single diamond-like (SD-like, Fdm) and from double P (DP, Imm) to single P-like (SP-like, Pmm). It is noted that various well-ordered polymer-based nanohybrids can be synthesized via a variety of templated approaches. Therefore, this approach represents a platform technology to fabricate novel networks with adjustable chemical compositions from bicontinuous cubic structures for novel properties.
 Fig. 42  The band structures of (a) DG, (b) shifted DG, and (c) SG nanostructures with a unit cell length of 100 nm and volume fraction of 30%, 30%, and 15%, respectively. The refractive index of the gyroid skeleton is 2.5 with an air/TiO2 dielectric contrast of 6.25:1. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
In contrast to photonic crystals from regular structures with long-range order, recently there has been considerable interest in amorphous photonic crystals that possess only short-range order.185 Different from ordered photonic crystals, amorphous photonic crystals show unique optical properties, including isotropic photonic bandgaps or photonic pseudo-gaps, noniridescent structural-color productions, localized states by defects, and localization due to disorder.150 These interesting properties demonstrate that amorphous photonic crystals are a new kind of optical material and could have a variety of important applications, such as in photonics, color-related technologies, displays, and in solar cells. Nevertheless, there still remain many problems that need in-depth studies to be carried out, both theoretically and experimentally, as it is difficult to fabricate real amorphous structure for systematic study. Before that, photonic crystals from well-ordered structures had been well developed and today still play an important role in optical applications. In addition to photonic materials for their effective bandgap, well-ordered nanoporous materials possess a great benefit to give specific optical properties such as antireflective properties. Nanoporous materials with a nanostructured surface topology can be applied as optical and optoelectronic materials because of their transparent character of a feature scale smaller than the wavelength of the incoming light, and also their low refractive index attributed to the high porosity. The refractive indices of porous materials are related to the degree of porosity and to the refractive indices of the corresponding dense materials. Because of their low refractive index properties, nanoporous materials have been extensively exploited in optical applications, in particular for their antireflection properties.186 Antireflection structures are used to restrict the reflection of light from the surface of optical components and to improve transmission. For instance, Steiner and co-workers demonstrated porous polymer films for antireflection structures. They excellently controlled their film thicknesses to under a few hundred nanometers, as well as their pore sizes, by blending PS and PMMA for spinodal decomposition through phase separation, followed by the selective removal of the PS blocks. Nevertheless, their antireflection structures made from polymeric materials (i.e., PMMA) are not wear-resistant and may have strong absorption of incident light. As a result, nanoporous inorganic materials should be the ideal candidates for antireflection materials. In particular, nanoporous materials with well-ordered nanotextures possess homogeneously distributed nanopores, giving reliable and independent antireflective properties of the wavelength. On the basis of these concepts, we demonstrated the fabrication of a nanoporous gyroid-forming SiO2 with high porosity and a well-defined 3D nanostructure via a templated sol–gel reaction from PS-PLLA for use in antireflective applications, as shown in Fig. 43 (see details in Section 4.1 with respect to the fabrication procedures of the nanoporous gyroid-forming SiO2).25
 Fig. 43  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of well-defined nanoporous gyroid-forming SiO2via templated sol–gel reaction. (a) PS-PLLA with a gyroid phase (skeleton of gyroid-forming bicontinuous networks with two identical networks (green and red)). (b) Nanoporous PS template with gyroid-forming nanochannels after removal of the minority PLLA network. (c) PS–SiO2 gyroid nanohybrids via the templated sol–gel process. (d) Nanoporous gyroid SiO2 after removal of the PS template as low refractive index materials. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
The porosity of the nanoporous gyroid SiO2 bulk from the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) measurements was determined as 66%; the higher porosity for the nanoporous gyroid SiO2 than the constituent volume fraction of the PS block (61%) after the PS block was removed by UV degradation is attributed to the presence of voids in the amorphous SiO2 matrix after evaporation of the solvent during the sol–gel reaction. Owing to the high porosity of the air voids and the low refractive index of amorphous SiO2 from the sol–gel reaction, the nanoporous gyroid SiO2 thin film (Fig. 44a) thus possesses an extremely low refractive index (as low as 1.1), leading, as expected, to a significant antireflection property (Fig. 44b). Therefore, nanoporous gyroid SiO2 thin films can be utilized in appealing applications, such as antireflection structured materials with high transmission, low reflection properties, and superior environmental resistance. Most importantly, unlike antireflective materials made from moth-eye structures, the low reflectivity of the nanoporous gyroid SiO2 is evident over the complete spectral range of visible light.
 Fig. 44  (a) FESEM micrograph of nanoporous gyroid SiO2 from PS–SiO2 gyroid nanohybrids after the UV removal of the PS template. (b) Normal-incidence reflectances of quartz (black dashed line) and gyroid-forming nanostructures with different constituents: PS-PLLA (solid red line); nanoporous PS template (solid purple line); PS–SiO2 gyroid nanohybrids (solid green line); and nanoporous gyroid SiO2 (solid blue line) on a quartz substrate. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
5.2 Gyroid-forming metamaterials
As mentioned above, photonic crystals can offer the possibility for controlling the flow of light, because their artificial periodic structures interact with an electromagnetic wave, strongly depending on the ratio between the lattice constant a and the electromagnetic wavelength λ. When λ ∼ a, light traveling through the photonic crystals strongly experiences the dielectric contrast between the different materials forming the periodic structure, in the same way as electrons “feel” the periodic potential in a semiconductor crystal. For a sufficiently strong dielectric contrast and with suitable geometric parameters, it is possible to obtain artificial materials possessing a frequency region in which light cannot propagate through the structure, called the photonic bandgap. On the other hand, when λ ≫ a, long-wavelength light traveling through the structure does not experience the details of the structure of the artificial material and the photonic crystal behaves as if it were homogeneous. Therefore, a new concept of optical materials is mentioned, leading to the development of metamaterials.187,188 Metamaterials are artificial materials engineered to have properties that have not yet been found in nature. They are assemblies of multiple individual elements fashioned from conventional materials, such as metals or plastics. Also metamaterials are usually constructed into repeating patterns, often with macroscopic structures. In 1999, Pendry and co-workers first investigated the spectral response of metamaterials with respect to the classic sparse cubic wire array, which exhibits a great plasma frequency leading to interesting properties, for example, negative refraction.187 Following this work, much effort has been devoted to the design and fabrication of metamaterials with a negative refractive index for use in potential applications. For example, negative index metamaterials can be used as superlenses to overcome the diffraction limit in imaging or to enable novel optical effects, including cloaking.189 As described above, structured color attributed to the gyroid texture has been found in several species of butterfly wing structure. Note that the photonic properties of the butterfly wing structure are attributed to the SG texture from the unique morphological evolution of DG. The DG structure is composed of a cubic matrix and a pair of continuous, interpenetrating but independent, coherent SG networks, one left- and one right-handed, to form an achiral structure in 3D space. By contrast, the SG structure is a chiral structure. Within each of the two network domains bounded by the gyroid, there are two chiral elements of opposite rotation sense: three-fold screw axes along the [111] and, in the opposite rotation sense, four-fold screw axes along the [100] axes, as shown in Fig. 45.190 It is believed that chirality will lead to circular dichroism effects that may relate to insect communication. Many arthropods can detect linearly polarized light but human cannot. In other words, this suggests that self-assembled biological structures are worth exploring for hints to the optimal design of synthetic chiral optical metamaterials and circular polarization-sensitive optical devices. Using a circular polarization analysis of the band structure of SG networks from butterfly wings, Schröder-Turk and co-workers demonstrated strong circular dichroism effects, e.g., SG microstructure showed significant circular dichroism for blue to ultraviolet light, that warranted a search for biological receptors sensitive to circular polarization.51
 Fig. 45  Various views of the gyroid minimal surface. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Copyright 2012, The Royal Society. 
The linearly polarized beamsplitter is another interesting optical device and is a widely used for optical component in photonics. It is typically built from a linearly birefringent crystal (e.g., calcite) with different critical reflection angles for right-handed and left-handed polarized light, leading to the transmission of one linear polarization and angled reflection of the other. Spiral photonic crystals, consisting of a square array of dielectric helices, can serve as a linearly polarized beamsplitter, however, they are highly anisotropic due to their uniaxial chirality. By contrast, a SG exhibits identical chiroptic properties along all three Cartesian axes, giving a linearly polarized beamsplitter regardless of the incident direction of light. Gu and co-workers presented a chiral beamsplitter for a linearly polarized beamsplitter from a nano-engineered photonic crystal.54 This device is schematically illustrated in Fig. 46a. A triangular prism with an internal nanostructure corresponding to a chiral SG with a cubic unit cell size a = 1.2 μm was fabricated by a galvo-dithered direct laser writing method. The chiral beamsplitter (Fig. 46b), consisting of a polymeric SG network (refractive index = 1.48) with a filling fraction of ∼30%, was oriented such that the top, bottom, and two sides of the prism clip the photonic crystal with a [100] inclination, and the input surface at the hypotenuse has a [110] inclination. While light is incident at 45° towards the prism's hypotenuse (Fig. 46a), the reflected (transmitted) intensity strongly depends on the circular polarization state of the incident plane wave because of the chirality of the SG texture. As shown in Fig. 46c, the incident light completely reflects off the chiral beamsplitter at a wavelength of 1570 nm due to the existence of a photonic bandgap. Light is in a transmission band and passes through the chiral beamsplitter with minimal reflection at the longer wavelength of 1650 nm. In particular, at a wavelength of 1615 nm, left-handed circularly polarized light is transmitted more through the chiral beamsplitter, whereas right-handed circularly polarized light is reflected more. The chiral beamsplitter phenomenon becomes significant at a wavelength of 1615 nm. As a result, the fabricated chiral SG network can be used to separate left- and right-handed circularly polarized light in the wavelength region around 1615 nm, providing a new form of polarization control.
 Fig. 46  (a) Illustration of the chiral beamsplitting phenomenon, where left circularly polarized light (blue) is transmitted and right circularly polarized light (red) is reflected. (b) SEM images of the chiral beamsplitter fabricated using galvo-dithered direct laser writing and consisting of 64000 unit cells of the SG network. The inset shows the zoomed-in view of the highlighted area. (c) Spectral plot of the transmission (solid lines) and reflection (dashed lines) of right-circularly polarized (red) and left-circularly polarized (blue) light. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
As mentioned above, most metamaterial fabrication today relies on top-down approaches, giving feasible approaches to produce 3D isotropic metamaterials for their practical applications. In contrast to the top-down approach, BCP self-assembly has emerged as a useful design tool to create well-ordered 3D nanostructures, including DG and DD for frontier nanoscale metamaterial properties. Wiesner and co-workers calculated the photonic bands of 3D periodic metallic nanomaterials (i.e., Au, Ag, and Al) with DG and with alternating DG morphologies. For the DG structure, negative refraction was predicted in the visible and near-infrared regime for low-loss metals like Ag and Al but not for Au. Owing to the chirality of the gyroid minority networks, circularly polarized light propagation was also predicted. They showed that the refractive index and negative refraction frequencies of the resultant metamaterials are controlled by the structural parameters of these morphologies. For the alternating DG structure, a surprising metallic bandgap was observed at low frequencies.52 It is noted that gyroid-forming metallic networks can be fabricated through templated electrochemical deposition and templated electroless plating using BCP as a template, as introduced in Section 4. Therefore, Steiner, Baumberg and co-workers first created SG-forming chiral optical metamaterial through the combination of BCP self-assembly and metal hybridization.29 A SG-forming Au network was prepared using ISO BCP films, which are known to self-assemble into the gyroid morphology with a chiral isoprene phase (i.e., alternating DG). As shown in Fig. 47a, the morphology of the orientated SG Au networks is perpendicular to the substrate surface across the entire sample, twinning in lateral directions with domain sizes of 10–100 μm. This material is continuous and has features in the 10 nm length scale and exhibits orientation-dependent color under linearly polarized incident light. Note that the DG structure is isotropic but the SG structure is anisotropic. As a result, the optical response of the SG structure strongly depends on its orientation. To probe the photonic behavior of the SG-forming Au metamaterial, transmission measurements on an aligned twinned domain were taken with left- and right-handed circularly polarized light. The sample was tilted by 35° and rotated around the [110] surface normal. For each full turn, there are two rotation angles for which the optical axis coincides with the chiral [111] direction of the SG. Fig. 47b shows the normalized difference in gyrotropic transmission (ΔT) between right- and left-handed polarized light as a function of sample rotation angle, averaged over the frequency region between 600 nm and 750 nm. There are two maximal rotation angles (0° and 180°) of the transmission of circularly polarized light, at which the optical axis is colinear with the [111] and [110] directions. By changing the rotation angle, the optical path is increasingly obstructed by the Au struts, causing the reduction of |ΔT|. Therefore, the chirality in this SG metamaterial can be clearly observed by the rotation of the sample. The gyrotropic transmission can be well reproduced by a finite difference time domain calculation. Also, a short-wavelength resonance is seen for polarization along the 〈100〉G direction of the domain in the SG sample, which is red-shifted by 20% in the perpendicular direction. These findings pave the way for the potential mass production of optical metamaterials. Also, Steiner and co-workers demonstrated several approaches to tune the optical behavior of SG-forming optical metamaterials.53 The optimized structural parameters led to a transmission through 300 nm thick layers of a SG-forming Au nanostructure up to 20%. These methods can also be applied to other 3D metamaterials. Increasing the lattice dimensions in the gyroid metamaterial reduces the plasma frequency and the transmissivity, which is highest for the small unit cell with the lowest filling fraction. By controlling the templated electrochemical deposition, nanoporous SG-forming templates with various filling fractions of Au can be achieved. With the increase of the filling fraction of Au from 30% to 90%, a reduction in the plasma wavelength results, leading to a blue shift of the reflectivity edge to shorter wavelengths. Once the filling fraction approaches 100% (i.e., solid SG-forming Au network), the reflection spectra are similar with that of solid Au and the reflection minimum disappears. Increasing the filling fraction of Au causes a continuous deformation in the shape of the reflectivity curves and increases the plasma frequency towards solid Au. Finally, the optical characteristics can be reversibly tuned by adjusting the refractive index of the medium that is infiltrated into the gyroid pore structure, revealing a linear variation of the plasma edge with the refractive index.
 Fig. 47  (a) SEM image of the area with the aligned SG-forming Au network where the optical measurements were performed. (b) Gyrotropic transmission through a sample inclined at 35°. The gyrotropic transmission is the difference between the transmission spectra in the left and right channels as the sample was rotated around the [110] axis. The open symbols are the results of a finite difference time domain calculation, while the full ones are the measurements. Lines are the guides for the eye. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons. 
5.3 Periodic bicontinuous hybrids for energy absorption
As an extension of optical metamaterials, metamaterials can be broadly defined as including all well-ordered micro-/nano-structured materials, regardless of the relative scale ratio between the characteristic structural length and the wavelengths of electromagnetic or mechanical waves.191 The structure of metamaterials can be considered as a homogeneous effective medium, because the characteristic length scale of their structures are one or more orders smaller than the wavelengths. The effective properties of a material arise not from the bulk behavior of the materials which compose it, but more from their deliberate structuring. As a result, metamaterials are at the intersection of two classical categories: materials and devices. The metamaterial concept has recently been extended to a variety of material properties, especially the mechanical behaviors. Compared to irregular structured materials, the mechanical properties of 3D well-ordered structured materials (i.e., mechanical metamaterials) are easier to predict using numerical simulations because of their regular geometries. In particular, it is well known that regular structural materials possess a negative Poisson's ratio due to their structural anisotropy, leading to better mechanical properties. Many natural structural materials are highly mechanically anisotropic, for instance, the shell of an abalone, the exoskeleton of a lobster, and human bones. Therefore, the evolution of mechanical metamaterials made from 3D periodic structured materials aims to develop entirely new and greatly enhanced material behaviors by rational design. From the above introduction of the unique texture of gyroid-forming networks, we can clearly ascertain their interesting properties and applications in optical fields based on their well-ordered chiral structures. In addatin for optical applications, by extension of the well-ordered structural character, the 3D periodic nanostructures possess great capacity for energy absorption for uses in the engineering of mechanically superior materials. It is well known that by fabricating randomly porous metals, materials with stronger mechanical properties are possible because of the nanoscale dimensions of the ligaments. Recently, a relatively new class of cellular materials, holographically defined networks, has been fabricated by the light-induced cross-linking of photoresists using the interference of multiple laser beams (i.e., interference lithography).192 Unlike traditional cellular materials, the cell geometry and topology of the holographic 3D periodic networks can be rationally designed. The geometry, scale, and volume fraction of the microstructure can be precisely controlled by interference lithography, while post exposure baking and flood illumination gives control of the cross-linking density of the materials. The cross-linking density, combined with the length scale and geometry of the material structures, tailor and determine the global mechanical behaviors of the system. Therefore, nanoscale networks made by interference lithography may lead to improved mechanical properties beyond specific stiffness, including enhanced energy absorption and fracture toughness. Thomas and co-workers elucidated how the mechanical characteristics depended on the relative density, including anisotropic deformation, elastic moduli, the elastic deformation limit, plastic deformation modes, and energy dissipation.55 They used a photo-cross-linkable epoxy resin (SU-8, Microchem) to fabricate epoxy nanoframes through multiple beam interference lithography with UV laser beams (λ = 355 nm). After exposure, the sample was then baked to initiate cross-linking in the high exposure areas, and the uncross-linked areas were subsequently washed out in a development process, leading to the formation of a well-ordered nanoporous material. As shown in Fig. 48a, the loads were applied by a diamond spherical indenter with the same rate of loading and unloading. Periodic bicontinuous nanoscale networks show several distinctive mechanical characteristics compared to traditional randomly structural cellular materials. Because of their anisotropic nature, spherical indentation deformation leads to a 3-fold symmetric residual indent and a modulus-relative density scaling exponent of 1.26. The modulus of nanoscale networks does not change monotonically with their relative density, instead the modulus exhibits a transition point near a relative density of 0.65, and the energy dissipation also transitions at this same relative density. Moreover, reducing the relative density to 0.50 results in the nanoscale networks dissipating 25% more energy per unit volume than for a relative density of 0.75 (Fig. 48b). The moduli derived from the larger load (e.g., 1.2 mN) are not sensitive to the relative density, giving higher values than those determined from the lower load (e.g., 0.6 mN). They simulated the representative volume elements of the nanoframe microstructures to identify the deformation mechanisms underlying the transition in the modulus and dissipation with relative density, as well as underlying the remarkable energy dissipation per unit volume achieved in these structures. These simulations found that there was a transition from shear-compression combined with deformation to a shear-dominant one as the relative density decreased below 0.65; these same deformation modes provided the enhanced energy dissipation, suggesting alternative microstructural designs for achieving and optimizing the energy dissipation. In other words, nanoscale networks with well-ordered nanopores can lead to better energy absorption.
 Fig. 48  (a) SEM micrograph with a schematic of the spherical indenter. A nanoscale network is supported by a uniform SU-8 film. (b) The relative moduli of the nanoscale networks for two different maximum loads. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
By biomimicking from biological composites, Thomas and co-workers further demonstrated the mechanical behavior of an interpenetrating carbon–epoxy periodic submicrometer-scale bicontinuous composite material.56 Biological composites, including bones, fish scales, and nacres, demonstrate exceptional protection performance via their intricate 3D submicrometer-scale architectures.193 There are several design rules required for outstanding biological composites, such as (i) a combination of hard and soft materials for strength and toughness, (ii) structural anisotropic materials should be oriented in a desired direction for enhanced performance, (iii) strong 3D interlocking of phases is needed for load sharing and energy dissipation, and (iv) submicrometer scale architecture with flaw insensitivity should be used. Thomas and co-workers investigated three different classes of submicrometer-scale networks: epoxy-A–air, pyrolyzed carbon–air, and pyrolyzed carbon–epoxy-B composites, and focused on their energy absorption characteristics (Fig. 49a). An assessment of the energy absorption capabilities of the three types of structures was performed by carrying out microscopic uniaxial compression tests of the pillar-shaped test regions, presenting a well-defined compression volume without imposing significant strain gradients. After the compression, all the micropillars were completely crushed to estimate the maximum attainable energy absorption (Fig. 49b). In contrast to the epoxy-A–air and pyrolyzed carbon–air composites, the fragments of the carbon–epoxy-B composite are more retained at the collapsed site, because of the more brittle carbon fragments contained in the epoxy-B phase. From the stress and strain results, direct comparison of the three different types of pillars in terms of modulus and compressive strength is possible. Interestingly, all the pillars can undergo significant compression to over 10% strain without failure (Fig. 49c). This behavior primarily resulted from the carbonized epoxy-A itself, because of the 14% strain at a yield point in the compression tests of the solid carbon pillars. Also, several major collapse events do not cause the total failure of the pillar. Exceptionally high specific energy absorption values were observed in all the nanoscale networks: epoxy-A–air (310–370 kJ kg−1), pyrolyzed carbon–air (380–570 kJ kg−1), and pyrolyzed carbon–epoxy-B (470–720 kJ kg−1), as shown in Fig. 49d. These values are considerably higher than for other advanced energy absorption materials (30–275 kJ kg−1). The higher value of the specific energy absorption of pyrolyzed carbon–air over epoxy-A–air can be attributed to a change in the basic material from polymer to carbon. On the other hand, the 25% increase in the specific energy absorption of the two-phase bicontinuous pyrolyzed carbon–epoxy-B composite over the pyrolyzed carbon–air results from the synergic effect via introduction of the polymer phase. Interphase interactions, including stress transfer and strain sharing, are essential to make the composite system defect-insensitive and to enhance its specific energy absorption. In other words, significantly improved energy absorbing materials are possible by exploiting the periodic bicontinuous frame architecture, which offers practical opportunities to develop high-performance protective films by mechanically fusing two different materials with high specific area into an interlocked topology. As numerous geometrical and material variations are possible, this approach may become an important method to achieve unprecedented artificial nanocomposite materials in the future.
 Fig. 49  (a) Schematic illustration of the compression experiment. (b) SEM images of: (1) epoxy-A–air, (2) pyrolyzed carbon–air, and (3) pyrolyzed carbon–epoxy-B pillars. (4–6) SEM images after uniaxial compression tests. (c) Engineering stress–strain from the first loading curves of all tested pillars. The actual data points are shown in a darker color. (d) Ranges of the upper limit (solid line) and lower limit (dashed line) of the specific energy absorption of the three materials versus compressive strength. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
6. Concluding remarks and perspective
Although the manufacturing process of using templated synthesis is an ancient skill and the fabrication of complicated and delicate sculptures with fine details can be achieved by such an approach on a large scale, it is highly challenging and requires sophisticated technologies to fabricate materials in the nanoscale. Even with rapid advances in technology, the preparation of nanomaterials, in particular with well-ordered textures, remains challenging for the development of procedures providing a rational design of tailor-made structures and the incorporation of customized functionalities while retaining sufficient stability of the mechanical and thermal properties. In contrast to the limitations in size and the time-consuming nature of the processing from top-down methods for nanostructure fabrication, bottom-up (i.e., self-assembly) approaches are able to create nanostructured materials with delicate shapes and a high degree of order, and even controlled orientation, in a facile and swift way. For the fabrication of well-ordered nanomaterials by templated syntheses, self-assembling approaches can be simply classified into hard and soft templates on the basis of the development procedures carried out for the templated syntheses. The use of pre-prepared templates is a hard templating approach. By contrast, using amphiphilic molecules as structure-directing agents for the formation of nanostructured materials in one step is a soft templating approach. While the soft templating approach possesses simple and easy structural formation, it is difficult for large areas and for the controlled orientation of forming ordered nanostructures, due to its complicated phase behaviors. A much more direct method for the preparation of nanostructured materials with controlled pore size, shape formation, and order, as well as orientation from templated syntheses, is to use pre-formed templates. On the basis of the material properties of the templates, in contrast to the use of inorganic templates such as silica- and carbon-based templates, templates made of self-assembled molecules or polymers are referred to as organic templates. Note that it is also much easier to remove the organic templates completely without causing damage to the filling materials, because the fillers for hybridization usually possess distinct properties with the organic matrix. Organic materials can be degraded through hydrolysis, ozone decomposition, UV degradation, reactive ion etching, and calcination. By consideration of the templates with easily degradable properties but sufficient mechanical strength, nanoporous polymers are usually excellent candidates as templates. Also, it is much easier to create a monolith of nanomaterials with a large area, especially in the thin-film state, due to the easy processing of polymeric materials. For the fabrication of nanoporous polymers, one of the most convenient ways is to use degradable BCPs for the self-assembly to create well-ordered nanostructured phases, followed by the preferential removal of the constituent components in BCPs through degeneration, as described above.
For the fabrication of 3D nanohybrids with complex ordered structures and self-supporting nanoporous materials, DG from the self-assembly of BCPs is especially appealing. After selective degeneration of the minor phase, the DG nanostructure can be exploited to create fully interconnected nanochannels, leading to great potential for the fabrication of inorganic network nanostructures from different templated syntheses. Because of their high porosity and large specific surface area, nanoporous materials resulting from the templating of gyroid are very promising for use in a variety of applications. Unfortunately, the gyroid morphology, which has a kind of multi-continuous structure, occurs over rather limited areas of the phase portrait, essentially in narrow slivers on either side of the diagram between the cylinders and lamellae. A facile method to acquire the DG phase from the self-assembly of chiral block copolymers (BCPs*), polystyrene-b-poly(L-lactide) (PS-PLLA) is therefore suggested. A wide region for the formation of DG can be found in the phase diagram of the BCPs*, suggesting that the helical phase (H*) from the self-assembly of BCPs* can serve as a stepping stone for the formation of the DG, due to its easy path for the order-order transition from a two-dimensional to a three-dimensional (network) structure. Moreover, our recent studies found that the order-order transition from metastable H* to stable DG can be expedited by blending the PS-PLLA with a compatible entity. Owing to the use of the low-molecular-weight oligomer, the increase in the BCP chain mobility in the blends significantly reduces the transformation time for the order-order transition from H* to DG. Consequently, by taking advantage of the degradable character of the PLLA, nanoporous gyroid inorganic materials can be fabricated using hydrolyzed PS-PLLA blends as a template for many reactions, such as the sol–gel reaction, electroplating, electroless plating and atomic layer deposition, followed by removal of the PS matrix. Most importantly, well-defined nanostructured phases can be tailored by the molecular engineering of synthetic BCPs to obtain promising features for applications in nanotechnologies, in particular by exploiting nanostructured gyroid thin films with controlled orientation and thickness over a large area. In contrast to the use of degradable BCPs, well-ordered nanoporous polymers can be fabricated by using solvents for dissolution of the constituent components to create the pore structures or for evaporation-induced pore formation in BCP systems. However, control of the intrinsic texture for the porous structure or pore texture formation and corresponding orientation, in particular in the thin-film state, may require dedicated approaches or processing. Moreover, the formation of well-defined 3D textures or porous textures remains challenging using BCP as a structure-directing material, since it strongly relies on the well-controlled kinetics process for microphase separation from sophisticate phase behaviors. As a result, the use of self-assembled morphologies directly from degradable BCPs has become as templates for fabricating well-defined nanostructured materials. Certainly, this approach will require additional research efforts in terms of researching appropriate methods for removal of the degradable component. Moreover, for the controlled orientation of a DG nanostructure, as demonstrated recently by our laboratory, the controlled ordering of gyroid thin films on a neutral substrate can be achieved by solvent annealing. With the use of appropriate solvents, it is possible to acquire a thin-film sample with a thermodynamically stable gyroid thin film with the (211) plane parallel to the air surface and also to the functionalized substrate, giving a DG template with a specific orientation. In contrast to the well-ordered bicontinuous structures such as gyroid, disordered bicontinuous nanoporous materials can be fabricated by templating with BCPs. This class of porous material has been investigated rather extensively, and this type of nanoporous medium also carries many of its advantages in specific applications without the constraints associated with aligning cylinders or hitting the restricted regions where the gyroid is found.
For templated syntheses, the fully-developed nanochannels from prepared BCP templates can provide enough space for a high loading of inorganic fillers, thus giving a free-standing and well-defined inorganic nanostructure after removal of the matrix, and also a controlled order and orientation can be achieved before the conduction of templated syntheses. Most importantly, there are many syntheses available using pre-made templates as nanoreactors for controlled reactions. Nevertheless, how to pore-fill the template with reactive agents is usually critical for the successful templating and requires extensive efforts for control of the pore-filling to overcome the blocking problem caused by large gel formation from the sol–gel reaction, the concentration gradient for electroplating, and nucleation and chemical deposition from the outer surface of the template for electroless plating and atomic layer deposition, respectively. For templated electroplating, with the use of the templates deposited on conductive substrates, metal-based and ceramic-based nanomaterials, and even semi-conductive nanomaterials with gyroid-forming morphologies, can be successfully fabricated. In contrast to templated electroplating, the formation of a variety of metallic materials through nucleation and growth processes can be achieved by electroless plating without the application of an electric field for the reduction of metal ions, providing the feasibility to fabricate micrometer particles with nanoporous textures and multibranched metallic materials. The templated sol–gel reaction is a very comprehensive method to fabricate a variety of ceramic nanomaterials, because of the sophisticated development of sol–gel sciences (many available recipes for the sol–gel reaction). In the case of templated ALD, with appropriate control of the diffusion problem for the precursors, it is highly possible to fabricate tubular and even core–shell textures, due to the controllable deposition rate from the reaction cycles. Consequently, free-standing, well-ordered nanoporous inorganics with specific functions for appealing applications can be fabricated by removal of the polymer matrix from the fabricated organic–inorganic nanohybrids due to its self-supporting character.
The gyroid-forming materials from BCP templating can give stable, homogeneous and isotropic materials, thus giving it promising properties for many applications. As a result, gyroid-forming nanoporous materials can be applied in optoelectronics (e.g., solar cells), energy storage, catalysis, and sensing because of their homogeneous structures with high porosity and large specific surface area. Moreover, nanoporous gyroid materials can be surface-functionalized to extend their applications in many fields, such as in drug delivery, due to the precise control on pore size, improved therapeutic efficiency, and specificity, by addressing the free-standing environment-selective delivery system. Most importantly, the gyroid is a well-ordered structure with specific structural characters (i.e., well-ordered 3D networks) that give it novel optical and photonic characteristics, as well as good mechanical properties with a free-standing structure. As demonstrated for nanoporous gyroid SiO2, the porosity of the nanoporous gyroid SiO2 from Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) measurements is approximately 66%, giving a low refractive index as low as 1.1, leading to a significant antireflection property in the whole visible spectrum, due to its low refraction and ordered texture. Therefore, nanoporous gyroid SiO2 thin films can be utilized in many appealing applications, such as antireflection structured materials that have high transmission, low reflection properties, and superior environmental resistance. Most importantly, unlike antireflective materials made from moth-eye structures, the low reflectivity of the nanoporous gyroid SiO2 is evident over the complete spectral range of visible light. Also, with manipulation of the shifting network (a physical method instead of a chemical approach like the butterfly uses to break the inversion symmetry between the two coherent networks in DG structure), the formed nanoporous SG-like TiO2 is expected to have nanophotonic behaviors, similar to the optical properties of a butterfly wing structure, in which the reflective wavelength is equivalent to the dimension of the nanostructured gyroid. For optical applications, it is also noted that disordered bicontinuous nanoporous materials may possess the advantages of short-range order for photonic applications, such as broadband reflection and scattering enhanced light absorption, as well as high reflectance with angle independence. As a result, it is promising to use BCPs as templates for the formation of nanoporous materials by tuning the forming structures in the long-range and short-range order for practical applications.
One of the most exciting research areas involves exploiting the BCP templating to create ordered nanohybrids and nanoporous materials for the properties of metamaterials. In contrast to photonic crystals where the period is commensurate with the target range of wavelengths of light, metamaterials have been developed – a new concept of artificial structures ranging from several times to several orders smaller than the targeted wavelength. There should involve many interesting behaviors, in particular the chiral photonic of the metamaterials, being suggested but not much of anything yet is really convincing experimentally on novel photonics that can be enabled by chiral materials, especially 3D chiral materials. The gyroid has chiral networks. With the development of the platform technology for the fabrication of diverse gyroid nanohybrids and nanoporous materials, it is possible to take advantage of the chiral properties of the gyroid structure. Many novel properties, such as negative refraction and circular polarization-dependent properties, can be expected for use in applications such as in superlenses, chiroptics and sub-wavelength imaging, because of the chiral character and repeating patterns of the gyroid structure; metallic gyroid materials can also be seen as candidates for chiral metamaterial devices. How to control the chirality of gyroid structure becomes essential for those applications, but currently remains a challenge.
Another long standing challenge is to understand the confinement principles of BCP-directed templated syntheses even at the molecular level. In addition, from an application point of view, the development of simple and scalable procedures for the construction of well-ordered porous materials with hierarchical structures at different organization levels is particularly appealing in many cases, since the hierarchical pores are expected to synergistically exhibit the advantage of each class of pore. The final goal is to merge concepts and tools from different methodologies and complex components together for the development of well-ordered nanohybrids and nanoporous materials with innovative properties targeting selected applications, and resulting from the effects of size and shape on the nanoscale, and the functions of order and controlled orientation from the forming arrays, as well as the appealing functions and complexity that come from the well-ordered structures and morphologies.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Science Council of the Republic of China, Taiwan, under Contract NSC 102-2120-M-007-002 and Grant NSC 102-2633-M-007-002.
Notes and references

          http://www.liuli.com/en-us/index.aspx
        .

          G. Cao, Nanostructures & Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties & Applications, Imperial College Press, London,  2004 Search PubMed .
B. Das, S. Subramanium and M. R. Melloch, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 1993, 8, 1347 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, Science, 2002, 295, 2418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Prockop and A. Fertala, J. Struct. Biol., 1998, 122, 111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Martin, Science, 1994, 266, 1961 CAS .
T. Kyotani, T. Nagai, S. Inoue and A. Tomita, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 609 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Göltner and M. C. Weissenberger, Acta Polym., 1998, 49, 704 CrossRef .
R. C. Furneaux, W. R. Rigby and A. P. Davidson, Nature, 1989, 337, 147 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang, J. Cizeron, J. F. Bertone and V. L. Colvin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 7957 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Kresge, M. E. Leonowicz, W. J. Roth, J. C. Vartuli and J. S. Beck, Nature, 1992, 359, 710 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ryoo, S. H. Joo and S. Jun, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Meng, D. Gu, F. Zhang, Y. Shi, H. Yang, Z. Li, C. Yu, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, F. Xu, B. Sun, R. Fu, H. He and K. Matyjaszewski, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 3959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Thomas, D. M. Anderson, C. S. Henkee and D. Hoffman, Nature, 1988, 334, 598 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Bates, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 525 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Bates and G. H. Fredrichson, Phys. Today, 1999, 52, 32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, C. Harrison, P. M. Chaikin, R. A. Register and D. H. Adamson, Science, 1997, 276, 1401 CrossRef CAS .
V. Z.-H. Chan, J. Hoffman, V. L. Lee, H. Iatrou, A. Avgeropoulos, N. Hadjichristidis, R. D. Miller and E. L. Thomas, Science, 1999, 286, 1716 CrossRef CAS .
T. Thurn-Albrecht, R. Steiner, J. DeRouchey, C. M. Stafford, E. Huang, M. Bal, M. Tuominen, C. J. Hawker and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 787 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Cheng, C. A. Ross, V. Z. H. Chan, E. L. Thomas, R. G. H. Lammertink and G. J. Vancso, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1174 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Zalusky, R. Olayo-Valles, C. J. Taylor and M. A. Hillmyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1519 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Ho, W. H. Tseng, H. W. Fan, Y. W. Chiang, C. C. Lin, B. T. Ko and B. H. Huang, Polymer, 2005, 46, 9362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Tseng, C. K. Chen, Y. W. Chiang, R. M. Ho, S. Akasaka and H. Hasegawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Hsueh, H. Y. Chen, M. She, S. C. K. Chen, R. M. Ho, S. Gwo, H. Hasegawa and E. L. Thomas, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Hsueh and R. M. Ho, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. W. Crossland, M. Kamperman, M. Nedelcu, C. Ducati, U. Wiesner, D. M. Smilgies, G. E. S. Toombes, M. A. Hillmyer, S. Ludwigs, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. W. Crossland, S. Ludwigs, M. A. Hillmyer and U. Steiner, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 670 RSC .
S. Vignolini, N. A. Yufa, P. S. Cunha, S. Guldin, I. Rushkin, M. Stefik, K. Hur, U. Wiesner, J. J. Baumberg and U. Steiner, Adv. Mater., 2011, 24, OP23 Search PubMed .
M. R. J. Scherer, L. Li, P. M. S. Cunha, O. A. Scherman and U. Steiner, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wei, M. R. J. Scherer, C. Bower, P. Andrew, T. Ryhänen and U. Steiner, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. J. Scherer and U. Steiner, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hashimoto, K. Tsutsumi and Y. Funaki, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 6869 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vukovic, S. Punzhin, Z. Vukovic, P. Onck, J. T. M. De Hosson, G. ten Brinke and K. Loos, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1913 CrossRef PubMed .
G. G. du Sart, I. Vukovic, Z. Vukovic, E. Polushkin, P. Hiekkataipale, P. Hiekkataipale, J. Ruokolainen, K. Loos and G. ten Brinke, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 366 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. Hsueh, R. M. Ho, Y. C. Huang, C. H. Lai, T. Makida and H. Hasegawa, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Hsueh, H. Y. Chen, Y. C. Hung, Y. C. Ling, S. Gwo and R. M. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, X. Yao, Z. Wang, W. Xing, W. Jin, J. Huang and Y. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kim, Y. Vaynzof, A. Sepe, S. Guldin, M. Scherer, P. Cunha, S. V. Roth and U. Steiner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 863 CrossRef CAS .
V. Luzzati and P. A. Spegt, Nature, 1967, 215, 701 CrossRef CAS .

          A. H. Schoen, NASA Technical Note TN D-5541, 1970.
R. M. Ho, Y. W. Chiang, S. C. Lin and C. K. Chen, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Wang, L. H. Yu, X. B. Wang and R. M. Ho, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 7993 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. W. Crossland, M. Nedelcu, C. Ducati, S. Ludwigs, M. A. Hillmyer, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Lee, H. Y. Hsueh, U. S. Jeng and R. M. Ho, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 3041 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Hsueh, H. Y. Chen, Y. C. Ling, W. S. Huang, Y. C. Hung, S. Gwo and R. M. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4667 RSC .
M. Maldovan, A. M. Urbas, N. Yufa, W. C. Carter and E. L. Thomas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 165123 CrossRef .
M. D. Turner, G. E. Schröder-Turk and M. Gu, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 10001 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Millea, E. C. Tyrodea and R. W. Corkery, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9873 RSC .
H. Y. Hsueh, Y. C. Ling, H. F. Wang, L. Y. Chang Chien, Y. C. Hung, E. L. Thomas and R. M. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saba, M. Thiel, M. D. Turner, S. T. Hyde, M. Gu, K. Grosse-Brauckmann, D. N. Neshev, K. Mecke and G. E. Schröder-Turk, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 103902 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hur, Y. Francescato, V. Giannini, S. A. Maier, R. G. Hennig and U. Wiesner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Salvatore, A. Demetriadou, S. Vignolini, S. S. Oh, S. Wuestner, N. A. Yufa, M. Stefik, U. Wiesner, J. J. Baumberg, O. Hess and U. Steiner, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Turner, M. Saba, Q. Zhang, B. P. Cumming, G. E. Schröder-Turk and M. Gu, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 801 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, L. Wang, S. Kooi, M. C. Boyce and E. L. Thomas, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee, L. Wang, M. C. Boyce and E. L. Thomas, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, C. Sanchez, B. Lebeau and J. Patarin, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4093 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Lu and F. Schüth, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1793 CrossRef CAS .
W. Stöber, A. Fink and E. Bohn, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1968, 26, 62 CrossRef .
T. Yokoi, Y. Sakamoto, O. Terasaki, Y. Kubota, T. Okubo and T. Tatsumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Goodwin, J. Hearn, C. C. Ho and R. H. Ottewill, Colloid Polym. Sci., 1974, 252, 464 CAS .
J. W. Goodwin, R. H. Ottewill, R. Pelton, G. Vianello and D. E. Yates, Br. Polym. J., 1978, 10, 173 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zou, S. Ma, R. Guan, M. Park, L. Sun, J. J. Aklonis and R. Salovey, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1992, 30, 137 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, B. Gates, Y. Yin and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 693 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 42, 2610 RSC .
F. Caruso, R. A. Caruso and H. Möhwald, Science, 1998, 282, 1111 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, M. Chen, X. Fanga and L. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5472 RSC .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huang, Y. Wu, H. Feick, N. Tran, E. Weber and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 113 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Pan, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2001, 291, 1947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yang, H. Yan, S. Mao, R. Russo, J. Johnson, R. Saykally, N. Morris, J. Pham, R. He and H. J. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 323 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2004, 16, 829 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang and J. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima and T. Ichihashi, Nature, 1993, 363, 603 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Bethune, C. H. Klang and M. S. de Vries, Nature, 1993, 363, 605 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2002, 297, 787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sgobba and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 165 RSC .
P. M. Ajayan, O. Stephan, Ph. Redlich and C. Colliex, Nature, 1995, 375, 564 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Satishkumar, A. Govindaraj, E. M. Vogl, L. Basumallick and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Res., 1997, 12, 604 CrossRef CAS .

          R. L. Fleisher, P. B. Price and R. M. Walker, Nuclear Tracks in Solids, University of California Press, Berkeley, CA,  1975 Search PubMed .
H. Masuda and K. Fukuda, Science, 1995, 268, 1466 CAS .
A. P. Li, F. Müller, A. Birner, K. Nielsch and U. Gösele, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 6023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nielsch, J. Choi, K. Schwirn, R. B. Wehrspohn and U. Gösele, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 677 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. M. Jani, D. Losic and N. H. Voelcker, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 636 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Hulteen and C. R. Martin, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1075 RSC .
J. Lee, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2073 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, Z. Li and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2008, 47, 3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. H. Lu, D. Zhao and Y. Wan, Nanocasting: A versatile strategy to create nanostructured porous materials, RSC Publishing,  2009 Search PubMed .
T. Y. Ma, L. Liu and Z. Y. Yuan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3977 RSC .
C. Triantafillidis, M. S. Elsaesser and N. Hüsing, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3833 RSC .
C. Gérardin, J. Reboul, M. Bonne and B. Lebeaub, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4217 RSC .
Y. Xia, B. Gates and Z. Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 409 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Norris, E. G. Arlinghaus, L. Meng, R. Heiny and L. E. Scriven, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1393 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Dziomkina and G. J. Vancso, Soft Matter, 2005, 1, 265 RSC .
J. Zhang, Z. Sun and B. Yang, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Holland, C. F. Blanford and A. Stein, Science, 1998, 281, 538 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stein, B. E. Wilson and S. G. Rudisill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2763 RSC .
D. Zhao, J. Feng, Q. Huo, N. Melosh, G. H. Fredrickson, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Science, 1998, 279, 548 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Q. Huo, J. Feng, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 6024 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kruk, M. Jaroniec, R. Ryoo and J. M. Kim, Microporous Mater., 1997, 12, 93 CrossRef CAS .
C. Z. Yu, Y. H. Yu and D. Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2000, 575 RSC .
J. Fan, C. Z. Yu, T. Gao, J. Lei, B. Z. Tian, L. M. Wang, Q. Luo, B. Tu, W. Z. Zhou and D. Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, C. Burger and B. Chu, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2003, 28, 5 CrossRef .
N. Mizoshita, T. Tani and S. Inagaki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 789 RSC .
P. Van Der Voort, D. Esquivel, E. De Canck, F. Goethals, I. Van Driessche and F. J. Romero-Salguero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3913 RSC .
Y. Deng, J. Wei, Z. Sun and D. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4054 RSC .
F. Danhier, E. Ansorena, J. M. Silva, R. Coco, A. L. Breton and V. Préat, J. Controlled Release, 2012, 161, 505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kamaly, Z. Xiao, P. M. Valencia, A. F. Radovic-Morenob and O. C. Farokhzad, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2971 RSC .
J. Nicolas, S. Mura, D. Brambilla, N. Mackiewicz and P. Couvreur, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1147 RSC .
P. Gentile, V. Chiono, I. Carmagnola and P. V. Hatton, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2014, 15, 3640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hans and A. M. Lowman, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2002, 6, 319 CrossRef .
J. S. Beck, J. C. Vartuli, W. J. Roth, M. E. Leonowicz, C. T. Kresge, K. D. Schmitt, C. T. W. Chu, D. H. Olson, E. W. Sheppard, S. B. McCullen, J. B. Higgins and J. L. Schlenker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 10834 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lehn, Science, 1985, 227, 849 CAS .
G. M. Whitesides and M. Boncheva, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 4769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Ho, Y. W. Chiang, C. C. Tsai, C. C. Lin, B. T. Ko and B. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Ho, Y. W. Chiang, C. K. Chen, H. W. Wang, H. Hasegawa, S. Akasaka, E. L. Thomas, C. Burger and B. S. Hsiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Ho, M. C. Li, S. C. Lin, H. F. Wang, Y. D. Lee, H. Hasegawa and E. L. Thomas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Forster, A. K. Khandpur, J. Zhao, F. S. Bates, I. W. Hamley and A. J. Ryan, Macromolecules, 1994, 27, 6922 CrossRef .
C. K. Chen, H. Y. Hsueh, Y. W. Chiang, R. M. Ho, S. Akasaka and H. Hasegawa, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 8637 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Bates, M. F. Schulz, A. K. Khandpur, S. Forster and J. H. Rosedale, Faraday Discuss., 1994, 98, 7 RSC .
K. S. Anderson and M. A. Hillmyer, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 1857 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Matsen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 4470 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kim and M. Libera, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 2569 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, M. J. Misner, T. Xu, M. S. H. Kimura and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 226 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Koppi, M. Tirrell and F. S. Bates, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 70, 1449 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Morkved, M. Lu, A. M. Urbas, E. E. Ehrichs, H. M. Jaeger, P. Mansky and T. P. Russell, Science, 1996, 273, 931 CAS .
T. Hashimoto, J. Bodycomb, Y. Funaki and K. Kimishima, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 952 CrossRef CAS .
C. De Rosa, C. Park, E. L. Thomas and B. Lotz, Nature, 2000, 405, 433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Rockford, Y. Liu, P. Mansky, T. P. Russell, M. Yoon and S. G. J. Mochrie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 2602 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Kim, H. H. Solak, M. P. Stoykovich, N. J. Ferrier, J. J. de Pablo and P. F. Nealey, Nature, 2003, 424, 411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Ryu, K. Shin, E. Drockenmuller, C. J. Hawker and T. P. Russell, Science, 2005, 308, 236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Stoykovich, M. Müller, S. O. Kim, H. H. Solak, E. W. Edwards, J. J. de Pablo and P. F. Nealey, Science, 2005, 308, 1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Hawker and T. P. Russell, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 952 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Segalman, H. Yokoyama and E. J. Kramer, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1152 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Cheng, C. A. Ross, H. I. Smith and E. L. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2505 CrossRef CAS .
K. Temple, K. Kulbaba, K. N. Power-Billard, I. Manners, A. Leach, T. Xu, T. P. Russell and C. J. Hawker, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 297 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. L. Albert and H. E. Thomas, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 24 CrossRef CAS .
A. Knoll, A. Horvat, K. S. Lyakhova, G. Krausch, G. J. A. Sevink, A. V. Zvelindovsky and R. Magerle, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 035501 CrossRef CAS .
E. Han, K. O. Stuen, M. Leolukman, C. C. Liu, P. F. Nealey and P. Gopalan, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4896 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, J. Y. Wang, B. Kim, J. Xu and T. P. Russell, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. She, T. Y. Lo and R. M. Ho, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. She, T. Y. Lo and R. M. Ho, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 175 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lindman, N. Kamenka, T. M. Kathopoulis, B. Brun and P. G. Nilsson, J. Phys. Chem., 1980, 84, 2485 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Bates, W. W. Maurer, P. M. Lipic, M. A. Hillmyer, K. Almdal, K. Mortensen, G. H. Fredrickson and T. P. Lodge, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 79, 849 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhou, F. S. Bates and T. P. Lodge, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Jones and T. P. Lodge, Polym. J., 2012, 44, 131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, Y. Zhang, B. Dong, T. Zhan, X. Liu and J. Zi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, J. Stevens, J. A. Villa, J. T. Goldbach, K. W. Guarini, C. T. Black, C. J. Hawker and T. P. Russell, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 698 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Peinemann, V. Abetz and P. F. W. Simon, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, U. Gösele and M. Steinhart, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Seo and M. A. Hillmyer, Science, 2012, 336, 1422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lee, A. Hirao and S. Nakahama, Macromolecules, 1988, 21, 274 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Cheng, A. M. Mayes and C. A. Ross, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4386 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ruiz, H. M. Kang, F. A. Detcheverry, E. Dobisz, D. S. Kercher, T. R. Albrecht, J. J. de Pablo and P. F. Nealey, Science, 2008, 321, 936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Son, J. Gwyther, J. B. Chang, K. K. Berggren, I. Manners and C. A. Ross, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Tang, E. M. Lennon, G. H. Fredrickson, E. J. Kramer and C. J. Hawker, Science, 2008, 322, 429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aissou, H. K. Choi, A. Nunns, I. Manners and C. A. Ross, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. W. Yang, Y. S. Jung, J. B. Chang, R. A. Mickiewicz, A. Alexander-Katz, C. A. Ross and K. K. Berggren, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. La, M. P. Stoykovich, S.-M. Park and P. F. Nealey, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4538 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chao, T. Z. Wang, R. M. Ho, P. Georgopanos, A. Ageropoulos and E. L. Thomas, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Chao, R. M. Ho, P. Georgopanos, A. Ageropoulos and E. L. Thomas, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 3582 RSC .
D. H. Kim, Z. C. Sun, T. P. Russell, W. Knoll and J. S. Gutmann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1160 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Chinthamanipeta, Q. Lou and D. A. Shipp, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stefik, S. Mahajan, H. Sai, T. H. Epps, III, F. S. Bates, S. M. Gruner, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stefik, S. Wang, R. Hovden, H. Sai, M. W. Tate, D. A. Muller, U. Steiner, S. M. Grunerbg and U. Wiesner, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1078 RSC .
J. G. Werner, T. N. Hoheisel and U. Wiesner, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Chen, K. Shin, J. M. Leiston-Belanger, M. Zhang and T. P. Russell, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1476 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Wang, H. Y. Hsueh and R. M. Ho, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4642 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Hench and J. K. West, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 33 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. Mareau, S. Akasaka, T. Osaka and H. Hasegawa, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 9032 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Park, J. Jung, T. Chang, K. Matsunaga and H. Jinnai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Thurn-Albrecht, J. Schotter, C. A. Kastle, N. Emley, T. Shibauchi, L. Krusin-Elbaum, K. Guarini, C. T. Black, M. T. Tuominen and T. P. Russell, Science, 2000, 290, 2126 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Finnemore, M. R. J. Scherer, R. Langford, S. Mahajan, S. Ludwigs, F. C. Meldrum and U. Steiner, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3928 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3187 CrossRef CAS .
V. Saranathan, C. O. Osuji, S. G. J. Mochrie, H. Noh, S. Narayanan, A. Sandy, E. R. Dufresne and R. O. Prum, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 11676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Shefelbine, M. E. Vigild, M. W. Matsen, D. A. Hajduk, M. A. Hillmyer, E. L. Cussler and F. S. Bates, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 8457 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hückstädt, A. Göpfert and V. Abetz, Polymer, 2000, 41, 9089 CrossRef .
J. Suzuki, M. Seki and Y. Matsushita, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112, 4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. H. Lammertink, M. A. Hempenius, E. L. Thomas and G. J. Vancso, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 1999, 37, 1009 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Finnefrock, R. Ulrich, A. Du Chesne, C. C. Honeker, K. Schumacher, K. K. Unger, S. M. Gruner and U. Wiesner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1207 CrossRef .
Y. Tselikas, N. Hadjichristidis, R. L. Lescanec, C. C. Honeker, M. Wohlgemuth and E. L. Thomas, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 3390 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Rojas-Ochoa, J. M. Mendez-Alcaraz, J. J. Sáenz, P. Schurtenberger and F. Scheffold, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 073903 CrossRef CAS .
S. Walheim, E. Schaeffer, J. Mlynek and U. Steiner, Science, 1999, 283, 520 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pendry, A. Holden, W. Stewart and I. Youngs, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 4773 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Shelby, D. R. Smith and S. Schultz, Science, 2001, 292, 77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schurig, J. J. Mock, B. J. Justice, S. A. Cummer, J. B. Pendry, A. F. Starr and D. R. Smith, Science, 2006, 314, 977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Stephen and G. E. Schröder-Turk, Interface Focus, 2012, 2, 529 CrossRef .
J. H. Lee, J. P. Singer and E. L. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Campbell, D. N. Sharp, M. T. Harrison, R. G. Denning and A. J. Turberfield, Nature, 2000, 404, 53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Munch, M. E. Launey, D. H. Alsem, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia and R. O. Ritchie, Science, 2008, 322, 1516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Han-Yu Hsueh
	Dr Han-Yu Hsueh received his bachelor's degree from the Department of Chemical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University (Taiwan) in 2005. Afterward he moved to Department of Material Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University for graduate study and received MS degree in 2007. In 2011, he received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from National Tsing Hua University (Taiwan) under the supervision of Professor Rong-Ming Ho. Now, he is a visiting scientist in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, University of Massachusetts Amherst (USA) with Professor Alfred J. Crosby, and his current researches focus on biomimetic mechanical properties from block copolymers.

Cheng-Thai Yao
	Mr Cheng-Thai Yao received his BS degree from the Department of Chemical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University (Taiwan) in 2014. He joined the research group of Professor Rong-Ming Ho for undergraduate research project, and continues his research to pursue the PhD degree. His current research is focused on the fabrication of various nanohybrids and nanoporous materials based on the templating of block copolymers for applications.

Rong-Ming Ho
	Dr Rong-Ming Ho received his PhD degree from the Institute of Polymer Science, University of Akron (USA) in 1995 under the supervision of Prof. Stephen Z. D. Cheng. He then moved to Minneapolis and worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Minnesota (USA) with Profs. Christopher W. Macosko and Frank S. Bates. Currently, he is a distinguished professor in NTHU. His current researches focus on supramolecular and block copolymer self-assembly, nanopatterning technologies via integration of top-down and bottom-up methods, and hybridization via block copolymer templating.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the manufacture of traditional Chinese yellow cakes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the lost wax process (i.e., Pâte de verre) for traditional Taiwan Liuli. (a) A model is made of completely combustible materials (e.g., wax). (b) The model is mounted onto a base and positioned within a plaster cylinder. (c) The investment is dried and then burned out in an oven to cure the mold and to remove all traces of the model. Then, glass ingredients are added into the leftover negative space. (d) After brief cooling, the plaster covering is broken to release the raw blank. (e) A beautiful and flickering Liuli art is thus created. Reproduced from ref. 1 with permission from Copyright, Liuligongfang.	 

 	Fig. 3  Summary of the development of the manufacturing of hybrid and porous materials with different templates.	 

 	Fig. 4  Degradable BCPs with well-ordered nanostructures for the fabrication of functional materials via different templated syntheses, including atom layer deposition, electroless plating, sol–gel reaction, and electrochemical deposition.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM images of (a) PS nanoparticles coated with one SiO2–PDADMAC multilayer, (b) hollow silica spheres fabricated by calcination using PS nanoparticles as templates, (c) carbon nanotubes coated with V2O5, (d) V2O5 nanotubes fabricated by calcination using carbon nanotubes coated with V2O5 as templates, (e) AAO membranes as templates. And (f) SEM image of Au nanofibers fabricated from AAO membrane. Reproduced from (a), (b) ref. 66 with permission from Copyright 1994; (e), (f) ref. 6 from Copyright 1994, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (c), (d) from ref. 82 with permission from Copyright 1997, Materials Research Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of MCM-41 materials. (b) Schematic illustration of: (1) the surfactant-templating mechanism, and (2) the cooperative self-assembling mechanism for the formation of ordered mesoporous silica. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from Copyright 1992, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of SBA-15 mesoporous silica fabricated using PEO-containing BCPs for templated synthesis after calcination. (b) Corresponding TEM image in a high magnification showing the hexagonal texture of the mesoporous silica. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Copyright 1998, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of templated synthesis using silica as a template: (a) MCM-48 mesoporous silica is used as a template, (b) formation of nanohybrids after completing carbonization within the mesoporous silica, and (c) fabricated CMK-1 after removal of the silica template. (d) Corresponding TEM image of the fabricated CMK-1. Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from Copyright 1999, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of ordered mesoporous carbon via the evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA) approach. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from Copyright 2005, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  The four ordered morphologies for the BCP melts, spheres (S), cylinders (C), DG, and lamellae (L), are controlled by the composition fvA and the product of the segment–segment interaction parameter and degree of polymerization (χN). Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from Copyright 2005, Materials Research Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Bright-field TEM micrographs of a self-assembled twisted morphology in the PS-PLLA bulk sample with fvPLLA = 0.34. (b) Schematic H* phase in which the helices are packed in a hexagonal lattice with an interdigitated character. (c) Phase diagram of the PS-PLLA BCPs* with respect to the segregation strength and composition. Reproduced from (a) ref. 118 with permission from Copyright 2004; (b) ref. 119 with permission from Copyright 2009; (c) ref. 43 with permission from Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM micrograph of a PS-PLLA solution-cast sample from an intermediate evaporation. (b) Relative geometric arrangement in the 3D space of the helix H* phase and DG phase. (c) Illustration of the suggested Gibbs free energy versus the transition path from H* and HC to DG. Reproduced from (a) ref. 122 with permission from Copyright 2010; (b) ref. 43 with permission from Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a, b) Tapping-mode scanning force microscopy phase images of thin SBS films on Si substrates after annealing in chloroform vapor. The contour lines calculated from the corresponding height images are superimposed. (c) Schematic height profile of the phase images shown in (a, b). (d) Simulation of an SBS BCP film in one large simulation box of [352 × 32 × H(x)] grid points with increasing film thickness H(x). Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from Copyright 2002, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Top view SEM image of a PS-PMMA film (∼300 nm thickness) etched by O2 plasma. Cross-sectional TEM image of PS-PMMA films with thicknesses of (b) 300 nm, and (c) 500 nm. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  TEM images of a cross-sectional (a) cylinder-forming PS-PLLA thin film with a thickness of 400 nm, and (b) a gyroid-forming PS-PLLA thin film with an initial thickness of 200 nm on SiO2 functionalized with PS-OH and PLLA-OH. Inset shows the tapping-mode SPM top-view height image of (b), indicating the gyroid nanostructure with the (211) plane parallel to the air and the substrate. Reproduced from (a) ref. 144 with permission from Copyright 2013; (b) ref. 145 with permission from Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) FESEM and (b) 2D GISAXS pattern of PS-PLLA thin film with an initial thickness of 200 nm on a functionalized SiO2 substrate treated in 1,2-dichloroethane vapor after hydrolysis. The insets show the enlarged area of the FESEM image. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of nanoporous material from a polymeric bicontinuous microemulsion precursor: selective cross-linking of one domain A with the subsequent removal of the other domain (homopolymer B) by solvent dissolution. SEM images of the nanoporous PI from the bicontinuous microemulsion sample under two different magnifications: (b) ×10000; (c) ×50000. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the swelling of a BCP thin film with thickness t and period λ to a thickness t′ using a solvent that is selective for the minor component. This opens pores in the film with a diameter d. Re-annealing the film reverses the process. (b) SEM image of the porous polystyrene film produced via annealing, then rinsed in acetic acid. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from Copyright 2004, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 19  SEM images of (a) the cross-sectional view and (b) the top-view of the asymmetric PS-P4VP film. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Copyright 2007, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) TEM image of an as-released nanorod consisting of a cylinder-forming PS-P2VP after staining the P2VP with iodine. The inset shows the TEM image of an ultrathin slice containing a section across a PS-P2VP nanorod. (b) TEM image of nanorods consisting of cylinder-forming PS-P2VP after exposure to an acidic environment. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic depiction of nanoporous monolith generation by a controlled polymerization-induced microphase separation process. (a) A macro-CTA containing the degradable polymer (yellow) is dissolved in the mixture (light blue) of a monomer and a cross-linker. (b) Reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer copolymerization allows controlled growth of chains (dark blue) generating a BCP structure. (c) At a critical conversion, microphase separation occurs over a small time interval and cross-linking arrests the emergent bicontinuous structure with a nanoscopic length scale. (d) Removal of the degradable polymer produces percolating nanopores in a cross-linked and mechanically robust matrix. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Cross-sectional view of the FESEM micrographs of spin-coated PS-PLLA (fvPLLA = 0.26) thin films with cylinder-forming nanochannels on a silicon wafer after hydrolysis. (b) FESEM micrographs of a PS-PLLA thin film (fvPLLA = 0.39) with gyroid-forming nanochannels on a functionalized SiO2 substrate after hydrolysis for 30 min. The inset show the enlarged area of the FESEM image in (b). Reproduced from (a) ref. 23 with permission from Copyright 2005, Elsevier B.V and (b) ref. 145 with permission from Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of the manufacturing procedure with RIE. TEM images of (b) a spherical monolayer PS–PB film before RIE. The lighter regions are the PB domains that were degraded and removed by ozone. (c) Hexagonally ordered arrays of holes in silicon nitride after RIE. (d) SEM images of a partially etched PS–PI BCP film, showing the ozonated monolayer film of spherical microdomains. After the continuous PS matrix at the top was taken off, the empty PI domains were exposed (as holes) and appear darker in the micrograph. (e) SEM micrograph of ordered arrays of holes on silicon nitride. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Copyright 1997, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 24  FESEM images of (a) the top-view and (b) the cross-sectional view of the cylindrical PS template obtained after removal of the PMMA with UV degradation. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from Copyright 2000, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 25  BCP lithography. (a) A magnetic 2D metallic pattern using a cylindrical PS-PMMA on a sparse chemical template. (b) Templated square post array of a PI–PS–PFDMS triblock terpolymer/PS homopolymer blend on a double-post template and within the trenches. (c) Square hole arrays from blends of PEO–P(S-r-HS) and PMMA–P(S-r-P4VP), in which the polymer assembly is mediated by hydrogen bonding between polyhydroxystyrene and P4VP. (d) Non-periodic structures can be enforced by a template. Serpentine patterns from templated PS-PDMS cylinders (Pitch = 35 nm) guided by posts, which are shown as bright dots. Reproduced from (a) ref. 157 and (c) ref. 159 with permission from Copyright 2008, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (b) ref. 158 with permission from Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 161 with permission from Copyright 2010, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) The experimental route for the formation of graphite-like nanotubes prepared from the carbonization of PAN in AAO template via solvent annealing for pore filling. (b) HRTEM image showing that the carbon nanotubes have multilayer structures, and that the growth direction of the layers aligns along the axis of the AAO pores. Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) FESEM micrograph of amorphous SiO2 nanohelices synthesized from the PS-PLLA with H* phase, followed by the hydrolysis, templated sol–gel reaction, and removal of the polymer template by UV. (b) Reconstructed 3D images of PS–SiO2 gyroid-forming nanohybrids. Inset shows the gyroid-forming SiO2 with two identical networks (green and red). Reproduced from (a) ref. 24 with permission from Copyright 2009; (b) ref. 25 with permission from Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic illustration for the creation of well-defined bicontinuous ceramics from a templated sol–gel reaction: (a) the templated sol–gel reaction under acid-catalyzed or base-catalyzed precursor solutions; (b) acid-catalyzed sol–gel reactions performed at different temperatures; (c) the acid-catalyzed sol–gel reaction performed in acyclic alcohols with different polarities at low temperature; (d) acid-catalyzed sol–gel reaction performed by using different chelating agents in acyclic alcohols with strong polarity (i.e., methanol) at low temperature; (e) polymer–ceramic gyroid nanohybrids resulting from the acid-catalyzed sol–gel reaction performed using suitable chelating agents (i.e., DEA) in methanol at low temperature. After a specific calcination process, nanostructured ceramics with high crystalline can be successfully fabricated. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) FESEM micrograph of bicontinuous TiO2 networks from the PS–TiO2 gyroid nanohybrids after removal of the PS matrix by calcination. The inset shows the photograph of centimeter-sized nanoporous TiO2 bulks. (b) Comparison of the photodecomposition rate of the MB in the presence of: bicontinuous TiO2 (■); commercial P25 TiO2 powders (●); and blank tests (material without TiO2 (▼)). Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  Schematic representation of TiO2 networks via templated electrochemical deposition for hybrid solar cells: (a) self-assembly of PFS-b-PLA on FTO glass, (b) nanoporous PFS template after selective removal of the PLA networks, (c) free-standing gyroid network array after removing the PFS template, (d) back-filling of the array with a solid state hole transporting material and capping with a suitable counter electrode to form a bicontinuous bulk heterojunction solar cell architecture. (e) SEM fracture cross-section images of the bicontinuous TiO2. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  SEM images of nanostructured morphologies viewed from the cross-sectional perspectives. (a) Standing cylinder-forming TiO2. (b) Gyroid-forming networks. (c) Sintered NP mesoporous layer. (d) Absorption spectra after sensitization with N719 (inset). (e) Spectral response of liquid electrolyte dye-sensitized solar cells. (f) Current–voltage curves under simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (full lines) and in the dark (dashed lines). The solar cell characteristics are for 1.2 μm thick cylinder-forming (solid red box), 1.2 μm thick gyroid-forming (solid black triangle), and 1.4 μm thick NP (solid blue circle) TiO2 nanostructures. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Cross-sectional scanning electron micrograph of a mesoporous gyroid V2O5 film on a FTO substrate. Inset shows the photograph of a fully transparent electrochromical supercapacitor consisting of an oxidized yellow top electrode, a laterally offset green/gray bottom electrode in the reduced state, and a thermoplastic gasket spacer. (b) Schematic illustration of a supercapacitor design based on two laterally offset gyroid-forming electrodes. (c) CV of supercapacitors made with gyroid-forming V2O5 electrode films, where a is the CV cycled with an RTIL electrolyte containing lithium salt and (b) is the CV using Li-free RTIL as the electrolyte, displaying an electric double-layer response. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  Preparation of a bicontinuous NiO nanotubular array. (a) Schematic illustration of the six preparation steps: (1) synthesis of PS-PLA. (2) Formation of gyroid phase after thermal annealing. The blue interconnected PLA networks are surrounded by a red PS matrix. (3) Hydrolysis of PLA block. (4) Templated electrochemical deposition of Ni. (5) Removal of the PS matrix to form a free-standing Ni replica. (6) Thermal oxidation based on the NKE results in a porous NiO nanotubular array with a gyroid morphology. Cross-sectional SEM micrographs of (b) the nanoporous PS template, (c) the partially replicated template, (d) the free-standing Ni networks, and (e) the NiO nanotube arrays. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 34  Schematic illustration of the mechanism of templated electroless plating for the generation of Ni from PS-PLLA templating: (a) nanoporous PS template pores filled with Pd + 2; (b) the nucleation of Pd clusters is initialized and Pd + 2 ions are reduced to Pd clusters by hydrazinium hydroxide; (c) nucleation and growth of Ni from the Pd clusters within the PS template. (d) Low-magnification SEM image of the gyroid-forming nanoporous Ni. The insets show the TEM image of the PS–Ni gyroid nanohybrids without staining and a photograph of the centimeter-sized nanoporous gyroid Ni bulks. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 35  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of well-defined nanostructured Au from BCP as a template: (a) PS-PLLA–gyroid phase (skeleton of gyroid-forming structure with two identical networks (green and red)); (b) gyroid-forming nanoporous PS template after removal of the PLLA network; (c) PS–Au nanohybrids from the controlled nucleation and growth of Au within the polymer template via a seeding growth approach; (d) nanostructured Au after removal of the PS template. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 36  The band structures of (a) FESEM images of the top-view of 3D gyroid-forming Au multibranches. (b) The corresponding cross-sectional view. The inset shows the photograph of the centimeter-sized 3D SERS-active substrate. (c) UV-Vis absorption spectra (blank squares) and FDTD simulation (solid lines) of multibranched Au in the PS template with a thickness of 200 nm via the templated seeding growth approach. (d) SERS spectra of 10−8 M CV adsorbed on 3D (red line) and 2D (black line) SERS-active substrates with Au multibranches and the CV bulk from the casting of 10−1 M CV (blue line) on a quartz substrate as the reference. The Raman shift at 1589 cm−1 (I1589) is labeled with a star. Reproduced from (a)–(c) ref. 37 with permission from Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons; (d) ref. 46 with permission from Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 37  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) the interconnected metal oxide (i.e., Al2O3 or TiO2) nanotubes fabricated by ALD onto templates of swelling-induced porous PS-P2VP BCPs. The insets from the top to bottom are the magnified SEM images of the positions near the upper surface, in the middle, and near the bottom of the cross section, respectively, and (b) well-defined ZnO networks after removal of the polymer template, followed by calcination. Reproduced from (a) ref. 38 with permission from Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 39 with permission from Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Schematic representation of the templated crystallization process. PS-b-PI self-assembles into a polymer film with a DG microphase. After removal of the bicontinuous PI networks (red and orange) from the PS matrix (blue), calcite crystals nucleate (scenario A) on the surface of or inside (scenario B) the polymer film and grow into the porous networks, leading to a gyroid-patterned single crystal, which is visible after removing the PS matrix. (b) Examples of the replication of a DG (bicontinuous networks) and a SG (just a single network) are shown. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Copyright 2009, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Light micrograph of the dorsal wing cover scales of the Parides sesostris (Papilionidae). (Scale bar: 100 μm.) (b) TEM cross-section of a ventral wing scale cell, depicting the complex infolding of the plasma membrane and the SER membrane. The developing nanostructure shows the diagnostic motif of two concentric rings roughly in a triangular lattice. The yellow and red boxes highlight the areas revealing different sections through the (110) plane of a polarized (ABCB′A′) pentacontinuous core–shell alternating gyroid (the color insets). (Scale bar: 1 μm.) The inset shows a colored model of a core–shell alternating gyroid of the ABCB′A′ form. (c) 3D model of the development of a photonic butterfly wing scale cell. (I) Unit-cell volume rendering of the core–shell alternating gyroid model structure of the form ABCB′A′. Color of each component from inset in A. (II) SG composed of cell plasma membrane (black) surrounding extracellular space (red). (III) As the scale cell dies, the cellular cytoplasm and membranes (BCB′A′ blocks of the core–shell alternating gyroid) are replaced with air, leaving behind a SG core–shell network of chitin (red) in air. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Copyright 2010, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 40  The band structures of: (a) DG structure with 38% volume fraction, showing an incomplete photonic bandgap (i.e., a pseudo-gap), (b) SG structure with 17% volume fraction, (c) SD structure with 42% volume fraction, and (d) SP structure with 33% volume fraction. The dielectric contrast is given by ε1 = 1.0, ε2 = 13.0. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Copyright 2002, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) TEM micrographs of the 〈211〉 projection of polymer–ceramic nanohybrids before and (b) after thermal treatment. Two separated ceramic networks marked by the red and green tripods in the polymer matrix can be recognized. The insets show the enlarged areas of the corresponding micrographs. (c) The corresponding TEM micrograph of the 〈111〉 projection of (b). (d) Temperature-resolved 1D SAXS profiles of the nanohybrids, and (e) the corresponding variation of the 1D SAXS profiles. The reflections of the nanohybrids before and after the thermal treatment are marked with solid and dotted arrows, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 42  The band structures of (a) DG, (b) shifted DG, and (c) SG nanostructures with a unit cell length of 100 nm and volume fraction of 30%, 30%, and 15%, respectively. The refractive index of the gyroid skeleton is 2.5 with an air/TiO2 dielectric contrast of 6.25:1. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 43  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of well-defined nanoporous gyroid-forming SiO2via templated sol–gel reaction. (a) PS-PLLA with a gyroid phase (skeleton of gyroid-forming bicontinuous networks with two identical networks (green and red)). (b) Nanoporous PS template with gyroid-forming nanochannels after removal of the minority PLLA network. (c) PS–SiO2 gyroid nanohybrids via the templated sol–gel process. (d) Nanoporous gyroid SiO2 after removal of the PS template as low refractive index materials. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 44  (a) FESEM micrograph of nanoporous gyroid SiO2 from PS–SiO2 gyroid nanohybrids after the UV removal of the PS template. (b) Normal-incidence reflectances of quartz (black dashed line) and gyroid-forming nanostructures with different constituents: PS-PLLA (solid red line); nanoporous PS template (solid purple line); PS–SiO2 gyroid nanohybrids (solid green line); and nanoporous gyroid SiO2 (solid blue line) on a quartz substrate. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 45  Various views of the gyroid minimal surface. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Copyright 2012, The Royal Society.	 

 	Fig. 46  (a) Illustration of the chiral beamsplitting phenomenon, where left circularly polarized light (blue) is transmitted and right circularly polarized light (red) is reflected. (b) SEM images of the chiral beamsplitter fabricated using galvo-dithered direct laser writing and consisting of 64000 unit cells of the SG network. The inset shows the zoomed-in view of the highlighted area. (c) Spectral plot of the transmission (solid lines) and reflection (dashed lines) of right-circularly polarized (red) and left-circularly polarized (blue) light. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 47  (a) SEM image of the area with the aligned SG-forming Au network where the optical measurements were performed. (b) Gyrotropic transmission through a sample inclined at 35°. The gyrotropic transmission is the difference between the transmission spectra in the left and right channels as the sample was rotated around the [110] axis. The open symbols are the results of a finite difference time domain calculation, while the full ones are the measurements. Lines are the guides for the eye. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 48  (a) SEM micrograph with a schematic of the spherical indenter. A nanoscale network is supported by a uniform SU-8 film. (b) The relative moduli of the nanoscale networks for two different maximum loads. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 49  (a) Schematic illustration of the compression experiment. (b) SEM images of: (1) epoxy-A–air, (2) pyrolyzed carbon–air, and (3) pyrolyzed carbon–epoxy-B pillars. (4–6) SEM images after uniaxial compression tests. (c) Engineering stress–strain from the first loading curves of all tested pillars. The actual data points are shown in a darker color. (d) Ranges of the upper limit (solid line) and lower limit (dashed line) of the specific energy absorption of the three materials versus compressive strength. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
