Computational protein design, from single domain soluble proteins to membrane  proteins  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B810924A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B810924A
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2071-2082Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsComputational protein design, from single domain soluble proteins to membrane proteins

        
          
            Pu 
            Tian
          
          
        
      
College of Life Sciences & Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, 2699 Qian-Jin, Street, Changchun, China 130012. E-mail: tianpu@jlu.edu.cn
Received 
      15th October 2009
    First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      20th April 2010
    AbstractComputational protein design is becoming more and more important in both understanding the fundamental biological roles of proteins and facilitating their utilization in biotechnology. Based upon the significant progress in our understanding of protein folding, development of efficient sequence and conformational search algorithms and accurate scoring functions, and ever increasing computational resources, great progress has been made in design of single domain soluble proteins. There are also reports of membrane protein design, albeit very limited. This tutorial review will give a brief introduction, the state of the art, and future prospects and implications of protein design in improving healthcare and environment. The interplay between protein design, molecular simulations and experiments will be presented to emphasize the interdisciplinary nature of the field.
Pu Tian
Pu Tian received his BS in Chemical Engineering from Sichuan University (Chengdu, China) in 1995 and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Utah, in 2003. He joined the University of Michigan as a research fellow in Department of Chemistry in 2003 and moved to National Institute of Diabetes & Digestive & Kidney Diseases as a research fellow in 2005. He has been a member of faculty in College of Life Science at Jilin University (Changchun, China) since late 2009. His current research interests include molecular simulations and design of macrobiomolecules with emphasis on membrane proteins.
1. Introduction
Molecular biology research has been focusing on understanding the structure, dynamics, function and interactions of macrobiomolecules (proteins, DNAs and RNAs) of given sequences, with the theoretical aspects hinging on how proteins fold into their native structures. The inverse problem (see Fig. 1), to design biological molecules with desired structural and dynamic properties, is gaining more and more attention. The ability to design functional biomolecules will provide us diverse ways to realize controlled intervention of biological systems. Potential benefits include, but are not limited to, improved health care through innovative drugs and more efficient disease diagnostics1,2 and designed enzymes that can catalyze necessary chemical reactions under environmentally friendly conditions.3 This review only touches a small subset of these issues, the design of proteins.
 Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of the inverse relationship between structure prediction (protein folding) and protein design. (A) A known sequence (indicated by different gray scale of the tube protein representation, color online) in a random coil state. (B) The backbone of a given target fold without any information on the sequence. (C) A folded protein with both structure and sequence (indicated by different gray scale of the carton representation, color online) determined. 
Naturally occurring proteins have two common properties, (i) a stable structure (or a set of stable structural states) and proper dynamical behavior under physiological conditions (this property implies that a sufficiently large free energy gap of approximately 10–100 kcal mol−1 exists between the native state ensemble and other molten globule states); and (ii) the ability to rapidly fold into their native structure either alone or with the help of some chaperons or interaction partners. As a matter of fact, most functional protein molecules, with the exception of inherently disordered proteins, do have these properties. Based upon the belief that dominant folding pathways of a protein are those with transition states that maximize the formation of favorable native interactions and simultaneously minimize the entropy loss of the given polypeptide chain, computational design4 was successfully utilized to switch the preferred folding pathway of protein G through stabilization of a β hairpin that is not well structured in the original transition state. Folding kinetics of a few designed small globular proteins was found to be somewhat different from their natural counterparts.5 However, we have very limited knowledge on the relationship between sequence and dynamics, and between sequence and folding mechanisms of proteins with realistic size and structural complexity. Therefore, the majority of current rational protein designs mainly focus on finding thermodynamically stable sequences with desired structures and interaction specificity, thus leaving the analysis of dynamics and folding kinetics to posterior experimental characterizations and functional assays.
Since the term “inverse folding problem” appeared in the early 1980s, the protein design community has made steady progress in design of many different proteins. Such exercises have evolved from redesign of natural proteins by mutating a few key residues based upon simple motifs6 to rational design of a novel fold7 (see Fig. 2) which do not exist in the current protein data bank (PDB), and to de novo design of a new enzyme8 which catalyzes chemical reactions that are not catalyzed by any known natural enzymes. Additionally, although most of the early studies were focusing on small soluble proteins, efforts have been made toward the design of integral membrane proteins.9 While still in its infancy when compared to mature engineering design of cars, planes and electronic circuits, protein design has started to show promises in helping solving two of the most pressing issues facing our society, namely the health care and the energy crisis. On the disease treatment side, peptide and protein (antibody) based drugs are now important new drugs that are on the market and in the pipeline, and designing peptides and proteins which can interact correctly with their targeted biomolecules (usually proteins or nucleic acids) is starting to make important contributions in this regard.1 On the disease diagnostics side, sensitive membrane protein based biosensors are designed to improve the detection of specific biomarkers.10 The conversion of biomass to easily transportable fuel, together with other clean energy sources (solar, wind and nuclear), will greatly reduce our fossil fuel consumption that is the culprit of the green house effects. The critical step of the biomass conversion process, breaking cellulose fibers into smaller fuel molecules, could be potentially facilitated by rational design of more industrially friendly cellulase.
 Fig. 2  Comparison of the computationally designed model (black, blue online) to the solved X-ray crystal structure (gray, red online) of Top7. (A) Cα overlay of the model and structure in stereo (backbone RMSD = 1.17 Å). (B) The C-terminal halves of the X-ray crystal structure and model are extraordinarily similar. The representative region shown (Asp78 to Gly85) has an all-atom RMSD of 0.79 Å and a backbone RMSD of 0.54 Å. (C) Stereo-representation of the effectively superposable side chains in the cores of the designed model and the solved structure (Science, 2003, 302, 1364–1368. Copyright 2003, AAAS). 
According to different extent of utilizing existing sequences from structures in the PDB database, protein design is usually classified into redesign and de novo design. The former involves improving and enhancing original functions or introducing new functions into naturally occurring proteins with limited amount of mutations, while the latter refers to assignment of sequences that are not related to any natural protein sequences adopting the target fold. However, the border is not clear cut. For example, in the full sequence redesign of Drosophila melanogaster engrailed homeodomain by Shah et al.,11 two highly stable sequences (with midpoint thermal denaturation temperature higher than 99 °C) of only 22% and 24% native sequence identity were obtained. Different strategies are utilized in these two types of designs. For limited sequence redesigns, deterministic sequence and conformational search are the method of choice, while for extensive design with many mutable residues, only stochastic methods can realistically provide approximate solutions (see Section 2.1). However, the general principles are the same and no special attention will be given to differentiate them in this review. It is important to point out that current “de novo” design still extensively utilizes empirical knowledge obtained from high-resolution structures deposited in the PDB, in contrast to quantum mechanics based “ab initio” small molecule simulations, which uses pure electronic structure theory as the start point.
The first step of a de novo design is to choose a target fold based upon the desired function. As there is no rule existing for the designability (a designable fold should has at least one solution sequence) of a given fold, the safest bet would be to pick from the PDB a natural occurring one or a combination of them. Since the number of distinctive folds in the PDB is approximately 1100 as classified by CATH12 and is continuing to increase, this resource should satisfy most of our needs for a target fold. Many methods (e.g. ScaffoldSelection13 and references therein) have been developed to search for appropriate scaffolds in the PDB for enzyme design. Once a target fold is selected, we face major challenges of sequence/conformational search, energy evaluations, and final experimental validation.
There are many excellent detailed reviews either focusing on the performance of various methodologies14–17 or regarding the latest progresses on design of different type of proteins.9,18 As a tutorial review, this article will first give a brief introduction to the fundamental problems that need to be solved by the protein design community, then summarize where we are in terms of addressing these challenges, with emphasis on the computational design of both soluble and membrane proteins. The important interplay between computational protein design, experiments and simulations is presented. Finally, the prospects, challenges and opportunities in this rapidly expanding field are discussed.
2. Fundamentals of protein design
The purpose of current protein design is to select one or more sequences which will fold into a desired structure with reasonable stability. A 100-residue protein has 20100 possible different sequences, which dictate that the complexity of protein design is literally much more challenging than picking a needle in a haystack. This problem is exacerbated by the fact that each residue has backbone degrees of freedom represented by dihedral angles ϕ and ψ. Additionally, depending upon its identity, each residue has various number of side-chain degrees of freedom named rotameric states (rotations around various C–C bonds [e.g. Cα–Cβ, Cβ–Cγ] in side chains). The rule of the selection is that sequences folding into a more stable desired structure should have lower free energy than those folding into less stable ones. The process of such selection, usually referred to as the sequence and conformational search problem, is only one of the two challenges facing protein designers. The other challenge is that we do not know how to accurately and rapidly compute the free energy of a given protein sequence adopting a desired structure. Scientists have come up with various approximate functions, usually called potential functions or scoring functions, to characterize the free energy of a protein sequence in a given structure.
2.1 Methodologies for sequence and conformational search
By utilizing a fixed backbone and discrete rotameric states for each amino acid, the backbone degrees of freedom is reduced to one and the side-chain conformational space is also greatly decreased. Therefore the search for the global minimum energy conformation (GMEC) becomes a combinatorial problem of the sequence and discrete rotameric states for a given fold. However, even after such simplification, a brute force exhaustive calculation of free energy for all possible sequences and conformations and then picking the lowest energy candidates is apparently out of the question even for a small protein. With a conservative sampling of only five rotameric states for each amino acid, a 100-residue design involves evaluating and comparing energies for (5 × 20)100 = 10200 states, far exceeding capability of any current supercomputer. This challenge will remain true in the foreseeable future when petaflop (1015 float point operations per second) machines are on everybody's desktop. However, it is widely known that in the PDB database, the number of folds is only a small fraction of that of protein structures and typical structures are shared by many different sequences. In addition, there are cases that proteins with low sequence identity share an almost identical structure,19 indicating that sequences far away from each other in the sequence space can be equally good candidates for some target fold. This is a comforting fact since we need only one or a few sequences that can stably fold into our desired structure. It is also important from a theoretical point of view that due to this fact, the sequence search problem in protein design can be treated as a local minimization problem rather than a global minimization problem. Consequently, unlike importance sampling of conformational space in molecular simulations, the detailed balance requirement (which dictates that the probability of transition from a microstate A to a microstate B has to be equal to the probability of the inverse transition from B to A) is not necessary in the sequence search of protein design. Therefore, in principle, there could be a lot of different ways to bias the random walk in the sequence space to facilitate our search. Despite the fact that side chains (especially ones on the surface of a protein) can easily flip between different rotameric states belonging to the native ensemble, it is desirable in most cases that the native structural ensemble itself settles in a unique lowest free energy valley. This is because a protein with multiple comparable low free energy valleys would potentially have promiscuous functions and low specificity. Therefore, the conformational search process is usually a global minimization problem. Currently, sequence and conformational search are conducted either simultaneously (all possible amino acids and their rotameric states for each design position are considered in each search move, e.g. DESIGNER), or alternately (first a search in sequence space is conducted and then a conformational search is carried out with the sequence fixed, this two procedures are performed alternately to find lowest energy sequence and conformation combination. e.g. RosettaDesign). There is not much discussion on the benefit (or lack of it) of separating sequence and conformational search in the literature. The conformational search has been the center of search algorithm research. Development of the novel sequence sampling technique has potential to become a fertile frontier of computational protein design.
There are mainly two categories of sequence and conformational sampling methods, namely deterministic and stochastic ones. Deterministic search methods give a unique solution (or a unique set of solutions) once converged while solution(s) from stochastic search methods depend upon specific sets of random numbers used and the length of search operations. A widely used deterministic method is the Dead End Elimination (DEE) algorithm,20 which rigorously finds the global free energy minimum in the sequence and conformational space through eliminations of sequences and conformations that are provably not compatible with GMEC. However, because of the exponential increase of the sequence and conformational space with the number of residues, the convergence of DEE can only be achieved for de novo design of small proteins or redesign of proteins with limited mutable positions. Since being first introduced by Desmet et al. in 1992,20 this method has been improved significantly through introduction of more efficient elimination rules21,22 and the divide and conquer strategy.23,24 The DEE was later on combined with other innovative procedures to further improve its search efficiency. Desmet et al.25 developed an iterative algorithm named FASTER (Fast and Accurate Side-Chain Topology and Energy Refinement), which uses DEE for initial rotamer eliminations. The method was found to be two to three orders of magnitude faster than DEE in reaching the GMEC for most of a set of 33 small proteins and it scales favorably with the size of protein. Additionally, the FASTER method always converges (not true for DEE in many cases). FASTER was further improved26 by use of Monte Carlo (MC) simulation to create a number of high quality initial structures. By focusing relaxation steps on residues that interacting strongly with perturbed positions, this strategy effectively utilizes structural correlation between interacting residues. DEE was also combined with a search tree based algorithms (A*)27 to identify all of the low energy conformations within a threshold energy value of the GMEC in strict order of increasing energy, thus providing a detailed picture of the energy profile in the vicinity of the GMEC.
Another deterministic method is based upon self consistent mean field (SCMF) approximation,14 this method is guaranteed to converge and its computational cost scales linearly with the number of residues in a protein. But the minimum obtained from SCMF are not guaranteed to be the real GMEC and as a matter of fact, it does not converge to the correct GMEC in many cases.14
Stochastic methods, such as MC and genetic algorithm methods,14 do not aim at rigorous search of GMEC. Instead, a random walk through the sequence and conformational space is carried out and the lowest energy conformation found is used as an approximate solution to the given design problem. In a typical MC search procedure, after a random move is made in sequence or conformational space, the Metropolis MC28 criteria is used to accept the move with a probability P = 1: Eb < Ea;P = exp[−(Eb − Ea)]/kbT: Eb > Ea(1)with kb being the Boltzmann constant, Ea and Eb are the free energy before and after the mutation or conformational change, and T is the temperature. For the conformational search, it is critical to create moves that have both good accept ratio and the ability to rapidly explore the free energy landscape. One way to accelerate the MC sampling is by starting from a high temperature so that even moves with relatively large energy change will have a significant probability to be accepted, then gradually reduce the temperature so that the search settles down in low free energy valleys. This process is termed simulated annealing (SA). Each SA search process will settle in a local free energy minimum in the protein conformational space and many cycles of SA are usually performed by cyclically raising and lowering the temperature, the lowest free energy conformation found is used as the GMEC. However, increasing temperature does not solve all the potential problems in MC sampling. For example, any moves that cause significant steric clashes will result in a huge free energy pulse and consequently will not have much chance to be accepted even at a relatively high temperature. Therefore creative moves are essential to facilitate conformational sampling using MC. A set of moves were specifically developed for proteins in Rosetta package.
Genetic algorithm (GA) is another widely used stochastic search method for protein design.14 This method explores the sequence space through random mutation and recombination to find low energy sequences for the target fold. It usually starts with many random sequences, mutations are then applied randomly at a certain rate to generate a group of sequences and free energy of generated sequences/conformations are evaluated and ranked. Solutions with lowest free energy will be paired for recombination and new mutations are started for the second cycle. The population dynamics of GA give it some advantage over MC for crossing higher energy barriers. However, because the correlation between the inter-residue spatial distance and inter-residue sequence distance is quite weak, finding clean crossover points during the recombination step is not straight forward.
The extreme optimization (EO) method, originally applied to spin glass optimization problems in condensed matter physics, was adapted to protein design problems.29 Using ir to denote the r-th rotamer at position i and js to denote the s-th rotamer at position j, the free energy based on single-residue E(ir) and pair-residue E(ir, js) (2)can be written as (3)with N being the number of residues in the protein. This stochastic search method divides the total energy into a sum of local pair energies in the following way: (4)and rank these local energies in decreasing order: εΠ (1) ≥ εΠ (2) ≥ ⋯ ≥ εΠ(k) ≥ ⋯ ≥ εΠ(N)(5)Starting from a random state, with k being the rank of site index Π(k), the EO pick a rank from a power-law distribution with an exponent −τ: P(k) ∼ k−τ. At site k, the rotamer energy is ranked in increasing order: εiΠ (1) ≤ εiΠ (2) ≤ ⋯ ≤ ⋯ ≤ εΠ(k′) ≤ εiΠ(Mrot(i))(6)with k′ being the rank of rotamer index Π′(k′) and Mrot(i) being the number of candidate rotamers at this site. Then a rotamer index k′ is picked from a power distribution with exponents −τ′: P(k′) ∼ (k′)−τ′. A change of rotamer at site Π(k) to rotamer Π′(k′) is performed and the move is accepted unconditionally. Local energies are updated after the rotamer change and such ranking and changing is repeated until energy converges to a preset target or a certain number of iterations have been reached. After optimizing the two exponents τ and τ′, EO was found to be comparable with SA for conformational space sampling. Based upon characteristics of protein local energy landscape, the authors further improved the method by using the difference between the local energy and a reference local energy for ranking, and the improved method is termed Reference Energy Extremal Optimization (REEO).
Each of the above mentioned methods has its own pros and cons, it is essential to choose a suitable strategy for a given design problem. As demonstrated by FASTER, combination of different methods has greatly advanced our ability to carry out rapid conformational searches. In a typical divide and conquer strategy, sub-problems at each level may have different characteristics, therefore, further development in combining various methods in such a sequence and conformational search cascade has great potential.
2.2 Potential functions for protein design
To make free energy evaluation tractable for many conformational states of given sequences and target fold, all current protein design potential functions approximate molecular interactions through pairwise additive terms. In principle, the energy of a sequence on a fixed backbone can be expanded into the following form: (7)with E0 accounting for the energy of the backbone itself, Ei accounting for the interaction between each residue and the backbone and the residue self energy, and Eij, Eijk,… representing pair, triple and higher order interactions among different residues. In reality, this expansion is usually cut off at the second order. The reasons for ignoring the triple and higher order interactions are threefold: (i) computation of triple and higher order interactions are much more expensive (scale as n3, n4…, n being the number of residues), while computational cost for pairwise interactions scales with n2 and can be reduced to n if only short range interactions are considered; (ii) due to the limited number of high resolution experimental structures, no accurate parameters can be derived for triple and higher order interactions based upon current PDB, and (iii) pairwise interaction approximation has been proven to be effective by many successful design studies.
The pairwise approximation is also widely used for describing non-bonded interactions in molecular mechanics (MM) force fields (FF). Many mature MMFF have very similar terms and functional forms for each term.30 The basis for these MMFF include both small molecule experimental data and quantum mechanical calculation, consequently they are referred to as physics based FF. There are two main reasons that MM force fields were not widely used in protein design. Firstly, MMFF are very expensive and are not suitable for initial energetic screening for large numbers of sequences and configurations; secondly, MMFF are parameterized to represent molecular configurations very close to the equilibrium structure and are highly sensitive to small coordinate changes, thus resulting in very rugged energy landscapes. In protein design, the placement of side chain positions are usually based on discrete rotamer libraries and small steric clashes between atoms are very common in the initial model building stage. The repulsive term accounting for van der Waals interaction is usually softened in some ways to alleviate this problem. A study conducted by Summa and Levitt31 demonstrated that knowledge based potentials perform better than MMFF in terms of bringing denatured or close-to-native structures to the native state.
Potential functions used for protein design by different groups have widely different forms at various resolutions. They usually contain a mixture of knowledge based pair potentials derived from high resolution structures in PDB and physical based energy terms accounting for van der Waals, solvation and electrostatics interactions. Entropy is usually implicitly considered through the knowledge-based pair potentials and reference state energies for each amino acid type. Explicit consideration of side chain conformational entropy in design of 110 native backbones by Hu et al.32 indicated that conformational entropy does not play a significant role in determining sequence preference in protein design. However, a recent study by Sciretti et al.33 suggested that side chain entropy does make a non-trivial difference in that the rank of the best scoring sequences of 1cka is significantly changed with explicit entropy consideration. However, in the former case, the entropy term was added to the Rosetta potentials and in the latter case, it was added to the DESIGNER potentials. The differences between these two set of potentials (as stated below) makes the direct comparison between these two studies difficult. In a given set of potential functions, ad hoc weighting factors are used for each term and are optimized empirically to fit either experimental data (e.g. melting temperature) or native sequences (or sequence profiles). Rosetta is one of the most successful protein structure prediction and design packages up to date. It has two sets of potential functions with different resolutions. The low-resolution set represents each residue by its centroid. The detailed explanation for each term can be found in Rohl et al.34 One important contribution separating the pairwise potentials in Rosetta from other earlier derivations is that it rigorously decouples the residue–environment interactions from residue–pair interactions. The high-resolution set consists of a Ramachandran torsion preference term, a Lennard-Jones term, a statistical hydrogen bonding term, a solvation term, a term for rotamer energy and a reference term representing unfolded states. In contrast, DESIGNER has only three adjustable parameters with atomistic resolution. They are the dielectric constant (ε) and two weighting factors accounting for the solvation contribution of the reference (unfolded) state (ω) and the pairwise solvation term in the folded state (γ). Recently, a set of orientation dependent statistical all-atom potentials, dubbed PSP (potential derived from side-chain packing) were developed by Lu et al.,35 the PSP is based on a basis set of 19 rigid-body blocks extracted from chemical structures of the 20 amino acids (see Fig. 3) and exhibited great performance in the limited tests that have been carried out. In addition to the accuracy of individual terms, the performance of a set of potential functions is also determined by the proper balance among various interactions. Increasing accuracy of any single term in isolation is not an effective way for improving the performance for a specific set of potential functions.
 Fig. 3  Definition of 19 rigid-body blocks. (a) Illustration of block types. Blocks are categorized into nine symmetry classes from I to IX. Block classes I, II, III and VI are line shapes, and the others are plane shapes. Heavy atoms are numbered for determining contacts, steric clashes and reference frames (see Supplementary Data in the reference). R and R′ are not considered parts of the blocks but are shown to indicate connectivity only. The reference frames for line shapes and plane shapes are shown schematically alongside their corresponding block types at the bottom of the Figure. (b) Block composition of residues. All blocks are circled for all amino acids. The block types (numbers in parentheses) are defined in (a). Each residue contains at least one block type, and within that residue, no block type occurs more than once (J. Mol. Biol., 2008, 376. 288–301, Copyright 2008, Elsevier). 
2.3 The importance of unfolded states reference energies
Understanding the energetic properties of unfolded states is critical for improving accuracy of potential functions. In principle, the goal of the sequence search is to find the sequence with lowest folding free energy ΔGfolding = Gfolded − Greference. The reference is the collection of all unfolded states. Due to the difficulty in characterizing these unfolded states, many potential functions choose to ignore them36 (that is equivalent to assume all polypeptides with the same length have the same free energy in unfolded states). Another approximation is to use the sum of contributions from individual isolated amino acids,37 this treatment assumes that the free energy for the unfolded states of proteins are only determined by their amino acid composition. In a recent study by Alvizo and Mayo,38 based upon the random energy model, they derived potential function parameters through fixed-composition optimization, the resulted potentials were shown to have significantly greater predicting power.
2.4 Treatment of explicit water molecules in protein design
As reflected in many high-resolution crystal structures, water molecules can be very tightly bound to proteins. Apparently the molecular geometry of water molecules becomes important under such situations and various widely used implicit solvation models break down. To model water-mediated hydrogen bonds at protein–protein interfaces, Jiang et al.39 came up with a “solvated rotamer” approach which includes water molecules in rotamers. In the design of retro-Aldol enzymes by Jiang et al.,40 inclusion of explicit water molecules to mediate proton shuffling was found to be significantly more successful than the results from utilizing charged side-chain networks. The failure to predict a water molecule at a protein–protein interface in the crystal structure41 indicate that, within the certainty of the involved crystal structure, there are apparent deficiencies in the current modeling of explicitly bound water molecules. Improvement of explicit water modeling, especially at the protein–protein interface or protein–ligand interface, is necessary to achieve more accurate design of interactions in inter-facial region of proteins.
2.5 Backbone flexibility
In reality, protein backbones are not rigid. As a matter of fact, the backbone flexibility is of great importance to protein function. A direct consequence of incorporating backbone flexibility is the increased conformational space that needs to be explored. However, many studies demonstrated that the additional sampling effort engendered is worthwhile. With an alternating design scheme (optimizing the sequence for a fixed protein backbone using rotamer based sequence search and optimizing the backbone for a fixed sequence with atomic resolution structure prediction), a globular protein Top7 with a novel fold was designed.3 A set of MC moves were developed to systematically introduce backbone flexibility in this study. Using the same optimization strategy, Saunders and Baker42 found that flexible backbone design better recapitulate sequence variation within protein families than sequence optimization with fixed or randomly perturbed backbones for ten diverse protein structures. Fu et al.43 utilized normal mode analysis to introduce the backbone flexibility. In this study, their designed BH3 peptides effectively broadened the set of sequences when compared with fixed backbone design, and provided insight into positions important for binding Bcl-xL.
The most common local backbone structural variation seen in high-resolution crystal structures was given a term “Backrub”44 (see Fig. 4). It involves a primary rotation around an axis (Cαi−1–Cαi+1), which shifts the Cα–Cβ orientation of a given side-chain by rigid-body dipeptide rotation. Two accompanying secondary rotations around axes Cαi−1–Cαi and Cαi–Cαi+1 rotate the two neighboring planar peptide bonds of the central Cα. Such concerted local motion costs little energy as bonding parameters (bond lengths, angles and peptide planarity) are maintained close to ideal during the process. The corresponding algorithm was utilized45 to generate an ensemble of backbone conformations to account for backbone flexibility. The sequence profile obtained from such ensembles of backbone conformations was shown to distinguish restrictive positions (positions where only a small number of amino acids are allowed) from highly plastic positions (positions where a large number of amino acids are allowed) at protein–protein interfaces, and to qualitatively predict the tolerance profile of restricted positions. Another important consequence of the flexible backbone design is that the search for GMEC becomes more complex. For stochastic search methods such as MC, incorporating flexibility simply requires additional moves modeling various backbone conformations. For DEE, the traditional pruning criteria may eliminate the real GMEC as the flexibility may change the relative free energy ranking obtained for a fixed backbone. To address this issue, Georgiev and Donald introduced a flexible-ackbone EE (BD) algorithm46 with the global backbone flexibility represented by a bounded continuous family of solutions. The same group also developed another algorithm, BRDEE,47 which represent local backbone flexibility by a finite set of conformations generated via the “backrub” algorithm. When applied in redesigns of core residues of the β1 domain of protein G (Gβ1) and the active site of the non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) enzyme Gramicidin Synthetase A (GrsA-PheA), both algorithms are found to be superior to original rigid backbone DEE in identifying more low-energy sequences and conformations. These two methods are complementary since BD represents flexibility with continuous global motions while BRDEE represents flexibility with discrete local conformations.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representations of the Backrub motion (A) A schematic diagram of the Backrub motion. The primary rotation (θ1,3) moves the central residue and its adjacent peptides around the axis (connecting Cαi–1 to Cαi+1) as a rigid body, causing the central Cα to trace out the black (red online) dotted circle. Secondary rotations (θ1,2 and θ2,3, gray/blue online dotted circle) move the individual peptides as rigid bodies around the axes Cαi−1–Cα and Cα–Cαi+1. A small amount of distortion is introduced into the two τ angles (N–Cα–C), but they generally remain well within the range of values seen in typical crystal structures. (B) A series of backbones generated with Backrub by making 5° steps around the primary rotation axis (hydrogen atoms not shown). (C) Another series of backbones generated with Backrub by making 5° steps around the primary rotation axis, while also rotating each peptide to roughly maintain the H bonding position of the NH and CO groups. (Structure, 2006, 14, 265–274, Copyright 2006, Cell Press). 
2.6 The concerted progresses of search methodology and energy functions
Because all accuracy tests of potential functions are limited by the extent of conformational sampling performed, the development of conformational search methods and potential functions are highly correlated. As an example, Shmygelska and Levitt48 found that the Rosetta force fields actually create false native states in addition to real ones. The deficiency was only observed when sufficient conformational sampling was achieved by using Hamiltonian Replica Exchange† Monte Carlo sampling method, which was demonstrated to perform better than both Temperature Replica Exchange Monte Carlo and the original Monte Carlo SA used in the Rosetta package. Additionally, they also discovered that the long-range and short-range backbone hydrogen-bonding energy terms of the Rosetta energy discriminate between the non-native and native-like structures significantly better than the low-resolution scores used in Rosetta.
The specifics of a search algorithm always depend upon the form of potential functions. Grigoryan et al.49 developed a cluster expansion method in which energies for a subset of conformational space were computed with structure based potential functions and then used to train a set of expansion coefficients. Specifically, denote the energy of the sequence  on the N-residue target fold backbone Emin(), where  = {σ1, ... ,σN}, and σi is a variable representing the amino acid at the i-th position. Let M be the number of allowed amino acids at each position and σi may assume any value from 0 to M − 1, then Emin() can be expanded into the following form: (8)where φ(si,i) is a binary function and equals 1 if site si is occupied by an amino acid i or 0 otherwise. The summations are over all sites and amino acid identities, Terms J are the effective contributions of each function to the total energy. This expansion will be exact if used in its entirety. In reality, truncation at the second or third order is necessary. Terms J can be derived by using a training set of sequence-energy pairs obtained from traditional structured-based energy evaluation procedures. Once these terms are established, the energy is expressed in terms of sequence instead of structure. Great accuracy was achieved for bZIPs (basic-region leucine zipper) and the search is extremely fast when combined with optimization by Integer Linear Programming (ILP)‡. The downside is that such expansion has to be performed for each specific fold, which constitutes a significant challenge for designing multiple structural states involving different folds. However, for single fold design, the integrated frame termed CLASSY49 (cluster expansion and linear programming based analysis of specificity and stability) is in principle extremely flexible and both physical/structure-based models and empirical/statistics based models can be accommodated. The only requirement is that potential functions can be expressed as a linear function of sequence variables.
3. Significant achievements of soluble protein design
3.1 Improving thermal stability through computational design
Thermal stability is one of basic goals in protein design as proteins that are intended to carry out certain functions should maintain their function under ambient conditions or even withstand reasonably high temperature for robustness. Since it has been understood that hydrophobic packing is the major driving force for the folding of globular proteins, most design studies successfully increased protein stability by increasing the hydrophobic burial.3 Fundamentally, high thermal stability of a protein requires two conditions to be satisfied. First, in the absolute sense, the designed sequences should withstand ambient or higher temperature in its intended structure and this property is represented by the computed value of the lowest folding free energy; second, there should be a large enough gap between the free energies of the designed sequence in the target structure and in alternative structures, should there be any. The fact that the design process is a search for the lowest folding energy sequence automatically considers the first condition. Therefore, even without explicit consideration of heuristic rules such as large hydrophobic burial, high stability can be achieved in automated design procedures as demonstrated by the redesign of Drosophila melanogaster engrailed homeodomain.4 However, in reality, there are always functional constraints that have to be satisfied while increasing the stability. By fixing residues directly involved in catalysis, Korkegian et al.50 successfully redesigned the yeast cytosine deaminase to be 10 °C more stable while maintaining its catalytic efficiency. Preserving function of natural proteins while increasing their stability will continue to be an important area of protein design since a lot of functions performed by natural proteins (e.g. fixation of nitrogen under ambient conditions, breaking of the glycosidic bonds in cellulose by cellulase) could potentially be utilized in industries.
3.2 Interaction specificity in protein design
A designed protein or peptide is usually meant to carry out certain functions through interactions with its intended target/partner. For optimal effects, the designed protein/peptide has to have sufficient stability and specificity. The stability can be achieved by simply searching for the lowest free energy sequence for a given fold (which matches well with the intended target) and such a process is usually termed positive design. Specificity design is more complex because it has to explicitly consider the possible alternative structures the design sequence may adopt, thus facing a structure prediction problem accompanying the design process for the intended target. Further complications arise when selection against proteins that are homologous to the target has to be considered. Designing processes which explicitly address these issues are termed negative design. While there are examples of specificity being convenient by-products of a pure positive design51 (Yosef et al. 2009, and references therein), stability and specificity are conflicting goals in many cases and appropriate compromises have to be made to achieve a suitable balance, especially when the intended target has many structurally similar molecules that coexist in its environment.
Despite the above mentioned challenges, great progress has been made in achieving specificity in protein design. Havranek and Harbury52 developed an algorithm that selects sequences with an energetic preference for the desired state over competing states. They implemented the algorithm for automated design of specificity in molecular recognition, and designed two coiled-coil sequences that prefer homodimers over heterodimers. Joachimiak et al.41 introduced a new hydrogen-bond network into the colicin E7 Dnase-Im7 immunity protein complex and obtained at least 300-fold specificity over one of the cognate interactions. Grigoryan et al.49 implemented a “specificity sweep” procedure within their CLASSY framework to design bZIP binding peptides. Many of their designs were selective for the intended targets over all 19 other families (20 bZIP families were investigated in the study).
3.3 Computational design of enzymes
With the ability to accelerate chemical reactions up to 1020 (e.g. Arginine Decarboxylase) and to realize their performance under ambient or physiological conditions, it is not surprising that enzymes have attracted significant effort from the protein design community. A typical catalyzed chemical reaction involves substrate binding → conformational transition(s) to the transition state → reaction → conformational transition(s) to the product release state → product release. It is demonstrated for dihydrofolate reductase53 that the rate limiting step coincides with a step exhibiting slowest dynamical transition. Current design of enzymes mainly targets the transition-state interactions involving high-energy states of substrates. In this regard, Lassila et al.54 redesigned E. coli chorismate mutase by stabilizing transition-state binding and only mutating second-shell residues. One of the five designed single mutations increased efficiency by 60%. Recently, Rothlisberger et al.3 successfully designed an enzyme that catalyzes the Kemp elimination reaction, for which no known natural enzymes is available. They achieved reaction acceleration of up to 105. Using hashing based new algorithms, Jiang et al.16 designed retro-aldol enzymes with rate acceleration up to four orders of magnitude. Compared to earlier enzyme redesigns with limited mutations, these two de novo designs created enzymes for non-biological reactions. While the rate enhancement in both studies is not impressive at all when compared with natural enzymes, these achievements are significant milestones toward our goal of designing novel enzyme with natural-enzyme like capacities. Bolon et al.55 stated in their 2002 review that “Computational design is not currently an effective tool for increasing fitness, which may occur through subtle changes in backbone structure and protein dynamics”. Unfortunately, this statement remains true today although we are certainly much closer to solving the problem. The inability to capture subtle structural changes has its origin in both sequence and conformational search capability and insufficient accuracy of potential functions. This is because a distal mutation can potentially cause subtle or even significant structural changes in the active site. From a pure structural view point, a design with backbone deviation less than 2 Å would be considered high quality. However, chemical reactions require key atoms within a few tenths of an angstrom, presenting much more stringent tests for the accuracy of potential functions. With increasing number of groups joining the community, further progress in both sequence/conformational search and accuracy of potential functions are expected in the coming years, and design of higher quality structures will appear. However, new methodologies on designing multiple relevant structural states and dynamical transitions between them have to be developed before we can routinely design useful enzymes. As large conformational changes are often necessary in enzymatic reactions, ensemble design considering only structures or backbone flexibility in the vicinity of a single native state may be insufficient for such purposes. In this regard, Allen and Mayo56 developed a multistate design (MSD) method in which the sequence selection is based on the energetic contributions from multiple structural states. Depending upon the intended importance of various states, either Boltzmann-weighted or arithmetically weighted average energy from the multiple target states is used in the sequence selection criteria. This method is combined with both MC (MSD-MC) and FASTER (MSD-FASTER) search algorithm and MSD-FASTER is found to have significantly better performance than MSD-MC.
4. Progress of membrane protein design
Our knowledge of membrane proteins certainly does not match their biological and potential technological importance. From a protein design point of view, limited availability of high-resolution structures and biochemical data makes it difficult to simply replicate the successes of soluble protein design in their membrane counterparts. Compared with design of soluble proteins, there are two major differences need to be considered for membrane protein design. First, the partition of residues among the aqueous, hydrophobic core and inter-facial regions of biomembranes; second, molecular interactions for residues partitioned into lipid bilayers are different from both surface and buried residues in soluble proteins. Great progress has been made in the last decade on these issues. In the molecular simulation community, a wide range of implicit membrane models have been developed57 (see Fig. 5) to account for the membrane environment in simulations. One of such models, namely IMM1,58 was proven to be sufficient to recapitulate side chain conformational preference and residue partitions in a series of tests by Barth et al.59 to recover sequences and conformations for a set of polytopic membrane proteins. For transmembrane helical (THM) proteins, inter-helical interactions are the key to their tertiary structure. In this regard, using the double-mutant cycle analysis, Joh et al.60 found that the average contribution of eight inter-helical side-chain hydrogen bonds in bacteriorhodopsin is only 0.6 kcal mol−1. Utilizing well-defined sequence–structure correlations at TMH interfaces, Yin et al.61 designed peptides that specifically recognize the TM helices of two closely related integrins (αIIbβ3 and αvβ3) in micelles, bacterial membranes, and mammalian cells. Their results demonstrated that geometric complementarity alone is sufficient to drive specific recognition and activation of target integrin variants. The importance of complementary packing was also demonstrated in another study by North et al.62
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of a typical implicit membrane model; ε represents the dielectric constant. Acyl chains of a lipid bilayer are represented by a slab of low dielectric media (“hydrophobic core”), head groups (“interfacial region”) with a slab with intermediate dielectric constant. 
In addition to helical membrane proteins, the other class of integral membrane proteins features beta barrels. Due to their excellent thermal stability and relative ease for expression and purification, a number of them (e.g. Alpha-hemolysin, OmpG) were studied10 as potential biosensors. However, the mutation design in these studies are limited to empirical trials based on visual inspection or molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of high resolution crystal structures. No systematic design study has been carried out for membrane embedded beta barrels.
5. Interplay of computational protein design, experiments and molecular simulations
Experimental validations certainly play critical role in testing and improving our computational protein design protocols. As demonstrated by many successful studies,16,4 the most direct test of our protein design capability is the comparison between computationally built models and high-resolution X-ray or NMR structures. On the other hand, protein design can be very useful in facilitating experimental studies. While computational design can sample much larger sequence space than protein design using directed evolution,63 the latter performs much better in terms of fine tuning the free energy landscapes. Fundamentally, in computational design approximate potential functions are applied to a larger set of sequences while in directed evolution, the exact “potential functions” were applied to a smaller set of sequences through appropriate selection assays. If an effective selection assay is available for the directed evolution, combining these two classes of methodologies by utilizing the minimally functional design from computational studies as the starting point of directed evolution is a great option. Computational protein design has been proved to generate libraries with greater diversity and better preservation of function than random library generation.64 With rapid and continuing progress in modeling protein–protein interfaces, computational protein design will find more utilities in facilitating experimental molecular biology research.
MD simulation has been extensively used to study the dynamics of biomolecules at atomic resolution. Its strength in this regard will reserve the method a well-deserved niche in the future molecular biological sciences. With development of mature MD packages and increasingly affordable computation resources, MD simulation is now carried out in both computational and experimental research groups. Currently, the interaction between the computational protein design field and MD simulation field is limited to sharing of some potential functions or MD simulations of some structural models derived from protein design. The complementary strength of these two types of methodology may lead to deeper interaction between them. Possible scenarios include, but are not limited to, inclusion of MD simulation steps in structural refinement stage of protein design or derivation of protein dynamics–sequence relationship from both MD trajectories and experiments and utilization of such relationship in protein design. While bioinformatics methods, such as BLAST or similar sequence analysis methodologies, quickly find their way into experimental labs, MD simulations are slowly gaining popularity among some experimental molecular biologists. With improved availability of mature packages, computational protein design will certainly become an important tool for many molecular biologists in the future.
6. Challenges and prospects of protein design
The major challenge at the moment is still insufficient sampling capabilities of research groups with only small computing clusters available. So faster search algorithms is still the top priority for design of targets with more than 150 amino acids. On the bright side, in addition to the ever faster clock of processing units, with rapid development of GPU (Graphic Processing Units) based, massively parallel supercomputing facilities and internet based cloud computing, the computational power available to small research groups will get a big boost in the coming years. As a matter of fact, some projects, such as Folding@home (http://folding.stanford.edu) and Rossetta@home (http://boinc.bakerlab.org/rosetta), have been using internet resources for many years.
The capability of fine tuning the free energy landscape is critical in realizing effective design of functional proteins such as enzymes. Sub-angstrom structural accuracy and significant improvement of current potential functions is necessary to achieve this goal. One direction in this regard is to gradually improve general potential functions (which can be utilized for arbitrary folds) based upon our increasing understanding of physical interactions underlining the protein structure and function (e.g. Rosetta). The other direction would be to develop specialized potential functions for a given type of fold (e.g. Cluster Expansion49).
Protein dynamics is critically important for their functions. However, most current protein designs do not explicitly include dynamical properties as design objectives. The Elastic Network Model (ENM)65 has been very successful in rapidly predicting functionally important domain motions on relatively long time scale (micron second to millisecond and beyond). Since no solvent is considered in this model, it can be easily added as a filter in future design of larger and/or multi-domain proteins. Rational and explicit consideration of the effect of solvent–molecule dynamics on protein dynamics on the ns to μs time scale await for development of novel algorithms to account for it.
Given the impressive progress in the last two decades, with continuing improvement of computational power, sampling algorithms and potential functions, we may well see in the coming decade that the activity of protein design gradually propagate from computational groups to experimental laboratories, and from academic laboratories to pharmaceutical, medical and chemical engineering industries. There are plenty of opportunities in both developing better searching algorithms and more accurate potential functions. For example, without the constraint of the detailed balance requirement, there is great potential in development of smarter MC or other stochastic search methodologies in sequence space. Most of the current algorithms are implemented for running on regular CPUs. To utilize rapid hardware development of GPUs, efficient implementations of many classical search algorithms on GPU based or mixed CPU/GPU computing facilities will greatly boost our computational capability in the next few years. While one major traditional test for potential functions is to maximally recapitulate sequence identity of native proteins, matching the sequence profiles from protein designs (which incorporating backbone flexibility or backbone structural ensemble) with that of naturally occurring proteins may be a better and more general test. Additionally, rigorous experimental structural verification of designed models is essential in improving potential functions.
References
M. Rubinstein and M. Y. Niv, Biopolymers, 2009, 91, 505 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Moss, S. Sharma and N. P. J. Brindle, Biochem. Soc. Trans., 2009, 37, 717 CrossRef CAS .
S. Martí, J. Andres, V. Moliner, E. Silla, I. Tunon and J. Bertran, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2634 RSC .
S. Nauli, B. Kuhlman and D. Baker, Nat. Struct. Biol., 2001, 8, 602 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kuhlman and D. Baker, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 2004, 14, 89 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Degrado, C. M. Summa, V. Pavone, F. Nastri and A. Lombardi, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 1999, 68, 779 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kuhlman, G. Dantas, G. Ireton, G. Varani, B. Stoddard and D. Baker, Science, 2003, 302, 1364 CrossRef CAS .
D. Röthlisberger, O. Khersonsky, A. M. Wollacott, L. Jiang, J. Dechancie, J. Betker, J. L. Gallaher, E. A. Althoff, A. Zanghellini, O. Dym, S. Albeck, K. N. Kouk, D. S. Tawfik and D. Baker, Nature, 2008, 453, 190 CrossRef .
P. Barth, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 2007, 17, 460 CrossRef CAS .
G. Maglia, M. R. Restrepo, E. Mikhailova and H. Bayley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 19720 CrossRef CAS ; M. Chen, S. Khalid, M. S. P. Sansom and H. Bayley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 6272 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Shah, G. K. Hom, S. A. Ross, J. K. Lassila, K. A. Crowhurst and S. L. Mayo, J. Mol. Biol., 2007, 372, 1 CrossRef CAS .
O. C. Redfern, A. Harrison, T. Dallman, F. M. G. Perl and C. A. Orengo, PLoS Comput. Biol., 2007, 3, e232 Search PubMed .
C. Malisi, O. Kohlbacher and B. Hocker, Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf., 2009, 77, 74 Search PubMed .
C. A. Voigt, D. B. Gordon and S. L. Mayo, J. Mol. Biol., 2000, 299, 789 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Vizcarra and S. L. Mayo, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2005, 9, 622 CAS .
F. E. Boas and P. B. Harbury, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 2007, 17, 199 CrossRef CAS .
R. Das and D. Baker, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 2008, 77, 363 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, N. Yeung, N. Sieracki and N. M. Marshall, Nature, 2009, 460, 855 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Tian and J. Sholnick, J. Mol. Biol., 2003, 333, 863 CrossRef CAS .
J. Desmet, M. De Maeyer, B. Hazes and I. Lasters, Nature, 1992, 356, 539 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Goldstein, Biophys. J., 1994, 66, 1335 CAS .
D. B. Gordon and S. L. Mayo, J. Comput. Chem., 1998, 19, 1505 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Pierce, J. A. Spriet, J. Desmet and S. L. Mayo, J. Comput. Chem., 2000, 21, 999 CrossRef CAS .
I. Georgiev, R. H. Lilien and B. R. Donald, Bioinformatics, 2006, 22, e174 CrossRef CAS .
J. Desmet, J. Spriet and I. Lasters, Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet., 2002, 48, 31 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Allen and S. L. Mayo, J. Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1071 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Leach and A. P. Lemon, Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet., 1998, 33, 227 CrossRef CAS .
N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller and E. Teller, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 1087 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang and C. Zeng, J. Comput. Chem., 2008, 29, 1762 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Mackerell Jr, J. Comput. Chem., 2004, 25, 1584 CrossRef .
C. M. Summa and M. Levitt, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 3177 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu and B. Kuhlman, Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf., 2006, 62, 739 Search PubMed .
D. Sciretti, P. Bruscolini, P. Alessandro, M. Pretti and A. Jaramillo, Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf., 2009, 74, 176 Search PubMed .
C. A. Rohl, C. E. M. Strauss, K. M. S. Misura and D. Baker, Methods Enzymol., 2004, 383, 66 CAS .
M. Lu, A. Dousis and J. Ma, J. Mol. Biol., 2008, 376, 288 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Gordon, S. A. Marshall and S. L. Mayo, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 1999, 9, 509 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jaramillo, L. Wernisch, S. Hery and S. J. Wodak, Comb. Chem. High Throughput Screening, 2001, 4, 643 CAS .
O. Alvizo and S. L. Mayo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 12242 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, B. Kuhlman, T. Kortemme and D. Baker, Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf., 2005, 58, 893 Search PubMed .
L. Jiang, E. A. Althoff, F. R. Clemente, L. Doyle, D. Rothlisberger, A. Zanghellini, J. L. Gallaher, J. L. Betker, F. Tanaka, C. G. Barbas III, D. Hilvert, K. N. Houk, B. L. Stoddard and D. Baker, Science, 2008, 319, 1387 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Joachimiak, T. Kortemme, B. L. Stoddard and D. Baker, J. Mol. Biol., 2006, 361, 195 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Saunders and D. Baker, J. Mol. Biol., 2005, 346, 631 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fu, J. R. Apgar and A. E. Keating, J. Mol. Biol., 2007, 371, 1099 CrossRef CAS .
I. W. Davis, W. B. Arendall, D. C. Richardson and J. S. Richardson, Structure, 2006, 14, 265 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Humphris and T. Kortemme, Structure, 2008, 16, 1777 CrossRef CAS .
I. Georgiev and B. R. Donald, Bioinformatics, 2007, 23, i185 CrossRef CAS .
I. Georgiev, D. Keedy, J. S. Richardson, D. C. Richardson and B. R. Donald, Bioinformatics, 2008, 24, i196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shmygelska and M. Levitt, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 1415 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grigoryan, A. W. Reinke and W. E. Keating, Nature, 2009, 458, 859 CrossRef CAS .
A. Korkegian, M. E. Black, D. Baker and B. L. Stoddard, Science, 2005, 308, 857 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yosef, R. Politi, M. H. Chio and J. M. Shifman, J. Mol. Biol., 2009, 385, 1470 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Havranek and B. P. Harbury, Nat. Struct. Biol., 2003, 10, 45 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Boehr, D. McElheny, H. J. Dyson and P. E. Wright, Science, 2006, 313, 1638 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lassila, J. R. Keeffe, P. Oelschlaeger and S. L. Mayo, Protein Eng., Des. Sel., 2005, 18, 161 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Bolon, C. A. Voigt and S. L. Mayo, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2002, 6, 125 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Allen and S. L. Mayo, J. Comput. Chem., 2010, 31, 904 CAS .
M. Feig and C. L. Brooks III, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 2004, 14, 217 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lazaridis, Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet., 2003, 52, 176 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barth, J. Schonbrun and D. Baker, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 15682 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Joh, A. Min, S. Faham, J. P. Whitelegge, D. Yang, V. L. Woods and J. U. Bowie, Nature, 2008, 453, 1266 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, J. S. Slusky, B. W. Berger, R. S. Walters, G. Vilaire, R. I. Litvinov, J. D. Lear, G. A. Caputo, J. S. Bennett and W. F. Degrado, Science, 2007, 315, 1817–1822 CrossRef CAS .
B. North, L. Cristian, X. Fu, J. D. Lear, J. G. Saven and W. F. Degrado, J. Mol. Biol., 2006, 359, 930 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jäckel, P. Kast and D. Hilvert, Annu. Rev. Biophys., 2008, 37, 153 Search PubMed .
T. Treynor, C. L. Vizcarra, D. Nedelcu and S. L. Mayo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 48 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tirion, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 1905 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Replica Exchange (RE) is a sampling method where multiple simulations are carried out in parallel, and exchange between neighboring replica pairs is performed under the principle of detailed balance to facilitate exploration of the conformational space. For temperature RE, each replica has a different temperature. Replicas with higher temperatures will be able to cross energy barrier more rapidly and therefore facilitate sampling of configuration space of the lowest temperature through replica exchange. Hamiltonian RE uses different Hamiltonian (interactions) instead of temperature for each replica to facilitate sampling. In both cases, one replica (usually the first one) is simulated with the interested target parameter (temperature or Hamiltonian). More details can be found in J. Chem. Phys.. 116:9058–9067, and references wherein.‡ Linear Programming is a mathematical method for optimization of a given model that is represented by linear equations. In the special case when variables in a model are integers, it is called Integer Linear Programming (ILP). Protein design, as it is formulated in ref. 48, is a special case of ILP called binary integer programming as occupation of each site by a specific amino acid is either 1 or 0. See ref. 48 and reference wherein for more details.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Pu Tian
	Pu Tian received his BS in Chemical Engineering from Sichuan University (Chengdu, China) in 1995 and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Utah, in 2003. He joined the University of Michigan as a research fellow in Department of Chemistry in 2003 and moved to National Institute of Diabetes & Digestive & Kidney Diseases as a research fellow in 2005. He has been a member of faculty in College of Life Science at Jilin University (Changchun, China) since late 2009. His current research interests include molecular simulations and design of macrobiomolecules with emphasis on membrane proteins.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of the inverse relationship between structure prediction (protein folding) and protein design. (A) A known sequence (indicated by different gray scale of the tube protein representation, color online) in a random coil state. (B) The backbone of a given target fold without any information on the sequence. (C) A folded protein with both structure and sequence (indicated by different gray scale of the carton representation, color online) determined.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of the computationally designed model (black, blue online) to the solved X-ray crystal structure (gray, red online) of Top7. (A) Cα overlay of the model and structure in stereo (backbone RMSD = 1.17 Å). (B) The C-terminal halves of the X-ray crystal structure and model are extraordinarily similar. The representative region shown (Asp78 to Gly85) has an all-atom RMSD of 0.79 Å and a backbone RMSD of 0.54 Å. (C) Stereo-representation of the effectively superposable side chains in the cores of the designed model and the solved structure (Science, 2003, 302, 1364–1368. Copyright 2003, AAAS).	 
P = 1: Eb < Ea;P = exp[−(Eb − Ea)]/kbT: Eb > Ea	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
εΠ (1) ≥ εΠ (2) ≥ ⋯ ≥ εΠ(k) ≥ ⋯ ≥ εΠ(N)	(5)
εiΠ (1) ≤ εiΠ (2) ≤ ⋯ ≤ ⋯ ≤ εΠ(k′) ≤ εiΠ(Mrot(i))	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 3  Definition of 19 rigid-body blocks. (a) Illustration of block types. Blocks are categorized into nine symmetry classes from I to IX. Block classes I, II, III and VI are line shapes, and the others are plane shapes. Heavy atoms are numbered for determining contacts, steric clashes and reference frames (see Supplementary Data in the reference). R and R′ are not considered parts of the blocks but are shown to indicate connectivity only. The reference frames for line shapes and plane shapes are shown schematically alongside their corresponding block types at the bottom of the Figure. (b) Block composition of residues. All blocks are circled for all amino acids. The block types (numbers in parentheses) are defined in (a). Each residue contains at least one block type, and within that residue, no block type occurs more than once (J. Mol. Biol., 2008, 376. 288–301, Copyright 2008, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representations of the Backrub motion (A) A schematic diagram of the Backrub motion. The primary rotation (θ1,3) moves the central residue and its adjacent peptides around the axis (connecting Cαi–1 to Cαi+1) as a rigid body, causing the central Cα to trace out the black (red online) dotted circle. Secondary rotations (θ1,2 and θ2,3, gray/blue online dotted circle) move the individual peptides as rigid bodies around the axes Cαi−1–Cα and Cα–Cαi+1. A small amount of distortion is introduced into the two τ angles (N–Cα–C), but they generally remain well within the range of values seen in typical crystal structures. (B) A series of backbones generated with Backrub by making 5° steps around the primary rotation axis (hydrogen atoms not shown). (C) Another series of backbones generated with Backrub by making 5° steps around the primary rotation axis, while also rotating each peptide to roughly maintain the H bonding position of the NH and CO groups. (Structure, 2006, 14, 265–274, Copyright 2006, Cell Press).	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of a typical implicit membrane model; ε represents the dielectric constant. Acyl chains of a lipid bilayer are represented by a slab of low dielectric media (“hydrophobic core”), head groups (“interfacial region”) with a slab with intermediate dielectric constant.	 
Footnotes
† Replica Exchange (RE) is a sampling method where multiple simulations are carried out in parallel, and exchange between neighboring replica pairs is performed under the principle of detailed balance to facilitate exploration of the conformational space. For temperature RE, each replica has a different temperature. Replicas with higher temperatures will be able to cross energy barrier more rapidly and therefore facilitate sampling of configuration space of the lowest temperature through replica exchange. Hamiltonian RE uses different Hamiltonian (interactions) instead of temperature for each replica to facilitate sampling. In both cases, one replica (usually the first one) is simulated with the interested target parameter (temperature or Hamiltonian). More details can be found in J. Chem. Phys.. 116:9058–9067, and references wherein.
‡ Linear Programming is a mathematical method for optimization of a given model that is represented by linear equations. In the special case when variables in a model are integers, it is called Integer Linear Programming (ILP). Protein design, as it is formulated in ref. 48, is a special case of ILP called binary integer programming as occupation of each site by a specific amino acid is either 1 or 0. See ref. 48 and reference wherein for more details.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
