Progress on two-dimensional binary oxide materials  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NR01076C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NR01076C
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 9576-9608Progress on two-dimensional binary oxide materials

        
          
            Manli 
            Yang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhixiang 
            Ye†
b, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad Ahsan 
            Iqbal
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huawei 
            Liang
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yu-Jia 
            Zeng
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518052, Guangdong, China. E-mail: yjzeng@szu.edu.cn; hwliang@szu.edu.cn
bCollege of New Materials and New Energies, Shenzhen Technology University, Shenzhen 518118, Guangdong, China
Received 
      24th February 2022
    , Accepted 1st June 2022First published on 2nd June 2022AbstractTwo-dimensional van der Waals (2D vdW) materials have attracted much attention because of their unique electronic and optical properties. Since the successful isolation of graphene in 2004, many interesting 2D materials have emerged, including elemental olefins (silicene, germanene, etc.), transition metal chalcogenides, transition metal carbides (nitrides), hexagonal boron, etc. On the other hand, 2D binary oxide materials are an important group in the 2D family owing to their high structural diversity, low cost, high stability, and strong adjustability. This review systematically summarizes the research progress on 2D binary oxide materials. We discuss their composition and structure in terms of vdW and non-vdW categories in detail, followed by a discussion of their synthesis methods. In particular, we focus on strategies to tailor the properties of 2D oxides and their emerging applications in different fields. Finally, the challenges and future developments of 2D binary oxides are provided.
1. Introduction
In recent years, 2D materials have shown excellent physical and chemical properties in low-dimensional systems due to their in-plane bound charge interaction and ultra-high specific surface area.1,2 Due to their large surface-to-volume ratio, these 2D structures expose nearly all of their components to the surface. This allows for a wide range of adjustments to hydrophilicity, hydrophobicity, surface charge, and structure to meet specific application needs.3 Also, the 2D electronic constraints give them good electronic properties, and the atomic thickness gives them high mechanical flexibility and optical transparency. This makes 2D materials a good choice for making electronic or optoelectronic devices that are both flexible and transparent.4 Due to the small thickness of 2D materials, the quantum confinement effect will change the electron band structure, charge transport, and optical properties in ways that are different from those of regular 3D materials.3 With the increasing interest in nanotechnology, the unprecedented performance of 2D materials has been unlocked. Because of their excellent properties, 2D materials show great charm in the fields of optics, energy storage, catalysis, sensing, biomedicine, and so on.
In 1996, Sasaki et al.5 successfully stripped layered titanium oxide and defined the term nanosheet. Their research showed that nanosheets behaved as a single molecular entity rather than an aggregate or crystal. Geim and Novosolov6 demonstrated in 2004 that monoatomic graphene can be prepared on silicon oxide using the “Scotch tape method”, demonstrating the thinnest electronic device in scientific history. To date, scientists have developed a variety of 2D nanomaterials with atomic thickness, such as black phosphorus,7,8 metal chalcogenides,9 metal phosphates, hexagonal boron nitride,10 transition metal oxides,2 and so on. Among them, metal oxides have the characteristics of low cost, high stability, and high adjustability. At the same time, they also have a very rich structural diversity.11 As oxides, these crystals are not easily affected by air but easily lose oxygen or react with water and hydrogen. The transition from bulk to 2D may bring about different properties from its parent, and compared with 3D oxides, 2D oxides usually have a lower dielectric constant and a larger bandgap and can exhibit charge density waves.12 According to previous research findings, only a small portion of the material has a layered structure that can be directly peeled from the 3D matrix (via mechanical exfoliation, liquid peeling, laser thinning, and so on). Many of these materials are formed by strong chemical bonds between atoms in the 3D direction of the crystal, which cannot be easily synthesized by a top-down method. Therefore, many bottom-up growth methods (such as the hydrothermal method, sol–gel method, etc.) have been developed. Because of these characteristics, oxide nanosheets can eventually be used to manufacture unique devices, such as fast switches, large transconductance field-effect transistors, fast photochromic transducers, high-sensitivity detectors, and light modulators.13–16 Using these nanosheets, it is also possible to optimize superlattice combinations, quantum wells, and complex heterostructures with unique electrons and magnetism.13,17–20 Recent excellent reviews have summarized progress on 2D layered double hydroxides21,22 and ternary or more multivariate oxides.23,24 In this review, we will limit our discussion to 2D binary oxides, which have a simple structure, low cost, high stability, and strong adjustability.
Although 2D oxides have many unique properties, they have attracted less attention compared with other 2D materials such as chalcogenides. This review aims to provide a comprehensive and up-to-date entry of oxide nanosheets, covering vdW oxides and non-vdW oxides in a comparative framework. More importantly, we systematically discussed various modification methods of 2D oxides over the years and their applications in many fields, such as the tunable localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect and its application in spectral enhancement and photodetection. To systematically introduce 2D oxide materials, this review is divided into four main parts: classification (section 2), synthesis (section 3), modulation (section 4), and applications (section 5). In section 2, based on the crystal structure, we discuss two types of 2D oxides: 2D vdW oxides and 2D non-vdW oxides. We will discuss in detail the crystal structure, the unique properties, and related research progress on a series of typical 2D oxides from the two categories. In section 3, the preparation methods of 2D metal oxides are introduced in detail from two aspects (top-down and bottom-up). The top-down methods mainly refer to exfoliation (mechanical exfoliation and liquid phase exfoliation), and are aimed at 2D vdW oxides. The bottom-up methods mainly include deposition technology (vapor deposition and liquid deposition) and the template method. These methods are mainly aimed at 2D non-vdW oxides. In section 4, we discuss four different control methods for modulating the performance. Firstly, we introduce the commonly used intercalation technology, which changes the electronic or crystal structure of metal oxides through insertion to adjust their electrochemical and photochemical properties. Then we discuss the very important doping technology. We will focus on three parts: self-doping, external doping, and co-doping. The method is mainly based on regulating the LSPR properties of semiconductor oxides. Then, defect engineering is discussed, and the inherent properties of materials are changed by manufacturing defects. Finally, the adjustment method of the crystal plane/phase structure and interface engineering are discussed. In section 5, we discuss the emerging and potential applications of 2D oxides, including enhanced spectroscopy, photodetection, sensing, catalysis, biological imaging, treatment, and energy storage. In section 6, we conclude with the challenges and future perspectives of 2D oxide materials.
2. Categories of 2D oxides
According to the crystal structure, 2D oxides can be divided into two categories: (1) vdW oxides have strong transverse chemical bonds in the plane but weak vdW interactions between the planes; (2) non-vdW oxides have atomic bonds in 3D space but a limited number of layers, giving them a 2D sheet structure.
2.1. Typical 2D van der Waals oxides
We know that bulk oxides have a small specific surface area, low surface free energy, and high melting point. In 2D oxides, the existence of oxygen atoms on the material surface can significantly improve the surface energy and material properties, breaking the technical bottleneck of bulk oxides being difficult to apply to miniaturized platforms. The simplest way to obtain 2D oxide nanomaterials is to separate them from the matrix by various exfoliation techniques, which is very different from other low-dimensional materials (0 and 1 dimensions), which depend heavily on their crystal growth mechanism. At present, most of the 2D nanomaterials studied come from layered compounds, which are kinds of material with strong in-plane covalent bonds but weak inter-plane vdW interaction.4 These materials are obtained by top-down methods, such as mechanical cleavage, liquid exfoliation, ion intercalation, exfoliation, etc. The specific synthesis methods are described in section 3.
Many metal oxides such as MoO3,25–47 WO3,48–50 and V2O551–53 can exist in the form of layered crystals. The obtained 2D nanosheets have stable physical and chemical properties. The crystal structure diagram is shown in Fig. 1a. The well-known layered oxide MoO3 has three basic forms: a layered structure called α-MoO3; a kind of twisted ReO-like structure, namely β-, β′- and β′′-MoO3; and an open hexagonal structure.54–57 They have very different physical and chemical properties, including refractive index, bandgap energy, and mechanical hardness. In the thermodynamically stable orthogonal phase α, each atomic layer is composed of a twisted MoO6 octahedral double-layer planar crystal, which is subjected to weak vdW forces in the vertical {010} direction (Fig. 1a). The chemical bond in octahedra is mainly covalent. Bulk α-MoO3 has a large bandgap (∼3 eV), which results in a low carrier concentration and makes it unsuitable for electronic devices. Therefore, many methods (such as hydrogen insertion) have been developed to adjust its bandgap.58 The metastable β phase adopts a monoclinic 3D structure, which is not conducive to the formation of planar crystals. The difference between the two can be seen in Fig. 1b. The spontaneous transformation of the β/α phase occurs between 370 and 400 °C. V2O5 also crystallizes in an orthogonal crystal structure, including a twisted [VO5] square pyramid layer stacked in the (001) direction (Fig. 1a). The bandgap of bulk V2O5 is ∼2.4 eV, and the (001) monolayer has similar physical properties and stability to the bulk. The results show that the single-layer V2O5 sheet (indirect gap: 1.91 eV) has tunable properties.58 In addition, there are transition metal oxides such as perovskites. If the perovskite block crystals are layered, similar to layered transition metal oxides, as shown in Fig. 1c, they can also be directly stripped from their natural layered phase.15,59
 Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structure of orthorhombic MoO3 and orthorhombic V2O5.42,58 Copyright 2013, Wiley. And 2015, WIREs Computational Molecular Science. (b) Thermodynamically stable orthorhombic α-MoO3 and metastable monoclinic β-MoO3.60 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Different layered perovskites.15,59 Copyright 2002, American Chemical Society. And 2016, Elsevier. 
MoO3 is a promising vdW oxide with a wide range of applications. It naturally exists in the form of the mineral molybdite.38 The structure is shown in Fig. 2a. Due to the weak interlayer interaction, 2D vdW oxides can be easily stripped with appropriate solvents or surfactants. The MoO3 lattice can be seen in Fig. 2b, indicating that the stripped material has high structural quality. The relationship between the thickness, length, and width of the nanosheet can be determined by an atomic force microscope (AFM) (Fig. 2c). It is confirmed that the relationship between the thickness of the sheet and the area is a monotonically increasing function. The 2D β-Ga2O3 obtained by Feng et al.61 through the oxidation of layered GaSe can be applied as a solar-blind photodetector. As shown in Fig. 2d, the SEM image shows that the surface of the prepared nanosheet is flat and free of large-area defects, which is of great significance for photoelectric applications. The TEM results are consistent with the SEM results. The thickness of the nanosheet measured by AFM is only 6 nm. The photoelectric detection device based on 2D β-Ga2O3 has excellent wavelength selectivity and excellent photocurrent ability. WO3 is an ideal n-type semiconductor for functional electronic and optical devices. Its bandgap is adjustable in the range of 2.5–3.7 eV. It has high photocurrent and photocurrent conversion efficiency, a low pH value, and high-temperature resistance. It has high application value in the fields of optoelectronics, microelectronics, and optical memory. 2D WO3 nanosheets can be stripped from hydrated layered crystals with a minimum thickness of only 2.8 nm, as shown in Fig. 2e. The transition from an insulating dielectric layer to a high carrier mobility layer can be used in planar photodiodes and transistors.49 Orthogonal V2O5 is connected by twisted VO6 octahedral structural blocks to form a layered anisotropic structure,52 as shown in Fig. 2f. The adjacent layers are stacked by weak vdW interaction, which is also a typical layered 2D material. V2O5 can also be obtained from its layered hydrate with high stability. TEM (Fig. 2g) shows a 2D sheet structure with a transverse size of 100–400 nm. TEM shows clear lattice fringes with a fringe spacing of 0.34 nm (Fig. 2h). The AFM image (Fig. 2i) shows that the thin film has a nanostructured surface.
 Fig. 2  (a) Structure of MoO3 from above, viewing the a–c plane (top), and from the side, viewing the b–c plane (bottom). (b) TEM and HRTEM images of typical very small, small, and large MoO3 nanosheets. The crystallographic directions are indicated in the panels. (c) Representative AFM height images of vs-MoO3, s-MoO3, and l-MoO3, respectively.38 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) SEM, TEM, HRTEM, and AFM of 2D b-Ga2O3 nanosheets.61 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Typical AFM image and profile of hydrated WO3 sheets. A minimum thickness of 2.8 nm can be observed.49 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (f) Exfoliation of layered bulk V2O5 into {001}-oriented few-layer V2O5 nanosheets. (g) The TEM image and the corresponding colloidal acetone dispersion. (h) HRTEM and the corresponding selected area electron diffraction. (i) AFM image and the corresponding height profile.52 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.2. Typical 2D non-van der Waals oxides
2D non-vdW oxides have the advantages of an atomically thin structure and a highly active surface, so they show many excellent physical and chemical properties. 2D non-vdW oxides are formed by 3D chemical bonds. Unsaturated dangling bonds formed on the surface make 2D non-vdW oxides very active.62 In recent years, great progress has been made in the synthesis and application of 2D non-vdW oxides, including metals, metal sulfides, transition metal oxides, perovskites, and so on. Among them, transition metal oxides have the advantages of high chemical stability, low cost, high refractive index, and non-toxicity. However, most bulk transition metal oxides have strong interlayer ionic bonds and no obvious layered structure, which makes it difficult to obtain their 2D nanosheets by exfoliation. Non-vdW oxides that are commonly used include In2O3,63 TiO2,64–73 CeO2,74 Gd2O3,75 NiO,76–79 Eu2O3,80 Co3O4,81–85 Al2O3,86 SnO2,87–105 ZnO,106–114 WO3,48–50 and so on. Due to the 3D block structure, only the outermost atoms and active sites on the surface can play a role, while other atoms and active sites are covered, which is far from the full utilization of the materials. Therefore, it is very necessary to prepare oxide nanosheets with corresponding atomic thicknesses from bottom to top,115 which leads to rich and adjustable optical, electrical, magnetic, and catalytic properties.

Fig. 3 shows the crystal structure of some typical non-layered 2D oxides. The most common crystal forms of TiO2 are anatase, boehmite, and rutile, with anatase being the most common 2D structure.116 Anatase adopts a tetragonal structure, the opposite edges of each TiO6 octahedron are shared, and a linear chain is formed along the {001} direction (Fig. 3a).117 ZnO is also a typical non-vdW oxide. Bulk ZnO crystallizes at atmospheric pressure into hexagonal wurtzite or cubic sphalerite structures, or both,118 and 2D ZnO nanostructures are mostly wurtzite structures (Fig. 3d).119 The wurtzite structure may collapse and then change to a specific 2D arrangement.120 WO3 is another popular 2D non-layered material. The monoclinic phase is the most common crystal structure in 2D WO3. It contains a WO6 octahedron with an oxygen sharing angle, which is in a slightly distorted cubic arrangement (Fig. 3b).121,122 The bandgap of 2D WO3 nanosheets is slightly larger than that of bulk crystals, and positive displacement occurs at the edges of the valence band (VB) and the conduction band (CB). It has great application prospects in the field of photocatalysis. The crystal structure of 2D CuO belongs to monoclinic system, in which the Cu atom is coordinated by four coplanar O atoms to form a nearly rectangular parallelogram, while the O coordination polyhedron has four Cu atoms located at the corners of a distorted tetrahedron (Fig. 3c).123 α-Fe2O3 usually has a rhombic structure composed of FeO6 octahedra, and its hexagonal unit cell and rhombic primitive cell are shown in Fig. 3e.124
 Fig. 3  (a) Polyhedron structures for the TiO2 polymorphs including rutile, anatase, brookite, columbite, baddeleyite, cotunnite, pyrite, fluorite, and tridymite. Ti and O atoms are represented by big blue and small red spheres, respectively.117 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Tilt patterns of the different polymorphs of WO3.122 Copyright 2000, IUCR. (c) Crystal structure of the refined CuO unit cell, and side views of relaxed {101}, {001}, {011}, {010}, {110}, and {100} crystal planes of CuO.123 Copyright 2015, Scientific Reports. (d) Structure model of ZnO, showing the ±(0001) polar surfaces.119 Copyright 2004, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the hexagonal unit cell and the rhombohedral primitive cell of α-Fe2O3.124 Copyright 2014, Minerals. 
In recent years, many methods have emerged to obtain nanoflakes directly from atoms, ions, or molecules. For example, Al2O3 is not a layered oxide material, but Huang et al.86 successfully prepared uniform 2D-Al2O3 nanosheets with a transverse size of tens of microns and a thickness of only 4 nm using graphene oxide as a template. As shown in Fig. 4a, it can be seen from the SEM image that its morphology is very similar to that of graphene oxide nanosheets, indicating that the morphology of graphene oxide has been successfully copied. Sharp rings appear in the SAED diagram, indicating that an ordered structure is formed in the 2D-Al2O3 sheet. The 2D-Al2O3 nanosheet is smooth under AFM, and its thickness is found to be 4.1 nm. 2D Al2O3 greatly improves adsorption performance when compared with bulk materials, which broadens its application in catalysis, environmental science, and other fields. This method is also expected to guide the design and synthesis of other new 2D nanosheets. Nano titanium dioxide sheets obtained by layered titanate layering represent another attractive category of 2D semiconductors. The thickness of a quasi TiO2 crystal with a Ti defect is approximately 0.7 nm, and the transverse size is hundreds of nanometers to several microns. Compared with bulk TiO2, its optical absorption peak has a considerable blue shift. It is expected to have advanced multifunctions, such as unidirectional electron or energy transfer, improved photocatalytic activity, and improved photovoltaic efficiency owing to the reduced electron–hole recombination rate. Orzali et al.68 produced TiO2 nanosheets from constituent elements (titanium and molecular oxygen) on a suitable substrate, and then studied their structural properties on the atomic scale by using surface science tools. Lei63 first proposed the concept that the O-vacancy is limited to the atomic thickness of the sheet. In the non-layered structure formed by In2O3, the In layer and O layer are alternately arranged in the cubic phase, as shown in Fig. 4b. When In(OH)3 is converted to In2O3, the lattice oxygen is released into O2, and the O-vacancy is distributed in the crystal. Here, the O vacancy induces a new intermediate level, reduces the bandgap, and improves the carrier separation efficiency. Zhu et al.76 synthesized non-layered NiO nanosheets with a plane area of a micron and a thickness of 2 nm (Fig. 4c). Most of the atoms are exposed to the outside with high activity thanks to the ultrathin 2D nanostructure, which helps the surface-dependent electrochemical reaction processes.
 Fig. 4  (a) Morphological and structural analysis of the 2D-Al2O3 nanosheets.86 Copyright 2016, Wiley. (b) Crystal structure of 5-atom-thick oxygen-defect In2O3.63 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) FESEM images, TEM image, HRTEM image, and HRTEM image of NiO nanosheets.76 Copyright 2014, Nature. 
3. Synthesis and exfoliation of 2D oxides
In the fabrication of 2D materials, two general strategies are usually used: top-down and bottom-up. The top-down process is usually divided into physical top-down (such as lithography) and chemical top-down (such as acid and alkali etching). However, obtaining 2D oxide nanosheets from natural layered materials often depends on using various driving forces to break the weak vdW interactions between layers and peel off single layers or a few layers of nanosheets. In the bottom-up approach, 2D nanosheets can be grown directly through different atomic or molecular precursors, or self-assembled into more complex structures. Deposition techniques and molecular self-assembly processes are usually used. Growth can also be controlled by rapid nucleation and then in the presence of coordination ligands or surfactants. Next, we will discuss in detail how these two strategies can be used to make 2D oxides.
3.1. Exfoliation mechanisms (mechanical exfoliation, liquid exfoliation, and laser thinning)
Layered oxides are a kind of material with a layered main structure. They have a 3D structural system composed of nano-sized 2D laminates arranged longitudinally and in an orderly manner. Strong covalent bonds are formed between the atoms in the layers of the layered compounds, and the atoms in the layers are combined through weak vdW (∼40–70 meV) or electrostatic force. Therefore, it is easy to produce dislocation and exfoliation. This section describes the main methods used in the exfoliation process of layered metal oxides. Two widely used methods include mechanical exfoliation and liquid-phase exfoliation. In addition, some recently reported methods will be discussed.

3.1.1. Mechanical exfoliation. 
The most common way to obtain a single or several layers of 2D material from bulk materials is to mechanically peel the bulk crystals with tape. First, the layered material is pasted on one piece of transparent tape, and then the other side of the layered material is pasted on another piece of transparent tape. Next, separate the two transparent tapes, so that the layered material can be divided into two parts to achieve the effect of thinning. Finally, repeat the above steps only for enough time to obtain a few layers or a single layer of nanosheets, and then attach the nanosheets to the required substrate with the transparent tape under appropriate pressure. After removing the tape, we can observe the morphology of the nanosheet under the optical microscope, as shown in Fig. 5a. Mechanical exfoliation is a simple technology. Since the successful isolation of graphene, it has become the most widely used process to obtain single-layer films. This process makes use of the weak bonding characteristics between planar interlayers. The use of mechanical exfoliation to separate individual or a few layers is the most effective method to study their properties, because mechanical exfoliation is much less destructive than other methods, and it has been successfully used to make large single-layer sheets of up to 10 μm on various substrates. In recent years, the development of nanotechnology has made it possible to obtain metal oxides with many layers, such as MoO3 and V2O5, by mechanical exfoliation.
 Fig. 5  (a) Mechanical exfoliation of 2D materials using sticky tape. (b) Selected representations of α-MoO3: the formation of secondary crystallite networks of edge- and corner-sharing MoO6 octahedra viewed along different crystallographic planes.46 Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Characterization of MoO3 and MoO(3−x) flakes and the configuration of FETs.43 Copyright 2013, Wiley. 
As mentioned above, MoO3 has attracted much attention because of its various structural and functional properties. Orthogonal α-MoO3 has a unique 2D layered structure suitable for mechanical exfoliation, and α-MoO3 consists of two connected twisted MoO6 octahedra (Fig. 5b). The adjacent layers along [010] are only connected by weak vdW forces to form a layered structure. The [100], [010], and [001] projection structures of α-MoO3 are shown in Fig. 5b. Kalantar-zadeh et al.46 prepared MoO3 sheets by mechanical exfoliation of thermally evaporated crystals. These 2D crystals provide a wide range of possibilities for the development of new optical and electronic devices. Balendran et al.43 successfully peeled layers off by inserting hydrogen into the octahedral α-MoO3 lattice and reducing it to MoO(3−x). The carrier mobility reaches 1100 cm2 V−1 S−1, which shows that ultra-thin molybdenum oxide can be used in high-speed nanoelectronics (Fig. 5c).
Because there is no chemical reaction in the process, the oxide nanosheets obtained by mechanical exfoliation retain the original structure and inherent properties of the corresponding bulk materials. This can produce high-quality 2D materials. However, due to its dependence on the substrate, the practical application of this method is limited by its low yield of ultra-thin 2D nanosheets. Therefore, for the large-scale manufacturing of 2D devices, other options should be explored.


3.1.2. Liquid exfoliation. 
As mentioned earlier, the output of mechanical exfoliation is low, and the current output cannot be expanded technically. One possible solution is to peel the layered compounds in the liquid to produce a large number of dispersed nanoflakes. Liquid exfoliation technology is a general method to obtain many low-cost, easy-to-scale 2D materials. The liquid phase intercalation/exfoliation method has been explored since the early 1970s.125 This technology includes introducing guest species into the gap between the main layers of the material and then separating them by various methods. Fig. 6 shows the three most common liquid phase exfoliation methods: ion intercalation, ion exchange, and ultrasonic-assisted stripping.126–131 The key to this strategy is the good match between the exfoliation material and the surface energy of the solvent, which reduces the driving energy and improves the exfoliation efficiency. So far, many-layered 2D nanosheets have been made by using ultrasonic exfoliation in suitable solvents such as water, ethanol, isopropanol, N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP), N, N-dimethylformamide (DMF), etc.
 Fig. 6  (a) Ion intercalation.131 Copyright 2011, Science. (b) Electrochemical lithiation process for the fabrication of 2D nanosheets from the layered bulk material.126 Copyright 2011, Wiley. (c) Ion exchange. (d) Sonication-assisted exfoliation.131 Copyright 2011, Science. 
The oldest method of exfoliating low reduction potential layered crystals is to oxidize the original crystals and then disperse them into appropriate solvents. For example, treating graphene with oxidants will increase hydroxyl and epoxy groups on the base surface. The resulting hydrophilicity allows water intercalation and large-scale peeling, resulting in the formation of graphene oxide under the action of ultrasound. The second method is ion intercalation. As shown in Fig. 6a, in an appropriate solvent, the layered material strongly adsorbs the guest molecules into the gap between the layers to expand the crystal and weaken the vdW interactions between the layers. 2D nanosheets can be completely stripped and dispersed by stirring (ultrasonic, thermal shock, etc.), which is widely used in layered materials. Lithium is usually used as an intercalation agent. The embedded lithium reacts violently with water to produce lithium hydroxide and hydrogen, separating the monolayers. However, this method has a long cycle, and some processes are sensitive to the surrounding environment. This must be carried out in an inert atmosphere. This limitation can be effectively overcome by inserting small molecules into layered materials to obtain 2D nanosheets. When the small molecule intercalation precursor is ultrasonically treated in an appropriate solution, the intercalation molecules (such as H2O or NH3) will escape from the interlayer of the layered material. Compared with simple liquid exfoliation of the bulk material, the exfoliation speed of the material is accelerated and the exfoliation efficiency is improved. Now, the commonly used electrochemical stripping also includes ion intercalation technology.126Fig. 6b shows the layered block material as the cathode in an electrochemical battery, which allows it to keep monitoring and fine-controlling lithium intercalation in the block during discharge. As early as 1996, Sasaki et al.5 used tetrabutylammonium hydroxide solution to peel layered titanate protons, which was the first example of a monolayer titanate. Liu et al.127 studied the intercalation of tetramethylammonium, tetraethylammonium, tetrapropylammonium, and tetrabutylammonium ions in layered borate manganese oxide. Chen et al.128 carried out in situ intercalation polymerization of aniline and bulk V2O5 to obtain polyaniline-intercalated vanadium oxide layered nanocomposites with a mixed layered structure in the form of white fungi. The third method is ion exchange (Fig. 6c), which uses the characteristic that a metal oxide has an exchangeable cation counter-ion intercalation. Some layered compounds contain ions between layers to balance the surface charge of the layer. These ions can be exchanged in a liquid environment for other, usually larger ions. For example, TiO2 layered crystals are often negatively charged, so CS+ plasma is contained between the layers to ensure charge neutrality. Larger ions cause significant expansion. Generally speaking, the expansion will promote the exfoliation by employing ultrasound and so on, resulting in negatively charged nanoflakes. Tagaya et al.129 also found that organic compounds and azo compounds can be layered and inserted into the MoO3 main lattice through ion exchange. The last method is to expose the layered material to solvent and generate cavitation bubbles by ultrasound. These cavitation bubbles collapse into high-energy jets, destroying the layered crystals and obtaining 2D nanosheets (Fig. 6d). If the surface energy of the solvent is similar to that of the layered material, the energy difference between the stripped state and the reunited state will be very small, thus eliminating the driving force of the reunited state. Ji et al.130 combined the advantages of grinding and ultrasound to prepare 2D-MoO3. Compared with the sensor using bulk MoO3, the 2D-MoO3 sensor has a higher response speed, faster response speed, and recovery time.


3.1.3. Other methods. 
Although high-quality 2D nanosheets can be obtained by mechanical and liquid-phase exfoliation methods, their use is limited due to the inability to control the thickness, shape, size, and position of the sheets. Castellanos-Gomez et al.132 proposed a laser thinning technique (Fig. 7a) to obtain multi-layer to single-layer 2D MoS2 crystals by adjusting the laser power. They generated monolayers with arbitrary shapes and patterns, and the unique size could be reduced to 200 nm. The analysis of their photoluminescence and electron transport properties shows that the generated 2D crystals have equivalent optical and electronic properties to the original exfoliated MoS2 monolayers. This method is expected to be applied to the preparation of 2D oxide. Lin et al.78 used a laser in a top-down method to ablate large crystalline NiO powder to obtain densely folded nanosheets with a thickness of 10 nm. The sample preparation process is shown in Fig. 7b. 2D amorphous NiO nanosheets were synthesized. Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) can also be introduced by increasing electron doping, which resulted in 2D plasma amorphous NiO. The morphology and structure of the two nanosheets are shown in Fig. 7c. Lasers can thin bulk materials down to a single layer with any shape or pattern. This makes it possible to make electronic, photovoltaic, and optoelectronic devices on-demand in the future.
 Fig. 7  (a) Laser thinning diagram and light microscope image before and after scanning laser.132 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of the preparation processes of the four samples. Ni: blue balls, O: pink balls, H: cyan balls. (c) TEM images and HRTEM images of 2DA and 2DPA.78 Copyright 2018, Nature. 

3.2. Vapor phase deposition
Vapor synthesis methods can be divided into physical vapor deposition (PVD) and chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The key step in the preparation of layered nanomaterials is to limit the growth of newly formed 2D crystals. PVD is a process in which metals, alloys, or compounds are sputtered in a vacuum chamber to deposit these vapor atoms or molecules on the surface of the workpiece under certain conditions. Common PVD synthesis technologies include thermal evaporation, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), van der Waals epitaxy (vdWe), pulsed laser deposition (PLD), electron beam evaporation (EBE), radio frequency sputtering (RFS), and DC sputtering (DCS). However, it is reported that most of these technologies (PLD, EBE, and RFS) result in non-layered transition metal oxides, such as nanoparticles, nanorods, and nanotubes. This is mainly because these methods will produce many nucleation sites. MBE and vdWe typically produce ordered layered structures in a very low vacuum and with controllable deposition rates. However, the deposition rates of MBE and vdWe are low and this is usually very expensive. CVD is a way to make a solid film on the substrate by using gaseous substances to start a chemical reaction at a certain temperature.

3.2.1. Physical vapor deposition. 
We know that high-energy technologies such as electron irradiation, laser ablation, microwave plasma, arc discharge, and pulsed laser can provide a large activation energy in a very short time, and have been used to synthesize a variety of 2D structural materials.133,134 WO3 thin film is a well-known electrochromic material. To explore the possibility of its application in electrochromic devices, it is necessary to further study the optical properties of matrix materials. Sivakumar et al.50 prepared WO3 thin films by electron beam evaporation physical vapor deposition (PVD: EBE) at a pressure of 1 × 105 mbar. The effects of the annealing temperature on the structure, surface morphology, and optical properties of electron-beam evaporated WO3 films are described in detail (Fig. 8a). The results show that a higher annealing temperature is beneficial for the growth of oriented nanocrystalline films, and the transmittance decreases with the increase of annealing temperature, indicating that oxygen vacancies are formed in the films. The optical energy gap shrinks slightly with the increase in annealing temperature. This may be due to the optical band filling effect, which reveals the crystallization of the film.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM architecture of WO3 films on glass and SnO2:F substrates at different annealing temperatures: Tsub = RT, Tanne = 200 °C, and Tanne = 300 °C.50 Copyright 2007, Elsevier. (b) Experimental setup describing the liquid phase H+ intercalation process, and SEM images of MoO3 crystal morphologies on quartz substrates at temperatures of 560 °C, 520 °C, 460 °C, and 350 °C.43 Copyright 2013, Wiley. 
It is well known that MoO3 has a wide bandgap, low carrier concentration, and low mobility in its inherent situation, but α-MoO3 could be reduced to MoO(3−x). With the increase of X, the energy band can be effectively reduced. Balendhran et al.43 synthesized layered α-MoO3 flakes by thermal evaporation of MoO3 powder and then obtained perfect α-MoO3 planar crystals through mechanical exfoliation (Fig. 8b). The thermal evaporation method has an obvious advantage of controllability. Temperature and carrier gas flow rate can be easily controlled during a deposition process. The oxygen vacancy is then introduced by H-ion intercalation, a high-energy beam, or annealing in a high-vacuum environment to reduce the material to obtain MoO(3−x). It can reduce the bandgap and increases the carrier concentration of MoO(3−x). Electrochromic devices require ion transmission, and the layered structure of the α phase determines the highly anisotropic transmission through the material. In contrast, the β phase is composed of a 3D network that shares octahedra, so all the surfaces are exposed to Mo atoms and unsaturated O atoms. Therefore, the β phase is relatively more active and will be expected to be superior in gas-sensing applications. Therefore, Altman et al.135 used oxygen plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (OPA-MBE) to grow single crystal β-MoO3 film. A MoO3 thin film is formed by depositing a small amount of Mo and then oxidizing the Mo. The structure of the film is very sensitive to the growth temperature. The experimental results show that the thermal stability of β-MoO3 can be improved by epitaxial growth on a lattice-matched substrate.


3.2.2. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD). 
CVD is an effective method to prepare various 2D oxides, in particular for their planar heterojunctions. Based on previous experience, it is possible to know that the phase diagrams of the elements forming layered compounds include new phases of hollow and closed nanostructures. Closed shell structures need high reaction temperatures or large activation energies to overcome the activation barrier related to the bending of other planar 2D layers. Most of the mainstream methods rely on high temperatures or complex processes, so they may not be suitable for the large-scale preparation of 2D nanostructured materials with the fewest by-products. Etzkorn et al.136 reported that it was easy to make large nanoparticles by heating metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), which provided good enlightenment.
Gesheva et al.137 successfully prepared Mo, W and M/Cr mixed oxide films on a cold wall horizontal quartz reactor by atmospheric pressure CVD. It is proved that atmospheric pressure CVD is a suitable deposition method for preparing the working electrode and the counter electrode of an electrochromic battery. The MoO3–WO3 film is uniform and transparent, and the color development efficiency is as high as 120 cm2 C−1. The optical absorption spectra are shown in Fig. 9a–c, and the Raman spectra are shown in Fig. 9d. This technology can be used to prepare optically passivated mixed metal oxide films as counter electrodes with high light transmittance and good cycling stability. Dahal et al.138 demonstrated the insertion of a grown 2D FeO layer between CVD-grown graphene and a Pt (111) substrate by continuously inserting iron and oxygen, which could separate the graphene from the metal substrate. They showed that metal-stabilized 2D oxidized monolayers can grow between graphene and metal substrates to form 2D heterostructures that can adjust the material properties of graphene. TiO2 is an excellent gas-sensing material. In the work of Mukhopadhyay et al.,87 a porous tin dioxide film sensor with a thickness of 0.22 μm was prepared on a commercial glass slide by using a new, low-cost, and modified chemical deposition technology. The properties of the films were controlled by changing the immersion times, bath temperature, and bath concentration.
 Fig. 9  (a) Transmittance spectra of CVD MoO3–WO3 film, deposited on a big conductive glass substrate and annealed at different temperatures for 1 h. (b) Transmittance spectra of CVD MoO3–WO3 film deposited on a 75/75 mm conductive glass substrate and annealed at different temperatures for 1 and 2 h. (c) UV-Vis spectra of CVD MoO3–Cr2O3 films, obtained at an oxygen content of 1/16 (solid line) and 1/32 (dotted line), respectively. The films are as-deposited and after annealing at 500 °C for 1 and 2 h. The substrates are ordinary glass. (d) Raman spectra of CVD MoO3–Cr2O3 films, grown at an oxygen content of 1/16 and 1/32 and annealed at 500 °C/1 h. The substrates used are ordinary glasses.137 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
The traditional CVD synthesis method has certain limitations. The chemical vapor is continuously introduced into the vacuum chamber, so the deposition process is continuous. The thickness of the deposited film is related to many factors, such as temperature, pressure, gas flow, flow uniformity, time, and so on. ALD is a method different from traditional CVD in the principle of the deposition reaction, the requirements of the deposition reaction conditions, and the quality of the deposition layer. It sends different reaction precursors into the reaction chamber alternately in the form of a gas pulse, so it is a discontinuous process. Compared with the traditional deposition process, ALD has obvious advantages in film uniformity, step coverage, and thickness control. By taking advantage of ALD technology, homogeneous catalysts such as ZnO, TiO2, and V2O5 were deposited on porous substrates. CoO is also a fascinating material that can be used in catalysis and for its electrochromic properties. Diskus et al.,139 used cobalt alkene (CoCp2) and ozone as precursors to prepare CoO thin films by atomic layer deposition (ALD). The thickness deposited on the substrate is controlled by the number of deposition cycles at a specific temperature.

3.3. Liquid phase deposition
The liquid phase method is the most widely used method to prepare nanomaterials in laboratories and industry. Compared with other methods, the liquid phase method has the advantages of mild reaction conditions, ease of control, uniform product composition, and high purity. It is easy to add active ingredients in this process, and the chemical composition and the size and shape of the product can be accurately controlled. Commonly used liquid phase technologies include electrodeposition, hydrothermal, solvothermal, and sol–gel processes. In these methods, the ionic precursors have transition metal elements and oxygen elements to make 2D oxides when the right kind of energy (electrical, thermal, or chemical) is used.
Electrodeposition refers to the process of electrochemical deposition of metal or alloy from its compound aqueous solution, non-aqueous solution, or molten salt. Among these technologies, electrochemical methods have advantages because they are usually easy to perform and can be easily used to engineer the physical and chemical properties of nanosheets. They provide easy control of thickness, morphology, oxidation, and doping under room temperature and environmental conditions. This makes the process universal and compatible with electronic equipment industry standards. It has been reported that α- and β-phase MoO3 were prepared on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates by electrodeposition with sodium molybdate (Na2MoO4) as the solvent. In this process, Yao et al.60 could simultaneously obtain layers by controlling the cyclic voltammetry (CV) parameters and demonstrated how the phase and morphology of MoO3 films significantly affected their electrochromic properties. Patil140 electrodeposited MoO2 thin films using fluorine-doped tin-oxide-coated conductive glass as the substrate. After deposition, argon annealing resulted in MoO2 that could be used as an anode material for microcells, and gas annealing resulted in MoO3 that could be used in electrochromic applications.
The hydrothermal method mainly refers to a method of reacting substances in solution with water in a high-temperature and high-pressure reaction environment in an autoclave with the reaction medium at a certain temperature and pressure. This can overcome the inevitable hard agglomeration of some high-temperature equipment, with high purity, good dispersion, good crystal form, and a controllable shape. Shi et al.111 proposed a simple method for preparing 2D grid ZnO nanoplates by an oxalic acid-assisted hydrothermal method. By changing the heat treatment temperature, the morphology of ZnO evolved from the 3D flower-like particles to 2D nanonets. Using oxalic acid as a substitute, 3D ZnO caged spheres and hexagonal prisms were obtained. The results show that the 2D and 3D morphologies of ZnO are easy to control by changing the calcination temperature and additives. 2D ZnO showed the best sensing performance and selectivity for triethylamine, as shown in Fig. 10a. Yang et al.141 demonstrated a simple hydrothermal reaction and the simple and general synthesis of 2D spinel metal oxide nanosheets (Fig. 10b). This method was used to synthesize cubic γ-Ga2O3, ZnGa2O4, and MnGa2O4 nanosheets, which grew preferentially along the (111) plane with the lowest generation energy. Their morphology and structure are shown in Fig. 10c. Using different vanadium sources and reaction conditions, Miao et al.142 synthesized ultra-thin VO2(b) nanosheets and bulk powders by a hydrothermal method and explored the Raman enhancement effect of VO2 semiconductor nanosheets induced by phase transition. SEM and TEM images of VO2(b) nanosheets (Fig. 10d) confirmed that the product was made up of clear nanosheets with a length and width of several microns. The presence of VO2 (B) nanosheets (Fig. 10d) in the SEM and TEM images confirmed that the product was made up of clear nanosheets with dimensions of several microns in length and width. The hydrothermal method can be applied to the direct synthesis of various semiconductor nanosheets with essentially non-layered structures. Transition metals in these 2D nanosheets also make it possible to combine different optoelectronic nanodevices with specific functions in different fields.
 Fig. 10  (a) Responses of as-synthesized ZnO-x to various VOCs (100 ppm) with an inset showing a ZnO single layer TEM image.111 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram describing the formation process of spinel-type 2D oxide nanosheets; photographs of as-prepared γ-Ga2O3, ZnGa2O4, and MnGa2O4 samples; crystal structural unit of spinel-type oxide and its 2D nanosheet model.141 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Typical low-magnification TEM images of γ-Ga2O3, ZnGa2O4, and MnGa2O4 nanosheets, and their corresponding high-resolution TEM images and FFT patterns. STEM image of ZnGa2O4 nanosheet and its corresponding Zn, Ga, and O elemental mappings; EDS spectrum and XRD pattern of ZnGa2O4 nanosheets. The inset is the enlarged HRTEM image of γ-Ga2O3 nanosheets taken along the [111] zone axis.141 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) SEM image, TEM image, HRTEM image, and corresponding SAED pattern (inset) of the prepared VO2(B) nanosheets of the prepared VO2(B) bulk and VO2(B) nanosheets.142 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The solvothermal method has been developed based on the hydrothermal method. By dissolving one or several precursors in non-aqueous solvents, under liquid phase or supercritical conditions, the reactants become more active in the solution and react and slowly produce products. The difference from the hydrothermal reaction is that the solvent used is organic rather than water. Therefore, when the precursor is sensitive to water (reaction with water, hydrolysis, decomposition, or instability), the solvothermal method is more appropriate. This method is simple and easy to operate, and can effectively prevent the volatilization of toxic substances. The size and morphology of the product can also be controlled, and the chemical reaction activity of the reactants can be greatly improved, which often makes the reaction possible at a low temperature. Using absolute ethanol and distilled water as solvents and nickel nitrate hexahydrate as a nickel source, San et al.79 synthesized a flower-like NiO layered structure assembled from nanoflakes with a thickness of about 30 nm by a solvothermal method without using any surfactant. Li et al.144 used tetrabutyl titanate (TBT) as a titanium source. A layered TiO2 microstructure (HM-TiO2) was synthesized by a simple solvothermal method in the mixed solvent of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), and acetic acid (HAc).
The sol–gel method is a commonly used wet chemical synthesis method. The metal oxide homogenous sol is prepared by the hydrolysis and polymerization of metal alkoxides or metal non-alkoxides and then concentrated into a transparent gel. The method has good chemical uniformity and high purity, but the material has poor sintering and large shrinkage during drying. Prasad et al.145 have compared the gas-sensing behaviors of MoO3 thin films prepared by ion beam deposition and the sol–gel method. In the sol–gel preparation process, MoO3 was prepared by mixing molybdenum isopropoxide and n-butanol in a glove box under a nitrogen atmosphere, and then the sol was stirred, sonicated, precipitated, aged, spin-coated, and annealed to prepare a thin film.
3.4. Liquid metal printing
In recent years, liquid metals have been very attractive in the fabrication of 2D metal oxides. Due to its solubility, fluidity, and reactivity, liquid metal has attracted extensive attention in the industrial production of 2D components. Lin et al.,146 using the collision process between liquid metal surface oxide and substrate, reported a new method for printing and preparing silicon scale semiconductor β-Ga2O3 thin films. When the liquid metal droplets collided with the SiO2/Si substrate, they discovered that the oxide scale was transferred to the substrate, and the thickness of the prepared 2D β-Ga2O3 film was about 5 nm. The β-Ga2O3 layer prepared by this method is relatively dense and suitable for transistor manufacturing and other applications. Messalea et al.147 used this method to separate 2D α-Bi2O3 monolayer films with sub-nanometer thickness, high crystallinity, and a large lateral size from liquid bismuth. Compared with other metals, tin has a lower melting point. Because of this, it has been widely studied in the process of making 2D oxides from liquid metals.90,91,148 SnO and SnO2 are p-type and n-type semiconductors, respectively, which are usually used in gas sensing and field-effect transistors. We know that constructing ultra-thin vdW heterostructures is challenging. Alsaif et al.90 use a liquid metal-based method to easily produce high-quality 2D SnO/In2O3 vdW heterostructures. In general, liquid metals have the characteristics of good solubility, good chemical reactivity, a weak interfacial force, and a liquid-solid phase transition. They show great potential in the preparation of 2D metal oxides and their heterostructures.
3.5. Template method
The 2D template method can be used to synthesize layered and non-layered 2D nanosheets. By selecting the appropriate 2D template, the growth of nanocrystals can be limited to a specific size and effectively inhibit the growth of 2D nanosheets along the third dimension in the synthesis process. In general, graphene and its derivatives and previously reported 2D nanosheets can be used as potential templates for the synthesis of non-layered 2D oxides. As mentioned in the second section, Huang et al.86 synthesized graphene-like 2D γ-Al2O3 nanosheets for the first time. They used graphene oxide as a template so that aluminum oxide could replicate the shape of the graphene oxide. They successfully prepared a uniform 2D-Al2O3 nanosheet with a lateral size of tens of microns and a thickness of only 4 nm. In addition, Cheng et al.149 successfully synthesized a typical transition metal oxide α-Fe2O3 half-unit nanosheet. The nanosheet exhibited strong intrinsic ferromagnetism of 0.6 μB per atom at 100 K and remained ferromagnetic at room temperature. The synthesis, morphology, and structure of α-Fe2O3 nanosheets are shown in Fig. 11a. Chen et al.150 developed a general template-oriented strategy to control the synthesis of 2D assembled Co3O4 nanoparticles (ACNs). As shown in Fig. 11b, the nanoparticles have a unique hole structure and adjustable hole size, which greatly improves the alkali ion storage performance. It is important to note that, to obtain 2D anisotropic nanosheets, the target 2D nanosheet and the template should have lattice planes that match well.
 Fig. 11  (a) The synthesis, morphology, and structure of α-Fe2O3 nanosheets.149 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the formation of 2D holey ACNs and their advantages for ion transport.150 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
To sum up, we classify and summarize the synthetic methods for 2D metal oxides. It is worth noting that, for each fabrication method, we should pay attention to its yield and its impact on the environment. At present, the yield of the mechanical exfoliation technology is the lowest. On the other hand, the PLD, CVD, and ALD methods can deposit 2D films with a high yield and the weakest impact on the environment. However, not all 2D metal oxides can be prepared by these methods. Although some liquid-phase exfoliation and liquid-phase synthesis technologies have high yields, they often involve the use of some organic solvents, which are harmful to the environment. In addition, the precise control of both the thickness and transverse size of 2D materials by liquid-phase methods remains very challenging.
4. Tailoring of two-dimensional oxides
2D materials have many advantages over their bulk counterparts, which brings broad development opportunities. They can absorb light more effectively and interact with light more strongly. Thanks to the thin atomic structure, 2D materials shorten the diffusion distance from the carriers to the surface and minimize the recombination loss. Oxide semiconductors with appropriate electronic band structures have been widely studied. For example, TiO2 and ZnO show relatively wide optical band gaps (3.2–3.6 eV), indicating light absorption in the ultraviolet region, while WO3, MoO3, and V2O5 have medium bandgaps (2.6–3.0 eV), showing stronger photon absorption in the visible region. However, 2D oxides typically have poor conductivity; appropriate engineering strategies, therefore, need to be adopted to improve their conductivity. Many effective engineering technologies have been applied, mainly including intercalation, doping (intrinsic doping, extrinsic doping, and co-doping), defect engineering (plasma treatment, heavy ion irradiation, and chemical reduction), crystal facet, and phase engineering. These strategies are described in detail below.
4.1. Intercalation
Intercalation is a reversible process in which guest species insert into or exit the layered host structure. Insertion can change the electronic and crystal structures of 2D oxides and adjust their electrochemical and photochemical properties. The crystal structure of 2D transition metal oxide shows different phases. The atomic arrangement between the metal and oxide results in different properties from semiconductor to metal. When the object entity is inserted into the main structure, the atomic phases in the layer are able to slide between different phases. Injecting free electrons with a high enough concentration into metal oxide semiconductors can cause plasma resonance and induce absorption visible in the near-infrared bands. In addition, the introduction of an intercalator can also reduce the oxidation state of the metal center, changing the Fermi energy and energy density of states at the Fermi level, and therefore improving the conductivity of the material. Guest insertion can also make the distance between layers bigger and make a number of active edge sites.
Common intercalation techniques include electrochemical, ultrasonic-assisted, and hydrothermal methods, as mentioned in section 3.Guest ions, atoms, molecules, polymers, and organic/inorganic compounds are inserted into the main structure. This seriously distorts the vdW gap of layered transition metal oxides, leading to phase transformation, expansion of spacing, and an increase in the proportion of the accessible surface area. In general, intercalated guest molecules increase the interlayer spacing, allowing for faster ion diffusion. MoO3 is a typical host, which can be intercalated smoothly with guest molecules, such as Be2+ and H+.151,152 Many organic compounds153–155 and alkylamines156–158 can also be embedded in the interlayer of MoO3. Chen et al.159 intercalated alkylamines into layered MoO3 for the construction of high-performance asymmetric supercapacitors. Liu et al.160 used oleylamine intercalation to prepare MoO3 nanosheets for high-power lithium-ion batteries. Honda et al.161 also intercalated alkylamines into MnO2 and TiO2 to obtain organic–inorganic composite nanosheets. The variety of intercalation techniques has opened up many channels for the regulation and control of the structure and properties of 2D binary materials.
4.2. Doping (intrinsic doping, extrinsic doping, and co-doping)
Doped semiconductor oxides are considered promising materials. The introduction of a small concentration of dopants into semiconductors can greatly change the existing properties or even introduce new properties. In recent years, the changes caused by many useful dopants show that the selection of appropriate dopants helps to produce new functionalities to meet the current technical requirements. In particular, oxide nanostructures maintaining plasma properties have been widely studied. An LSPR effect is found in heavily doped metal oxides, which is due to the introduction of high-density free carriers. The excitation of LSPR depends on the interaction between free carriers and light. One of the main advantages of doped semiconductors is that the doping concentration can easily control the carrier density. In these doped oxides, the free carrier density is lower than that of noble metals. Therefore, their LSPR peaks are at lower energy or longer wavelengths to provide tunability of LSPR peaks from the infrared to the mid-infrared region.
There are many ways to realize doping in oxide nanostructures, which can be divided into three categories. One is the “inherent” formation of cationic vacancies, also known as self-doping; the other is the substitution doping of “extrinsic” and heterovalent doped atoms, also known as extrinsic doping. Taking silicon as an example, heterovalent boron doping induces p-type conduction through-hole doping. On the other hand, pentavalent phosphorus-doped silicon is the result of electron doping. This heterovalent doping and the resulting electron or hole doping changes can be used to adjust the Fermi level for various optoelectronic applications. Co-doping is the way of using multiple dopants in the same body to increase the dynamic range of carrier concentration. Several typical dopants are shown in Fig. 12a and b.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematics of the band structure of n-type and p-type semiconductors. (b) Schemes of common doping mechanisms with host cations (orange spheres) and anions (red spheres) and corresponding examples of n- and p-type-doped semiconductor systems. Three common donor doping types are (i) aliovalent substitutional impurities, (ii) vacancies, and (iii) interstitial impurities.143 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) UV-vis-NIR spectrum of WO3−x NPLs in CCl4. The inset shows a photograph of WO3x NPLs in CHCl3. Dependence of the λLSPR maximum on the index of refraction of solvent (330 nm RIU−1).162 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) UV-vis-NIR spectra of ITO NPs doped with 3–10 and 15–30% Sn. Dependence of the SPR peaks of ITO NPs on the doped %Sn. The peak wavelengths of 5, 8, 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30% Sn-doped ITO NPs were 1940, 1772, 1618, 1626, 1650, 1782, and 1836 nm, respectively. NIR spectra of 8% Sn-doped ITO NPs.163 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (e) UV-vis-NIR spectra of spherical FICO NCs dispersed in CCl4. The percentage of the InF3 precursor and the metal-to-oleic acid molar ratios (M:OA) used for NC synthesis are indicated on the graph.165 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) Optical absorbance spectra of equimolar dispersion of {(I) 0.64, 0; (II) 0.62, 0.27; (III) 0.57, 0.34; (IV) 0.55, 0.62; (V) 0.52, 0.78; (VI) 0.49, 0.94; (VII) 0.45, 1.23; (VIII) 0.41, 1.54; (IX) 0.33, 1.73; (X) 0.31, 2.1} % Sn and Cd co-doped ZnO NCs.164 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
In self-doping or vacancy doping materials, controlling the stoichiometry, such as the oxygen vacancies in WO3−x, can adjust the free carrier concentration. The vacancy can introduce free holes or free electrons without external doping ions. Some metal oxides show a strong LSPR response when lattice vacancy causes intrinsic doping. Low oxygen synthesis conditions are conducive to the formation of oxygen vacancy defects in the lattice, especially when the metal has a large atomic radius and different stable oxidation states. Under the condition of a low oxygen partial pressure, the precursor is degassed before nucleation, and the lattice vacancy balance of the metal oxide will be strongly conducive to the formation of oxygen vacancies. After synthesis, the vacancy concentration can be further adjusted by oxygen exposure. Oxygen vacancies cause shallow donor levels. It is easy to introduce two electrons to the conduction through thermoionization, leaving an electron defect with two positive charges. Prusty et al.162 reported the colloidal synthesis of 2D WO3−x nanoplates (x ≈ 0.55–1.03), showing tunable near-infrared LSPR characteristics and additional high free electron density. The oxygen vacancy percentage inferred from the measurement of LSPR is much higher than that determined by X-ray diffraction analysis, indicating that the aspect ratio of ultra-thin WO3−x NPLs is the key to producing an ultra-high free electron density. A very clear characteristic LSPR peak (λLSPR) appears in the 1470 nm band, as shown in Fig. 12c. The near-infrared optical response of WO3−x NPL is due to the generation of free carrier electrons by oxygen vacancies in the lattice, rather than the absorption of scattering, impurities, or local defects. For verification, the position of the near-infrared absorption band and solvent refraction were investigated. As the refractive index increases, λLSPR redshifts (Fig. 12c), and its direction is consistent with the nanostructure showing LSPR characteristics. Alsaif et al.40 irradiated 2D MoO3 flakes with solar energy to induce oxygen vacancies to tune the plasmonic response, obtained a tunable 2D plasmonic resonance in the visible region, and maintained a stable 2D structure.
Extrinsic doping requires that the main atoms in the nanocrystalline lattice structure be completely replaced by impurity atoms. According to the different doping sites, it is mainly represented by substitution doping and gap doping. Lattice atoms are replaced by heterovalent dopants to raise or lower the Fermi level. These doping sites can generate free carriers, or they can also be compensated by other defects such as cation or anion vacancies and interstitial oxygen. Many doped oxide nanocrystals have been extensively studied, such as the well-known indium tin oxide (ITO). The LSPR of ITO can be tuned from 1618 nm to greater than 2200 nm by doping with Sn, as shown in Fig. 12d.163 In the same way, a series of ZnO nanocrystals doped with group III elements had high concentrations of carriers, which led to LSPRs that could be adjusted.164,165 Doping regulations based on 2D oxides have also been intensively studied in recent years. For example, 2D WO3, Nb2O5, and MoO3 nanosheets are doped with reducing gases such as hydrogen, which improves electrical conductivity.166–168 Researchers have looked at highly doped 2D MoO3, which has plasmonic absorption bands that can be changed from the visible to the infrared range.41 By doping MoO3 with NH4+, Haque et al. made monolayer polycrystalline metal nanosheets, which increased the surface-active area and the conductivity.169 Wang et al. reported that Co-doped 2D TiO2 can change the structure of its conduction and valence bands, resulting in the absorption of visible light.170
Adding a variety of dopants to the same substrate can further broaden the carrier concentration range, expand the universality of doping, and tune the plasma band. Generally, with an increase in the doping concentration, the carrier concentration increases, and the LSPR wavelength blueshifts. However, the further increase of doping concentration will flatten the carrier concentration, resulting in the redshift of the LSPR band. In addition, the lattice distortion caused by excessive doping makes the shape and size of the product uncontrollable. To break through these limitations, the co-doping strategy can be considered. Murray et al. adopted F–In co-doped CdO (FICO), F-substituted O2−, and In3+ substituted Cd2+, all of which can provide free electrons and jointly tune the LSPR over a wide spectral range from 1.5 μm to 3.3 μm (Fig. 12e).165 Ghosh et al. reported Sn-doped ZnCdO alloy NCs. When both Cd and Sn levels increased at the same time, the LSPR band slowly moved from 890 nm to 2600 nm (Fig. 12f).164 Tandon et al. prepared colloidal In2O3 nanocrystals co-doped with Fe and Sn. The nanocrystals showed LSPR and good electrical conductivity.171 Núñez et al. introduced N and Cu into 2D ZnO, which altered the energy band structure and reduced the recombination rate of electrons and holes.172 To date, the studies of the link between the LSPR of 2D oxides and co-doping are still very limited, which certainly needs further investigation.
4.3. Defect engineering
In recent years, the defect engineering regulation of 2D metal oxides has been widely studied. The types of defect include point defects, line defects, and surface defects.173 Among them, point defects are the simplest crystal defects, mainly including vacancy, interstitial atoms, and replacement atoms. There are many methods of manufacturing defects, mainly including plasma treatment and reduction methods.
Plasma treatment is generally used for etching or surface cleaning of materials. Gas molecules in the plasma state have high chemical activity and can react with atoms on the surface of materials. Therefore, the oxide surface can be etched to produce a large number of oxygen vacancies. Xu et al.174 treated Co3O4 with Ar plasma and obtained Co3O4 nanosheets with oxygen vacancies and a high surface area. The reduction method can make metal oxide materials obtain anion vacancies, especially oxygen vacancies. In this method, the selection of an appropriate reducing agent is particularly important. As a powerful reducing agent, H2 can reduce many oxides and produce rich defects.175,176 The electrochemical reduction method is used to provide an appropriate voltage and enough electrons to the interior of the material, which will produce defects. Ultrathin 2D nanosheets containing a large number of defects can be prepared by directly introducing defects in the synthesis process, such as 2D CeO2,74 VO2,177 WO3,178,179 In2O3,63 MnO2,180etc. The presence of defects in these 2D oxide materials changes their electronic structure and other properties that are relevant in many application fields.
4.4. Crystal facet and phase structure
Different surface and phase structures show different conductivities and active center densities. The electron band structure also depends on the surface layer. Certain surfaces in some materials have a higher conduction band bottom than other dominant surfaces, showing more reducing electrons. In addition, the crystal orientation also affects the separation of photoexcited carriers. This method usually adopts alkali metal ion intercalation, with the charge transferred to each layer, and then liquid phase exfoliation is carried out with the help of thermal shock or ultrasound. Similar to the plasma exposure technology of engineering defects, the ions in the plasma carry a certain kinetic energy to bombard the surface of a metal oxide semiconductor, induce a local phase transition, and produce point vacancies to stabilize the phase transition. For example, Voiry et al.181 reported the chemical exfoliation of MoS2 nanosheets containing very high concentrations of metal 1T phase by solvent-free intercalation. The phase transition from the semiconductor 2H phase to the metal 1T phase was realized by Li-ion intercalation. The improved conductivity and the changed band gap can significantly improve the charge transfer power. Wang et al.182 proved that Li-ion insertion not only increased the layer spacing (changing the band gap) but also reduced the oxidation state of Mo by changing the d-band filling. This method is also applicable to 2D metal oxides. Chen et al.183 used the solid–liquid arc discharge method to obtain ultra-thin single crystal WO3 nanosheets with a thickness of about 4–5 nm, corresponding to 6 monoclinic WO3 repeat unit cells along the c-axis. The size quantization effect of this ultra-thin nanostructure allows a changing of the energy band gap of WO3 so that it shows a strong photocatalytic reduction performance of CO2.
Interface engineering is an important method for designing high-performance 2D oxides.184 Many experiments show that the interaction of two different materials at the interface changes both their electronic and chemical properties, resulting in fascinating properties.185,186 Interface engineering can be divided into two categories: heterostructure engineering and synergistic interaction. Heterostructure engineering usually involves complex chemical bonds between two different materials, and synergistic interaction is the physical contact between the two materials under limited electron transport. Chen et al.187 successfully fabricated MoO2–CeF3 heterojunction nanosheets by a three-step method. Owing to the synergistic effect between the CeF3 and MoO2 interfaces, the activity of alkaline hydrogen evolution was increased, and the proper introduction of CeF3 enlarged the size of the nanosheets. 2D oxide heterostructures play important roles in fields such as optoelectronics and catalysis.
5. Applications
5.1. Enhanced spectroscopy
Enhanced spectroscopy techniques, such as surface-enhanced Raman scattering and surface-enhanced infrared absorption, as well as tip-enhanced Raman scattering, have received a lot of research recently. In general, enhancement spectroscopy mainly considers two mechanisms, namely the electromagnetic mechanism (EM) and the chemical mechanism (CM). Electromagnetic enhancement is controlled by LSPR, and in the CM enhancement path, the enhancement relies on vibrational coupling at the interface between the target molecule and the substrate. Metals have extremely large free carrier density and exhibit strong LSPR absorption in the UV-vis band. The enhancement factor is generally between 106–1010. However, metal substrates often have problems such as resource shortages, high costs, and large inter-band loss. Therefore, we need to find new materials with LSPR properties to replace noble metals, and these must have a sufficiently high carrier density. Non-precious metal–semiconductor materials (mainly including sulfides and oxides) currently have the most potential as alternative materials. These materials have the advantages of abundant resources, low cost, good stability, and a tunable carrier density. More efficient EM enhancement can be achieved with lower damping rates and reduced ohmic losses. Also, higher CM enhancement can be achieved due to the enhanced charge transfer. Therefore, 2D oxide materials become a good complement.188

5.1.1. Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). 
SERS generally refers to the optical phenomenon that the Raman scattering signal of probe molecules adsorbed on the rough surface of precious metals is significantly enhanced under irradiation with an incident laser. This is a highly effective surface trace analysis technology that is commonly used to characterize the structure of substances and detect various analytes. Non-noble metal SERS substrates have attracted much attention in the past ten years because of their higher chemical stability and signal repeatability than noble metal (Au and Ag) substrates. At present, a large number of oxide materials have been proved to be usable to construct SERS reinforced substrates.189 As mentioned earlier, most plasma SERS substrates rely on EM enhancement, while 2D materials usually rely on CM enhancement. This is an amplification effect mainly depending on the Raman polarization tensor of molecules on the chemisorption on the surface of 2D materials. Charge transfer (CT) and exciton resonance, which are dependent on the energy band structure and surface defects of a semiconductor substrate, are the primary sources of CM enhancement. CT is very common in metal SERS substrates, but exciton resonance is rarely involved. Exciton resonance is the unique electronic property of most 2D materials, and the exciton binding energy of 2D materials is higher than that of bulk materials. It can not only increase the SERS enhancement factor, but also change the shape of the SERS spectra.
Miao et al.142 showed for the first time that VO2 nanosheet material can be used as a SERS substrate based on a chemical enhancement mechanism for molecular detection. Compared with bulk VO2 (B) materials, due to the increase of surface defects and lattice distortion of VO2 (B) nanosheets, the SERS signal of probe dye molecules on the nanosheets is enhanced and the charge transfer process is enhanced, as shown in Fig. 13a. With the increase of crystal symmetry from VO2 (B) to VO2 (M) and VO2 (R), the temperature-dependent Raman study confirmed that the Raman enhancement effect of VO2 nanosheets decreased significantly (Fig. 13b). This study strongly showed that the low-dimensional and low-symmetry coordination strategies may be a new way to design efficient metal oxide semiconductor SERS substrates. Lin et al.27 reported a solid–solid surface reaction strategy to prepare 2D non-layered MoO2 nanosheets with an average thickness of 2–3 units. The prepared MoO2 nanosheets contain a high concentration of free electrons and high crystallinity, making them infrared-active. Using these 2D MoO2 nanosheets as the SERS substrates and rhodamine 6G (R6G) as probe molecules, the lower limit of detection concentration can be as low as 10−7 m and the maximum enhancement factor (EF) is up to 104, significantly improving the detection limit of the Raman spectrum. The SERS spectra of R6G coating on 2D MoO2 nanosheets with different concentrations are shown in Fig. 13c. In addition, Tan et al.190 used plasma MoO3−x@MoO3 nanosheets as SERS substrates for methylene blue detection. They demonstrated extraordinary sensitivity owing to the shell isolation electromagnetic enhancement of the plasma MoO3−x core and the elimination of photocatalytic degradation by the MoO3 shell.
 Fig. 13  (a) SERS spectra of MB. (b) Phase-dependent Raman intensity at 1620 cm−1 of MB molecules on three different phases of VO2 substrate.142 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SERS spectra of R6G coated on 2D-MoO2 nanosheets with various concentrations from 10−4 to 10−7 M.27 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
These studies lay the foundation for an in-depth understanding of the enhancement mechanism of emerging 2D oxides in SERS analysis and will further facilitate their enormous potential applications. However, the practical application of SERS is limited by the universality of materials, morphology, and molecules. To solve this problem, tip-enhanced Raman scattering (TERS) technology is proposed.191–194
TERS combines Raman spectroscopy with scattering scanning near-field optical microscopy, which depends on the enhancement of light and the spatial limitation near the nanotip of plasma. This creates nano Raman spectroscopy and imaging technology that goes far beyond the diffraction limit of the detection light. At the moment, there is not much research on TERS based on 2D oxides, but it is something that could be looked into in the future to improve the SERS technique.


5.1.2. Surface-enhanced infrared absorption (SEIRA). 
In addition to SERS, surface vibration spectroscopy also includes SEIRA. Infrared spectroscopy, like Raman spectroscopy, is a powerful analytical tool that contains very important molecular information. It can reveal the atomic vibration of different molecules and compounds without damaging them.195–197 This concept was first proposed by Hartstein et al.198 in 1980. A significant enhancement of about five orders of magnitude was observed on randomly arranged Ag nanofilms. We know that the cross-section of the interaction between light and molecules is very small. This makes infrared light less sensitive to detecting molecules and makes it harder to use in the spectral analysis of trace materials. SEIRA can overcome this technical bottleneck. With the help of surface plasmon, it provides a huge electromagnetic field on the nanoscale and significantly improves the infrared detection sensitivity. As mid-infrared plasma materials, scientists have explored a wide range of doped semiconductors. For example, ITO can have a high carrier concentration of more than 1021 cm3, which enables it to maintain the resonance frequency of surface plasmon in the near-infrared spectral region. Kamakura et al.199 made periodic arrays of ITO and Au and proved that the plasmonic photonic hybrid mode is very effective in enhancing SEIRA. However, similar to TERS, the application of 2D oxides in SEIRA has been very limited. Zeng et al.195 proposed Zn–Al layered double hydroxide as a SEIRA-reinforced substrate with long-term stability, which is a promising candidate for SEIRA application.

5.2. Photodetectors
Photodetectors have the advantages of fast response, high precision, small volume, low power consumption, and non-contact measurement.165 They are the core components in the field of optoelectronic technology. Due to the limitation of its detection principle, the traditional photodetector can only distinguish light intensity information, but cannot distinguish the wavelength, polarization, incident angle, and other information about the incident light. It needs to be combined with other components to achieve its goal. It is very important to solve these technical bottlenecks in the detector. 2D materials have attracted extensive attention in the field of optoelectronics because of their unique structural, optical, and electrical properties. Compared with the zero-dimensional nanostructures of quantum dots and the one-dimensional nanostructures of nanowires, nanorods, and nanoribbons, the 2D structure is more in line with the existing micromachining technology and can be easily transformed into more complex structures. Graphene is a typical 2D material with special electrical, optical, and mechanical properties. However, graphene has no bandgap, weak light absorption, and fast photoinduced carrier recombination. These points lead to a loss of spectral selectivity, low response, and low external quantum efficiency. Compared with graphene photodetectors,200–202 photodetectors made of ultra-thin layered materials have a higher light response and spectral selectivity.61,203,204
ZnO is a metal oxide semiconductor with great research value.205,206 Compared with other competitive materials, ZnO has a larger exciton binding energy (60 meV) than GaN (26 meV). This makes it more suitable for optoelectronic applications, especially at temperatures close to and above room temperature. Al-Hardan et al.207 prepared 2D hexagonal ZnO by electrochemical deposition. The prepared 2D ZnO photodetector was tested in the ultraviolet region. The maximum response range was 300–350 nm, the internal gain was 2.7, the reaction time was 26 s and the recovery time was 11 s. Recently, Krishnamurthi et al.208 used a liquid metal exfoliation technique to obtain ZnO nanosheets with a lateral dimension of millimeters and a thickness of 5 nm. Compared with other ZnO morphologies, its visible-blind photodetectors have many advantages. Mottram et al.209 reported a dye-sensitized In2O3 phototransistor. Because the device has extremely high signal gain characteristics, the maximum photosensitivity of this simple phototransistor structure is 106 and the response value is 2000 A W−1. It is further proved that the optical transparency, preferential spectral response, and processing universality of a low-dimensional In2O3/D102 (a light-absorbing organic dye) phototransistor are expected to lead to the development of special equipment such as full-color transparent photodetectors. Gallium oxide (β-Ga2O3) is an emerging oxide semiconductor with a wide bandgap of 4.9 eV. It is a potential material for solar-blind photodetectors. Due to many applications such as missile tracking and ozone layer monitoring, solar-blind photodetectors operating in the range of the solar-blind spectrum have attracted extensive attention. Feng et al.61 investigated the performance of a solar-blind photodetector of 2D β-Ga2O3 using a simple method that did not require a template. The 2D β-Ga2O3 nanosheet photodetector has a sensitive, fast, and stable optical response to ultraviolet radiation (254 nm). The responsivity, detectability, and external quantum efficiency of the photodetector are 3.3 A W−1 and 4.0 × 1012 Jones and 1600%, respectively, indicating that 2D Ga2O3 has great application potential in solar-blind detectors. Very recently, Wu et al.210 used an epitaxial growth technique to successfully synthesize ultrathin 2D γ-Bi2O3 flakes, and the photodetector had a very good UV detection capability and an ultrafast response speed at 365 nm. Yalagala et al. prepared 2D V2O5 that can absorb light from the ultraviolet to the visible range. The V2O5-based broadband photodetector had good mechanical stability and a good response.211 There have also been a number of studies on optoelectronic devices made from MoO3 nanosheets. These studies have all shown that 2D oxides have great optoelectronic properties.212–214
Heterostructures assembled from atomically thin materials provide a new example for the development of next-generation high-performance functional devices. Alsaif et al.90 constructed a large-area heterostructure of p-SnO/n-In2O3 nanosheets. The heterostructure exhibits a detectivity of 5 × 109 Jones and a photoresponsivity of 1047 A W−1 at 280 nm with a response time of 1 ms. These excellent properties are due to the formation of a narrow-interleaved band gap at the P–N junction. Although most research on photodetectors focuses on improving the responsivity of one region of the electromagnetic spectrum by preparing mixed 2D materials, the main problem is still not solved; that is, they cannot absorb a wide range of the electromagnetic spectrum. Most photodetectors are composed of P–N heterojunctions, one of which is responsible for absorbance. However, for broadband photodetectors, both materials in the heterojunction should participate in the absorbance. Gautam et al.215 composited 2D transition metal oxides and transition metal dichalcogenides to prepare a 2D ZnO–MoS2 photodetector device with good UV-visible light response characteristics. In general, 2D oxide-based photodetectors have been widely studied owing to their low cost and high performance. But most of the research being done has focused on UV and visible photodetectors. It is therefore expected that 2D oxide-based infrared photodetectors will make more progress in the future.
5.3. Sensors
Metal oxide is a typical sensing material, which is usually used in gas sensing and biosensors. The large surface area of 2D oxide provides a large reaction site for sensors. MoO3,41 MnO2, WO3,216,217 TiO2,64 ZnO,111 Nb2O5 and SnO2 are well studied. These high surface area oxides can participate in physical adsorption and chemical adsorption at temperatures below 150 °C.
Tin dioxide (SnO2) is an n-type semiconductor with a relatively wide bandgap of 3.5 eV. The intrinsic conduction mechanism of SnO2 is usually related to the oxygen vacancy. It is a unique and very important material for toxic and combustible gas sensors in commercial production. At present, a large number of reports have proved its excellent sensing performance.87,88,99–101,104,218 Fu et al.219 developed a simple method to fabricate 2D network SnO2/ZnO heterostructures with porous characteristics, showing superior H2S sensing performance, good sensor response, selectivity, and long-term stability. 10 ppb H2S can also be detected at a working temperature of 100 °C, which has a good application prospect in high-performance H2S sensors. Yin et al.98 synthesized WO3–SnO2 nanocomposites and observed the gas-sensing response of WO3–SnO2 nanocomposites depending on the apparent interface density of states. In 50 ppm acetone gas, the response is up to 32.1, 10 times that of the original WO3 ns sensor, and the response time is less than 2 s. Shendage et al.220 used a simple hydrothermal technology to directly grow WO3 film on a soda-lime glass substrate to prepare a NO2 gas sensor. The 2D nanoplates of WO3 exhibit a gas response of about 10 to 5 ppm to toxic NO2 gas at relatively low operating temperatures. Harale and his colleagues221 synthesized a kind of whole tissue WO3 nanosheet-assembled microcrystalline brick by a hydrothermal method at 180 °C. It is observed that the maximum gas-sensing response of the sensor to NO2 gas is seven times that of other gases, showing high response (about 11.5) and fast response recovery characteristics, especially at 100 ppm. The gas response time is 16 seconds and the recovery time is 260 s. Chen et al.106 prepared 2D ZnO nanowalls on glass substrates by low-temperature thermal evaporation. ZnO nanowalls have high sensitivity to methane gas, a fast response speed, and a short recovery time. They also have the advantages of low growth temperature, good crystallization quality, fast speed, low cost, and easy preparation. These unique properties are attributed to the high surface volume ratio of ZnO nanowalls. Liu et al.222 prepared ultra-thin 2D ZnO nanosheets with a thickness of several nanometers by a solvothermal method. The very large surface area to volume ratio is converted into an excellent ethanol-sensing response. Modifying the nanosheets with CuO nanoparticles will further improve the response to ethanol vapor by twice. Alsaif et al.167 demonstrated the application of plasma on 2D MoO3 sheets for gas sensing. 2D MoO3 flakes were obtained by a grinding-assisted liquid exfoliation method and exposed to simulated sunlight. The results showed that the response coefficient is highest at 60 °C and the response/recovery time is optimized at 100 °C. They also used the liquid-phase organic solvent-assisted grinding ultrasonic method to prepare a 2D moderately hydrated MoO3 nanosheet suspension. The sheet thickness of the suspension is about 1.4 nm. A conductivity sensor template for H2 gas sensing has been developed. The sensor has a large response to H2 gas, and the response time and recovery time are in the order of seconds.168
In addition to gas sensing, 2D metal oxides can also be used to build a biosensor platform, which can accommodate a large number of charged particles in the presence of an electrochemical force.223–228 Some of these charged particles are important components of many biological processes. With the electrochemical insertion of ions into the crystal structure, the accompanying electron implantation leads to an increase in free-electron concentration and a change in the electron band structure of 2D oxides, such as 2D α-MoO3, TiO2, and MnO2. Because of its large transconductance, the 2D semiconductor has been proved to be an excellent material for preparing field-effect transistors (FETs), which can be effectively used to develop biosensor platforms. Most 2D oxides have strong d–d transitions with strong light absorption. Therefore, they can quench the luminescence of fluorophores when conjugated, which is mainly due to Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) (Fig. 14).228 After exposure to analytes, the structure of 2D transition metal oxides will change, or the binding affinity between the target luminescent material and 2D oxide will decrease. This will lead to the recovery of luminescence. Balendhran et al.223 proposed a biosensing platform based on 2D α-MoO3 FETs. The thickness of most nanosheets is below 2.8 nm. They found that the biosensor can respond to bovine serum albumin within 10 s with a detection limit as low as 250 μg mL−1. Its excellent response characteristics are attributed to the high dielectric constant of 2D α-MoO3. Zhang et al.224 synthesized electron-doped few-layer α-MoO3 nanosheets by the H+ insertion method. The resulting sub-stoichiometric MoO3−x nanosheets provide strong plasma resonance at ∼735 nm, with a detection limit of 1 pg ml−1 for bovine serum albumin. The feasibility and prospects of applying 2D MoO3−x plasma nanosheets to biosensor platforms are clarified. Yuan et al.225 established label-free nanoplatforms based on an ultra-thin 2D MnO2 nanosheet. Using different probes and following different sensing principles, they constructed two kinds of aflatoxin A and cathepsin D biosensors with good performance. This process is suitable for other luminescent materials and various probes, which have broad application prospects in the field of biosensors. Zhai et al.226 systematically studied the mechanism of monolayer MnO2 nanoparticles inhibiting the fluorescence of 7-hydroxycoumarin, and proposed a new fluorescence method for the in vivo detection of ascorbic acid (AA) in rat brain. On this basis, they developed a new method for detecting ascorbic acid in vivo with MnO2 nanotablets, which improved the efficiency. How et al.227 used a solvothermal method to make TiO2 with a highly exposed {001} surface modified with reduced graphene oxide. This study showed that 2D oxides could be used as a candidate material for an electrochemical electrode when biomolecules are present.
 Fig. 14  Illustration of the operation principle of a representative 2D MnO2 upconversion particle FRET-based optical biosensor in the presence of glucose oxidase and glucose.228 Copyright 2016, Wiley. 
5.4. Biological imaging and therapy
In addition to the uses for biosensors, 2D transition metal oxides have many important uses in biology, such as imaging and treating living things.30,34,229 2D materials have a larger surface area, allowing for more adsorption sites. Biological imaging technology mainly includes magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and fluorescence-labeled biological imaging. The application of biotherapy is mainly in diagnostic imaging and drug delivery. We know that the 2D planar structure provides a large surface area for molecular binding and allows 2D oxides to be used as a carrier for controllable drug delivery to target cells. Here, the high adsorption, degradability, and non-toxicity of carrier materials are often used.
MRI is a powerful and noninvasive imaging tool for diagnosis and post-treatment evaluation. Contrast agents are commonly used in the clinic to enhance image contrast and improve resolution and signal-to-noise ratio. It has been clinically shown that the commonly used gadolinium contrast agent may cause renal abnormalities or brain damage. Therefore, a safer alternative to gadolinium-based contrast agents is needed.230 Due to its magnetic core, iron oxide is widely used in negative or positive magnetic resonance contrast agents according to its transverse size. The use of 2D iron oxide with a transverse size greater than 10 nm has been shown to significantly improve MRI performance. 2D MnO2 nanosheets have been widely studied in biological applications, including but not limited to the biosensors mentioned above. They can also be used as a contrast agent for biological imaging. Park et al.231 synthesized ultra-thin MnO2 nanoplates, whose surface was exposed to a high concentration of Mn2+, showed a very high longitudinal relaxation value, up to 5.5 mM−1 s−1, and observed low-dose strong contrast enhancement in magnetic resonance imaging in vitro and in vivo. Zhao et al.232 designed a new double-activated fluorescence/MRI bimodal platform for tumor cell imaging by using a MnO2 nanosheet aptamer nanoprobe. MnO2 nanosheets are used as DNA nanocarriers, fluorescence quenchers, and intracellular glutathione (GSH)-activated MRI contrast agents. This work will help with the development of different fluorescence/MRI dual modes that can be used in cells or in living organisms.
There is an urgent need for cancer treatment to develop intelligent nanocarriers with stimulation of drug release and diagnostic imaging functions. Chen et al.233 reported the construction of an intelligent diagnostic platform based on highly dispersed 2D MnO2 nanosheets for both ultra-sensitive pH-response MRI and drug release/administration. Yang et al.234 also confirmed that it is possible to prepare biocompatible drug delivery systems with a targeted drug delivery ability. Hao et al.235 prepared MnO2 nanosheets with particles that were 20–60 nm in size. Then, after a series of treatments, they made a reduction and pH dual-response tumor diagnosis platform based on degradable MnO2 nanosheets. This is a new and promising way to use tumor-targeted therapy. 2D MnO2 was also used as a protective material against enzymolytic proteins in a complex with DNAzyme (a therapeutic gene silencer) so that the drug could be successfully delivered to the target cells.236 Many diagnostic nanosystems based on single-photon fluorescence have been developed for simultaneous therapeutic intervention/monitoring of various types of cancer. However, for the early diagnosis of cancer, two-photon fluorescence microscopy (TPFM) can achieve higher spatial resolution in deep tissue imaging. Therefore, a multifunctional nanoprobe for contrast-enhanced bimodal cell imaging and targeted therapy has been reported. In this report, MnO2 nanotablets were also used as contrast agents, and the probe components worked together to significantly improve the therapeutic effect.237 For the detection of glutathione in serum, MnO2 phenolic resin (PFR) nanocomposites can be used. MoOx polyethylene glycol (PEG) can not only effectively ablate tumors as a photothermal agent, but also efficiently load therapeutic molecules.238 Liu et al.239 synthesized molybdenum oxide nanosheets with high near-infrared absorbance and pH-dependent oxidative degradation and functionalized them with PEG as a degradable photothermal agent and drug carrier. The concept is that inorganic nanotherapeutic agents should be relatively stable in tumors for imaging and treatment, and easy to degrade in normal organs for rapid excretion and to avoid long-term retention/toxicity. Although the biological application of 2D oxides has made good progress, there are still many issues worthy of our consideration. The most important one is biocompatibility. Although most 2D oxides are thought to be non-toxic in general, some studies have demonstrated their toxicity.231,240,241 Therefore, how to make use of their advantages and overcome their limitations is important for future research.
5.5. Photocatalysis and electrocatalysis
Environmental crises and energy demand promote the vigorous development of catalytic technology. People are interested in photocatalysis and electrocatalysis because they can be done in conditions that are not as harsh as traditional thermal catalysis. This is because traditional thermal catalysis needs a high temperature and high pressure to activate and react molecules. 2D oxides are a series of popular materials for photocatalytic and electrocatalytic applications that have been widely studied in recent years.242–245 Because 2D oxides have a high surface area, the number of reaction sites increases, and the demand for necessary catalytic loaders is reduced. Moreover, due to the uniform electronic structure of 2D oxide, there is little difference in its catalytic performance at different positions.246,247 In addition, unlike chalcogenides, carbides, nitrides, and phosphates, oxides usually do not suffer negative ion loss/replacement, so they are usually more stable under environmental conditions. Finally, in 2D oxides, carriers do not need to diffuse on the surface of the bulk material, which reduces the recombination of photoexcited electrons and holes. To date, 2D oxides have been applied to chemical reactions such as hydrogen evolution reactions, CO2 reduction reactions, and N2 reduction reactions. However, there are still many limitations for commercial applications of 2D oxides, such as low conductivity, few active sites, fast charge recombination, etc. Therefore, it is necessary to improve their performance through reasonable structural design and chemical modification, such as ion intercalation, doping regulation, and defect engineering. The performance of the photocatalytic system is generally enhanced by a broader photoadsorption spectrum and efficient photo-induced charge separation. Increasing the number of active sites promotes the efficient transfer of electrons from the electrode to the catalytically active site to improve the electrocatalytic performance. Many 2D metal oxides have been reported for catalysis, such as MoO3−x,26,30–32,39 TiO2,67 NiO,78,248 SnO2,102,105 In2O3,63 MnO2,249 and so on. Fig. 15a shows the volcanic diagram of oxygen evolution of a selected transition metal oxide, emphasizing that selecting the right oxide can bring excellent performance.59
 Fig. 15  (a) Volcano plot of transition metal oxides catalysts for oxygen evolution showing activity for O2 production (η) on transition metal oxide surfaces vs. the enthalpy of transition (ΔHfo) of the oxide in acidic (●) and basic (○) solutions. Overpotential measured relative to 0.1 mA cm−2 current density.59 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Raman spectra and XRD patterns of commercial MoO3, MoO3−x (49 mmol), MoO3−x (69 mmol), and MoO3−x (88 mmol), respectively. Selected XRD pattern of the (040) peaks.26 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
The LSPR properties of 2D metal oxides have also attracted extensive attention in the field of photocatalysis. Most of the time, the traditional thermal injection method is used to make plasmonic semiconductor nanostructures. This method requires surfactants to accurately control the size and monodispersity. However, the use of a surface-covering agent reduces the surface feasibility of nanocrystals in the field of catalysis. Therefore, Cheng et al.39 prepared molybdenum oxide nanosheets without surfactants. The prepared MoO3−x nanosheets show strong absorption over a wide range, and the LSPR can be tuned from visible light to near-infrared. It is shown that the plasma semiconductor nanostructure can be used as an efficient catalyst to significantly improve the hydrogen generation activity of aminoborane under visible light irradiation. TiO2 nanosheets can also show a high hydrogen evolution rate. From the degradation of organic pollutants to the decomposition of water, the photocatalytic performance of TiO2 is dependent on its exposed surface, and the shape control strategy has always been the research focus for achieving a highly active surface. Li et al.67 prepared anatase TiO2 nanosheets by the ethanol solvothermal method. The hydrogen evolution rate of the synthesized sample under ultraviolet light is 17.86 mmol h−1 g−1, and the corresponding apparent quantum efficiency is 34.2%. Etman et al.32 synthesized MoO3−x nanosheets by the liquid exfoliation method with a thickness of only a few nanometers. Under visible light irradiation, the peak of MoO3−x nanosheet-mediated LSPR appeared at 954 and 1160 nm, indicating that light excitation produced more oxygen vacancies and increased the free carrier density. Under visible light irradiation, MoO3−x nanosheets can decolorize dye molecules rapidly in 10 min. The simple synthesis process of MoO3−x nanosheets, combined with their remarkable photochemical properties, reflects the high potential of nanosheets in catalytic applications and opens a new way for the removal of dyes in wastewater. Liu et al.26 synthesized plasmonic MoO3−x nanosheets with tunable oxygen vacancies using a solvothermal method. The LSPR peak of the nanosheets is located at 680 nm, which broadens the light adsorption and significantly improves the photodegradation performance of dyes and tetracyclines. As shown in Fig. 15b, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis showed that MoO3−x (88 mmol) has a high content of surface oxygen vacancies. This work provides a new idea for the application of 2D oxide semiconductors with LSPR effects in the field of photocatalysis.
Some noble metal catalysts show good electrocatalytic properties, such as Ru and Pt.250,251 Unfortunately, their costs are high and they are not environmentally friendly. Low-cost 2D oxides are therefore good alternatives. The electronic structure of two-dimensional oxide is closely related to its electrocatalytic reaction barrier. Dou et al.252 prepared Co3O4 nanosheets with a large number of low-coordination surface atoms and a highly accessible surface area. This greatly reduced the energy barrier of electrocatalyst mass transfer and greatly improved the performance stability compared with other forms of materials. Zhao et al.253 prepared a MnO2 nanochip array, which significantly improved its conductivity and electrocatalytic performance because it contained a large number of oxygen vacancies and Mn3+ active sites. Wu et al.254 prepared 2D double active Bi2O3 nanosheets, which significantly increased the electrochemically active area and accelerated the charge transfer, providing a new idea for the design of catalytic activity. Kashfi-Sadabad et al.31 synthesized graphene oxide-encapsulated mesoporous molybdenum oxide by nano-casting and self-assembly/thermal reduction and used it as an electrocatalyst in the oxygen reduction reaction. We know that α-MoO3 is a layered material, which can be better close to the crystal plane where the reaction occurs. In addition, MoO3 can be a corrosion-resistant metal oxide with good stability. These characteristics have potential application in a fuel cell environment with harsh chemical conditions. The overpotential of the catalyst is 0.86 V (relative to the reversible hydrogen electrode) and it has good electrochemical stability. Their work makes it possible to synthesize stable and highly active non-noble metal electrocatalysts. Although 2D oxide has great potential in photocatalysis and electrocatalysis, there is still a big gap in meeting commercial needs. The large-scale production and improvement of catalytic performance of these materials still need to be continued.
5.6. Energy storage
To promote the development of advanced sustainable energy systems, researchers are turning their attention to the emerging 2D materials. Because 2D materials are ultra-thin, they have a very short diffusion path and a stable, high-active surface area. This makes it easier for lithium ions and electrons to move quickly. They have been widely studied in the fields of energy storage, energy conversion, and energy utilization.255,256 In addition to the famous graphene nanosheets, many transition metal oxides have also been greatly applied in the energy field, such as V2O5,177,257 MoO3,38,258 MnO2,259–261 Mn3O4,262 TiO2,69,263 CoO,83 Co3O4,84,85,150 SnO2,89,104 Fe3O4,264 Fe2O3, etc.
As we all know, conductivity and specific surface area are two key factors determining the performance of supercapacitors when evaluating electrode materials in supercapacitors. Considering the advantages of 2D conductive materials in planar energy storage devices, nanochips with high conductivity are of great significance for the preparation of planar supercapacitors. Pazhamalai69 first reported that a b-TiO2 nanosheet was used as the electrode material in a high-performance supercapacitor. Through cyclic voltammetry and charge–discharge analysis, it was found that it had the pseudocapacitance property of high specific capacitance (∼19 mF cm−2). Through further research, it has been confirmed that TiO2 has potential as a new electrode material for high-performance supercapacitors. Hanlon et al.38 prepared MoO3 nanosheet films as supercapacitor electrodes by the liquid exfoliation method. The capacitance is relatively low (2 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1). However, the addition of carbon nanotubes exceeding the percolation threshold will increase the capacitance by 100 times. The capacitance of some MoO3/nanotube composites is up to 540 F g−1 at 0.1 mV s−1. He et al.260 combined carbon cloth with MnO2 nanosheet; the specific capacitance of the MnO2 reached 683.73 F g−1 at 2 A g−1 and remained at 269.04 F g−1 at 300 A g−1. Because the original carbon fiber cloth has a low specific surface area, its specific capacitance is only 0.78 F g−1. This shows that the carbon cloth/MnO2 hybrid has a great rate capacitance performance.
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are considered the most effective and practical electrochemical energy-storage technology. To meet the demand for lithium-ion batteries with a high energy density and excellent cycle performance, people have been committed to the development of new electrode materials. There is a big bottleneck in the development of these materials; that is, their alloying reaction with lithium will cause extremely high volume changes. The ultra-thin 2D nanosheets can significantly reduce the ion diffusion path, to achieve faster phase transition and a sufficient external surface gap, and the internal porous structure can successfully adapt to huge volume changes. A reasonable design and preparation of SnO2-based anode materials can effectively alleviate the problem of large volume change and ensure good reaction kinetics for electrochemical lithium storage. Compared with one-dimensional SnO2 nanorods, ultra-thin SnO2 nanoplates have a significant electrochemical lithium storage performance. They can cycle 40 times at 200 mA g−1 current density and have a reversible capacity of 757.6 mA h g−1.104 In addition, carbonaceous materials can be introduced as a matrix to absorb volume changes and improve the structural stability of the electrode. Su et al.265 used a method for the first time to encapsulate graphene-based metal oxide (G@MO) hybrid material nanosheets on a carbon layer. The metal oxide materials are SnO2 and Fe3O4. As can be seen from Fig. 16a, the material encapsulated with a carbon layer exhibits a high reversible capacity and excellent rate performance. Xiong et al.259 used an alternating stacked single-layer MnO2/graphene superlattice structure for high-performance lithium and sodium storage. All the monolayer MnO2 nanosheets were separated and stabilized between graphene monolayers. For lithium storage and sodium storage, they showed large specific capacities of 1325 and 795 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and 370 and 245 mA h g−1 at 12.8 A g−1, respectively. This is the ultra-high performance reported so far (Fig. 16b). Thus, 2D oxides are believed to play a critical role in future energy storage.
 Fig. 16  (a) Charge/discharge profiles of G@SnO2, G@SnO2@C at a current density of 200 mA g−1 in a voltage window of 0.01–3.00 V: the discharge curves in the 1st, 5th, 10th, and 50th cycles. Reversible charge/discharge capacities against cycle number for G@Fe3O4 and G@Fe3O4@C at a current density of 200 mA g−1 in the voltage window of 0.01–3.00 V; rate performance of G@Fe3O4 and G@Fe3O4@C electrodes at a rate of 200, 500, 1000, 2000, and 5000 mA g−1.265 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (b) Lithium storage performance of the MnO2/graphene superlattice. Sodium storage performance of the MnO2/graphene superlattice.259 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Different preparation methods are needed for different types of 2D material (vdW and non-vdW). For various applications of a specific 2D material, we often need to adopt different preparation ideas. For example, SnO2 is applied to lithium-ion batteries. Firstly, because it is a non-vdW material, we need to choose the bottom-up method. Some hydrothermal synthesis technologies105,266,267 have successfully prepared SnO2 nanosheets, but they need a high temperature, high pressure, and harsh reaction parameters, resulting in a high cost and low yield. Although CVD can deposit 2D samples on a large scale, it is not conducive to the transfer of 2D oxide nanosheets. Some simple and controllable liquid-phase preparation technologies seem to be a better choice. For example, Zhu et al.104 used microwave-assisted liquid-phase synthesis. For the application of MoO3 in lithium-ion batteries, the layered structure and easily formed intercalation state are generally considered first; so the top-down stripping technology was adopted.268 Recently, some studies have adopted some bottom-up growth techniques.269,270 It is sometimes difficult to directly compare the results from different groups since they involve too many parameters. As mentioned above, MoO3 is often used in photocatalysis. Some researchers have used the top-down liquid-phase stripping method,32 while others have used the bottom-up solvent method to grow ultra-thin nanosheets.26 We present a comparison of the preparation methods, applications and corresponding performance38,271–274 of 2D SnO2 and MoO3, as shown in Table 1. In fact, in addition to considering the final performance of the material, it also needs to consider issues such as cost, environmental protection, and time. The ultimate goal is to mass-produce large-area 2D metal oxide materials to meet practical applications.
Table 1 Synthesis, application and related properties of two typical 2D metal oxides




Materials
Synthesis methods
Advantages and disadvantages
Applications
Performances
Ref.




SnO2
Microwave-assisted solution-phase growth
Scalable, ultrarapid, simple, time-saving, and high quality
Lithium storage
A high reversible capacity of 757.6 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 in 40 cycles

104



Hydrothermal
Large-scale, highly pure and low efficiency
Lithium storage
The discharge and charge capacities in the second cycle are 936 and 872 mA h g−1, respectively

266



MoO3
PLD
High quality and cost
Sensor
Higher response of about 25% at a lower temperature. Lower detection limits (up to 100 ppb)

271



ALD
High controllability, quality, yield and cost
Sensor
Great sensitivity of 168.72 μA mM−1 cm−2. The lowest detection limit of 0.076 μM at a signal to noise ratio of 3. Ultra-fast response/recovery time of ∼2.0 s

273



Liquid-phase exfoliation
Low cost and scalable
Supercapacitor
Relatively low capacitance (2 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1). MoO3/nanotube composites displayed 540 F g−1 at 0.1 mV s−1

38



Soft chemical exfoliation
Simple and moderate, low efficiency and high cost
Supercapacitor
MoO3/carbon black composites displayed 201 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1 in a three-electrode system. High stability for 2000 cycles with 94% capacitance retention in a two-electrode system

272



Template
General, scalable and high quality
Supercapacitor
Achieved 300 F cm−3 at 5 mV s−1 in the Al2(SO4)3 electrolyte. For organic electrolytes, capacities as high as 996 C g−1 and 1100 C cm−3 were obtained at a sweep rate of 2 mV s−1

274



Heat treatment routes
Simple and excellent performance
Lithium storage
High reversible specific discharge capacity of ∼540 mA h g−1 at 0.2C-rate with 99.9% coulombic efficiency as well as 63% capacity retention after 200 charge–discharge cycles

270



Liquid exfoliation
Versatile, scalable and high quality
Lithium storage
High reversible capacities of 1110 mA h g−1 (3.0 to 0.01 V) and 841 mA h g−1 (2.0 to 0.01 V)

268



Solvothermal
Simple and high ability
Photocatalyst
Enhanced performance in the photodegradation of dyes and tetracycline

26



Liquid exfoliation
Environmentally friendly and high quality
Photocatalyst
Make a rapid decolorization for the dye molecules in less than 10 min

32





6. Conclusions and perspectives
With the rapid development of the 2D family, 2D oxide materials represent an important group thanks to their numerous advantages. In this review, we summarize their composition and structure in terms of vdW and non-vdW categories. The synthesis methods of 2D binary oxides are also outlined. In particular, we critically discuss strategies to tailor the properties of 2D oxides and their emerging applications in different fields. From basic research to the development of future technology, the field of 2D binary oxide nanomaterials has undoubtedly made leaps and bounds. Some 2D binary oxides show great potential for the existing commercial technologies.
2D oxides have come a long way in recent years, but there are still theoretical and practical issues to solve. Firstly, natural 2D binary oxides, in particular vdW oxides, are limited. Exploring and developing new metal oxide nanosheets is one of the important tasks in the future. Second, due to the structural degradation and morphological damage of layered materials in the stripping process, the preparation of high-quality nanosheets with reasonable transverse sizes remain a great challenge. Harsh reaction conditions (such as high temperature, high vacuum, or strong acid/alkali) may cause physical adsorption or desorption of functional groups, and nanosheets tend to aggregate or sinter, which undoubtedly limits their development. The lack of a large-scale production method for 2D oxide remains another critical issue for practical applications. It is very important to modulate the size, thickness, structural deformation, and defect structure of oxide nanosheets, to affect their performance in practical applications. Therefore, the development of a cost-effective and scalable synthesis technology for 2D metal oxides, especially non-layered metal oxides, is worthy of attention. Third, an in-depth understanding of the interaction between the microstructure and macroscopical properties remains to be improved. Future research should focus on building a bridge between theoretical simulation and display systems. The efficiency and accuracy of the prediction and identification of material structures and properties can be improved by using machine learning or optimizing theoretical and experimental data at the same time. We expect that the combination of these methods with high-throughput computing may further lead to a more effective prediction and identification of 2D metal oxide structures and properties. Fourth, we can have higher hopes for the application prospects of 2D materials. For example, some 2D metal oxides with adjustable LSPR properties can be applied to enhance the spectrum to become an effective alternative to precious metal substrates. Alternatively, in the field of sensing, 2D nanosheets can be assembled into a 3D hierarchy with medium bulk density to make the best use of their geometric advantages to ensure extensive surface exposure. In battery applications, 2D oxide nanosheets need to overcome the strong tendency of self-agglomeration in the process of an electrode assembly. Therefore, we need to pay attention to the innovation of electrode assembly methods. Finally, in addition to all the excellent properties outlined in this review, very recently, 2D oxides have also shown other emerging properties, such as ferroelectricity and ferromagnetism.275–277 These emerging properties in 2D oxides will bring exciting opportunities to the 2D community.
In short, this review presents a comprehensive discussion on 2D binary oxides. We believe that many interesting developments are yet to come in this exciting field.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (Grant No. 2022A1515010649), and the Shenzhen Science and Technology Project (Grant No. JCYJ20180507182246321, JCYJ20200109105825504, JCYJ20210324095611032).
References
Y. Wang, B. Ren, J. Zhen Ou, K. Xu, C. Yang, Y. Li and H. Zhang, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 1228–1252 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5082–5104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kumbhakar, C. Chowde Gowda, P. L. Mahapatra, M. Mukherjee, K. D. Malviya, M. Chaker, A. Chandra, B. Lahiri, P. M. Ajayan, D. Jariwala, A. Singh and C. S. Tiwary, Mater. Today, 2021, 45, 142–168 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sasaki, M. Watanabe, H. Hashizume, H. Yamada and H. Nakazawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 8329–8335 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Du, Y. Deng and P. D. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2732–2743 RSC .
A. Zhao, H. Li, X. Hu, C. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Lu, S. Ruan and Y.-J. Zeng, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 293002 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kubota, K. Watanabe, O. Tsuda and T. Taniguchi, Science, 2007, 317, 932–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Chen, Y. C. Liu, C. L. Shao, R. Mu, Y. M. Lu, J. Y. Zhang, D. Z. Shen and X. W. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 586–590 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, R. Ma, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1235–1239 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Schaak and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1455–1471 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Schaak and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2513–2516 CrossRef CAS .
M. Osada and T. Sasaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2503–2511 RSC .
C. Felser, G. H. Fecher and B. Balke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 668–699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Osada, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 295–299 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sato, K. Ono, T. Sasaki and A. Yamagishi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9824–9828 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, L. Tao, S. Du, W. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Zou and S. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909832 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Zhang, J. Hu, Y. B. Jia, R. T. Liu, T. Cai and Z. P. Xu, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 7533–7549 RSC .
H. Xie, Z. Li, L. Cheng, A. A. Haidry, J. Tao, Y. Xu, K. Xu and J. Z. Ou, iScience, 2022, 25, 103598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Heard, J. Cejka, M. Opanasenko, P. Nachtigall, G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1801712 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Ye, D. Chang, A. Ayub, K. Ibrahim, A. Shahin, R. Karimi, S. Wettig, J. Sanderson and K. P. Musselman, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 4510–4521 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Wu, J. Zhang, K. Chen, C. Huang, H. Chen and X. Qiu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 490, 395–402 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, P. Yan, F. Xu, W. Wu, T. Hu, C. Wei and Q. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7196–7200 RSC .
C. Guo, P. Yan, C. Zhu, C. Wei, W. Liu, W. Wu, X. Wang, L. Zheng, J. Wang, Y. Du, J. Chen and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12527–12530 RSC .
H. Zu, Y. Guo, H. Yang, D. Huang, Z. Liu, Y. Liu and C. Hu, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 18533–18540 RSC .
Y. Zhan, Y. Liu, H. Zu, Y. Guo, S. Wu, H. Yang, Z. Liu, B. Lei, J. Zhuang, X. Zhang, D. Huang and C. Hu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5997–6004 RSC .
R. Kashfi-Sadabad, S. Yazdani, T. D. Huan, Z. Cai and M. T. Pettes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 18212–18222 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Etman, H. N. Abdelhamid, Y. Yuan, L. Wang, X. Zou and J. Sun, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 2193–2201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, Q. Xu, W. Cui, C. Zhu and Y. Qi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1600–1604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ding, W. Guo, C. Guo, J. Sun, N. Zheng, F. Wang, M. Yan and S. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2020–2029 RSC .
S. J. Xiao, X. J. Zhao, P. P. Hu, Z. J. Chu, C. Z. Huang and L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8184–8191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, M. Wen, X. Ma, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, Y. Dai, B. Huang and H. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9316–9324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, A. F. Chrimes, T. Daeneke, S. Balendhran, D. O. Bellisario, Y. Son, M. R. Field, W. Zhang, H. Nili, E. P. Nguyen, K. Latham, J. van Embden, M. S. Strano, J. Z. Ou and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 91–100 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hanlon, C. Backes, T. M. Higgins, M. Hughes, A. O'Neill, P. King, N. McEvoy, G. S. Duesberg, B. Mendoza Sanchez, H. Pettersson, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1751–1763 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2910–2914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Alsaif, K. Latham, M. R. Field, D. D. Yao, N. V. Medhekar, G. A. Beane, R. B. Kaner, S. P. Russo, J. Z. Ou and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3931–3937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Alsaif, M. R. Field, B. J. Murdoch, T. Daeneke, K. Latham, A. F. Chrimes, A. S. Zoolfakar, S. P. Russo, J. Z. Ou and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12780–12791 RSC .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, J. Z. Ou, S. Zhuiykov, R. B. Kaner, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3952–3970 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balendhran, J. Deng, J. Z. Ou, S. Walia, J. Scott, J. Tang, K. L. Wang, M. R. Field, S. Russo, S. Zhuiykov, M. S. Strano, N. Medhekar, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 109–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, S. Hu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Chemistry, 2012, 18, 15283–15287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Ou, J. L. Campbell, D. Yao, W. Wlodarski and K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10757–10763 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Tang, M. Wang, K. L. Wang, A. Shailos, K. Galatsis, R. Kojima, V. Strong, A. Lech, W. Wlodarski and R. B. Kaner, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 429–433 RSC .
X. K. Hu, Y. T. Qian, Z. T. Song, J. R. Huang, R. Cao and J. Q. Xiao, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1527–1533 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, K. Li, C. Xiao, S. Fan, J. Liu, W. Zhang, W. Xu, W. Tong, J. Liao, Y. Zhou, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3102–3108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, A. Vijayaraghavan, M.-H. Ham, H. Zheng, M. Breedon and M. S. Strano, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5660–5666 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sivakumar, R. Gopalakrishnan, M. Jayachandran and C. Sanjeeviraja, Opt. Mater., 2007, 29, 679–687 CrossRef CAS .
G. Terán-Escobar, J. Pampel, J. M. Caicedo and M. Lira-Cantú, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3088–3098 RSC .
X. Rui, Z. Lu, H. Yu, D. Yang, H. H. Hng, T. M. Lim and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 556–560 RSC .
S. Surnev, M. G. Ramsey and F. P. Netzer, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2003, 73, 117–165 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. McCarron, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 336–338 RSC .
N. A. Caiger, S. Crouch-Baker, P. G. Dickens and G. S. James, J. Solid State Chem., 1987, 67, 369–373 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Parise, E. M. McCarron and A. W. Sleight, Mater. Res. Bull., 1987, 22, 803–811 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Parise, E. M. McCarron, A. W. Sleight and E. Prince, Mater. Sci. Forum, 1988, 27–28, 85–88 CAS .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and Z. Chen, WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci., 2015, 5, 360–379 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Z. Ou, T. Daeneke, A. Mitchell, T. Sasaki and M. S. Fuhrer, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 73–89 CrossRef .
D. D. Yao, J. Z. Ou, K. Latham, S. Zhuiykov, A. P. O'Mullane and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 1865–1870 CrossRef CAS .
W. Feng, X. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Wang, W. Zheng, P. Hu, W. Cao and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3254–3259 RSC .
N. Zhou, R. Yang and T. Zhai, Mater. Today Nano, 2019, 8, 100051 CrossRef .
F. Lei, Y. Sun, K. Liu, S. Gao, L. Liang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6826–6829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Akhtar, A. Umar, S. Sood, I. Jung, H. H. Hegazy and H. Algarni, Materials, 2019, 12, 1–14 Search PubMed .
W. J. Hyun, H. K. Lee, S. S. Oh, O. Hess, C. G. Choi, S. H. Im and O. O. Park, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1846–1850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Leng, Y. Chen and J. Xue, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8531–8534 RSC .
M. Li, Y. Chen, W. Li, X. Li, H. Tian, X. Wei, Z. Ren and G. Han, Small, 2017, 13, 1604115 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Orzali, M. Casarin, G. Granozzi, M. Sambi and A. Vittadini, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 156101 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Pazhamalai, K. Krishnamoorthy, V. K. Mariappan and S. J. Kim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 536, 62–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Qian, H. Zong, J. Schneider, G. Zhou, T. Zhao, Y. Li, J. Yang, D. W. Bahnemann and J. H. Pan, Catal. Today, 2019, 335, 78–90 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Umh, S. Yu, Y. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee and J. Yi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15802–15808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-H. Wu, A. Fortunelli and G. Granozzi, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2009, 28, 517–576 Search PubMed .
S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3575–3579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Liu, S. Gao, H. Cheng, F. Lei, Z. Sun, Y. Jiang, H. Su, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2899 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang and B. Yan, Chemistry, 2012, 18, 5150–5154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, C. Cao, S. Tao, W. Chu, Z. Wu and Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huh, J. Yang and S.-C. Kim, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5491–5494 RSC .
Z. Lin, C. Du, B. Yan, C. Wang and G. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4036 CrossRef PubMed .
X. San, G. Zhao, G. Wang, Y. Shen, D. Meng, Y. Zhang and F. Meng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 3540–3549 RSC .
Y. Zhong, Y. Yang, Y. Ma and J. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10355–10357 RSC .
B. Bai, H. Arandiyan and J. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 677–683 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hilgenkamp, Ariando, H. J. Smilde, D. H. Blank, G. Rijnders, H. Rogalla, J. R. Kirtley and C. C. Tsuei, Nature, 2003, 422, 50–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, L.-X. Ding, S. Wang, D. Cai and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5625–5630 RSC .
F. Zhan, B. Geng and Y. Guo, Chemistry, 2009, 15, 6169–6174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, L. Bai, Y. Sun, X. Zhang, Q. Li, B. Cao, W. Yan and Y. Xie, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5241–5246 RSC .
Z. Huang, A. Zhou, J. Wu, Y. Chen, X. Lan, H. Bai and L. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1703–1708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Mukhopadhyay, P. Mitra, A. P. Chatterjee and H. S. Maiti, Ceram. Int., 2000, 26, 123–132 CrossRef CAS .
E. Comini, A. Cristalli, G. Faglia and G. Sberveglieri, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 65, 260–263 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Zhou, M. Ge, X. Xu, Z. Zhang and J. Z. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 46–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, S. Kuriakose, S. Walia, N. Syed, A. Jannat, B. Y. Zhang, F. Haque, M. Mohiuddin, T. Alkathiri, N. Pillai, T. Daeneke, J. Z. Ou and A. Zavabeti, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900007 CrossRef CAS .
P. Atkin, R. Orrell-Trigg, A. Zavabeti, N. Mahmood, M. R. Field, T. Daeneke, I. S. Cole and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2102–2105 RSC .
Q. Guo, G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 17983–17989 RSC .
M. Houssa, K. Iordanidou, G. Pourtois, V. V. Afanas'ev and A. Stesmans, AIP Adv., 2018, 8, 055010 CrossRef .
K. J. Saji, K. Tian, M. Snure and A. Tiwari, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500453 CrossRef .
A. Shukla and N. K. Gaur, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2020, 754, 137717 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, E. D. Gaspera, T. Ahmed, S. Walia, R. Ramanathan, J. van Embden, E. Mayes and V. Bansal, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025110 CrossRef .
C. Xiao, F. Wang, Y. Wang, S. A. Yang, J. Jiang, M. Yang, Y. Lu, S. Wang and Y. Feng, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 2570 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yin, Y. Yao, H. Fan and S. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 736, 322–331 CrossRef CAS .
X.-T. Yin, W.-D. Zhou, J. Li, P. Lv, Q. Wang, D. Wang, F.-Y. Wu, D. Dastan, H. Garmestani, Z. Shi and Ş. Ţălu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 14687–14694 CrossRef CAS .
X.-T. Yin, W.-D. Zhou, J. Li, Q. Wang, F.-Y. Wu, D. Dastan, D. Wang, H. Garmestani, X.-M. Wang and Ş. Ţălu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 805, 229–236 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, X. Liu, T. Zhou, L. Wang and T. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 524, 76–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao and X. Wu, Mater. Lett., 2018, 210, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou and N. Umezawa, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17816–17820 RSC .
Y. Zhu, H. Guo, H. Zhai and C. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2745–2753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, F. Lei, S. Gao, B. Pan, J. Zhou and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10569–10572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Chen, S. P. Chang, F. Y. Hung, S. J. Chang, Z. S. Hu and K. J. Chen, Sensors, 2013, 13, 3941–3950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Guo, R. Lu, S. Liu, G. W. Ho and C. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21038–21041 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Kumar and K. S. R. K. Rao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 3306–3351 RSC .
C. Li, W. Guo, Y. Kong and H. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 033108 CrossRef .
T. M. Schmidt, R. H. Miwa and A. Fazzio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 195413 CrossRef .
W. Shi, M. M. Ahmed, S. Li, Y. Shang, R. Liu, T. Guo, R. Zhao, J. Li and J. Du, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 5430–5439 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Feng, L. Zhu, H. Guo, W. Ding, L. Chen, Y. Qin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 724–733 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Yuhas, D. O. Zitoun, P. J. Pauzauskie, R. He and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 420–423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, X. Li, Y. Gao, L. Li, L. Huang and J. Ye, Mater. Lett., 2019, 234, 26–29 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Zeng, K. Schouteden, M. N. Amini, S. C. Ruan, Y. F. Lu, Z. Z. Ye, B. Partoens, D. Lamoen and C. Van Haesendonck, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10617–10622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, S. Ouyang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1348–1354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhu and S.-P. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11385–11396 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Tian, J. A. Voigt, J. Liu, B. McKenzie, M. J. McDermott, M. A. Rodriguez, H. Konishi and H. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 821–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Today, 2004, 7, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tusche, H. L. Meyerheim and J. Kirschner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 026102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, J. Z. Ou, M. S. Strano, R. B. Kaner, A. Mitchell and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2175–2196 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roussel, P. Labbe and D. Groult, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2000, 56(Pt 3), 377–391 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Su, X. Xie, S. Dou and G. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Dzade, A. Roldan and N. de Leeuw, Minerals, 2014, 4, 89–115 CrossRef .
M. B. Dines, J. Chem. Educ., 1974, 51, 551–555 CrossRef .
Z. Zeng, Z. Yin, X. Huang, H. Li, Q. He, G. Lu, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11093–11097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-H. Liu, K. Ooi, H. Kanoh, W.-P. Tang and T. Tomida, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 4154–4164 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, G. Yang, Z. Zhang, X. Yang, W. Hou and J. J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2131–2138 RSC .
H. Tagaya, K. Ara, J. Kadokawa, M. Karasu and K. Chiba, J. Mater. Chem., 1994, 4, 551–555 RSC .
F. Ji, X. Ren, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, L. Pang, J. Jiang and S. F. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8696–8703 RSC .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Barkelid, A. M. Goossens, V. E. Calado, H. S. van der Zant and G. A. Steele, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3187–3192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Hu, J. S. Zabinski, J. E. Bultman, J. H. Sanders and A. A. Voevodin, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 2603–2605 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Parilla, A. C. Dillon, B. A. Parkinson, K. M. Jones, J. Alleman, G. Riker, D. S. Ginley and M. J. Heben, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 6197–6207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. I. Altman, T. Droubay and S. A. Chambers, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 414, 205–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Etzkorn, H. A. Therese, F. Rocker, N. Zink, U. Kolb and W. Tremel, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2372–2375 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Gesheva, T. M. Ivanova and G. Bodurov, Prog. Org. Coat., 2012, 74, 635–639 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dahal and M. Batzill, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11378 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Diskus, O. Nilsen and H. Fjellvåg, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2011, 17, 135–140 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Patil, M. D. Uplane and P. S. Patil, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252, 8050–8056 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, J. Li, X. Zhang, C. Zhang, X. Jiang and B. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 549–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Miao, J. Wu, Y. Du, Y. Sun and P. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10855–10860 RSC .
A. Agrawal, S. H. Cho, O. Zandi, S. Ghosh, R. W. Johns and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3121–3207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Li, L. E. Mo, W. C. Chen, X. Q. Shi, N. Wang, L. H. Hu, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and S. Y. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32026–32033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Prasad, D. J. Kubinski and P. I. Gouma, Sens. Actuators, B, 2003, 93, 25–30 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, Q. Li, T.-Y. Liu, Y. Cui, H. Zheng and J. Liu, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 13, 1900271 CrossRef .
K. A. Messalea, B. J. Carey, A. Jannat, N. Syed, M. Mohiuddin, B. Y. Zhang, A. Zavabeti, T. Ahmed, N. Mahmood, E. Della Gaspera, K. Khoshmanesh, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and T. Daeneke, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15615–15623 RSC .
T. Daeneke, P. Atkin, R. Orrell-Trigg, A. Zavabeti, T. Ahmed, S. Walia, M. Liu, Y. Tachibana, M. Javaid, A. D. Greentree, S. P. Russo, R. B. Kaner and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10974–10983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cheng, J. He, T. Yao, Z. Sun, Y. Jiang, Q. Liu, S. Jiang, F. Hu, Z. Xie, B. He, W. Yan and S. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10393–10398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, L. Peng, Y. Yuan, Y. Zhu, Z. Fang, C. Yan, G. Chen, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, J. Lu, K. Amine and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3907–3913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Icaza and R. K. Guduru, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 726, 453–459 CrossRef CAS .
I. Shakir, M. Shahid, U. A. Rana and M. F. Warsi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 8741–8745 RSC .
S. Rajagopal, M. Bharaneswari, D. Nataraj, O. Y. Khyzhun and Y. Djaoued, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 88287–88299 RSC .
X.-Y. Ren, D. Li, Y. Gao and Y.-G. Chen, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2018, 89, 89–93 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, Y. Zhao, J. Sun, Z. Tong, R. Luo, D. Li and A. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 239, 131–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. Niederberger, F. Krumeich, H.-J. Muhr, M. Müller and R. Nesper, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1941–1945 RSC .
R. Wang, X. Lu, L. Hao, W. Jiao, W. Liu, J. Zhang, F. Yuan and F. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 427–433 RSC .
M. I. Shukoor, H. A. Therese, L. Gorgishvili, G. Glasser, U. Kolb and W. Tremel, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2144–2151 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, L. Ni, J. Zhou, G. Zhu, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, F. Gao, C. Lu, H. Ji, J. Chen, X. Wang, X. Guo, L. Peng, W. Ding and W. Hou, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2788–2798 RSC .
X. Liu, J. Yang, W. Hou, J. Wang and Y. Nuli, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2621–2624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Honda, Y. Oaki and H. Imai, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3579–3585 CrossRef CAS .
G. Prusty, J. T. Lee, S. Seifert, B. B. Muhoberac and R. Sardar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5938–5942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kanehara, H. Koike, T. Yoshinaga and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17736–17737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, M. Saha, V. Dev Ashok, B. Dalal and S. K. De, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1180–1187 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, J. Fei, B. T. Diroll, T. Paik and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11680–11686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Breedon, P. Spizzirri, M. Taylor, J. du Plessis, D. McCulloch, J. Zhu, L. Yu, Z. Hu, C. Rix, W. Wlodarski and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 10, 430–439 CrossRef .
R. Ab Kadir, R. A. Rani, M. M. Alsaif, J. Z. Ou, W. Wlodarski, A. P. O'Mullane and K. Kalantar-Zadehp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4751–4758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, S. Balendhran, M. R. Field, K. Latham, W. Wlodarski, J. Z. Ou and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 192, 196–204 CrossRef CAS .
F. Haque, A. Zavabeti, B. Y. Zhang, R. S. Datta, Y. Yin, Z. Yi, Y. Wang, N. Mahmood, N. Pillai, N. Syed, H. Khan, A. Jannat, N. Wang, N. Medhekar, K. Kalantar-zadeh and J. Z. Ou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 257–268 RSC .
T. Wang, X. Meng, G. Liu, K. Chang, P. Li, Q. Kang, L. Liu, M. Li, S. Ouyang and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9491–9501 RSC .
B. Tandon, G. S. Shanker and A. Nag, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2306–2311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Núñez, V. A. de la Peña O'Shea, P. Jana, J. M. Coronado and D. P. Serrano, Catal. Today, 2013, 209, 21–27 CrossRef .
G. Li, G. R. Blake and T. T. Palstra, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1693–1706 RSC .
L. Xu, Q. Jiang, Z. Xiao, X. Li, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5277–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Han, X. Zhou, L. Huang, F. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Ding, X. Zheng, H. Han and C. Li, J. Catal., 2013, 307, 148–152 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yao, L. Liu, C. Xiao, X. Zhang, Q. Liu, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7554–7558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Liu, R. Long, M. Li, S. Chen, Z. Qi, C. Wang, L. Song, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Small, 2017, 13, 1701354 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-P. Zhai, L.-F. Gao, H. Zhang, Y. Peng, X.-D. Zhang, Q. Wang and H.-L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 1169–1177 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Hang, X. Zhang, J. Xie, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1195–1199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, M. Salehi, R. Silva, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6222–6227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Lu, S. Xu, D. Kong, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, P. C. Hsu, K. Yan, D. Bradshaw, F. B. Prinz and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 19701–19706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Li, J. Liu and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3372–3377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, Ariando, X. Renshaw Wang, A. Rusydi, J. Chen, H. Yang and T. Venkatesan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802439 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M. C. Tsai, J. Zhou, M. Guan, M. C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, D. Y. Wang, J. Yang, S. J. Pennycook, B. J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, X. Qi, C. Liu, J. Zeng and T. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 51418–51427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, K. Xu, S. Jiang, D. Luo, R. Chen, C. Xu, P. Shum and Y. J. Liu, Mater. Today Phys., 2021, 18, 100378 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lin, L. Hu, J. Wang, W. Zhang, S. Ruan and Y. J. Zeng, Opt. Lett., 2018, 43, 2244–2247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tan, L. Wang, C. Cheng, X. Yan, B. Shen and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2893–2896 RSC .
W. Zhang, Z. Fang and X. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5095–5109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Verma, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6447–6466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, N. Coca-Lopez, J. Janik and A. Hartschuh, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 4945–4960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hartschuh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8178–8191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Hu, S. Huang, Z. Jin, M. Zhang, X. Huang, J. Lu, S. Ruan and Y. J. Zeng, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 426–434 RSC .
S. Q. Li, P. Guo, L. Zhang, W. Zhou, T. W. Odom, T. Seideman, J. B. Ketterson and R. P. Chang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9161–9170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kundu, F. Le, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 452, 115–119 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hartstein, J. R. Kirtley and J. C. Tsang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1980, 45, 201–204 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kamakura, T. Takeishi, S. Murai, K. Fujita and K. Tanaka, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 2602–2608 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Iqbal, A. Liaqat, S. Hussain, X. Wang, M. Tahir, Z. Urooj and L. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2002628 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, M. A. Iqbal, M. Xu, Y.-C. Wang, H. Wang, M. Ji, X. Wan, T. J. A. Slater, J. Liu, J. Liu, H. Rong, W. Chen, S. V. Kershaw, S. J. Haigh, A. L. Rogach, L. Xie and J. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Iqbal, M. Cui, A. Liaqat, R. Faiz, M. Hossain, X. Wang, S. Hussain, C. Dang, H. Liu, W. Wen, J. Wu and L. Xie, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 254003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zha, M. Luo, M. Ye, T. Ahmed, X. Yu, D. H. Lien, Q. He, D. Lei, J. C. Ho, J. Bullock, K. B. Crozier and C. Tan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2111970 CrossRef .
N. Huo and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1801164 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jiang, Y. Guo, X. Weng, F. Long, Y. Xin, Y. Lu, Z. Ye, S. Ruan and Y.-J. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 4978–4988 RSC .
L. Hu, Q. Liao, Z. Xu, J. Yuan, Y. Ke, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, G. P. Wang, S. Ruan, Y.-J. Zeng and S.-T. Han, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 886–894 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Al-Hardan, M. J. Abdullah, N. M. Ahmed, F. K. Yam and A. Abdul Aziz, Superlattices Microstruct., 2012, 51, 765–771 CrossRef CAS .
V. Krishnamurthi, T. Ahmed, M. Mohiuddin, A. Zavabeti, N. Pillai, C. F. McConville, N. Mahmood and S. Walia, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2100449 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Mottram, Y. H. Lin, P. Pattanasattayavong, K. Zhao, A. Amassian and T. D. Anthopoulos, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4894–4902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, F. Wang, H. Li, S. Yang, P. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Li and T. Zhai, Small, 2022, 18, e2104244 CrossRef PubMed .
B. P. Yalagala, P. Sahatiya, C. S. R. Kolli, S. Khandelwal, V. Mattela and S. Badhulika, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 937–947 CrossRef CAS .
A. Arash, T. Ahmed, A. Govind Rajan, S. Walia, F. Rahman, A. Mazumder, R. Ramanathan, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran, E. Mayes, M. S. Strano and S. Balendhran, 2D Mater., 2019, 6, 035031 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhong, K. Zhou, Z. Wei, Y. Li, T. Li, H. Dong, L. Jiang, J. Li and W. Hu, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 035033 CrossRef .
B. Zheng, Z. Wang, Y. Chen, W. Zhang and X. Li, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 045011 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gautam, A. Verma, P. Chaudhary and B. C. Yadav, Opt. Mater., 2022, 123, 111860 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Rout, M. Hegde and C. N. R. Rao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 128, 488–493 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, T. J. Lou, X. M. Sun and Y. D. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 5442–5449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Choi, N. Izu, N. Shirahata and Y. Masuda, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 1820–1827 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fu, C. Zhu, X. Zhang, C. Li and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1390–1398 RSC .
S. S. Shendage, V. L. Patil, S. A. Vanalakar, S. P. Patil, N. S. Harale, J. L. Bhosale, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 240, 426–433 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Harale, D. S. Dalavi, S. S. Mali, N. L. Tarwal, S. A. Vanalakar, V. K. Rao, C. K. Hong, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 6094–6105 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Sun, M. Yu, Y. Yin, B. Du, W. Tang, T. Jiang, B. Yang, W. Cao and M. N. R. Ashfold, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 3384–3390 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, M. Alsaif, E. P. Nguyen, J. Z. Ou, S. Zhuiykov, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9753–9760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Y. Zhang, K. Li, T. Zhang, P. Shum, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, N. Zhang, J. Zhang, T. Wu and L. Wei, ACS Photonics, 2017, 5, 347–352 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, S. Wu, F. Shu and Z. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1095–1097 RSC .
W. Zhai, C. Wang, P. Yu, Y. Wang and L. Mao, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 12206–12213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. T. How, A. Pandikumar, H. N. Ming and L. H. Ngee, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. P. He and H. Tian, Small, 2016, 12, 144–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Deng, C. Fang, X. Ma, X. Li, Y. J. Zeng and X. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20321–20330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Macher, J. Totenhagen, J. Sherwood, Y. Qin, D. Gurler, M. S. Bolding and Y. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 490–494 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, N. Lee, S. H. Choi, K. An, S.-H. Yu, J. H. Kim, S.-H. Kwon, D. Kim, H. Kim, S.-I. Baek, T.-Y. Ahn, O. K. Park, J. S. Son, Y.-E. Sung, Y.-W. Kim, Z. Wang, N. Pinna and T. Hyeon, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3318–3324 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, H. Fan, G. Zhou, H. Bai, H. Liang, R. Wang, X. Zhang and W. Tan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11220–11223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, D. Ye, M. Wu, H. Chen, L. Zhang, J. Shi and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7019–7026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, D. He, X. He, K. Wang, Z. Zou, X. Li, H. Shi, J. Luo and X. Yang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 205–212 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hao, L. Wang, B. Zhang, H. Zhao, M. Niu, Y. Hu, C. Zheng, H. Zhang, J. Chang, Z. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 025101 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fan, Z. Zhao, G. Yan, X. Zhang, C. Yang, H. Meng, Z. Chen, H. Liu and W. Tan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4801–4805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Meng, L. Lu, X. H. Zhao, Z. Chen, Z. Zhao, C. Yang, X. B. Zhang and W. Tan, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 4448–4454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, D. Wang, Y. Guo, C. Yang, X. Liu, A. Iqbal, W. Liu, W. Qin, D. Yan and H. Guo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 77, 299–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Song, J. Hao, C. Liang, T. Liu, M. Gao, L. Cheng, J. Hu and Z. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2122–2126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Z. Ou, T. Daeneke, M. S. Strano, M. Pumera and S. L. Gras, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5086–5099 CrossRef CAS .
T. Anh Tran, K. Krishnamoorthy, Y. W. Song, S. K. Cho and S. J. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2980–2986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiao, X. Fu, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, S. Ruan, Y.-J. Zeng and H. Huang, Nano Today, 2021, 36, 101028 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, X. Jiang, Q. Zhang, S. Huang, L. Zhang, L. Huang, T. He, H. Zhang, T. Ohno, S. Ruan and Y.-J. Zeng, Commun. Mater., 2020, 1, 90 CrossRef .
S. Jiao, X. Fu, L. Zhang, Y.-J. Zeng and H. Huang, Nano Today, 2020, 31, 100833 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, Y. Long, S. Ruan and Y. J. Zeng, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 15593–15599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2244–2250 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Farneth, P. A. M. Hotsenpiller, J. D. Bolt, J. B. Lowekamp and G. S. Rohrer, Abstr. Pap., Jt. Conf. - Chem. Inst. Can. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 216, U747–U747 Search PubMed .
F. Yu, X. Xu, H. Peng, H. Yu, Y. Dai, W. Liu, J. Ying, Q. Sun and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 507, 109–118 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha and A. Pal, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 134, 26–36 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, P. Wang, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3072–3106 RSC .
N. M. Markovic, T. J. Schmidt, V. Stamenkovic and P. N. Ross, Fuel Cells, 2001, 1, 105–116 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dou, T. Liao, Z. Ma, D. Tian, Q. Liu, F. Xiao, Z. Sun, J. Ho Kim and S. Xue Dou, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 267–275 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, C. Chang, F. Teng, Y. Zhao, G. Chen, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse, W. Huang and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700005 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, J. Mei, Q. Liu, S. Wang, W. Li, S. Xing, J. Bai, J. Yang, W. Luo, O. Guselnikova, A. P. O'Mullane, Y. Gu, Y. Yamauchi, T. Liao and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 808–817 RSC .
P. Li, J. Lu, H. Cui, S. Ruan and Y.-J. Zeng, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 2483–2509 RSC .
Y. Yuan, Y. Lu, B. E. Jia, H. Tang, L. Chen, Y. J. Zeng, Y. Hou, Q. Zhang, Q. He, L. Jiao, J. Leng, Z. Ye and J. Lu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, F. Feng and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5157–5183 RSC .
B. Mendoza-Sánchez, D. Hanlon, J. Coelho, S. O. Brien, H. Pettersson, J. Coleman and V. Nicolosi, 2D Mater., 2016, 4, 015005 CrossRef .
P. Xiong, R. Ma, N. Sakai and T. Sasaki, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1768–1777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He and W. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 150–158 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kundu, C. C. Ng, D. Y. Petrovykh and L. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8459–8461 RSC .
Y. Zhao, G. Chen, C. Yan, C. Lv, R. Wang and J. Sun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 106206–106212 RSC .
P. Xiong, X. Zhang, F. Zhang, D. Yi, J. Zhang, B. Sun, H. Tian, D. Shanmukaraj, T. Rojo, M. Armand, R. Ma, T. Sasaki and G. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12337–12346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qu, S. Yang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5574–5580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, S. Li, D. Wu, F. Zhang, H. Liang, P. Gao, C. Cheng and X. Feng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8349–8356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, G. Du, K. Ståhl, H. Huang, Y. Zhong and J. Z. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4000–4011 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, M. F. Ng, H. B. Wu, L. Zhang and X. W. Lou, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5133–5136 RSC .
H. Zhang, L. Gao and Y. Gong, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 52, 67–70 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. P. Camacho, R. Tian, J. Liu, S. Zhou, A. Wu and H. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 394, 139121 CrossRef CAS .
R. Syamsai, J. R. Rodriguez, V. G. Pol and A. N. Grace, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 565, 197–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bisht, A. Kumar, I. T. Jensen, M. Ahmad, B. D. Belle and B. R. Mehta, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 341, 129953 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sricharan, B. Gupta, S. Moolayadukkam and H. Matte, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2020, 11, 662–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, Z. Hai, M. K. Akbari, D. Qi, K. Xing, Q. Zhao, F. Verpoort, J. Hu, L. Hyde and S. Zhuiykov, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 262, 334–344 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, H. Song, S. Lin, Y. Zhou, X. Zhan, Z. Hu, Q. Zhang, J. Sun, B. Yang, T. Li, L. Jiao, J. Zhou, J. Tang and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qi, S. Ruan and Y. J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, S. Ruan and Y. J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900065 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Xu, R. Ma, T. Sasaki, Y. J. Zeng, S. Ruan and Y. Hou, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 841–848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structure of orthorhombic MoO3 and orthorhombic V2O5.42,58 Copyright 2013, Wiley. And 2015, WIREs Computational Molecular Science. (b) Thermodynamically stable orthorhombic α-MoO3 and metastable monoclinic β-MoO3.60 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Different layered perovskites.15,59 Copyright 2002, American Chemical Society. And 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Structure of MoO3 from above, viewing the a–c plane (top), and from the side, viewing the b–c plane (bottom). (b) TEM and HRTEM images of typical very small, small, and large MoO3 nanosheets. The crystallographic directions are indicated in the panels. (c) Representative AFM height images of vs-MoO3, s-MoO3, and l-MoO3, respectively.38 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) SEM, TEM, HRTEM, and AFM of 2D b-Ga2O3 nanosheets.61 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Typical AFM image and profile of hydrated WO3 sheets. A minimum thickness of 2.8 nm can be observed.49 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (f) Exfoliation of layered bulk V2O5 into {001}-oriented few-layer V2O5 nanosheets. (g) The TEM image and the corresponding colloidal acetone dispersion. (h) HRTEM and the corresponding selected area electron diffraction. (i) AFM image and the corresponding height profile.52 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Polyhedron structures for the TiO2 polymorphs including rutile, anatase, brookite, columbite, baddeleyite, cotunnite, pyrite, fluorite, and tridymite. Ti and O atoms are represented by big blue and small red spheres, respectively.117 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Tilt patterns of the different polymorphs of WO3.122 Copyright 2000, IUCR. (c) Crystal structure of the refined CuO unit cell, and side views of relaxed {101}, {001}, {011}, {010}, {110}, and {100} crystal planes of CuO.123 Copyright 2015, Scientific Reports. (d) Structure model of ZnO, showing the ±(0001) polar surfaces.119 Copyright 2004, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the hexagonal unit cell and the rhombohedral primitive cell of α-Fe2O3.124 Copyright 2014, Minerals.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Morphological and structural analysis of the 2D-Al2O3 nanosheets.86 Copyright 2016, Wiley. (b) Crystal structure of 5-atom-thick oxygen-defect In2O3.63 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) FESEM images, TEM image, HRTEM image, and HRTEM image of NiO nanosheets.76 Copyright 2014, Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Mechanical exfoliation of 2D materials using sticky tape. (b) Selected representations of α-MoO3: the formation of secondary crystallite networks of edge- and corner-sharing MoO6 octahedra viewed along different crystallographic planes.46 Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Characterization of MoO3 and MoO(3−x) flakes and the configuration of FETs.43 Copyright 2013, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Ion intercalation.131 Copyright 2011, Science. (b) Electrochemical lithiation process for the fabrication of 2D nanosheets from the layered bulk material.126 Copyright 2011, Wiley. (c) Ion exchange. (d) Sonication-assisted exfoliation.131 Copyright 2011, Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Laser thinning diagram and light microscope image before and after scanning laser.132 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of the preparation processes of the four samples. Ni: blue balls, O: pink balls, H: cyan balls. (c) TEM images and HRTEM images of 2DA and 2DPA.78 Copyright 2018, Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM architecture of WO3 films on glass and SnO2:F substrates at different annealing temperatures: Tsub = RT, Tanne = 200 °C, and Tanne = 300 °C.50 Copyright 2007, Elsevier. (b) Experimental setup describing the liquid phase H+ intercalation process, and SEM images of MoO3 crystal morphologies on quartz substrates at temperatures of 560 °C, 520 °C, 460 °C, and 350 °C.43 Copyright 2013, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Transmittance spectra of CVD MoO3–WO3 film, deposited on a big conductive glass substrate and annealed at different temperatures for 1 h. (b) Transmittance spectra of CVD MoO3–WO3 film deposited on a 75/75 mm conductive glass substrate and annealed at different temperatures for 1 and 2 h. (c) UV-Vis spectra of CVD MoO3–Cr2O3 films, obtained at an oxygen content of 1/16 (solid line) and 1/32 (dotted line), respectively. The films are as-deposited and after annealing at 500 °C for 1 and 2 h. The substrates are ordinary glass. (d) Raman spectra of CVD MoO3–Cr2O3 films, grown at an oxygen content of 1/16 and 1/32 and annealed at 500 °C/1 h. The substrates used are ordinary glasses.137 Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Responses of as-synthesized ZnO-x to various VOCs (100 ppm) with an inset showing a ZnO single layer TEM image.111 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram describing the formation process of spinel-type 2D oxide nanosheets; photographs of as-prepared γ-Ga2O3, ZnGa2O4, and MnGa2O4 samples; crystal structural unit of spinel-type oxide and its 2D nanosheet model.141 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Typical low-magnification TEM images of γ-Ga2O3, ZnGa2O4, and MnGa2O4 nanosheets, and their corresponding high-resolution TEM images and FFT patterns. STEM image of ZnGa2O4 nanosheet and its corresponding Zn, Ga, and O elemental mappings; EDS spectrum and XRD pattern of ZnGa2O4 nanosheets. The inset is the enlarged HRTEM image of γ-Ga2O3 nanosheets taken along the [111] zone axis.141 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) SEM image, TEM image, HRTEM image, and corresponding SAED pattern (inset) of the prepared VO2(B) nanosheets of the prepared VO2(B) bulk and VO2(B) nanosheets.142 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The synthesis, morphology, and structure of α-Fe2O3 nanosheets.149 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the formation of 2D holey ACNs and their advantages for ion transport.150 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematics of the band structure of n-type and p-type semiconductors. (b) Schemes of common doping mechanisms with host cations (orange spheres) and anions (red spheres) and corresponding examples of n- and p-type-doped semiconductor systems. Three common donor doping types are (i) aliovalent substitutional impurities, (ii) vacancies, and (iii) interstitial impurities.143 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) UV-vis-NIR spectrum of WO3−x NPLs in CCl4. The inset shows a photograph of WO3x NPLs in CHCl3. Dependence of the λLSPR maximum on the index of refraction of solvent (330 nm RIU−1).162 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) UV-vis-NIR spectra of ITO NPs doped with 3–10 and 15–30% Sn. Dependence of the SPR peaks of ITO NPs on the doped %Sn. The peak wavelengths of 5, 8, 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30% Sn-doped ITO NPs were 1940, 1772, 1618, 1626, 1650, 1782, and 1836 nm, respectively. NIR spectra of 8% Sn-doped ITO NPs.163 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (e) UV-vis-NIR spectra of spherical FICO NCs dispersed in CCl4. The percentage of the InF3 precursor and the metal-to-oleic acid molar ratios (M:OA) used for NC synthesis are indicated on the graph.165 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) Optical absorbance spectra of equimolar dispersion of {(I) 0.64, 0; (II) 0.62, 0.27; (III) 0.57, 0.34; (IV) 0.55, 0.62; (V) 0.52, 0.78; (VI) 0.49, 0.94; (VII) 0.45, 1.23; (VIII) 0.41, 1.54; (IX) 0.33, 1.73; (X) 0.31, 2.1} % Sn and Cd co-doped ZnO NCs.164 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SERS spectra of MB. (b) Phase-dependent Raman intensity at 1620 cm−1 of MB molecules on three different phases of VO2 substrate.142 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SERS spectra of R6G coated on 2D-MoO2 nanosheets with various concentrations from 10−4 to 10−7 M.27 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Illustration of the operation principle of a representative 2D MnO2 upconversion particle FRET-based optical biosensor in the presence of glucose oxidase and glucose.228 Copyright 2016, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Volcano plot of transition metal oxides catalysts for oxygen evolution showing activity for O2 production (η) on transition metal oxide surfaces vs. the enthalpy of transition (ΔHfo) of the oxide in acidic (●) and basic (○) solutions. Overpotential measured relative to 0.1 mA cm−2 current density.59 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Raman spectra and XRD patterns of commercial MoO3, MoO3−x (49 mmol), MoO3−x (69 mmol), and MoO3−x (88 mmol), respectively. Selected XRD pattern of the (040) peaks.26 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Charge/discharge profiles of G@SnO2, G@SnO2@C at a current density of 200 mA g−1 in a voltage window of 0.01–3.00 V: the discharge curves in the 1st, 5th, 10th, and 50th cycles. Reversible charge/discharge capacities against cycle number for G@Fe3O4 and G@Fe3O4@C at a current density of 200 mA g−1 in the voltage window of 0.01–3.00 V; rate performance of G@Fe3O4 and G@Fe3O4@C electrodes at a rate of 200, 500, 1000, 2000, and 5000 mA g−1.265 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (b) Lithium storage performance of the MnO2/graphene superlattice. Sodium storage performance of the MnO2/graphene superlattice.259 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

SnO2	Microwave-assisted solution-phase growth	Scalable, ultrarapid, simple, time-saving, and high quality	Lithium storage	A high reversible capacity of 757.6 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 in 40 cycles	
104

Hydrothermal	Large-scale, highly pure and low efficiency	Lithium storage	The discharge and charge capacities in the second cycle are 936 and 872 mA h g−1, respectively	
266

MoO3	PLD	High quality and cost	Sensor	Higher response of about 25% at a lower temperature. Lower detection limits (up to 100 ppb)	
271

ALD	High controllability, quality, yield and cost	Sensor	Great sensitivity of 168.72 μA mM−1 cm−2. The lowest detection limit of 0.076 μM at a signal to noise ratio of 3. Ultra-fast response/recovery time of ∼2.0 s	
273

Liquid-phase exfoliation	Low cost and scalable	Supercapacitor	Relatively low capacitance (2 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1). MoO3/nanotube composites displayed 540 F g−1 at 0.1 mV s−1	
38

Soft chemical exfoliation	Simple and moderate, low efficiency and high cost	Supercapacitor	MoO3/carbon black composites displayed 201 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1 in a three-electrode system. High stability for 2000 cycles with 94% capacitance retention in a two-electrode system	
272

Template	General, scalable and high quality	Supercapacitor	Achieved 300 F cm−3 at 5 mV s−1 in the Al2(SO4)3 electrolyte. For organic electrolytes, capacities as high as 996 C g−1 and 1100 C cm−3 were obtained at a sweep rate of 2 mV s−1	
274

Heat treatment routes	Simple and excellent performance	Lithium storage	High reversible specific discharge capacity of ∼540 mA h g−1 at 0.2C-rate with 99.9% coulombic efficiency as well as 63% capacity retention after 200 charge–discharge cycles	
270

Liquid exfoliation	Versatile, scalable and high quality	Lithium storage	High reversible capacities of 1110 mA h g−1 (3.0 to 0.01 V) and 841 mA h g−1 (2.0 to 0.01 V)	
268

Solvothermal	Simple and high ability	Photocatalyst	Enhanced performance in the photodegradation of dyes and tetracycline	
26

Liquid exfoliation	Environmentally friendly and high quality	Photocatalyst	Make a rapid decolorization for the dye molecules in less than 10 min	
32

Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
