Photofunctional triplet excited states of cyclometalated Ir( iii ) complexes: beyond electroluminescence  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35171D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35171D
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7061-7084Photofunctional triplet excited states of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes: beyond electroluminescence

        
          
            Youngmin 
            You
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Wonwoo 
            Nam
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Bioinspired Science, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Korea. E-mail: odds2@ewha.ac.kr; wwnam@ewha.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-2-3277-4441;   Tel: +82-2-3277-2392
Received 
      15th December 2011
    First published on 16th July 2012AbstractThe development of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes has enabled important breakthroughs in electroluminescence because such complexes permit the efficient population of triplet excited states that give rise to luminescent transitions. The triplet states of Ir(III) complexes are advantageous over those of other transition metal complexes in that their electronic transitions and charge-transfer characteristics are tunable over wide ranges. These favorable properties suggest that Ir(III) complexes have significant potential in a variety of photofunctions other than electroluminescence. In this critical review, we describe recent photonic applications of novel Ir(III) complexes. Ir(III) complexes have been shown to affect the exciton statistics in the active layers of organic photovoltaic cells, thereby improving the photon-to-current conversion efficiencies. Nonlinear optical applications that take advantage of the strong charge-transfer properties of triplet transitions are also discussed. The tunability of the electrochemical potentials facilitates the development of efficient photocatalysis in the context of water photolysis or organic syntheses. The photoredox reactivities of Ir(III) complexes have been employed in studies of charge migration along DNA chains. The photoinduced cytotoxicity of Ir(III) complexes on live cells suggests that the complexes may be useful in photodynamic therapy. Potential biological applications of the complexes include phosphorescence labeling and sensing. Intriguing platforms based on cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes potentially provide novel protein tagging and ratiometric detection. We envision that future research into the photofunctionality of Ir(III) complexes will provide important breakthroughs in a variety of photonic applications.
Youngmin You
Youngmin You received BS (Magna Cum Laude) and MS degrees in Chemical Engineering from Seoul National University, Korea. He then moved to Department of Materials Science and Engineering at SNU and earned his PhD under the supervision of Professor Soo Young Park in 2007. After a postdoctoral stay at Lippard Lab in MIT, he joined Research Center for Bioredox Systems at Ewha Womans University as a Research Professor. His research is at the borderline between chemistry and materials science, and his research interest is discovery and creation of new photofunctional molecules.
Wonwoo Nam
Wonwoo Nam received his BS (Honors) degree in Chemistry from California State University, Los Angeles, and his PhD degree in Inorganic Chemistry from UCLA under the direction of Professor Joan S. Valentine in 1990. After one year postdoctoral experience at UCLA, he became an Assistant Professor at Hong Ik University in 1991. He moved to Ewha Womans University in 1994, where he is presently a Distinguished Professor of Ewha Womans University. His current research focuses on the dioxygen activation, water oxidation, and sensors for metal ions in bioinorganic chemistry.
I. Introduction
The early works of Watts and Güdel1–9 stimulated a surge of research interest in the development of phosphorescent cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes due to breakthroughs in the use of Ir(III) complexes to boost the performances of organic electroluminescence devices. A nearly 100% internal quantum efficiency for the conversion of electric energy to photons was achieved.10–29 Optimal electroluminescence efficiencies were obtained from devices employing cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes as emitting materials.30–32 These achievements were made possible by the ability of Ir(III) complexes to utilize triplet and singlet excitons for photon conversion through the highly efficient spin–orbit coupling (SOC) provided by the Ir(III) center.
The success in electroluminescence has inspired extensive efforts toward the development of a variety of Ir(III) complexes. These investigations have furthered our understanding of the molecular parameters that govern the triplet excited states associated with phosphorescence emission.33–37 In particular, previous studies established the structure−property relationships that enabled the realization of high-efficiency phosphorescence emission over a wide spectral coverage spanning the near UV to the near IR. The tunability of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes distinguishes the complexes from other d-block organometallic compounds. A variety of synthetic protocols have also been developed which permit a diversity of functionalization. As is typical of organometallic cyclometalates, Ir(III) complexes are chemically and thermally stable, and their properties are minimally attenuated under prolonged photoirradiation and repetitive electrochemical cycling. These features are potentially useful for achieving the efficient conversion of triplet excited state energy into a variety of photonic applications.
Once the properties of Ir(III) complexes became well-understood, researchers sought to use the triplet states in photoelectronic fields other than electroluminescence. For instance, Ir(III) complexes serve as highly efficient photosensitizers for photo-driven water splitting.38 In another example, organic photovoltaic cells were fabricated based on the long-lived triplet excitons of Ir(III) complexes.39,40 These attempts were promising and motivate the exploration of Ir(III) complex photofunctionalities. This critical review describes several novel applications of Ir(III) complexes in emerging fields, including photoenergy conversion, nonlinear optics, and photocatalysis. The principles and key ideas of these applications are explained in terms of molecular control. Finally, discoveries with biological utility are described. Reviews of phosphorescence control33,35–37,41–52 and applications in bioimaging, sensing,53–63 and displays35,64,65 have been published previously. The interested reader is encouraged to read these reviews. We hope that this critical review will stimulate future efforts toward enhancing the photofunctional utility of Ir(III) complexes.
This critical review begins with a brief introduction to the syntheses, structures, and photophysics of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes. Novel ideas and recent examples of photonic applications are then presented in the following order: photovoltaics, nonlinear optics, water photolysis, photocatalysis, biological activities, and biosensing.
1. Synthesis and structure
Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes possess a pseudo-octahedral coordination geometry, in which three monoanionic bidentate ligands occupy the six coordination sites of the Ir atom. Cyclometalating ligands (C∧N), such as 2-phenylpyridinate, bind to the Ir(III) core to form penta- or hexa-membered metallacycles. Similar to the bonds of other cyclometalated transition metal complexes, the Ir−ligand bonds are kinetically inert and as strong as covalent bonds due to the cyclic structure and the presence of strong σ bonds. Standard organic chemistry techniques can therefore be employed in the purification and handling of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes. Post-synthetic modifications of the complexes can be readily carried out without affecting the coordination structures.
Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes are typically synthesized via a standard two-step procedure (Scheme 1). The first step, the Nonoyama reaction,66 involves the preparation of a bis μ-chloro dinuclear Ir(III) complex by refluxing an aqueous alcoholic solution containing a cyclometalating proligand (HC∧N) and IrCl3·xH2O. The chlorides in the Ir(III) dimer are then substituted with a third ligand in the presence of base or chloride scavengers to afford the tris- or bis-cyclometalated mononuclear Ir(III) complex. If the third ligand is identical to the ligands bound to the bis μ-chloro Ir(III) dimer, the resulting complex is homoleptic. The complex is heteroleptic if the third ligand is different. The preparation of homoleptic Ir(III) complexes requires high reaction temperatures and viscous solvent systems such as glycerol. A homoleptic Ir(III) complex possesses two geometric isomers, the facial (fac) and meridional (mer) forms, which have N,N-cis and N,N-trans configurations, respectively (Scheme 1). The coexistence of the two isomers is quite common. The kinetic product (mer) can be transformed into a thermodynamic product (fac) by applying heat or photoexcitation.22 In contrast, heteroleptic Ir(III) complexes are free from isomeric contamination by the strong preference of the N,N-trans configurations. As an extra benefit, the synthesis of heteroleptic Ir(III) complexes requires mild reaction conditions, thereby enabling the use of a variety of ligand structures. The charges on the Ir(III) complexes can be controlled by choosing an appropriate third ligand, such as a neutral N∧N diimine, a dianionic C∧C ligand, or a monoanionic C∧N ligand. The synthetic versatility is beneficial for integrating functional moieties; thus, this platform is suitable for a broad range of applications.
 Scheme 1  Syntheses and structures of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes. 
Complementing the classical methods described above, synthetic protocols have been developed for the preparation of nontraditional Ir(III) cyclometalate scaffolds. The principal goal of such efforts was to increase the phosphorescence quantum yield, to obtain blue phosphorescence emission, or to permit post-synthetic modifications. One notable approach employed aryl phosphite derivatives, P(OAr)3, as the cyclometalating ligands. The high π-backbonding properties resulted in the coordination of the phosphine moieties to stabilize the t2g orbitals of the Ir complexes, leading to deep blue phosphorescence emission; however, the poor synthetic versatility prevented the introduction of a phosphine atom into the cyclometalating ligand frameworks. The Chi and Chou groups established synthetic routes to cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes comprising phosphite ligands.67–69 Bis-cyclometalation occurred between Ir and the P(OPh)3 ligand to produce a facial-type intermediate in which the phosphine atom and two carbon atoms of the phosphite ligand were positioned on the same face of an octahedron (Scheme 2a). The intermediate compound then further reacted with a variety of ligands to yield neutral and cationic cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes (Scheme 2a). In an alternative approach, the chlorides were substituted with phosphine and phosphite in the bis μ-chloro Ir(III) dimer in the presence of silver triflate (AgOTf) (Scheme 2b).70 Although the substitution reaction appeared to be sensitive to the stoichiometry and reaction steps, a series of blue phosphorescent Ir(III) complexes could be prepared.
 Scheme 2  Synthetic approaches and structures of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes containing phosphite (a and b) and terdentate ligands (c–g). 
The cyclometalation of terdentate ligands presented another notable nontraditional approach to preparing Ir(III) complexes with unusual properties. Unlike the traditional tris-cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes, bis-cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes with terdentate ligands did not form isomers. In addition, the one-dimensional chelate configuration of the ligand−Ir−ligand structure enabled strategic control over charge-transfer in the excited states. Williams and co-workers subjected a monoanionic 1,3-di(2-pyridyl)-4,6-dimethylbenzene terdentate (N∧C∧N) ligand to the Nonoyama conditions. The reaction furnished a bis μ-chloro Ir(III) dimer containing two additional chlorides at either Ir(III) center (Scheme 2c). The Ir(III) dimer could be cleaved by a variety of ligands to produce neutral [Ir(N∧C∧N)(C∧N∧C)],71 [Ir(N∧C∧N)(C∧N∧O)],72 and [Ir(N∧C∧N)(C∧N)Cl]72 complexes, as well as the monocationic [Ir(N∧C∧N)(N∧N∧C)]+73,74 and dicationic [Ir(N∧C∧N)(N∧N∧N)]2+75 complexes. Alternatively, [Ir(N∧C∧N)(N∧N∧N)]2+ complexes could be obtained via a stable mononuclear [IrCl3(N∧N∧N)] intermediate (Scheme 2d).76 A terdentate ligand was reported to exist in two rotational forms, C∧N∧N and N∧N∧N, that underwent a cyclometalation reaction with IrCl3 to yield a mixture of [Ir(C∧N∧N)(N∧N∧N)]2+ and [Ir(C∧N∧N)2]+ complexes (Scheme 2e).77
The cyclometalation of the dianionic terdentate C∧C∧N ligands was investigated by Koga, Matsubara, and co-workers.78 The reaction between pyridylbiphenylene and [IrCl(cod)]2 (cod = cis,cis-1,5-cyclooctadiene) yielded a charge-neutral mononuclear Ir(III) complex of [IrCl(cod)(C∧C∧N)] (Scheme 2f). Subsequent treatment with 2,2′-bipyridine and a C∧N∧N ligand produced a monocyclometalated [IrCl(C∧N∧N)(N∧N)] complex and a biscyclometalated [Ir(C∧C∧N)(C∧N∧N)] complex, respectively. Cyclometalation of the C∧N∧C ligands was also achieved.79,80 Scandola and co-workers employed a charge-neutral [IrCl3(N∧N∧N)] complex in which chloride ions were displaced by a C∧N∧C ligand in the presence of AgNO3 (Scheme 2g). These recent demonstrations promise the construction of platforms that permit topological and photophysical tuning. Still, the cyclometalation potential of a broad range of ligand structures remains unexplored, and future synthetic studies may yield promising results.
2. Photophysics of the cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes

(1) Photoexcitation to the excited states. 
The strong electronic interactions through the Ir core favor the delocalization of frontier molecular orbitals of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes over the entire molecule. Photoexcitation, therefore, initiates a multitude of photophysical steps. Fig. 1 illustrates the simplest case of a prototypical cyclometalated homoleptic Ir(III) complex, fac-iridium tris(2-phenylpyridinato) (fac-Ir(ppy)3).81 The molecular orbitals participating in photoexcitation to the lowest triplet state were obtained using quantum chemical calculations employing time-dependent density functional theory.82 In the case of fac-Ir(ppy)3, the triplet state arose principally from electronic transitions from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). The former was delocalized over the t2g orbital of Ir and the π orbitals of 2-phenylpyridinate, whereas the latter exclusively involved the π* orbitals of 2-phenylpyridinate (Fig. 1). Photoexcitation accordingly promoted at least two electronic transitions, which could be characterized as Ir → ligand (MLCT, metal-to-ligand charge-transfer) and ligand-centered (LC) transitions. In addition to these transitions, strong SOC exerted by the Ir core facilitated triplet MLCT and LC transitions, yielding four electronic states: the singlet and triplet MLCT (1MLCT and 3MLCT) or LC (1LC and 3LC) transition states.
 Fig. 1  Structure and isodensity plot of the frontier molecular orbitals of fac-Ir(ppy)3. 
Typically, 1LC transitions are higher in energy than 1MLCT transitions. Because the exchange energy (i.e., Esinglet − Etriplet) of a LC transition is usually larger than that of a MLCT transition, 3MLCT transition bands are observed between the 1MLCT and 3LC bands. The energetic ordering of the four transitions is, therefore, 1LC > 1MLCT > 3MLCT > 3LC. 3LC transition bands are not commonly observed in the room-temperature UV-vis absorption spectrum due to significant overlap with the phosphorescence spectrum. It should be stressed, however, that the classification of transitions as MLCT or LC is an oversimplification. In most cases, the lowest triplet state is best described as a combination of MLCT and LC transition states (vide infra). TD-DFT calculation studies that consider relativistic effects demonstrated that the lowest triplet transition increased its oscillator strength through configuration interaction (CI) with the higher energy singlet LC states.83–90 This suggests the preparation of a hybrid triplet state. Recent quantum chemical studies based on multiconfigurational self-consistent field orbitals (MCSCF) and second-order configurational interactions (SOCIs) permitted estimation of the degree of hybridization in the triplet excited states.86
Despite the complex nature of the triplet states, several phenomenological guidelines have been employed to distinguish the dominance of the MLCT or LC nature in the triplet states. For instance, MLCT phosphorescence is characterized by a structureless spectrum with strong solvatochromism and rigidochromism.26 These spectral features arise from the susceptibility of the charge-transfer emission to the electronic environment around a photoexcited molecule.91,92 Another feature typical of MLCT phosphorescence is a relatively short phosphorescence lifetime (τp). Tsuboyama and co-workers compared the phosphorescence behaviors of a variety of homoleptic cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes and categorized the transitions as MLCT or LC.93 On the basis of their study, it was proposed that a triplet state could be described as a linear combination of pure MLCT and LC transition states.
Unlike organic chromophores, parallel approaches may be used to tune the excited-state energies of Ir(III) complexes. This versatility originates from the hybrid nature of the triplet state, prepared from varying contributions of the MLCT and the LC transition states. Several studies have identified the molecular parameters that govern the energies of MLCT and LC transition states.93–104 The LC transition state energy is principally tuned via ligand structure control. Band gap theory provides the simplest framework for understanding LC energy tuning; ligands with long conjugation lengths produce bathochromic shifts. Many red phosphorescent Ir(III) complexes possess ligand structures with narrow band gaps, such as 2-(2-pyridyl)benzothiophene26 and dibenzo[f,h]quinoxaline.105 Alternatively, electronic effects invoked by electron-donating or -withdrawing substituents can significantly affect the frontier orbital energies, thereby controlling the triplet state energy. In most cases, phosphorescence color tuning via ligand structure control mainly occurs through LUMO control.
Another method for tuning the triplet state energy involves altering the t2g orbital of an Ir(III) complex. Ligands with strong ligand-field strength energies (LFSE) can selectively stabilize the t2g orbital, leaving the π* orbitals relatively unaltered. Accordingly, the MLCT transition energy increases to produce a hypsochromic shift (Fig. 2). The studies performed by the research groups of Grätzel,94 Ma,106 Holmes,107 and Thompson21 demonstrated efficient phosphorescence color tuning by employing ancillary ligands with a range of spectroelectrochemical series. This tuning method is attractive because one can control the HOMO energy without altering the LUMO, which is localized on the cyclometalating ligands. The utility of this approach was further demonstrated by the achievement of efficient deep blue phosphorescence emission from Ir(III) complexes involving high-field N-heterocyclic carbene ligands.108
 Fig. 2  MLCT state energy tuning via frontier molecular orbital control. 
In addition to the LC and MLCT transition states, other electronic transitions, such as an intraligand charge-transfer (ILCT) transition, can be promoted if the electronic structure of the cyclometalating ligands permits such transitions. The ILCT transition is normally observed in ligands with donor–acceptor electronic structures.109–115 Similar to the LC transition state, ILCT transitions are ligand-localized. The large charge displacement is thought to produce a low-energy ILCT transition state near the singlet LC and MLCT transition states; however, strong interactions with other electronic states complicate the spectroscopic identification and characterization of ILCT states.


(2) Excited state photophysics. 
The photophysical processes of typical cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes are schematically depicted in Fig. 3. Photoexcitation promotes population of the LC and MLCT transition states. These two electronic states are strongly coupled because they share a common LUMO located on the cyclometalating ligand. Internal conversion (IC) in fac-Ir(ppy)3 from the high-lying 1LC transition state to the low-lying 1MLCT state occurs with a time constant greater than 100 fs.116 Because the 1MLCT transition state is heavily influenced by the Ir core through SOC, the transition state undergoes highly efficient intersystem crossing (ISC) to the triplet MLCT transition state (3MLCT).116 Extensive studies have investigated the kinetics of ISC. Samuel and co-workers measured the ultrafast ISC process in fac-Ir(ppy)3, which is found to have a time constant of less than 100 fs.117,118 This time scale is shorter than that of IC (>100 fs), indicating that the ISC process is not a rate-determining step in the excited-state process. In fact, the ISC rates were comparable to those of Ru(II) complexes,119–122 indicating efficient SOC. The ultrafast generation of a triplet excited state was explained based on the fact that the magnitude of SOC was proportional to the fourth power of the atomic number.123 The one-electron SOC constant (ζc) of Ir was 3909 cm−1, greater than the constants of Ru(II) (990 cm−1) and Rh(III) (1425 cm−1) and comparable to the values of Os(II) (3531 cm−1) and Pt(II) (4000 cm−1).124,125
 Fig. 3  (a) Excited state photophysics of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes, and (b) the construction of excited states via molecular orbital interactions: MC, metal-centered ligand-field state; LC, ligand-centered state; MLCT, metal-to-ligand charge-transfer state; LL′CT, ligand-to-ligand charge-transfer state; ILCT, intraligand charge-transfer state; IC, internal conversion; ISC, intersystem crossing; IVR, intramolecular vibrational redistribution. L and L′ denote different ligands of a heteroleptic Ir(III) complex. 
The 3MLCT transition states are non-degenerate due to the symmetry-reducing influence of the ligand structures and the local environment. In the case of fac-Ir(ppy)3, three 3MLCT substates, ΓIII, ΓII, and ΓI, were produced with a zero-field splitting (ZFS) energy of 170 cm−1.81 All three substates contributed to phosphorescence, but their photodynamics differed markedly. Yersin and co-workers revealed that the radiative time constant of the highest-lying ΓIII substate was ca. 1 μs, whereas that of the lowest-lying ΓI substate was 0.1 ms.126 Typical phosphorescence lifetimes of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes are in the range of 100–101 μs; therefore, the ΓIII substate was thought to dominate in the radiative transition. This was explained in terms of the configuration interaction, which predicted that the high-lying ΓIII substate hybridized more strongly with singlet excited states, such as the 1LC transition state. Hybridization resulted in intensity borrowing from the singlet states, facilitating an electronic transition to the ground state. This rationale further inferred that more efficient radiative transitions were at higher values of ZFS (i.e., for a ΓIII substate closer to the singlet states). Theoretical studies by Powell and co-workers showed that the radiative rate constant was inversely proportional to the fourth power of the energy difference between the S3 state and the lowest triplet state.90,127
Successive IC and ISC processes to the ΓIII substate are followed by population redistribution over three 3MLCT substates via the combined effects of solvent-assisted cooling and intramolecular vibrational redistribution (IVR). IVR involves an energy transfer from vibrationally hot modes to lower frequency modes.117 Powell and co-workers recently revealed that IVR and cooling processes are slower than ISC and IC.90 Therefore, the rate-determining step before the radiative transition was a thermal redistribution process.
Heteroleptic Ir(III) complexes exhibit complex photophysics because the third ligand (L′) enables additional L′C and ML′CT transitions in addition to a ligand-to-ligand charge-transfer (LL′CT) transition (see Fig. 3); the LL′CT process is described in detail in recent reviews.34,44,46 Despite this complexity, the heteroleptic structure permits facile phosphorescence color tuning. Because the phosphorescent transition energy is mainly determined by a global LUMO energy, the lowest-energy ligand among the three ligands dominates the phosphorescence transition. Therefore, the incorporation of low-band gap ancillary ligands into heteroleptic constructs should produce bathochromic shifts in the phosphorescence spectra.101,103,104,128 The migration of excited state energy from high-energy ligands to low-energy ligands is thought to underlie the photophysical mechanism, although the timescale of the migration remains under debate.129 It should be noted that phosphorescence color tuning via ligand control benefits from the limited access to the high-lying metal-centered ligand-field state (MC in Fig. 3; i.e., t2g → eg) involved in phosphorescence quenching.130 This tunability contrasts sharply with the limited photophysical controllability of Ru(II) polyimine complexes with low-lying MC states.
In addition to radiative decay, a multitude of non-radiative decay processes is available to the triplet excited states of Ir(III) complexes. Non-radiative decays can be categorized into two groups, depending on the temperature effects. Temperature-independent decay occurs via direct crossing between two potential energy surfaces of the triplet state and the ground state. These transitions are commonly observed when huge structural deformations are allowed in the excited states, such as photochromism or twisted intramolecular charge-transfer transitions (TICT). Vibrational coupling to the ground state provides additional routes to dissipate the excited state energy. High-frequency stretching modes in the Ir–ligand bonds or C–C bonds in the cyclometalating ligand framework are attributed to vibrational coupling. These non-radiative routes can be effectively suppressed by employing rigid ligand frameworks. Non-radiative decay also occurs through temperature-dependent equilibration to a metal-centered ligand-field state (MC) (Fig. 4). Non-emissive MC states of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes are high-energy states; therefore, MC states are not accessible at room temperature in green- and red-phosphorescent Ir(III) complexes. However, the states may be reached through the high-energy 3MLCT states of blue- and near-UV-emitting Ir(III) complexes. Thompson and co-workers revealed the presence of thermal processes that populated the 3MC state associated with weak blue phosphorescence emission.108 They proposed that rupture of the Ir–N bond in a cyclometalating ligand occurred under photoexcitation, and the resulting geometry change favored the 3MC state as the dominant triplet state.130 This conclusion was consistent with the theoretical studies by the Ortí and Accorsi group, which showed strong antibonding orbital interactions (dσ*) between the Ir–N bonds in the excited state.131
 Fig. 4  Temperature-dependent population of the non-radiative 3MC state. 


(3) Photophysics in condensed states. 
The photophysical processes of Ir(III) complexes are easily affected by the surrounding media. Phase transitions (rigidochromism) and polarity changes (solvatochromism) often accompany spectral shifts in the phosphorescence emission. These observations may be explained on the basis of dipolar stabilization of the triplet state, the extent of which varies depending on the properties of the medium. In addition to environmental effects, phosphorescence changes may be evoked through intermolecular interactions among the excited Ir(III) complexes. In fact, phosphorescent Ir(III) complexes are susceptible to such interactions because they have long excited-state lifetimes. Excited state homodimers (excimers) and heterodimers (exciplexes) are typically observed in condensed states. Although these species show weak emission, their emission is bathochromically shifted relative to monomeric emission. Forrest and co-workers took advantage of this shift to produce white electroluminescence from a single Ir(III) complex in the solid state.132
If the molecular packing permits significant orbital interactions in the ground state, aggregate emission may be produced. The photophysics of aggregate emission differs from the photoprocesses of excimers and exciplexes because ground state interactions are involved. Aggregation-induced electronic perturbations are expected to accompany UV-vis absorption changes. Huang and co-workers reported the interesting phenomenon of ‘aggregation-induced phosphorescence emission’ in cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes.133 The phosphorescence intensities of powder and micro-aggregate suspensions improved tremendously relative to the solution-state emission. The crystal packing structures and DFT calculations suggested that through-space molecular interactions occurred between adjacent molecules to produce a strongly phosphorescent electronic state. The generation of new electronic states via intermolecular interactions is reminiscent of photophysics in square-planar organometallic compounds, such as the metal–metal-to-ligand charge-transfer (MMLCT) transition states of cyclometalated Pt(II) complexes.134–136
The extent of intermolecular electronic coupling is sensitive to the spatial arrangements of molecules. Special molecular packing modes, such as H- (face-to-face) and J (head-to-tail)-type aggregates, and their unique photoluminescence properties have been extensively studied in the context of organic fluorophores.137–140 The nearly spherical molecular shape of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes, however, is not expected to favor the formation of unidirectional aggregates. Still, it is possible that the complexes crystallize with a particular supramolecular order in which the cyclometalating ligands perturb the inherent electronic transitions. A recent report by Su, Liao, and co-workers described the unprecedented piezochromism of cyclometalated cationic Ir(III) complexes (Fig. 5).141 The compounds displayed bathochromic shifts in their phosphorescence emission upon grinding under shear stress. The original phosphorescence was then restored by heating or recrystallization. Powder XRD, DSC, and NMR studies suggested that phase transitions between the crystalline and amorphous states were responsible for the piezochromic phosphorescence changes.
 Fig. 5  Piezochromic phosphorescence changes in the cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes: phosphorescence emission of (a) B1 and (b) Y1 powders before and after grinding, and the corresponding phosphorescence spectral changes (c and d). Reproduced from Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2000−2002. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to the intermolecular photophysical processes, hazardous intramolecular effects may be suppressed in the aggregated states. A representative example is the reduced formation of non-radiative TICT states.142 Other vibrational deactivation processes, such as coupling between electronic potential energy surfaces, are minimized, leading to further improvements in the phosphorescence intensity.143

II. Photonic applications of the triplet excited states of Ir(III) complexes
The efficient generation of triplet excited states in Ir(III) complexes enables a broad range of photofunctionalities, as depicted in Fig. 6. The photofunctionalities take advantage of the unique triplet state properties, including the long excited state lifetimes, a high degree of charge transfer, and the tunable triplet-state energies and excited state redox potentials. Recent photonic applications of these triplet excited states are discussed below. Accounts of electroluminescence are strongly avoided. Electroluminescent Ir(III) complexes are described in detail in recent articles.33,34,36,45–50
 Fig. 6  Photofunctionalities of the triplet excited states of Ir(III) complexes. 
1. Organic photovoltaics
The conversion of photons into electric currents in photovoltaic cells offers a potential means for addressing energy harvesting needs. Organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells, such as bulk-heterojunction solar cells, have numerous advantages over silicon-based photovoltaic cells and dye-sensitized solar cells, including their flexibility, easy fabrication, low manufacturing costs, and synthetic tunability. OPV cells are constructed through the deposition of multilayers that incorporate a transparent electrode, an active layer, a charge separation layer, and a metal electrode. The absorption of incident photons by the active layer generates excitons (neutral excited states) that diffuse to the heterojunctions between an active layer and a charge separation layer, then dissociate into holes and electrons. The charge carriers are transported to the opposite electrodes to generate an electric current (Fig. 7a). The two key steps that determine photon-to-current conversion yields are the generation and transport of excitons. Extensive synthetic efforts have established classes of low band gap molecules and polymers that exhibit excellent solar absorption properties;144 however, photon absorption by these organic compounds exclusively produces short-lived singlet excitons. The diffusion lengths of singlet excitons are typically limited to several nanometers, much smaller than the thickness of an active layer. Any attempt to reduce the thickness of the active layer compromises the light absorption profile. As a result, a large number of excitons are dissipated before transport to the heterojunction.
 Fig. 7  (a) A schematic representation of photocurrent generation in organic photovoltaic cells. The blue and red arrows indicate the diffusion of singlet (antiparallel spin) and triplet (parallel spin) excitons, respectively. Ld, exciton diffusion length. ITO, indium tin oxide; PCBM, [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester. (b) ISC between singlet and triplet excitons and their polaron pairs by intermolecular SOC: S, ground state; S*, singlet exciton; T, triplet exciton; 1(PP), singlet polaron pair; 3(PP), triplet polaron pair. Adapted with permission from J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 043909. Copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics. (c) Triplet exciton sensitization by excited state energy exchange: TTET, triplet–triplet energy transfer. 
One promising approach to addressing this problem is to use long-lived triplet excitons. The diffusion lengths of excitons are proportional to the exciton lifetime, so improved charge generation would be expected for triplet excitons (Fig. 7a). In addition, detrimental hole and electron recombination is effectively suppressed by the repulsive magnetic interaction of the spin-parallel polarizations of triplet excitons. For these reasons, the use of transition metal complexes, such as Pt(II) complexes, as active layers offers a valuable approach to improving photovoltaic performances.145
Research into the OPV uses of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes has not yet been extensively explored. Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes display weak visible absorption properties that hamper the efficient harnessing of solar radiation. Thus, direct triplet exciton formation and charge transport by photoexcitation of Ir(III) complexes cannot serve as the key process in OPV cells. Instead, studies have been directed toward employing Ir(III) complexes as sensitizers for the conversion of organic polymer singlet excitons to triplet excitons. Bulk-heterojunction OPV cells were fabricated with a device configuration of ITO/MEH-PPV:PCBM:Ir complex/Al (ITO, indium tin oxide; MEH-PPV, poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene]; PCBM, [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester).146 The photovoltaic performances of the Ir(ppy)3-doped OPV cells were found to be better than those of Ir(III) complex-free OPV cells, as evident from the 80% enhancement in the power conversion efficiency. Ir(ppy)3 was doped into the MEH-PPV active layer at a level of 5 wt%; therefore, the complex was not directly involved in the photon-to-exciton conversion. The improved efficiency could be attributed to the sensitization of triplet excitons of MEH-PPV. Further investigations, including magnetic field-dependent photocurrent and temperature-dependent photoluminescence measurements, have provided evidence for an increased triplet exciton ratio. Intermolecular SOC between MEH-PPV and Ir(ppy)3 was proposed to account for the increased triplet exciton ratio (Fig. 7b). Excited state energy exchange with a net spin-flip may present an alternative explanation (Fig. 7c).
An identical approach was pursued, in which iridium tris(2-(4-tolyl)pyridinato), Ir(mppy)3, was employed as a triplet sensitizer. The Ir(III) complex was doped into poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) and regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) films.39 Photoinduced absorption measurements were used to directly monitor the triplet exciton sensitization by Ir(mppy)3. Furthermore, phase separation in the doped system was suppressed by covalently attaching the Ir(III) complex sensitizers to polymers.40 Poly(9,9-dihexylfluorene)-based copolymers that incorporate Ir(ppy)3 units (13 mol% comonomer ratio) into the main chain were prepared (Fig. 8). OPV devices with a configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:PCBM/Al (PEDOT:PSS, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)) exhibited an external quantum efficiency of 10.3%, approx. 10-fold better than that of the Ir(III)-free polymer devices (1.1%).
 Fig. 8  Polymers used in the active layers of OPV cells, and their J–V curves. Reproduced with permission from Chem. Mater. 2008, 20, 5351–5355. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
The effects of the Ir(III) complexes on the photogenerated triplet excitons were investigated by fabricating OPV devices with a thin layer of iridium bis(2-(4-t-butylphenyl)benzothiazolato) (acetylacetonato), (t-bt)2Ir(acac), in the pentacene/C60 heterojunction.147 An enhanced open-circuit voltage (Voc) was observed, primarily attributed to the deep HOMO level of (t-bt)2Ir(acac); however, the overall external quantum efficiencies remained unchanged. These results were consistent with those reported previously, which concluded that the photovoltaic performance was mainly governed by the hole mobility of the Ir(III) complexes.148 These observations indicated that the diffusion of triplet excitons of Ir(III) complexes minimally affected the overall device performance. In fact, the diffusivity of the triplet excitons was found to be as low as 0.041 ± 0.003 × 10−4 cm2 s−1 for platinum (2,3,7,8,12,13,17,18-octaethyl-21H,23H-porphine), PtOEP, which is far smaller than the values for singlet excitons.149 Accordingly, triplet exciton diffusion through the transition metal complexes was limited. The low diffusivity value was, however, due to the propensity of the Pt(II) complex to form aggregates, which produce exciton traps. Recent studies of ladder-type poly(para-phenylene) revealed much longer exciton diffusion lengths for the triplet excitons.150,151 These studies concluded that the most effective role of transition metal complexes is as a triplet exciton sensitizer rather than as an active component for exciton generation and transport.
Previous studies collectively provide important guidance for the use of triplet exciton sensitizers in OPV applications. Maximum sensitization of triplet excitons is expected when the sensitizers exert efficient intermolecular electronic effects without altering the exciton diffusion of active compounds. Therefore, it is preferred to employ triplet exciton sensitizers with high SOC values. The triplet state energy of a sensitizer should be higher than that of the active compound in order to prevent exciton trapping within the sensitizer. In addition, the HOMO of the triplet exciton sensitizer should be low enough to avoid hole trapping. In this context, Ir(III) complexes with strong SOC effects, wide band gaps, and deep HOMO energies appear to be suitable for triplet exciton sensitization in OPV cells. Furthermore, the octahedral structures of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes favorably suppress hazardous aggregate formation.
2. Nonlinear optics
Nonlinear optical (NLO) materials are employed in advanced photonics, such as photorefraction and multi-photon luminescence. Extensive research has established that the intramolecular charge-transfer characters of push–π–pull electronic structures are crucial for the NLO properties of organic compounds.152 Heteroleptic Ir(III) complexes are attractive NLO platforms because their MLCT and LL′CT transitions feature strong charge displacement. One particular advantage is the possibility of independent control over the frontier molecular orbitals that principally determine the push–pull structure. For instance, the HOMO and LUMO of [Ir(ppy)2(phen)]+ are located at the 2-phenylpyridinate (ppy) and 1,10-phenanthroline (phen) ligands, respectively. One can therefore easily tailor the NLO properties by substituting these ligands.
The NLO properties of Ir(III) complexes have been evaluated by the Roberto and De Angelis groups by employing electric field-induced second harmonic generation (EFISH) and harmonic light scattering (HLS) techniques. These studies revealed that [Ir(ppy)2(N∧N)]+ has considerable second-order NLO character, where N∧N is 5-substituted 1,10-phenanthroline.153 The effects of this substituent were further investigated, and it was established that the electron density of the N∧N ligand was inversely proportional to the second-order NLO response. This relationship may be explained in terms of the fact that photoexcitation promotes charge-transfer to the N∧N ligand. In contrast, the modification of cyclometalating ligand structures produces a weaker effect,154,155 which indicates that the second-order NLO response is predominantly determined by control over the LUMO.156
Among third-order NLO responses, the most widely studied is two-photon luminescence because it has a wide range of photonic applications, including upconverted lasing, 3D data storage, and two-photon luminescence microscopy. The fundamentals of the two-photon process have been established, and research has mainly focused on the development of molecular materials with large two-photon absorption cross sections. Unlike second-order NLO responses, centrosymmetric intramolecular charge-transfer and a large polarization are vital for large two-photon absorption cross sections. Studies of the two-photon photophysics of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes are extremely scarce, even though their platforms are expected to be useful in two-photon phosphorescence (TPP). Vacha and co-workers observed two-photon emission from Ir(ppy)3.157 Under photoexcitation at 438 nm, the complex emanated peculiar two-photon fluorescence (TPF) as well as normal single-photon phosphorescence. The quadratic dependence of the fluorescence intensity on the laser power intensity pointed unambiguously to a two-photon process. Despite these interesting findings, however, the photophysics and molecular parameters underlying the two-photon process have not been completely understood to date. Further studies of the two-photon photophysics of Ir(III) complexes are, therefore, urgently required.
Studies have focused on employing two-photon phosphorescence in bioimaging applications. Multi-photon bioimaging has been enthusiastically pursued using Pt(II)158,159 and Ru(II)160 complexes. Two-photon imaging is preferred over single-photon techniques due to the excellent signal-to-noise ratio.161,162 This improvement stems from the fact that the long-wavelength excitation allows for deeper penetration depths and reduced scattering. In addition, a smaller excitation focal volume under two-photon excitation improves the spatial resolution, which is particularly useful in studies of subcellular events. Ho, Wong, and co-workers prepared a cyclometalated heteroleptic Ir(III) complex containing two different 2-phenylpyridinate ligands that tether either an electron-donating diphenylamino group or an electron-withdrawing dimesitylboryl group (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  (a) Structure and (b) two-photon absorption cross section (λem = 520 nm) of a cyclometalated Ir(III) complex and (c) two-photon phosphorescence Golgi staining (left, a fluorescence Golgi-specific stain; middle, Ir(III) complex stain; right, a merged image). Reproduced from Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2525–2527. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Bright two-photon phosphorescence was observed under photoexcitation at 700 nm with a two-photon absorption (TPA) cross section of 340 GM. This TPA cross section value exceeded that of a homoleptic Ir(III) complex bearing diphenylamino-functionalized 2-phenylpyridinate ligands only, suggesting that an asymmetric electronic configuration is critical for improved two-photon processes. The heteroleptic complex was incubated with live HeLa cells and A549 cells and was found to be localized within the Golgi apparatus.
Unlike two-photon luminescence, which requires intense and coherent light sources, upconverted emission based on bimolecular annihilation of two triplet states provides another viable means for upconversion.163 This upconversion is obviously not a nonlinear process because upconverted emission requires two molecules, each of which is excited by a single photon. In addition, the process does not produce harmonic frequencies, but yields an anti-Stokes shift only. Upconversion is achieved by the following sequential processes: (1) the photogeneration of the triplet state of a sensitizer, (2) triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET) from the sensitizer to an acceptor, (3) bimolecular triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) of the acceptors, and (4) fluorescence emission from the acceptor.164,165 High-efficiency upconverted emission is, therefore, anticipated when fast triplet sensitization is facilitated.166 Upconverted emission has been generated by taking advantage of the efficient ISC of transition metal complexes based on Pd167 and Ru.168,169 In this respect, cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes with ultrafast ISC processes are appealing candidates for upconverted emission.
Upconverted fluorescence emission by an Ir(III) complex as a triplet sensitizer was first demonstrated by Castellano and co-workers.170 They employed Ir(ppy)3 and pyrene derivatives as the triplet sensitizer and acceptor, respectively. Stern–Volmer analyses revealed the occurrence of efficient TTET from Ir(ppy)3 to pyrene. To further improve the photosensitization efficiency, a coumarin moiety was conjugated to the ligand framework of the Ir(III) complex (Fig. 10a).171 In addition to improved molar absorptivity (70920 M−1 cm−1 at 466 nm), the coumarin-derivatization extended the triplet state lifetime (75.5 μs) of the Ir(III) complex. This increased lifetime arose from the internal conversion of the 3MLCT transition state to the triplet state of the distal coumarin component, where SOC by the Ir core was not effective. This long-lived state is beneficial for TTET, resulting in highly efficient upconverted emission from the 9,10-diphenylanthracene (Fig. 10b).
 Fig. 10  (a) Ir(III) complexes that act as long-lived triplet sensitizers for upconverted emission. (b) Photograph showing upconversion by the Ir(III) complexes (10 μM, deaerated CH3CN at 25 °C) in the absence or presence of DPA (9,10-diphenylanthracene, 8 equiv.). λex = 445 nm (5 mW). Reprinted from Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 3165–3173. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. 
Another method for improving the upconversion efficiency involved increasing the TTET rate between the triplet sensitizer and the fluorescent acceptor. This increase was achieved by confining the two components in close proximity. Nanoparticles with an iridium bis(2-phenylbenzothiazolato) (acetylacetonate) core and a perylene shell were fabricated using the cetyl trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) template method, followed by reductively wrapping the core with a perylene shell.172 Delayed fluorescence from perylene was detected upon photoexcitation of the MLCT band of the Ir(III) complex (λex = 500 nm).
3. Water photolysis
The production of dihydrogen and dioxygen from water under solar irradiation is of considerable importance as another potential solution to the energy deficit problem.173–175 In particular, dihydrogen can readily replace fossil fuels, and progress has been made in the development of hydrogen storage materials.176 The water-splitting reaction is a highly endothermic four-electron process and requires the effective separation of cathodic and anodic processes.177 These conditions pose significant challenges to the design of catalytic systems for water splitting. Research has focused on the division of the reaction into two half-reactions (Scheme 3a). The evolution of hydrogen via two-electron reduction (i.e., 2H + 2e− → H2) requires less energy than the evolution of oxygen. Typical systems for photocatalytic hydrogen production consist of a sacrificial reductant (SR), a photosensitizer (PS), and a water-reduction catalyst (WRC), all of which are dissolved or suspended in an aqueous organic solution. The simplest mechanism involves two coupled PS and WRC catalytic cycles (Scheme 3b). Light irradiation generates an excited state PS (PS*), which accepts an electron from a nearby sacrificial reductant, such as triethylamine (TEA) or triethanolamine (TEOA). The resulting PS radical anion (PS*˙−) transfers its electron to the WRC, and hydrogen evolution occurs via an active species involving a metal–hydride bond. Recent investigations employing combined in situ EPR, resonance Raman, and IR spectroscopy by Ludwig, Brückner, and co-workers identified active metal hydride intermediates.178 [Fe3(CO)12],179 K2PtCl4,180–183 K2PdCl4,184 rhodium tris(2,2′-bipyridine),185 and cobalt complexes, such as cobaloxime186,187 and cobalt tris(2,2′-bipyridine),38 are widely used as WRCs (Scheme 3). A biomimetic diiron thiolate, [Fe2S2], has also been used as a WRC.188
 Scheme 3  (a) Water splitting and its half-reactions. (b) A simplified mechanism for photocatalytic dihydrogen production: SR, sacrificial reductant; PS, photosensitizer; WRC, water-reduction catalyst. 
Of the various aspects of catalytic dihydrogen production, the PS and its effective combination with the WRC is the most central to operational efficiency. Among the various transition metal complexes, ruthenium tris(2,2′-bipyridine) is considered to be the golden standard because of its large molar absorptivity;189 however, the dissociative and low-lying MC states of Ru(II) complexes lead to both structural instability and poor photophysical tunability, which reduce their utility as robust photosensitizers. Other complexes, such as Zn(II) porphyrin,190 [ReBr(CO)3(2,2′-bipyridine)],191 and cyclometalated Pt(II) complexes,187,192,193 were tested in these catalytic reactions, but their performances were insufficient for practical applications. Good PS materials should feature strong visible absorption, sufficiently long excited state lifetimes, and a large driving force for intermolecular electron transfer. In addition to these properties, a PS should retain structural stability during the photophysically driven redox cycles. Tunability over a wide range of photophysical and electrochemical energies is also highly desirable.
Bernhard and co-workers performed pioneering research into the use of Ir(III) complexes in photocatalytic dihydrogen production. This group employed a combinatorial approach to prepare a series of cationic Ir(III) complexes (Fig. 11).38,181,183–185,194 The [Ir(C∧N)2(N∧N)]+ platform enables the HOMO and LUMO energies to be independently controlled by altering the C∧N and N∧N ligand structures, respectively. The complexes were tested as photocatalysts in the presence of excess amounts of TEOA and WRCs such as cobalt tris(2,2′-bipyridine),38 rhodium tris(2,2′-bipyridine),185 and colloidal metal particles of K2PtCl4180,181,183,195 and K2PdCl4.184 Under blue LED irradiation, they observed efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution with turn-over numbers that were larger (TON > 9000) than those observed for Ru(II) complexes.38 This improvement was thought to arise from the larger driving force for reductive electron transfer from the SR to the Ir(III) complexes.185 These studies also showed that the phosphorescence lifetimes and molar absorptivities did not significantly influence the PS performance.184 The photocatalytic efficiencies were further improved by adsorbing Ir(III) complexes with terminal pyridines183 or dicarboxylates182 onto heterogeneous WRC surfaces. These synthetic modifications reduced the distance between the PS and the WRC, which increased the electron transfer rate. In addition, the ligand dissociation was suppressed due to the reduced lifetime of the PS*˙−. In this context, approaches to molecular dyads that incorporate PS and WRC are notable, and a variety of dyad systems including PS components of Zn(II) porphyrin196 and Ru(II)197–203 and Ir(III) complexes204 have been developed (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 11  Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes used as photosensitizers in the context of photocatalytic dihydrogen production. 
 Fig. 12  Molecular dyads of a photosensitizer (PS) and a water-reduction catalyst (WRC) for photocatalytic dihydrogen production. 
Despite the outstanding photocatalytic performances of Ir(III) complexes, significant challenges to their future development remain present. Most of all, their absorption of solar radiation is poor. The high energy and small molar absorptivity of the MLCT transition are limiting factors that can retard solar power applications. Although the PS performance and the molar absorptivity are only weakly correlated, the photocatalytic performance may be enhanced by improving the molar absorptivity because the performance should be proportional to the product of the molar absorptivity and the quantum yield of the photocatalytic reactions. Straightforward approaches toward achieving this aim include the use of low-band gap ligands or ligands with intramolecular charge-transfer characteristics that produce a large transition dipole moment. Alternatively, supramolecular systems capable of light harvesting and endothermic energy funneling to an Ir(III) complex offer an alternative means for overcoming the small molar absorptivity. In this antenna system, the key technology is the judicious selection of the energy-donating unit to prevent triplet–triplet back-energy transfer. Secondly, the stability of the Ir(III) complex PSs under continuous photoredox cycles must be improved; Ir(III) complexes have catalytic lifetimes less than several tens of hours. Liberation of the weakly bound N∧N ligand and the subsequent coordination of solvent molecules, such as acetonitrile (i.e., the formation of [Ir(C∧N)2(CH3CN)2]+), is thought to be responsible for poor catalytic longevity.195 The Bernhard group attempted to resolve this problem by converting the [Ir(C∧N)2(N∧N)]+ structure to [Ir(C∧N∧N)2]+ (Fig. 13).180 Cyclometalation by the terdentate 6-phenyl-2,2′-bipyridine ligand (C∧N∧N) resulted in tight binding in the Ir(III) coordination sphere, thereby effectively suppressing ligand dissociation. Furthermore, cyclometalation of the terdentate ligand evoked stronger light absorption and longer phosphorescence lifetimes, which improved the photocatalytic activities. Indeed, significant enhancements in terms of the photocatalytic longevity and turnover numbers were found for the [Ir(C∧N∧N)2]+ complex compared to the traditional [Ir(C∧N)2(N∧N)]+ complex. An alternative approach may include the use of ligands with strong intramolecular π–π interactions to prevent solvent accommodation. The utility of this approach has been demonstrated in the context of light-emitting electrochemical cells.205
 Fig. 13  [Ir(C∧N∧N)2]+ complex for photocatalytic dihydrogen production with improved photostability. 
In contrast with the success of photocatalytic dihydrogen production, the development of light-driven dioxygen evolution catalysts remains a significant challenge due to the high thermodynamic barrier to four-electron oxidation. Research has been focused on electrochemical catalysis, and a notable approach has been to mimic the oxygen-evolving system of Photosystem II comprising a μ-oxo Mn4 cluster. In this system, the availability of broad manganese oxidation states is pivotal. After Meyer and co-workers' initial observation of O2 evolution by an oxo-bridged ruthenium dimer,206 various multinuclear water oxidation catalysts were developed based on transition metal complexes, such as Mn207 and Ru,208–213 or metal oxides, such as iridium oxide.214–216 Ru217,218 and Fe219 mononuclear catalysts, as well as catalysts containing Ir complexes,220–223 have also been reported. For example, bisaquo Ir(III) complexes with two cyclometalating ligands produced O2 in neutral water in the presence of (NH4)2Ce(NO3)6 (Scheme 4).223,224 Among the electrochemically driven catalytic systems, of particular interest is the family of cyclometalated half-sandwich Ir(III) complexes investigated by the research groups of Crabtree, Brudvig,221,222,225,226 and Fukuzumi227 (Fig. 14). The Cp*Ir complexes comprising a cyclometalating ligand and a cyclopentadienyl ligand readily formed an active species, such as Ir(V)O, that efficiently oxidized water molecules. Structural variations were introduced in an effort to improve the catalytic performance toward oxygen evolution. The investigations also revealed that Ir(III) diimine complex constructs also acted as active catalysts for water oxidation. However, molecular catalysts developed to date required strong sacrificial oxidants to generate the active species and were not photocatalytic. It is envisioned, therefore, that the establishment of the photoelectrochemical reaction mechanism for O–O bond formation should provide an important breakthrough in the development of water oxidation catalysts. The recent demonstration of H2 production using a Cp*Ir complex by the Fukuzumi group suggests the potential for preparing complete water-splitting systems.228
 Scheme 4  Proposed mechanism for dioxygen evolution from water using a cyclometalated Ir(III) complex as a catalyst. Adapted from Dalton Trans, 2011, 40, 11241–11247. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 14  Cp*Ir complex catalysts for electrochemical dioxygen evolution. 
4. Photoredox catalysts
Typical cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes possess fully saturated coordination spheres around their Ir cores; therefore, photocatalysis involving direct interactions with Ir centers is scarce. By contrast, rich catalytic reactivities are attainable by redox cycles triggered through photoinduced intermolecular electron transfer.231,232 The excited state redox potentials of Ir(III) complexes are tunable over a wide range, and therefore have significant potential for use in a variety of redox reactions. Photoredox behaviors have indeed been demonstrated in several model systems. Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes comprising a biimidazole ligand can form ion pairs with a benzoate molecule through two tight hydrogen bonds.229 Photoexcitation of the Ir(III) complex then provokes a reductive electron transfer to benzoate via proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET). Oxidative photoinduced electron transfer has also been demonstrated for a molecular dyad consisting of a phenothiazine donor and an Ir(III) complex acceptor.230 The achievement of bidirectional electron transfer is attractive because it enables catalysis of both oxidation and reduction. In contrast with the case of solar energy conversion, light sources used in typical photoreactions provide sufficient photons to alleviate the disadvantages associated with the low molar absorptivity of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes.
The tunable HOMO levels of Ir(III) complexes introduce a positive driving force into the photoinduced electron transfer from electron-rich substrates. Substrates are oxidized via single electron transfer to the reactive radical species. The reduced photoredox catalyst is then re-oxidized to its initial form by oxidants, such as dissolved dioxygen. Stephenson and co-workers developed a photocatalytic system for the oxidative coupling between a nitroalkane and a tertiary amine (Scheme 5a).231 A cationic Ir(III) complex served as a photocatalytic oxidant for C–H oxidation, thereby triggering the subsequent aza-Henry reaction. In another example, an Ir(III) complex was employed as a photocatalyst for the formation of azomethine ylides that readily undergo dipolar [3+2] cycloaddition with N-methyl maleimide.232 The work, performed by Rueping and co-workers, demonstrated that the Ir(III) photocatalyst abstracted one electron from a tertiary amine and transferred the electron to O2 (Scheme 5b). This photocatalytic cycle produced two radical species, O2˙− and the radical cation of the amine. The radical cation of the amine was then further oxidized by O2˙− and deprotonated to create the azomethine ylide.
 Scheme 5  Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes as photocatalysts with redox catalytic property. 
Combinations of sacrificial electron donors and photoredox catalysts have expanded applications to synthesis. As with the photocatalytic water reduction systems, photoexcitation promotes reductive one-electron transfer to an Ir(III) complex from triethylamine. The one-electron reduced complex cleaves C–X bonds to produce alkyl radical species. The Stephenson group employed this reduction to initiate an intramolecular radical cyclization reaction (Scheme 5c).233 The catalytic action was attributed to photoinduced electron relay from a sacrificial electron donor. Similarly, photoreduced Ir(III) complexes reductively open epoxide and aziridine rings.234 The ring-opened radical species react with terminal olefins or become further reduced to the carbanions (Scheme 5d). In this reaction, Fensterbank and Ollivier employed the Hantzsch ester as a sacrificial electron donor.
As explained earlier, the MLCT transitions in an Ir(III) complex involve intramolecular electron transfer from Ir(III) to its cyclometalating ligands. The charge separation corresponds to the generation of an excited state radical species with a high redox power. The photoredox strength can be predicted according to the Rehm–Weller equation, −ΔGPeT = −(Eox(D/D+) − Ered(A/A−)) + ΔE00 + c, where ΔGPeT, Eox(D/D+), Ered(A/A−), ΔE00, and c are the free energy for photoinduced electron transfer, the ground state oxidation potential of an electron donor, the reduction potential of the electron acceptor, the photoexcitation energy, and the charge-separation term, respectively. The charge-separation term can be ignored in polar solvents, such as acetonitrile. Because MLCT transition state energies can be as high as 2.75 eV (ca. 450 nm) in typical blue-phosphorescent Ir(III) complexes, ΔE00 is large enough to overcome the electrochemical gap between the Ir(III) complex and a substrate (i.e., Eox(D/D+) − Ered(A/A−)). Therefore, −ΔGPeT remains positive in most cases, providing a thermodynamic driving force for both photoreduction and photooxidation.
The Stephenson group demonstrated the photoreductive catalytic action of a cyclometalated Ir(III) complex in the atom-transfer radical addition of alkyl halides, such as CF3I, CCl3Br, and α-bromomalonate.235 As shown in Scheme 6a, a photoexcited Ir(III) complex was readily oxidized through one-electron transfer to the alkyl halide. The reductive electron transfer activated the alkyl halide to a reactive alkyl radical species, which subsequently underwent an addition reaction at the terminal olefin. MacMillan and co-workers pioneered this photoreduction catalysis strategy. In their recent report, the group established an efficient methodology for the photocatalytic trifluoromethylation of arenes (Scheme 6b).236 Dicationic ruthenium tris(2,2′-bipyridine) and neutral iridium tris(2-(2,4-difluorophenyl)pyridinato) were employed for the photogeneration of a reactive trifluoromethyl radical species. The one-electron oxidized catalyst was then reduced to the initial state by accepting an electron from the reaction intermediates. The synthetic protocol was valuable because it did not require preactivated substrates, such as halogenated arenes. The group further expanded the utility to photocatalytic enantioselective reactions by combining the Ir(III) photocatalyst with chiral organocatalysts. They demonstrated the enantioselective α-benzylation237 (Scheme 6c) and α-trifluoromethylation238 (Scheme 6d) of aldehydes. The tandem catalytic actions involved the photoreductive generation of reactive alkyl radicals and the formation of a chiral enamine via condensation with an organocatalyst and a benzaldehyde substrate. The photogenerated CF3 or benzyl radicals readily reacted with the enamine in a stereoselective manner. Finally, hydrolysis of the alkylation adducts yielded the desired product with a large enantiomeric excess.
 Scheme 6  Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes as photocatalysts with reductive catalytic property. 
The sequential oxidative and reductive electron transfers involved in the photocatalytic cycle were applied to the generation of two different radical reactants. Under photoirradiation, iridium bis(2-phenylpyridinato) (4,4′-di(t-butyl)-2,2′-bipyridine) and fac-Ir(ppy)3 facilitated one-electron transfer to an electron-deficient arene to generate a radical anion (Scheme 6e).239 Subsequently, the oxidized Ir(III) complexes accepted one electron from N-aryl pyrrolidine, and the radical cation of the pyrrolidine underwent a radical−radical coupling reaction with the preformed arene radical anion. Finally, loss of a leaving group yielded the desired α-arylated pyrrolidine.
In addition to these synthetic demonstrations, photoredox catalytic activity based on photoinduced intermolecular electron transfer was implemented in a ring-opening polymerization. Although the reaction mechanism requires further elucidation, efficient photopolymerization resulted from a catalytic system comprising Ir(ppy)3, silane, and iodonium salt.240
Despite the great success, the reactions based on photocatalysis presented several disadvantages. First, the reaction systems needed to be thoroughly deaerated to avoid undesired oxidation by singlet oxygen (vide infra). The formation of oxidation byproducts is significant if substrates contain reactive moieties, such as stilbene and diene. The scope of possible substrates is limited to wide-band gap materials. Otherwise, competing triplet–triplet energy transfer from the photocatalyst to the substrate will retard the electron transfer.
Another photocatalytic function of Ir(III) complexes is the sensitization of singlet dioxygen. Singlet oxygen (1ΔgO2) is generated through TTET from a photoexcited complex to the ground state triplet dioxygen (Type II reaction in Fig. 15a).241 The generation of endogenous singlet oxygen is linked to certain pathological states, such as porphyria syndromes.242 The propensity of singlet oxygen to engage in strongly oxidative reactions has found application in a variety of medical and environmental fields,243,244 including cancer treatments241,245 and wastewater management.246 Photosensitizers that efficiently generate singlet oxygen are, therefore, of considerable importance. Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes may be readily employed in singlet oxygen photosensitization because their TTET activity is well-established through extensive studies of energy transfer dynamics in the emitting layers of OLEDs.28 Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes are promising candidates for highly efficient singlet oxygen sensitization because they feature ultrafast ISC that generates triplet states with a unity efficiency. Additionally, the radiative and non-radiative decay rates of the complexes are much slower than the TTET rates.247
 Fig. 15  (a) Energy and electron transfer from the triplet state of Ir(III) complexes to dioxygen. (b) Ir(III) complexes used for singlet oxygen photosensitization. 
Several studies have examined the photogeneration of singlet oxygen using Ir(III) complexes (Fig. 15b).247–250 Murata and co-workers compared the singlet oxygen sensitization properties of known tris- and bis-cyclometalates and established notable molecular parameters that govern the photosensitization efficiency.247 According to their study, high efficiencies are attainable by minimizing photoinduced electron transfer to dioxygen (Type I reaction in Fig. 15a).241 Thus, structural controls may be implemented to increase the reduction potential and lower the triplet state energies as a means for achieving high efficiencies. Ligand platforms with minimized steric hindrance are preferred for facilitating rapid TTET. Thompson and co-workers investigated the photosensitization properties of Ir(III) complexes and achieved singlet oxygen generation quantum yields as high as unity.251,252 The photophysical measurements suggested that these high values could be ascribed to fast electron transfer to dioxygen. Their research also demonstrated that Ir(III) complexes are useful platforms for photosensitization because they are photoelectrochemically tunable and display excellent photocatalytic longevity. The latter property is particularly beneficial for coordinatively saturated structures that suppress the formation of inactive Ir-oxo species.
5. Bioactivity
The rich photoredox activities of Ir(III) complexes have great potential for use in a variety of redox reactions in biological systems. The broad tunability of Ir(III) complexes offers significant advantages over Ru(II) and Rh(I) complexes, although few studies involving biological systems have been reported. A series of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes comprising 2-phenylpyridinate and dipyridophenazine were found to intercalate into DNA base pair stacks to generate photocurrents (Fig. 16a).253–256 These Ir(III) complexes displayed excited state redox potentials suitable for the oxidation of purine and reduction of pyrimidine. Photogenerated electrons or holes were transferred along the DNA duplex and were detected by ESR or by the analysis of the redox products of guanine and cytosine. The intriguing photocurrent generation elucidated the dynamics of charge migration along DNA, which supported the investigation of the mechanisms underlying DNA damage. The photoredox active Ir(III) complexes identified in previous studies of water photolysis are likely to be useful tools in the investigations of bioredox systems.
 Fig. 16  Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes for use as DNA photoredox catalysts (a) and a photoinduced apoptosis agent (b). 
Some Ir(III) complexes displayed considerable photoinduced cytotoxicity toward cancer cells. During an investigation of antiangiogenic properties, Meggers and co-workers found that the photoexcitation of Ir(III) complexes induced the apoptosis, i.e., programmed cell death, in HeLa cells.257 Ir(III) complexes comprising pyridocarbazole and octadiene ligands were efficient protein kinase inhibitors (Fig. 16b).258 The selenocyanate coordinated to an Ir(III) core was liberated from the complex under photoirradiation. Apoptosis was thought to be linked to this photochemical reaction. The study lacked a mechanistic investigation, but the photoinduced cytotoxicity was unambiguous, as evidenced by the determination of the EC50 value as low as 0.2 μM (1 h irradiation and 24 h incubation). Although limited, these studies suggested the biological utility of photoexcited Ir(III) complexes. Further studies of their actions in a biological milieu are strongly recommended.
6. Bioimaging and biosensing
The strong tunable phosphorescence emission of Ir(III) complexes is useful for sensors and biolabels applications, which have been enthusiastically developed. Ir(III) complexes presented several advantages for bioimaging applications, including a high stability, a large Stokes shift, the ability to control the molecular charge, and an amenability toward derivatization for accommodating a variety of bioactive moieties. Most importantly, long-lived phosphorescence emission facilitates the time-gated detection of signals that are completely free from background noise, such as autofluorescence or scattering.259 This section introduces the novel advances presented by Ir(III) complex-based bioimaging applications. Extensive descriptions of the bioimaging applications of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes can be found in recent reviews.54–57,59–63
Early sensing applications of phosphorescent Ir(III) complexes targeted molecular oxygen.260–264 Fast electron and energy transfer to dioxygen (Type I and II reactions in Fig. 15) resulted in significant phosphorescence quenching in the presence of ambient air. The sensitivity of the phosphorescence signal intensity to dioxygen was much greater than any other signal output, such as electrochemical measurements. The phosphorescence signals could, therefore, be employed as a means for estimating the in vivo oxygen levels. A notable recent approach involved hypoxia imaging of cancerous specimens. Because cancer cells require excess amounts of dioxygen for their growth, the depletion of oxygen levels can be a strong indication of cancer. Tobita and co-workers demonstrated luminescence in vitro/in vivo O2 imaging using a neutral red phosphorescent Ir(III) complex, iridium bis(2-(2′-benzothienyl)-pyridinato) (acetylacetonate) (Fig. 17a).265 They administrated the Ir(III) complex to tumor-bearing athymic nude mice and succeeded in detecting strong phosphorescence signals at the transplanted tumor sites.
 Fig. 17  (a) Structure of a phosphorescent O2 probe and its application to in vivo hypoxia imaging. Reproduced with permission from Cancer Res., 2010, 70, 4490–4498. Copyright 2010, American Association for Cancer Research. (b) Ratiometric visualization of intracellular O2 in HeLa cells using a dual-emissive sensor. Reproduced from Angew Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4148−4151. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. 
The signal fidelity of the Ir(III) complexes was further improved by the Tobita group by synthesizing a dyad comprising an oxygen-insensitive fluorophore, coumarin 343, and a phosphorescent Ir(III) complex, linked through a proline oligomer bridge (Fig. 17b).266 Under photoexcitation, the molecular dyad displayed dual emission originating from the two chromophores. The photoluminescence intensity ratio of the dual emission was strongly dependent on the O2 concentration. The intriguing ratiometric sensing properties were successfully applied toward imaging the intracellular oxygen levels in HeLa cells. The probe unfortunately suffered from a slow cellular uptake, which disrupted the quantitative measurements of the O2 concentrations. In vitro/in vivo O2 imaging based on phosphorescence signals requires caution because under photoexcitation phosphorescent probes can significantly deplete the local O2 concentrations. The cytotoxic effects due to the photogenerated 1O2 or O2˙− must be overcome. These drawbacks present future challenges to the development of biological O2 probes.
Water-soluble cationic Ir(III) complexes were shown to be suitable for the luminescent staining of mammalian cells. Li and co-workers demonstrated phosphorescent live cell staining using bis-cyclometalated diimine Ir(III) complexes (Fig. 18).267 These complexes were cell-permeable due to their balanced lipophilicity. The phosphorescence signals exhibited exceptional stability during continuous photoirradiation when compared with fluorescence signals of a nucleus-specific fluorescent stain, DAPI (diamidino-2-phenylindole). Rational variations in the ligand structures established a broad range of stains with emission spectra that were tunable from blue (459 nm) to red (634 nm).268 The water-solubility was further improved by preparing zwitterionic versions of the Ir(III) complexes.269 Cellular experiments indicated that amphiphilicity was a key factor for determining the intracellular uptake.
 Fig. 18  Phosphorescent Ir(III) complexes for the cytoplasm staining of live mammalian cells. Reproduced from Chem. Commun., 2008, 44, 2115−2117. Copyright 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Although charge-neutral Ir(III) complexes have limited compatibility with aqueous solutions, a unique ligand design has enabled bioimaging applications.270 Ir(III) complexes comprising the 2-pyridylbenzimidazolate ligand (N∧N−) are charge-neutral and exhibit strong green phosphorescence. Protonation of the basic nitrogen of the benzimidazolate transforms the ligand into a neutral diimine (N∧N), which generates an Ir(III) complex with an overall positive charge (Fig. 19). The acid–base equilibrium at pKa = 6.6 alleviates the hydrophobicity. The complex was found to accumulate in the lysosomes of live HeLa cells to produce organelle-specific phosphorescence signals. As a useful demonstration of the technique, time-gated imaging was performed (delay time = 10 ns) to distinguish the phosphorescence signals from the strong fluorescence signals of Hoechst 33342.
 Fig. 19  (a) Interconversion between a charge-neutral form (1) and a cationic form (2) in an acid–base equilibrium. (b) Photoluminescence spectra of the Ir(III) complex and its conjugate base. (c) Photoluminescence time-gated imaging of live HeLa cells pretreated with the Ir(III) complex and a fluorescent nuclear stain: Left, total photoluminescence microscope image dominated by the fluorescence signal of the nucleus-specific stain, Hoechst 33342; right, time-gated photoluminescence microscope image at a delay time of 10 ns. Reproduced from Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8743−8745. Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A number of targeting groups were conjugated to the Ir(III) complexes for labeling purposes. Lo and co-workers performed pioneering research into the development of phosphorescent labels; recent examples include the bioconjugation of sugar271 and bovine serum albumin (BSA)-specific indoles.272 They also investigated the biological properties of poly(ethylene glycol)273 and perfluorinated alkyl chains,274 in terms of amphiphilicity, protein binding, cellular uptake, and cytotoxicity. Notably, they recently tested cyclometalated Ir(III) solvento complexes (Fig. 20a). The Ir(III) solvento complexes ([Ir(C∧N)2(solv)2]+, solv = CH3CN, DMSO) were readily prepared through the cleavage of the bis μ-chloro Ir(III) dimer in the presence of excess acetonitrile or DMSO.8 The cationic complexes were highly soluble in aqueous solution. The solvent molecules weakly coordinated to the Ir core and were susceptible to displacement by strongly coordinating biomolecules, such as histidine. The displacement produced a shift in the Ir(III) complex phosphorescence.
 Fig. 20  Histidine-specific phosphorescence peptide labeling. (a) Proposed peptide binding modes of the bis-cyclometalated Ir(III) solvento complex. (b) Mitochondria-specific phosphorescent staining of live HeLa cells: top left, bright field image; top right, phosphorescence staining with the Ir(III)-labeled peptide; bottom left, fluorescence staining with MitoTracker; bottom right, merged images. Reprinted from Chem.–Eur. J. 2011, 17, 8028–8032. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. 
This method was reminiscent of displacement assays,275 and peptide labeling using histidine or polyhistidine tags has been established previously.276,277 Further studies showed that histidine and histidine-rich proteins, such as BSA, selectively interact with [Ir(ppy)2(solv)2]+ (solv = H2O or CH3CN) in PBS buffer solutions to produce large phosphorescence turn-on signals.278 Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry and binding assays using histidine-free β-lactamase provided supporting evidence for histidine binding to [Ir(ppy)2]+. Additional mechanistic studies established that the Ir(III) complexes favored protein binding at the N-terminal histidine or two vicinal histidines (Fig. 20a).279 Phosphorescent histidine tags have several advantages, including easy processing, high efficiency, and low toxicity. In addition, minimal sequence alterations were required for tagging, and the resulting conjugates were resistant to the presence of de-metalating glutathione. The biological utility of histidine-specific peptide labeling has further been demonstrated via the phosphorescent staining of mitochondria (Fig. 20b)279 and nuclei280 in live HeLa cells. Analogous phosphorescent labels targeting biomolecules other than histidine can potentially be prepared through the choice of an appropriate displacement chemistry.
The incorporation of reactive molecules into the coordination sphere of a bis-cyclometalated Ir(III) complex may provide novel opportunities for detecting small molecules. The reaction between hydrazine (N2H4) and carbon dioxide (CO2) was followed using phosphorescence signals from a complex in which two N2H4 molecules were coordinated to the Ir center of [Ir(ppy)2]+ (Fig. 21).281 Schwartz and Mann showed that the interaction between CO2 and the coordinated N2H4 yielded an N-carboxylated product, carbazate, which remained coordinated to the Ir(III) complex. The reaction was accompanied by a bathochromic shift in the phosphorescence spectrum that easily distinguished the selective reaction between N2H4 and CO2. Apparently, the contribution of the MLCT transition in the carbazate complex increased to yield the spectral response. These studies demonstrated the utility of Ir(III) complexes for accommodating and detecting chelatable molecules. The coordination properties of Ir(III) complexes can potentially facilitate investigations of biologically relevant small molecules, such as nitric oxide (NO).
 Fig. 21  Reaction between the Ir(III) bishydrazino complex and CO2 to produce an Ir(III) carbazate complex, and the corresponding changes in the UV-vis absorption and phosphorescence spectra. Reprinted with permission from Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 12477−12485. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
As described earlier, the phosphorescent states of Ir(III) complexes arise through CI between various triplet excited states, including MLCT, LC, and LL′CT transitions. Depending on the ligand structure, CI can involve a thermodynamic barrier that is extremely sensitive to environmental conditions. Multiple emission bands are expected when the electronic coupling between photoexcited states is weak. Band shifts are more probable in heteroleptic complexes in which spatially distant ligands display poor orbital overlap.282–284 In fact, the observation of multiple phosphorescence emission bands is not unusual; isoelectronic Ru(II) complexes bearing 1,10-phenanthroline and 2,3-bis(alkynyl)-1,4,8,9-tetraazatriphenylene emanate dual emission bands.285 Multi-emissive platforms offer fascinating opportunities for the development of ratiometric sensors.286 The Lo group observed dual emission from Ir(III) complexes comprising 2,2′-bipyridine and 2-phenylpyridinate, which tethered a distal secondary amino group. The intensity ratio of the dual emission was strongly affected by the nature of the medium. The dual emission appeared to originate from the 3LC transition state and the 3MLCT/3LL′CT transition states. Taking advantage of this unique spectral behavior, the Lo group developed phosphorescence ratiometric labels by tethering the complexes to targeting moieties, such as biotin or estradiol.286
Inspired by the research of the Lo group, our group developed phosphorescence ratiometric sensors for biological copper287 and zinc ions. The phosphorescence ratiometric copper sensor (ZIr2) contained 2-phenylpyridinate (ppy) and 2-pyridylbenzo[b]thiophene (btp) ligands, which in their Ir(III) complexes are known to display green and red emission bands, respectively (Fig. 22a). Metal-chelating di(2-picolyl)amine (DPA) was tethered to the red-emissive ligand. Dual emission from the two ligands was observed in the copper-free state, whereas selective binding of paramagnetic Cu(II) ions preferentially quenched the red phosphorescence. The non-conjugated DPA was pivotal for achieving dual emission because the reference complex lacking the DPA unit displayed pronounced red emission. IC from the high-energy ppy ligand to the low-energy btp ligand was perturbed somehow by the DPA receptor. The photophysical mechanism underlying the ratiometric Cu(II) response was investigated by considering the occurrence of non-radiative electron transfer from the red-emissive ligand to a nearby Cu(II) center in the Cu(II)-bound form. This ratiometric response enabled us to monitor exogenously supplied intracellular copper ions in the HeLa cells (Fig. 22b).
 Fig. 22  Phosphorescence ratiometric sensors for copper (a and b) and zinc (c and d) ions. (a) Structure of the phosphorescence ratiometric Cu(II) sensor. (b) Intracellular copper imaging of HeLa cells. From the left: differential interference contrast images, phosphorescence acquired through a green channel, phosphorescence acquired through a red channel, co-localization scatter plots of the green and red channels, and phosphorescence intensity ratio images of the green and red channels. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11488−11491. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (c) Structure of the phosphorescence ratiometric Zn(II) sensor. (d) Fluorescence lifetime microscope images of A549 cells treated with the phosphorescent zinc probe. From the left: overlay of images, long-lived component (τ1) images, midrange component (τ2) images, short-lived component (τ3) images, and amplitude plots of the x-scan for the grey regions in the τ1 images. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18328−18342. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
The design concept was extended to a cationic Ir(III) complex (ZIrF), comprising 2-(2,4-difluorophenyl)pyridinate (dfppy) and DPA-appended 1,10-phenanthroline (Fig. 22c). In acetonitrile solutions, ZIrF displayed blue emission due to the presence of dfppy ligands, suggesting poor electronic interactions between dfppy and the phenanthroline ligands. Zinc binding provoked selective turn-on of the yellow emission from the phenanthroline to produce a ratiometric change. Extensive mechanistic studies showed that zinc binding yielded two excited state effects: perturbation of the photoinduced electron transfer from DPA to the Ir(III) chromophore, and switching the lowest energy triplet state from the 3ILCT transition state to the 3MLCT transition state. In aqueous buffer solutions, the yellow emission from the phenanthroline prevailed over the blue emission from the dfppy ligands, indicating that the dual emission was highly sensitive to subtle changes in the medium. The zinc probe was cell-permeable and exhibited strong phosphorescence turn-on signals in the presence of intracellular zinc ions. In particular, intracellular zinc binding led to an increase in the photoluminescence lifetimes of the signals, as visualized using fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (Fig. 22d).
III. Concluding remarks
Phosphorescent cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes have been used as key components in highly efficient electroluminescence devices. Synthetic methods for preparing pure blue, green, and red emission components for full-color displays have been pursued. Such research has been fruitful; Ir(III) complexes have been obtained with distinct emission bands spanning the spectral range from the near UV to the near IR. The accumulation of knowledge about phosphorescent Ir(III) complexes has enabled us to understand their photophysical behavior. The excited state properties of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes are favorable for a variety of photoelectrochemical applications due to the fast SOC and the presence of high-lying MC state, which guarantees the efficient utilization of the triplet excited state. The synthetic versatility of the complexes permits the wide tuning of their photophysical and electrochemical properties. These advantageous aspects of Ir(III) complexes suggest a variety of photonic applications. This critical review has been devoted to the presentation of inspiring examples of novel photonic applications of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes. Recent uses in OPVs, NLO, water photolysis, and photocatalysis, as well as biological utility in applications, such as biosensing, are described. The use of these complexes in photoenergy conversion is notable and promises important breakthroughs. Despite these prospects, the photonic applications of Ir(III) complexes are as yet underdeveloped. We hope that this critical review provides helpful guidance for future researchers in the development of triplet-state Ir(III) complex photofunctionalities.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support of Ewha Womans University (RP-Grant 2010), a 2011 KRICT OASIS project, and NRF/MEST of Korea through the GRL and WCU (R31-2008-000-10010-0).
References
G. A. Carlson, P. I. Djurovich and R. J. Watts, Inorg. Chem., 1993, 32, 4483–4484 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Colombo, T. C. Brunold, T. Riedener, H. U. Güdel, M. Förtsch and H.-B. Bürgi, Inorg. Chem., 1994, 33, 545–550 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Colombo, A. Hauser and H. U. Güdel, Inorg. Chem., 1993, 32, 3088–3092 CrossRef CAS .
F. O. Garces, K. A. King and R. J. Watts, Inorg. Chem., 1988, 27, 3464–3471 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohsawa, S. Sprouse, K. A. King, M. K. DeArmond, K. W. Hanck and R. J. Watts, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 1047–1054 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Wilde, K. A. King and R. J. Watts, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Colombo, A. Hauser and H. U. Güdel, Top. Curr. Chem., 1994, 171, 143–171 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schmid, F. O. Garces and R. J. Watts, Inorg. Chem., 1994, 33, 9–14 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. King, P. J. Spellane and R. J. Watts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 1431–1432 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Baldo, S. Lamansky, P. E. Burrows, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 4–6 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ma, P. I. Djurovich, S. Garon, B. Alleyne and M. E. Thompson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2438–2446 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pfeiffer, S. R. Forrest, K. Leo and M. E. Thompson, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1633–1636 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. D'Andrade, M. A. Baldo, C. Adachi, J. Brooks, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 1045–1047 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Kwong, M. R. Nugent, L. Michalski, T. Ngo, K. Rajan, Y.-J. Tung, M. S. Weaver, T. X. Zhou, M. Hack, M. E. Thompson, S. R. Forrest and J. J. Brown, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 162–164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lamansky, P. Djurovich, D. Murphy, F. Abdel-Razzaq, R. Kwong, I. Tsyba, M. Bortz, B. Mui, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 1704–1711 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sajoto, P. I. Djurovich, A. Tamayo, M. Yousufuddin, R. Bau, M. E. Thompson, R. J. Holmes and S. R. Forrest, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 7992–8003 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, H.-F. Chen, K.-T. Wong and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3133–3139 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Holmes, S. R. Forrest, T. Sajoto, A. Tamayo, P. I. Djurovich and M. E. Thompson, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 163–172 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lamansky, R. C. Kwong, M. Nugent, P. I. Djurovich and M. E. Thompson, Org. Electron., 2001, 2, 53–62 CrossRef CAS .
C. Adachi, M. A. Baldo, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 904–906 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, P. I. Djurovich, B. D. Alleyne, M. Yousufuddin, N. N. Ho, J. C. Thomas, J. C. Peters, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 1713–1727 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Tamayo, B. D. Alleyne, P. I. Djurovich, S. Lamansky, I. Tsyba, N. N. Ho, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 7377–7387 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lamansky, P. I. Djurovich, F. Abdel-Razzaq, S. Garon, D. L. Murphy and M. E. Thompson, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 1570–1575 CrossRef CAS .
F.-C. Chen, Y. Yang, M. E. Thompson and J. Kido, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2308–2310 CrossRef CAS .
C. Adachi, M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 5048–5051 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lamansky, P. Djurovich, D. Murphy, F. Abdel-Razzaq, H.-E. Lee, C. Adachi, P. E. Burrows, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4304–4312 CrossRef CAS .
C. Adachi, M. A. Baldo, S. R. Forrest, S. Lamansky, M. E. Thompson and R. C. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 1622–1624 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Holmes, S. R. Forrest, Y.-J. Tung, R. C. Kwong, J. J. Brown, S. Garon and M. E. Thompson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 2422–2424 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2000, 403, 750–753 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Su, T. Chiba, T. Takeda and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2125–2130 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, J. Gao, Y. Cheng, Z. Xie, L. Wang, D. Ma, X. Jing and F. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 575–581 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, W.-Y. Wong, B. Yao, Z. Xie and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1149–1151 CrossRef CAS .
E. Holder, B. M. W. Langeveld and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1109–1121 CrossRef CAS .
P.-T. Chou and Y. Chi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 380–395 CrossRef CAS .
V. Marin, E. Holder, R. Hoogenboom and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 618–635 RSC .

          M. K. Nazeeruddin, C. Klein, M. Grätzel, L. Zuppiroli and D. Berner, in Highly Efficient OLEDs with Phosphorescent Materials, ed. H. Yersin, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2008, pp. 363–387 Search PubMed .
G. Zhou, W.-Y. Wong and X. Yang, Chem.–Asian J., 2011, 6, 1706–1727 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Goldsmith, W. R. Hudson, M. S. Lowry, T. H. Anderson and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7502–7510 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Yang, C.-H. Wu, H.-H. Liao, K.-Y. Lai, H.-P. Cheng, S.-F. Horng, H.-F. Meng and J.-T. Shy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 133509 CrossRef .
G. L. Schulz and S. Holdcroft, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5351–5355 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Lowry and S. Bernhard, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 7970–7977 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Dixon, J.-P. Collin, J.-P. Sauvage, L. Flamigni, S. Encinas and F. Barigelletti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2000, 29, 385–391 RSC .
J. A. G. Williams, A. J. Wilkinson and V. L. Whittle, Dalton Trans., 2008, 2081–2099 RSC .
Y. You and S. Y. Park, Dalton Trans., 2009, 1267–1282 RSC .

          Y. Chi and P.-T. Chou, in Highly Efficient OLEDs with Phosphorescent Materials, ed. H. Yersin, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2008, pp. 185–216 Search PubMed .

          P. I. Djurovich and M. E. Thompson, in Highly Efficient OLEDs with Phosphorescent Materials, ed. H. Yersin, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2008, pp. 131–154 Search PubMed .

          A. Tsuboyama, S. Okada and K. Ueno, in Highly Efficient OLEDs with Phosphorescent Materials, ed. H. Yersin, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2008, pp. 163–179 Search PubMed .

          H. Yersin and W. J. Finkenzeller, in Highly Efficient OLEDs with Phosphorescent Materials, ed. H. Yersin, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2008, pp. 1–89 Search PubMed .
J. D. Slinker, J. Rivnay, J. S. Moskowitz, J. B. Parker, S. Bernhard, H. D. Abruña and G. G. Malliaras, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2976–2988 RSC .
E. Baranoff, J.-H. Yum, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 2661–2670 CrossRef CAS .
L. Flamigni, A. Barbieri, C. Sabatini, B. Ventura and F. Barigelletti, Top. Curr. Chem., 2007, 281, 143–203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chi and P.-T. Chou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 638–655 RSC .
A. Ruggi, D. N. Reinhoudt and A. H. Velders, Bioinorg. Med. Chem., 2011, 383–406 CrossRef CAS .
V. Fernandez-Moreira, F. L. Thorp-Greenwood and M. P. Coogan, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 186–202 RSC .
V. Guerchais and J.-L. Fillaut, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 2448–2457 CrossRef CAS .
K. K.-W. Lo, M.-W. Louie and K. Y. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2603–2622 CrossRef CAS .
K. K.-W. Lo, K. H.-K. Tsang, K.-S. Sze, C.-K. Chung, T. K.-M. Lee, K. Y. Zhang, W.-K. Hui, C.-K. Li, J. S.-Y. Lau, D. C.-M. Ng and N. Zhu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 2292–2310 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ruggi, F. W. B. van Leeuwen and A. H. Velders, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 2542–2554 CrossRef CAS .
K. K.-W. Lo, S. P.-Y. Li and K. Y. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 265–287 RSC .
K. K.-W. Lo, K. Y. Zhang and S. P.-Y. Li, Pure Appl. Chem., 2011, 83, 823–840 CrossRef CAS .
K. K.-W. Lo, Top. Organomet. Chem., 2010, 29, 115–158 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, C. Huang and F. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2508–2524 RSC .
Q. Zhao, F. Li and C. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3007–3030 RSC .
Z.-q. Chen, Z.-q. Bian and C.-h. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1534–1539 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ulbricht, B. Beyer, C. Friebe, A. Winter and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4418–4441 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nonoyama, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1974, 47, 767–768 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Chang, J.-Y. Hung, Y. Chi, J.-P. Chyn, M.-W. Chung, C.-L. Lin, P.-T. Chou, G.-H. Lee, C.-H. Chang and W.-C. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 5075–5084 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lin, C.-Y. Lin, J.-Y. Hung, Y.-Y. Chang, Y. Chi, M.-W. Chung, Y.-C. Chang, C. Liu, H.-A. Pan, G.-H. Lee and P.-T. Chou, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 1785–1795 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lin, Y.-Y. Chang, J.-Y. Hung, C.-Y. Lin, Y. Chi, M.-W. Chung, C.-L. Lin, P.-T. Chou, G.-H. Lee, C.-H. Chang and W.-C. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3182–3186 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Chin, M.-S. Eum, S. y. Kim, C. Kim and S. K. Kang, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 372–375 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Wilkinson, A. E. Goeta, C. E. Foster and J. A. G. Williams, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 6513–6515 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Wilkinson, H. Puschmann, J. A. K. Howard, C. E. Foster and J. A. G. Williams, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 8685–8699 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Whittle and J. A. G. Williams, Dalton Trans., 2009, 3929–3940 RSC .
V. L. Whittle and J. A. G. Williams, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 6596–6607 CrossRef CAS .
A. Auffrant, A. Barbieri, F. Barigelletti, J.-P. Collin, L. Flamigni, C. Sabatini and J.-P. Sauvage, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 10990–10997 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yutaka, S. Obara, S. Ogawa, K. Nozaki, N. Ikeda, T. Ohno, Y. Ishii, K. Sakai and M.-a. Haga, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4737–4746 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mamo, I. Stefio, M. F. Parisi, A. Credi, M. Venturi, C. Di Pietro and S. Campagna, Inorg. Chem., 1997, 36, 5947–5950 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Koga, M. Kamo, Y. Yamada, T. Matsumoto and K. Matsubara, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 2869–2878 CrossRef CAS .
M. Polson, S. Fracasso, V. Bertolasi, M. Ravaglia and F. Scandola, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 1950–1956 CrossRef CAS .
M. Polson, M. Ravaglia, S. Fracasso, M. Garavelli and F. Scandola, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 1282–1289 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hofbeck and H. Yersin, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 9290–9299 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Hay, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 1634–1641 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nozaki, J. Chin. Chem. Soc. (Taipei), 2006, 53, 101–102 CAS .
E. Jansson, B. Minaev, S. Schrader and H. Åagren, Chem. Phys., 2007, 333, 157–167 CrossRef CAS .
S. Obara, M. Itabashi, F. Okuda, S. Tamaki, Y. Tanabe, Y. Ishii, K. Nozaki and M.-a. Haga, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 8907–8921 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsushita, T. Asada and S. Koseki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6897–6903 CAS .
B. Minaev, H. Åagren and F. De Angelis, Chem. Phys., 2009, 358, 245–257 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. G. Smith, M. J. Riley, S.-C. Lo, P. L. Burn, I. R. Gentle and B. J. Powell, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 041105 CrossRef .
A. R. G. Smith, P. L. Burn and B. J. Powell, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 2429–2438 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. G. Smith, M. J. Riley, P. L. Burn, I. R. Gentle, S.-C. Lo and B. J. Powell, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 2821–2831 CrossRef CAS .
P.-T. Chou, Y.-I. Liu, H.-W. Liu and W.-S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12119–12120 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seo, S. Kim and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11154–11155 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tsuboyama, H. Iwawaki, M. Furugori, T. Mukaide, J. Kamatani, S. Igawa, T. Moriyama, S. Miura, T. Takiguchi, S. Okada, M. Hoshino and K. Ueno, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12971–12979 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, D. Berner, S. Rivier, L. Zuppiroli and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 8790–8797 CrossRef CAS .
K. K.-M. Lo, C.-K. Chung, T. K.-M. Lee, L.-H. Lui, K. H.-K. Tsang and N. Zhu, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 6886–6897 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Huang, J. T. Lin, C.-H. Chien, Y.-T. Tao, S.-S. Sun and Y.-S. Wen, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 2480–2488 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Yang, C.-C. Tai and I.-W. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 947–950 RSC .
P. Coppo, E. A. Plummer and L. De Cola, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1774–1775 RSC .
S.-J. Yeh, M.-F. Wu, C.-T. Chen, Y.-H. Song, Y. Chi, M.-H. Ho, S.-F. Hsu and C. H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 285–289 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, P. I. Djurovich, B. D. Alleyne, I. Tsyba, N. N. Ho, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, Polyhedron, 2004, 23, 419–428 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Kwon, H. S. Cho, M. K. Kim, J.-W. Kim, J.-J. Kim, K. H. Lee, S. J. Park, I.-S. Shin, H. Kim, D. M. Shin, Y. K. Chung and J.-I. Hong, Organometallics, 2005, 24, 1578–1585 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kappaun, S. Sax, S. Eder, K. C. Möller, K. Waich, F. Niedermair, R. Saf, K. Mereiter, J. Jacob, K. Müllen, E. J. W. List and C. Slugovc, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1209–1211 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12438–12439 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, K. S. Kim, T. K. Ahn, D. Kim and S. Y. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4052–4060 CAS .
J. P. Duan, P. P. Sun and C. H. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 224–228 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, C. Yang, J. Qin, J. Gao, H. You and D. Ma, J. Organomet. Chem., 2006, 691, 3519–3530 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. K. Mak, A. Hayer, S. I. Pascu, S. E. Watkins, A. B. Holmes, A. Köhler and R. H. Friend, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4708–4710 RSC .
T. Sajoto, P. I. Djurovich, A. Tamayo, M. Yousufuddin, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 7992–8003 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Goldstein, Y. Y. Cheng, T. W. Schmidt, M. Bhadbhade and P. Thordarson, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 2053–2061 RSC .
W. Leslie, A. S. Batsanov, J. A. K. Howard and J. A. G. Williams, Dalton Trans., 2004, 623–631 RSC .
T. Liu, H.-X. Zhang and B.-H. Xia, J. Organomet. Chem., 2008, 693, 947–956 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Chen, Y.-H. Wu, L.-H. He, H.-R. Wen, J. Liao and R. Hong, Organometallics, 2010, 29, 2882–2891 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhao, Y.-H. Wu, H.-M. Wen, X. Zhang and Z.-N. Chen, Organometallics, 2009, 28, 5603–5611 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, H.-X. Zhang and B.-H. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 8724–8730 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen, C.-H. Yang, Y. Chi, Y.-M. Cheng, Y.-S. Y. P.-T. Chou, H.-Y. Hsieh, C.-S. Liu, S.-M. Peng and G.-H. Lee, Can. J. Chem., 2006, 84, 309–318 CrossRef CAS .
K.-C. Tang, K. L. Liu and I.-C. Chen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 386, 437–441 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Hedley, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 450, 292–296 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Hedley, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 114, 8961–8968 CrossRef .
N. H. Damrauer, G. Cerullo, A. Yeh, T. R. Boussie, C. V. Shank and J. K. McCusker, Science, 1997, 275, 54–57 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Damrauer and J. K. McCusker, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 8440–8446 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Yeh, C. V. Shank and J. K. McCusker, Science, 2000, 289, 935–938 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Bhasikuttan, M. Suzuki, S. Nakashima and T. Okada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8398–8405 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Kober and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1982, 21, 3967–3977 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Montalti, A. Credi, L. Prodi and M. T. Gandolfi, Handbook of Photochemistry, Talyer & Francis, New York, 3rd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .

          S. Fraga, J. Karwowski and K. M. S. Sexena, Handbook of Atomic Data. Physical Science Data, Elselvier, New York,  1976 Search PubMed .
W. J. Finkenzeller and H. Yersin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 377, 299–305 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Jacko and B. J. Powell, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 508, 22–28 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, J. Seo, S. H. Kim, K. S. Kim, T. K. Ahn, D. Kim and S. Y. Park, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1476–1487 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Duan, P.-T. Chou, C.-C. Hsu, J.-Y. Hung and Y. Chi, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 6501–6508 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sajoto, P. I. Djurovich, A. B. Tamayo, J. Oxgaard, W. A. Goddard and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9813–9822 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Costa, F. Monti, G. Accorsi, A. Barbieri, H. J. Bolink, E. Ortí and N. Armaroli, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 7229–7238 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. D'Andrade, J. Brooks, V. Adamovich, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1032–1036 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, L. Li, F. Li, M. Yu, Z. Liu, T. Yi and C. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 685–687 RSC .
C. Yu, K. H.-Y. Chan, K. M.-C. Wong and V. W.-W. Yam, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3756–3758 RSC .
M. Iswarya and S. Wenfang, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 5885–5898 RSC .
F. Juan, F. Sara, L. J. Antonio, M. Antonio and S. Violeta, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 7166–7176 CrossRef .
B.-K. An, S.-K. Kwon, S.-D. Jung and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14410–14415 CrossRef CAS .
W. I. Gruszecki, J. Biol. Phys., 1991, 18, 99–109 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cornil, D. Beljonne, J.-P. Calbert and J.-L. Brédas, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1053–1067 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gierschner, M. Ehni, H. Egelhaaf, B. M. Medina, D. Beljonne, H. Benmansour and G. C. Bazan, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 144914–144919 CrossRef .
G.-G. Shan, H.-B. Li, H.-T. Cao, D.-X. Zhu, P. Li, Z.-M. Su and Y. Liao, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2000–2002 RSC .
C. Cornelissen-Gude, W. Rettig and R. Lapouyade, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 9673–9677 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, H. S. Huh, K. S. Kim, S. W. Lee, D. Kim and S. Y. Park, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3998–4000 RSC .
J. L. Delgado, P.-A. Bouit, S. Filippone, M. Á. Herranz and N. Martín, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4853–4865 RSC   and references therein.
W.-Y. Wong and C.-L. Ho, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1246–1256 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, B. Hu and J. Howe, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 043909 CrossRef .
J. Huang, J. Yu, Z. Guan and Y. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 143301 CrossRef .
W. Lee, T.-H. Kwon, J. Kwon, J.-y. Kim, C. Lee and J.-I. Hong, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 2557–2563 RSC .
R. R. Lunt, N. C. Giebink, A. A. Belak, J. B. Benziger and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 053711 CrossRef .
A. Haugeneder, M. Neges, C. Kallinger, W. Spirkl, U. Lemmer, J. Feldmann, U. Scherf, E. Harth, A. Gügel and K. Müllen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 15346 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reufer, P. G. Lagoudakis, M. J. Walter, J. M. Lupton, J. Feldmann and U. Scherf, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 241201 CrossRef .
D. R. Kanis, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 195–242 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dragonetti, S. Righetto, D. Roberto, R. Ugo, A. Valore, S. Fantacci, A. Sgamellotti and F. D. Angelis, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4116–4118 RSC .
A. Valore, E. Cariati, C. Dragonetti, S. Righetto, D. Roberto, R. Ugo, F. D. Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Sgamellotti, A. Macchioni and D. Zuccaccia, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 4814–4825 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dragonetti, S. Righetto, D. Roberto, R. Ugo, A. Valore, F. Demartin, F. De Angelis, A. Sgamellotti and S. Fantacci, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 4070–4076 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aubert, L. Ordronneau, M. Escadeillas, J. A. G. Williams, A. Boucekkine, E. Coulaud, C. Dragonetti, S. Righetto, D. Roberto, R. Ugo, A. Valore, A. Singh, J. Zyss, I. Ledoux-Rak, H. L. Bozec and V. Guerchais, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 5027–5038 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Koide, S. Takahashi and M. Vacha, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10990–10991 CrossRef CAS .
C.-K. Koo, K.-L. M. Wong, C. Wing-Yin, H.-L. Tam, S.-W. Tsao, K.-W. Cheah and M. H.-W. Lam, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 7501–7503 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Botchway, M. Charnley, O. W. Haycock, A. W. Parker, D. L. Rochester, J. A. Weinstein and J. A. G. Williams, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 16071–16076 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Puckett and J. K. Barton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8738–8739 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Sánchez and E. Gratton, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 469–477 CrossRef .
G. S. He, L.-S. Tan, Q. Zheng and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 1245–1330 CrossRef CAS .
E. Downing, L. Hesselink, J. Ralston and R. Macfarlane, Science, 1996, 273, 1185–1189 CAS .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 155122–155124 CrossRef .
T. N. Singh-Rachford, A. Haefele, R. Ziessel and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16164–16165 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2560–2573 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Keivanidis, S. Baluschev, T. Miteva, G. Nelles, U. Scherf, A. Yasuda and G. Wegner, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2095–2098 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Kozlov and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2860–2861 RSC .
R. R. Islangulov, D. V. Kozlov and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3776–3778 RSC .
W. Zhao and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 11440–11445 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, W. Wu, H. Guo and J. Zhao, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 3165–3173 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Y. Zheng, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4959–4961 RSC .
N. D. McDaniel and S. Bernhard, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10021–10030 RSC .
L. L. Tinker, N. D. McDaniel and S. Bernhard, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3328–3337 RSC .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. C. Rowsell and O. M. Yaghi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4670–4679 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Esswein and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4022–4047 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hollmann, F. Gärtner, R. Ludwig, E. Barsch, H. Junge, M. Blug, S. Hoch, M. Beller and A. Brückner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10246–10250 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gärtner, B. Sundararaju, A.-E. Surkus, A. Boddien, B. Loges, H. Junge, P. H. Dixneuf and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9962–9965 CrossRef .
L. L. Tinker and S. Bernhard, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 10507–10511 CrossRef CAS .
S. Metz and S. Bernhard, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7551–7553 RSC .
Y.-J. Yuan, Z.-T. Yu, X.-Y. Chen, J.-Y. Zhang and Z.-G. Zou, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 12891–12895 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. DiSalle and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11819–11821 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Curtin, L. L. Tinker, C. M. Burgess, E. D. Cline and S. Bernhard, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 10498–10506 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Cline, S. E. Adamson and S. Bernhard, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 10378–10388 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fihri, V. Artero, M. Razavet, C. Baffert, W. Leibl and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 564–567 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, K. Knowles and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12576–12577 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Na, X. Li, Y. Jiang and L. Sun, Dalton
Trans., 2010, 39, 1204–1206 RSC .
K. Kalyanasundaram, J. Kiwi and M. Grätzel, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1978, 61, 2720–2730 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Kluwer, R. Kapre, F. Hartl, M. Lutz, A. L. Spek, A. M. Brouwer, P. W. N. M. van Leeuwen and J. N. H. Reek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 10460–10465 CAS .
B. Probst, A. Rodenberg, M. Guttentag, P. Hamm and R. Alberto, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 6453–6460 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, P. Du, J. Schneider, P. Jarosz and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7726–7727 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, J. Schneider, F. Li, W. Zhao, U. Patel, F. N. Castellano and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5056–5058 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Lowry, J. I. Goldsmith, J. D. Slinker, R. Rohl, J. Robert, A. Pascal, G. G. Malliaras and S. Bernhard, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5712–5719 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Tinker, N. D. McDaniel, P. N. Curtin, C. K. Smith, M. J. Ireland and S. Bernhard, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 8726–8732 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Pan, Y. Na, J. Liu, B. Åkermark and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 8198–8202 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ozawa, M. Haga and K. Sakai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4926–4927 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masaoka, Y. Mukawaa and K. Sakai, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 5868–5876 RSC .
H. Ozawa, M. Kobayashi, B. Balan, S. Masaoka and K. Sakai, Chem.–Asian J., 2010, 5, 1860–1869 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rau, B. Schäfer, D. Gleich, E. Anders, M. Rudolph, M. Friedrich, H. Görls, W. Henry and J. G. Vos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6215–6218 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elvington, J. Brown, S. M. Arachchige and K. J. Brewer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10644–10645 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rangan, S. M. Arachchige, J. R. Brown and K. J. Brewer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 410–419 CAS .
A. Fihri, V. Artero, M. Razavet, C. Baffert, W. Leibl and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 564–567 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jasimuddin, T. Yamada, K. Fukuju, J. Otsuki and K. Sakai, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8466–8468 RSC .
R. D. Costa, E. Ortí, H. J. Bolink, S. Graber, C. E. Housecroft and E. C. Constable, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5978–5980 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Gersten, G. J. Samuels and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 4029–4030 CrossRef CAS .
J. Limburg, J. S. Vrettos, L. M. Liable-Sands, A. L. Rheingold, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Science, 1999, 283, 1524–1527 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zong and R. P. Thummel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12802–12803 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, A. Fischer, Y. Xu and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10397–10399 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bozoglian, S. Romain, M. Z. Ertem, T. K. Todorova, C. Sens, J. Mola, M. Rodriguez, I. Romero, J. Benet-Buchholz, X. Fontrodona, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi and A. Llobet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15176–15187 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Gilbert, D. S. Eggleston, W. R. Murphy, Jr, D. A. Geselowitz, S. W. Gersten, D. J. Hodgson and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 3855–3864 CrossRef CAS .
S. Romain, L. Vigara and A. Llobet, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1944–1953 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, T. Cardolaccia, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1727–1752 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Morris and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11114–11121 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakagawa, N. S. Bjorge and R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15578–15579 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926–927 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16462–16463 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Duan, Y.-H. Xu, P. Zhang, M. Wang and L.-C. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Ellis, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and T. J. Collins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10990–10991 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lalrempuia, N. D. McDaniel, H. Müller-Bunz, S. Bernhard and M. Albrecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9765–9768 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Hull, D. Balcells, J. D. Blakemore, C. D. Incarvito, O. Eisenstein, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8730–8731 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Blakemore, N. D. Schley, D. Balcells, J. F. Hull, G. W. Olack, C. D. Incarvito, O. Eisenstein, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16017–16029 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. McDaniel, F. J. Coughlin, L. L. Tinker and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 210–217 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Xie, K. E. deKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13445–13454 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Schley, J. D. Blakemore, N. K. Subbaiyan, C. D. Incarvito, F. D'Souza, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10473–10481 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Brewster, J. D. Blakemore, N. D. Schley, C. D. Incarvito, N. Hazari, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, Organometallics, 2011, 30, 965–973 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hong, M. Murakami, Y. Yamada and S. Fukuzumi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5708–5716 CAS .
Y. Maenaka, T. Suenobu and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 367–374 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Freys, G. Bernardinelli and O. S. Wenger, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4267–4269 RSC .
D. Hanss, J. C. Freys, G. Bernardinelli and O. S. Wenger, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 4850–4859 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Condie, J. C. Gonzalez-Gomez and C. R. J. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1464–1465 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rueping, D. Leonori and T. Poisson, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9615–9617 RSC .
J. W. Tucker, J. D. Nguyen, J. M. R. Narayanam, S. W. Krabbe and C. R. J. Stephenson, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4985–4987 RSC .
M.-H. Larraufie, R. Pellet, L. Fensterbank, J.-P. Goddard, E. Laôte, M. Malacria and C. Ollivier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4463–4466 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Nguyen, J. W. Tucker, M. D. Konieczynska and C. R. J. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4160–4163 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Nagib and D. W. C. MacMillan, Nature, 2011, 480, 224–228 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Shih, M. N. V. Wal, R. L. Grange and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13600–13603 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Nagib, M. E. Scott and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10875–10877 CrossRef CAS .
A. McNally, C. K. Prier and D. W. C. MacMillan, Science, 2011, 334, 1114–1117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lalevée, N. Blanchard, M.-A. Tehfe, M. Peter, F. Morlet-Savary and J. P. Fouassier, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 917–920 CrossRef .
P. Agostinis, K. Berg, K. A. Cengel, T. H. Foster, A. W. Girotti, S. O. Gollnick, S. M. Hahn, M. R. Hamblin, A. Juzeniene, D. Kessel, M. Korbelik, J. Moan, P. Mroz, D. Nowis, J. Piette, B. C. Wilson and J. Golab, Cancer J. Clin., 2011, 61, 250–281 CrossRef .

          B. Halliwell and J. M. C. Gurreridge, Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine, Oxford University Press Inc., New York, 4th edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
M. C. DeRosa and R. J. Crutchley, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 233–234, 351–371 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, R. Gao, F. Zhou and M. Selke, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 487–493 RSC .
K. Berg, A. Weyergang, L. Prasmickaite, A. Bonsted, A. Hoegset, M.-T. R. Strand, E. Wagner and P. K. Selbo, Methods Mol. Biol. (Totowa, N. J.), 2010, 635, 133–145 CrossRef CAS .
F. Manjon, D. Garcia-Fresnadillo and G. Orellana, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 926–932 CAS .
S.-y. Takizawa, R. Aboshi and S. Murata, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2011, 10, 895–903 CAS .
J. N. Demas, E. W. Harris and R. P. McBride, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 3547–3551 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Demas, E. W. Harris, C. M. Flynn, Jr. and D. Diemente, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1975, 97, 3838–3839 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, J. Zhao, H. Guo and W. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4169–4171 RSC .
R. Gao, D. G. Ho, B. Hernandez, M. Selke, D. Murphy, P. I. Djurovich and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14828–14829 CrossRef CAS .
P. I. Djurovich, D. Murphy, M. E. Thompson, B. Hernandez, R. Gao, P. L. Hunt and M. Selke, Dalton Trans., 2007, 3763–3770 RSC .
F. Shao and J. K. Barton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14733–14738 CrossRef CAS .
B. Elias, F. Shao and J. K. Barton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1152–1153 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shao, B. Elias, W. Lu and J. K. Barton, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 10187–10199 CrossRef CAS .
E. Meggers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2442–2448 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kastl, A. Wilbuer, A. L. Merkel, L. Feng, P. D. Fazio, M. Ocker and E. Meggers, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1863–1865 RSC .
A. Wilbuer, D. H. Vlecken, D. J. Schmitz, K. Kröling, K. Harms, C. P. Bagowski and E. Meggers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3839–3842 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You and S. Y. Park, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3820–3826 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Medina-Castillo, J. F. Fernández-Sánchez, C. Klein, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Segura-Carretero, A. Fernández-Gutiérrez, M. Graetzelc and U. E. Spichiger-Keller, Analyst, 2007, 132, 929–936 RSC .
G. Di Marco, M. Lanza, A. Mamo, I. Stefio, C. Di Pietro, G. Romero and S. Campagna, Anal. Chem, 1998, 70, 5019–5023 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. D. Rosa, P. J. Mosher, G. P. A. Yap, K.-S. Focsaneanu, R. J. Crutchley and C. E. B. Evans, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 4864–4872 CrossRef .
M. C. D. Rosa, D. J. Hodgson, G. D. Enright, B. Dawson, C. E. B. Evans and R. J. Crutchley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7619–7626 CrossRef .
L. Huynh, Z. Wang, J. Yang, V. Stoeva, A. Lough, I. Manners and M. A. Winnik, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4765–4773 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, M. Hosaka, T. Yoshihara, K. Negishi, Y. Iida, S. Tobita and T. Takeuchi, Cancer Res., 2010, 70, 4490–4498 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshihara, Y. Yamaguchi, M. Hosaka, T. Takeuchi and S. Tobita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4148–4151 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, Q. Zhao, L. Shi, F. Li, Z. Zhou, H. Yang, T. Yi and C. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2115–2117 RSC .
Q. Zhao, M. Yu, L. Shi, S. Liu, C. Li, M. Shi, Z. Zhou, C. Huang and F. Li, Organometallics, 2010, 29, 1085–1091 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, Y. Gao, Y. Sun, F. Ding, Y. Xu, Z. Bian, F. Li, J. Bian and C. Huang, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 3252–3260 CrossRef CAS .
L. Murphy, A. Congreve, L.-O. Pålsson and J. A. G. Williams, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8743–8745 RSC .
H.-W. Liu, K. Y. Zhang, W. H.-T. Law and K. K.-W. Lo, Organometallics, 2010, 29, 3474–3476 CrossRef .
J. S.-Y. Lau, P.-K. Lee, K. H.-K. Tsang, C. H.-C. Ng, Y.-W. Lam, S.-H. Cheng and K. K.-W. Lo, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 708–718 CrossRef CAS .
S. P.-Y. Li, H.-W. Liu, K. Y. Zhang and K. K.-W. Lo, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8329–8339 CrossRef CAS .
S.-K. Leung, H.-W. Liu and K. K.-W. Lo, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10548–10550 RSC .
B. T. Nguyen and E. V. Anslyn, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 3118–3127 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Hauser and R. Y. Tsien, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 3693–3697 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H.-Y. Park, J. Kim, J. Ryu, D. Y. Kwon, R. Grailhe and R. Song, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1910–1912 RSC .
D.-L. Ma, W.-L. Wong, W.-H. Chung, F.-Y. Chan, P.-K. So, T.-S. Lai, Z.-Y. Zhou, Y.-C. Leung and K.-Y. Wong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3735–3739 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Jia, Z. Huang, M. Zhou and H. Fei, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 8028–8032 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, M. Yu, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, C. Huang and F. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11231–11239 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Schwartz and K. R. Mann, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 12477–12485 CrossRef CAS .
K. K.-W. Lo, K. Y. Zhang, C.-K. Chung and K. Y. Kwok, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 7110–7120 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Yeh, Y.-M. Cheng, P.-T. Chou, G.-H. Lee, C.-H. Yang, Y. Chi, C.-F. Shu and C.-H. Wang, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 2294–2297 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Park, Y. S. Kim and Y. Ha, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2007, 7, 390–395 CrossRef .
B. R. Spencer, B. J. Kraft, C. G. Hughes, M. Pink and J. M. Zaleski, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 11333–11345 CrossRef CAS .
K. K.-W. Lo, K. Y. Zhang, S.-K. Leung and M.-C. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2213–2216 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, Y. Han, Y.-M. Lee, S. Y. Park, W. Nam and S. J. Lippard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11488–11491 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Youngmin You
	Youngmin You received BS (Magna Cum Laude) and MS degrees in Chemical Engineering from Seoul National University, Korea. He then moved to Department of Materials Science and Engineering at SNU and earned his PhD under the supervision of Professor Soo Young Park in 2007. After a postdoctoral stay at Lippard Lab in MIT, he joined Research Center for Bioredox Systems at Ewha Womans University as a Research Professor. His research is at the borderline between chemistry and materials science, and his research interest is discovery and creation of new photofunctional molecules.

Wonwoo Nam
	Wonwoo Nam received his BS (Honors) degree in Chemistry from California State University, Los Angeles, and his PhD degree in Inorganic Chemistry from UCLA under the direction of Professor Joan S. Valentine in 1990. After one year postdoctoral experience at UCLA, he became an Assistant Professor at Hong Ik University in 1991. He moved to Ewha Womans University in 1994, where he is presently a Distinguished Professor of Ewha Womans University. His current research focuses on the dioxygen activation, water oxidation, and sensors for metal ions in bioinorganic chemistry.

 	Scheme 1  Syntheses and structures of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthetic approaches and structures of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes containing phosphite (a and b) and terdentate ligands (c–g).	 

 	Fig. 1  Structure and isodensity plot of the frontier molecular orbitals of fac-Ir(ppy)3.	 

 	Fig. 2  MLCT state energy tuning via frontier molecular orbital control.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Excited state photophysics of cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes, and (b) the construction of excited states via molecular orbital interactions: MC, metal-centered ligand-field state; LC, ligand-centered state; MLCT, metal-to-ligand charge-transfer state; LL′CT, ligand-to-ligand charge-transfer state; ILCT, intraligand charge-transfer state; IC, internal conversion; ISC, intersystem crossing; IVR, intramolecular vibrational redistribution. L and L′ denote different ligands of a heteroleptic Ir(III) complex.	 

 	Fig. 4  Temperature-dependent population of the non-radiative 3MC state.	 

 	Fig. 5  Piezochromic phosphorescence changes in the cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes: phosphorescence emission of (a) B1 and (b) Y1 powders before and after grinding, and the corresponding phosphorescence spectral changes (c and d). Reproduced from Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2000−2002. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photofunctionalities of the triplet excited states of Ir(III) complexes.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) A schematic representation of photocurrent generation in organic photovoltaic cells. The blue and red arrows indicate the diffusion of singlet (antiparallel spin) and triplet (parallel spin) excitons, respectively. Ld, exciton diffusion length. ITO, indium tin oxide; PCBM, [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester. (b) ISC between singlet and triplet excitons and their polaron pairs by intermolecular SOC: S, ground state; S*, singlet exciton; T, triplet exciton; 1(PP), singlet polaron pair; 3(PP), triplet polaron pair. Adapted with permission from J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 043909. Copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics. (c) Triplet exciton sensitization by excited state energy exchange: TTET, triplet–triplet energy transfer.	 

 	Fig. 8  Polymers used in the active layers of OPV cells, and their J–V curves. Reproduced with permission from Chem. Mater. 2008, 20, 5351–5355. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Structure and (b) two-photon absorption cross section (λem = 520 nm) of a cyclometalated Ir(III) complex and (c) two-photon phosphorescence Golgi staining (left, a fluorescence Golgi-specific stain; middle, Ir(III) complex stain; right, a merged image). Reproduced from Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2525–2527. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Ir(III) complexes that act as long-lived triplet sensitizers for upconverted emission. (b) Photograph showing upconversion by the Ir(III) complexes (10 μM, deaerated CH3CN at 25 °C) in the absence or presence of DPA (9,10-diphenylanthracene, 8 equiv.). λex = 445 nm (5 mW). Reprinted from Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 3165–3173. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Scheme 3  (a) Water splitting and its half-reactions. (b) A simplified mechanism for photocatalytic dihydrogen production: SR, sacrificial reductant; PS, photosensitizer; WRC, water-reduction catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 11  Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes used as photosensitizers in the context of photocatalytic dihydrogen production.	 

 	Fig. 12  Molecular dyads of a photosensitizer (PS) and a water-reduction catalyst (WRC) for photocatalytic dihydrogen production.	 

 	Fig. 13  [Ir(C∧N∧N)2]+ complex for photocatalytic dihydrogen production with improved photostability.	 

 	Scheme 4  Proposed mechanism for dioxygen evolution from water using a cyclometalated Ir(III) complex as a catalyst. Adapted from Dalton Trans, 2011, 40, 11241–11247. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Cp*Ir complex catalysts for electrochemical dioxygen evolution.	 

 	Scheme 5  Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes as photocatalysts with redox catalytic property.	 

 	Scheme 6  Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes as photocatalysts with reductive catalytic property.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Energy and electron transfer from the triplet state of Ir(III) complexes to dioxygen. (b) Ir(III) complexes used for singlet oxygen photosensitization.	 

 	Fig. 16  Cyclometalated Ir(III) complexes for use as DNA photoredox catalysts (a) and a photoinduced apoptosis agent (b).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Structure of a phosphorescent O2 probe and its application to in vivo hypoxia imaging. Reproduced with permission from Cancer Res., 2010, 70, 4490–4498. Copyright 2010, American Association for Cancer Research. (b) Ratiometric visualization of intracellular O2 in HeLa cells using a dual-emissive sensor. Reproduced from Angew Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4148−4151. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  Phosphorescent Ir(III) complexes for the cytoplasm staining of live mammalian cells. Reproduced from Chem. Commun., 2008, 44, 2115−2117. Copyright 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Interconversion between a charge-neutral form (1) and a cationic form (2) in an acid–base equilibrium. (b) Photoluminescence spectra of the Ir(III) complex and its conjugate base. (c) Photoluminescence time-gated imaging of live HeLa cells pretreated with the Ir(III) complex and a fluorescent nuclear stain: Left, total photoluminescence microscope image dominated by the fluorescence signal of the nucleus-specific stain, Hoechst 33342; right, time-gated photoluminescence microscope image at a delay time of 10 ns. Reproduced from Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8743−8745. Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  Histidine-specific phosphorescence peptide labeling. (a) Proposed peptide binding modes of the bis-cyclometalated Ir(III) solvento complex. (b) Mitochondria-specific phosphorescent staining of live HeLa cells: top left, bright field image; top right, phosphorescence staining with the Ir(III)-labeled peptide; bottom left, fluorescence staining with MitoTracker; bottom right, merged images. Reprinted from Chem.–Eur. J. 2011, 17, 8028–8032. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 21  Reaction between the Ir(III) bishydrazino complex and CO2 to produce an Ir(III) carbazate complex, and the corresponding changes in the UV-vis absorption and phosphorescence spectra. Reprinted with permission from Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 12477−12485. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Phosphorescence ratiometric sensors for copper (a and b) and zinc (c and d) ions. (a) Structure of the phosphorescence ratiometric Cu(II) sensor. (b) Intracellular copper imaging of HeLa cells. From the left: differential interference contrast images, phosphorescence acquired through a green channel, phosphorescence acquired through a red channel, co-localization scatter plots of the green and red channels, and phosphorescence intensity ratio images of the green and red channels. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11488−11491. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (c) Structure of the phosphorescence ratiometric Zn(II) sensor. (d) Fluorescence lifetime microscope images of A549 cells treated with the phosphorescent zinc probe. From the left: overlay of images, long-lived component (τ1) images, midrange component (τ2) images, short-lived component (τ3) images, and amplitude plots of the x-scan for the grey regions in the τ1 images. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18328−18342. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
