A photovoltaic-driven solid-state Zn–CO 2 electrochemical cell system with sunlight-insusceptible chemical production   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA01451F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA01451F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13806-13811A photovoltaic-driven solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell system with sunlight-insusceptible chemical production†

        
          
            Xueyuan 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad Arsalan 
            Ghausi
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Yang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Maoxiang 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiafang 
            Xie
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yaobing 
            Wang
          
        
      *ac
aCAS Key Laboratory of Design and Assembly of Functional Nanostructures, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Nanomaterials, State Key Laboratory of Structural Chemistry, Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials Chemistry and Physics, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, China. E-mail: xiejiafang@fjirsm.ac.cn; wangyb@fjirsm.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
cDalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian 116023, China
Received 
      6th February 2020
    , Accepted 22nd June 2020First published on 23rd June 2020AbstractArtificial leaves conduct photo(electro)chemical reactions for chemical and fuel production directly driven by sunlight/photovoltaic cells. Therefore, only in the presence of real-time sunlight can artificial leaves generate chemicals and fuels, limiting the prolonged production and flexible application of artificial leaves. In this work, by simply coupling a photovoltaic cell with a solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell as a new conceptual artificial leaf, continuous chemical production not only with sunlight but also in the dark was realized. In this conceptual artificial leaf, photo-generated electricity from the photovoltaic cell was pre-stored in the electrochemical cell during charge and CO2 reduction occurred in discharge. With pure CO2 supply, the conceptual artificial leaf achieved a solar-to-CO efficiency up to 15.2%, which surpassed that of the record artificial leaves and was among the highest efficiencies for artificial photosynthesis devices. This work provides possibilities for developing more universal-applied artificial leaves producing chemicals and fuels with ever-changing sunlight.
Introduction
Producing chemicals and fuels with renewable energies and CO2 is in ever-increasing demand for a sustainable economy and environment.1,2 Among various devices, artificial leaves, a solid-state artificial photosynthesis device, gained particular interest for their solid-state appearance facilitating transportation and operation.3–5 The artificial leaf with H2 evolution and O2 evolution catalysts deposited on the card-like photovoltaic cell can produce H2 with up to 10% solar-to-H2 efficiency.6,7 When a CO2 reduction catalyst is attached instead of a hydrogen evolution catalyst, carbon-based chemicals and fuels could be generated, such as CO with 4.2% solar-to-fuel efficiency.8 Despite great breakthroughs that previous studies have achieved,9–11 however, current artificial leaves still depend strongly on real-time sunlight, limiting chemical and fuel production under dark conditions. Moreover, prolonged and stable generation of carbon-based products is also a challenge for artificial leaves due to the ever-changing climate. The bottleneck of both problems is derived from the immediate and direct utilization of photo-generated electricity.
Metal–CO2 batteries are thus a promising candidate solution because they can implement a pre-storage of energy prior to being stored in carbon-based products because they take inherent advantage of separation of energy inputs and cathodic active species reduction in charge and discharge processes, respectively.12,13 So metal–CO2 batteries are qualified for prolonged and stable chemical production that is free from being affected by the ever-changing climate and sunlight.14,15 When simply coupling a photovoltaic cell with a solid-state metal–CO2 battery, a new artificial leaf with continuous chemical production not only with sunlight but also in the dark could be obtained. However, an aqueous solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemistry cell that can generate flexible carbon-based products via the unique proton-coupled electron transfer mechanism has not been reported as far as we know.16–18
In this work, we realized, for the first time, a conceptual artificial leaf that could continuously generate carbon-based products not only with sunlight but also in the dark by designing a rechargeable solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell and then simply coupling it with a photovoltaic cell. The configuration of the conceptual artificial leaf and how it overcame its dependence on real-time sunlight were presented. The appearance and functions of this conceptual artificial leaf and natural tree leaf were compared. The performances of the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell and the conceptual artificial leaf were investigated preliminarily. This work shows an alternative artificial leaf with a wide prospect for a sustainable carbon cycle with sunlight-insusceptible chemical production.
Results and discussion

Scheme 1 presents the conceptual artificial leaf comprising the photovoltaic cell and the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell. We focused on the design of the solid-state electrochemical cell because it implemented the key pre-storage of photo-generated electricity and CO production from the electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction (ECDRR) while has not been realized yet. We designed a thin-film gel electrolyte membrane to separate the Zn foil anode and catalyst cathode at the same time to allow ion transfer between two electrodes. The cathode is required to be a bifunctional catalyst to enable a low-overpotential ECDRR and water oxidation and additionally loaded on carbon cloth as a thin cathode film. Based on the above-mentioned layer-to-layer structure, the conceptual artificial leaf could generally mimic a natural leaf in the aspect of the working principle and functions with two-step process: (1) adsorbing solar energy and pre-storing it in the chemical bond accompanied by water oxidation, and (2) implementing CO2 reduction with pre-stored energy. In addition, with easy thickness control of each component, the whole electrochemical cell would be a thin-film and in a solid state, which benefits further mobility and flexibility applications and also mimics natural leaves in appearance.
 Scheme 1  Schematic of a photovoltaic-driven solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell system with the function of photosynthesis mimicking a natural tree leaf. With sunlight, the photovoltaic cell harvests sunlight and generates electricity, which is pre-stored in the Zn anode accompanied by O2 evolution by the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell charging. With sunlight or in the dark, the artificial leaf can continuously produce CO from CO2 reduction by the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell discharging. 
The conceptual artificial leaf presents a series of similarities with a natural leaf not only in detailed steps but also in key impact factors, as shown in Table 1. In the energy input process, both leaves absorb solar energy, store it in the chemical bond, accompanied with O2 generation. Furthermore, in the CO2 fixation process, both leaves utilize energy stored in the chemical bond to drive CO2 reduction with water providing protons. Considering impact factors, the two leaves also share similarities, such as being environmentally friendly, less toxic and low-cost. Therefore, the conceptual artificial leaf mimics a natural leaf in regard of the solid-state appearance, working process, and several key characteristics.
Table 1 Comparison of the natural leaf and artificial leaf in this work




Process
Natural leaf
Artificial leaf in this work




Energy input
Energy source
Sunlight
Sunlight


Energy storage
Chemical bond (ATP and NADPH)
Chemical bond (Zn)


Product
ATP, NADPH, O2
Zn, O2


Place
Chloroplast thylakoid membrane
Cathode


Process
Light reaction
Charge


CO2 fixation
Energy source
ATP and NADPH hydrolysis
Zn dissolution


Co-reagent
Water
Water


Product
Glucose
CO, hydrocarbon, organics, etc.


Place
Chloroplast matrix
Cathode


Process
Dark reaction
Discharge


Impact factor
Requirement of temperature
Strict
Loose


Requirement of sunlight for chemical production
Real-time sunlight
With sunlight and in the dark


Mobility
No
Yes


CO2 supply
∼400 ppm in air
Pure CO2


Environmental friendliness
High
Moderate


Hazard
Little
Very low


Cost
Low
Moderate




In further comparison between the two leaves, it was found that the conceptual artificial leaf possesses several advantages over the natural leaf. Because the energy could be pre-stored in the Zn anode in large amounts for a longer time, the conceptual artificial leaf can utilize Zn anode dissolution to drive continuous CO2 reduction in the ever-changing climate and even in the dark. However the natural leaf only implements CO2 reduction in the presence of sunlight, which also occurs in current artificial leaves as far as we know. Moreover, because the aqueous ECDRR catalysts can be designed with different product selectivity and high efficiency, the conceptual artificial leaf potentially produces various chemicals and fuels more than glucose, which is commonly reported for a natural leaf. Due to the pure inorganic system and advanced properties of components, the conceptual artificial leaf could achieve a higher solar-to-fuel efficiency and controllable operation over the natural leaf. Finally, owing to the solid-state thin-film structure, the artificial leaves can be easily transported and densely placed, just like current artificial leaves, which cannot be realized in most natural leaves. On the other hand, it should be noted that current metal–CO2 electrochemical cells are still discharged with pure CO2 supply, leading to a shortcoming of the conceptual artificial leaf compared to a natural leaf; the latter can directly utilize CO2 in air (about 400 ppm). Overall, based on the high solar-to-fuel efficiency, high flexibility of the product and operation, little dependence on real-time sunlight, and high mobility, the conceptual artificial leaf still shows high promise for application in solar energy conversion/storage coupled with CO2 recycle to chemicals.
To realize the designed electrochemical cell and further the conceptual artificial leaf, a bifunctional catalyst cathode for the low-overpotential ECDRR and O2 evolution reaction (OER) is required. Such a bifunctional catalyst was synthesized by a one-pot pyrolysis and denoted as SiNFC hereinafter, as it contains silicon, nitrogen, and fluorine in the carbon matrix. The purity of SiNFC was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Fig. S1†) and energy dispersive X-ray analysis (Fig. S2†). SiNFC exhibited a porous structure (Fig. S3†) with uniform dispersion of carbon, silicon, nitrogen, and fluorine (Fig. 1a and b). More characterization of the chemical bond and porosity of SiNFC can be found in Fig. S4, S5 and Table S1.†
 Fig. 1  Characterization of the SiNFC catalyst. (a) HAADF image and (b) elemental mapping images of SiNFC. (c) LSV curves of SiNFC under CO2 and Ar conditions. Scan rate: 10 mV s−1. The BET area instead of the geometric area was applied to calculate the current here. (d) FE of CO and H2 generation in 6 h electrolysis at −0.6 V on SiNFC. 
The electrochemical CO2 reduction test on SiNFC was conducted in an H-type cell. The catalyst with the addition of a Cl-contained precursor instead of a F-contained precursor (SiNClC) and the one without F (SiNC) were also examined for comparison.19 Their morphology, porosity, chemical bond, and purity information can be found in Fig. S6–S11 and Table S1.† The linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) in Fig. 1c showed that SiNFC exhibited higher current density compared to SiNClC (Fig. S12†) and SiNC (Fig. S13†) under Ar, suggesting higher electrochemical activity on SiNFC, which was consistent with double layer capacitance results (Fig. S14–S16†). Moreover, SiNFC showed higher current density under CO2 conditions than under Ar conditions, which was also presented in the cyclic voltammogram (Fig. S17†), suggesting high ECDRR activity on SiNFC. The current density increased even faster in the absence of CO2 which could be explained by the observation that when there is CO2 reduction, the absorbed intermediates of CO2 reduction would occupy the active sites, leading to lower total current density, especially at high applied potentials.20–23 Though SiNClC and SiNC also showed high ECDRR activity, SiNFC exhibited the highest selectivity for CO generation with up to 96% faradaic efficiency (FE) in potentiostatic electrolysis over a wide potential range (Fig. S18†). In contrast, SiNClC and SiNC showed lower CO FE with maximum values of 90% and 89%, respectively. SiNC has been demonstrated as an effective catalyst for the ECDRR; on the other hand, the fluorine dopant has been demonstrated to optimize the electron density of active site atoms in the neighbor matrix due to its highly strong electronegativity.19,24,25 Therefore fluorine in SiNFC possibly increases ECDRR selectivity via further tuning the electron density of active sites. The role of fluorine in the ECDRR on SiNFC was not specifically investigated due to limited space and is expected to be investigated in further studies. Moreover, this high selectivity for the ECDRR on SiNFC could remain stable for 6 h with only a 3% decrease (Fig. 1d). In contrast, SiNClC and SiNC lost 23% and 11% selectivity in regard of FE (Fig. S19†). Thus, a highly active, selective, and stable ECDRR on SiNFC was demonstrated. For the OER, SiNFC showed the highest activity again with 5 mA cm−2 at 1.67 V, while SiNClC required 1.76 V to reach the same current density and SiNC even presented only 0.67 mA cm−2 at 1.85 V (Fig. S20†). Therefore, the high catalytic properties of SiNFC toward both the ECDRR and OER were demonstrated. Thus, a bifunctional metal-free carbon-based catalyst was achieved, enabling the assembly of the conceptual artificial leaf.
A liquid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell was first assembled according to previous studies with bifunctional metal-free SiNFC catalyst coated carbon paper as the cathode.26 As shown in Fig. S21,† the liquid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell showed successful discharge with CO generation of 88% FE at 0.1 mA with a discharge voltage of 0.47 V (theoretical discharge voltage: 0.72 V) at the same time. When the discharge current increased gradually to 1.5 mA, CO generation showed high FE over 85%. Furthermore, the liquid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell presented stable discharge and charge voltages during the 7 h cycling test (Fig. S22†). The corresponding discharge reaction and charge reaction on the cathode as well as the overall reaction of this liquid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell with the SiNFC catalyst cathode were proposed as eqn (1)–(3), respectively.26 Thus, the feasibility of applying bifunctional SiNFC as the catalyst cathode in the Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell system was demonstrated. Cathode discharge: CO2 + 2H+ + 2e → CO + H2O(1) Cathode charge: H2O → 2H+ + 1/2O2 + 2e(2) Overall: CO2 → CO + 1/2O2(3)
To assemble a solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell, Zn foil, an alkaline gel electrolyte membrane, a neutral gel electrolyte membrane, and carbon cloth with the SiNFC catalyst on the upper side were layer-to-layer assembled carefully from the bottom to top to achieve seamless connection (Fig. S23†). When the Zn foil and the carbon cloth were coupled with an external wire, the charge and discharge profiles of the solid-state electrochemical cell could be obtained (Fig. 2a) with an initial voltage of 0.769 V. According to the calculations (ESI†), the assembled solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell exhibited a theoretical discharge voltage of 0.74 V, which was lower than the initial voltage of the discharge profile. It could be ascribed to the competitive hydrogen evolution (theoretical discharge voltage of H+/H2 and Zn(II)/Zn couples: 0.885 V), especially at low discharge currents, which was shown in galvanostatic discharge results (Fig. S24†). Moreover, the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell generated CO successfully with considerable FE up to 74% at tested discharge currents. During a long-term galvanostatic discharge at 0.75 mA, the solid-state electrochemical cell showed that CO generation increased in the first 120 min and remained stable afterward while it showed a discharge voltage that remained stable at the first 90 min and decreased afterward (Fig. 2b). This variation and lower discharge voltages and gas generation of the solid-state electrochemical cell compared to the liquid-state electrochemical cell possibly involved with the non-optimized design of the solid-state electrochemical cell, which still held high impedance and gas entrapment.14
 Fig. 2  Solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cells. (a) Charge/discharge profiles of the electrochemical cell. Scanning rate: 10 mV s−1. (b) CO FE and potential at 0.75 mA discharge current. FE of competitive H2 generation was also shown. 
Finally, by simply coupling the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell with a photovoltaic cell, the conceptual artificial leaf was built. This artificial leaf device would possess multiple functions of light harvesting, O2 evolution, and CO2 reduction, which were the same as those of a natural leaf. However the artificial leaf can conduct prolonged CO2 reduction even in the absence of sunlight. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 3a, when there is sunlight, the photovoltaic cell absorbs solar energy, converts it into electricity, and stores it in the chemical bond of the Zn anode in the Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell, on the catalyst cathode of which the OER occurred at the same time. This whole energy input process of the conceptual artificial leaf mimics the light reaction process of the natural leaf. To realize this energy input process, a triple-junction GaAs solar cell was applied to harvest solar energy under 300 W Xe lamp irradiation with an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The characterization of the triple-junction GaAs solar cell (Fig. 3b) showed a short circuit current of 10.7 mA, an open circuit voltage of 2.44 V, and the maximum photoelectric conversion efficiency of 21.9%. When overlapped with the matched charge polarization curve of the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell, the maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the energy input process from light harvesting of the GaAs solar cell to the charge of the Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell was suggested to be 20.7%. To adjust the charge voltage of the solid-state electrochemical cell, an external resistance was applied when the photovoltaic cell drove Zn deposition and O2 evolution. As shown in Fig. 3c, stable charge voltages ranging from 2.1 V to 2.5 V could be obtained at a series of charge currents ranging from 2.0 mA to 6.1 mA, suggesting the success and stability of the artificial leaf in implementing light harvesting, Zn deposition, and O2 evolution.
 Fig. 3  Conceptual artificial leaf comprising the photovoltaic cell and the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell. (a) Schematic of the conceptual artificial leaf: the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell charges with water oxidation and Zn deposition powered by the photovoltaic cell, and the electrochemical cell discharges spontaneously with CO2 reduction. (b) J–V curve of the GaAs solar cell (blue curve) and charge polarization curve of the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell (red curve). The red dot indicates the maximum PCE point of the designed energy input process on the conceptual artificial leaf. (c) Prolonged galvanostatic charge curves of the conceptual artificial leaf at several charge currents. (d) CO FE, discharge voltage, and solar-to-CO PCE during prolonged galvanostatic discharge at 1 mA. 
Furthermore, the long-term CO2 reduction in the conceptual artificial leaf was carried out by galvanostatic discharging at 1 mA. As shown in Fig. 3d, the conceptual artificial leaf showed a gradually increased CO generation, which reached the maximum of 75% FE at the 2.5th hour and it remained stable afterward. The corresponding solar-to-CO efficiency was calculated to be up to 15.2%, surpassing that of the reported artificial leaves and matching that of the best artificial photosynthesis devices that comprised metal-based cathodes (Table S2†). The gradual increase of CO FE in the first 2.5 h could be ascribed to the non-optimized diffusion of gas in the conceptual artificial leaf. Overall, the conceptual artificial leaf was realized successfully with stable performance in both processes and a high solar-to-chemical efficiency.
Based on the above experiments, the conceptual artificial leaf has been demonstrated to utilize solar energy, CO2, and water to produce chemicals, just like the reported artificial leaves (may produce H2 only) and natural leaves.27–29 Moreover, thanks to the unique pre-storage of solar energy by the metal–CO2 electrochemical cell, the conceptual artificial leaf in this work shows an advantage that it can implement chemical production with and even in the absence of sunlight, broadening the application of artificial leaves. On the other hand, the good solar-to-CO efficiency in our artificial leaf was obtained with pure CO2 supply, leading to the requirement of extra energy to concentrate CO2 for practical applications, which requires further investigation of the catalyst and device operation under low CO2 conditions.30,31 Additionally, to enhance the operating current and energy efficiency, the internal resistance of the device should be reduced exemplified by optimizing the preparation of the electrode and solid-state membrane and their connection. Still, more optimization and further development of our conceptual artificial leaf are needed to unravel this problem.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we proposed and demonstrated a conceptual artificial leaf that overcame the real-time sunlight-dependence of natural leaves and current artificial leaves by simply coupling a photovoltaic cell with a solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell. The photovoltaic cell implemented solar-to-electricity conversion and the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell implemented the pre-storage of photo-generated electricity, O2 evolution, and continuous CO2 reduction. The conceptual artificial leaf could achieve a high solar-to-CO efficiency up to 15.2%, outperforming the reported artificial leaves and is among the best artificial photosynthesis devices that comprised metal-based catalyst cathodes. This work opens opportunities for artificial leaves and also other artificial photosynthesis devices to conduct value-added CO2 conversion continuously not only with sunlight but also in the dark.
Experimental
Preparation of catalysts
To synthesize SiNFC, 11 mmol D-glucose (AR, Sinopharm), 120 mmol NH4F (AR, Sinopharm) and 33 mmol SiO2 nanoparticles (50 nm, 99.5%, Aladdin) were ground until a uniform mixture was obtained. The mixture was then transported to a furnace tube for pyrolysis under Ar: warming to 900 °C with a rate of 10 °C min−1 and maintaining at 900 °C for 1 h. The resulting particles were collected and soaked in 10% HF with stirring for 12 hours to remove the SiO2 template. The remaining precipitate was washed with excessive DI water to obtain neutral solution and then dried overnight in a vacuum oven. SiNClC was prepared by replacing NH4F with NH4HCO3 (99.995%, Macklin). SiNC was prepared without NH4F.19
Characterization
The high-resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were obtained using an SU8010. The high angle annular dark field (HAADF) image and elemental distribution were characterized using a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL JEM-2010) at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. X-ray power diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a MiniFlex 600 diffractometer using a Cu Kα (λ = 1.54 Å) radiation source at a scan rate of 5° min−1. The element contents and the chemical valence of the materials were analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, VG ESCALAB 250). Specific correction was performed by employing the C 1s binding energy of 284.6 eV. N2 sorption isotherms were measured at 77 K using an ASAP 2010 analyzer, after the samples were degassed in a vacuum at 120 °C for 12 h. The specific surface area and the pore size distribution were calculated using the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) model and density functional theory (DFT) model, respectively.
Electrochemical measurements
Electrochemical measurements were carried out in a three-electrode system with an electrochemical station (CHI 660E). Ag/AgCl (saturated KCl) and a Pt wire were used as the reference and counter electrode, respectively. The double-layer capacitance of materials was evaluated in 0.1 M NaClO4 (99.5%, Aladdin) saturated with Ar. The electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction test was carried out in an H-type reactor with 0.1 M KHCO3 (99.7%, Sigma-Aldrich) electrolyte separated by a Nafion membrane (Nafion 211, DuPont). Prior to experiments, CO2 (99.995%) was bubbled through cathodic electrolyte for 20 min and controlled at 20 mL min−1 during experiments. The electrochemical O2 evolution test was carried out on a rotating ring disk electrode (1600 rpm) in 1 M KOH with a 5 mm-diameter electrode. The LSV curves of the CDRR and OER were obtained at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. All potentials in this part were converted to potentials vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) according to the equation (ERHE = EAg/AgCl + 0.197 V + (0.0591 × pH) V).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21872147 and 21805277), the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (No. 2018J05030 and 2019J05152), the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences, CAS (No. ZDBS-LY-SLH028), the DNL Cooperation Fund, CAS (DNL201924), and the Strategic Priority Research Program, CAS (No. XDB20000000).
Notes and references
T. Keijer, V. Bakker and J. C. Slootweg, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 190–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Shih, T. Zhang, J. Li and C. Bai, Joule, 2018, 2, 1925–1949 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, X. Li, T. Fan, F. E. Osterloh, J. Ding, E. M. Sabio, D. Zhang and Q. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 951–956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Dogutan and D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3143–3148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Cox, J. Z. Lee, D. G. Nocera and T. Buonassisi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 14057–14061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Varadhan, H. C. Fu, Y. C. Kao, R. H. Horng and J. H. He, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato, R. Haasch, P. Zapol, B. Kumar, R. F. Klie, J. Abiade, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Science, 2016, 353, 467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sharifi, C. Larsen, J. Wang, W. L. Kwong, E. Gracia-Espino, G. Mercier, J. Messinger, T. Wagberg and L. Edman, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600738 CrossRef .
S. Esiner, R. E. M. Willems, A. Furlan, W. W. Li, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23936–23945 RSC .
H. Wu, H. N. Alshareef and T. Zhu, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 417–425 CrossRef .
Z. Xie, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Z. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605891 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xie, Z. Zhou and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Wang, J. L. Liu, Y. F. Wang, Y. G. Wang and G. F. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5003 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xie and Y. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 1721–1729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, Z. Li and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5785–5789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, Z. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Sun, Q. Zhao, J. Wang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602396 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Li, Z. Guo, B. Yang, Y. Liu and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9126–9130 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Ghausi, J. Xie, Q. Li, X. Wang, R. Yang, M. Wu, Y. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13135–13139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schreier, Y. Yoon, M. N. Jackson and Y. Surendranath, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10221–10225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Landers, M. Fields, D. A. Torelli, J. P. Xiao, T. R. Hellstern, S. A. Francis, C. Tsai, J. Kibsgaard, N. S. Lewis, K. Chan, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1450–1457 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Yao, Y. L. Qiu, T. T. Zhang, P. P. Su, X. F. Li and H. M. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5249–5255 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Xue, H. Yang, T. Yang, P. F. Yuan, Q. Li, S. C. Mu, X. L. Zheng, L. F. Chi, J. Zhu, Y. G. Li, J. N. Zhang and Q. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15271–15277 RSC .
J. Xie, X. Zhao, M. Wu, Q. Li, Y. Wang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9640–9644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Diercks, S. Lin, N. Kornienko, E. A. Kapustin, E. M. Nichols, C. Zhu, Y. Zhao, C. J. Chang and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1116–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Xie, M. A. Ghausi, J. Lv, Y. Huang, M. Wu, Y. Wang and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807807 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Shoji, A. Yamaguchi, E. Sakai and M. Miyauchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20613–20619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, T. Kim, S. Lee, S. Baek, T. Park and K. Yong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 7 Search PubMed .
A. Hussain, S. M. Arif and M. Aslam, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 71, 12–28 CrossRef .
B. Kim, H. Seong, J. T. Song, K. Kwak, H. Song, Y. C. Tan, G. Park, D. Lee and J. Oh, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 5, 749–757 CrossRef .
Q. Huang, Q. Li, J. Liu, Y. R. Wang, R. Wang, L. Z. Dong, Y. H. Xia, J. L. Wang and Y.-Q. Lan, Matter, 2019, 1, 1656–1668 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta01451fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic of a photovoltaic-driven solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell system with the function of photosynthesis mimicking a natural tree leaf. With sunlight, the photovoltaic cell harvests sunlight and generates electricity, which is pre-stored in the Zn anode accompanied by O2 evolution by the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell charging. With sunlight or in the dark, the artificial leaf can continuously produce CO from CO2 reduction by the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell discharging.	 

Energy input	Energy source	Sunlight	Sunlight
Energy storage	Chemical bond (ATP and NADPH)	Chemical bond (Zn)
Product	ATP, NADPH, O2	Zn, O2
Place	Chloroplast thylakoid membrane	Cathode
Process	Light reaction	Charge
CO2 fixation	Energy source	ATP and NADPH hydrolysis	Zn dissolution
Co-reagent	Water	Water
Product	Glucose	CO, hydrocarbon, organics, etc.
Place	Chloroplast matrix	Cathode
Process	Dark reaction	Discharge
Impact factor	Requirement of temperature	Strict	Loose
Requirement of sunlight for chemical production	Real-time sunlight	With sunlight and in the dark
Mobility	No	Yes
CO2 supply	∼400 ppm in air	Pure CO2
Environmental friendliness	High	Moderate
Hazard	Little	Very low
Cost	Low	Moderate

 	Fig. 1  Characterization of the SiNFC catalyst. (a) HAADF image and (b) elemental mapping images of SiNFC. (c) LSV curves of SiNFC under CO2 and Ar conditions. Scan rate: 10 mV s−1. The BET area instead of the geometric area was applied to calculate the current here. (d) FE of CO and H2 generation in 6 h electrolysis at −0.6 V on SiNFC.	 
Cathode discharge: CO2 + 2H+ + 2e → CO + H2O	(1)
Cathode charge: H2O → 2H+ + 1/2O2 + 2e	(2)
Overall: CO2 → CO + 1/2O2	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cells. (a) Charge/discharge profiles of the electrochemical cell. Scanning rate: 10 mV s−1. (b) CO FE and potential at 0.75 mA discharge current. FE of competitive H2 generation was also shown.	 

 	Fig. 3  Conceptual artificial leaf comprising the photovoltaic cell and the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell. (a) Schematic of the conceptual artificial leaf: the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell charges with water oxidation and Zn deposition powered by the photovoltaic cell, and the electrochemical cell discharges spontaneously with CO2 reduction. (b) J–V curve of the GaAs solar cell (blue curve) and charge polarization curve of the solid-state Zn–CO2 electrochemical cell (red curve). The red dot indicates the maximum PCE point of the designed energy input process on the conceptual artificial leaf. (c) Prolonged galvanostatic charge curves of the conceptual artificial leaf at several charge currents. (d) CO FE, discharge voltage, and solar-to-CO PCE during prolonged galvanostatic discharge at 1 mA.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta01451f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
