Review on the latest design of graphene -based inorganic materials  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR31750H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR31750H
(Feature Article)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6205-6218Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsReview on the latest design of graphene-based inorganic materials

        
          
            Na 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Minhua 
            Cao
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Changwen 
            Hu
          
        
      
Key Laboratory of Cluster Science, Ministry of Education of China, Department of Chemistry, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P. R. China. E-mail: caomh@bit.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-10-68918572;   Tel: +86-10-68918468
Received 
      6th July 2012
    , Accepted 15th August 2012First published on 20th August 2012AbstractThe breathtakingly fast evolution of research on graphene and its modification methods in the recent 8 years has made possible the various preparations and applications of its derivatives. These hybrid structures exhibit excellent material characteristics including high carrier mobility and radiate recombination rate as well as long-term stability since graphene sheets possess super electrical conductivity, mechanical flexibility and good optical transparency. Besides, the versatile and fascinating properties of the nanostructures grown on graphene layers make it possible to fabricate high-performance electronic, optoelectronic and catalytic devices. This review presents an overview of the latest design of structure, synthetic methods and applications of graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites. The challenges and perspectives of these emerging hybrid heterostructures are also discussed.Na LiNa Li is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Professor Minhua Cao at the Chemistry Department in the Beijing Institute of Technology. Among her research interests is the preparation and property study of graphene-based nanocomposites. In 2011 she was selected as the “Outstanding graduate student” in the Beijing Institute of Technology.Minhua CaoMinhua Cao is a Professor at Beijing Institute of Technology, China. She received her PhD degree in inorganic chemistry from the Northeast Normal University, China (2005). In 2006 she was awarded a Humboldt Research Fellowship and joined the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interface, Germany (2006–2007). Her current research interests focus on synthesis and property study of nanostructural materials including metal oxides, metal sulphides and graphene-based composites.
1. Introduction
Since graphene, a single-layer carbon sheet with a hexagonal packed lattice structure, was discovered by Novoselov et al. in 2004,1 an exponential growth of graphene research in both the scientific and engineering fields was witnessed in the past eight years. Data from Web of Science (Fig. 1) shows that the number of graphene related papers soared from 33 in 2004 to 6578 in 2011. This star material of the century has many unique properties, such as the quantum hall effect (QHE),1 ambipolar electric field effect,2 large theoretical specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1),3 high carrier mobility at room temperature, excellent thermal conductivity (3000–5000 W m−1 K−1),4 good optical transparency (∼97.7%)5 and high Young's modulus (∼1 TPa).6 Combining these fascinating properties with excellent characteristics of other nanostructures has become a popular trend among researchers around the world to achieve applications in multiple fields. Over the past few years, various inorganic composites have been successfully decorated on graphene sheets including metals like Ag,7–14 Au,15–23 Cu,24–27 Ni,28,29 Co,30 Pd,31–33 Pt,34–37 Rh,38 Ru,38 and metal oxides like TiO2,39–48 SnO2,49,50 Co3O4,51–54 Fe3O4,55–59,235,236 CuO,60–62 Cu2O,63–65 WO3,66 and ZnO.67–81 These inorganic components show diverse morphologies such as belts, tubes, rods, wires, particles, and polyhedrons. Their composites with graphene have been intensively explored in applications such as batteries, supercapacitors and photocatalysis. In the last three years, A–B–graphene ternary materials like SnO2–Fe3O4–graphene,82 MnO2–Ni–graphene83 and MoS2–TiO2–graphene84 were designed and fabricated to bring out the best synergistic effects. Other forms of carbon, such as carbon nanotubes (CNT) or carbon cloth (CC), were also compounded with graphene to achieve unexpected properties. Simultaneously, versatile and reliable synthetic routes have been developed to prepare graphene's derivatives ranging from in situ reduction to ex situ decoration under different conditions. Emerging modified routes like gas–liquid interfacial synthesis also provide interesting platforms for the fabrication of these increasingly delicate materials.
 Fig. 1  Number of papers related to graphene (2004–2011). 
It is desirable to harness both the useful properties of graphene and its derivatives through incorporation with various kinds of functional materials in composites. In this review, we first summarize the fresh ideas of the last three years on the design of structures decorated on graphene and then provide new insights of various techniques for synthesizing the nanocomposites. Finally, we demonstrate the superb advantages of graphene–inorganic nanocomposites for a wide range of applications and discuss the remaining challenges and future prospects.
2. New combination strategy with graphene
2.1 A–B–graphene ternary materials
A vast amount of work has proved that nanoparticles could be successfully decorated on the surface of graphene, especially after the easy production of graphene oxide. However, in the early days only one type of substance, metal or metal oxide/sulphide, was usually anchored on graphene sheets for testing in various application fields. Currently there has been a new trend to compound at least two components with graphene to observe their synergistic effects for better structure and results. Two types of inorganic particles or organic–inorganic combinations loaded on graphene are of especial interest. For instance, Wang et al. successfully fabricated Fe3O4–Sn2O–graphene82 nanocomposites with uniform dispersion and applied them in the lithium ion batteries. Their results indicate that the electrochemical performance of this ternary material is better than that of Fe3O4–graphene85 or Sn2O–graphene86 synthesized under the same conditions. The author ascribed the improved electrochemical performance to the coexistence of following two reactions: 3Fe + 4Li2O ↔ Fe3O4 + 8Li+ + 8e−(1) SnO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2O + Sn(2)
Excessive Li2O can be formed, which allows recovery of the Fe nanograins to Fe3O4 easily during the oxidation process, leading to low irreversible capacity. In addition, the initial Columbic efficiency of the product is also higher than that of reported SnO2–graphene nanocomposites,87–90 indicating that introducing the Fe3O4 component can effectively reduce the initial irreversible capacity. It is also worth mentioning that even with more components on the graphene substrate, these particles of different kinds are mostly strongly attached on the surface of graphene and treatments like sonication would not change the morphology or structure of the products.
In the early years, many studies on Pt–graphene materials were reported34–37 since Pt was considered as a perfect catalyst and the highly conductive graphene could further improve its performance. Recent research on the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) revealed that the addition of an early transition metal to Pt can change the geometric (Pt–Pt bond distance and coordination number) and electronic structures of Pt.91,92 Due to these structural changes, the adsorption of –OH is mostly centered on the second metal, not on Pt, and oxygen tends to be reduced on Pt in a “four electron” process. Inspired by this phenomenon, Sun and Guo successfully designed and fabricated monodispersed Pt–Fe–graphene which exhibited significantly enhanced catalytic performance for ORR.93 The close contact between graphene and FePt facilitates p-electron polarization from graphene to FePt (via a possible coordination bonding), making the FePt surface more easily accessible for O2 absorption and activation. With the successful synthesis of systems like Pt–TiO2–graphene,94 Pt–lucigenin–graphene95 and Pt–pyrogallol–graphene,96 it is predictable that the combination of Pt–X–graphene will become a new trend in the catalytic chemistry for ORR and other applications in the near future.
Certain materials chosen to be inserted in the graphene-based nanocomposites generally play the role of cocatalysts. For photocatalytic H2 production in water splitting, TiO2–graphene composites have always shown an enhanced catalytic efficiency compared to TiO2 alone.39–48 However, their activity must be further enhanced from the viewpoint of practical applications and commercial benefits. In recent years, MoS2 with a layered structure has been extensively investigated as a promising electrocatalyst for H2 evolution.97–101 Yu et al. reported for the first time the synthesis of TiO2 nanoparticles on a layered MoS2–graphene hybrid for use in photocatalytic H2 production and found that the activity of TiO2 nanoparticles is significantly enhanced.84 The H2 production rate of simple combination of TiO2–MoS2 and TiO2–graphene only reached 36.8 and 29.7 μmol h−1, respectively, while the ternary TiO2–MoS2–graphene hybrid achieved 165.3 μmol h−1 under the same conditions, reflecting the significance of the synergistic effect. A mechanistic study (Fig. 2) showed that the photogenerated electrons in the conduction band (CB) of TiO2 are transferred to MoS2 nanosheets through the graphene sheets and then react with the adsorbed H+ ions at the edges of MoS2 to form H2. This novel structure can bring suppression of charge recombination, improve the interfacial charge transfer and increase the number of active adsorption sites and photocatalytic reaction centers.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the charge transfer in TiO2–MoS2–graphene composites (adapted from ref. 84 with permission). 
In a similar design, Khalida's group synthesized TiO2–Fe–graphene nanocomposites and used them in the degradation of methyl orange.102 Compared to TiO2–graphene, the photoluminescence emission intensity significantly decreases with Fe doping, indicating that the recombination of photogenerated carriers is effectively suppressed. With more methyl orange molecules absorbed on the surface, enhanced degradation performance is observed for the TiO2–Fe–graphene sample. Therefore, it is safe to conclude that doping Fe in the TiO2–graphene material at the optimal concentration not only narrows the band gap of TiO2 to extend the absorption into the visible light region but is also beneficial for the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.
As popular as the idea is, the three body system of PbSe–TiO2–graphene nanoflakes (Fig. 3) was reported by Loh et al. for their unique properties in the application of infrared photodetectors. PbSe nanoparticles possess a high extinction coefficient, a large intrinsic dipole moment, and compatibility with solution-processable techniques in manufacturing.104,105 The PbSe-only film in the experiment shows a characteristic band gap in the photothermal deflection spectroscopy (PDS). Coating it with graphene can cause an increase in the optical absorption coefficient by at least one order of magnitude. Adding TiO2 then contributes to a distinct band edge absorption in the UV region. The whole combination promotes additional absorption in the visible-infrared regions since a tight coupling at the interface allows additional optical transition. Lacking any of the three components can lead to the damage of the performance at different levels.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representation of the multiphase assembly of the PbSe–TiO2–graphene photodetector. (b) Large-area printed PbSe–TiO2–graphene photodetector patterns on flexible substrate (adapted from ref. 103 with permission). 
It is noteworthy that binding more materials onto graphene does not always guarantee the best result in applications. For the Co–Ni–graphene nanocomposites obtained by a simple route, Shen and his colleagues found that only an optimal ratio of the two metals in this compound gave the best reduction of 4-nitrophenol.106 Otherwise it may even perform worse than Ni–graphene alone. The author assumed that the difference in the catalytic activity was mainly attributed to the size and composition of the nanocomposites. The sample of Ni25Co75–graphene with a smaller size was observed to possess the highest value of apparent rate constant (kapp) among all samples, thus performing the best. In this case, a higher percentage of Co also leads to a faster reduction since its catalytic activity is higher than that of pure Ni.107 A similar result was also found by Xie's group when they tried to synthesize Co–Sb–graphene for the application of lithium ion batteries.108
When the M–graphene mode cannot meet the high standards of devices like photoelectric sensors or electrochemical cells, assistance from the third body in the material therefore becomes necessary. The attachment of Au nanoparticles onto the surface of graphene had been considered a facile way to develop biosensors with high performance in the past few years.16–23 However, only a few of examples showed satisfactory properties of high sensitivity, long stability, large detection range, and good selectivity. To modify the existing system, Zhang et al. prepared Au–POM–graphene hybrids without using any surface active agents. They exhibit significantly improved biosensing properties compared to Au–graphene nanocomposites,109 in which POM (polyoxometalate) serves as a reducing and encapsulating molecule as well as a bridging molecule in the formation of the hybrids. This is because POMs are early transition-metal oxygen-anionic clusters and exhibit remarkably rich redox and photoelectrochemical properties.
Different forms of carbon can also be applied as the extra components since they possess disparate structures that lead to various functions. In the application in lithium ion batteries, graphene affords good dispersion of the nanoparticles and guarantees a high electrical conductivity of the overall electrode, which is good for the purpose of high rates. Nevertheless, the nanoparticles may still undergo successive agglomeration during the Li uptake/release process, leading to capacity fading when directly exposed to the electrolyte.50,52,58,62,87,110–116 One of the promising strategies to solve this problem is to confine the electrolyte materials within individual carbon shells and then to spread them on the surface of graphene thus forming a double protection. The carbon shell can act as a buffer that minimizes volume changes and direct contact between the nanoparticle and the electrolyte, facilitating the formation of a stable solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) which leads to outstanding cycling performance.
The Ge–C–graphene hybrid obtained by Guo's group offered proof for the effectiveness of this design.117 More specifically, Ge nanoparticles were first coated by carbon from oleylamine (Fig. 4) and then the carbon-coated Ge nanoparticles were dispersed on graphene sheets, in which graphene acted as an elastic and electronically conductive substrate that guaranteed high electrical conductivity of the overall electrode. This system with double-protection structure brought super high initial charge and discharge specific capacities and exhibited high performance of rate capability. Other materials like SnO2–C–graphene118 and LiFePO4–C–graphene119 from the same design also showed exciting results in the application for lithium ions. Guo et al. pointed out that the volume expansion rates of Sn and graphene during lithium intercalation/de-intercalation were significantly different. Thus, the SnO2 nanoparticles may peel off from the graphene sheets after several charge–discharge cycles.118 This was supported by the fast capacity fading of graphene–SnO2 anodes in previous reports.89,120 To solve this problem, they coated the SnO2 nanoparticles on graphene with thin layers of amorphous carbon by a hydrothermal method using glucose as carbon source and observed superior electrochemical performance with large reversible capacity and excellent cycling performance of this multicomponent material, better than contrast sample graphene–SnO2 in all aspects. As an anode material for lithium batteries, LiFePO4–graphene hybrid has also been successfully prepared via various ways121–124 and significantly improved rate capability and cycling stability were obtained. Zhang et al. assumed that due to the two-dimension nature of graphene, the nanoparticles could not be tightly wrapped, resulting in a restricted enhancement in electrochemical activity.119 By using a carbon-coating process as other researchers did, they obtained LiFePO4–C–graphene nanoflakes and studied the influence of the content of C in the composites on their electrochemical performance. The results indicated that for electrode materials, anode or cathode, the graphene–C–X structure exhibited better electronic conductivity as well as stability and outperformed the once hot graphene–X composites in the application of lithium ion batteries.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the synthesis route for the Ge–C–graphene nanocomposite (adapted from ref. 117 with permission). 
The art of coating carbon varies from group to group and presents the beauty of synthetic chemistry. Zhi et al.125 obtained a SnO2–carbon sheath–graphene by a hydrothermal-CVD method adopting C2H2 as the wrapping agent (Fig. 5). The SnO2/C nanocables with an average diameter of ca. 100 nm protruded from graphene substrate at high density. Interestingly, the carbon sheaths were found not fully filled, which might have been caused by the volume shrinkage of SnO2 during the cooling process. This vacancy structure then became an attractive option for use in lithium ion batteries since it was expected to be beneficial for accommodating the huge volume change during the lithium insertion/extraction process. This assumption was then confirmed by the electrochemical evaluations of the material. What is more amazing about this work is that these nanocables with a uniform diameter and high aspect ratio are also capable of being easily tailored into other interesting one-dimensional nanomaterials like carbon nanotubes with one open end or SnO2 nanotubes, providing novel perspectives for nanomaterial synthesis.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of procedures for the synthesis of SnO2–C–graphene. (b) Cycling performances of SnO2–C–graphene nanocables and Sn–graphene electrodes at a rate of 50 mA g−1. (c) SEM image of the product (adapted from ref. 125 with permission). 
More complicated designs have been adopted in the biology field for immune sensors to achieve sensitive, accurate and facile detection. For example, Yu's group developed an electrochemical immunoassay using an Au–CNT–graphene composite modified electrode (Fig. 6). The CNT and graphene provided effective antibody immobilization matrix and made the immobilized immunocomponents possess high stability and bioactivity.126 In this device, CNT–graphene coupling produces a synergistic effect on the electroanalytical performance of the resulting electrode material. The Au nanoparticles decorated on the surface of the coupling not only improve the electron transfer rate, but also increase the surface area to capture a large amount of primary antibodies. In the field of biology, an issue about the usage of graphene is its water solubility, which usually limits its further application in biosensing and other areas. Graphene sheets are hydrophobic and tend to form agglomerates in water.127 The A–B–graphene structure can effectively solve this problem and has been employed by some research groups for the fabrication of a series of chitosan–graphene–magnetic nanoparticles hybrids for various applications.128
 Fig. 6  Fabrication processes of Au/TH/MCM-41 nanomaterials and measurement protocol of the electrochemical immunosensor (adapted from ref. 126 with permission). 
The simple structure of graphene–X is gradually fading and novel designs of multicomponent-graphene materials currently are leading the application-driven synthetic chemistry. Nevertheless, despite the advantages brought about by synergistic effects, some problems like loose connection between components and poor stability still exist in some cases. For example, Fe nanoparticles easily fall out after repeated washing for the Pt–Fe–graphene composites and POMs in the Au–POM–graphene hybrid tend to decompose during application. These drawbacks might not affect the properties of the materials as the authors discussed, yet it is still urgently important to find solutions for the accurate control of each part of these A–B–graphene ternary or even quaternary materials in the future for improved performances.
2.2 Graphene-based three-dimensional (3D) materials
Graphene-based materials are normally considered as a 3D structure since the carbon sheets are usually wrinkled and decorated with nanoparticles to form a net-work structure. However, these structures are not rigid enough and often collapse and distort severely after usage since graphene sheets are too thin and soft to maintain the whole system as it originally is. Consequently, aggregation and stacking between individual graphene sheets driven by the strong π–π interaction greatly compromise the intrinsic high specific surface area of graphene. Furthermore, the high conductivity of graphene is also largely compromised due to intersheet contact resistance. In view of the above problems, more ordered and stiff 3D structured materials are considered to be combined with graphene like nanofoams or arrays instead of nanoparticles, belts or wires in recent years. For instance, in the application of lithium ion batteries, nano-sized LiFePO4 (LFP) usually exhibits higher rate of lithium ion diffusion and better electrical conductivity compared to bulk materials. Nevertheless, this strategy adversely affects the tap density and volumetric energy density, hampering its use in industrial-scale technologies. Therefore, the development of unique geometrical structures such as 3D porous architectures is promising since such networks could provide a high tap density and a porous structure that facilitates fast and efficient transfer for mass and charge. With more percolation from the electrolyte into active materials by the interconnected open pores of the structure, more efficient use of the batteries can be then realized.129–131 In their design of 3D LiFePO4–graphene material, Sun et al.132 took advantage of the CO and CO2 formed in the annealing process to obtain a porous structure from the xerogel precursor (Fig. 7). In comparison with bare LFP, the 3D LiFePO4–graphene material showed enhanced Li ion insertion/extraction kinetics. The authors assume that the embedded graphene possesses a higher degree of graphitization than amorphous carbon, which increases the speed of electron migration. The graphene acts as a bridge to increase electrochemically accessible surface area, thus significantly reducing the inert zones and leading to high specific capacity.
 Fig. 7  SEM images of 3D LiFePO4–graphene (adapted from ref. 132 with permission). 
For the same idea of inserting graphene into a 3D structure, Xu's group employed the electrophoretic deposition (EPD) method to lay graphene sheets on nickel nanofoams (NF) and electrochemically decorated MnO2 on the surface of it to obtain a multicomponent porous material for lithium ion batteries.83 Needle-like MnO2 nanostructures were uniformly grown on the surface of graphene, which then was closely coated on the 3D cross-linked grid structure of the NF. Compared to normal MnO2–graphene materials, the macroscopic pores of the NF and open pore structure of graphene effectively shortened the length of ion diffusion and significantly enhanced the electrochemical performance of the active material. Close interfacial contact between MnO2 and graphene–Ni NFs also remarkably promoted the electric conductivity of the electrode.
Graphene foam obtained by chemical vapor deposition (CVD)133–135 is also a promising material that can alleviate the aforementioned problems that plague the performance of graphene composites. Graphene foams are seamlessly continuous and highly conductive, i.e., free of defects and intersheet junctions. Their porous structure is ideal to serve as the scaffold for the fabrication of monolithic composite electrodes. Dong et al. chose graphene foam as template and synthesized 3D Co3O4–graphene nanowire composites (Fig. 8), which can serve as a free-standing monolithic electrode and exhibit excellent performance in supercapacitors and in enzyme-free electrochemical detection of glucose.136 The specific capacitance was several times larger than that of the previously reported Co3O4–graphene composite electrodes53,137 and many times larger than other reported graphene-based composite electrodes like MnO2–graphene,138 NiO–graphene139 and PANI–graphene.140 For glucose detection, when the graphene foam skeleton was taken out, the electrochemical capacity of Co3O4 nanowires synthesized under the same conditions was much smaller and their response to glucose was also much less sensitive and slower, suggesting the importance of the 3D graphene support.
 Fig. 8  SEM images of (a) 3D graphene nanofoams (b) Co3O4–graphene nanowire composite (adapted from ref. 136 with permission). 
Assembling ordered nanotubes on graphene sheets is another intriguing strategy to construct 3D structures, which could offer enhanced performance in many applications such as photoluminescence, solar cells, and sensors, due to its larger specific surface area and higher porosity. In Xu's group, large-scale vertical ZnO nanotube arrays were directly grown on graphene/glass substrate by seedless electrochemical deposition method in pure zinc nitrate solution (Fig. 9).141 ZnO nanorods were initially grown on the graphene electrode and a selective self-etching approached then was adopted to generate nanotubes during the synthetic process. The depth of nanotubes can be controlled by varying deposition time. A high optical transparency of above 75% in the entire visible range was obtained in this hybrid, which was promising for applications in various transparent optoelectronic nanodevices. To obtain a similar structure to the above, a general approach for the growth of metal oxide nanorod arrays on graphene sheets was proposed by Hu et al.142 They successfully designed and synthesized TiO2, ZnO, MnO2, CuO, and ZrO2 on both sides of flexible graphene (G) sheets to form sandwich-like MO/G/MO heterostructures. They first grow seeds on the surface of graphene sheets by annealing the precursor at high temperature and in the second step more reactants are adsorbed on the substrate using a solvothermal method to form the final product. Among these 3D structures a TiO2–graphene hybrid was found to exhibit a much higher photocatalytic activity for the degradation of methylene blue than TiO2 nanorods. Thus it is a promising candidate for photocatalytic decontamination. Other products obtained from this approach also have distinctive properties and wide applications in field-effect transistors, gas sensors, optoelectronic devices, and so on.
 Fig. 9  SEM images of 3D ZnO–graphene nano-arrays (adapted from ref. 141 with permission). 
Besides metal oxide arrays on graphene, theoretical studies143–147 have indicated that 3D pillared architectures, consisting of parallel graphene layers supported by vertically aligned carbon nanotubes in between them, possess desirable out-of-plane transport and mechanical properties while maintaining the excellent properties of their building blocks. This structure is predicted to have efficient hydrogen storage after being doped with lithium cations.144 Dai's group created tunable 3D pillared CNT–graphene architectures through intercalated growth of CNTs into thermally expanded highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) by the pyrolysis of FePc.148 It could be observed from the SEM images (Fig. 10) that the CNTs grew from both sides of adjacent graphene sheets in the thermally expanded HOPG, with an intimately contacted CNT–graphene interface. This 3D CNT–graphene product was demonstrated to be an excellent electrode material for energy-related devices and significantly outperformed many electrode materials, including RuO2,149 MnO2,150 NiO,151 Mn3O4,152 and Ni(OH)2,153,154 as well as their composites with CNTs or graphene,155–160 that are currently used in the state-of-art supercapacitors.
 Fig. 10  SEM images of 3D CNT–graphene structure (adapted from ref. 148 with permission). 
Since graphene possesses the typical structure of sheet-like flat substrate, its use in field emission (FE) devices is highly restricted. Modern technology generally uses the cold cathode to induce flexibility in field emission devices and the cold cathode must satisfy two major criteria: easy electron emission and no bending-generated performance failure. It is a stringent requirement for substrate organized graphene sheets to face an applied electric field with their vertical edges for effective field amplification and thereby easy electron emission. Unfortunately, documented attempts161–164 were found to yield continuous films with graphene lying flat over the substrate, thus devoid of any active sharp emission sites. Besides, the agglomeration tendency of individual sheets of graphene due to van der Waals forces would also lead to inhomogeneous and irreproducible distribution of vertical edges in the electrophoretic deposition (EPD) film. To solve the above problems, Chattopadhyay et al.165 designed hierarchical graphene nanocones over a 3D platform of carbon fabrics for FE devices (Fig. 11). The nanostructure was realized through plasma treatment of graphene, coaxially deposited over individual carbon fiber by means of a simple aqueous phase electrophoretic deposition technique. Outstanding FE performance was observed since the electric field modification around the special woven-like geometry of the underlying base fabric substrate served as a booster to the nanostructured graphene related field amplification at the electron emission site. The suppressed joule heating on behalf of higher inborn accessible surface area of graphene nanocone as well as excellent electrical and thermal conductivity of both the graphene and carbon fabrics lead to the product's superb robustness in the emission stability. The superior flexibility of this high-performance graphene based 3D emitter and other similar structures thus ensure their huge potential use in completely foldable and wearable field emission devices.
 Fig. 11  (a) and (b) Plasma etched hierarchical graphene nanowall at different magnification obtained with etching time 40 s. (c) and (d) 3 min plasma etched hierarchical graphene nanocones with different magnification (adapted from ref. 165 with permission). 
Graphene, unlike CNTs with limited decoration space or length, has great potential to be compounded with various materials in composites or in different dimensions for numerous applications in diverse fields. Stimulating fresh ideas in the design of graphene-based inorganic materials has become urgently important to develop functional derivatives of this star material in the new century.
3. Novel routes to combine graphene and inorganic materials
In the last few decades, huge efforts have been made to synthesize inorganic nanostructures with controlled shape, size, crystallinity and functionality. These materials are widely employed in various applications like electronics, optics, electrochemical energy conversion and storage, solar energy harvesting and so on. In order to further enhance their properties, a great number of inorganic nanostructures have been used to form composites with graphene and its derivatives. Common combining approaches include hydro/solvothermal method, electrochemical deposition, gas phase deposition, chemical reduction, microwave-assisted reduction, sonication-assisted reduction, photo-assisted reduction, thermal evaporation, sol–gel method, template method, ex situ assembly and so on. These synthetic methods and their advantages/disadvantages had been thoroughly summarized and discussed in previous reviews.166,167 Here we present a few newly designed inspiring approaches on the basis of original routes for better combination of inorganic nanoparticles and graphene.
3.1 Gas–liquid interface method
Interface chemistry is of great interest to researchers since numerous reactions can happen on the interface to produce materials with unique morphology because of the distinct characters of different phases. Combining the solvothermal method and interface synthesis, a “beaker in autoclave” method (Fig. 12) was recently developed by Wang's group for the fabrication of Fe3O4–graphene nanocomposites.85 In this system, a beaker with ethylene glycol (EG) was put in an autoclave containing ammonia solution. Graphene and iron nitrate were added as precursors into EG to react in the sealed autoclave at 180 °C for 12 h. Several advantages can be outlined from this clever modification of the traditional solvothermal method. Most importantly, the reaction mainly occurred at the interface due to the poor solubility of NH3 in EG at 180 °C. Therefore the particle growth is localized, which is important for synthesizing monodispersed nanoparticles with a narrow size distribution. In addition, the convection inside the beaker will cause the graphene sheets to become immersed in the liquid and return back to the interface along the convection flow during the reaction process, which helps to achieve a homogeneous loading of nanoparticles on all the graphene sheets. Besides, the EG solution has a boiling point as high as 197 °C, which offers a wide range of reacting temperatures for different reactions in the same system to avoid it from splashing out of the beaker. This idea was first mentioned by Guo et al.168 for the fabrication of Fe3O4 nanoparticles and was then successfully extended to synthesize Fe3O4–graphene,85 SnO2–graphene86 and Fe3O4–SnO2–graphene82 multicomponent materials. EG in this system can be replaced by other solutions that possess high boiling points as well as good reducibility and ammonia can be replaced by other volatile liquids for the preparation of more graphene-based hybrids.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of gas–liquid interface method (adapted from ref. 85 with permission). 
3.2 The adoption of unique reducing agents
Chemical reduction by far is the most popular strategy for synthesis of graphene-based nanomaterials. Traditional reducing agents like hydrazine,10,16,63,64,67,169–180 ascorbic acid,181,182 bovine serum albumin (BSA),11 bacterial respiration,183 and hydriodic acid184,185 are widely adopted. In the first years, hydrazine was the most common reducing agent for the reduction of graphene oxide, whereas in the view of its toxicity to human health and environmental protection, it now is often replaced by hydriodic acid or acetic acid. Researchers around the world now try to search for simple and cost-effective reducing agents that can simultaneously control the morphology of the products. Sun's group demonstrated an environmentally friendly, one-pot strategy toward rapid preparation of Ag–graphene nanocomposites by directly heating the mixture of GO and AgNO3 aqueous solution in the presence of NaOH at 80 °C for 10 min under stirring, without the extra introduction of other reducing agents or surface modifiers.186 In this specific reaction system, GO covered with hydroxyl groups on the hexagonal basal plane served as a mild reducing agent and reduced Ag+ from Ag(OH) intermediate into Ag0 nanoparticles accelerated by plenteous NaOH.7,187,188 On the other hand, GO can be converted into graphene rapidly under strong alkaline conditions such as Zhang et al. proved.189 This fast successful approach is significant since it provides insights for other researchers to find simpler reducing agents and design less complicated routes to obtain graphene-based materials.
Photochemical reduction is another ‘‘green’’ process, which can provide a uniform reducing environment in solution and no additional reducing reagents are introduced. Most researchers chose semiconductors with wide band gaps, such as TiO2,41,45,190 ZnO,71,191 WO3,66 and BiVO4,192 as the decorating particles on graphene since they can generate electrons under the UV-visible irradiation and reduce GO. However, by choosing phosphotungstic acid (PTA) as the assisting reductant, non-semiconductors like Pt, Au, Ag, and Pd could also be decorated on graphene sheets for better application. PTA is a switchable reducing agent that could easily be activated by a UV stimulus. It can participate in the catalytic redox process as an electron relay and can be reduced electrolytically or photochemically. Various oxidants like O2 and H2O2, could restore reduced PTA to its original form, completing the photocatalytic cycle. Pasrichaa et al. pointed out that the reducing ability of PTA in this system can be selectively switched on and off.193 These reactions happen instantly at room temperature and do not need any stabilizers since UV assisted mechanism has the advantage of immobilizing PTA on the surface of GO (Fig. 13). Choi et al. also chose PTA as a photocatalyst in their study on M–graphene.194 They assumed that the photoexcitation of PTA induces the electron transfer from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). [PW12O40]4− centers serve as trapping sites for photogenerated electrons during irradiation and the PTA solution usually turns blue on accumulation of electrons. It's noteworthy that in this system not only reduced PTA but also electrons stored on graphene sheets can reduce metal ions to generate metal nanoparticles.195,196
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the PTA mediated synthesis of noble metal NP decorated RGO (adapted from ref. 193 with permission). 
3.3 Novel deposition method
Chemical vapor deposition and electrochemical deposition are two common ways to fabricate graphene-based materials with averagely distributed particles/arrays on the surface of the carbon layer. For their further development in the deposition method system, Sun's group for the first time brought up an atomic layer deposition (ALD) method and prepared sandwich-like SnO2–graphene hybrids containing both amorphous and crystalline SnO2 phases.197 Atomic layer deposition is a surface-controlled and layer-by-layer process, relying on two sequential self-terminating half-reactions. It affords superior control over SnO2 deposition with high flexibility and precision; specifically, ALD offers unrivalled precision in terms of controlling the ratio and morphology of the crystalline and amorphous phases of deposited SnO2. It was found that the amorphous SnO2–graphene hybrid is more effective than the crystalline SnO2–graphene in overcoming electrochemical and mechanical degradation, which is consistent with the intrinsically isotropic nature of the amorphous SnO2. Therefore, the amorphous SnO2–graphene hybrid can effectively alleviate the large volume changes associated with charge/discharge processes.
To attain faster deposition speed, Cho et al. introduced a rapid (10 seconds of heating) graphene growth method that can be carried out on any desired substrate, including an insulator, thus avoiding the need for the transfer step from the metal substrate.198
This technique is based on metal-induced crystallization of amorphous carbon (a-C) into graphene, and involves an ultra-thin metal layer that is less than 10 nm in thickness (Fig. 14). Rapid annealing of a bilayer of a-C and metal deposited on the surface leads to the first formation of graphene film and subsequent breaking-up of the thin metal layer underneath the film, thus resulting in the formation of a graphene–metal hybrid film, which is both transparent and electrically conducting. The use of an ultra-thin metal layer in this method allows enhanced transmittance of the graphene film. The thin metal layer also makes it possible to grow graphene at 400 °C, one of the lowest conversion temperatures ever reported, in a short time of 10 s, which is one of the shortest heating times ever for graphene formation based on dry synthesis. The shorter annealing time can be explained by a similar work199 that reported the requirement of an annealing time of 15 min to form graphene with a 300 nm-thick nickel layer at 800 °C. The time needed for diffusion is proportional to the square of the diffusion length. Therefore, the diffusion time for 10 nm-thick layer is almost 1000 times shorter than that for the 300 nm-thick layer.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of the graphene–metal hybrid by metal-induced crystallization of a-C and agglomeration of ultra-thin metal film. (b) The obtained hybrid film (adapted from ref. 198 with permission). 
Through modifications of existing methods and replacing conventional reacting agents, tremendous efforts in recent years have focused on the development of synthetic routes for graphene-based materials. How to effectively extract their advantages to design cost-effective, environmentally friendly, rapidly and precisely controlled synthetic routes still remains a challenge for the fabrication of graphene-based inorganic nanomaterials.
4. Broader applications
Graphene-based inorganic materials enjoy a wide range of applications due to the favorable properties of graphene and the synergistic effect between multiple components. They are commonly designed and used in lithium ion batteries, superconductors, fuel cells, solar cells, catalysts, sensors and other devices for energy storage and conversion, gas/bio-detection, photocatalysis and so on, which have been reported in detail in other reviews. In this section, we present some broader applications of these hybrid materials in the military, environmental protection and the design of smart devices.
4.1 Application in military
Electromagnetic wave absorbing materials are usually chosen as the coating of stealth aircraft to avoid radar detection and are required to have wide absorption frequency range, strong absorption properties, low density, good thermal stability, and antioxidation capability. Compared with traditional ferrite materials, carbon based composite materials with advantages like low density and high complex permittivity values200 are often designed to improve the microwave absorption performance and electromagnetic interference shielding effect. Chemically reduced graphene oxide (r-GO) is then believed to exhibit a microwave absorption property arising from residual defects and groups on the surface of the r-GO nanosheets, which can introduce defect polarization and electronic dipole relaxation of groups.201 Xu et al. decorated graphene on both sides with bowl-like Fe3O4 hollow spheres. They found that the composites exhibited an enhanced microwave absorption property in the range of 2–18 GHz compared with graphene and pure Fe3O4 nanoparticles.202 This result is even better than that of the reported M-type hexagonal ferrite203 with the same coating thickness of 2 mm. A possible reason is that the decoration of Fe3O4 hollow spheres on both sides of the graphene nanosheets greatly enhances the dielectric loss and magnetic loss of the materials, thus resulting in the enhanced microwave absorption properties. Substituting Fe3O4 with nitrile butadiene, Kumar's group also found significantly enhanced properties in microwave absorption of the as synthesized graphene-based material.204 It is predictable that by choosing proper magnetic components compounding with the highly conductive graphene substrate, an excellent microwave absorbing material with substantial electric as well as magnetic loss will be achieved.
Ammonium perchlorate (AP) as the most common oxidant in composite solid propellants is often used in rockets or other related equipment. Its reaction rate, activation energy, and temperature of the thermal decomposition are closely related to the properties of solid propellants. The lower its pyrolysis temperature gets, the higher the combustion rate can be.205–207 Certain nanoscale transition metals and their oxides have been proved to have catalytic effect on the thermal decomposition of AP.208–211 However, these nanomaterials easily agglomerate due to their small size, large surface area, and high surface activity, which greatly affect their catalytic properties. Moreover, the agglomeration leads to an inhomogeneous dispersion of the nano-catalysts, and therefore the catalysts cannot fully come into contact with the media, resulting in a decreased catalytic efficiency. Cao et al. fabricated Ni–graphene nanocomposites with nickel particles uniformly distributed on the graphene substrate, which significantly lowered the decomposition temperature of AP.28 In this catalytic process, Ni nanoparticles on graphene sheets can decrease the activation energy of decomposition of AP, while the graphene can accelerate the flow of electrons, which further enhance the rate of heterogeneous decomposition of deprotonized HClO4 gas on the surfaces of catalyst particles.
4.2 Application in environmental protection
Since graphene bears high sensitivity to electrical perturbations from the surrounding environment due to its ultrasmall thickness, it has been integrated into novel sensors for detecting gas molecules and biomolecules with such advantages as small device size, low energy consumption, fast response, and a user-friendly analytical platform.45,212–214 Although graphene has huge potential for sensor applications, there are only a few reports on graphene sensors for online chemical detection in the aqueous environment. Access to clean water is one of the challenges for people who live near factories or in highly polluted areas. Mercury and its compounds are among major aqueous contaminants due to their high toxicity and risk to human health.215 Even a trace amount of mercury intake can lead to acute or chronic damage to the human body. In view of this urgent problem, Chen and his group designed field-effect transistor sensors based on thermally reduced graphene oxide with thioglycolic acid (TGA) functionalized gold nanoparticles for detecting mercury ions in aqueous solutions.216 The lowest mercury ion concentration detected by the sensor is 2.5 × 10−8 M. The drain current shows rapid response within less than 10 s after the solution containing Hg2+ ions was added to the active area of the Au–TGA–graphene hybrid sensors. Zhang et al.217 also showed noncovalent surface modification of graphene for mercury detection by taking advantage of the interactions between 1-octadecanethiol and graphene; however, the resulting detection limit was relatively low. For the same purpose of Hg2+ detection, Chen et al.218 functionalized graphene with a metallothionein type II protein via the precoated pyrene linker molecules. The linker reacted with a protein on one end and attached to graphene on the other end through the strong π–π stacking covalent bonding, and excellent results were achieved. These examples suggest that graphene-based hybrid structures are promising for low-cost, portable and real-time heavy metal ion detectors.
Certain chemical reagents like hydrazine are known as highly poisonous and pose a danger to human health and other living creatures. However, they are still commonly used in the laboratories for the synthesis of various materials and the residues remain a major problem. A Rh–Ni–graphene hybrid material was recently found to exert 100% selectively and exceedingly high activity to complete the decomposition reaction of hydrous hydrazine at room temperature owing to the role of graphene role as a communicating platform in facilitating the electron transfer and mass transport kinetics during the catalytic reaction process.219 The same material may be further applied in decomposition of other hazardous reagents and minimize their harmful effects on human body and the environment.
Greenhouse effect is another major environmental problem that people face in the twenty first century. It is urgently important to reduce the excessive carbon dioxide produced by human activities in the atmosphere and stop its negative effect to the world climate or to other aspects. Lately, a high conversion of CO2 into renewable fuels was realized by Zhou et al. using Ti0.91O2–graphene composites as a catalyst.220 They pointed out that upon band gap excitation of Ti0.91O2 nanosheets, holes and electrons are generated in the valence band and the conduction band, respectively. The electrons and holes either take part in redox reactions at the surface or recombine, and the recombination process generally has faster kinetics than the redox reactions. Graphene nanosheets compactly stacking with Ti0.91O2 nanosheets allows the photogenerated electron to migrate fast from Ti0.91O2 nanosheets into graphene, leading to spatial separation of the electrons and holes. It thus enhances lifetime of the charge carriers and therefore improves the efficiency of the photocatalytic process. The efficient charge transfer in the case of Ti0.91O2–graphene may originate from the surface conjugation (d–π conjugate) of titania with graphene.
4.3 Application in smart devices
One unique property of the two-dimensional honeycomb lattice of graphene is the linear energy dispersion relationship around the Dirac point where the carriers behave like relativistic particles.1,213 Recently, novel nanoscale electronic devices in this region have been systematically investigated. Xu et al. demonstrated that the metal/graphene contact can be switched between ‘ohmic-like’ and ‘space charge region-limited’ states and robust bistable memory cells were achieved by properly applying electric bias when low work function metal electrodes, graphene active layer, and self-assembled monolayers (SAM) modified substrate were used in combination.221 The memory elements exhibited high performance in terms of on–off ratio of current, cycling endurance and retention time. They interpreted the bistable contact states with a density-of-states (DOS) limited space-charge region model and the mechanism was qualitatively substantiated by Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM). The results illustrate the great potential of graphene in future high-efficiency low-cost memories and the strategy of utilizing the small DOS of graphene around its Dirac point provides an effective route for improving the on–off ratio in graphene devices.
The combination of the high transparency, wideband tunability, and excellent mechanical properties of graphene makes graphene a very promising candidate for flexible electronics, optoelectronics, and phonotics.222–224 The technical breakthrough of large-scale graphene synthesis in the past few years has further accelerated the use of graphene films as transparent electrodes.225,226 Hong et al. presented a new route to achieve low sheet resistance values in large-scale single-layer graphene by introducing a transparent thin ferroelectric polymer coating.227 The as-obtained graphene-ferroelectric transparent conductors (GFeTC) exhibited a low sheet resistance value at ambient conditions due to a large electrostatic nonvolatile doping from ferroelectric dipoles. Beyond having low sheet resistance values, the GFeTCs are also highly transparent (>95%) in the visible wavelength range, making them suitable for optoelectronics applications where a combination of both is required. With the excellent mechanical support the hybrid GFeTCs fabrication can also easily be integrated with industrial-scale fabrication processes such as roll-to-roll techniques.
In the medical field, photothermal therapy (PTT) employs photo-absorbing agents to generate heat from optical energy, leading to the ‘burning’ of cancer cells. Graphene with a strong optical absorbance in the NIR tissue transparency window, have been proposed as photothermal agents for PTT treatment of cancer.228,229 Liu et al. designed a novel probe based on a Fe–graphene nanocomposite, which was noncovalently functionalized with a biocompatible polymer, polyethylene glycol (PEG), for applications in multimodal imaging guided photothermal therapy of cancer.230 The as obtained Fe–PEG–graphene product with intrinsic high NIR optical absorbance and strong magnetic property revealed high tumor uptake of the nanocomposite in a 4T1 murine breast tumor mouse model. In the designed in vivo photothermal therapy (PTT) study, the tumors of mice treated with Fe–PEG–graphene were effectively ablated by irradiation with an 808 nm NIR laser at a low power density than usually applied gold nanomaterials.231–234 Importantly, no noticeable in vitro toxicity or in vivo side effects were observed at the tested doses. These data indicate great promise for future explorations of graphene-based functional nanocomposites for cancer theranostic applications.
5. Conclusions and outlook
Driven by the constant demand for optimization of graphene-based inorganic composite properties, particular efforts are directed towards the design and formation of specially constructed hybrid architectures rather than random mixtures. The roles of graphene sheets in these designs could be summarized as follows: acting as a substrate for supporting more than one kind of inorganic nanomaterials or other materials; forming soft covers to enwrap the inorganic nanoparticles; uniformly disperse in inorganic matrices or stack with ultrathin inorganic nanoplates alternately to form multilayer films. Diverse new approaches and techniques, such as gas–liquid interface reactions, chemical reduction with special reducing agents, modified deposition methods have been developed for fabricating graphene–inorganic nanocomposites different from traditional synthetic routes including direct decomposition of precursors, hydrothermal/solvothermal techniques, sol–gel processing or template methods. These newly designed nanocomposites exhibit excellent properties and improved functionalities due to the synergistic effects between graphene and the inorganic components, which thus have been explored to broader applications in the fields of military, smart devices and environmental protection (Fig. 15). It is expected that the development of practical and convenient intelligent devices to improve the quality of people's daily life is one of the most promising directions in the progress of graphene–inorganic nanocomposites.
 Fig. 15  Illustration of new trends in the structure, synthetic method and application designs of graphene-based materials. 
With the rapid development of graphene–inorganic nanocomposites, more kinds of inorganic materials will be blended with these special carbon sheets, and numerous applications in various fields are arising. However, despite all of the promising results obtained so far, further effort for graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites is still needed to realize their practical applications. For example, strictly high-quality graphene as the core component of the hybrid material is often hard to attain. It greatly affects the reinforcement of graphene in its novel properties and potential applications. To date, it is still difficult to synthesize graphene with controllable size, layer number, composition and defect level in a cost-effective and environmentally friendly manner, although promising steps in this direction have been witnessed. At the same time, it is of great importance to improve the adhesion between graphene and inorganic components, which is especially important for applications that involve charge transfer processes. A poor interfacial contact will destroy the synergistic effects, and thus weaken the performance of the nanocomposites. To avoid these drawbacks various surface functionalization methods, synthesis techniques, and novel structures should be developed to make sure a large interfacial area between graphene and inorganic components. A bigger challenge involves the exact mechanism study of assembly behaviors of graphene sheets with inorganic building blocks. How these synthetic methods precisely correlate with inorganic nanostructures stabilized on graphene is still rarely known. Therefore successful design of the material requires improvements in methodology to ensure better understanding of interaction mechanism of the components and structure–property relationship in the nanocomposites. Finally, the successful application and further development of graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites in broader fields cannot be realized without the multidisciplinary efforts from math, physics, chemistry, biology, medical and materials science. Therefore more versatile fabrication/synthesis strategies are expected to be developed in future for the continuous advancement of graphene-based functional composites.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China 21173021, 21231002, 21276026, 21271023, 91022006, and 20973023, the 111 Project (B07012), the Program of Cooperation of the Beijing Education Commission (20091739006), and specialized research fund for the doctoral program of higher education (SRFDP. No. 20101101110031).
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
S. Latil and L. Henrard, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 036803 CrossRef .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pasricha, S. Gupta and A. K. Srivastava, Small, 2009, 5, 2253–2259 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and C. Y. Liu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 1244–1248 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, X. Huang, X. Qi, S. Wu, C. Xue, F. Y. C. Boey, Q. Yan, P. Chen and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10842–10846 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Fu, B. Yuan, Y. Li and Z. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7279–7281 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Lu, S. Mao, S. Park, R. S. Ruoff and J. H. Chen, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 192–200 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Shen, M. Shi, N. Li, B. Yan, H. W. Ma, Y. Z. Hu and M. X. Ye, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 339–349 CrossRef .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 520–527 Search PubMed .
T. Cassagneau and J. H. Fendler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 1789–1793 CrossRef CAS .
R. Muszynski, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5263–5266 CrossRef CAS .
G. Goncalves, P. A. A. P. Marques, C. M. Granadeiro, H. I. S. Nogueira, M. K. Singh and J. Gracio, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4796–4802 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. S. Li, Y. Z. Huang, S. X. Wu, X. Z. Zhou, S. Z. Li, C. L. Gan, F. Boey, C. A. Mirkin and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 292–301 Search PubMed .
B. S. Kong, J. X. Geng and H. T. Jung, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2174–2176 RSC .
F. H. Li, H. F. Yang, C. S. Shan, Q. X. Zhang, D. X. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4022–4025 RSC .
C. Xu, X. Wang and J. W. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19841–19845 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jasuja and V. Berry, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2358–2366 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Kim, H. K. Na and D. H. Min, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13065–13070 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, L. Zhang, B. Chen, N. Ji, F. Chen, Y. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2733–2738 RSC .
H. M. A. Hassan, V. Abdelsayed, A. Khder, K. M. Abou Zeid, J. Terner, M. S. El-Shall, S. I. Al-Resayes and A. A. El-Azhary, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3832–3837 RSC .
S. Bai, X. P. Shen, G. X. Zhu, Z. Xu and Y. J. Liu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 4563–4570 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Luechinger, E. K. Athanassiou and W. J. Stark, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 445201 CrossRef .
X. B. Bin, J. Z. Chen, H. Cao, L. T. Chen and J. Z. Yuan, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2009, 70, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, M. Cao, Q. Wu and C. Hu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 428–434 RSC .
H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3270–3271 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Warner, M. H. Ruemmeli, A. Bachmatiuk, M. Wilson and B. Buechner, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 470–476 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Scheuermann, L. Rumi, P. Steurer, W. Bannwarth and R. Muelhaupt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Z. Y. Wang, K. K. Zhao, Z. J. Shi, S. K. Xu and Z. N. Gu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 6748–6751 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Johnson, A. Behnam, S. J. Pearton and A. Ural, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4877–4880 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7990–7995 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, T. Okata, T. Akita, M. Kohyama, J. Nakamura and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2255–2259 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Liu, S. H. Fu, B. Yuan, Y. L. Li and Z. X. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7279–7281 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Si and E. T. Samulski, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6792–6797 CrossRef CAS .
D. Marquardt, C. Vollmer, R. Thomann, P. Steurer, R. Mulhaupt, E. Redel and C. Janiak, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1326–1332 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Bai, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Zhang and D. D. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4175–4181 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, X. Lai, N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Kisailus, F. Su, D. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 590–596 .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487–1491 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. S. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, D. Choi, J. Li, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, R. Kou, D. Hu, C. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907–914 CrossRef CAS .
O. Akhavan, M. Abdolahad, A. Esfandiar and M. Mohatashamifar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12955–12959 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, X. T. Zhang, X. H. Li, L. Wang, R. Y. Han, B. B. Liu, W. T. Zheng, X. L. Li and Y. C. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3499–3501 RSC .
Y. B. Tang, C. S. Lee, J. Xu, Z. T. Liu, Z. H. Chen, Z. B. He, Y. L. Cao, G. D. Yuan, H. S. Song, L. M. Chen, L. B. Luo, H. M. Cheng, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3482–3488 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Sun, L. Gao and Y. Q. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 083113 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, R. Kou, D. Choi, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, J. Li, L. V. Saraf, D. Hu, J. Zhang, G. L. Graff, J. Liu, M. A. Pope and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Zhang, L. Y. Jiang, H. J. Yan, W. D. Wang, W. Wang, W. G. Song, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5462–5467 RSC .
Z. S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Wen, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. Zhou, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187–3194 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, X. Feng, S. Ivanovici and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8408–8411 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, T. Wei, W. Qiao, B. Shao, Q. Zhao, L. Zhang and Z. Fan, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6973–6978 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, Y. K. Sharma, Z. Zeng, X. Zhang, M. Srinivasan, S. Mhaisalkar, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8400–8406 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Shen, Y. Z. Hu, M. Shi, N. Li, H. W. Ma and M. X. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1498–1503 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, D. W. Wang, F. Li, L. Zhang, N. Li, Z. S. Wu, L. Wen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306–5313 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Xu, D. Sui, L. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, F. Li and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17465–17471 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, X. Zhang, Y. Ma, Y. Huang, Y. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2710–2714 RSC .
J. Su, M. Cao, L. Ren and C. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14469–14477 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Zhu, G. Y. Zeng, F. D. Nie, X. M. Xu, S. Chen, Q. F. Han and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 988–994 RSC .
Y. J. Mai, X. L. Wang, J. Y. Xiang, Y. Q. Qiao, D. Zhang, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2306–2311 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X. L. Wu, C. Y. Shu, Y. G. Guo and C. R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10661–10664 RSC .
S. Wu, Z. Yin, Q. He, X. Huang, X. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11816–11821 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, Z. Yin, Q. He, G. Lu, X. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 21, 3467–3470 Search PubMed .
C. Xu, X. Wang, L. C. Yang and Y. P. Wu, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 182, 2486–2490 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, M. Cao, N. Li and C. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17167–17174 RSC .
Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Zhou, X. Huang, Q. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 307–312 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Hwang, D. H. Lee, J. Y. Kim, T. H. Han, B. H. Kim, M. Park, K. No and S. O. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 21, 3432–3437 Search PubMed .
J. M. Lee, Y. B. Pyun, J. Yi, J. W. Choung and W. I. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19134–19138 CrossRef CAS .
G. Williams and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13869–13873 CrossRef CAS .
O. Akhavan, Carbon, 2011, 49, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Liu, L. K. Pan, T. Lv, T. Lu, G. Zhu, Z. Sun and C. Q. Sun, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 1189–1193 RSC .
W. B. Zou, J. W. Zhu, Y. X. Sun and X. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 125, 617–620 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wu, X. P. Shen, L. Jiang, K. Wang and K. M. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 2826–2830 CrossRef CAS .
D. Choi, M. Y. Choi, W. M. Choi, H. J. Shin, H. K. Park, J. S. Seo, J. Park, S. M. Yoon, S. J. Chae, Y. H. Lee, S. W. Kim, J. Y. Choi, S. Y. Lee and J. M. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2187–2192 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. Cuong, V. H. Pham, J. S. Chung, E. W. Shin, D. H. Yoo, S. H. Hahn, J. S. Huh, G. H. Rue, E. J. Kim, S. H. Hur and P. A. Kohl, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 2479–2482 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lin, M. Penchev, G. P. Wang, R. K. Paul, J. B. Zhong, X. Y. Jing, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Small, 2010, 6, 2448–2452 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Li and H. Q. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3346–3349 RSC .
T. G. Xu, L. W. Zhang, H. Y. Cheng and Y. F. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 382–387 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lu, Y. P. Zhang, H. B. Li, L. K. Pan, Y. L. Li and Z. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4170–4173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Chen, Z. A. Hu, Y. Q. Chang, H. W. Wang, Z. Y. Zhang and Y. Y. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2563–2571 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lian, S. Liang, X. Zhu, W. Yang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 58, 81–88 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, D. Zhao, P. Tang, Y. Wang, C. Xu and H. Li, Mater. Lett., 2012, 76, 127–130 Search PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lian, X. Zhu, H. Xiang, Z. Li, W. Yang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 834–840 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lian, X. Zhu, S. Liang, Z. Li, W. Yang and H. Wan, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4532–4539 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Paek, E. Yoo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 72–75 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, X. Shen, B. Wang, H. Liu and G. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1849–1852 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Zhou, K. Yao, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Du, X. Yin, M. Zhang, Q. Hao, Y. Wang and T. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 2076–2079 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552–556 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Stamenkovic, B. Fowler, B. S. Mun, G. Wang, P. N. Ross, C. A. Lucas and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2007, 315, 493–497 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2492–2495 CrossRef CAS .
B. Neppolian, A. Bruno, C. L. Bianchi and M. Ashokkuma, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2012, 19, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He and H. Cui, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 4823–4826 Search PubMed .
Q. Shi and S. Mu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 203, 48–56 Search PubMed .
Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, L. M. Xie, Y. Y. Liang, G. S. Hong and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS .
H. I. Karunadasa, E. Montalvo, Y. Sun, M. Majda, J. R. Long and C. J. Chang, Science, 2012, 335, 698–702 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bonde, P. G. Moses, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 219–231 RSC .
N. R. Khalida, Z. Hong, E. Ahmed, Y. Zhang, H. Chan and M. Ahmaa, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 5827–5834 Search PubMed .
K. K. Manga, J. Wang, M. Lin, J. Zhang, M. Nesladek, V. Nalla, W. Ji and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1697–1702 Search PubMed .
E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3958–3964 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, A. Eychmuller, S. G. Hickey and S. V. Kershaw, Small, 2007, 3, 536–557 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, X. Shen, G. Zhu, M. Li, H. Xi and K. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2378–2386 Search PubMed .
M. H. Rashid, M. Raula and T. K. Mandal, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4904–4917 RSC .
Y. Zheng, J. Xie, S. Liu, W. Song, G. Cao, T. Zhu and X. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 276–283 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, S. Li, X. Yu, G. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Yao, B. Keita, L. Nadjo and L. Zhi, Small, 2012, 8, 1398–1406 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. F. Cui, Y. Yang, H. S. Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo and Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7100–7107 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, Y. X. Yin, S. Xin, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5221–5225 RSC .
B. Li, H. Cao, J. Shao and M. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10374–10376 RSC .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Madhavi and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5780–5782 RSC .
F. F. Cao, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, X. L. Wu, L. Y. Jiang, R. R. Bi, L. J. Wan and J. Maier, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1908–1914 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Cao, J. W. Deng, S. Xin, H. X. Ji, O. G. Schmidt, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4415–4420 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xue, S. Xin, Y. Yan, K. Jiang, Y. Yin, Y. Guo and L. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2512–2515 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, X. Peng, Z. Guo, C. Cai, Z. Chen, D. Wexler, S. Li and H. Liu, Carbon, 2012, 50, 1897–1903 CrossRef CAS .
C. Su, X. Bu, L. Xu, J. Liu and C. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 64, 190–195 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, D. Lei, Z. Du, X. Yin, L. Chen and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1673–1676 RSC .
L. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Liu, C. Xiao, S. Dong, P. Han, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. Bi and G. Cui, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 1685–1689 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Wang, Y. Zhu and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3353–3358 RSC .
Y. Ding, Y. Jiang, F. Xu, J. Yin, H. Ren, Q. Zhuo, Z. Long and P. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 10–13 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Su, C. You, Y. B. He, W. Lv, W. Cui, F. Jin, B. Li, Q. H. Yang and F. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9644–9650 RSC .
B. Luo, B. Wang, M. Liang, J. Ning, X. Li and L. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1405–1409 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, S. Liu, S. Ge, M. Yan, J. Yu and X. Hua, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 33, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Shan, H. F. Yang, J. F. Song, D. X. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 2378–2382 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, C. Luo, M. Sun, X. Li, F. Lu and H. Qiu, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 114, 703–706 Search PubMed .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Hu, P. Adelhelm, B. M. Smarsly, S. Hore, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1873–1878 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, M. Yao, L. Guo, Y. M. Li, J. H. Li and S. H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2959–2964 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. Wang, D. Wang, X. Li, D. Geng, G. Liang, M. Gauthier, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 340–344 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H. M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Cao, Y. M. Shi, W. H. Shi, G. Lu, X. Yan, Q. Y. Huang, Q. C. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Yong, X. C. Dong, M. B. Park, H. Song and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2394–2400 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, H. Xu, X. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Park, H. Zhang, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Wang, Z. A. Hu, Y. Q. Chang, Y. L. Chen and Z. Y. Zhang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 130, 672–679 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. W. Zhu, X. D. Wu, Q. F. Han and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2822–2830 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Wu, Y. P. Lin, C. H. Lin and J. T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2442–2448 RSC .
Q. Wu, Y. X. Xu, Z. Y. Yao, A. R. Liu and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, B. S. Kim, J. Lee, M. Kim, S. W. Hwang, B. L. Choi, E. K. Lee, J. M. Kim and D. Whang, Mater. Lett., 2012, 72, 25–28 Search PubMed .
R. Zou, Z. Zhang, L. Yu, Q. Tian, Z. Chen and J. Hu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13912–13917 CrossRef CAS .
V. Varshney, S. S. Patnaik, A. K. Roy, G. Froudakis and B. L. Farmer, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1153–1161 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Dimitrakakis, E. Tylianakis and G. E. Froudakis, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3166–3170 CrossRef .
Y. L. Mao and J. X. Zhong, New J. Phys., 2009, 11, 093002 Search PubMed .
E. F. Sheka and L. A. Chernozatonskii, J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci., 2009, 7, 1814–1824 Search PubMed .
J. S. Arellano, J. Nano Res., 2009, 5, 201–209 Search PubMed .
F. Du, D. Yu, L. Dai, S. V. Varshney and A. K. Roy, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4810–4816 Search PubMed .
J. H. Jang, A. Kato, K. Machida and K. Naoi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A321–324 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Zhu, Q. Han, Z. Zheng, Y. Yang and X. Wang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 4356–4361 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yuan, X. Zhang, L. Su, B. Gao and L. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5772–5777 RSC .
N. Nagarajan, H. Humadi and I. Zhitomirsky, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 3039–3045 CrossRef CAS .
U. M. Patil, K. V. Gurav, V. J. Fulari, C. D. Lokhande and O. S. Joo, J. Power Sources, 2009, 188, 338–342 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lang, L. Kong, W. Wu, M. Liu and Y. Luo, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2009, 13, 333–340 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and I. Zhitomirsky, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 9684–9689 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nam, K. Kim, E. Lee, W. Yoon, X. Yang and K. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2008, 182, 642–652 CrossRef CAS .
G. An, P. Yu, M. Xiao, Z. Liu, Z. Miao, K. Ding and L. Mao, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 275709 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, G. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Shi and Z. Gu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2664–2668 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bi, X. Wu, F. Cao, L. Jiang, Y. Guo and L. Wan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2448–2451 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Liang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472–7477 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463–470 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, Z. Yan, J. Yao, E. Beitler, Y. Zhu and J. M. Tour, Nature, 2010, 468, 549–552 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, X. Zhang, P. Yu and Y. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4527–4529 RSC .
S. Park, J. An, R. D. Piner, I. Jung, D. Yang, A. Velamakann, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6592–6594 CrossRef CAS .
U. N. Maiti, S. Maiti, N. S. Das and K. K. Chattopadhyay, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4135–4141 RSC .
S. Bai and X. Shen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 64–98 RSC .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boeyab and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
Z. Cui, L. Jiang, W. Song and Y. Guo, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1162–1166 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qi, K. Y. Pu, H. Li, X. Zhou, S. Wu, Q. L. Fan, B. Liu, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9426–9429 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, H. G. Sudibya, Z. Yin, S. Wu, H. Li, F. Boey, W. Huang, P. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3201–3208 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, X. Cao, H. G. Ong, J. W. Cheah, X. Zhou, Z. Yin, H. Li, J. Wang, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3058–3061 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qi, K. Y. Pu, X. Zhou, H. Li, B. Liu, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 663–669 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Y. Wei, Q. He, F. Boey, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6974–6976 RSC .
J. Liu, Z. Yin, X. Cao, F. Zhao, A. Lin, L. Xie, Q. Fan, F. Boey, H. Zhang and W. Huang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3987–3992 CrossRef CAS .
S. Agarwal, X. Zhou, F. Ye, Q. He, G. C. K. Chen, J. Soo, F. Boey, H. Zhang and P. Chen, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2244–2247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Lin, T. Liu, Z. Yin, X. Zhou, S. Chen, L. Xie, F. Boey, H. Zhang and W. Huang, Small, 2010, 6, 1536–1542 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, C. Peng, W. Luo, M. Lv, X. Li, D. Li, Q. Huang and C. Fan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4317–4323 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, X. Wan and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2367–2371 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, C. Wang, M. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13103–13107 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
V. Dua, S. Surwade, S. Ammu, S. Agnihotra, S. Jain, K. Roberts, S. Park, R. Ruoff and S. Manohar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2154–2157 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Fernandez-Merino, L. Guardia, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, P. Solıs-Fernandez, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6426–6432 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Salas, Z. Sun, A. Luttge and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4852–4856 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Moon, J. Lee, R. S. Ruoff and H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 73–76 Search PubMed .
S. Pei, J. Zhao, J. Du, W. Ren and H. M. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4466–4474 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Li, L. Wang, Y. Luo, A. M. Asiri, A. O. AlYoubi and X. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 4742–4746 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, H. Wu, Q. Kuang, R. Huang, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2774–2778 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nishimure, D. Mott, A. Takagaki, S. Maenosono and K. Ebitani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9335–9343 RSC .
X. Fan, W. Peng, Y. Li, X. Li, S. Wang, G. Zhang and F. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4490–4493 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Lambert, C. A. Chavez, N. S. Bell, C. M. Washburn, D. R. Wheeler and M. T. Brumbache, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 188–191 RSC .
G. Williams and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13869–13873 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, N. J. Bell, A. Kudo and R. Amal, Catal. Today, 2011, 164, 353–357 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pasrichaa, S. Gupta, A. G. Joshia, N. Bahadura, D. Haranatha, K. N. Sooda, S. Singha and S. Singha, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 118–125 Search PubMed .
G. Moon, Y. Park, W. Kim and W. Choi, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3454–3462 CrossRef CAS .
A. Troupis, A. Hisikia and E. Papaconstantinou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1911–1914 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Lightcap, T. H. Kosel and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 577–583 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Meng, J. Liu, D. Geng, Y. Zhang, M. N. Banis, Y. Li, J. Yang, R. Li, X. Sun, M. Cai and M. W. Verbrugge, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1647–1654 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Cho, H. M. Kim, M. H. Lee, D. Lee and K. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 115301–115307 Search PubMed .
M. Zheng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 063110 CrossRef .
C. L. Zhu, M. L. Zhang, Y. J. Qiao, G. Xiao, F. Zhang and Y. J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16229–16235 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Han, P. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Du, S. Hu, J. Wang and X. wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 072906 Search PubMed .
H. Xu, H. Bi and R. B. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 07A522 Search PubMed .
M. R. Meshrama, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2004, 271, 207–214 CrossRef .
V. K. Singh, A. Shukla, M. K. Patra, L. Saini, R. K. Vadera and N. Kumar, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2202–2208 Search PubMed .
M. Shusser, F. E. C. Culick and N. S. Cohen, J. Propul. Power, 2002, 18, 1093–1100 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Fitzgerald and M. Q. Brewster, Combust. Flame, 2004, 136, 313–326 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. M. Jacobs and H. M. Whitehe, Chem. Rev., 1969, 69, 551–590 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Survase, M. Gupta and S. N. Asthana, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater., 2002, 45, 161–165 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Said and R. Al-Qusmi, Thermochim. Acta, 1996, 275, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Zhu, X. Yang, L. Lu and X. Wang, Thermochim. Acta, 2005, 437, 106–109 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. Singh and A. K. Ojha, Thermochim. Acta, 2002, 390, 67–72 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zahir, S. J. Rizwi, S. K. Haq and R. H. Khan, Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol., 2005, 20, 351–360 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, G. Lu, J. Chang, S. Mao, K. Yu, S. Cui and J. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 4057–4062 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Z. Cheng, Y. Wang, Z. Li, C. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Fang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4738–4741 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Sudibya, Q. He, H. Zhang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1990–1994 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Wang, L. Wang and Y. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6885–6888 RSC .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Tian, J. Gao, X. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1215–1221 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Xie, J. Du, C. Wang, N. Zhao and J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2614–2619 Search PubMed .
P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4285–4294 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. B. Zhang, C. S. Tian, C. Girit, A. Zettl, M. Crommie and Y. R. Shen, Science, 2008, 320, 206–209 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Li, W. W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. X. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc and S. K. Banerjee, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ni, Y. Zheng, S. Bae, C. Y. Tan, O. Kahya, J. Wu, B. H. Hong, K. Yao and B. Ozyilmaz, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3935–3942 Search PubMed .
K. Yang, S. Zhang, G. Zhang, X. Sun, S. T. Lee and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3318–3323 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Markovic, L. M. Harhaji-Trajkovic, B. M. Todorovic-Markovic, D. P. Kepic, K. M. Arsikin, S. P. Jovanovic, A. C. Pantovic, M. D. Dramicanin and V. S. Trajkovic, Biomaterials, 2010, 32, 1121–1129 Search PubMed .
K. Yang, L. Hu, X. Ma, S. Ye, L. Cheng, X. Shi, C. Li, Y. Li and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1868–1872 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Yavuz, Y. Cheng, J. Chen, C. M. Cobley, Q. Zhang, M. Rycenga, J. Xie, C. Kim, K. H. Song, A. G. Schwartz, L. V. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 935–939 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Huang, I. H. El Sayed, W. Qian and M. A. Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2115–2120 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, D. Wang, J. Xi, L. Au, A. Siekkinen, A. Warsen, Z. Y. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Xia and X. Li, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1318–1322 CrossRef CAS .
G. von Maltzahn, J. H. Park, A. Agrawal, N. K. Bandaru, S. K. Das, M. J. Sailor and S. N. Bhatia, Cancer Res., 2009, 69, 3892–3900 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Huang, J. Oh, M. Kozlov, D. Sui, S. Fang, R. H. Baughman, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3778–3784 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Na Li	Na Li is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Professor Minhua Cao at the Chemistry Department in the Beijing Institute of Technology. Among her research interests is the preparation and property study of graphene-based nanocomposites. In 2011 she was selected as the “Outstanding graduate student” in the Beijing Institute of Technology.
Minhua Cao	Minhua Cao is a Professor at Beijing Institute of Technology, China. She received her PhD degree in inorganic chemistry from the Northeast Normal University, China (2005). In 2006 she was awarded a Humboldt Research Fellowship and joined the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interface, Germany (2006–2007). Her current research interests focus on synthesis and property study of nanostructural materials including metal oxides, metal sulphides and graphene-based composites.

 	Fig. 1  Number of papers related to graphene (2004–2011).	 
3Fe + 4Li2O ↔ Fe3O4 + 8Li+ + 8e−	(1)
SnO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2O + Sn	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the charge transfer in TiO2–MoS2–graphene composites (adapted from ref. 84 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representation of the multiphase assembly of the PbSe–TiO2–graphene photodetector. (b) Large-area printed PbSe–TiO2–graphene photodetector patterns on flexible substrate (adapted from ref. 103 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the synthesis route for the Ge–C–graphene nanocomposite (adapted from ref. 117 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of procedures for the synthesis of SnO2–C–graphene. (b) Cycling performances of SnO2–C–graphene nanocables and Sn–graphene electrodes at a rate of 50 mA g−1. (c) SEM image of the product (adapted from ref. 125 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 6  Fabrication processes of Au/TH/MCM-41 nanomaterials and measurement protocol of the electrochemical immunosensor (adapted from ref. 126 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of 3D LiFePO4–graphene (adapted from ref. 132 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of (a) 3D graphene nanofoams (b) Co3O4–graphene nanowire composite (adapted from ref. 136 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images of 3D ZnO–graphene nano-arrays (adapted from ref. 141 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of 3D CNT–graphene structure (adapted from ref. 148 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) and (b) Plasma etched hierarchical graphene nanowall at different magnification obtained with etching time 40 s. (c) and (d) 3 min plasma etched hierarchical graphene nanocones with different magnification (adapted from ref. 165 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of gas–liquid interface method (adapted from ref. 85 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the PTA mediated synthesis of noble metal NP decorated RGO (adapted from ref. 193 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of the graphene–metal hybrid by metal-induced crystallization of a-C and agglomeration of ultra-thin metal film. (b) The obtained hybrid film (adapted from ref. 198 with permission).	 

 	Fig. 15  Illustration of new trends in the structure, synthetic method and application designs of graphene-based materials.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
