NIR luminescent nanomaterials for biomedical imaging  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TB21447H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TB21447H
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 2422-2443NIR luminescent nanomaterials for biomedical imaging

        
          
            Rui 
            Wang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Fan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Laboratory of Advanced Materials, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, P. R. China. E-mail: zhang_fan@fudan.edu.cn
Received 
      16th October 2013
    , Accepted 6th December 2013First published on 6th December 2013AbstractLuminescent labels have been widely used for biological applications, primarily in bioimaging and assays. Recently much attention has been focused on the development of luminescent nanoprobes with excitation/emission maxima falling in the region of minimal tissue absorbance/autofluorescence between 650 and 1450 nm, an “imaging window”. Tissues have minimal absorbance in this wavelength range allowing for deep penetration of light. This enables whole animal imaging with high sensitivity in core organs in real time without the need for dissection. While several excellent reviews cover various aspects of imaging, there has not been a review that covers NIR imaging nanomaterials adequately. In the present review, we will focus on nanomaterials which can be excited or emitted in NIR I (650–900 nm) and NIR II (1000–1450 nm) regions, including lanthanide based nanoparticles, carbon based nanoparticles, quantum dots and noble metal nanomaterials. We systematically summarize the recent progress in their fabrication and application in biomedical imaging, and discuss the shortcomings, challenges and opportunities in it.Rui WangRui Wang was born in Jiangxi, China in 1991. After obtaining his B.S. degree from East China University of Science and Technology (China) in 2012, he pursued his research as a PhD student under the direction of Professor Fan Zhang in Fudan University. Currently, his research focuses on lanthanide based upconversion and downconversion nanomaterials for near-infrared biomedical imaging and other bioapplications.Fan ZhangProf. Fan Zhang received his PhD in 2008 from Fudan University followed by more than 2 years postdoctoral experience in the University of California at Santa Barbara before joining as an associate professor in the Chemistry Department of Fudan University in 2010. His current research interest includes the development of multifunctional nanostructured materials and nanotechnology for applications in bioanalysis. Prof. Zhang has authored more than 60 peer-reviewed research papers, a number of book chapters, and patents.
1. Introduction
Recently, the rapid development of life science and medicine has stimulated the investigation of biomedical imaging. This rising research area includes plenty of bioassay methods such as computed tomography (CT),1–5 positron emission tomography (PET),2,3,5–8 single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT),4,5,9 and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).5,8,10–12 These tomographic imaging techniques play an important role in biomedical imaging due to their superiority of unlimited penetration depth. However, they also suffer from some inevitable disadvantages such as limited spatial resolution and inability to visualize real-time dynamics owing to their long acquisition time.13 Compared to tomographic imaging techniques, fluorescent-based biomedical imaging has the advantages of fast feedback, high sensitivity and resolution, but is limited by tissue penetration.14 Absorption and scattering of the photons induced by biological tissue and water are the major factors that lead to attenuation of signal proportional to the depth of the feature of interest, especially in the traditional visible imaging region (400–750 nm) (Fig. 1a).15–17 To overcome this problem, much effort has been made to develop and implement imaging agents in the “biological transparency window”: the NIR I window (650–900 nm).18–20 From the 1990s, NIR I biomedical imaging has obtained extensive attention because tissues scatter and absorb less light at longer wavelengths, resulting in deeper penetration in biological tissues than visible light.21 In practice, however, this NIR I window is not optimal because tissue autofluorescence produces substantial background noise and the tissue penetration depth is still limited to 1–2 cm.22 In 2003, simulations and modeling studies of optical imaging in turbid media such as tissue or blood suggested that it would be possible to improve signal-to-noise ratios by over 100-fold by using quantum dot fluorophores that emit light around 1320 nm (instead of 850 nm).23 This has, since then, aroused interest in finding new biocompatible fluorescent probes with excitation/emission maxima falling in this special near-infrared window: NIR II (1000–1450 nm).24,25
 Fig. 1  (a) Absorption coefficient of hemoglobin and water in the 400–1000 nm range,15 (b) absorption coefficient of water (μa), (c) reduced scattering coefficient (μs') for skin, adipose tissue and mucous tissue in the 800–1400 nm range.17,26 
The tissue optical penetration depth generally depends on the absorption and scattering of the excitation and emission light. Bashkatov et al. have proposed a formula to calculate it: δ = (3μa(μa + μs'))−1/2, where μa is the optical absorption extinction coefficient which depends on the wavelength (Fig. 1b), μs'(∼λ−w) is the reduced scattering coefficient, and δ is the resulting penetration depth. The exponent (w) depends on the size and concentration of scatters in the tissue and ranges from 0.22 to 1.68 for different tissues (Fig. 1c).17,26 From the above mentioned formula and Fig. 1, we can find that water absorption is stronger in NIR II than in NIR I, but NIR I suffers from more tissue scatter than NIR II. So, the winner between them is uncertain based on these basic data and should depend on the actual situation, namely biomedical imaging application. The development of biocompatible nanomaterials for biomedical imaging and targeted therapy is an area of significant current interest.18,21–25 The basic rationale is that nanosized materials have functional and structural properties that are not found in either discrete molecules or bulk materials. When conjugated with biomolecular affinity ligands, such as antibodies, peptides or small molecules, these nanomaterials can be used to target malignant tumors with high specificity.27,28 Structurally, nanomaterials also have large surface areas for the attachment of multiple diagnostic (e.g., optical, radioisotopic, or magnetic) and therapeutic (e.g., anticancer) agents for multimode detection.29–33 Therefore, the main content of this review is nanomaterials which can be excited or emitted in NIR I and NIR II regions. They can be divided into four species: lanthanide based nanomaterials, carbon based nanomaterials, quantum dots and noble metal nanoparticles. We systematically summarize the recent progress in their fabrication and application in biomedical imaging, and discuss the shortcomings, challenges and opportunities in it.
2. Lanthanide based imaging nanomaterials
Lanthanide elements are spectroscopically rich species,34 a property that facilitates their use as optical codes in a spectral window distinct from fluorescent dyes used for labeling biological samples. The lanthanide 4f orbitals are buried beneath the 6s, 5p, and 5d orbitals; hence, spectra arising from f–f transitions are narrow and insensitive to their environment, unlike transition metal (3d) spectra.35 Most importantly, this gives rise to a rich energy level structure in the NIR, visible (VIS) and ultraviolet (UV) spectral range. Triply ionized lanthanide ions in solid hosts typically have emission line widths of ∼10 to 20 nm (FWHM, full width at half maximum), which is about half that observed for quantum dots (∼25 to 40 nm) and much narrower than that observed for organic dyes (∼30 to 50 nm) or transition metal ions (∼100 nm).36,37 This feature allows more resolvable bands to be packed into the same spectral bandwidth, which enables a larger number of distinct combinations. Because lanthanide emissions involve only atomic transitions, they are extremely resistant to photobleaching. The energy level structure of lanthanide ions also creates the possibility for large shifts between the excitation and emission bands. This shift can be several hundred nanometers containing discrete gaps with zero absorption. By comparison, the HOMO–LUMO (highest occupied molecular orbital–lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) transition in organic dyes typically results in overlapping excitation and emission bands and a Stokes shift of only 10–30 nm between the absorption and emission maxima. The large variety of absorption and emission wavelengths, the independence on host materials and low vibration energy losses make lanthanide ions ideal for spectral conversion. Lanthanide ions can be doped in a variety of solids such as crystals, fibers or glass ceramics to give them the desired downconversion and upconversion optical properties. Thus, their remarkable luminescence properties have been widely applied in lasers, solar cells, analytical sensors, photodynamic therapy and optical imaging.
2.1 Lanthanide upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs)
Upconversion materials, which emit high energy photons under excitation by NIR light (anti-Stokes shift) were first discovered in the 1960s,38 but have primarily been exploited for the development of some remarkably effective optical devices such as infrared quantum counter detectors,39,40 temperature sensors41,42 and compact solid state lasers.43–46 Thus, the use of the upconversion effect has been limited to bulk glass or crystalline materials for more than 30 years.47–50 Due to the appropriate size (which is small enough to go in and out of many biological hosts, such as cytoplasm, karyon and so on) and the unique optical properties, such as high chemical stability, low cytotoxicity, and high signal-to-noise ratio, the bio-application of UCNPs for analytical assays and bioimaging was reasonably recognized.51–54 The upconversion process proceeds by different mechanisms: excited-state absorption (ESA), energy-transfer upconversion (ETU), and photon avalanche (PA).55 ESA and ETU are based on the sequential absorption of two or more photons by metastable, long-lived energy states. In the case of ESA, the ground state activator absorbs at least two photons of suitable energy sequentially. In ETU, the activator and neighboring sensitizer both absorb one photon at first, then energy transfer between the sensitizer and activator happens, resulting in the population of a highly excited state of the emitting ion.56 PA was first reported by Jay S. Chivian et al. in 1979.57 They found that when Pr3+ doped LaCl3 or LaBr3 crystal was exposed to laser-pump radiation slightly in excess of a certain critical intensity, the fluorescence of Pr3+ increased by orders of magnitude.44,57 PA-induced UC features an unusual pump mechanism that requires pump intensity above a certain threshold value and always responds slowly to excitation (up to several seconds). The quantum yield (QY) is extremely different among these three mechanisms; in theory, ESA < ETU < PA, but PA always needs a rather high excitation power and suffers from slow response to excitation. The QY of ETU is two orders of magnitude higher than ESA, making it well explained and applicable in extensive fields.38
Efficient UCNPs are composed of three components: a host matrix, a sensitizer and an activator. An ideal host matrix needs to be optically transparent and have low lattice phonon energy, which is the guarantee to minimize nonradiative losses and maximize radiative emission. NaYF4,58–60 NaGdF4,61,62 NaLuF4,63 LaF3,64 CaF2 (ref. 65), etc. have been proven to be the ideal candidates. With the development of nanotechnology, several methods have been used to fabricate uniform monodispersed UCNPs with controlled crystalline phases and sizes, including co-precipitation,66–73 thermal decomposition,74–78 hydro(solvo)-thermal synthesis,79–93 sol–gel process,94–97 and combustion synthesis,98 which have been reviewed in many papers.38,51,56,99–103 The appropriate choice of the method for synthesis allows for the development of UCNPs whose properties match the need for the applications envisioned. On the other hand, the rational choice of different lanthanide ions as the sensitizer and activator is also very important. Typically, Yb3+ is always chosen as the sensitizer because of its larger absorption cross-section around 980 nm. Er3+, Tm3+ and Ho3+ feature ladder-like arranged energy levels which are in favor of a multiphoton process, and thus are frequently used as activators.56 Besides these three components, rational design of core–shell structures to minimize surface quenching effects and improve the luminescence efficiency of UCNPs is also very crucial.56,101–103
The upconversion materials were first used in tissue imaging in 1999, where Zijlmans and co-workers reported the first UC bioimaging based on submicron-sized Y2O2S:Yb/Tm particles (0.2–0.4 μm).104 Upon excitation at 980 nm, they observed a low autofluorescence signal and no bleaching even after continuous exposure to high excitation energy levels. After that, the idea of UC bioimaging was realized by employing some other oxysulfides or oxide nanomaterials (e.g., Y2O3:Yb/Er, and Gd2O3:Yb/Er).105,106 However, the size of the applied oxysulfide or oxide particles was in the level of submicrons, which limited the applications. The necessary requirements for material selection in practical bioimaging are small size, bright luminescence and biological safety. Recently, with the rapid development of synthesis techniques, fluoride-based UCNPs with a smaller size but high-quality luminescence have been explored extensively and widely used in cell, tissue, and animal imaging. In contrast to the oxysulfide or oxide host materials, fluorides are considered as a better kind of host material for the doping of lanthanide ions to achieve intense UC emissions, owing to their low phonon energies and the minimization of quenching of the excited state of the lanthanide ions. One of the first reports for in vivo imaging of UCNPs in small animals realized spot measurements of subcutaneously injected UCNPs in rats by Zhang et al. in 2008, which showed a much deeper penetration depth under 980 nm excitation compared to commercial green emitting QDs excited by UV.107 Although the NIR excitation light for UC materials has strong penetration ability, the UV/VIS UC emissions are more easily absorbed by biological samples, which definitely limits their further applications for observation of deep biological tissues. For small-animal in vivo imaging, highly sensitive NIR–NIR systems have attracted increasing attention, because both the excitation and emission lights are located in the “optical transmission window” of tissues (750–900 nm).18 For this purpose, Tm3+ ions are frequently chosen as dopants since they can exhibit strong NIR emission between 750 and 850 nm due to the transition from 3H4 to 3H6 under CW laser excitation at 980 nm. Nyk et al. reported the use of 20–30 nm-sized NaYF4 nanoparticles doped with Tm3+ and Yb3+, which have an emission around 800 nm for both in vitro and in vivo imaging (Fig. 2).108 High-contrast photoluminescence imaging was possible in cells and small animals due to the better tissue penetration depths achieved since both the excitation and emission are in the NIR region. After that, in vivo whole-body imaging of small animals has been successfully realized based on Tm3+-doped NaYF4,109 NaGdF4,110 NaLuF4,111 and NaYbF4 (ref. 112) NPs.
 Fig. 2  (a) Photoluminescence spectra of NaYF4:2 %Tm3+, 20%Yb3+ UCNPs in aqueous dispersion; excitation at 975 nm. Inset: sample of the UCNPs aqueous dispersion demonstrating colloidal stability, optical transparency, and efficient visible (blue) PL under 975 nm excitation. (b) In vitro transmission (left) and PL (right) images of Panc 1 cells treated with UCNPs. The inset shows localized PL spectra taken from cells (red) and the background (black). (c) Whole body images of mouse injected intravenously with UCNPs; intact mouse (left), same mouse after dissection (right). The red color indicates emission from UCNPs, green and black show the background as indicated by the arrows. The inset presents the PL spectra corresponding to the spectrally unmixed components of the multispectral image obtained with the Maestro system.108 
Traditionally, highly efficient UCNPs require a NIR laser at a wavelength of about 980 nm as the excitation source since the sensitizer ion Yb3+ has a high absorption cross-section in its absorption band, while this 980 nm laser suffers from strong absorption of water and biological specimens (Fig. 1a).15 Thus, 980 nm excitation has been argued for its associated problems like limited penetration depth and tissue damage because of sample overheating. Therefore, the excitation band tuning of UCNPs in an appreciable range is also an important issue for improving the performance of UCNPs. Zou et al. reported the concept of UCNPs where an organic near-infrared dye is used as an antenna to harvest the NIR photons with a broad band (740–850 nm) for β-NaYF4:Yb,Er nanoparticles in which the upconversion occurs (Fig. 3a). The overall upconversion by the dye-sensitized nanoparticles is dramatically enhanced (by a factor of ∼3300) as a result of increased absorptivity and overall broadening of the absorption spectrum of the upconverter.113 Prasad's group also reported the intense upconversion photoluminescence in colloidal LiYF4:Er3+ nanocrystals under excitation with telecom-wavelength at 1490 nm (Fig. 3b). The intensities of two- and three-photon anti-Stokes upconversion photoluminescence bands are higher than or comparable to that of the Stokes emission under excitation with low power density in the range of 5–120 W cm−2. The QY of the upconversion photoluminescence was measured to be as high as ∼1.2 ± 0.1%, which is almost 4 times higher than the highest upconversion photoluminescence efficiency (0.3 ± 0.1%) reported to date for lanthanide-doped nanocrystals in 100 nm sized hexagonal NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ using excitation at ∼980 nm.114 Zhan et al. demonstrated a new promising excitation approach for better NIR-to-NIR UC photoluminescence in vitro or in vivo imaging employing a cost-effective 915 nm laser. This novel laser excitation method provides drastically less heating of the biological specimen and larger imaging depth in animals or tissues due to the quite low water absorption (Fig. 3c).115 Recently, researchers have paid more attention to the 800 nm excitation UCNPs based on the big absorption cross-section of Nd3+ at 800 nm (around one order of magnitude higher than Yb3+ at 980 nm).116 Han et al. found that when Nd3+, Yb3+, and Er3+/Tm3+ were co-doped in NaYF4, naked eye distinguishable upconversion could be observed upon 800 nm excitation. In these novel UCNPs, Nd3+ serves as an 800 nm photon sensitizer and Yb3+ as a bridging ion; the energy transfer proceeded as follows: Nd3+ → Yb3+ → Er3+/Tm3+. However, the doping limit of Nd3+ is only 1% because of concentration quenching.117 Therefore, a novel structure needs to be designed to increase Nd3+ concentration. In 2013, Liu et al. reported a new type of core–shell UCNPs (Fig. 4a). Through spatially confined doping of Nd3+ which can be effectively excited at 795 nm, he claimed that the active NaYF4:Nd3+ shell layer can effectively prevent surface quenching of Yb3+ emission and can simultaneously promote the transfer of excitation energy to Yb3+ ions, which significantly enhances the upconversion efficiency. Further cell irradiation experiments confirmed that 800 nm is better than 980 nm with regard to heat generation (Fig. 4b and c).118 Almost at the same time, Yan and his co-worker reported a similar core–shell structure (Fig. 4d) with a similar design idea by doping Nd3+ in the shell to ensure successive Nd3+ → Yb3+ → activator energy transfer. In vivo imaging of a nude mouse subcutaneously injected with UCNPs showed us that comparable photon numbers could be measured when irradiated with 980 nm laser and 808 nm laser, respectively (Fig. 4e). Besides the upconversion process, downconversion photoluminescence (PL) of lanthanide doped NPs was also performed by the authors. In vivo NIR imaging of a nude mouse injected with “UCNPs” shows a high signal-to-noise ratio under 808 nm laser excitation (Fig. 4f–h). The above results indicate that UCNPs which can be excited under 800 nm, indeed, are a good future direction for development of the biomedical imaging of UCNPs.119
 Fig. 3  (a) Principal concept of dye-sensitized nanoparticles. Antenna dyes (green) absorb NIR solar energy (red wavy arrows) and transfer it (brown arrows) to the nanoparticle core (in yellow), where upconversion occurs. Upconversion denotes a nonlinear (on the incident radiation intensity) process in which the energies of two NIR quanta are summed to emit a quantum of higher energy in the green–yellow region (green–yellow wavy arrow).113 (b) Intense visible and near infrared upconversion photoluminescence in colloidal LiYF4:Er3+ nanocrystals under excitation at 1490 nm.114 (c–e) In vivo whole body image of a NaYbF4:Yb3+/Tm3+ injected nude mouse: (c) bright field image, (d) pseudocolor image obtained from the true image (the inset black/white image), and (e) superimposed image (bright field image and pseudocolor image) with the unmixed spectra of the in vivo image (the inset chart) of UC signal and background as indicated by the arrows.115 
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic design (top) and simplified energy level diagram (bottom) of a core–shell nanoparticle for photon upconversion under 800 nm excitation. Nd3+ ions doped in the core and shell layers serve as sensitizers to absorb the excitation energy and subsequently transfer it to Yb3+ ions. After energy migration from the Yb3+ ions to activator ions, activator emission is achieved via the Nd3+-sensitization process. (b and c) Optical microscopy images of trypan blue-treated HeLa cells recorded after irradiation for 5 min at 800 and 980 nm, respectively (6 W cm−2).118 (d) Integration scheme of the Nd3+ → Yb3+ energy transfer process by introducing a Nd3+/Yb3+ co-doped shell. The resulting Nd3+ → Yb3+ → activator energy transfer could extend the effective excitation bands for conventional Yb3+ sensitized UCNPs. (e) Energy transfer pathway from Nd3+ to Yb3+-activated Er3+ upconversion emission in core–shell structured NPs under 808 nm excitation. (f–h) In vivo NIR imaging of a nude mouse injected with Er@Nd NPs dispersed in water. (f) White-light photograph, (g) NIR image obtained with 808 nm excitation, and (h) overlapped image. The injection site is denoted with a white arrow.119 
2.2 Lanthanide downconversion nanoparticles (DCNPs)
The synthesis and surface modification procedures successfully used for UCNPs can also be well utilized for DCNPs. Almost all of the fifteen lanthanide ions possess downconversion property, with emission wavelengths across ultraviolet, visible light, NIR I, NIR II and even mid-infrared regions.120–122 The preliminary attempt of utilizing DCNPs as a biomedical imaging agent (NIR I or NIR II) was made in the last decade.
As early as 2002, Veggel et al. reported Nd3+ as well as Er3+ and Ho3+ doped LaF3 NPs with both NIR I and NIR II emission under 514 nm laser excitation. Because of the interesting luminescence emission in the telecommunication window (i.e., Er3+ at 1530 nm, Nd3+ at 1330 nm, and Ho3+ at 1450 nm), they were considered promising materials for polymer-based optical components.123 In 2006, inspired by Veggel's work, Wang et al. developed a simple method to synthesize LaF3:Nd3+ in aqueous solution at low temperature, and pointed out that this kind of DCNPs would have potential application in biomedical imaging. The emission of Nd3+ doped LaF3 nanocrystals is located in NIR II under 802 nm laser excitation.124 Later in 2008, NdF3 NPs were synthesized in aqueous solution by a similar method used to synthesize traditional Nd3+ doped LaF3 NPs. NdF3 NPs showed no doping concentration quenching effect; moreover, vibrational quenching caused by the O–H groups on the surfaces of the NdF3 NPs can be suppressed after coating of silica shells. For deep tissue imaging, mice were injected intramuscularly and intraperitoneally with 100 μL of NdF3/SiO2 NPs (1.0 μg mL−1) in the thigh and abdominal cavity respectively. NIR signals (1050 nm) from the deep tissues of the thigh and abdominal cavity can be both clearly distinguished from the tissue autofluorescence under 730 nm excitation.125
Although the above mentioned efforts have been made on LaF3:Nd3+ and NdF3, morphology control of the NPs is still a big problem for this kind of materials. Thanks to the well-developed synthesis of UCNPs, uniform and monodispersed NaReF4:Nd3+ NPs have been obtained and have attracted more and more attention in recent years.126–128 In 2012, Prasad et al. reported highly efficient NaGdF4:Nd3+@NaGdF4 for NIR–NIR downconversion biomedical imaging;129 unlike LaF3:Nd3+, these novel DCNPs benefit from controllable morphology: even ∼3 nm uniform NaGdF4 shells have been successful synthesized.130 Recently, some attempts have been made to explore the downconversion optical property of the traditional UCNPs. Nagasaki et al. had reported the application of Y2O3:Yb3+, Er3+ as a UCNP biomedical imaging nanoprobe in 2008.131 In 2011, they used the same kind of nanoparticles for downconversion bioimaging research. 24 h after intravenous injection of DCNPs, a strong NIR signal (1550 nm) could be observed upon irradiation of 980 nm laser.132 Most recently, an exciting work on DCNPs biomedical imaging has been shared by Moghe and his colleagues. NaYF4:Yb3+, Ln3+ (Ln = Er, Ho, Tm or Pr)@NaYF4 core–shell structures have been prepared in this work. In the case of Er3+ doping, optical efficiency of the emission in NIR (1550 nm) was higher than 1% under 980 nm excitation. When applied to biomedical imaging, not only the organs and tumor but also the vessels could be well distinguished, indicating the good performance as a downconversion biomedical imaging agent with high resolution (Fig. 5).133
 Fig. 5  RE nanoprobes enable real-time and multispectral imaging in vivo. (a) Schematic of the portable SWIR-imaging prototype. The prototype consists of a room temperature-cooled InGaAs camera operating at a typical exposure time of 50 ms, adjustable filter mounts, a collimated laser with an output power density of 0.14 W cm−2 and a neoprene rubber imaging surface. (b) Nude mice bearing melanoma xenografts were intravenously injected with REs and imaged near surrounding tumor regions before dissection from the ventral aspect.133 
3. Carbon based imaging nanomaterials
Carbon, one of the most abundant elements on the earth, with the inherent advantage of being inexpensive, has given rise to many photoluminescent nanomaterials in recent years, such as carbon nanoparticles, single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) and nanographene. In the following section, we will introduce them respectively.
3.1 Zero-dimensional carbon
Amorphous, graphitic and diamond are the three crystalline states of carbon, and all of them have been realized in zero-dimensional nanomaterials (NPs) with photoluminescence property.

3.1.1 Amorphous carbon. 
In 2007, Liu et al. first reported amorphous carbon NPs with tunable emission by refluxing candle soot with HNO3, but the quantum yield was very low (0.8–1.9%) under UV excitation and the emission light was always located in the visible region.134 This interesting attempt inspired others. In 2008, Giannelis et al. obtained amorphous carbon NPs by oxidizing organic molecules. The quantum yield increased 2–3 folds compared with Liu's work, but the emission light was still in the visible range.135 In 2013, Lee et al. claimed that they synthesized water soluble amorphous carbon NPs with better photoluminescence properties.136 Indeed, in their work, the emission could be tuned to the NIR region with low emission intensity. What is more, the Stokes shift between excitation and emission light was too small; all of these defects hinder the application of amorphous carbon NPs in biomedical imaging. It is worth mentioning that carbon clusters as a special form of amorphous carbon have attracted much attention due to the breakthrough in NIR imaging. Tour et al. reported the synthesis of hydrophilic carbon clusters (HCCs) by oxidizing single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs).137 In 2012, Liu and his colleagues published their modification work on C dots. Nearly identical C dot products with a diameter of 3–4 nm were produced from carbon nanotubes and graphite after a mixed-acid treatment. These C dots exhibit strong yellow fluorescence under UV irradiation and shifted emission peaks as the excitation wavelength is changed, including some in the NIR region. Furthermore they also demonstrated good signal–noise ratio in the NIR region through in vivo fluorescence imaging application.138


3.1.2 Graphitic carbon. 
Sun and Ding et al. established a laser induced and electrochemical method to fabricate graphitic carbon NPs in 2006 and 2007, respectively.139,140 Unfortunately, both of the materials developed by these two groups could not reach the NIR region for optimal bioimaging applications. In 2007, Sun found that graphitic carbon NPs can be excited by femtosecond pulsed laser for two-photon excitation in the NIR region (800 nm), and used it for in vitro imaging (Fig. 6).141 Despite the poor progress, graphitic carbon NPs are still considered as the next generation two-photon biomedical imaging agent because of their unique properties such as high photostability, tunable emission, nonblinking fluorescence and low toxicity. What is more, benefiting from the two-photon anti-Stokes procedure, the excitation light can be completely located in the NIR I window. Thus, two-photon carbon NPs solved a big problem which traditional C dots are facing. In 2012, Tian et al. reported two-photon biomedical imaging and biosensing of pH in living cells and tissues using a specially engineered C dots-based inorganic–organic hybrid nanomaterial. Water-soluble C-dots with strong luminescence upon 800 nm excitation were obtained using surface-bound 4′-(aminomethylphenyl)-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine (AE-TPY) molecules as receptors that selectively respond to the change of pH. The integrated C dot–TPY exhibited fluorescent emission in the visible region by two-photon excitation at the wavelength of 800 nm. Using rhodamine as a standard, the PL quantum yield of C-dots was calculated to be ∼10%. The application of the C dot–TPY probe to two-photon biomedical imaging and biosensing of intracellular pH was also demonstrated.142
 Fig. 6  (a) C-dot structure; (b) AFM topography image of C-dots on a mica substrate, with the height profile along the line in the image; luminescence images (all scale bars 20 μm) of the C-dots with (c) argon ion laser excitation at 458 nm and (d) femtosecond pulsed laser excitation at 800 nm; (e) is an overlay of (c) and (d); (f and g) representative two-photon luminescence image (800 nm excitation) of human breast cancer MCF-7 cells with internalized C-dots.141 


3.1.3 Nanodiamonds. 
As we all know, high energy is needed when converting amorphous carbon or graphitic carbon into a diamond structure based on thermodynamics, so is the case with nanodiamonds. The synthesis of nanodiamonds often requires high energy pulse laser.143 Compared to other carbon nanoparticles, luminescent nanodiamonds appear as promising alternative biomarkers. Their photoluminescence, with emission in the red and NIR spectral region (575–750 nm), results from nitrogen-vacancy color centers embedded in the diamond matrix.144 Nanodiamonds are also widely acclaimed because of their low toxicity, and absence of photobleaching or photoblinking properties.145 As far as we know, many biomedical imaging studies have been reported in this field.146,147 However, the emission of nanodiamonds displays only a small overlap with the NIR region; fabrication of high quality nanodiamonds with high efficiency in NIR I and NIR II is still desirable for efficient NIR biomedical imaging.

3.2 One-dimensional carbon
Generally speaking, when we talk about one-dimensional carbon NIR biomedical imaging agents, we refer to single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs). SWNT is a seamless cylinder rolled up by only one piece of graphene sheet. With small bandgaps on the order of 1 eV, semiconducting SWNTs exhibit photoluminescence in the 800–2000 nm range which covers both NIR I and NIR II windows, and therefore holds great promise in NIR biomedical imaging.148,149 However, a major obstacle to such a good NIR bioimaging agent is the diversity of tube diameters, chiral angles, and aggregation states in nanotube samples obtained from the various preparation methods. Aggregation is particularly problematic because the resulting parallel bundles or ropes perturb the electronic structure of the tubes and quench the fluorescence. In 2002 Smalley et al. pioneered in simply detaching SWNTs from bundles by sonication treatment. The removed SWNTs were captured by the surrounding surfactants to form micelle-encapsulated SWNTs; then, centrifugation was used to remove any remaining bundles from the solution, yielding individual SWNTs in aqueous micellar suspensions. The estimated quantum yield was about 10−3.148 In 2007, Lefebvre et al. suspended SWNTs in air over trenches and imaged them through their intrinsic NIR photoluminescence (1.0–1.6 μm) (Fig. 7a). They also estimated the quantum efficiency of individual suspended SWNTs at 7% orders of magnitude higher than Smalley's result. Lefebvre claimed that the difference might arise from the sample preparation. Micelle encapsulated nanotubes show broad emission peaks, inhomogeneous broadening and line-shape variations. However, these drawbacks were not found for freely suspended nanotubes in air.150 Almost at the same time, Hertel et al. showed that after removing bundled nanotubes from bulk SWNTs by centrifuging in an iodixanol gradient, the quantum yield can be increased to as high as 11%.151 For the purpose of fabricating high quantum yield SWNTs, simple and effective methods are required to forbid aggregation and nonuniform morphology to realize their potential in NIR biomedical imaging.
 Fig. 7  (a) Photoluminescence image of a straight, long (>100 μm) SWNT which is suspended over a series of trenches.150 (b–e) Colocalization of the fluorescence from SWNTs (green) with their corresponding cell image at the final stage of the experiment for four different lengths: (b) 660 ± 40, (c) 430 ± 35, (d) 320 ± 30, and (e) 130 ± 18 nm.153 
In 2004, Weisman et al. investigated the nonspecific uptake of SWNTs in phagocytic cells by imaging in NIR (1125–1600 nm), strictly speaking, NIR II. Encouragingly, they found that SWNTs showed no toxic effects on phagocytic cells.149 Utilizing the NIR photoluminescence of SWNTs, Strano et al. have tracked over 10000 individual SWNTs as they are incorporated into and expelled from NIH-3T3 cells in real time on a perfusion microscope stage. Furthermore, the endocytosis and exocytosis rates can also be computed by summing all observed trajectories crossing the membrane.152 One year later, they reported size-dependent uptake of SWNTs with different lengths through their nano-tracking method. As shown in Fig. 7b–e, long (Fig. 7b, 660 ± 40 nm) and short (Fig. 7e, 130 ± 18 nm) SWNTs show lower fluorescent intensities than SWNTs with an average length of 430 ± 35 nm (Fig. 7c) and 320 ± 30 nm (Fig. 7d). The 320 nm SWNTs reveal the highest uptake even if one corrects for the length dependent quantum yield. The SWNT quantum yield has been shown to increase with length. If a correction is applied, 320 nm remains the maximum.153 In 2008, Dai et al. developed antibody conjugated SWNTs as NIR fluorescent labels for probing cell surface receptors with high specificity and high sensitivity. This novel structure was obtained by using functional SWNTs with phospholipid–polyethyleneglycol (PEG)–amine (PL–PEG–NH2). Then nanotubes were conjugated with Rituxan and Herceptin antibodies that can recognize the CD20 cell surface receptor and HER2/neu receptor on certain breast cancer cells respectively. To impart biological specificity to the PEGylated nanotubes, Dai et al. covalently linked the terminal amine groups of PEG chains on SWNTs via sulfosuccinimidyl-4-(N-maleimidomethyl) cyclohexane-1-carboxylate (sulfo-SMCC) to thiolated Rituxan antibodies specific to the CD20 cell surface receptor on B-cell lymphomas, or Herceptin, which recognizes the HER2/neu receptor (Fig. 8a). The results of NIR fluorescence imaging for the positive and negative cell lines after incubation in SWNT–Herceptin (Fig. 8b and c) clearly showed selective binding of nanotube conjugates to the positive cells. Mean photoluminescence values from a high cell density area (Fig. 8d) show a positive/negative ratio of 20:1, suggesting the generality of selective binding of SWNT–antibody to specific cell types and retention of biological specificity of the antibodies when conjugated to PEGylated SWNTs.154
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic image of NIR photoluminescence detection of a SWNT–Rituxan conjugate selectively bound to CD20 cell surface receptors on B-cell lymphoma (left). The conjugate is not recognized by T-cell lymphoma (right). (b) NIR fluorescence image of BT-474 cells, which are HER2/neu positive, treated with the SWNT–Herceptin conjugate. (c) NIR fluorescence image of MCF-7 cells, which are HER2/neu negative, treated with the SWNT–Herceptin conjugate. (d) Mean NIR fluorescence values for the positive and negative cell lines after treatment with the SWNT–Herceptin conjugate, showing a positive/negative ratio of ∼20:1.154 
The first in vivo imaging of nanotubes with small animals was achieved by the Weisman group in 2007. They raised Drosophila larvae on food containing ∼10 ppm of disaggregated SWNTs. Their viability and growth were not reduced by nanotube ingestion. Peristaltic movements in the digestive system can also be shown clearly through videos constructed from NIR fluorescence image sequences.155 Before SWNTs are really used in mammal biomedical imaging application, in vivo distribution investigation should be done first. In 2006, Dai et al. reported their investigation on biodistribution of radio-labelled SWNTs in mice by in vivo positron emission tomography (PET), ex vivo biodistribution and Raman spectroscopy. It was found that SWNTs functionalized with phospholipids bearing polyethyleneglycol (PEG) are surprisingly stable in vivo. Effectively PEGylated SWNTs exhibited relatively long blood circulation times and low uptake by the reticuloendothelial system (RES). Efficient targeting of integrin positive tumor in mice was achieved with SWNTs coated with PEG chains linked to an arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) peptide. The high tumor accumulation was attributed to the multivalent effect of the SWNTs.156
In 2009, Dai et al. showed that sonication of single-walled carbon nanotubes with sodium cholate, followed by surfactant exchange produced both bright and biocompatible phospholipid-polyethylene glycol coated nanotubes for bioimaging. For the first time, they have shown whole-animal NIR imaging in vivo in the NIR II window using an InGaAs camera, which has not been realized by any other biomedical imaging agents before. These exchange-SWNTs show more than one order of magnitude improvement in relative quantum yield compared to SWNTs directly suspended in PL-PEG. This improvement was attributed to the more pristine nature of the exchange-SWNTs. Therefore, exchange-SWNTs demonstrated the ability to achieve high image contrast at a relatively low dose (17 mg L−1) for whole-mouse imaging. Astonishingly, the tumor vessels can be resolved to a few micrometres, approaching the diffraction limit.157 This work was highlighted by Nat. Nanotechnol. with the title “Second window for in vivo imaging”,25 and considered as a turning point in the field of SWNTs NIR biomedical imaging agents. What is more, the range of NIR II is not limited to SWNTs; plenty of biomedical imaging agents would find their position in this novel window, but SWNTs are the first to have been explored in this window. Later in 2011, the same group shared its advancement based on previous work; the authors performed high-frame-rate video imaging of mice during intravenous injection of SWNTs and investigated the path of SWNTs through mouse anatomy. After injection of SWNTs-DSPE-mPEG, the oxygen-poor blood travelled to the heart and lungs to be oxygenated before being distributed throughout the body. Following this spike in intensity, the lung contrast faded, indicating the spread of the nanotube-rich oxygenated blood to the rest of the circulatory system. Concurrent to the loss of lung contrast was a peak in kidney contrast; they claimed that the increased signal at these early time points was a result of the nanotube-rich blood passing through the highly vascularized kidneys. Following the peak in kidney contrast, the kidney levels decreased toward their mean signal. The one-pass circulation time of blood in a mouse was previously determined to be approximately 15 s.158 During the first 15 s of imaging, the SWNT-rich blood was distributed throughout the body. After the first passage of SWNT-rich blood, the liver, lungs, muscle, and kidneys all showed a fairly constant signal indicating consistent blood flow in these organs.26
Peripheral arterial diseases (PADs), as a great threat to human health, demand sufficient imaging methods to assess vasculature and hemodynamics in small vessels in vivo. Compared with traditional imaging methods like micro-CT and MRI, NIR II fluorescence imaging technology possesses the advantage of high spatial and temporal resolution for small vessel imaging. Recently, Dai et al. reported in vivo real-time epifluorescence imaging of mouse hind limb vasculature in the NIR II region using SWNTs as the biomedical imaging agent. First, biocompatible SWNT–IRDye-800 conjugates were created as dual-window imaging agents; in this hybrid composite, both the SWNT and IRDye-800 label could be excited by a 785 nm laser, but they had different emissions. The IRDye-800 dye emitted at ∼800 nm in NIR I, whereas the SWNTs emitted in the 1.1–1.4 μm in the NIR II region. The injected mouse was illuminated using a 785 nm laser at 8 mW cm−2 and imaged in NIR I (Fig. 9a–c) using a silicon-based CCD camera and in NIR II (Fig. 9d–f) using an InGaAs camera equipped with different emission filters. They found that all images in the NIR I region employing IRDye-800 fluorescence showed indistinct vascular anatomy. The corresponding cross-sectional intensity profiles were characterized by broad peaks (Fig. 9a–c). In contrast, when the same mouse was imaged in the NIR II region by detecting SWNT fluorescence, there was a substantially improved spatial resolution of vessels at all magnifications. Moreover, in the NIR II window smaller, higher-order branches of blood vessels could be clearly visualized at higher magnifications. Cross-sectional intensity profiles all showed sharp peaks, with the calculated vessel diameter values consistent with expected values (Fig. 9d–f). This result can be attributed to the substantial scattering and absorbance of NIR I photons, which limited the depth and resolution of traditional NIR imaging in vivo. They have also compared spatial resolution of the proximal femoral artery and vein achieved by NIR II and micro-CT methods in the same mouse and their results confirmed that the two techniques are comparable in imaging vascular structures several hundred microns in diameter, but NIR II enjoyed much smaller resolution limits (∼30 μm in diameter) against micro-CT (∼100 μm in diameter).159
 Fig. 9  (a–c) NIR I fluorescence images (top) and cross-sectional fluorescence intensity profiles (bottom) along red-dashed lines of a mouse injected with the SWNT–IRDye-800 conjugates. Gaussian fits to the profiles are shown with red dashed curves. (d–f) NIR II fluorescence images (top) and cross-sectional fluorescence intensity profiles (bottom) along red-dashed bars of a mouse injected with the SWNT–IRDye-800 conjugates. Gaussian fits to the profiles are shown with red dashed curves.159 
3.3 Nanographene
Basically, luminescent nanographene includes nanographene and its derivatives such as graphene oxide (GO), reduced graphene oxide (RGO) and GO-nanocomposites.160 They have been widely explored in biomedical applications as novel nano-carriers for drug/gene delivery,161–163 and photothermal agents for hyperthermia therapy164 based on their ultra-high surface area and intrinsic NIR optical absorbance properties, respectively.
Recently, nanographene has aroused significant interest as a promising new class of fluorophores for bioimaging, owing to its interesting and tunable photoluminescence properties originating from quantum confinement, excellent photostability, low toxicity, good water solubility, chemical inertness, small size, and low cost.165–167 In 2008, Dai and co-workers reported intrinsic luminescence from predominantly single-layer nanographene oxide (NGO) sheets in both the visible and NIR regions. After grafting polyethylene glycol (PEG) star-polymers covalently onto the chemically activated surfaces and edges, the aqueous stability to NGO in buffer solutions and other biological media significantly increased, which is very essential for bioapplications. It is worth mentioning that, in Dai's work, cell imaging was achieved by detecting NIR photoluminescence in the range of 1100 to 2200 nm (NIR II window) using an InGaAs detector under 658 nm laser excitation. Although the quantum yield of NGO-PEG fluorescence was rather low, cell imaging using its intrinsic fluorescence has been successfully realized owing to the extremely low autofluorescence background of biological tissues in the NIR II window.161 Considering the high cost of an InGaAs IR camera, a number of groups turned to utilizing external fluorescent dyes to label PEGylated GO for in vitro and in vivo imaging. In 2010, Yang et al. labeled NGO-PEG with a NIR Cy7 dye at the PEG terminal to avoid significant fluorescent quenching. Then, mice bearing different tumor models were intravenously injected with NGO-PEG-Cy7 and imaged by a Maestro EX in vivo fluorescence imaging system (CRi, Inc.). Increasing fluorescence signals were found in the tumor over time, indicating efficient tumor passive targeting of NGO-PEG in several different xenograft tumor models.160
4. Quantum dots
Quantum-confined particles or quantum dots (QDs) have unique optical and electronic properties, such as size- and composition-tunable fluorescence emission from visible to infrared wavelengths, high QY, large absorption coefficients across a wide spectral range and high photostability. Since the first method for synthesizing colloidal QDs reported by Henglein168 and Rossetti et al.169 in 1980s, researchers have paid more attention to improve the overall qualities of QDs (such as monodispersity, tunable size and bandgap which result in a tunable first exciton emission peak). The most exciting work was done by Alivisatos's group. For the first time, they introduced QDs in biomedical imaging. They conducted dual-labeling with two colored QDs, and specifically labeled the F-actin filaments utilizing the avidin–biotin interaction, a model system for ligand–receptor binding. These ideas turned into several important concepts in biomedical imaging: multiplexed imaging and targeted recognition. Their accomplishment led to the developing tendency of use of nanomaterials for biomedical imaging.170
The emission wavelength of QDs is associated with the bandgap; a narrower bandgap is always needed for NIR QDs that result in a handful choices of composition elements. Typically, NIR QDs include II–VI (CdTe, HgTe), III–V (InP, InAs), I–III–VI solid solutions (CuInSe, AgInS2), parts of IV–VI (PbS, PbSe), I–VI (Ag2S, Ag2Se) and some special structures like doped QDs, type-II core–shell structures and multiphoton QDs.171
4.1 II–VI based NIR QDs
CdTe,172,173 HgTe,174–177 CdxHg1−xTe178−180 are the most widely studied II–VI QDs in the NIR region; the reported QYs are about 40% and 50% for CdTe and HgTe based QDs, respectively. Alloying these materials within a nanocrystal results in mixed CdxHg1−xTe particles, which opens up an opportunity for further band-gap engineering of QDs. The control of the CdTe and HgTe QD sizes and the composition of alloyed CdxHg1−xTe QDs allowed us to tune the luminescence band in the wide spectral region from green to NIR (Fig. 10).181 In 2002, Rogach et al. used water-soluble CdTe QDs with bright luminescence in the visible and NIR to create both single-color tagged microspheres and multicolored beads with controlled emission intensity ratios.182 However, the emission of CdTe QDs displayed only a small overlap with NIR. After a year, they constructed biocompatible polymer microcapsules, labeled with water-soluble CdTe nanocrystals emitting in the visible region and, for the first time, with CdxHg1−xTe or HgTe NCs emitting in the NIR region. The authors claimed that their biocompatible microcapsules labeled with CdxHg1−xTe nanocrystals emitting at 750–1200 nm might be of special interest for monitoring the drug delivery processes in the NIR region.183
 Fig. 10  Tunability of the PL spectra of CdTe, CdxHg1−xTe, and HgTe QDs prepared in water.181 
Usually, core–shell QDs are used because they have reduced surface defects and nonradioactive decay or formed a novel structure like type-II core–shell QDs. With a higher valence band or lower conduction band in the shell than in the core, type-II QDs have many novel properties, such as the red-shift of the emission and a longer decay lifetime in comparison with either of the single materials.184 In 2004, Weiss et al. reported the synthesis procedure of highly luminescent CdTe/ZnS and CdHgTe/ZnS QDs, after ZnS shell coating; both first exciton absorption and emission peaks exhibited a red shift compared with the pure core, and enhanced QY (higher than 50%) was also obtained.185 Almost at the same time, Bawendi's group showed that the fluorescence emission of type II QDs (CdTe/CdSe) can be tuned into the NIR while preserving the absorption cross-section, and that a polydentate phosphine coating renders them soluble, disperse and stable in the serum. They also demonstrated that these QDs facilitate a major cancer surgery, sentinel lymph node mapping. These NIR QDs were used for sentinel lymph node mapping in mice and pigs. Injection of only 400 pmol of NIR QDs (QY in PBS is 13%) facilitated easy imaging of 1 cm deep sentinel lymph nodes in real time using 500 nm excitation with low power density (5 mW cm−2).186 In 2009, Prasad et al. reported the synthesis of monodisperse, biocompatible, lysine-crosslinked mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA) CdSe0.25Te0.75/CdS NIR QDs (QY of 10–15%) and used them as probes to study their long term in vivo distribution, clearance, and toxicity.187
4.2 III–V based NIR QDs
III–V based NIR QDs include InP, InAs and InAsxP1−x, which benefit from their narrow bandgap, but suffer from low QY. To overcome this problem, plenty of efforts have been made in designing core–shell structures to enhance the QY. In 2005, Banin et al. synthesized InAs/CdSe/ZnSe core–shell1–shell2 (CSS) complex structures, where the intermediate CdSe buffer layer decreases the strain between the InAs core and the ZnSe outer shell. After shell growth using a layer-by-layer method, the QY for CSS with a small InAs core reaches over 70% – exceptional photoluminescence intensity for III–V QDs. The emission wavelength can be tuned from 885 to 1425 nm by tuning the core size and shell thickness.188 Bawendi also designed an InAsxP1−x/InP/ZnSe CSS structure. The InAsxP1−x alloyed core had a graded internal composition with increasing arsenic content from the center to the edge of the dots. The first shell of InP contributed to a red-shift and an increase in QY, and the final shell of ZnSe served to stabilize the dots for applications in aqueous environments. After ligand exchange, this CSS InAsxP1−x/InP/ZnSe was used in a sentinel lymph node mapping experiment (Fig. 11). After injection of 150 pmol CSS QDs for 3 min, an NIR fluorescence signal could be easily distinguished from the autofluorescence background around the sentinel lymph node, revealing fine details of lymphatic flow from the injection site to the SLN.189 Later in 2006, Bawendi et al. modified their CSS structure and created InAs/ZnSe core–shell NIR QDs with hydrodynamic diameters (HD) smaller than 10 nm. By varying the core size and the shell thickness or composition, wide tunability of the final emission wavelength was achieved, ranging from 750 to 920 nm with high QY: 7–10% in hexane and 6–9% in water. To utilize these NIR QDs for in vivo bioimaging, mapping of SLN was also presented with a high signal–noise ratio.190 In 2009, Chen and his colleagues reported their work on InAs/InP/ZnSe NIR QDs in vivo imaging. In a word, they have synthesized ultrasmall (<10 nm) NIR emission (800 nm) non-cadmium QDs, which were capped with mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) for passive tumor targeted imaging. As shown in Fig. 12b, the fluorescence signals derived from QD800–MPA both appeared in the 22B tumor and LS174T tumor (arrows) 1 hour after injection, while the signal of other organs was low. The tumor fluorescence intensity increased over time. After 4 hours, the tumors were quite distinguishable from other tissues with good fluorescence contrast, indicating high tumor uptake of QD800-MPA. Ex vivo imaging (Fig. 12c) further confirmed the obvious fluorescence signal from the tumor, although the fluorescence intensity of the liver was the highest among all the organs. Then, authors coated human serum albumin (HSA) on the surface of QD800–MPA, which resulted in reduced localization in mononuclear phagocytic system-related organs over QD800–MPA plausibly due to the low uptake of QD800-MPA-HSA in macrophage cells.191
 Fig. 11  Sentinel lymph node mapping using InAsxP1−x/InP/ZnSe. Postinjection (a–c), 3 min postinjection (d–f), and post-resection (g–i) images using white light, NIR fluorescence, and color/NIR merge, respectively.189 
 Fig. 12  (a) The structure of QD800-MPA and the illustration of the passive tumor targeting of QD800-MPA in a tumor model. (b and c) In vivo imaging and ex vivo imaging (4 h p.i.) of LS174T tumor-bearing mice (arrows) after the tail-vein injection of QD800-MPA-HSA nanoparticles. (1) LS174T tumor; (2) heart; (3) spleen; (4) pancreas; (5) lung; (6) liver; (7) intestine; (8) muscle; (9) kidney; (10) skin.191 
In 2007, Peng et al. announced that among all II–VI and III–V semiconductors, InP was probably the only one which could offer a compatible or even broader emission color range similar to that of CdSe QDs but without intrinsic toxicity since InP had neither Class A elements (Cd and Hg) nor Class B elements (As and Se). They synthesized InP QDs with controlled size, and then coated it with ZnS. The QY of the InP plain core was low (<1%), but it reached as high as above 40% for the core–shell ones. The bandgap PL color of the InP/ZnS core–shell QDs spanned from blue to NIR.192
4.3 I–III–VI solid solution based NIR QDs
I–III–VI solid solution based QDs include AgInS2, CuInS2 and CuInSe2. As ternary compounds, they exhibit the tendency to form non-stoichiometric composites and solid alloys with other structurally similar compounds.
As one of the most important I–III–VI materials, AgInS2 with a bandgap of ∼1.8 eV was extensively studied for its electrical and optical properties.193 But either in a non-stoichiometric or solid alloy system, AgInS2 always exhibits the longest wavelength; any impurities would increase the blue-shift of emission. In AgInS2–AgGaS2 solid solution NPs, photoluminescence and absorption spectra were also blue-shifted as the ratio of Ga increased due to the larger bandgap of AgGaS2 compared with that of AgInS2, which emits at 750 nm with a QY of 45%.194 The same phenomenon was also found in ZnS–AgInS2 solid solution, whose wavelength of the photoluminescence peak was blue-shifted with an increase in the fraction of ZnS,195,196 while in non-stoichiometric AgxIn1−xS2, the absorption onset was blue-shifted from 750 to 580 nm with a decrease in the Ag content, due to the enlargement of the energy gap of particles.197
The same problem troubles CuInSe2 and CuInS2; fortunately their bandgap is a bit narrower than that of AgInS2. In general, the excitation and emission of CuInS2 or CuInSe2 based solid solution can be tuned in the visible to NIR I window; for example, CuInS2/ZnS: from 500 to 950 nm with a QY of up to about 30% (Fig. 13a);198 non-stoichiometric Cu–In–Se: from 650 to 975 nm with a QY of up to 25%.199 In 2011, Searson et al. explored the performance of CuInxSey/ZnS QDs for biomedical imaging, 230 pmol of lipid-coated QDs in 120 μL of saline were introduced by tail-vein injection. Fluorescence images were taken as a function of time post-injection (P.I.). Fig. 13b–e showed fluorescence images recorded before injection, and at 5 min, 90 min, and 48 h P.I. Immediately after injection (Fig. 13c) the fluorescence intensity increased relatively uniformly over the whole body of the mouse. Indeed, some of the larger blood vessels were easily detectable. The fluorescence intensity started to decay at 90 min P.I. (Fig. 13d), and after 48 h returned to the same level as that before injection (Fig. 13e). There are no bright spots indicating aggregation or measurable accumulation in organs such as the liver or spleen, suggesting good clearance from the body (although this remains to be confirmed by quantitative analysis). The kinetics of circulation was analyzed quantitatively by determining the average intensity per pixel over the whole image (Fig. 13f). The average intensity (I) remains constant for about 2 h P.I. and then decreases to the background level. By fitting the data to the function  an average retention time t1/2 of 268 ± 16 min and a clearance time τ of 74.5 ± 11.9 min could be obtained.200
 Fig. 13  (a) Photoluminescence properties of the CuInS2/ZnS core–shell nanocrystals.198 (b–e) Fluorescence images obtained from the ventral side of a mouse after tail-vein injection of 230 pmol QDs. (b) Before tail-vein injection, (c) 5 min post-injection, (d) 90 min post-injection, and (e) 48 h post-injection. (f) Normalized average intensity per pixel obtained from the fluorescence images over time after injection.200 
4.4 IV–VI based NIR QDs
IV–VI based NIR QDs refer to PbS,201 PbSe202 and PbTe203 QDs. These materials show a well-defined excitonic structure whose size can be readily tuned from 0.5 to 1.0 eV. Their band-edge fluorescence can be easily tuned from 1 to 2 μm with high QY. Although they have attracted less attention in the past, an aqueous synthesis route has been developed based on this group of QDs, which opens another gate toward hydrophilic QDs.171 Recently, Jin's group reported the aqueous synthesis of glutathione-coated PbS QDs by reacting Pb(CH3COO)2 and Na2S in the presence of glutathione. The emission wavelength of the resulting PbS QDs can be tuned from 1000 to 1200 nm by changing the amount of Na2S, and the QY values were determined to be 16%, 12% and 6% for QDs with emission peaks at 1000, 1100 and 1200 nm, respectively. The authors also examined the feasibility of GSH-coated PbS QDs for NIR II fluorescence imaging of breast cancer tumors and lymph nodes/vessels.204
4.5 I–VI based NIR QDs
I–VI based QDs include Cu2S, Ag2S and Ag2Se. But Cu2S QDs can hardly reach the NIR region.205 In contrast, monoclinic R–Ag2S, which has a bulky bandgap of 1.1 eV and a relatively large absorption coefficient, can be easily tuned to NIR.206 In addition, Ag2S is reported to have negligible toxicity in organisms. Therefore, the appropriate narrow bandgap and low toxicity of Ag2S QDs render them excellent NIR QDs. In 2010, Wang et al. first reported the synthesis of Ag2S QDs which emit in the NIR region in a mixed organic solvent through thermal decomposition of a single precursor of Ag(DDTC) [(C2H5)2NCS2Ag]. The as-obtained Ag2S QDs were the first observed to present NIR emission at 1058 nm under excitation of 785 nm.206 Later in 2012, Wang and Dai et al. modified the above mentioned synthesis method by changing the mixed organic solvent to a sole solvent: 1-dodecanethiol. The obtained Ag2S NIR QDs exhibit strong emission at 1200 nm; after ligand exchange of DT with dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA) and labeling of the targeted molecule, in vitro targeted cellular imaging was performed in the NIR II window.207 The most exciting NIR biomedical imaging based on Ag2S was also performed by Wang and Dai et al.; the as synthesized Ag2S–DHLA reacted with the amine-functionalized six-armed PEG, using ethyl(dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide/N-hydroxysuccinimide (EDC/NHS) to afford highly water, buffer, and serum soluble 6PEG–Ag2S NIR QDs with an average diameter of approximately 5.4 nm. Then in vivo whole body imaging was done using 6PEG–Ag2S NIR QDs as Dai et al. had done before26 using SWNTs. An enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect of the tumor vasculature was also found in mice bearing xenograft 4T1 tumor. In Fig. 14, a steady increase of NIR II fluorescence of 6PEG–Ag2S QDs in the tumor region and a decrease of NIR II fluorescence in other organs and skin were observed from 30 min P.I. to 24 h P.I., leading to an increased tumor-to-background ratio over time.208
 Fig. 14  NIR II fluorescence imaging of a xenograft 4T1 tumor with high uptake of 6PEG–Ag2S QDs. (a–e) Time course of NIR II fluorescence images after injection. These results were reproduced with a total of three mice. (f) A white-light optical image of the same mouse at 24 h p.i. The tumor mass was visibly darkened owing to high uptake of 6PEG–Ag2S QDs. (g) The tumor-to-background ratio (TBR) plotted as a function of time p.i. for NIR II images, indicating a 100% certainty of the tumor being identified from the NIR II image after 4 h p.i., according to the Rose criterion. (h) A representative plot of the % ID per gram of the 6PEG–Ag2S QDs in the blood versus time after tail-vein injection, as determined by the NIR II fluorescence of the blood samples. A first-order exponential fits the data points with a half-life of circulation for the 6PEG–Ag2S QDs of 4.37 ± 0.75 h. This half-life measurement was repeated with two other mice (3.98 ± 1.16 h and 3.51 ± 0.86 h). (i) Quantitative biodistribution of 6PEG–Ag2S QDs in various organs and the tumor 72 h after injection based on ICP-MS.208 
4.6 Doping and multiphoton NIR QDs
Syntheses of doped QDs have recently become an active subject in the field of materials chemistry because of their unique optical, electronic, and magnetic properties. Generally, doped QDs consist of a transition metal dopant and normally a QDs host matrix. The emission color of the dopant can be tuned by changing the size of the QDs host matrix and doping element. In the case of Cu doped InP which was reported by Peng et al. in 2009, the energy between the energy level of Cu(II) and the conduction band of InP (shown in Fig. 15a) can be tuned by changing the size of InP, which results in efficient, stable, and tunable emissive Cu–InP in red and NIR windows, approximately between 630 and 1100 nm (Fig. 15b and c).209
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the energy diagram of Cu-doped bulk InP crystals; (b) PL spectra and (c) PL peak positions of differently sized InP QDs and Cu:InP doped QDs;209 (d) Jablonski diagram of one-photon and three-photon excited luminescence in Mn2+ doped ZnS QDs.211 
Multiphoton QDs imaging with nonlinear optical processes by NIR pulsed-laser excitation involves a similar mechanism to that of UCNPs. Both of them realize an anti-Stokes shift through absorption of two or more photons sequentially. The difference is that upconversion relies on the step-like energy state of lanthanide ions, but multiphoton QDs rely on the virtual state of the QDs. Benefiting from the anti-Stokes process, multiphoton QDs not only provide high spatial resolution but also enable in vivo deep-tissue imaging. In 2003, Webb et al. reported Cd–Se–Zn two photon QDs for in vivo imaging. They visualized QDs dynamically through the skin of living mice, in capillaries hundreds of micrometers deep under 900 nm excitation.210 However, these previous efforts on multiphoton QDs always involved toxic elements such as Cd and Te, which cannot be metabolized by the human body. In this regard, ZnS NCs have attracted significant attention because both Zn and S are essential constituents of the human body. In 2013, Hyeon et al. introduced Mn2+ in ZnS QDs which can be excited upon NIR through three photon excitation (Fig. 15d), and was successfully applied to high-resolution in vivo tumor-targeted imaging.211
5. Noble metal nanoparticles
In the past decade, a large amount of highly luminescent noble metal (e.g., Au and Ag) nanoparticles with different sizes and surface chemistries have been developed. They have been considered as a class of promising optical probes for biomedical imaging because of their strong brightness, good photostability and excellent biocompatibility.212–219 The luminescent noble metal nanoparticles can be divided into two major classes: nanoclusters (<2 nm) and nanoparticles (>2 nm).212 Actually, the two categories are divided not only by particle size, but also by the emission mechanism, and more subclasses can be further divided based on the detailed mechanism, such as the particle size effect, surface ligand effect, valence state effect, etc.215 Owing to space limitations, we will discuss less about the complex mechanism, and pay more attention to the applications of NIR nanoprobes for biomedical imaging.
Recently, noble metal nanoclusters (NCs) have also been explored as novel biomedical imaging agents both in vitro and in vivo. In 2010, Wu et al. reported in vivo and ex vivo imaging work utilizing bovine serum albumin stabilized AuNCs (∼2.7 nm). Their results showed that the ultrasmall NIR AuNCs could be highly accumulated in the tumor areas based on the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effects.220 In 2011, Wang et al. conjugated bovine serum albumin stabilized AuNCs with Herceptin (AuNCs-Her), for specific targeting and nuclear localization in ErbB2 over-expressing breast cancer cells and tumor tissue. More interestingly, they found that AuNCs-Her could escape the endolysosomal pathway and enter the nucleus of cancer cells to enhance the therapeutic efficacy of Herceptin.221 Besides the traditional downconversion process, two-photon processes have also been observed in NCs. In 2008, Goodson et al. investigated the two-photon emission and cross-section of Au25 NCs with NIR excitation. They found that the Au25 NCs were very good two-photon nanoprobes which had a cross-section of 2700 GM at 1290 nm with luminescence in the NIR region. When changing the excitation light to 800 nm, two-photon cross-sections would be half-million to a few million GMs. Their work reveals that AuNCs possess potential in NIR two-photon biomedical imaging.222 Later in 2009, Chou et al. confirmed their potential for two-photon biomedical imaging by in vitro imaging of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). Bright luminescence from AuNCs could be observed in fixed cell samples via two-photon excitation using a confocal microscope and 800 nm pulsed laser.223 In 2011, Shang and coworkers studied internalization of the AuNCs by live HeLa cells using confocal microscopy with two-photon excitation. After incubation with DPA-AuNCs for 2 h, cells were imaged by using confocal microscopy with two-photon excitation at 810 nm. As shown in Fig. 16, bright luminescence from the NCs ingested by the HeLa cells can easily be observed inside the cells (Fig. 16a). Cells were also imaged at different z-positions for 3D reconstruction (Fig. 16b), which revealed that DPA-AuNCs were inside the cells as well as attached to the outside of the plasma membrane.224
 Fig. 16  (a) Confocal image of HeLa cells after incubation with DPA-AuNCs for 2 h. (b) Cross-section of a 3D image reconstruction, showing internalized DPA-AuNCs. Membranes were stained with the red dye DiD. Images were taken by two-photon excitation at 810 nm.224 (c–e) Kinetics for the passive tumor targeting of the PEG-AuNPs in nude mice bearing MCF-7 tumors. (c) In vivo NIR fluorescence images of the mouse i.v. injected with PEG-AuNPs at 5, 12, 18, 24, and 48 h p.i. (the arrow shows the tumor location). (d) Time-dependent contrast index of the tumor area after intravenous injection of the PEG-AuNPs or GS-AuNPs. (e) Accumulation and retention kinetics of the PEG-AuNPs in tumor and normal tissues.230 
Luminescent noble metal NPs with a particle size above 2 nm were widely studied recently. Typically, they are synthesized in aqueous solution under the protection of ligands, and these nanoparticles always exhibited strong luminescence but no surface plasmon absorption. In 2010, Zheng et al. synthesized glutathione-coated AuNPs by dissociating traditionally used polymeric glutathione-AuNPs in aqueous solution, but majority of the emission was located in the visible region.225 After one year, Guo et al. reported the synthesis of NIR luminescent AuNPs by heat-assisted reduction of a Au(I)–thiol complex. These NIR AuNPs exhibited strong emission with the peak maximum at 810 nm, microsecond-range photoluminescence lifetime, large Stokes shifts (>400 nm) and stability towards photobleaching and chemical oxidation. The QYs of NIR AuNPs were 4.7% in DMSO and 1.0% in water, respectively.226 Since 2011, Zheng et al. have done a series of bio-exploratory studies based on NIR glutathione-coated AuNPs. In 2011, they found that the renal clearance of 2 nm glutathione-coated luminescent NPs was more than 10 to 100 times better than that of similar-sized AuNPs coated with bis (p-sulfonatophenyl) phenylphosphine and cysteine and highlighted their prospects in biomedical imaging.227 In 2013, their in vivo experiments demonstrated that NIR glutathione-coated AuNPs exhibited a much longer tumor retention time and faster normal tissue clearance than small dye molecules (IRDye 800CW). The EPR effect made NIR glutathione-coated AuNPs even more promising for targeted biomedical imaging.228,229 Recently, they replaced glutathione with PEG-SH, and systematically studied the renal clearance, pharmacokinetics, and passive tumor targeting of PEG-AuNPs and glutathione-AuNPs in mice bearing MCF-7 tumors. Results showed that the PEG-AuNPs can effectively target tumors with an efficiency three times higher than that of the GS-AuNPs, although the two of them exhibited comparable low RES uptake (Fig. 16c–e).230
6. Conclusions
In the last decade, NIR biomedical imaging based on nanomaterials played an important role in biotechnology due to its intrinsic advantages against traditional imaging probes. Lanthanide, carbon, QD and noble metal nanomaterials are major components in this big family of NIR biomedical imaging agents. They all have their own merits and shortcomings due to their intrinsic structure and luminescence mechanism.
(1) Lanthanide nanomaterials benefit from the high photostability, non-blinking and low toxicity properties, but compared with QDs, the absorption coefficient of UCNPs is quite low, which results in low quantum yield (<1%). As far as we know, the low absorption coefficient is limited by low 980 nm absorption cross-section of Yb3+, and it is even lower in the case of Er3+ and Tm3+. As mentioned above, much efforts have been devoted to improve the QY of UCNPs, such as changing the excitation wavelength, etc. However, improving the QY is still an essential task for the UCNPs. Lanthanide DCNPs are limited to a handful of NPs which have not been well studied yet. Among the reported lanthanide based DCNPs, the QY of Nd3+ is much higher than any other lanthanide ions such as Er3+, Tm3+, Pr3+, etc.129,133 In order to realize multicolor bio-labeling like UCNPs, exploring high QY DCNPs with tunable emission wavelength in the NIR region is an urgent task for us.
(2) Carbon based luminescent nanomaterials, as a new member in the family of optical imaging agents, combine several merits such as resistance to photobleaching, ease of bioconjugation, low toxicity, low cost, etc. Besides these intrinsic advantages, they can be produced inexpensively and on a large scale (frequently using a one-step pathway and potentially from biomass waste-derived sources) by many approaches.166 The origins of luminescence are not yet entirely understood in carbon NPs, although there is mounting evidence that emission of graphitic carbon NPs arises from the radiative recombination of excitons located at surface energy traps; fluorescent nanodiamonds emit from point defects, particularly the negatively charged nitrogen vacancy site, which absorbs strongly at 569 nm and emits near 700 nm.166 Based on these previous explorations, further understanding of the luminescence mechanism is needed to realize tunable excitation/emission and better performance in NIR biomedical imaging. Besides the above mentioned advantages of other carbon nanomaterials, SWNTs also benefit from their small bandgaps on the order of ∼1 eV, resulting in photoluminescence in the NIR II window. But, they also confront some obstacles. Firstly, the size of SWNTs is too big to cross the cell membranes which results in their inefficiency in intracellular high-resolution biomedical imaging. Secondly, the emission spectrum of SWNTs is very broad, which can be seen as a big barrier for multiplexed biological detection.
(3) NIR QDs are the workhorse among them, which possess huge advantages such as high QY and tunable emission owing to their rationally designed structure and tunable bandgap. However, QDs are also troubled by some flaws like autofluorescence, intrinsic toxicity, instability, etc. Recently, multiphoton QDs have been explored in biomedical imaging, but their quantum yield is still very low, and require femtosecond pulse laser as the excitation source which makes it very expensive for research work.
(4) Noble metal nanomaterials have smaller hydrodynamic diameters than UCNPs/DCNPs and SWNTs, lower toxicity than QDs, and their emission tunability is better than carbon NPs. What is more, facile aqueous synthesis methods have been well established toward these renally clearable luminescent nanomaterials. However, their QYs (mostly less than 10%) are low when compared to the more popular bioconjugated QDs. In addition, their optical properties are both environmentally sensitive and unstable in high ionic strength media and under photoirradiation, limiting their use in cell and tissue imaging.216
7. Outlook

Table 1 illustrates some basic information including excitation wavelength, emission wavelength and QY of some representative NIR imaging nanoprobes. Combining the above discussion, we propose some perspectives as an outlook to NIR nanomaterials for biomedical imaging:
Table 1 Basic optical characteristics and measurement conditions of nano NIR imaging agentsa




Imaging agent

λ
ex (nm)

λ
em (nm)
Solvent
QY (%)
Notes
Reference





a R = relative QY, λex/em is the excitation/emission wavelength, N = measuring method was not mentioned.






Lanthanide based UCNPs



β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+
980
Mainly visible
Hexane
0.005–0.3
Particle size ranges from 10 to 100 nm

231



β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+@NaYF4
980
Mainly visible
Hexane
0.51 ± 0.08
A successive layer-by-layer method was introduced for shell coating

232



LiYF4:Er3+
1490
Visible and NIR I
Chloroform
1.2 ± 0.1



114



β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+/IR-806
800
Visible
Chloroform
0.12 ± 0.1



113



β-NaLuF4:Yb3+, Tm3+, Gd3+
980
Visible
Hexane
0.47 ± 0.06



63



 



Lanthanide based DCNPs



α-NaYF4:Nd3+
514.5
NIR I and NIR II
Chloroform
∼100 to 4
QYs vary from ∼100% to 4% for Nd3+ content increasing from 2 up to 25%

127



β-NaGdF4:Nd3+@NaGdF4
740
NIR I and NIR II
Hexane
40R
Indocyanine green (DMSO solution) was used as a reference dye

129



β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+
980
NIR II
Toluene
>1



133



 



C based bioimaging agents



C dots
Visible
Visible and NIR I
Water
3 to 6N



138



SWNTs
571
NIR I and NIR II
Water
>7R
Styryl 13 was used as a reference dye

151



Nanographene oxide-PEG
785
900–1500
Water
Up to several percentR
SWNTs were used as the reference

161



 



QDs



CdTe/CdS
Visible to NIR I
Visible to NIR I
Water
45–62R
Rhodamine 6G in ethanol was used as a reference dye

172



CdSe0.25Te0.75/CdS
650
NIR I
Water
10–15R
Cys 5.5 was used as a reference dye

187



InAs/CdSe/ZnSe
Visible to NIR I
NIR I and NIR II
Octadecylamine
2.5–70
A successive layer-by-layer method was introduced for shell coating

188



CuInS2/ZnS
Visible
Visible and NIR I
Hexane
30R
Reference dye not mentioned

198



Ag2S
808
NIR II
Water
5.8–15.5R
IR-26 was used as a reference dye, and Ag2S was transferred to aqueous solution

207 and 208



PbS
∼820 to 840
NIR I and NIR II
Water
26
PbS was synthesized in aqueous solution

204



 



Noble metal nanomaterials



Ag clusters
510–550
705
Water
34 ± 5
DNA encapsulated Ag nanoclusters

233



Au clusters
∼765
∼879
Water
10



234 and 235



Au NPs
UV–blue
∼810
Water
0.7
Glutathione-coated

229





1. The QY of lanthanide NIR imaging agents is very low; in other words, they also hold great potential to make an improvement. More reasonable and advanced nanostructures should be designed to reduce the crystal defects and or modify the crystal field of the host. What is more, in order to obtain highly efficient lanthanide nanoprobes, increasing the doping concentration without dropping down the QY is also a thinkable idea.
2. Carbon dots benefit from the presence of nontoxic transition metals. The small overlap with NIR needs red-shift to realize better NIR imaging. SWNTs have revealed really good performance in NIR II window bioimaging, but further long-term nanotoxicology studies are still required to be convinced of their biocompatibility.
3. As a biomedical imaging agent, QDs have the advantages of tunable emission, high QY and extremely small size. However, the issue of their intrinsic toxicity (Cd, Te, Hg, Pb, As, etc.) also cannot be ignored. Although much effort has been made toward discovering low toxicity QDs as NIR imaging agents, such as Ag2S, InP, etc., this new research area is now facing lack of standards, like the measure of QY, since different papers used different dyes as the reference due to the availability of only few dyes appropriate for use in the NIR II region. Here we propose that in order to have a good understanding of and perform research in NIR biomedical imaging, absolute QY should be measured for NIR biomedical imaging agents.
4. Noble metal nanomaterials always need UV or visible light as an excitation source, which is unfavorable in biomedical imaging. So, more explorations are needed to shift their excitation wavelength into NIR region.
The optical biomedical imaging technology has been currently applied for imaging small animals, but it could be expanded to clinical use as well, due to the penetration of NIR fluorescent signals up to several centimeters in tissues. Furthermore, the optical technology is relatively inexpensive, can be made portable, and uses non-ionizing radiation and stable molecular markers. These features can allow easy laboratory and bench-top use and enable monitoring of molecular events repeatedly and over time. The combination of molecular beacons and optical imaging technologies is expected to play a fundamental role in biomedicine in the next decade and continued developments in probe design and imaging technologies will undoubtedly further expand current capabilities.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the NSFC (grant no. 21322508, 21101029, 21273041, and 21210004), China National Key Basic Research Program (973 Project) (no. 2013CB934100, 2012CB224805, 2010CB933901), Shanghai Rising-Star Program (12QA1400400), the State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse Foundation (no. PCRRF12001), and the Fudan Startup Foundation for Advanced Talents.
References
A. Galperin, D. Margel, J. Baniel, G. Dank, H. Biton and S. Margel, Biomaterials, 2007, 28, 4461–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bar-Shalom, N. Yefremov, L. Guralnik, D. Gaitini, A. Frenkel, A. Kuten, H. Altman, Z. Keidar and O. Israel, J. Nucl. Med., 2003, 44, 1200–1209 Search PubMed .
T. Beyer, D. W. Townsend, T. Brun, P. E. Kinahan, M. Charron, R. Roddy, J. Jerin, J. Young, L. Byars and R. Nutt, J. Nucl. Med., 2000, 41, 1369–1379 CAS .
A. K. Buck, S. Nekolla, S. Ziegler, A. Beer, B. J. Krause, K. Herrmann, K. Scheidhauer, H. J. Wester, E. J. Rummeny, M. Schwaiger and A. Drzezga, J. Nucl. Med., 2008, 49, 1305–1319 CrossRef PubMed .
B. J. Pichler, H. F. Wehrl and M. S. Judenhofer, J. Nucl. Med., 2008, 49, 5S–23S CrossRef PubMed .
L. G. Strauss and P. S. Conti, J. Nucl. Med., 1991, 32, 623–648 CAS .
T. R. Degrado, T. G. Turkington, J. J. Williams, C. W. Stearns, J. M. Hoffman and R. E. Coleman, J. Nucl. Med., 1994, 35, 1398–1406 CAS .
B. J. Pichler, A. Kolb, T. Nagele and H. P. Schlemmer, J. Nucl. Med., 2010, 51, 333–336 CrossRef PubMed .
O. M. Merkel, D. Librizzi, A. Pfestroff, T. Schurrat, M. Behe and T. Kissel, Bioconjugate Chem., 2009, 20, 174–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dirksen, S. Langereis, B. F. M. de Waal, M. H. P. van Genderen, T. M. Hackeng and E. W. Meijer, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2811–2813 RSC .
J. L. Bridot, A. C. Faure, S. Laurent, C. Riviere, C. Billotey, B. Hiba, M. Janier, V. Josserand, J. L. Coll, L. Vander Elst, R. Muller, S. Roux, P. Perriat and O. Tillement, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5076–5084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Liu, W. B. Bu, S. J. Zhang, F. Chen, H. Y. Xing, L. M. Pan, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng and J. L. Shi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 2335–2341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Adams, R. P. Baum, T. Stuckensen, K. Bitter and G. Hor, Eur. J. Nucl. Med., 1998, 25, 1255–1260 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ntziachristos, J. Ripoll, L. H. V. Wang and R. Weissleder, Nat. Biotechnol., 2005, 23, 313–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Weissleder, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 316–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Frangioni, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2003, 7, 626–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Bashkatov, E. A. Genina, V. I. Kochubey and V. V. Tuchin, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 2543–2555 CrossRef CAS .
V. J. Pansare, S. Hejazi, W. J. Faenza and R. K. Prud'homme, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 812–827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. Chance, in Advances in Optical Biopsy and Optical Mammography, ed. R. R. Alfano,  1998, pp. 29–45 Search PubMed .
V. Ntziachristos, C. Bremer and R. Weissleder, Eur. J. Radiol., 2003, 13, 195–208 Search PubMed .
R. Weissleder, C. H. Tung, U. Mahmood and A. Bogdanov, Nat. Biotechnol., 1999, 17, 375–378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Gao, Y. Y. Cui, R. M. Levenson, L. W. K. Chung and S. M. Nie, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 969–976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Lim, S. Kim, A. Nakayama, N. E. Stott, M. G. Bawendi and J. V. Frangioni, Mol. Imaging, 2003, 2, 50–64 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Chen, S. Bangsaruntip, K. A. Drouvalakis, N. W. S. Kam, M. Shim, Y. M. Li, W. Kim, P. J. Utz and H. J. Dai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 4984–4989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Smith, M. C. Mancini and S. M. Nie, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 710–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Welsher, S. P. Sherlock and H. J. Dai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 8943–8948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. M. Nie, Y. Xing, G. J. Kim and J. W. Simons, in Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering,  2007, pp. 257–288 Search PubMed .
N. L. Rosi and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1547–1562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Goesmann and C. Feldmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1362–1395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Burda, X. B. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, D. Shen, L. Zhou, W. Li, X. Li, C. Yao, R. Wang, A. M. El-Toni, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3030–3037 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Klostranec and W. C. W. Chan, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1953–1964 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gill, M. Zayats and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7602–7625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Resifeld, C. K. Jørgensen, Lasers and Excited States of Rare Earths, Springer, New York,  1977 Search PubMed .
A. Poddar, S. C. Gedam and S. J. Dhoble, J. Lumin., 2013, 143, 579–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. W. Chan and S. M. Nie, Science, 1998, 281, 2016–2018 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Han, X. H. Gao, J. Z. Su and S. Nie, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 631–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Esterowi, A. Schnitzl, J. Noonan and J. Bahler, Appl. Opt., 1968, 7, 2053 CrossRef PubMed .
S. T. Liu and R. B. Maciolek, J. Electron. Mater., 1974, 3, 864 Search PubMed .
G. S. Maciel, L. D. Menezes, A. S. L. Gomes, C. B. deAraujo, Y. Messaddeq, A. Florez and M. A. Aegerter, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 1995, 7, 1474–1476 CrossRef .
H. Berthou and C. K. Jorgensen, Opt. Lett., 1990, 15, 1100–1102 CrossRef CAS .
E. Downing, L. Hesselink, J. Ralston and R. Macfarlane, Science, 1996, 273, 1185–1189 CAS .
M. F. Joubert, Opt. Mater., 1999, 11, 181–203 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Stoneman and L. Esterowitz, Opt. Lett., 1992, 17, 816–818 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Hutchinson and T. H. Allik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1992, 60, 1424–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Pacheco and C. B. Dearaujo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1988, 148, 334–336 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Chamarro and R. Cases, J. Lumin., 1988, 42, 267–274 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Quimby, M. G. Drexhage and M. J. Suscavage, Electron. Lett., 1987, 23, 32–34 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Yeh, W. A. Sibley and M. J. Suscavage, J. Appl. Phys., 1988, 63, 4644–4650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Eliseeva and J. C. G. Bunzli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 189–227 RSC .
H. Kobayashi, M. Ogawa, R. Alford, P. L. Choyke and Y. Urano, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2620–2640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Mader, P. Kele, S. M. Saleh and O. S. Wolfbeis, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2010, 14, 582–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, K. Yang, Y. G. Li, J. H. Chen, C. Wang, M. W. Shao, S. T. Lee and Z. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7385–7390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Haase and H. Schafer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5808–5829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang and X. G. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 976–989 RSC .
J. S. Chivian, W. E. Case and D. D. Eden, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1979, 35, 124–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Boyer, M. P. Manseau, J. I. Murray and F. van Veggel, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1157–1164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Hebbink, J. W. Stouwdam, D. N. Reinhoudt and F. van Veggel, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1147–1150 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. Han, C. S. Lim, Y. Lu, J. Wang, J. Xu, H. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Hong and X. Liu, Nature, 2010, 463, 1061–1065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, R. R. Deng, J. Wang, Q. X. Wang, Y. Han, H. M. Zhu, X. Y. Chen and X. G. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 968–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, J. Wang and X. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7456–7460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Sun, T. Yang, W. Feng, C. Li and F. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17122–17125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Zhang, X. Sun, R. Si, L. P. You and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3260–3261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zheng, S. Zhou, Z. Chen, P. Hu, Y. Liu, D. Tu, H. Zhu, R. Li, M. Huang and X. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6671–6676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang and X. G. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5642–5643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, D. K. Chatterjee, Z. Q. Li, Y. Zhang, X. P. Fan and M. Q. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5786–5791 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li and Y. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7732–7735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Zeng, J. Su, Z. H. Li, R. X. Yan and Y. D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2119–2123 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Yi and G. M. Chow, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4460–4464 RSC .
G. S. Yi, H. C. Lu, S. Y. Zhao, G. Yue, W. J. Yang, D. P. Chen and L. H. Guo, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2191–2196 CrossRef CAS .
S. Heer, K. Kompe, H. U. Gudel and M. Haase, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2102–2105 CrossRef CAS .
S. Heer, O. Lehmann, M. Haase and H. U. Gudel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3179–3182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Boyer, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 847–852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13721–13729 CAS .
H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, R. Si, Z. G. Yan, L. D. Sun, L. P. You and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6426–6436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Boyer, F. Vetrone, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7444–7445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Si, Y. W. Zhang, L. P. You and C. H. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3256–3260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang and D. Y. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 159–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, J. Li, J. Shan, L. Xu and D. Y. Zhao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 11010–11019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. W. Yang, H. L. Han, Y. Y. Zhang and J. X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18995–18999 CAS .
G. F. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14200–14201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Qin, H. W. Song, G. H. Pan, X. Bai, B. Dong, S. H. Xie, L. N. Liu, Q. L. Dai, X. S. Qu, X. G. Ren and H. F. Zhao, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 1750–1756 CAS .
H. Schafer, P. Ptacek, H. Eickmeier and M. Haase, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3091–3097 CrossRef .
Y. Wei, F. Q. Lu, X. R. Zhang and D. P. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 455, 376–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Li and Y. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19 Search PubMed .
F. Zhang, Y. Wan, T. Yu, F. Q. Zhang, Y. F. Shi, S. H. Xie, Y. G. Li, L. Xu, B. Tu and D. Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7976–7979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Wang and Y. D. Li, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 727–734 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Liu and D. P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3875–3880 RSC .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 6661–6665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Wang and Y. D. Li, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1645–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. X. Yan and Y. D. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 763–770 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Jayasankar, K. U. Kumar, V. Venkatramu, P. Babu, T. Troster, W. Sievers and G. Wortmann, J. Lumin., 2008, 128, 718–720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Yang, F. Zheng, R. N. Wu, H. S. Li and X. Y. Zhang, J. Rare Earths, 2006, 24, 162–166 CrossRef .
A. Patra, C. S. Friend, R. Kapoor and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3650–3655 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra, C. S. Friend, R. Kapoor and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 1909–1912 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qin, T. Yokomori and Y. G. Ju, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90 CAS .
G. F. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 322–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Fischer, G. S. Harms and O. S. Wolfbeis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4546–4551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, C. Wang and Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 23–37 RSC .
F. Wang, D. Banerjee, Y. S. Liu, X. Y. Chen and X. G. Liu, Analyst, 2010, 135, 1839–1854 RSC .
J. Zhou, Z. Liu and F. Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1323–1349 RSC .
H. Zijlmans, J. Bonnet, J. Burton, K. Kardos, T. Vail, R. S. Niedbala and H. J. Tanke, Anal. Biochem., 1999, 267, 30–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Hilderbrand, F. W. Shao, C. Salthouse, U. Mahmood and R. Weissleder, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4188–4190 RSC .
L. J. Zhou, Z. J. Gu, X. X. Liu, W. Y. Yin, G. Tian, L. Yan, S. Jin, W. L. Ren, G. M. Xing, W. Li, X. L. Chang, Z. B. Hu and Y. L. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 966–974 RSC .
D. K. Chatteriee, A. J. Rufalhah and Y. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 937–943 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nyk, R. Kumar, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, E. J. Bergey and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3834–3838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Xia, Y. Gao, J. Zhou, C. Y. Li, T. S. Yang, D. M. Wu, L. M. Wu and F. Y. Li, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 7200–7208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. Sun, X. X. Du, L. Q. Xiong, H. Hu and F. Y. Li, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 3287–3295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Xia, M. Chen, Y. Gao, D. M. Wu, W. Feng and F. Y. Li, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 5394–5405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Xing, W. B. Bu, Q. G. Ren, X. P. Zheng, M. Li, S. J. Zhang, H. Y. Qu, Z. Wang, Y. Q. Hua, K. L. Zhao, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng and J. L. Shi, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 5384–5393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Zou, C. Visser, J. A. Maduro, M. S. Pshenichnikov and J. C. Hummelen, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 560–564 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, A. Kachynski, H. Agren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4981–4986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Zhan, J. Qian, H. J. Liang, G. Somesfalean, D. Wang, S. L. He, Z. G. Zhang and S. Andersson-Engels, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3744–3757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Singh, R. Smith and L. Van Uitert, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1974, 10, 2566–2572 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, G. Chen, A.-M. Vu, W. Fan, O. S. Bilsel, C.-C. Chang and G. Han, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 644–650 CrossRef .
X. J. Xie, N. Y. Gao, R. R. Deng, Q. Sun, Q. H. Xu and X. G. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12608–12611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Wang, G. Y. Liu, L. D. Sun, J. W. Xiao, J. C. Zhou and C. H. Yan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7200–7206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hirai, S. Hashimoto, S. Sakuragi and N. Ohno, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 446, 138–141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Y. Zhang, G. F. Yang and Z. H. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91 Search PubMed .
R. Lisiecki, E. Augustyn, W. Ryba-Romanowski and M. żelechower, Opt. Mater., 2011, 33, 1630–1637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Stouwdam and F. van Veggel, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 733–737 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Fan and M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1031 RSC .
X.-F. Yu, L.-D. Chen, M. Li, M.-Y. Xie, L. Zhou, Y. Li and Q.-Q. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4118–4123 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, S. Y. Zhang and J. Q. Xu, Laser Phys. Lett., 2010, 7, 303–306 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bednarkiewicz, D. Wawrzynczyk, M. Nyk and W. Strek, Opt. Mater., 2011, 33, 1481–1486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bednarkiewicz, D. Wawrzynczyk, M. Nyk and W. Strek, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2010, 103, 847–852 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, S. Liu, W. C. Law, F. Wu, M. T. Swihart, H. Agren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2969–2977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. J. Johnson, W. Oakden, G. J. Stanisz, R. Scott Prosser and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3714–3722 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamimura, D. Miyamoto, Y. Saito, K. Soga and Y. Nagasaki, J. Photopolym. Sci. Technol., 2008, 21, 183–187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamimura, N. Kanayama, K. Tokuzen, K. Soga and Y. Nagasaki, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3705 RSC .
D. J. Naczynski, M. C. Tan, M. Zevon, B. Wall, J. Kohl, A. Kulesa, S. Chen, C. M. Roth, R. E. Riman and P. V. Moghe, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4 CAS .
H. Liu, T. Ye and C. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6473–6475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, M. Karakassides and E. P. Giannelis, Small, 2008, 4, 455–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, H. Li, Y. Liu, H. Huang, Z. Kang and S.-T. Lee, Colloids Surf., B, 2011, 87, 326–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Berlin, A. D. Leonard, T. T. Pham, D. Sano, D. C. Marcano, S. Y. Yan, S. Fiorentino, Z. L. Milas, D. V. Kosynkin, B. K. Price, R. M. Lucente-Schultz, X. X. Wen, M. G. Raso, S. L. Craig, H. T. Tran, J. N. Myers and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4621–4636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tao, K. Yang, Z. Ma, J. Wan, Y. Zhang, Z. Kang and Z. Liu, Small, 2012, 8, 281–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. F. Wang, P. J. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. L. Chen, L. M. Veca and S. Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Zhou, C. Booker, R. Y. Li, X. T. Zhou, T. K. Sham, X. L. Sun and Z. F. Ding, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 744–745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, X. Wang, M. J. Meziani, F. S. Lu, H. F. Wang, P. J. G. Luo, Y. Lin, B. A. Harruff, L. M. Veca, D. Murray, S. Y. Xie and Y. P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11318–11319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kong, A. Zhu, C. Ding, X. Zhao, B. Li and Y. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5844–5848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-L. Hu, K.-Y. Niu, J. Sun, J. Yang, N.-Q. Zhao and X.-W. Du, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 484 RSC .
A. Gruber, A. Drabenstedt, C. Tietz, L. Fleury, J. Wrachtrup and C. vonBorczyskowski, Science, 1997, 276, 2012–2014 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krueger, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 1382–1390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Krueger, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12571–12578 RSC .
O. Faklaris, V. Joshi, T. Irinopoulou, P. Tauc, M. Sennour, H. Girard, C. Gesset, J. C. Arnault, A. Thorel, J. P. Boudou, P. A. Curmi and F. Treussart, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3955–3962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. O'Connell, S. M. Bachilo, C. B. Huffman, V. C. Moore, M. S. Strano, E. H. Haroz, K. L. Rialon, P. J. Boul, W. H. Noon, C. Kittrell, J. P. Ma, R. H. Hauge, R. B. Weisman and R. E. Smalley, Science, 2002, 297, 593–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cherukuri, S. M. Bachilo, S. H. Litovsky and R. B. Weisman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15638–15639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lefebvre, D. G. Austing, J. Bond and P. Finnie, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1603–1608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Crochet, M. Clemens and T. Hertel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8058–8059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, D. A. Heller and M. S. Strano, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1577–1585 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jin, D. A. Heller, R. Sharma and M. S. Strano, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 149–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Welsher, Z. Liu, D. Daranciang and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 586–590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Leeuw, R. M. Reith, R. A. Simonette, M. E. Harden, P. Cherukuri, D. A. Tsyboulski, K. M. Beckingham and R. B. Weisman, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2650–2654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, W. Cai, L. He, N. Nakayama, K. Chen, X. Sun, X. Chen and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 2, 47–52 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Welsher, Z. Liu, S. P. Sherlock, J. T. Robinson, Z. Chen, D. Daranciang and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 773–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. Debbage, J. Griebel, M. Ried, T. Gneiting, A. DeVries and P. Hutzler, J. Histochem. Cytochem., 1998, 46, 627–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hong, J. C. Lee, J. T. Robinson, U. Raaz, L. Xie, N. F. Huang, J. P. Cooke and H. Dai, Nat. Med., 2012, 18, 1841–1846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, L. Z. Feng, X. Z. Shi and Z. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 530–547 RSC .
X. M. Sun, Z. Liu, K. Welsher, J. T. Robinson, A. Goodwin, S. Zaric and H. J. Dai, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 203–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. H. Li, D. H. Hu, C. T. Lin, J. H. Li and Y. H. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9274–9276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. T. Robinson, X. M. Sun and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10876–10877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, S. A. Zhang, G. X. Zhang, X. M. Sun, S. T. Lee and Z. A. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3318–3323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Zheng, A. Than, A. Ananthanaraya, D. H. Kim and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6278–6286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726–6744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Li, G. H. Wu, G. H. Yang, J. Peng, J. W. Zhao and J. J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4015–4039 RSC .
A. Henglein, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 2291–2293 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rossetti, S. Nakahara and L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 1086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bruchez Jr, Science, 1998, 281, 2013–2016 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Ma and X. G. Su, Analyst, 2010, 135, 1867–1877 RSC .
D. Zhao, Z. K. He, W. H. Chan and M. M. F. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1293–1300 CAS .
H. Shen, H. Wang, X. Chen, J. Z. Niu, W. Xu, X. M. Li, X.-D. Jiang, Z. Du and L. S. Li, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4756–4761 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. M. Piepenbrock, T. Stirner, S. M. Kelly and M. O'Neill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7087–7090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Koktysh, N. Gaponik, M. Reufer, J. Crewett, U. Scherf, A. Eychmüller, J. M. Lupton, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 1435–1438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, E. Kaufmann, D. Pachinger, J. Roither, M. Huber, J. Stangl, G. Hesser, F. Schaffler and W. Heiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3516–3517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rogach, S. V. Kershaw, M. Burt, M. T. Harrison, A. Kornowski, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 552–555 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lesnyak, A. Lutich, N. Gaponik, M. Grabolle, A. Plotnikov, U. Resch-Genger and A. Eychmüller, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 9147 RSC .
B. Tang, F. Yang, Y. Lin, L. H. Zhuo, J. C. Ge and L. H. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1212–1214 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Sun, H. Zhang, J. Ju, J. H. Zhang, G. Qian, C. L. Wang, B. Yang and Z. Y. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6764–6769 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gaponik, D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, A. Eychmuller and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 803–806 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gaponik, I. L. Radtchenko, G. B. Sukhorukov, H. Weller and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 879–882 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gaponik, I. L. Radtchenko, M. R. Gerstenberger, Y. A. Fedutik, G. B. Sukhorukov and A. L. Rogach, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 369–372 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, H. Shen, J. Z. Niu, C. Zhou, C. Yu, X. Li, Y. Hang, H. Wang, L. Ma and L. S. Li, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 272 RSC .
J. M. Tsay, M. Pflughoefft, L. A. Bentolila and S. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1926–1927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, Y. T. Lim, E. G. Soltesz, A. M. De Grand, J. Lee, A. Nakayama, J. A. Parker, T. Mihaljevic, R. G. Laurence, D. M. Dor, L. H. Cohn, M. G. Bawendi and J. V. Frangioni, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 22, 93–97 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-T. Yong, I. Roy, H. Ding, E. J. Bergey and P. N. Prasad, Small, 2009, 5, 1997–2004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aharoni, T. Mokari, I. Popov and U. Banin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 257–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Kim, J. P. Zimmer, S. Ohnishi, J. B. Tracy, J. V. Frangioni and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10526–10532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Zimmer, S. W. Kim, S. Ohnishi, E. Tanaka, J. V. Frangioni and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2526–2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, K. Chen, R. Xie, J. Xie, S. Lee, Z. Cheng, X. Peng and X. Chen, Small, 2010, 6, 256–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xie, D. Battaglia and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15432–15433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Z. Niu, H. Shen, W. Xu, H. Wang and L. S. Li, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 4410 RSC .
T. Uematsu, T. Doi, T. Torimoto and S. Kuwabata, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3283–3287 CrossRef CAS .
T. Torimoto, T. Adachi, K.-i. Okazaki, M. Sakuraoka, T. Shibayama, B. Ohtani, A. Kudo and S. Kuwabata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12388–12389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Subramaniam, S. J. Lee, S. Shah, S. Patel, V. Starovoytov and K.-B. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4014–4019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dai, S. Ogawa, T. Kameyama, K.-i. Okazaki, A. Kudo, S. Kuwabata, Y. Tsuboi and T. Torimoto, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12851 RSC .
R. G. Xie, M. Rutherford and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5691–5697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Allen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9240–9241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, C. Dvoracek, K. H. Lee, J. F. Galloway, H.-e. C. Bhang, M. G. Pomper and P. C. Searson, Small, 2011, 7, 3148–3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bakueva, I. Gorelikov, S. Musikhin, X. S. Zhao, E. H. Sargent and E. Kumacheva, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 926–929 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Wehrenberg, C. J. Wang and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10634–10640 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Murphy, M. C. Beard, A. G. Norman, S. P. Ahrenkiel, J. C. Johnson, P. R. Yu, O. I. Micic, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3241–3247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nakane, Y. Tsukasaki, T. Sakata, H. Yasuda and T. Jin, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7584–7586 RSC .
X. Li, H. Shen, S. Li, J. Z. Niu, H. Wang and L. S. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 923 RSC .
Y. P. Du, B. Xu, T. Fu, M. Cai, F. Li, Y. Zhang and Q. B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1470–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, G. S. Hong, Y. J. Zhang, G. C. Chen, F. Li, H. J. Dai and Q. B. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3695–3702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hong, J. T. Robinson, Y. Zhang, S. Diao, A. L. Antaris, Q. Wang and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9818–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xie and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10645–10651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Larson, W. R. Zipfel, R. M. Williams, S. W. Clark, M. P. Bruchez, F. W. Wise and W. W. Webb, Science, 2003, 300, 1434–1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yu, S. H. Kwon, Z. Petrasek, O. K. Park, S. W. Jun, K. Shin, M. Choi, Y. Il Park, K. Park, H. B. Bin Na, N. Lee, D. W. Lee, J. H. Kim, P. Schwille and T. Hyeon, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 359–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yuan, Z. T. Luo, Y. Yu, Q. F. Yao and J. P. Xie, Chem.–Asian J., 2013, 8, 858–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Diez and R. H. A. Ras, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1963–1970 RSC .
S. Choi, R. M. Dickson and J. H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1867–1891 RSC .
J. Zheng, C. Zhou, M. X. Yu and J. B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4073–4083 RSC .
Y. C. Shiang, C. C. Huang, W. Y. Chen, P. C. Chen and H. T. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12972–12982 RSC .
L. Shang, S. J. Dong and G. U. Nienhaus, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 401–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Huang, P. K. Jain, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Nanomedicine, 2007, 2, 681–693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Jin, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 343–362 RSC .
X. Wu, X. X. He, K. M. Wang, C. Xie, B. Zhou and Z. H. Qing, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2244–2249 RSC .
Y. L. Wang, J. J. Chen and J. Irudayaraj, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9718–9725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ramakrishna, O. Varnavski, J. Kim, D. Lee and T. Goodson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5032–5033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Liu, M. L. Ho, Y. C. Chen, C. C. Hsieh, Y. C. Lin, Y. H. Wang, M. J. Yang, H. S. Duan, B. S. Chen, J. F. Lee, J. K. Hsiao and P. T. Chou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21082–21089 CAS .
L. Shang, R. M. Dorlich, S. Brandholt, R. Schneider, V. Trouillet, M. Bruns, D. Gerthsen and G. U. Nienhaus, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2009–2014 RSC .
C. Zhou, C. Sun, M. X. Yu, Y. P. Qin, J. G. Wang, M. Kim and J. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7727–7732 CAS .
X. J. Tu, W. B. Chen and X. Q. Guo, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 095701 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhou, M. Long, Y. P. Qin, X. K. Sun and J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3168–3172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Liu, M. X. Yu, C. Zhou, S. Y. Yang, X. H. Ning and J. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4978–4981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, G. Y. Hao, P. Thomas, J. B. Liu, M. X. Yu, S. S. Sun, O. K. Oz, X. K. Sun and J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10118–10122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Yu, X. Ning, C. Zhou, S. Yang and J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12572–12576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Boyer and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1417 RSC .
X. Li, D. Shen, J. Yang, C. Yao, R. Che, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
C. I. Richards, S. Choi, J. C. Hsiang, Y. Antoku, T. Vosch, A. Bongiorno, Y. L. Tzeng and R. M. Dickson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5038–5039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, C. W. Zhang and R. M. Dickson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 077402 CrossRef .
C.-H. Quek and K. W. Leong, Nanomaterials, 2012, 2, 92–112 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Rui Wang	Rui Wang was born in Jiangxi, China in 1991. After obtaining his B.S. degree from East China University of Science and Technology (China) in 2012, he pursued his research as a PhD student under the direction of Professor Fan Zhang in Fudan University. Currently, his research focuses on lanthanide based upconversion and downconversion nanomaterials for near-infrared biomedical imaging and other bioapplications.
Fan Zhang	Prof. Fan Zhang received his PhD in 2008 from Fudan University followed by more than 2 years postdoctoral experience in the University of California at Santa Barbara before joining as an associate professor in the Chemistry Department of Fudan University in 2010. His current research interest includes the development of multifunctional nanostructured materials and nanotechnology for applications in bioanalysis. Prof. Zhang has authored more than 60 peer-reviewed research papers, a number of book chapters, and patents.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Absorption coefficient of hemoglobin and water in the 400–1000 nm range,15 (b) absorption coefficient of water (μa), (c) reduced scattering coefficient (μs') for skin, adipose tissue and mucous tissue in the 800–1400 nm range.17,26	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photoluminescence spectra of NaYF4:2 %Tm3+, 20%Yb3+ UCNPs in aqueous dispersion; excitation at 975 nm. Inset: sample of the UCNPs aqueous dispersion demonstrating colloidal stability, optical transparency, and efficient visible (blue) PL under 975 nm excitation. (b) In vitro transmission (left) and PL (right) images of Panc 1 cells treated with UCNPs. The inset shows localized PL spectra taken from cells (red) and the background (black). (c) Whole body images of mouse injected intravenously with UCNPs; intact mouse (left), same mouse after dissection (right). The red color indicates emission from UCNPs, green and black show the background as indicated by the arrows. The inset presents the PL spectra corresponding to the spectrally unmixed components of the multispectral image obtained with the Maestro system.108	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Principal concept of dye-sensitized nanoparticles. Antenna dyes (green) absorb NIR solar energy (red wavy arrows) and transfer it (brown arrows) to the nanoparticle core (in yellow), where upconversion occurs. Upconversion denotes a nonlinear (on the incident radiation intensity) process in which the energies of two NIR quanta are summed to emit a quantum of higher energy in the green–yellow region (green–yellow wavy arrow).113 (b) Intense visible and near infrared upconversion photoluminescence in colloidal LiYF4:Er3+ nanocrystals under excitation at 1490 nm.114 (c–e) In vivo whole body image of a NaYbF4:Yb3+/Tm3+ injected nude mouse: (c) bright field image, (d) pseudocolor image obtained from the true image (the inset black/white image), and (e) superimposed image (bright field image and pseudocolor image) with the unmixed spectra of the in vivo image (the inset chart) of UC signal and background as indicated by the arrows.115	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic design (top) and simplified energy level diagram (bottom) of a core–shell nanoparticle for photon upconversion under 800 nm excitation. Nd3+ ions doped in the core and shell layers serve as sensitizers to absorb the excitation energy and subsequently transfer it to Yb3+ ions. After energy migration from the Yb3+ ions to activator ions, activator emission is achieved via the Nd3+-sensitization process. (b and c) Optical microscopy images of trypan blue-treated HeLa cells recorded after irradiation for 5 min at 800 and 980 nm, respectively (6 W cm−2).118 (d) Integration scheme of the Nd3+ → Yb3+ energy transfer process by introducing a Nd3+/Yb3+ co-doped shell. The resulting Nd3+ → Yb3+ → activator energy transfer could extend the effective excitation bands for conventional Yb3+ sensitized UCNPs. (e) Energy transfer pathway from Nd3+ to Yb3+-activated Er3+ upconversion emission in core–shell structured NPs under 808 nm excitation. (f–h) In vivo NIR imaging of a nude mouse injected with Er@Nd NPs dispersed in water. (f) White-light photograph, (g) NIR image obtained with 808 nm excitation, and (h) overlapped image. The injection site is denoted with a white arrow.119	 

 	Fig. 5  RE nanoprobes enable real-time and multispectral imaging in vivo. (a) Schematic of the portable SWIR-imaging prototype. The prototype consists of a room temperature-cooled InGaAs camera operating at a typical exposure time of 50 ms, adjustable filter mounts, a collimated laser with an output power density of 0.14 W cm−2 and a neoprene rubber imaging surface. (b) Nude mice bearing melanoma xenografts were intravenously injected with REs and imaged near surrounding tumor regions before dissection from the ventral aspect.133	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) C-dot structure; (b) AFM topography image of C-dots on a mica substrate, with the height profile along the line in the image; luminescence images (all scale bars 20 μm) of the C-dots with (c) argon ion laser excitation at 458 nm and (d) femtosecond pulsed laser excitation at 800 nm; (e) is an overlay of (c) and (d); (f and g) representative two-photon luminescence image (800 nm excitation) of human breast cancer MCF-7 cells with internalized C-dots.141	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photoluminescence image of a straight, long (>100 μm) SWNT which is suspended over a series of trenches.150 (b–e) Colocalization of the fluorescence from SWNTs (green) with their corresponding cell image at the final stage of the experiment for four different lengths: (b) 660 ± 40, (c) 430 ± 35, (d) 320 ± 30, and (e) 130 ± 18 nm.153	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic image of NIR photoluminescence detection of a SWNT–Rituxan conjugate selectively bound to CD20 cell surface receptors on B-cell lymphoma (left). The conjugate is not recognized by T-cell lymphoma (right). (b) NIR fluorescence image of BT-474 cells, which are HER2/neu positive, treated with the SWNT–Herceptin conjugate. (c) NIR fluorescence image of MCF-7 cells, which are HER2/neu negative, treated with the SWNT–Herceptin conjugate. (d) Mean NIR fluorescence values for the positive and negative cell lines after treatment with the SWNT–Herceptin conjugate, showing a positive/negative ratio of ∼20:1.154	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–c) NIR I fluorescence images (top) and cross-sectional fluorescence intensity profiles (bottom) along red-dashed lines of a mouse injected with the SWNT–IRDye-800 conjugates. Gaussian fits to the profiles are shown with red dashed curves. (d–f) NIR II fluorescence images (top) and cross-sectional fluorescence intensity profiles (bottom) along red-dashed bars of a mouse injected with the SWNT–IRDye-800 conjugates. Gaussian fits to the profiles are shown with red dashed curves.159	 

 	Fig. 10  Tunability of the PL spectra of CdTe, CdxHg1−xTe, and HgTe QDs prepared in water.181	 

 	Fig. 11  Sentinel lymph node mapping using InAsxP1−x/InP/ZnSe. Postinjection (a–c), 3 min postinjection (d–f), and post-resection (g–i) images using white light, NIR fluorescence, and color/NIR merge, respectively.189	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The structure of QD800-MPA and the illustration of the passive tumor targeting of QD800-MPA in a tumor model. (b and c) In vivo imaging and ex vivo imaging (4 h p.i.) of LS174T tumor-bearing mice (arrows) after the tail-vein injection of QD800-MPA-HSA nanoparticles. (1) LS174T tumor; (2) heart; (3) spleen; (4) pancreas; (5) lung; (6) liver; (7) intestine; (8) muscle; (9) kidney; (10) skin.191	 

 		 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photoluminescence properties of the CuInS2/ZnS core–shell nanocrystals.198 (b–e) Fluorescence images obtained from the ventral side of a mouse after tail-vein injection of 230 pmol QDs. (b) Before tail-vein injection, (c) 5 min post-injection, (d) 90 min post-injection, and (e) 48 h post-injection. (f) Normalized average intensity per pixel obtained from the fluorescence images over time after injection.200	 

 	Fig. 14  NIR II fluorescence imaging of a xenograft 4T1 tumor with high uptake of 6PEG–Ag2S QDs. (a–e) Time course of NIR II fluorescence images after injection. These results were reproduced with a total of three mice. (f) A white-light optical image of the same mouse at 24 h p.i. The tumor mass was visibly darkened owing to high uptake of 6PEG–Ag2S QDs. (g) The tumor-to-background ratio (TBR) plotted as a function of time p.i. for NIR II images, indicating a 100% certainty of the tumor being identified from the NIR II image after 4 h p.i., according to the Rose criterion. (h) A representative plot of the % ID per gram of the 6PEG–Ag2S QDs in the blood versus time after tail-vein injection, as determined by the NIR II fluorescence of the blood samples. A first-order exponential fits the data points with a half-life of circulation for the 6PEG–Ag2S QDs of 4.37 ± 0.75 h. This half-life measurement was repeated with two other mice (3.98 ± 1.16 h and 3.51 ± 0.86 h). (i) Quantitative biodistribution of 6PEG–Ag2S QDs in various organs and the tumor 72 h after injection based on ICP-MS.208	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the energy diagram of Cu-doped bulk InP crystals; (b) PL spectra and (c) PL peak positions of differently sized InP QDs and Cu:InP doped QDs;209 (d) Jablonski diagram of one-photon and three-photon excited luminescence in Mn2+ doped ZnS QDs.211	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Confocal image of HeLa cells after incubation with DPA-AuNCs for 2 h. (b) Cross-section of a 3D image reconstruction, showing internalized DPA-AuNCs. Membranes were stained with the red dye DiD. Images were taken by two-photon excitation at 810 nm.224 (c–e) Kinetics for the passive tumor targeting of the PEG-AuNPs in nude mice bearing MCF-7 tumors. (c) In vivo NIR fluorescence images of the mouse i.v. injected with PEG-AuNPs at 5, 12, 18, 24, and 48 h p.i. (the arrow shows the tumor location). (d) Time-dependent contrast index of the tumor area after intravenous injection of the PEG-AuNPs or GS-AuNPs. (e) Accumulation and retention kinetics of the PEG-AuNPs in tumor and normal tissues.230	 



Lanthanide based UCNPs

β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+	980	Mainly visible	Hexane	0.005–0.3	Particle size ranges from 10 to 100 nm	
231

β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+@NaYF4	980	Mainly visible	Hexane	0.51 ± 0.08	A successive layer-by-layer method was introduced for shell coating	
232

LiYF4:Er3+	1490	Visible and NIR I	Chloroform	1.2 ± 0.1	
	
114

β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+/IR-806	800	Visible	Chloroform	0.12 ± 0.1	
	
113

β-NaLuF4:Yb3+, Tm3+, Gd3+	980	Visible	Hexane	0.47 ± 0.06	
	
63

 

Lanthanide based DCNPs

α-NaYF4:Nd3+	514.5	NIR I and NIR II	Chloroform	∼100 to 4	QYs vary from ∼100% to 4% for Nd3+ content increasing from 2 up to 25%	
127

β-NaGdF4:Nd3+@NaGdF4	740	NIR I and NIR II	Hexane	40R	Indocyanine green (DMSO solution) was used as a reference dye	
129

β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+	980	NIR II	Toluene	>1	
	
133

 

C based bioimaging agents

C dots	Visible	Visible and NIR I	Water	3 to 6N	
	
138

SWNTs	571	NIR I and NIR II	Water	>7R	Styryl 13 was used as a reference dye	
151

Nanographene oxide-PEG	785	900–1500	Water	Up to several percentR	SWNTs were used as the reference	
161

 

QDs

CdTe/CdS	Visible to NIR I	Visible to NIR I	Water	45–62R	Rhodamine 6G in ethanol was used as a reference dye	
172

CdSe0.25Te0.75/CdS	650	NIR I	Water	10–15R	Cys 5.5 was used as a reference dye	
187

InAs/CdSe/ZnSe	Visible to NIR I	NIR I and NIR II	Octadecylamine	2.5–70	A successive layer-by-layer method was introduced for shell coating	
188

CuInS2/ZnS	Visible	Visible and NIR I	Hexane	30R	Reference dye not mentioned	
198

Ag2S	808	NIR II	Water	5.8–15.5R	IR-26 was used as a reference dye, and Ag2S was transferred to aqueous solution	
207 and 208

PbS	∼820 to 840	NIR I and NIR II	Water	26	PbS was synthesized in aqueous solution	
204

 

Noble metal nanomaterials

Ag clusters	510–550	705	Water	34 ± 5	DNA encapsulated Ag nanoclusters	
233

Au clusters	∼765	∼879	Water	10	
	
234 and 235

Au NPs	UV–blue	∼810	Water	0.7	Glutathione-coated	
229


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
