All-solid-state proton conductive membranes prepared by a semi-interpenetrating polymer network (semi-IPN)  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM33267A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM33267A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18522-18527Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAll-solid-state proton conductive membranes prepared by a semi-interpenetrating polymer network (semi-IPN)

        
          
            Myung-Jin 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yeong Suk 
            Choi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yong Soo 
            Kang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jae-Hwan 
            Choi
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Moon-Sung 
            Kang
          
        
      *d
aEnergy Laboratory, Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), P.O. Box 111, Suwon, 440-600, Republic of Korea. E-mail: yeongsuk.choi@samsung.com;  Fax: +82 31 280 9359;   Tel: +82 31 280 9361
bWCU Department of Energy Engineering, Hanyang University, 1 Haengdang, Seongdong, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Kongju National University, 34 Gongupdae-gil, Seobuk-gu, Cheonan-si, Chungnam 331-717, Republic of Korea
dDepartment of Environmental Engineering, Sangmyung University, 300 Anseo-dong, Dongnam-gu, Cheonan-si, Chungnam 330-720, Republic of Korea. E-mail: solar@smu.ac.kr;  Fax: +82 41 550 5313;   Tel: +82 41 550 5383
Received 
      22nd May 2012
    , Accepted 13th July 2012First published on 16th July 2012AbstractNovel all-solid-state ion conductive polymer membranes were synthesized for anhydrous high temperature fuel cells. Ion-conductive monomers (ethylene glycol methacrylate phosphates, phosmers) were employed for fixing ion-conductive moieties in the matrix polymer (sulfonated poly(arylene sulfone), sPAS). Inorganic materials, acid-doped titanium oxide and tin indium phosphate were introduced to form anhydrous polymer composite membranes. As a result, poly(phosmer)s significantly improved both the proton conductivity and flexibility of the composite membranes. Sulfonated poly(arylene sulfone)–poly(phosmer)–tin indium phosphate composite membranes showed the highest ion-conductivity value under anhydrous conditions due to the dipolar interaction of poly(phosmer) with the matrix polymer and the inorganic material. The composite membranes exhibited a drastic enhancement in performances of anhydrous high temperature fuel cells compared to those of Nafion-based composite membranes. The fuel cell performances indicate that the poly(arylene sulfone)–poly(phosmer)–inorganic particle composites could be applicable for anhydrous high temperature fuel cells as promising polymer electrolyte membranes.
1. Introduction
Fuel cells (FCs) employing polymer electrolyte membranes (PEMs) are considered clean and efficient energy generators. Polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) have several merits over other types of fuel cells, e.g. molten carbonate fuel cells (MCFCs) or solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs), in terms of relatively low operation temperature, diversity of materials and small system size, so they are expected to be applicable for multiple applications in the automobile as well as stationary and portable fields.1 However, PEMFCs are facing several obstacles, such as relatively low power density, high production cost, insufficient durability of systems, etc. Increasing operation temperature of PEMFCs is one of the possible solutions for those obstacles. Since catalyst activity of PEMFCs increases on elevating the operation temperature, high temperature operation promises a solution for the improvement of efficiency and power density.2,3 Increasing operation temperature, however, affects the proton conductivity of PEMs. Basically, sulfonated polymers conduct proton transport via the Grotthus-type mechanism or the vehicular mechanism in the presence of water. Therefore, conventional PEMs might not be applicable to high temperature PEMFCs without additional humidifiers. For example, Nafion® shows a drastic decrease in ion conductivity under anhydrous conditions because water molecules in ion clusters leak out membranes through evaporation. So, PEMFCs fitted with conventional membranes require humidifiers to avoid membrane dry-out.4 From an operational point of view, controlling humidity in PEMFCs consumes a large amount of energy, leading to decreases in power density and fuel efficiency. Operation of PEMFCs above the boiling temperature of water requires a completely different type of membrane materials from conventional PEMs, that is, anhydrous proton conductors. The proton conduction under anhydrous conditions may be arisen from a non-vehicular mechanism, in which only protons are migrating without the assistance of diffusible vehicle molecules, such as water molecules.5 In principle, operation at temperatures above 100 °C could be achieved by using alternative proton conductors or solvents whose boiling temperatures are higher than that of water.6,7 Recently, many groups have focused on the development of alternative proton conductors such as perfluorinated ionomers and their composites with high and low molecular weight compounds,8–11 polymer electrolytes with non-volatile ionic liquids,12,13 and organic–inorganic hybrid membranes.14,15 Heterocyclic compounds, such as imidazoles or benzimidazoles, have also been investigated as useful substitutes for water at highly elevated temperatures (150–250 °C).16,17 Phosphoric acid doped poly(benzimidazole) membranes also show good performances in the temperature range of 120–170 °C.18–20 These materials would enable PEMFCs to function without the need of external humidification at temperatures above 100 °C. Phosphoric acid doped poly(benzimidazole) membrane fuel cells, however, have technical problems related to the instability of phosphoric acid, i.e. leakage of phosphoric acid from stacked membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs), flooding catalyst layers, high loading content, dissolution problem of Pt catalysts caused by phosphoric acid, etc.
In this article, we report a novel type of anhydrous solid-state polymer electrolyte membranes without leaking problems, which yields improvements in ion conductivity at high temperatures, leading to augmentation of fuel cell performances. The aim of this work is the synthesis of semi-IPN polymer membranes with organic/inorganic proton conductors having high proton conductivity in a wide temperature range under non-humidification conditions. As depicted in Scheme 1, the strategy for fabricating anhydrous solid-state PEMs involves highly proton conductive moiety in the presence of nano-sized inorganic fillers and polymers with phosphoric acid groups interpenetrating a sulfonated polymer matrix (i.e. semi-interpenetrating polymer network (semi-IPN) structure): polymerizing ion-conductive monomers, ethylene glycol methacrylate phosphates (phosmers) with various ethylene glycol units, through a radical polymerization and imbibing inorganic materials, such as acid-doped titanium oxide or tin indium phosphate aiming for additional improvement in ion conductivity. Sulfonated poly(arylene sulfone) (sPAS) was used as a matrix polymer for anchoring poly(phosmer)s in membranes because sPAS has excellent thermal and chemical stabilities. The as-prepared poly(phosmer)s were expected to provide ion conductivity without leaking ion conductive moiety from sPAS and inorganic particles will affect thermal property as well as ion conductivity of solid-state membranes. The results showed that our semi-IPN composite membranes exhibit a high proton conductivity as well as the highest power density values among the solid-state membranes which have been reported in the anhydrous high temperature PEMFC applications.
 Scheme 1  Schematic drawing of preparation and concept of novel anhydrous solid-state ion conductive membranes. 
2. Experimental section
2.1. Materials

N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP) and ethylene glycol methacrylate phosphates (phosmers) were purchased from Aldrich and used without further purification. Azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) was purchased from Aldrich and purified by recrystallization in acetone. 4,4′-Dichlorodiphenyl sulfone (DCDPS, Aldrich), sulfonated 4,4′-dichlorodiphenyl sulfone (sDCDPS, Aldrich), sodium salt (Na-sDCDPS, Aldrich), and 4,4′-(hexafluoroisopropylidene)diphenol (HFDP, Aldrich) were purified by recrystallization methods before the polymerization of sPAS. Nanocrystalline titanium oxide powder (anatase) with an average diameter of 25 nm was purchased from Ishihara Sanyo Kaisha (Japan). Tin indium phosphate (SIPO) nanopowder was kindly supplied by Nagoya University, consisting of a molar proportion of Sn/In/P/O = 0.9/0.1/2/7 (with an average diameter of 30 nm).21–23
2.2. Fabrication of anhydrous solid-state ion conductive membranes
sPAS was synthesized according to a method described in ref. 22. The sPAS had a sulfonation degree of 50%, a number-averaged molecular weight (Mn) of 71116 g mol−1, and a polydispersity index (PDI) of 3.3.
To fabricate sPAS–poly(phosmer) semi-IPN membranes, sPAS (10 wt%, H+-form) was dissolved in NMP, and phosmer and a radical initiator (AIBN, 3 wt% to phosmer) were added into the sPAS solution. The feed ratio by weight between the phosmer and sPAS was fixed at 2:1 for all membranes. The solution containing phosmer and AIBN was cast on a glass plate and heated at 80 °C for 24 h to form a membrane via radical polymerization of phosmers and removal of NMP. Neat poly(phosmer)s were also synthesized for comparisons. Poly(phosmer) synthesized in the presence of sPAS (i.e. the mixture of poly(phosmer) and sPAS) had a Mn of 244860 g mol−1 with a PDI of 2.4 while neat poly(phosmer) showed a Mn of 1.35 × 106 g mol−1 with a PDI of 4.3. The semi-IPN polymerizing system (the mixture of phosmer and sPAS) was more viscous than that of the neat poly(phosmer). It seems to cause an increase in the rate of polymerization of viscous monomers and prevent smooth behavior between the phosmer and sPAS by the autoacceleration (gel) effect, resulting in the reduction of the PDI.24 The thickness of the membranes was controlled to be 80 μm.
To prepare sPAS–poly(phosmer)–inorganic particle composite membranes, inorganic particles, AIBN (3 wt% to phosmer) and phosmer were successively added into the sPAS–NMP solution. The mixture was cast on a glass plate and heated at 80 °C for 24 h to polymerize phosmers.
A Nafion–PEG–TiO2 membrane (Nafion/PEG/TiO2 = 1/8/0.5 in weight ratio) was prepared using the method reported in ref. 25 for comparison.
2.3. Fabrication of membrane electrode assembly (MEA) and evaluation of fuel cell performance
For the evaluation of anhydrous high temperature PEMFC performances, catalyst-coated-electrolytes (CCEs) were prepared using a paste method, pressing CCEs at ambient temperature for 5 min.26 Cathode and anode catalyst layers for MEAs were fabricated with Pt and PtRu catalysts supported on carbon (46 wt% and 30 wt% of Pt, respectively, Tanaka Kikinzoku Kogyo) and poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF). PVDF binder was added as 2 wt% on the basis of the weight of catalyst (Pt/C or PtRu/C). Anode and cathode catalysts were coated on a SGL carbon paper, and Pt loading of anode and cathode were 0.8 and 1.7 mg cm−2, respectively. The PEMFC fitted with MEA having an active electrode area of 7.56 cm2 was operated at 150 °C with dry hydrogen and air. The gas flow rates were 100 mL min−1 for H2 and 250 mL min−1 for air and the pressure was normal pressure during the operation.
2.4. Characterizations
Proton conductivity measurement was performed with a two point probe method, equipped with a heating device.26 Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrometry analysis was carried out with a BIO-RAD FTS 3000 FT-IR spectrometer, equipped with a GRASEBY SPECAC diamond-attenuated total reflectance, averaging 16 scans at 4 cm−1 of resolution. Field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) images were obtained using a Hitachi UHR S 4500, operated at 30 kV. The glass transition temperature (Tg) measurement was performed with a Perkin-Elmer DSC7, fitted with a TAC7 controller under nitrogen atmosphere with a heating rate of 20 °C min−1. Tg was taken as the midpoint of the baseline shift. Number and weight average molecular weights (Mn and Mw) and molecular weight distributions (PDI) of sPAS and phosmers were measured at 40 °C using a Polymer Lab PL-GPC 210 gel permeation chromatograph (GPC), equipped with two Tosoh Biosep G2500 PWXL PL gel mixed B columns and a Viscotek TDA302 refractive index detector. Each sample was dissolved in dimethylformamide (DMF) containing a 0.5 wt% LiBr. The proton conductivities were measured after an overnight curing at 135 °C using a closed system with two non-blocking Pt electrodes in a dry room condition (<1% RH). The mechanical properties of the prepared membranes were also measured by a UTM testing machine (KTI2010, Lloyd Instruments, UK).
3. Results and discussion
The feed ratios by weight of the charged phosmer monomer (phosM) and sPAS were varied as shown in Table 1. When the feed ratio was 2:1 (i.e. 200 wt% of phosmer monomer for sPAS), the semi-IPN membrane showed the maximum conductivity of 8.35 × 10−3 S cm−1 and good enough mechanical strength for MEA preparation. Above the ratio of 2:1, however, the final membranes became brittle and we fixed the feed ratio of phosmer and sPAS as 2/1 (w/w) for the comparison of the fuel cell performances. In addition, there was no significant difference between the conversion degrees of the phosmer monomer (phosM) in the presence and absence of sPAS (92.3% and 89.6%, respectively).
Table 1 The feed ratio by weight between phosmer (phosM) and sPAS and the membrane proton conductivities measured at 150 °C




sPAS–poly(phosM)
Feed ratio of phosmer to sPAS (wt ratio)


Without phosmer
1:1
1.5:1
2:1




Proton conductivity (mS cm−1)
0.27
0.62
8.28
8.35




To probe the effect of ion-conductive phosmers on the proton conductivity in more detail, various composite membranes were fabricated. Fig. 1 shows the proton conductivities of the membranes measured with respect to temperature under anhydrous conditions. As shown in this figure, sPAS–poly(phosmer) membranes exhibited high ion conductivity values compared to those of conventional PEMs, i.e. Nafion-based composite and neat sPAS membranes. Among poly(phosmer)s tested in this work, poly(ethylene glycol methacrylate phosphate) with one ethylene glycol unit (i.e. poly(phosM)) showed higher conductivity values than poly(ethylene glycol methacrylate phosphate) with 4–5 ethylene glycol units (i.e. poly(phosPE)) above 120 °C. It is believed that the shorter distance between adjacent phosphoric acid groups, the higher proton conductivity. Considering that the neat sPAS becomes brittle due to dehydration of attached water at high temperature, the ion conductivity data, which are not obtainable with sulfonic acids under anhydrous conditions at high temperatures, explain that phosmers had a strong effect on the improvement of ion conductivity. When two different types of inorganic particles were added into the sPAS–poly(phosmer) membranes, the composite membranes showed different conductivity behaviors. The composite membrane incorporated with H+-doped TiO2 (5 wt%) exhibited relatively low ion conductivity values of 6 × 10−4 to 4 × 10−3 S cm−1 compared to those of the sPAS–poly(phosM) membranes at an identical temperature. In contrast, the sPAS–poly(phosmer)–SIPO composite membranes exhibited an increasing tendency in the ion conductivity with an increase in the SIPO content: 1.55 × 10−2 S cm−1 for 10 wt% and 1.63 × 10−2 S cm−1 for 20 wt% at 150 °C. As a result, the sPAS–poly(phosmer)–SIPO composite membranes had much higher conductivity values than those of sPAS–poly(phosM) and sPAS–poly(phosM)–TiO2 composite membranes. Furthermore, SIPO exhibited the preferential behavior toward molecular types of phosmers. The proton conductivity values for sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO composite membranes were 2.96 × 10−3 to 1.63 × 10−2 S cm−1 which are higher than those of sPAS–poly(phosPE)–SIPO composite membranes (i.e. 2.80 to 8.58 × 10−3 S cm−1). This result can also be interpreted by easy accessibility of the protons (among the transport sites) in the poly(phoM)-based membranes in comparison with the poly(phoPE)-based membranes. The significant improvement in proton conductivity by SIPO nanoparticles can be explained by their special crystalline structure providing well-developed holes or paths for proton transport.21–23 The results demonstrate that SIPO is an effective proton conductive material for improving the efficiency of high temperature PEMs.
 Fig. 1  Proton conductivity of membranes measured with a 2-point probe method under anhydrous conditions. Each membrane was dried at 150 °C for 1 h before the measurement. The number next to inorganic materials stands for weight percentage of inorganic particles. 
The physical properties of solid-state ion conductive membranes largely depended on the chemical structures of the phosmers. Even though the sPAS–poly(phosPP) membrane (made from a phosmer with 5–6 ethylene glycol units) and the sPAS–poly(phosMH) membrane (made from a phosmer with an amino ethylene glycol side group) maintained similar ion conductivity values compared to those of sPAS–poly(phosPE) and sPAS–poly(phosM) membranes, they became brittle and tended to break during conductivity measurements. The results elucidate that the side chain rigidity of poly(phosmer)s had a strong influence on the flexibility of the membranes. Also the sPAS–TiO2 and sPAS–SIPO composite membranes lost their film strength due to the crack formed under anhydrous conditions. Consequently, we could infer that poly(phosM) improved the flexibility of the sPAS–poly(phosM) membrane and the sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO composite membrane, leading to the formation of resilient membranes, as shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Photograph images of anhydrous solid-state ion conductive membranes. (a) sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO(20%) composite membrane; (b) sPAS–poly(phosM) membrane. 
The tensile strength at maximum (MPa) and elongation at break (%) of the prepared membranes were also measured as shown in Table 2. It was observed that the semi-IPN polymer shows the intermediate mechanical properties compared to those of neat sPAS and poly(phosM). The results also indicate that the semi-IPN membranes can be applicable to practical uses. Moreover, the addition of SIPO nanoparticles caused an increase in the tensile strength at maximum and a marginal reduction in the elongation at break, showing a typical mechanical behavior of polymer–inorganic nanoparticle hybrid composites.27
Table 2 Mechanical properties of the prepared membranes measured by the UTM testing machine




Membranes
Tensile strength (MPa)
Elongation at break (%)




sPAS
19.5
6.5


Poly(phosM)
13.5
8.3


sPAS–poly(phosM)
15.8
7.2


sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO(10%)
22.0
6.8


sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO(20%)
24.7
6.2




The excellent flexibility of sPAS–poly(phosM) and sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO semi-IPN membranes also indicates that unexplained interactions between sPAS and poly(phosM) exist. Interactions among ingredients were scrutinized with FT-IR spectra shown in Fig. 3. The FT-IR spectra elucidate that poly(phosM) and sPAS had a dipolar interaction between the carbonyl group of poly(phosM) and OSO of sPAS. A semi-IPN structure can be expected from peak shifts from 1452 cm−1 (methylene group) to 1465 cm−1 and from 1157 cm−1 (ester group) to 1165 cm−1. Moreover, a –SO3 stretching peak shift from 1014 cm−1 in sPAS-poly(phosM) to 1028 cm−1 in sPAS was observed. Poly(phosM) also maintained a dipolar interaction with SIPO, showing the peak shifts from 1722 cm−1 (carbonyl stretching) and 1157 cm−1 (ester stretching) to 1724 cm−1 and 1153 cm−1, respectively.
 Fig. 3  FT-IR spectra of poly(phosM), sPAS–poly(phosM), sPAS, sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO(20%) membranes, and SIPO. 
The dipolar interaction of poly(phosM) and sPAS was confirmed with the glass transition temperatures (Tg) of the membranes. As shown in Fig. 4, the Tg of neat poly(phosM) shifted from −4.5 °C to a high temperature of 1.61 °C and 7.14 °C, as sPAS and SIPO were added to the neat poly(phosM), respectively. The Tg shift elucidates that sPAS and poly(phosM) are miscible, indicating the formation of a semi-IPN structure. The Tg shift supports our discussion on the interaction of poly(phosM) with the matrix polymer and inorganic particles.
 Fig. 4  Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) thermograms of the ion conductive membranes measured at a heating rate of 20 °C min−1. 
For more discussion on the effect of inorganic particles, we sliced the composite membranes with a microtome and observed the cross-sections with FE-SEM. The FE-SEM images in Fig. 5 show the dispersion states of two different inorganic particles in the semi-IPN polymer (i.e. sPAS–poly(phosM)). Although the SIPO content (20 wt%) in the composite membrane was much higher than that of TiO2 (5 wt%), SIPO nanoparticles exhibited a better dispersion state in the sPAS–poly(phosM) matrix than that of TiO2 particles, elucidating that both the high ion conductivity and good dispersion state of SIPO in the sPAS–poly(phosM) matrix contributed to the enhancement in proton conductivity.
 Fig. 5  FE-SEM images of anhydrous solid-state ion conductive composite membranes: (a) sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO(20%); (b) sPAS–poly(phosM)–TiO2(5%) composite membranes. 
To probe the effect of SIPO on proton conductivity, PEMFC performance tests were carried out with a single fuel cell whose active area was 7.56 cm2. Since neat poly(phosmer) membranes had too low Tg to fabricate MEAs, PEMFC performance tests with neat poly(phosmer) membranes could not be carried out. Fig. 6 represents the performances of PEMFCs, fitted with various membranes and operated with hydrogen and air under anhydrous conditions. As can be expected from the conductivity results, the Nafion–PEG–TiO2 membrane showed the lowest cell performance (0.5 mW cm−2) due to low ion conductivity at high temperatures.25 The sPAS–poly(phosM)–IPN membrane exhibited a small increase in power density, exhibiting a value of 3.6 mW cm−2 at 150 °C. The sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO composite membrane, however, had a drastic enhancement in power density, exhibiting a power density value of 45 mW cm−2 at 150 °C. We can infer that the augmentation of ion conductivity by poly(phosmer)s and inorganic particles (SIPO) as well as thermal stability of sPAS resulted in the improvement of fuel cell performances.
 Fig. 6  Polarization curves of PEMFCs consisting of Nafion–PEG–TiO2, sPAS–poly(phosM), and sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO composite membranes. sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO and Nafion–PEG–TiO2 composite membranes containing SIPO (20 wt%) and H+-doped TiO2 (5 wt%), respectively. Dry hydrogen (anode fuel) and compressed air (cathode fuel) were charged at a fuel stoichiometry of 2. 
4. Conclusions
We successfully synthesized novel solid-state proton conductive membranes by the polymerization of ion-conductive monomers (ethylene glycol methacrylate phosphates, phosmers) and the addition of In3+-doped SnP2O7 (SIPO) nanoparticles in the sulfonated polymer matrix (sulfonated poly(arylene sulfone), sPAS) for anhydrous high temperature PEMFCs. The physical properties of solid-state state proton conductive membranes were strongly dependent upon the molecular structure of phosmers. The poly(phosmer)s had multirole functions in the formation of anhydrous solid-state ion conductive membranes as plasticizers for sPAS (improving brittleness of sPAS at high temperatures), ion-conductive materials, and dispersing agents of inorganic particles. The as-prepared sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO composite membranes showed the highest power density values among anhydrous solid-state membranes which have been reported. This method can be extended to other anhydrous solid-state membranes, providing a useful method for the improvement of high temperature PEMFC operations.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant (223-111-002) from the Converging Technology Project of Korea Institute of Environment Science and Technology (KIEST) funded by Korea Ministry of Environment. We also wish to thank Dr Tae Young Kim and Dr Pilwon Heo for FC cell test and kind supply of SIPO.
Notes and references
B. C. H. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu, D. Wang, S. P. Jiang, Y. Xiang, J. Lu and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 971 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eguizábal, J. Lemus, M. Urbiztondo, A. M. Moschovi, S. Ntais, J. Soler and M. P. Pina, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4314 CrossRef .
J.-C. Perrin, S. Lyonnard, A. Guillermo and P. Levitz, Fuel Cells, 2005, 6, 5 CrossRef .
K. D. Kreuer, Proton conductivity: materials and applications, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 610 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Herz, K. D. Kreuer, J. Maier, G. Scharfenberger, M. F. H. Schuster and W. H. Meyer, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 2165 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. He, Q. F. Li, A. Bach, J. Q. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 277, 38 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schönberger, A. Chromik and J. A. Kerres, Polymer, 2009, 50, 2010 CrossRef .
H. Steininger, M. Schuster, K. D. Kreuer and J. Maier, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 2457 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Kim, Y. Oba, M. Ohnuma, T. Mori, C. Nishimura and I. Honma, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 1098 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kufacı, A. Bozkurt and M. Tülü, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 1003 CrossRef .
J. D. Kim, S. Hayashi, M. Onoda, A. Sato, C. Nishimura, T. Mori and I. Honma, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7638 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, S. Y. Park, S. Choi and H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 385 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Tripathi and V. K. Shahi, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 945 CrossRef CAS .
R. Q. Fu, J. J. Woo, S. J. Seo, J. S. Lee and S. H. Moon, J. Power Sources, 2008, 179, 458 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bose, T. Kuila, T. X. H. Nguyen, N. H. Kim, K. Lau and J. H. Lee, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 813 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Boroglu, S. U. Celik, A. Bozkurt and I. Boz, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 375, 157 CrossRef CAS .

          J. S. Wainright, M. H. Litt, R. F. Savinell, W. Vielstich, A. Lamm and H. A. Gasteiger, Handbook of Fuel Cells, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,  2003, vol. 3, pp. 436–446 Search PubMed .
M. S. Boroglu, S. U. Celik, A. Bozkurt and I. Boz, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 375, 157 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Kerres, Fuel Cells, 2005, 5, 230 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Jin, M. Okada and T. Hibino, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4905 CrossRef CAS .
P. Heo, M. Nagao, T. Kamiya, M. Sano, A. Tomita and T. Hibino, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B63 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagao, T. Kamiya, P. Heo, A. Tomita, T. Hibino and M. Sano, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1604 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Dvornić and M. S. Jaćović, Polym. Eng. Sci., 1981, 21, 792 Search PubMed .
M.-S. Kang and M.-J. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 457 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xing, G. P. Robertson, M. D. Guiver, S. D. Mikhailenko and S. Kaliaguine, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2004, 42, 2866 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, J. Weston, E. Chalkova, M. A. Hofmann, C. M. Ambler, H. R. Allcock and S. N. Lvov, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 2173 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic drawing of preparation and concept of novel anhydrous solid-state ion conductive membranes.	 


Proton conductivity (mS cm−1)	0.27	0.62	8.28	8.35

 	Fig. 1  Proton conductivity of membranes measured with a 2-point probe method under anhydrous conditions. Each membrane was dried at 150 °C for 1 h before the measurement. The number next to inorganic materials stands for weight percentage of inorganic particles.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photograph images of anhydrous solid-state ion conductive membranes. (a) sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO(20%) composite membrane; (b) sPAS–poly(phosM) membrane.	 

sPAS	19.5	6.5
Poly(phosM)	13.5	8.3
sPAS–poly(phosM)	15.8	7.2
sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO(10%)	22.0	6.8
sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO(20%)	24.7	6.2

 	Fig. 3  FT-IR spectra of poly(phosM), sPAS–poly(phosM), sPAS, sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO(20%) membranes, and SIPO.	 

 	Fig. 4  Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) thermograms of the ion conductive membranes measured at a heating rate of 20 °C min−1.	 

 	Fig. 5  FE-SEM images of anhydrous solid-state ion conductive composite membranes: (a) sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO(20%); (b) sPAS–poly(phosM)–TiO2(5%) composite membranes.	 

 	Fig. 6  Polarization curves of PEMFCs consisting of Nafion–PEG–TiO2, sPAS–poly(phosM), and sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO composite membranes. sPAS–poly(phosM)–SIPO and Nafion–PEG–TiO2 composite membranes containing SIPO (20 wt%) and H+-doped TiO2 (5 wt%), respectively. Dry hydrogen (anode fuel) and compressed air (cathode fuel) were charged at a fuel stoichiometry of 2.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
