Metal–organic framework composites and their electrochemical applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA12178H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA12178H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7301-7327Metal–organic framework composites and their electrochemical applications

        
          
            Yuqi 
            Xue
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shasha 
            Zheng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Huaiguo 
            Xue
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Huan 
            Pang
          
          
        
      *
      School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Guangling College, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225009, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. E-mail: huanpangchem@hotmail.com; panghuan@yzu.edu.cn;  Web: http://huanpangchem.wix.com/advanced-material
Received 
      17th December 2018
    , Accepted 4th February 2019First published on 12th March 2019AbstractMetal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a new class of porous coordination polymers, which are distinguished among polymer materials due to their remarkable properties, such as large surface area, adjustable structure and high porosity, and therefore, have generated extensive interest. Nevertheless, the poor electrical conductivity and narrow micropores of MOFs have constrained their applications. Hence, MOF composites, in which MOFs are combined with a variety of functional materials, have been introduced to mitigate the disadvantages of individual components. Zero-dimensional materials such as nanoparticles and quantum dots, one-dimensional materials (nanorods, nanotubes and nanobelts), and two-dimensional nanosheet materials can be combined with MOFs, and three-dimensional MOF composites have also been reported, including core–shell and cubic composites. In this review, the recent development of MOF composites and their synthetic methods, and their electrochemical applications, including catalysts, sensors, supercapacitors and batteries, are discussed according to their dimensions.Huan PangHuan Pang received his PhD degree from Nanjing University in 2011. Currently, he is a University Distinguished Professor in Yangzhou University. In the past 10 years, his group has been engaged in the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials, especially MOF-based materials. He is on the editorial board of FlatChem and Managing Editor of EnergyChem, Elsevier. He has published more than 200 papers in peer-reviewed journals including Nature Catalysis, Chemical Society Reviews, Energy Environ. Sci., and Advanced Materials, with 6000 citations (H-index = 45). His research interests include the development of inorganic nanostructures and their applications in nanoelectrochemistry with a focus on energy devices.
1. Introduction
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), also known as porous coordination polymers (PCPs), are organic–inorganic hybridized materials that are formed from organic ligands and metal ions or metal ion clusters through ligand linkages.1–3 MOFs are extremely versatile materials, and thus have excited intense interest over the past two decades.4 They stand out among polymer materials owing to their brilliant properties, for instance, large surface area, adjustable structure and high porosity.5,6 Besides, MOFs and their derivatives have wide applications, such as UiO-66.7 Although MOFs have achieved considerable advancement in electrochemical applications, there is no comprehensive review regarding electrochemical applications, which has led to a poor understanding of the different applications of these novel materials.8 One of the primary restraints in the application of MOFs is that their surface area and adsorption capacity dramatically decrease when exposed to moisture.9,10 In addition, most MOFs have intrinsically poor electrical conductivity, and the narrow micropores of MOFs limit the rapid diffusion of gas inside the pores; thus, these defects have impeded their full potential. To address these disadvantages of MOFs, MOF composites, which combine MOFs with various functional materials and make them candidates for applications related to clean energy,11,12 have been proposed recently.
In MOF composites, the benefits of MOFs and various types of functional materials can be combined effectively, and the fabrication of MOF-based composites is easier. These composites can integrate the advantageous attributes and compensate for the disadvantages of their single components. Therefore, there are synergistic effects and novel potentialities that individual parts can never achieve. MOF composite materials can be used directly as progressive materials for innovation or as precursors for original inorganic solids, providing hopeful applications in the areas of protection and functional coatings,13 gas storage and separation,14,15 heterogeneous catalysis,16–18 batteries19 and sensing.20–22 They provide chemists with creative opportunities. Also, emerging MOF composites, with their excellent new properties and multifunctional capabilities will motivate neoteric applications in industry in important areas of technology. MOF composites can be divided into four parts according to their dimension, including MOF/zero-dimension (0D), MOF/one-dimension (1D), MOF/two-dimension (2D) and MOF/three-dimension (3D), as demonstrated in Scheme 1. 0D materials such as nanoparticles (NPs) and quantum dots (QDs), with broad absorption bands, narrow and symmetrical emission,10,23 small size and high surface energy,24 possess unique advantages including high dispersibility, stability and chemical activity, and thus are more attractive than larger particles.25 Thus, the advantages of 0D materials combined with the superiority of MOFs, which are structurally adaptive, flexible, ordered crystalline pores that have multi-coordination sites, can enhance the inherent functionality of MOFs and give rise to new features not observed in MOFs.26,27 1D materials have controlled morphologies and sufficient porosity and can enhance dispersive interactions with MOFs. Also, they can serve as a template and offer ions for the formation of MOFs.28 Additionally, the merits of 1D materials such as the high conductivity of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) improve the properties of MOF composites and nanobelts can serve as bridges for the transport of electrons in the outer circuit and within the inner MOF surface.29,30 For instance, Shao et al. reported the in situ growth of an MOF on 1D surface of carbon fibers via the oxidization of nitric acid. The use of this facile methodology can facilitate the use of MOF with porosity as a platform to enhance the properties between the surface and interface of fiber-reinforced composites with high-performance.13,31 For 2D materials, nanosheets are representatives, which can act as a comprehensive support to decorate MOF nanocrystals on their surface,32–34 enabling MOF composites to be further used extensive applications. In 3D materials such as yolk–shell composites, the holes in their core and shell not only retain large exposed metal surfaces for reagents, but also result in more homogeneous interaction between the reactants and the surface.35 MOFs have limited application as electrode materials due to their electrically electrical conductivity. Hence, MOF composites are beginning to be applied into the field of electrochemistry. For instance, Aijaz et al. demonstrated the benefits of metal nanoparticles (MNPs) in the MIL-101 matrix, where Pt NPs were distributed uniformly and did not aggregate after catalysis.25 Besides, Jin and colleagues synthesized a 2D composite and confirmed its improvement in electrochemical performance, which may be ascribed to the synergistic effect of functional MOFs with excellent theoretical capacity and highly conductive reduced graphene oxide (RGO).36,37
 Scheme 1  Overview of MOF/composites and their electrochemical applications. 
The outstanding functionalities of MOF composites have aroused significant interest, motivating the development of novel materials for energy applications. Hence, in this review, the components, synthetic procedures, structures and capabilities of MOF composites are discussed, with emphasis on the performance of composites with synergistic effects in electrochemical applications, including sensing, batteries, supercapacitors and catalysis. This review reports the rational design of MOF composite materials ranging from 0D to 3D. We expect that this review will arouse the attention and passion of chemical and materials scientists to explore MOF composites and their applications in electrochemistry.
2. MOF composites
MOFs with large surface areas are excellent structural hosts, which can load a large number of guest functional materials.26 Due to the drawbacks of pure MOFs, MOF composites have been synthesized and investigated to overcome their deficiencies. These composites not only promote the development of innovative advanced materials, but also broaden the scope of MOFs in electrochemical applications. Thus, MOF composites will be discussed in this section, which is divided into four parts according to the dimension of composite materials, namely, MOF/0D, MOF/1D, MOF/2D and MOF/3D. 0D materials, with a small size and high surface energy, can enhance the intrinsic functions and properties of MOFs. 0D MOF composites can be synthesized via several methods, most of which involve the encapsulation of prefabricated NPs in MOFs or MOFs acting as templates to produce NPs on their outer surface, as shown in Scheme 2 (MOF/0D).38–40 For instance, the one-step solvothermal reduction method can enhance the synthetic efficiency and make the preparation easier,38 the double solvent method41,42 can avoid the aggregation of MNPs on the outer surface of MOFs25 and the colloidal deposition method avoids the use of organic solvents and precursors, which are costly, very reactive and sensitive to air.43,44 The one-pot method can be adopted for the synthesis of 0D MOF composites, and through this facile and efficient method, not only a reduction in the cost of large scale preparation, but also superior catalytic performances can be achieved.40 MOF/1D materials include MOFs wrapped around 1D materials, 1D materials on the outer surface of MOFs and MOFs with 1D nanobelt materials grown on carbon cloth, as shown in Scheme 2. In situ polymerization can be used to combine MOFs with 1D nanobelts via chemical oxidation. The self-template method can be employed to synthesize 1D composites, where 1D materials are used as a template to dissolve metal ions with the aid of solvents, initiating the formation of MOFs without any surface modification.28 Also, the spontaneous phase segregation method is appropriate for the synthesis of MOFs such as ZIF-8 powder and is convenient for many applications of supported semiconductor 1D materials.45 A facile hydrothermal approach was adopted to fabricate CNTs@Mn-MOF, which could overcome the limitations of conventional electrode materials based on Mn.46Scheme 2 also shows that MOF/2D materials can be synthesized via the growth of MOFs on 2D nanosheet materials and encapsulation of 2D materials in MOFs. 2D nanosheet materials such as graphene oxide (GO) are usually combined with MOFs via the solvothermal method. Additionally, a facile ultrasonic method can be employed to synthesize 2D composites, which makes chemical reactions easier and the resulting products more uniform than that obtained via the solvothermal method.15,47 For MOF/3D composites, which contain core–shell and cubic structures, as illustrated in Scheme 2, their synthetic approaches including the melt-diffusion method48 and stepwise method are discussed in this review. A versatile step-by-step strategy called the layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly method, which can finely control the shell thickness of MOFs, can be adopted to fabricate 3D composites such as 3D core–shell composites, where the core can offer a surface for reactions and the porous shell plays the role of a barrier layer to restrain the activation of the surface to aggregate with the adjacent core during the reaction.49 The specific synthetic methods will be discussed below.
 Scheme 2  Schematic illustration of MOF/composites including MOF/0D, MOF/1D, MOF/2D and MOF/3D. 
2.1 MOF/zero-dimension
MOF/0D composites contain NPs and QDs composited with MOFs, where the NPs include metal oxide NPs and MNPs. With respect to NP@polymer, NP@silica, and NP@metal oxide,50–53 three kinds of core–shell nanostructures, the prominent benefits of NP@MOF such as unlimited choice of composition, adjustable pore sizes of the shells, and multifunctional cores and shells, offer an unprecedented opportunity to tune their material capabilities at the nanometer scale.24 Loading MNPs with a high surface-to-volume ratio54 into the pores of MOFs not only results in the brilliant property of gas/molecule storage, but also can afford areas where heterogeneous catalysts have the advantage of controlling the growth of particles at the nanoscale, leading to highly active sites and enhanced catalytic performances. Specifically, the encapsulated MNPs in the MOF pores have access to reactants for chemical transformations.55 In addition, MOFs are versatile and play various roles including stabilizing and dispersing QDs. The special capabilities of MOFs coupled with the photophysical and photochemical properties of QDs result in satisfying optoelectronic attributes, light-collecting capability and fluorescence. These composite materials have important applications on a large scale, for instance, photocatalysis, supercapacitors and sensing.10 0D MOF composites are an emergent class of materials, and this herein, we address the present accomplishments and further challenges for their electrochemical applications. With regard to the synthetic approaches of 0D MOF composites, Li and co-workers employed a facile one-pot method for the fabrication of the Pd@MOF composite. This one-pot method allowed the integration of highly dispersed MNPs on the surface of MOFs in one step without the use of a surfactant. Thus, this facile and efficient method not only reduces the cost for the large scale preparation of composites, but also results in superior catalytic performances. In addition, the resulting Pd@MOF composite displayed excellent selectivity and activity in the hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde, with no reduction in catalytic activity after repeated use.40

2.1.1 MOF/nanoparticle composites. 
MNPs, which have controllable shapes, sizes, crystallinity and functionality, are widely used in electronics, optics, energy conversion and storage in electrochemistry, solar energy collecting and catalytic applications.56,57 To further improve their capabilities and introduce new functionalities, MNPs have been combined with MOFs to generate MNP@MOF composites. Furthermore, attempts have been made to homogenize metal oxides, particularly those with magnetism and semiconductor properties, and MOFs into core–shell nanostructures. There are many ways to compound metal oxide NPs and MOF, for example, the gas phase infiltration method, liquid phase epitaxy method and yolk–shell synthetic method. In recent years, nanomaterials with porous structures have received significant attention due to their intriguing attributes, giving rise to various application prospects in biomedicine and catalysis. A one-pot method was adopted by Chen et al. to fabricate Pd@MOF composites. This gentle approach of efficiency can not only reduce the cost of the large scale preparation of composites, but also result in superior catalytic performances.40 Jiang et al. fabricated Au/MIL-101 via a CD/PVP approach, which exhibited higher activity for the oxidation of benzyl alcohol with alkali-free in comparison with the CD/glucose, DPSH, and IMP approaches. Thus, it was concluded that MNPs can be dispersed widely on the support of MIL-101 via the CD/PVP approach.43 Zeng et al. reported the encapsulation of Co oxides in a suitable hollow nanostructure, as shown in Fig. 1a, forming a distinctive yolk–shell nanoreactor, which has seldom been studied to date but will solve the construction barriers mentioned before perfectly. Specifically, the porous shell of the hollow nanostructure can impede the adjoining Co oxide NPs from aggregating and prevent the encapsulated catalyst from being influenced by harsh external surroundings without affecting the transport of the reactants and products. Simultaneously, the exposed catalytic sites can be preserved and accessible to reactants in the interior cavity of the nanoreactor, which offers a microenvironment for the oxidization of SO4˙−. Zeng et al. reported the preparation of yolk–shell Co3O4@MOF nanostructures with a hollow cavity via a one-pot solvothermal method, in which the Co3O4 core exhibited catalytic activity and the octahedral MOF-5 shell unified the structure, and primarily proved their application as a nanoreactor for SR-AOPs.58 In addition, a gas phase method was used to composite ZnO and an MOF. Daniel Esken and co-workers fabricated ZnO and TiO2 nanometer-size particles hosted in MOF-5, and Cu/ZnO@MOF-5 and Au/MOx@MOF-5 (M = Zn and Ti; x = 1, 2) composite systems. However, photoluminescence spectroscopy studies have recently demonstrated that MOF-5 is susceptible to contamination by ZnO impurities according to the synthetic conditions. Therefore, they opted to use the microporous zeolite imidazolate framework ZIF-8 (Zn(MeIM)2, MeIM = imidazolate-2-methyl) as the host for ZnO NPs.59 The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of the tiny ZnO NPs on the surface of ZIF-8 is shown in Fig. 1d. To date, only a few metal-oxide-NP@MOF core–shell nanocomposites have attracted interest, which include Co3O4@MOF nanocomposites, one of the earliest examples of the successful incorporation of iron oxide particles into porous MOFs. These metal-oxide-NP@MOFs enabled the external manipulation of the highly microporous MOFs for efficient catalyst separation and used magnetically induced heating for controllable drug release.
 Fig. 1  (a) Synthetic strategy for yolk–shell Co3O4@MOF nanocomposites. (b) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of yolk–shell Co3O4@MOFs. (c) Possible mechanism for the degradation of 4-CP in the Co3O4@MOFs nanoreactor. (d) HRTEM image showing the small ZnO NPs on the surface of ZIF-8. (e) Schematic illustration of the preparation of SnO2@MIL-101(Cr). (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 58 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 60 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
MNPs have been widely studied due to their broad potential and practical applications and their distinct physiochemical properties compared to their bulk counterparts.61–64 Due to their abundant active sites and high surface area, organic and electrochemical catalytic reactions involving MOFs have been extensively researched. The incorporation of metal NPs inside MOFs is a crucial strategy to improve their properties, particularly for catalytic activity and gas storage, where increasing number of publications demonstrate the application potential of “meta-NP@MOF” systems in these two areas.
Here, we discuss Au-NP@MOF composites, which incorporate Au NPs into MOF structures. Au NPs combined with MOFs were synthesized and studied by Tsuruoka.65 In addition, Ju et al. discussed the preparation of an iron-porphyrinic MOF (GR-5/(Fe–P)n-MOF) to probe the function of DNA. (Fe–P)n-MOF was prepared according to a previous report with slight modification.66 (Fe–P)n-MOF was modified with AuNPs and 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane (MPTS) using a solution of 13 nm diameter AuNPs67 and MPTS via vigorous shaking. Then, AuNPs-(Fe–P)n-MOF was collected via centrifugation, washed with ultrapure water three times, and dispersed in tris-acetate buffer. GR-5 was heat-treated and then cooled to ambient temperature. Subsequently, after mixing the resulting GR-5 with the suspension of AuNPs-(Fe–P)n-MOF, it underwent disulfide bond reduction with activation of tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP). Thus, a GR-5/(Fe–P)n-MOF probe was acquired via incubation at ambient temperature.67 Liu et al. reported four methods for the synthesis of Au/MIL-101, including the fabrication of Au/MIL-101 using PVP to deposit colloids as a protecting agent (CD/PVP), impregnation (IMP), sodium hydroxide deposition–precipitation (DPSH) and using glucose to deposit colloids as a protecting agent (CD/glucose). The stabilization of Au colloids with PVP was based on a reported method with slight modification.68 An aqueous solution of HAuCl4 was prepared and protected by adding PVP. Afterwards, the resulting solution was placed in an ice bath with vigorous stirring. Under strong agitation, a freshly prepared NaBH4 aqueous solution was added, and a deep brown dispersion of colloid was obtained. After the formation of the Au:PVP colloids, they were directly deposited on an MIL-101 support for the preparation of the Au/MIL-101 catalyst. To prepare a representative catalyst, the pre-fabricated Au:PVP hydrosol was sonicated and MIL-101 aqueous solution and H2O were added. At ambient temperature, the suspension was stirred and then rinsed with deionized water. Then the product was dried under vacuum and treated with H2 and heat to obtain Au/MIL-101 via the CD/PVP method.43 The second method involved adding an appropriate concentration of HAuCl4 aqueous solution dropwise to MIL-101, which was activated via the typical method. The reactant was kept at ambient temperature and treated with aqueous ammonia solution, then washed twice with deionized.69,70 The obtained sample was desiccated under vacuum, followed by treatment under an H2 stream to acquire Au/MIL-101 through the IMP method.43 For the third method, in a representative synthesis, an HAuCl4 aqueous solution was treated with heat and the pH adjusted to 8 by adding NaOH dropwise. After that, MIL-101 was scattered in the liquor, and the pH readjusted.71,72 The suspension was stirred vigorously, then desiccated under vacuum, and finally calcined under H2.43 In the last method, an HAuCl4 aqueous solution was treated with glucose as a protecting agent. Then, the hybrid was strongly agitated at ambient temperature. The color of the reactant changed from pale yellow to pink rapidly and then deep brown after the addition of NaBH4 solution, suggesting that small Au NPs were formed.73 The obtained brown solution was treated in an N2 atmosphere with stirring, and then thoroughly rinsed with deionized water. The sample was desiccated under vacuum and calcined under H2.74 The Au particles prepared via the CD/glucose method were much larger than that with the CD/PVP method due to the low temperature of 0 °C and treatment with sonication in the CD/PVP approach, facilitating the formation of small Au NPs. Hence, the CD/PVP approach was proven to be the most efficient approach for the fabrication of superior Au NPs on MOFs.43 Besides, the DPSH approach can generate larger Au NPs on MIL-101, which is efficient for the deposition of small Au NPs on metal oxides. In their research, Au/MIL-101 fabricated via the CD/PVP approach exhibited the highest activity for the oxidation of benzyl alcohol oxidation with alkali-free compared to that with the CD/glucose, DPSH, and IMP approaches. Thus, it can be concluded that MNPs can be dispersed more extensively on the MIL-101 support via the CD/PVP approach. For the synthesis of AuNi@MIL-101, compared with precious metals, more drastic conditions were required for the reduction with non-noble metals, for instance, the reduction of molecular H2 needed high temperature, which are unsuitable for MOFs due to their moderate stability.55,75 Hence, Xu and coworkers developed the liquid-phase strategy of concentration-controlled reduction (CCR). Using this CCR method, the size and the position of MNPs immobilized in MOFs can be controlled, particularly MNPs without noble metals, which are hard to achieve from the reduction of H2, and simultaneously guarantee the stability of the MOF at an appropriate temperature. This can control the size and location of the AuNi NPs during the reduction of the Au3+ and Ni2+ precursors, which uses double-solvent method to incorporate them in the pores of the MOF.76 A schematic representation of the immobilization of AuNi NPs in the MIL-101 matrix via the combination of DSM and liquid phase strategy of CCR is shown in Fig. 2c. Additionally, Xu and co-workers also adopted a reduction method, which facilitated the incorporation of ultrafine MNPs into MOF pores with no MNPs aggregated on the outer surface of the MOF. For Au/MOx@MOF-5 (M = Zn and Ti; x = 1, 2), ZnO and TiO2 NPs loaded in MOF-5 have previously been reported.77–79 The gas-phase infiltration approach can afford metal loadings more widely without competition between the metal precursor molecules and solvent compared with solution impregnation. Wang and co-workers employed a simple self-assembly method to load Au NPs on a zeolitic imidazolate framework, which was leaf-like (ZIF-L). ZIF-L was prepared based on a reported method with slight changes.80 PVP-Au NPs, PVP aqueous solution, Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and 2-methylimidazole aqueous solution were mixed and then reacted in an ice bath under intense stirring and the product was procured via centrifugation. This method can be used to prepare an extensive range of noble metal-based NPs and MOFs, offering MOF composites with promising electrochemical properties.81
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the preparation of the GR-5/(Fe–P)n-MOF probe. (b) TEM images of Au/MIL-101(CD/PVP). (c) Schematic representation of the immobilization of AuNi nanoparticles in the MIL-101 matrix using DSM combined with the liquid-phase CCR strategy. (d) Fringe contrast from poorly crystallized TiO2 at the surface of the MOF-5 crystal (indicated by arrows). (e) Micrographs of Au/ZnO@MOF-5: bright-field TEM (BFTEM) image of the Au/ZnO@MOF-5 crystal showing the presence of large Au NPs and inset: rotationally averaged diffraction pattern showing only rings corresponding to the cubic structure of the Au NPs. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 67 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 43 copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 76 copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d-e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 82 copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. 
Many other metal nanoparticles have been embedded in MOFs, including PdAg@MIL-101 (ref. 83) via a double-solvent approach, Ni NPs fixed by ZIF-8 through sequential deposition-reduction methods,84 and Ni NPs embedded in mesoporous MOF(MesMOF-1),85 Pd@MOF-5,86,87 Pt@MIL-101 (ref. 88) and MIL-101@Pt@MIL-101 (ref. 89) pores. For example, Lei et al. encapsulated iron(III) meso-5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin chloride (FeTCPP) into HKUST-1(Cu) with conjugation of an identification streptavidin (SA) element via a one-step process to fabricate FeTCPP@MOF composites (Fig. 3a). Through this one-pot encapsulation approach, the synthesis efficiency can be improved, the preparation can be much easier, and cost reduced for the large scale preparation of composites.90 Numerous active materials including, magnesium (Mg),91 platinum (Pt),25 copper (Cu),77 rubidium (Ru),92 silver (Ag),93 nickel (Ni)85 and palladium (Pd),94 have been successfully used to decorate MOFs for the fabrication of M@MOF composites.95 Once example is magnesium nanocrystals (Mg NCs) embedded in a MOF. Dae-Woon Lim and colleagues reported a simple strategy for the fabrication of magnesium nanostructures with a hexagonal-disk shape in an MOF, which is unprecedented. The obtained Mg NCs@MOF had the ability to store H2 and reduce the temperature via physical and chemical adsorption.91 Another example is the use of a double-solvent method41 to immobilize Pt NPs with high catalytic activity in the pores of an MOF. MIL-101 was fabricated based on a previously reported synthetic process,96 as shown in Fig. 3c. In the reduction process, there was no color change in the samples, indicating the high dispersion of the formed Pt NPs in the MIL-101 cavities. After the reduction of Pt@MIL-101 in H2, the powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns showed no loss in crystallinity and the Pt load reached up to 5 wt%. This indicated the maintenance of the MIL-101 framework integrity. The PXRD pattern of Pt@MIL-101 exhibited no characteristic Pt peaks, suggesting that tiny NPs were formed. The large reduction in the nitrogen adsorption performance and pore volume of Pt@MIL-101 suggested the occupation of the MIL framework cavities with highly dispersed Pt NPs.97 Thus, using this double solvent method, the resulting Pt@MIL-101 can display superior performances in catalytic reactions, in all phases, i.e. liquid, solid and gas, compared with that obtained via the traditional single solvent method in the impregnation process, which requires a large number of solvents with metal precursors and some of them are deposited on the external surface of the MOF in the form of aggregated MNPs. Martin Martis et al. fabricated Pd NPs inside MOF MIL-125 (ref. 98) and NH2-MIL-125 (ref. 99) based on titanium, which were used to dehydrogenate FA at ambient temperature. They demonstrated the incorporation of Pd NPs into the functional groups of the materials, which exhibited higher catalytic activity at ambient temperature due to the functionality of their amine groups. MIL-125 has a large aperture and window size, which facilitates the access of NPs and involves Ti ions with photoactivation ability; thus, it was selected as a support. Pd NP deposition was performed to obtain a Pd concentration of 0.5 wt%. An aqueous photo-assisted and ion exchange deposition method was employed to introduce Pd NP into MIL-125 and NH2-MIL-125 to synthesize Pd–NH2-MIL-125. This photo-assisted and ion exchange deposition method is effective for the fabrication of small NPs, which can be highly dispersed in the MOF structure.94 Besides Pt@MIL-101, another Pt NP MOF composite is Pt@UiO-66, which was synthesized by Liu et al. by embedding Pt MNPs into MOF matrices through a facile one-step strategy, as shown in Fig. 3g. In addition, MNPs@anionic MOFs/ERGO100 has been reported by Li and co-workers. Moreover, Deng et al. employed the straightforward and convenient strategy of one-pot hydrothermal reduction with ethanol, which enhanced the synthetic efficiency and made the preparation easier to encapsulate Pt NPs in three types of Zr-MOFs (UiO-66/67/68, denoted as UiO-66, UiO-67 and UiO-68) for the first time.38
 Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis of FeTCPP@MOF-SA composite. (b) TEM image of Mg@SNU-90′b. (c) Schematic representation of the synthesis of Pt NPs inside the MIL-101 matrix using the double-solvent method. (d) Synthesis of Pd–NH2-MIL-125 composite. (e) TEM images of Pd–NH2-MIL-125. (f) Images of the MIL-100(Al)/Pd composite. (g) Incorporation of Pt NPs in MOFs through a kinetically modulated in situ one-step strategy. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 91 copyright 2012, WILEY-VCH. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 97 copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 102 copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 103 copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. 


2.1.2 MOF/quantum dot composites. 
QDs are semiconductor nanocrystals that are 2–10 nm in size. Over the last two decades, QDs have received considerable attention due to their unique tunable and size-dependent electronic properties, which have applications in biology, analysis, medicine and engineering, among others.104–107 Recent efforts have expanded their application base by using them as new MOF guests, such as CNTs108 and polymer molecules.109 However, optically active semiconductor nanospecies in MOFs remain a largely untapped area. Highly luminous semiconductor QDs were introduced in MOF-5 crystals, extending the versatility of functional MOFs.110 In addition, the porosity of MOFs allows the preparation of multifunctional systems with the potential of QD@MOF materials to encapsulate molecules in their framework in advance, while fluorescent techniques can be used to monitor the composites. For convenience, herein, all QD MOF composites are denoted “QD@MOF”, although this does not necessarily mean a core–shell structure.10 In this section, we discuss the synthesis of QD@MOF composites based on the different types of QDs, which include oxide-based QDs, nitride-based QDs and carbon-based QDs.
Regarding oxide-based QD@MOF, TiO2@MOF-5 and SnO2 QDs@ZIF-8 will be discussed here. A simple route of in situ epoxide precipitation was used to fabricate SnO2 QDs@ZIF-8 with full utilization of its active material, leading to a high specific capacitance.111 Li et al. reported the synthesis of HKUST-1@TiO2 core–shell structures [HKUST-1 = Cu3(benzenetricarboxylic acid)2, btc] via a hydrolysis approach to coat TiO2 on microcrystals. Cu3(BTC)2 microcrystals were scattered in ethanol and then blended with tetrabutyl titanate. The dispersion was stirred at ambient temperature, and then blended with water and HF. Then, the dispersion was transferred to a Teflon-lined autoclave and heated. The product was obtained by centrifugation and washed three times with ethanol. Ultimately, the resulting powder was desiccated under vacuum. This method not only enhanced the separation of electric charge in the semiconductor, but also provided gas molecules, which were adsorbed on the MOF with energetic electrons.112
For nitride-based QD@MOF, Fischer and colleagues reported the synthesis of semiconductor nitride-based QDs in MOF crystals by infiltrating trimethylamine gallane in the micropores of ZIF-8 for the first time, which was then treated with ammonia for the formation of GaN, as presented in Fig. 4g. The highly volatile precursor [(CH3)3NGaH3] (1) with ZIF-8 was treated via chemical vapor infiltration (CVI), which was carried out for 7 consecutive days under static vacuum with pressure, resulting in the formation of [(CH3)3NGaH3]@ZIF-8 (2) at the saturated loading level. Subsequently, compound 2 was reacted with gasiform ammonia at ambient temperature, resulting in the trimerization of compound 1 and selective incorporation of cyclotrigallazane (H2GaNH2)3 in the pores ZIF-8. Therefore, the inclusion compound 3 was denoted as (H2GaNH2)3@ZIF-8. Compound 3 was further treated with ammonia and then treated with thermal annealing in a dynamic vacuum, leading to the formation of GaN@ZIF-8 (4), which contained GaN semiconductor with a 13 wt% load, as determined via elemental analysis, with 0.5 mole GaN per mole of ZIF-8. During the fabrication, the dehydrogenation of caged cyclotrigallazane resulted in the formation of Ga3N3 nuclei, which were mobile in the MOF and aggregated into GaN NPs, but had little effect on the available cavities.113
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the synthetic procedure for QD@MOF-5. (b) Schematic representation of Pi detection based on the interactions among ZnO QDs, MOFs and Pi. (c) SEM image of ZnO QDs + MOFs. (d) TEM image of the synthesized Cu3(BTC)2@TiO2 core–shell structure. (e) Schematic of the structure and light harvesting of a QD@MOF composite formed by surface modification of a porphyrin-containing framework with CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs. (f) Schematic representation of the synthesis of GQDs@ZIF-8 composite, where the green spheres (left) represent GQDs (their location denoted as a red circle in the TEM image) situated inside the spherical-shaped ZIF-8 nanocrystals and the white circle represents the ZIF-8 nanocrystal (tilted image of ZIF-8 on the right). (g) Conceptual representation of the confined formation of GaN QDs in the ZIF-8 matrix. (h) Illustration of C-dots@MOF composites. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 110 copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH. (b and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 120 copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 copyright 2014, Advanced Materials. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 121 copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 115 copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 113 copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 122 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For carbon-based QD@MOF composites, GQDs encapsulated and stabilized in a ZIF-8 matrix was previously reported by Bishnu et al. An electrochemical method was employed to synthesize graphene quantum dots (GQDs).114 For the synthesis of the GQDs@ZIF-8 composite (Fig. 4e), 2-methylimidazole (2-mIm), as-fabricated GQDs in propylene carbonate, and Zn(NO3)2·6H2O in methanol were mixed dropwise, with no agitation. Then, a white precipitate was obtained, which was collected via centrifugation, washed with methanol several times and dried under vacuum to acquire (0.4 wt%) GQDs@ZIF-8. In addition, 0.8 wt% and 1.2 wt% GQDs@ZIF-8 were synthesized using the same procedure.115 In addition, Qin et al. encapsulated luminescent carbon dots and Eu3+ lanthanide ions inside MOFs to fabricate the Eu3+/C-dots@MIL-53 (ref. 116) composite. Based on the method for the synthesis of CDs@ZIF-8,117 C-dots@MIL-53-COOH was formed by encapsulating C-dots inside MIL-53-COOH. Subsequently, C-dots@MIL-53-COOH was added to a Pyrex tube containing EuCl3·6H2O alcoholic solution.118 The resulting Eu3+/C-dots@MIL-53 was cleaned and dried under vacuum. The Eu3+/C-dots@MIL-53 composite was obtained after Eu3+ was incorporated into the mixture, and the resulting product combined the superiorities of the MOF matrix, luminescence of the lanthanide ion and characteristic luminescence and properties of C dots.119

2.2 MOF/one-dimension
In this section, the synthesis of MOF/1D nanostructures such as nanorods (NRs), nanotubes and nanobelts will be discussed. MOFs have been widely investigated for the past two decades; however, MOFs still have some drawbacks, which largely limit their applications. Stability is one of the main reasons hindering the applications of MOFs. When they are exposed to moisture, their surface area and adsorption capacity decrease dramatically.9 Thus, 1D MOF composite materials demonstrate superior performances. For instance, Shao et al. reported the in situ growth of an MOF on the surface of 1D carbon fibers via the oxidization of nitric acid. The use of this facile approach can facilitate the utilization of MOFs with porosity acting as a platform to enhance the properties between the surface and interface of fiber-reinforced composites with high-performance. Besides, it utilizes the superiority of MOF as a novel agent for interfacial connection between the polymer matrix and fibers. Therefore, it can release applied forces inside and outside to obtain carbon fibers with improved interlaminar shear strength at the interface and tensile strength simultaneously.13 Wee et al. proved that the encapsulation of ZnO NRs into the ZIF-8 matrix through a spontaneous phase segregation method improves its UV light absorption and photocatalytic activity. In this process, ZnO NRs served as the template and offered Zn2+ ions for the formation of ZIF-8. Similarly, the self-template strategy proposed by Wee and colleagues facilitated a new avenue for the synthesis of core–shell heterostructure MOFs.45 In addition, Anbia and Hoseini reported the synthesis of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) with acid treatment and MOF MIL-101, named MWCNT@MIL-101. The adsorption capacity of CO2 increased to around 60%, and the thermal stability of MIL-101 also improved after adding MWCNTs.123 Moreover, Zhang and co-workers used a facile hydrothermal method to incorporate CNTs into Mn-MOF to improve the material supercapacitive performance of a variety of MOFs.46 Wang et al. reported a new method to interweave MOF crystals with conducting polymer polyaniline (PANI), which were coated on carbon cloth via electrochemical methods to achieve high-performance supercapacitors and overcome the insulation difficulties of MOFs.124 Guo et al. also fabricated electrode materials via the carbonization of MOF-PANI composites using a new and simple method for supercapacitor applications, which enhanced the electrode material performance.125

2.2.1 MOF/nanorod composites. 
ZnO NRs were pre-synthesized, collected via centrifugation and washed using fresh DMF and ethanol via a simple self-template strategy to synthesize ZnO@ZIF-8, as shown in Fig. 5a. ZnO nanorod arrays were implanted in a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass and treated with galvanostatic electrodeposition. A Pt plate was used as the counter electrode, and equimolar amounts of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and HMTA were used as the electrolyte.126,127 In this fabrication process, the ZnO NRs served as the template and offered Zn2+ ions to form ZIF-8. Analogously, Wee and colleagues facilitated a new avenue for the synthesis of core–shell heterostructure MOFs. Besides, Sugikawa et al. embedded Au-NRs into MOFs to synthesize AuNR-MOF,128 as shown by the schematic in Fig. 5c. The embedded AuNR sections aggregated without interfering or destroying the inherent open frameworks and inclusion capabilities of the MOF.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of ZnO@ZIF-8 NRs via the self-template strategy. (b) Schematic illustration of SERS-active MOFs embedding AuNRs. (c) Scheme of MOF-525-PEDOT NTs composite. (d) SEM images of CNTs@Mn-MOF in different views (white arrows indicate CNTs). (e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the sandwich structure of carbonized Zn-MOF/PANI composites. (f) SEM images of the carbon cloth fibers after coating with ZIF-67 and after electropolymerization of aniline. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 28 copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 128 copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 135 copyright 2016, Elsevier. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 29 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 


2.2.2 MOF/nanotube composites. 
CNTs combined with MOFs make up a large portion of the nanotube composites, such as S@S-ZIF-8@CNTs,129 S8-loaded MOFs/CNT composite,8 PCN-224/MWCNT130 and CNT@MOF-5,108 which have been vastly studied due to their superior properties, including high surface area, medium porosity, conductivity, mechanical strength and corrosion resistance.131 Huang and co-workers demonstrated an in situ approach for the fabrication of MOF-525-PEDOT (Fig. 5c) composites, where poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) nanotubes (PEDOT NTs) were coated with porphyrin-based MOF-525 nanocrystals.132
MWCNTs were dispersed in DMF and then blended with a hybrid solution of chromium nitrate nonahydrate, terephthalic acid, HF and H2O to obtain MWCNT@MIL-101. The obtained mixture was stirred at ambient temperature and eventually heated. Varying quantities of MWCNTs were used for the incorporation of 10 wt% MWCNT in the MIL-101 sample.123 Zhu and colleagues fabricated HKUST-1 grown into vertically-aligned carbon nanotube (VACNT) arrays. For HKUST-1/VACNT, the interspaces of VACNT arrays offered space for restricted growth, which led to the formation of HKUST-1 crystal derivatives. Additionally, the HKUST-1/VACNT composite possessed superior micropore and mesopore volumes in comparison with bare VACNT.9 The SWNT@MIL-101 composite was synthesized by adding purified SWNTs to MIL-101.133 CNTs@Mn-MOF (Fig. 5d) was based on a previously revised report.134 A facile hydrothermal approach was adopted to fabricate CNTs@Mn-MOF via the incorporation of CNTs into MOFs, which can markedly enhance the properties of MOFs and exclude the majority of restrictions of conventional electrode materials based on Mn.46


2.2.3 MOF/nanobelt composites. 
In the case of nanobelt composites, carbonized Zn-MOF/PANI composites, as presented in Fig. 5e, were synthesized via in situ polymerization and chemical oxidation. In a typical procedure, doubly distilled water was used to disperse aniline, H2SO4 and carbonized Zn-MOF, and the dispersion was vigorously stirred in an ice water bath to obtain a uniform solution. Subsequently, (NH4)2S2O8 was added dropwise to the above solution in an ice bath, where polymerization occurred and stirring was continued. Then, the obtained hybrid was stored at ambient temperature with no disturbance. Next, the suspension was centrifuged and washed with distilled water and ethanol several times until the solution became colorless and transparent. The resulting product was dried in an oven to acquire the carbonized composite, Zn-MOF/PANI-0.1. More importantly, the carbonized Zn-MOF/PANI was denoted as MOF-PANI.135
Wang and co-workers chose a Co-based MOF, ZIF-67, as an electrical charge storage material. Carbon cloth is a type of high-conductivity textile with high economic efficiency, mechanical elasticity and good strength.136 Flexibility can be realized by using the carbon cloth as the base material and current collector. PANI possesses the advantages of simple processing, high capacitance, low cost, good chemical stability and unique proton acid doping mechanism. PANI was electrochemically deposited on a ZIF-67 carbon cloth via a unique proton acid doping mechanism.135 The resulting electrode was denoted as PANI-ZIF-67-CC (CC = carbon cloth). First, a suspension of 70 wt% ZIF-67 active material was bonded to 20 wt% Super P as a conductive additive and 10 wt% poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) adhesive bonded NMP on the carbon fabric. The obtained ZIF-67/carbon cloth electrode, which was named ZIF-67-CC, exhibited prominent mechanical strength and flexible performance. ZIF-67 crystals of approximately 300 nm were anchored with a good distribution on the surface of the carbon fiber cloth, as shown in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images in Fig. 5f. Subsequently, ZIF-67-CC and aniline monomer were electropolymerized under a cycling potential through conductive PANI. Then, the resulting PANI-ZIF-67-CC was cleaned and dried. Typically, ZIF-67 and PANI were coated on the carbon cloth, as shown in Fig. 5f. The SEM image clearly showed that the external surface of the ZIF-67 crystals had an obvious morphology change after electropolymerization of aniline. PANI chains covered the surface of the MOF, with interconnected single MOF crystals serving as ligaments. The conductive PANI covered the gaps between the particles and connected the ZIF-67 crystals. Due to the interweaving of MOF and the conductive polymer PANI during electropolymerization, PANI acted bridges to transfer electrons between the outer circuit and interface of the MOF, and enhance the conductivity of the MOF.29

2.3 MOF/two-dimension
Regarding 2D MOF composites, nanosheets, including graphene oxide (GO) materials, combined with MOF are representatives. It is conceivable that the incorporation of 2D nanomaterials into MOF materials can widen their potential catalytic, energy storage conversion and information storage device applications.32,137 Jin and co-workers reported the fabrication of Fe-MOF on RGO nanosheets via a solvothermal method, where the 2D composite exhibited an enhanced electrochemical performance owing to the synergistic effect of the high theoretical capacity of the MOF and high electroconductibility of RGO nanosheets.138 Similarly, Zhou et al. demonstrated excellent electrochemical properties in an MOF composite, which was ascribed to the attractive synergetic effect of Ni-MOFs and GO nanosheets with a unique floral structure.139
Nanosheet materials mainly include aerogels (GAs), GO and RGO. Bonakala et al. reported the further properties of MOF/GO composites concretely.140 MOF/nanosheet composites have been widely and thoroughly investigated, such as MIL-100(Fe)@LMC composite,141 GAMOF(Fe3+),142 Pd/PRGO/Ce-MOF,143 ZIF-8/GO,47 TMU-16/GO,144 and MIL-68(Al)/GO.145 Petit et al. reported Cu-based MOF/graphene composites that possessed the advantage of water stability, and thus were suitable for environmental applications in the presence of moisture.146 In the synthesis of 2D MOF composites, it can be seen that a facile ultrasonic method can make chemical reactions easier to carry out and the resultants more united than that obtained via the solvothermal method.
Fe-MOF/RGO composites with varying proportions of RGO were fabricated via a simple solvothermal approach. This solvothermal approach can contribute to the synergistic interaction between MOF of high theoretical capacities and RGO of high electrical conductivity, leading to superior performance in batteries. The details of the synthetic process for Fe-MOF/RGO are shown in Fig. 6a.36 GO was combined with a specific Fe-MOF (MIL-88(Fe)), which was denoted as MIL-88(Fe)@GO, as presented in Fig. 6d. Liu and colleagues employed an in situ solvothermal process to fabricate Ni-MOFs@GO. The introduced GO nanosheets enhanced the electrochemical performance of Ni-MOFs, which consequently served as an electrode for supercapacitors. The in situ Ni-MOF and GO nanosheet composites are shown in Fig. 6c.139 A facile ultrasonication method was employed to prepare ZIF-8/GO composites at room temperature. In a typical procedure, GO was dispersed in ethanol via sonication, and after that, ZIF-8 was immediately added with sonication. Then, the product was collected via centrifugation, which was washed with ethanol and dried in air.147 Through this ultrasound treatment, the chemical reaction could proceed easier and the resulting products were more homogeneous compared with that from solvothermal treatment. RGO@ZIF-8 and Pt-RGO@ZIF-8 composites were also synthesized via the reduction of prefabricated GO@ZIF-8 and Pt-GO@ZIF-8 in hydrazine steam, respectively. Pt–MoS2 was dispersed in water and then mixed with additional water in a vial, after which, a freshly prepared Zn(OAC)2 aqueous solution and MIM were added successively with mild shaking to obtain Pt–MoS2 nanosheets coated with ZIF-8. This synthetic method is similar to that for coating MoS2 with ZIF-8.32
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of electron and electrolyte conduction in MOF and MOF interwoven by PANI. (b) Schematic illustration of the formation process of nanosheet@MOF and metal NP-nanosheet@MOF hybrid structures. (c) Illustration of in situ hybrid of Ni-MOFs with GO nanosheets. (d) Illustration of the preparation of MIL-88(Fe)@GO. (e) TEM images of ZIF-8/GO composite fabricated from a ZIF-8/GO ratio of 3/7. (f) SEM micrographs of ZIF-8/GO. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 36 copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 32 copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 148 copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 147 copyright 2016, Springer. 
2.4 MOF/three-dimension
In this part, core–shell composites and cubic composites are the typical representatives of MOF/3D composites. MOF@MOF is an example of a core–shell composite, which is hopeful for improving the porosity and adding new functions to the MOF structure without changing the properties of the MOF crystal.149 Additionally, other core–shell and cubic composites are multifunctional and possess outstanding characteristic features. Wang and colleagues developed a mixed MOF method and adopted a zirconium-metalloporphyrin framework with embedded Cu(II), denoted as MOF-525(Cu), which could serve as a host for sulfur in a Li–S battery. Subsequently, 3D cubic composites, S@MOF-525(M), were synthesized, where the cathode of S@MOF-525(Cu) displayed the top performance among the reported cathode materials of sulfur/MOFs composites. Additionally, the LBL assembly method is usually adopted to synthesize 3D MOF composites, which can finely control the MOF shell thickness. For instance, in 3D core–shell composites, the core can offer a surface for the reaction and the porous shell plays the role of a barrier layer to restrain the surface activation to aggregate with the adjacent core during the reaction.

2.4.1 MOF/core–shell composites. 
In the case of core–shell composites, Fe3O4 was synthesized via the solvothermal method.150 Qiu et al. proposed a general strategy that can be used to reasonably design and synthesize new porous core–shell structures possessing a magnetic core and distinct MOF shell. A LBL controllable approach was employed to synthesize a sequence of Fe3O4@MOF core–shell composites with a made-to-order MOF shell.49,151,152 Fe3O4 nanospheres were prepared via a solvothermal approach.153 Similarly, Fe3O4@HKUST-1 core–shell nanospheres were fabricated. Based on the synthetic method mentioned above,49 Fe3O4@MIL-100 core–shell composites with magnetism were fabricated via a LBL assembly strategy.49,154 In addition, Wu and co-workers fabricated Fe3O4@MIL-100(Fe)155via a LBL assembly approach based on the LBL assembly strategy.156 In a representative synthesis, polystyrene@ZIF-8 core–shell particles were prepared via a step-wise solvent thermal reaction. Carboxylate-terminated polystyrene spheres with a diameter of 0.87 mm were added to a precursor methanol solution containing 2-methylimidazole (HMeIM) and Zn(NO3)2 (Fig. 7b). Subsequently, the above solution was heated to obtain the polystyrene@ZIF-8 composite.157 Core-shell microspheres of Fe3O4@MOF were fabricated using a LBL assembly method, which was also used to coat Fe3O4 particles with HKUST-1. Fig. 7c presents a schematic diagram of the LBL assembly method.158 Core-shell microspheres of PS@MOF were synthesized with a prospective shell thickness via repeated circular growth. Then, hollow PS@MOF microspheres were successfully prepared by immersing the prefabricated PS@MOF core–shell composites into DMF to remove their polystyrene cores.159 The images of the synthesized products are shown in Fig. 7f, which showed core–shell cubes with contrasting colors, where MOF-5 is colorless and IRMOF-3 is orange. The core–shell MOFs were decomposed and then analyzed via1H NMR, which demonstrated an approximately 1:1 BDC:ABDCE (BDC = 1,4-benzene dicarboxylate, ABDC = 2-amino benzene-1,4-dicarboxylate) molar composition for the block copolymer. For IRMOF-3@MOF-5 and MOF-5@IRMOF-3, the uptake of N2 for core–shell MOFs was B820 cm3 g−1 and B2750 m2 g−1, respectively, and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area values of 920 cm3 g−1 for MOF-5 and 750 cm3 g−1 for IRMOF-3. Additionally, yolk–shell nanocrystal@ZIF-8 composites have also been reported by Kuo et al.35
 Fig. 7  (a) TEM micrograph of the Fe3O4@MIL-100 core–shell magnetic microspheres. (b) Preparation of polystyrene@ZIF-8 core–shell and hollow ZIF-8 microspheres from carboxylate-terminated polystyrene spheres. (c) Schematic representation of the LBL synthesis strategy and a unit structure in HKUST-1. (d) Illustration of the fabrication process of PS@MOF core–shell MOF nanospheres via a step-by-step assembly strategy, preparation of hollow MOF nanospheres from core–shell MOF nanospheres and representative TEM image of an individual hollow nanosphere of MIL100-Fe MOF. (e) Structure of Ren-MOF coated on an Ag nanocube. (f) Microscope images of core–shell MOFs, IRMOF-3(shell)-@MOF-5(core). (g) Schematic illustration of S@MOF-525(M) synthesized through the melt-diffusion method at 155 °C under an Ar atmosphere. MOF-525(2H), M = 2H+; MOF-525(FeCl), M = Fe3+–Cl; and MOF-525(Cu), M = Cu2+. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 154 copyright 2013, Elsevier B.V. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 157 copyright 2012, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 158 copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 159 copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 160 copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 161 copyright 2009, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 


2.4.2 MOF/cubic composites. 
Wang et al. fabricated S@MOF-525(M) via a mixed-MOF approach, which showed the best properties among all the reported cathode materials of sulfur/MOFs composites. A melt-diffusion approach was employed to load MOF-525(2H) [MOF-525(FeCl), MOF-525(Cu)] with sulfur, as shown in Fig. 7g. Sulfur and the MOF host were blended using hand mill, and then heated in an oven under vacuum. Thereafter, the oven was filled with Ar and the temperature increase to 155 °C, and then maintained. The cathode material of S@MOF-525(2H) [S@MOF-525(FeCl), S@MOF-525(Cu)] was collected after cooling to ambient temperature.48 Choi et al. synthesized Ag⊂Re3-MOF by combining an Re-MOF stock solution and Ag nanocube solution in DMF containing acetic acid and magnetic stirrer, which was then heated in an aluminum heating block under vigorous stirring.160

3. Electrochemical applications
As a unit composed of two interesting materials, MOF composites have several brilliant performance and electrochemical applications that MOFs alone cannot achieve, including catalysis, sensing, supercapacitors and batteries. They not only optimize the characteristic features of single MOFs, but also stimulate the development of electrochemical applications due to the versatility of MOFs and their specific materials. Various functional materials with dimensions ranging from 0 to 2 combined with MOFs have broad applications in electrochemistry, while 3D functional materials fabricated with MOFs have rarely been investigated and discussed. In this section, MOF composites are divided and discussed according to their different types of applications and their dimensions.
3.1 MOF composites for catalysis
The worldwide demand and consumption of energy have tremendously increased and unprecedented in the past few years.162–164 The burning of fossil fuels such as coal and oil, which are non-renewable, accounts for a large percentage of the energy consumption globally, resulting in the significant emission of CO2 in the atmosphere and serious environmental issues.165,166 Thus, massive efforts such as seeking green and renewable energy sources as alternatives to fossil fuels are being undertaken worldwide to solve the energy shortage issue.167,168 Accordingly, electrocatalysts have been proposed for the conversion of clean energy. Pt catalysts are commonly applied in electrochemistry; however, their cost is quite high. Therefore, non-Pt catalysts such as MOF composites are emerging as environmentally and economically feasible alternatives.169 MOF composites are widely applied in electrocatalysis for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), such as polyoxometalate-based MOFs,170 and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). The HER at the cathode and OER at the anode in an electrolytic cell can produce H2 and O2 through water-splitting, respectively. Additionally, in another version of the electrolytic cell, hydrogen-based fuel cells, the ORR takes place at the cathode.171 The HER is a classic example of a two-electron transfer reaction and a catalytic intermediate. H plays a primary role in the reaction with respect to energy in acidic media (2H+ + 2e− → H2), which involves two processes. The first process is the generation of H* (where, * represents a site on the surface of the electrode), an adsorbed hydrogen atom, on the surface of the electrode. The other process is the combination of H* with a proton or the combination of two H* to form H2.172–174 Thus, active electrocatalysts such as MOF composites reduce the overpotential in the HER. The OER refers to the production of O2 during the electrochemical oxidation of water. Two molecules of H2O can generate four protons and one molecule of O2 through oxidation in acidic and neutral electrolytes. Whereas, in basic electrolytes, OH− can form H2O and O2 through oxidation.175–177 Currently, MOF composite electrocatalysts have exhibited high OER activity, including excellent electrocatalytic performance and stability. Besides, electrocatalysts in ORR have aroused intense interest in fuel cell and metal-air battery technologies, and numerous studies conducted with great effort.178–180 Additionally, Zn-MOF/CP181 (CP = carbon paper) was synthesized, which can be applied for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH4, as can be seen in Fig. 8d. The MOF composites used for electrocatalysis, such as HER, OER and ORR, are summarized in Table 1.
 Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of the design and preparation of the bifunctional electrocatalyst. (b) Electrochemical and sorption surface areas and electrochemical activity of the catalysts. Cyclic voltammograms of 10 mM Fe(CN)63−/4− in 1 M KCl using different materials drop casted on a glassy carbon electrode: (1) (GO 8 wt%) Cu-MOF, (2) (GO 6 wt%) Cu-MOF, (3) (GO 4 wt%) Cu-MOF, (4) (GO 2 wt%) Cu-MOF, (5) Cu-MOF, and (6) bare glassy carbon electrode, where the scan rate was 50 mV s−1. (c) (G-dye-FeP)n MOF and magnified view of the layers inside the framework of the (G-dye-FeP)n MOF showing how graphene sheets intercalated between the porphyrin networks. (d) Possible pathway for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH4 on the Zn-MOF/CP cathode in ionic liquids. (e) Synthesis of the Co-MOF@CNTs catalyst. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 186 copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 182 copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 181 copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 184 copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
Table 1 MOF composites as electrocatalysts for the HER, OER and ORRa




Reaction
MOF composite
Functional materials
MOF
Current density (mA cm−2)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)

E
onset (V vs. RHE)
Ref.





a HHTP = 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene.





HER
(GO 8 wt%) Cu-MOF
GO
Cu-MOF
—
84
0.087

182



NENU-500
Polymolybdate
NENU-5
10
96
0.18

183



OER
Co-MOF@CNTs (5 wt%)
CNTs
Co-MOF
10
69
1.51

184



(GO 8 wt%) Cu-MOF
GO
Cu-MOF
5.8
65
1.19

182



HHTP@ZIF-67
HHTP
ZIF-67
10
104
1.47

185



Co/MIL-101(Cr)
Co
MIL-101(Cr)
10
130
0.85

186



Ti@TiO2/CdS/ZIF-67
Ti@TiO2/CdS
ZIF-67
10
42
—

187



ORR
(GO 8 wt%) Cu-MOF
GO
Cu-MOF
—
69
0.29

182



Co/MIL-101(Cr)
Co
MIL-101(Cr)
10
162
0.08

186



ε-MnO2/MOF(Fe)
ε-MnO2
MOF(Fe)
5.56
120
—

188





In the case of 0D MOF composites, nano-CuS(x wt%)@Cu-BTC189 and Co/MIL-101(Cr)186 are good examples applied in electrocatalysis. Cho et al. adopted a straightforward method of solution infiltration to synthesize different quantities of CuS NPs (nano-CuS) in or on Cu-BTC. The various quantities of nano-CuS influenced the electrical conductivity, porosity and activity of the electrocatalysts for the ORR. Besides, Eonset (onset potential) of the ORR was also influenced by the quantities of nano-CuS. Particularly, in comparison with bare Cu-MOF, the electrical conductivity of nano-CuS@Cu-BTC was enhanced by approximately 109-fold and its porosity reduced with an increase in the quantity of nano-CuS. With the samples including nano-CuS of 1.4, 5.3, 8.8, and 28 wt%, Eonset shifted to more electropositive potentials of 0.79, 0.80, 0.85, and 0.91 V vs. RHE, respectively. Also, these Eonset values were all higher than that of the bare Cu-BTC or nano-CuS. However, in the case of CuS(56 wt%)@Cu-BTC, with superabundant nano-CuS loaded in or on Cu-BTC, its porosity (110 m2 g−1) and Eonset decreased (0.86 V). All these results indicated that the electrical conductivity and porosity of composite electrocatalysts have considerable impact on their ORR electrocatalytic performance. Particularly, in the ORR, CuS(28 wt%)@Cu-BTC displayed the quasi-quaternary electron transport pathway (n = 3.82), the best activity with 0.91 V Eonsetvs. RHE and 11.3 mA cm−2 kinetic current density at 0.55 V vs. RHE. The nano-CuS@Cu-BTC composite exhibited a considerable enhancement in electrocatalytic performance, including onset voltage, electron transport number and kinetic current density in comparison with pristine nano-CuS and bare MOF. All these results can be attributed to the synergistic effect, where Cu-BTC offers porosity and nano-CuS furnishes electrical conductivity.189 Additionally, He and co-workers fabricated Co/MIL-101(Cr) via oxidative or reductive treatment during the impregnation, which was applied as a bi-functional electrocatalyst in the OER and ORR, as shown in Fig. 8a. In their study, they found that various contents of CoII and CoIII on the surface had a considerable impact on the OER and ORR activities of the electrocatalyst. However, its activities were not affected by the BET surface area and the total amount of Co on its surface. In the case of CoIII, the OER activity of the catalyst was enhanced with an increase in CoIII on its surface. Besides, the reaction and electrophilic adsorption of O in OH− anions on the Co/MIL-101(Cr)–O electrocatalyst surface in basic electrolyte occurred easier with an increase in CoIII active sites. Therefore, its OER activity improved accordingly.190,191 Besides, in terms of CoII, more O2 would be preferentially absorbed and electrons would be transferred to O2 to form OH− in basic electrolyte with an increase in CoII content on the surface of the electrocatalyst. Also, its ORR activity improved accordingly.192 In addition, for the electrocatalyst with a higher ratio of CoIII/CoII, its bi-functional OER and ORR activity was enhanced when the OER and ORR proceeded simultaneously. Moreover, the MOF composites displayed higher durability in comparison with bare MIL-101(Cr) and Co/MIL-101(Cr), which can be attributed to the intense mutual effect of the support of MIL-101(Cr) and active surface of Co species.186
In terms of 1D MOF composites, nanorods, nanowires and CNTs combined with MOFs all exhibit excellent electrocatalytic performances. Wang and co-workers fabricated ε-MnO2/MOF(Fe) via the integration of ε-MnO2 nanorods and MOF(Fe). In their study, the observed current density of −0.47 mA cm−2 at 0.75 V for ε-MnO2/MOF(Fe) make it a potential electrocatalyst for the ORR. The ε-MnO2/MOF(Fe) composite displayed higher activity for the ORR in comparison with ε-MnO2 and ε-MnO2 + MOF(Fe) in basic electrolyte. It is easy for the ε-MnO2 nanorods to contact O2 due to the protuberant ends of the ε-MnO2 nanorods. Additionally, the MOF(Fe) matrix, which is porous and possesses a high specific surface area, contributes to the diffusion of oxygen, enabling the MOF composite to exhibit prominent electrocatalytic ORR activity. ORR based on the ε-MnO2/MOF(Fe) composite was beneficial for reducing O2 indirectly, then HO2− was generated and H2O2 underwent a disproportionation reaction. The ε-MnO2/MOF(Fe) composite exhibited excellent stability in comparison with ε-MnO2 and even with 20% Pt/C due to the intense mutual effect of the ε-MnO2 nanorods and MOF(Fe), which had the ability to stabilize the catalytic sites. Therefore, ε-MnO2/MOF(Fe) has potential as an efficient non-Pt electrocatalyst in metal–air batteries and fuel cells.188 Co-MOF@CNTs was fabricated by Fang et al. via a mild assembly approach, which functioned as an electrocatalyst for both the OER and ORR, as shown in Fig. 8e. The functional material CNTs can enhance the electrical conductivity and facilitate electron transfer at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte, which have the ability to withstand the severe oxidation environment in the OER with no corrosion of carbon. Also, the assembly of CNTs and Co-MOF can overcome the poor conductivity of Co-MOF and avoid the formation of conductive carbon by high template pyrolysis. Additionally, the distinct layered structure provide CNTs and active sites with a stable support and large surface area, enabling a hybrid with excellent durability. In addition, rational integration between the superiorities of the layered structure and synergistic effects of Co(II) redox centers, organic ligands and CNTs, resulted in the outstanding electrocatalytic performances. Moreover, the activity of the Co-MOF@CNTs hybrid catalyst for the OER and ORR was comparable to that of RuO2 and 20% wt% Pt/C catalysts and its stability was even better.184 Zhang et al. synthesized Ti@TiO2/CdS nanowire array substrates with ZIF-67 via an in situ growth approach, which served as an electrocatalyst for the OER and oxidation of H2O2. In their study, it was found that at 10 mA cm−2 current density, the Ti@TiO2/CdS/ZIF-67 electrode had a small Tafel slope of 42 mV dec−1 and 0.41 V overpotential, which enhanced its OER activity, and had strong stability in basic electrolyte. Besides, in terms of H2O2 oxidation, the Ti@TiO2/CdS/ZIF-67 electrode also exhibited excellent electrocatalytic activity and great stability with the high sensitivity of 1214.3 μA mM−1 cm−2, wide linear detection range from 5 μM to 14 mM, and low detection limit of 1.11 μM. The prominent electrocatalytic activity and brilliant stability of Ti@TiO2/CdS/ZIF-67 can be ascribed to the rapid electron can transfer from the 1D Ti@TiO2/CdS nanowires to Ti substrates, large active surface area and the N atom of the imidazole ligand, which can enhance the valence state of Co ions. Thus it hold great promise as a cost-effective electrocatalyst for various applications.187
With regard to 2D MOF composites, Jahan et al. fabricated GO nanosheets with an MOF, which could be employed as an electrocatalyst in the HER, OER and ORR. The GO-incorporated Cu-MOF composite synthesized by Jahan was a tri-functional catalyst. For the HER, the MOF composite with 8 wt% GO incorporated in Cu-MOF showed a higher current density of 122.5 mA cm−2 at −0.4 V in comparison with that of bare Cu-MOF; however, it was still was inferior to that of Pt/C of 313 mA cm−2 at −0.4 V. For the OER, MOF composites with 8 wt% GO incorporated in Cu-MOF exhibited a potential of 1.34 V at a current density of 2 mA cm−2, as shown in Fig. 8b. This indicated that the MOF composite was very active for the OER in acidic electrolyte compared with Pt/C, which has a value of 1.43 V. In the case of the ORR, a considerable enhancement of −0.23 V in the cathodic peak was observed with the ORR current density of −0.97 mA cm−2, which was higher than that of GO and Cu-MOF. The GO/Cu-MOF composites demonstrated higher currents and smaller overpotentials for the HER, OER and ORR, and exhibited excellent stability and durability in comparison with Pt/C in acidic electrolyte. All these results can be attributed to the distinct supporting porous structure, superior electron transfer and synergistic effects of GO and MOF. Moreover, GO allows rapid electron transport in oxidation–reduction reactions, particularly at the covalent bond interface of GO and MOF.182 In addition, Jahan et al. reported the incorporation of pyridinium dye-functionalized RGO sheets with MOF. The functionalized RGO sheets influenced the MOF crystallisation process and enhanced the electrocatalytic properties of the MOF composite with the addition of a proper content. In comparison with Pt catalysts, the MOF composite exhibited higher selectivity for the ORR and a considerable reduction in the influence of methanol crossover.66
In the case of 3D MOF composites, Song et al. fabricated MOF-5/3D-KSC (KSC = kenaf stem-derived porous carbon) composites via a simple one-step hydrothermal approach, which exhibited prominent electrocatalytic capacity for the oxidation of AA in comparison with bare MOF-5 and 3D-KSC. The MOF-5/3D-KSC electrode demonstrated a remarkable enhancement in the oxidation peak current of AA at 0.1 V. The improved electrocatalytic activity of MOF-5/3D-KSC electrode can be attributed to the synergistic interaction between 3D-KSC and MOF-5. Besides, the MOF-5/3D-KSC electrode had higher electrochemical active surface area than the other electrodes. In addition, the oxidation of AA was maintained at 98.2% of its initial value, indicating the practical stability of MOF-5/3D-KSC electrode, providing the possibility to boost the capacity in a harsh environment. Hence, the MOF-5/3D-KSC electrode has great potential application as an electrocatalyst for various reactions.193
3.2 MOF composites for sensing
MOF composites have extensive applications in sensing, for example, AuNCs/MOF132 for detecting metal ions in food and nutritional assessment, and CuxO NPs@ZIF-8 (ref. 194) for sensing H2O2. In the field of MOF/0D composites, (Fe–P)n-MOF67 and FeTCPP@MOF90 are good examples. Ju et al. reported a highly efficient electrochemical sensor for the detection of lead cations using a DNA-functionalized ferriporphyrin MOF (GR-5/(Fe–P)n-MOF) as a probe. The fabricated probe not only exhibited highly selective GR-5 recognition behavior for Pb2+, but also demonstrated that ((Fe–P)n-MOF significantly mimicked peroxidase. A good mimic enzyme should have good catalytic performance under broad conditions. Thus, the relevant activities of some catalysts were measured in a wide pH range from 3 to 10 and temperature ranging from 4 °C to 60 °C, including a natural enzyme (horseradish peroxidase (HRP)), a common mimic (hemin) and the (Fe–P)n-MOF modified screen-printed carbon electrode (SPCE). After exposure to solutions with a pH of 3.0 and 10.0 for 2 h, the catalytic activity of (Fe–P)n-MOF was maintained at 62.3% and 41.9%, respectively. In contrast, the activity of HRP and hemin was maintained at just 1.3% and 18.6% at a pH value of 3.0, and 11.6% and 20.8% at pH 10.0, respectively, with the same effect of temperature on their stability. When the temperature changed from 4 °C to 60 °C, (Fe–P)n-MOF remained stable and maintained 87% of its activities at 60 °C; whereas, HRP and hemin exhibited residual activity in a narrow temperature range and 60 °C maintained 22% and 47% of their activity, respectively. Distinctly, (Fe–P)n-MOF was more beneficial than HRP and hemin in a wider pH and temperature range, which were sensitive to pH and temperature, indicating that (Fe–P)n-MOF has excellent latent bioanalytic applications. The electrochemical sensor based on SPCE and the (GR-5/(Fe–P)n-MOF probe had the benefits of low cost, simple fabrication, high sensitivity and selective performance, which offers potential applications for the on-the-spot and real-time detection of Pb2+ in complex media.67 Lei et al. designed an electrochemical sensor for the sensitive detection of DNA on an MOF to simulate catalytic and hairpin DNA allosteric switches, which led to a new orientation of the MOF with porphyrin functionality for transducing signals in electrochemical biosensing, as presented in Fig. 9a.90 With an increase in the reaction time, the catalytic performances of FeTCPP, HKUST-1(Cu), FeTCPP@MOF and HRP (common natural catalyst) were investigated by electrochemical methods. The diffusion of o-PD decreased inside and outside of the framework channels by the interaction of FeTCPP@MOF through π–π stacking; thus, the initial oxidative rate for FeTCPP@MOF was lower than that for HRP and FeTCPP. Not only FeTCPP, but also FeTCPP@MOF showed better catalytic stability than HRP after 20 min, although HRP demonstrated higher activity, manifesting that the catalytic centers in the MOF had minimal degradation.90 Besides, compared with HRP, the FeTCPP@MOF catalyst maintained its stability and catalytic activity under a wide range of conditions.195 The effect of temperature and pH on their catalytic activity was studied under the same conditions. The catalytic activity of HRP was clearly susceptible to high temperature, which exhibited a 50% loss in activity at 60 °C. However, the change in temperature had little impact on FeTCPP@MOF. When HRP remained in pH 9.0 buffer for 1 h, its catalytic activity decreased by 39%; whereas, that of FeTCPP@MOF was remarkably stable. In general, the prefabricated catalyst FeTCPP@MOF was more stable than HRP with changes in time, temperature, and pH, suggesting the feasible of its application in diverse areas.90 With regard to QDs, Eu3+/C-dots@MIL-53, a novel ratiometric fluorescence hybrid probe with remarkable optical properties and water-tolerance, is a promising sensor with the dual function of selectivity and sensitivity for the detection and recognition of diaminotoluene (TDA), a metabolite of toluene diisocyanates (TDI).116
 Fig. 9  (a) Electrochemical DNA sensing via allosteric switch of hairpin DNA. (b) Schematic illustration of the assembly and sensing of DA in POMOFs/RGO. (c) Scheme for the electrochemical detection of DA using MOF-525-PEDOT NT composite. (d) CV curves in 1 M Na2SO4 at 100 mV s−1. (e) Construction of nMOF supercapacitors. (f) Schematic of the nitrite sensor. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 206 copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 207 copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 196 copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For 1D MOF composites, ZnO@ZIF-8 is a typical representative. Kuang et al. obtained ZnO@ZIF-8 nanorod arrays, which were successfully applied for the detection H2O2 in a slurry buffer solution and has potential to be applied in sensors. It is noteworthy that the photocurrent response of the ZnO@ZIF-8 nanorod array was closely related to the concentration of hole scavengers added to the electrolyte solution. With an increase in the concentration of H2O2, the photocurrent response increased, while with an increase in AA concentration, the photocurrent response decreased. Thus, it was concluded that the good or bad effect of hole scavenging agents on the ZnO@ZIF-8 PEC response was linearly correlated with their within a certain range, indicating that the fabricated ZnO@ZIF-8 NRs array has potential application in PEC-based sensors.28 In addition, MOF-525-PEDOT can be used as a dopamine (DA) sensor, where the MOF-525 surface has electrocatalytic active sites and PEDOT NTs accumulate charges for the rapid transportation of electrons from the MOF nanocrystals, as shown in Fig. 9c. The concentration range with a linear relationship for the detection of DA was evaluated to be 2 × 10−6 to 270 × 10−6 M and the detection limit was estimated to be 0.04 × 10−6 M with high selectivity for DA.132
For MOF/2D composites, Saraf et al. synthesized Cu-MOF/RGO and measured the cyclic voltammetry (CV) response of Cu-MOF/RGO/GCE in different concentration ranges of nitrite, which exhibited a sensitive response, and the current increased linearly with an increase in the concentration of nitrite. The standard curve for the current response vs. nitrite concentration was a straight line, indicating the potential capability of the Cu-MOF/RGO hybrid as an electrode material for nitrite sensors and its ability to detect nitrite on a large scale. Moreover, its long cycle life with 91.91% retention in activity after 1000 cycles demonstrated the highly stable performance on the surface of the electrode. In addition, the abnormal electrochemical detection of nitrite was performed on a Cu-MOF/RGO modified electrode. The dynamic range with a linear relation was 3–40000 mM (R2 = 0.99911), and the remarkable detection limit of 33 nm and high sensitivity of 43.736 mA mM−1 cm−2 were observed.196 A schematic of the nitrite sensor is shown in Fig. 9f.
With regard to 3D MOF composites, MOF-5/3D-KSC, which was discussed in catalysis, can be applied not only as an electrocatalyst, but also as sensor for AA. The sensitive AA electrochemical sensor based on the MOF-5/3D-KSC electrode exhibited a wide linear range of 0.7 mM to 11.5 mM (R2 = 0.996), low limit of detection (0.24 mM) and sensitivity of 68.4 mA cm−2 mM−1. Furthermore, its current response for 1.0 mM AA was 98.2% of its initial value after storage at ambient temperature over 30 days, which indicated that the MOF-5/3D-KSC electrode was stable for long-term storage. Besides, the detection performance for AA of the electrode based on MOF-5/3D-KSC was better than that of conventional enzyme- and non-enzyme-based sensors. All these superiorities including high sensitivity, wide linear range, great stability and low detection limit were attributed to the synergistic interaction between 3D-KSC and MOF-5 and superior electrochemical active surface area of the MOF-5/3D-KSC electrode.193 Additionally, Zhang et al. synthesized EuIII cubes containing an MOF. The Eu-MOF with water stability was applied as a sensor for multi-responsive luminescence, which exhibited superior selectivity for Cr2O72− ions and acetone, and excellent identification of four nitroaromatic compounds in water via ratiometric approaches.197
3.3 MOF composites for supercapacitors
Different from fuel cells and batteries, supercapacitors are electrochemical capacitors that have the capacity to store electric charge in the electric double layer formed between the electrode and electrolyte.198 They have some advantages over (rechargeable) batteries, for instance, faster charge transfer and superior rechargeable ability.199 Among them, double-layer capacitors are exhibit the ability to store energy via electrostatic interactions, pseudo-capacitors have the capacity to store energy via electrochemical interactions and hybrid capacitors combine both types of storage systems.111 MOFs have received increasing attention as hopeful electrode materials for supercapacitors, and the constructing of MOF supercapacitors can be seen in Fig. 9e.29 However, the poor conductivity of MOF materials hinders their application. Hence, MOF composites are proposed to offset the weaknesses of MOFs.
In terms of 0D MOF composites, pseudo-capacitors are generally electrodes composed of metal oxides such as SnO2 QDs owing to their ideal of optical and electrical properties, low cost and chemical durability.200,201 Thus, Tang et al. used structural characterizations to show the distribution of SnO2 QDs in ZIF-8. Due to the combination of the porous configuration of the MOF with SnO2 QDs, the utilization of the active material was maximized, leading to a high specific capacitance. When the scanning rate of SnO2 QDs@ZIF-8 was 5 mV s−1, the maximum specific capacitance reached 931 F g−1, exceeding that of 241 F g−1 for SnO2 QDs and 99 F g−1 for ZIF-8. Simultaneously, SnO2 QDs@ZIF-8 exhibited a good stable cycling performance over 500 cycles. Owing to the oxidation and reduction of the transition metal, each cyclic voltammetry had a clear redox reaction. Furthermore, the porous structure of ZIF-8 facilitated the simple back and forth diffusion of ions during charging and discharging. In comparison with pure ZIF-8 and SnO2 QDs, the SnO2 QDs@ZIF-8 electrode exhibited superior supercapacitance. This fine pseudo-capacitance was mostly due to the synergistic electrochemical performance of ZIF-8 and SnO2 QDs. Since ZIF-8 has intersecting 3D configuration characteristics, large surface area and large pore size, the SnO2 QDs could be well dispersed. In general, porous structures can facilitate the transfer of electrons. Tang et al. also examined the chronopotentiometry curves of ZIF-8 with electrodes of SnO2 QDs and SnO2 QDs@ZIF-8 at a current density of 5 mA cm−2.111 The oxidation–reduction reaction or adsorption/desorption at the boundary surface of certain potentials led to pseudocapacitance behavior in the electrodes, which did not show any feasible linear change in the charging/discharging cutaway views.202 Obviously, the capacitive characteristics of the SnO2 QDs@ZIF-8 electrode were superior to that of the ZIF-8 and SnO2 QDS electrodes. The long-term stable performance of the SnO2 QDs@ZIF-8 electrode was also examined at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1. In this case, the capacitance dropped sharply after 50 cycles, then remained nearly steady with slight variations up to 500 cycles. In the electrochemical process, the capacitance reduction in the original stage is probably a result of certain irreversible reactions. Nevertheless, it exhibited excellent specific capacitive and stable cycling performances.111
In the field of MOF/1D composites, a hybrid material of carbon NTs and Mn-MOF was fabricated and employed as a supercapacitor electrode material based on Mn by Lin and colleagues. The low capacitance of 72.9 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 in CNTs was within the 50–100 F g−1 range, which was limited by the double layer capacitive performance with no faradic reactions.203 Although the CV curve of Mn-MOF was similar to that of CNTs@Mn-MOF, due to the poor conductive performance of MOFs, a comparatively small area corresponded to low capacitance. However, after CNTs were incorporated in Mn-MOF, an intrinsic enhancement in conductive performance and inherent enhancement in specific capacitance were observed, where pure Mn-MOF exhibited a specific capacitance of 43.2 F g−1, which increased to 203.1 F g−1 for CNTs@Mn-MOF. The CV curves at different scanning rates ranging from 5 to 100 mV s−1 presented approximately rectangular characteristics, suggesting the approximate ideal pseudocapacitance properties of the electrode. All the curves were symmetrical, indicating ideal the pseudocapacity of the rapid charge–discharge cycles. Moreover, the symmetric supercapacitor based on CNTs@Mn-MOF showed a remarkable power density and prominent stable performance after 3000 cycles with the original capacitance remaining at 88%. Lin et al. opened a new direction in the development of supercapacitor materials based on Mn and offered a valid way to enhance the capacitive performance of MOF materials.46 Xu et al. used zinc acetate, 8-hydroxyquinoline, and aniline to develop carbonized ZMP composites for high performance supercapacitors. The specific capacitance of MOF/PANI (ZMP-0.04) reached 477 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. The carbonized MOF had excellent electrical conductivity, which enhanced the electrical conductivity of the carbonized MOF/PANI composite and improve the electrochemical capacity and activity of the PANI electrolyte. Additionally, the carbonized MOFs played a crucial part in enhancing the performance of the electrode materials.204 Wang et al. interweaved ZIF-67 crystals coated on carbon cloth with PANI via electrochemical polymerization, and they designed and fabricated supercapacitors based on the MOFs and other electrochemical devices. A remarkable regional capacitance of 2146 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1 was exhibited by PANI-ZIF-67-CC, where deposited PANI gave the conductive porous electrode flexibility and reduced the bulk electric resistance of the MOF.29
For the application of 2D MOF composite in supercapacitors, Ni-MOFs@GO139 ZMP-0.04 (ref. 204) are good representatives. For example, MOF/GA composites have the benefits of high capacitance, fast charge–discharge speed, and reliable stable cycling performance. At a scanning speed of 20 A g−1, their specific capacitive performance was as high as 353 F g−1, and after 10000 cycles, the retention rate was 74.4%.142 Zhou and colleagues reported a series of novel Ni-MOFs. The synthetic conditions had a significant influence on the morphology, porous structure and electrochemical properties of the Ni-MOFs. The capacitive performance was successfully enhanced using the in situ mixture of Ni-MOFs@GO. The pseudo capacitive performance of 1457.7 F g−1 for Ni-MOFs was obtained with HCl at 180 °C as a modulator, which increased to 2192.4 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 for Ni-MOFs@GO with 3 wt% GO content. This is because the specific capacitance was greatly enhanced when Ni-MOF was deposited on GO nanosheets. Besides, the preservation of its initial capacitive performance increased at 10 A g−1 from 83.5% to 85.1% after 3000 cycles. The excellent stable performance was attributed to the hydrolysis of nickel hydroxides. The brilliant capacitance was ascribed to the distinct flower-like structure and desirable synergistic effect between Ni-MOFs and GO nanosheets. Thus, the rapid diffusion and transportation of ions with access to electroactive sites and the prominent transportation of electrons occurred the Ni-MOF-HCl-180 and GO nanosheets.139 In addition, as discussed above, the Cu-MOF/RGO composite (Fig. 9f) was not only be employed as a sensor, but also a fascinating supercapacitor, which offered a high charge storage efficiency of 685.33 F g−1 at 1.6 A g−1, high energy of 137.066 W h kg−1, power density of 4800.04 W kg−1 and prominent rate ability at 8 A g−1, retaining 71.01% of its original capacitance owing to the positive synergistic effect in the Cu-MOF materials and RGO nanosheets.196
With regard to 3D MOF composites, an Ni3(NO3)2(OH)4@Zr-MOF composite with a flower-like morphology was fabricated via a solvothermal approach, which has potential application in supercapacitors. At a scan rate of 5 mV s−1, Ni3(NO3)2(OH)4@Zr-MOF exhibited a higher specific capacitance of 992 F g−1 than the 134 F g−1 for Zr-MOF and 753 F g−1 for Ni3(NO3)2(OH)4. Furthermore, the Ni3(NO3)2(OH)4@Zr-MOF electrode exhibited excellent capacitance and stable cycling performance after 3000 cycles. Besides, the charge transfer resistance of this MOF composite electrode was lower than that of the bare Ni3(NO3)2(OH)4 electrode, indicating its superior electrochemical performance. Furthermore, the high specific capacitance of Ni3(NO3)2(OH)4@Zr-MOF was attributed to the porosity of Zr-MOF, which can maximize the utilization of the Ni3(NO3)2(OH)4 active material and charge transfer at the interface, offering short diffusion paths for ions.205
3.4 MOF composites for batteries
Compared with supercapacitors and fuel cells, batteries have found widespread application and are commercially established. Batteries are self-sufficient units that can store chemical energy and convert it into electricity to offer various applications.199 Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are widely employed in portable electronic products due to their long cycle life, high voltage, abundant energy and high power density.208 MOF composites for LIBs and lithium sulfur batteries (Li–S batteries) will be discussed in this section and summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 MOF composites for batteries including LIBs and Li–S batteriesa




MOF composite
Functional materials
MOF
Type of battery
Reversible capacity/mA h g−1
Current density/Cb
Cycle number
Voltage vs. Li/Li+/V
Ref.





a GNS = graphene sheets.
b 1C = 1675 mA g−1.





Fe-MOF/RGO
RGO
Fe-MOF
LIBs
1010.3
0.3
200
0.01–3.0

36



Fe3O4@MOF
Fe3O4
HKUST-1
LIBs
∼1001.5
0.06
100
0.01–3.0

158



SnO2@MIL-101(Cr)
SnO2
MIL-101(Cr)
LIBs
∼510
0.1
100
0.02–2.5

60



S@S-ZIF-8@CNTs
CNTs, S
ZIF-8
Li–S
1104
0.1
100
1.7–2.8

129



S@MOF-525(Cu)
S
MOF-525(Cu)
Li–S
700
0.5
200
1.5–3.0

48



MOF-5@CNTs
CNTs
MOF-5
Li–S
540
0.5
50
1.5–3.0

129



S@HKUST-1/CNT
CNT
HKUST-1
Li–S
880
2
40
1.7–2.8

8



GNS-MIL-101(Cr)/S
GNS
MIL-101(Cr)
Li–S
809
0.8
134
1.0–3.0

54






3.4.1 Lithium-ion batteries. 
To date, LIBs are widely employed in portable electrical equipment, mixed electric vehicles and power grids due to their benefits of good environmental performance, high energy density, light weight and long cycle life, giving them excellent advantages as energy storage devices.36,209–211 In addition, LIBs are highly commercialized for use in portable electronic equipment due to their high energy density.212 However, graphite, the current anode material in commercial LIBs, has achieved close to its theoretical limit (372 mA h g−1), and thus, the search for alternative anode materials has become urgent.36 The use of MOFs as novel potential electrode materials in LIBs has attracted remarkable attention. Nevertheless, the poor electrical conductive performance of MOFs leads inferior cycling performances in LIBs.138 Hence, MOF composites have aroused interest for application of LIBs, which overcome the limitations of MOFs.
The 0D MOF composite SnO2@MIL-101(Cr)60 is a potential LIB material, which showed both high cyclability and speed capability at 0.1C with a reversible capacity of around 510 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. MIL-101(Cr), acting as protecting shell for electrochemical stability, combined with the high specific capacity of SnO2 of 790 mA h g−1 and low voltage plateau enhanced the battery performance.
Shen and co-workers synthesized Fe-MOF/RGO composites (2D) for application in reversible Li+ storage. The initial charging and discharging capacities of the Fe-MOF, Fe-MOF/RGO (5%) and Fe-MOF/RGO (10%) composites were 2213/786, 2055.9/891.1 and 1889.9/750 mA h g−1, corresponding to 35.5%, 43.3% and 39.7% original coulombic efficiency, respectively. The original coulombic efficiency of the Fe-MOF/RGO (5%) composites was the highest. This is because there was sufficient RGO coating on Fe-MOF to avoid immediate contact between the electrode and electrolyte. The loss of Li was caused by excess RGO via the reaction of Li with the functional groups of RGO. In addition, the fabricated Fe-MOF/RGO (5%) composite was employed as anode materials in LIBs which showed superior Li storage with a reversible capacity of 1010.3 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles, and a similar trend was observed when the Fe-MOF/RGO composite cathode and anode achieved peaks during the 2nd to 5th cycles. This indicates that the composites have high reversibility and RGO has the potential to improve of the cycling stability and structural performance of materials. In general, the improvement in the electrochemical performance of Fe-MOF/RGO may be due to the synergistic effect between the MOFs, with superior theoretical capacities and RGO with high electrical conductive performance.36
Also, Feng et al. demonstrated the synthesis of Fe3O4@MOF core–shell composites (3D) as anode materials in LIBs. In the 100th cycle, Fe3O4@MOF exhibited a high discharge capacity of 1001.5 mA h g−1, which was much higher than that of pure Fe3O4 with 696 mA h g−1 and a charge capacity of 993.7 mA h g−1, showing brilliant reversible capacity. Furthermore, the current density was as high as 2 A g−1, with an enhancement in current density from 0.1 to 2 A g−1 after 70 cycles, providing a reversible capacity of ∼429 mA h g−1. During all the cycles, Fe3O4@MOF exhibited superior discharging–charging properties to that of pure Fe3O4 owing to the alleviation of volume expansion in Fe3O4 due to the HKUST-1 buffer layer.158


3.4.2 Lithium-sulfur batteries. 
Li–S batteries have been demonstrated as one of the most promising systems for the next generation of high-energy rechargeable lithium batteries due to their theoretical specific capacity of 1680 mA h g−1 and energy density of 2600 W h kg−1.213 Besides, the theoretical energy density of Li–S batteries is much higher than that of traditional LIBs, which are considered as the next-generation batteries for the storage of electrochemical energy,214,215 such as S@ZIF-8,216 Ni-MOF/S217 and GNS-MIL-101(Cr)/S.54 However, the low electrical conductive performance of elemental sulfur and the rapid capacitance degradation of polysulfide dissolved in the electrolyte significantly restrict their practical applications.218,219
In the field of MOF/1D composites, S@S-ZIF-8@CNTs129 and HKUST-1/CNT8 both exhibit cycling stability for application in Li–S batteries. HKUST-1/CNT not only possesses stable capacity, electrical conductivity of confined active sulfur and tolerance to large volume changes during lithiation/delithiation, but also enables the electrode to have great flexibility and integrity through the CNTs interpenetrated in the MOF.8
With regard to 2D composites, MOF@GO was fabricated as a separator for Li–S batteries, serving as an efficient ionic sieve for the migration of polysulfides to the anode, which had little impact on the transfer of Li+ ions in the separator and its structure was stable and reliable under electrochemical conditions. Besides, it exhibited a sustainable enhancement in cycling stability and inferior capacity attenuation rate.220
For 3D MOF composites, S@MOF was applied in high-performance Li–S batteries, as reported by Chen et al. (Fig. 10f). The capacity of S@MOF-525(2H) decreased rapidly during cycling, while the capacitive performance of S@MOF-525(FeCl) and S@MOF-525(Cu) only decreased by 0.09% and 0.07% per cycle, respectively, after the 10th cycle. S@MOF-525-(FeCl) and S@MOF-525(Cu) showed both higher reversible capacitive performances and better ability in recovering capacity, with the maintenance of capacities over 400 mA h g−1 at the charge/discharge rate of 5C. After 150 cycles, the 2.1 V platform of S@MOF-525(Cu) decreased by merely about 0.1 V, suggesting its better electrochemical performance. Overall, the S@MOF-525(Cu) cathode displayed the greatest performance among the reported sulfur/MOFs composite electrode materials. After 200 cycles, its reversible capacity at 0.5C was approximately 700 mA h g−1. All these results demonstrate its potential applications in Li–S batteries.48
 Fig. 10  (a) Cyclic voltammetry curves of Fe3O4@MOF at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (b) Cyclic voltammograms at 0.1 mV s−1 for SnO2@MIL-101(Cr). (c) Schematic model of the S/MOF system in the discharge process. (d) Cycling performance for Li–S batteries. (e) Schematic of MOF@GO separators in Li–S batteries. (f) Cycle performance of S@MOF-525(Cu). (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 158 copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 60 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 221 copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 222 copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 220 copyright 2016, Nature Energy. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 

4. Summary and outlook
MOFs have received comprehensive attention over the past few decades due to their broad applications. However, their inherent defects such as poor conductivity and limited range of pore sizes have greatly impeded their full potential. Hence, MOF composites have been investigated and developed to compensate for the drawbacks of MOFs, in which the strong points of MOFs and a variety of functional materials can be combined efficiently. Furthermore, the fabrication of MOF-based composites is more likely to deal with the advantageous attributes that can be integrated and the weaknesses of individual components can be offset.
In this review, MOF composites were classified according to the dimensionality of the complex, and their compositions and applications were also discussed. As mentioned above, MOF composites have exhibited great impact in electrochemical applications, including catalysis, sensing, supercapacitance and batteries. Generally, MOF composites are divided into four types according to the complex, including MOF/0D, MOF/1D, MOF/2D and MOF/3D. In MOF/0D composites, the incorporation of NPs and QDs in MOFs is a significant approach to improving the performance of these materials. The liquid-phase synthesis method is an effective approach to incorporate ultrafine metal and oxide NPs into MOFs. The one-step solvothermal reduction method can enhance the synthesis efficiency and facilitate the easy preparation, the double-solvent method can avoid the aggregation of MNPs on the outer surface of the MOF, the colloidal deposition method can avoid the use of organic solvents and precursors which are costly, easy to react and sensitive to air, and the one-pot method for the synthesis of 0D MOF composites can reduce the cost of their large-scale preparation and achieve superior catalytic performances. Besides, MOFs play several roles, such as stabilizing and dispersing QDs. 0D MOF composites have numerous applications in sensing, photocatalysis and supercapacitance. In the case of 1D MOF composites, NRs, NTs and nanobelts are composited with MOFs. Typical representatives are ZnO NRs, which are used in photocatalytic applications, and CNTs for the fabrication of CNTs@Mn-MOF via a facile hydrothermal method for Mn-based supercapacitors as typical representatives, which can exclude the majority of restrictions of conventional electrode materials based on Mn. In addition, ZnO NRs serve as a template and offers Zn2+ ions to form ZIF-8. Accordingly, the self-template strategy can facilitate a new and wide field for the synthesis of core–shell heterostructure MOFs. For MOF/2D composites, a facile solvothermal method was successfully used to fabricate Fe-MOF/RGO and Ni-MOFs@GO composites, indicating that in situ mixtures of MOFs with conductive nanosheets through one-step solvothermal fabrication is a promising and environmentally friendly way to acquire suitable electrode materials for application in supercapacitors in industry. Nanocomposites of ZIF/GO were synthesized via a facile ultrasound method at ambient temperature, which can make chemical reactions easier to carry out and the resultants are more united than that obtained via solvothermal treatment. With regard to MOF/3D composites, core–shell composites and cubic composites are the typical representatives. Particularly, the versatile LBL assembly approach is employed to synthesize 3D MOF composite such as Fe3O4@MOF, which can finely control the MOF shell thickness. For instance, in 3D core–shell composites, the core can offer a surface for the reaction and the porous shell plays the role of a barrier layer to restrain the surface activation to aggregate with the adjacent core during the reaction. Besides, cubic composites such as MOF-525(Cu) are used as sulfur hosts in Li–S batteries. All these synthetic approaches and strategies have great potential to be applied in research in various fields for the fabrication of MOFs and functional materials and electrochemical applications.
Although MOF composites have made great contributions to electrochemical applications, many obstacles still need to be overcome.
(1) In the synthesis of MOF composites, the accurate control of complex size and position is especially difficult. The majority of synthetic methods have inherent restrictions, need organic solvents that are sensitive and costly and generally multiple steps are required. Thus, new types of synthetic approaches are urgently needed to simplify the synthetic steps and to make the obtained composites more uniform.
(2) Most of the MOF composites discussed above are combinations of MOFs and single materials. Hence, multiple materials or even MOFs combined with other MOFs deserve further research.
(3) The applications of MOF composites are not just limited to electrochemistry, they may also be promising materials for the magnetic solid-phase extraction of analyte traces from environmental samples and for drug delivery.
(4) Importantly, various functional materials with 0D, 1D and 2D structures exist, which can be combined with MOFs, thus enabling MOF composites to have wide applications in electrochemistry. However, despite the numerous 3D MOFs, few 3D functional materials have been combined with various MOFs, and their electrochemical applications rarely investigated. Thus, there is extensive scope for the combination of 3D functional materials with MOFs.
(5) Finally, the progress of MOF composites should not be dependent on MOF materials, and both MOFs and composites should be given research considerations.
In summary, MOF composites may shed light on overcoming synthetic challenges and developing novel composites with diverse applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Abbreviations

MOFsMetal–organic frameworks
PCPsPorous coordination polymers
0DMOF/zero-dimension
1DMOF/one-dimension
2DMOF/two-dimension
3DMOF/three-dimension
NPsNanoparticles
QDsQuantum dots
GQDsGraphene quantum dots
PCPropylene carbonate
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
MNPsMetal nanoparticles
RGOReduced graphene oxide
GOGraphene oxide
LBLLayer-by-layer
TEMTransmission electron microscope
HRTEMHigh resolution transmission electron microscopy
TCPPTetrakis(4-carboxyl)-21H,23H-porphyrin
DMFDimethylformamide
MPTSMercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane
TCEPTris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine hydrochloride
AAAscorbic acid
CD/PVPColloidal deposition with PVP as protecting agent
IMPImpregnating
DPSHDeposition–precipitation with sodium hydroxide
CD/glucoseColloidal deposition with glucose as protecting agent
CCRConcentration-controlled reduction
CVIChemical vapor infiltration
MAAMercaptoacetic acid
BFTEMBright-field TEM
MesMOF-1Mesoporous MOF
FeTCPPIron(III) meso-5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin chloride
SAStreptavidin
Mg NCsMagnesium nanocrystals
MgCp2Bis(cyclopentadienyl) magnesium
PXRDPowder X-ray diffraction
NRsNanorods
MWCNTsMulti-walled carbon nanotubes
PANIPolyaniline
FTOFluorine-doped tin oxide
PEDOT NTsPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) nanotubes
SEMScanning electron microscopy
GAsGraphene aerogels
MnTD[(Terpy)Mn(μ-O)2Mn](terpy)]3+
HRPHorseradish peroxidase
SPCEScreen-printed carbon electrode
BETBrunauer–Emmett–Teller
CPCarbon paper
KSCKenaf stem-derived porous carbon
BDC1,4-Benzene dicarboxylate
ABDC2-Amino benzene-1,4-dicarboxylate
CVCyclic voltammetry
DADopamine
LIBsLithium-ion batteries
Li–S batteriesLithium sulfur batteries

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC-21671170, 21673203, and 21201010), the Top-notch Academic Programs Project of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (TAPP), Program for New Century Excellent Talents of the University in China (NCET-13-0645), the Six Talent Plan (2015-XCL-030), and Qinglan Project. We also acknowledge the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.
References
L. Wang, Y. Han, X. Feng, J. Zhou, P. Qi and B. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 361–381 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Salunkhe, Y. V. Kaneti, J. Kim, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2796–2806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gadipelli and Z. X. Guo, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 69, 1–60 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6816–6854 RSC .
S. L. James, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 276–288 RSC .
O. M. Yaghi, M. O'Keeffe, N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi and J. Kim, Nature, 2003, 423, 705–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, S. Li, S. He, Y. Bai and L. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15064–15073 RSC .
Y. Mao, G. Li, Y. Guo, Z. Li, C. Liang, X. Peng and Z. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ge, L. Wang, V. Rudolph and Z. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 25360–25366 RSC .
J. Aguilera Sigalat and D. Bradshaw, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 267–291 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Zhu and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5468–5512 RSC .

  (a) S. L. Li and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1656–1683 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Ma, J. Wen, Q. Li and Q. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14896–14902 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, X. Jiang, Y. Huang, Z. Guo and L. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5590–5599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Banerjee, H. Furukawa, D. Britt, C. Knobler, M. O. Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3875–3877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rodenas, I. Luz, G. Prieto, B. Seoane, H. Miro, A. Corma, F. Kapteijn, F. X. Llabrés i Xamena and J. Gascon, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 48–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Q. Zou, H. Sakurai and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2542–2546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Nasalevich, R. Becker, E. V. Ramos Fernandez, S. Castellanos, S. L. Veber, M. V. Fedin, F. Kapteijn, J. N. H. Reek, J. I. van der Vlugt and J. Gascon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 364–375 RSC .
R. Q. Zou, H. Sakurai, S. Han, R. Q. Zhong and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8402–8403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Ning, B. Tian, L. M. Tan, Z. Ding, T. S. Herng, J. Ding and K. P. Loh, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 9892–9897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang and W. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5982–5993 RSC .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, D. Van Richard P. and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1105–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zheng, H. Xue and H. Pang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 373, 2–21 CrossRef CAS .
U. Resch Genger, M. Grabolle, S. Cavaliere-Jaricot, R. Nitschke and T. Nann, Nat. Methods, 2008, 5, 763–775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu and Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5819–5825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aijaz, A. Karkamkar, Y. J. Choi, N. Tsumori, E. Rönnebro, T. Autrey, H. Shioyama and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13926–13929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Railey, Y. Song, T. Liu and Y. Li, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 96, 385–394 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, S. Zheng, H. Tang, X. Guo, H. Xue and H. Pang, Energy Storage Materials, 2017, 9, 11–30 CrossRef .
W. Zhan, Q. Kuang, J. Zhou, X. Kong, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1926–1933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Feng, L. Ren, Q. Piao, J. Zhong, Y. Wang, H. Li, Y. Chen and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4920–4923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zheng, X. Li, B. Yan, Q. Hu, Y. Xu, X. Xiao, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602733 CrossRef .
B. Tian, G. H. Ning, Q. Gao, L. M. Tan, W. Tang, Z. Chen, C. Su and K. P. Loh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31067–31075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, B. Zheng, Z. Liu, C. Tan, J. Liu, B. Chen, H. Li, J. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Fan, W. Zhang, Z. Guo, F. Huo, Y. Yang, L. Xie, W. Huang and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8695–8701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, K. Jayaramulu, T. K. Maji and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4947–4949 RSC .
S. Liu, L. Sun, F. Xu, J. Zhang, C. Jiao, F. Li, Z. Li, S. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Jiang, H. Zhou, L. Yang and C. Schick, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 818 RSC .
C. H. Kuo, Y. Tang, L. Y. Chou, B. T. Sneed, C. N. Brodsky, Z. Zhao and C. K. Tsung, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14345–14348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, C. Zhao, Z. Sun, Y. Lin, L. Chen, D. Wang and C. Shen, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 30763–30768 RSC .
H. Pang, X. Li, B. Li, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhao, W. Y. Lai and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11689–11697 RSC .
M. Deng, X. Bo and L. Guo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 815, 198–209 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, G. Lu, C. Cui, Y. Liu, S. Li, W. Yan, C. Xing, Y. R. Chi, Y. Yang and F. Huo, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4056–4060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, H. Chen and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14752–14755 RSC .
M. Imperor Clerc, D. Bazin, M. D. Appay, P. Beaunier and A. Davidson, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1813–1821 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pang, Y. Zhang, T. Cheng, W. Y. Lai and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16012–16019 RSC .
H. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Tang and H. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13362–13369 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zheng, B. Li, Y. Tang, Q. Li, H. Xue and H. Pang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13270–13276 RSC .
L. H. Wee, N. Janssens, S. P. Sree, C. Wiktor, E. Gobechiya, R. A. Fischer, C. E. A. Kirschhock and J. A. Martens, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2056 RSC .
Y. Zhang, B. Lin, Y. Sun, X. Zhang, H. Yang and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 58100–58106 RSC .
W. Zhang, Y. Tan, Y. Gao, J. Wu, J. Hu, A. Stein and B. Tang, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2016, 46, 441–450 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, B. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Cui, Z. Wang, B. Chen and G. Qian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20999–21004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ke, L. G. Qiu, Y. P. Yuan, X. Jiang and J. F. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9497 RSC .
Y. Zhan and S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5650–5651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sindoro, Y. Feng, S. Xing, H. Li, J. Xu, H. Hu, C. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Shen and H. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9898–9902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, J. Chen, J. Liu, J. Liang, A. Du, W. Zhang, Z. Zhu, S. C. Smith, M. Jaroniec, G. Q. Lu and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20116–20119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu and Y. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2213–2221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, S. Wang, R. Liang, Z. Li, Z. Shi and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13509–13512 RSC .
A. Aijaz and Q. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1400–1411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Vayssieres, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2004, 1, 1 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, X. Li, S. Zheng, J. Shao, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1600798 CrossRef .
T. Zeng, X. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Niu and Y. Cai, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 2350–2357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Esken, H. Noei, Y. Wang, C. Wiktor, S. Turner, G. Van Tendeloo and R. A. Fischer, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5907 RSC .
B. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Cui, Y. Yang, Z. Wang and G. Qian, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 84662–84665 RSC .
D. Astruc, E. Boisselier and C. Ornelas, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 1857–1959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. You, S. Yang, B. Ding and H. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2880–2904 RSC .
Y. Xu, Q. Li, H. Xue and H. Pang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 376, 292–318 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, P. Gu, S. Zheng, M. Zheng, H. Pang and H. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 19078–19085 RSC .
T. Tsuruoka, H. Kawasaki, H. Nawafune and K. Akamatsu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3788–3791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6707–6713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cui, J. Wu, J. Li and H. Ju, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 10635–10641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsunoyama, H. Sakurai, Y. Negishi and T. Tsukuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9374–9375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Delannoy, N. El Hassan, A. Musi, N. N. Le To, J. M. Krafft and C. Louis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22471–22478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Tsai, Y. D. Lin, W. T. Fu and S. D. Lin, Gold Bull., 2007, 40, 184–191 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zanella, J. Catal., 2004, 222, 357–367 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zanella, S. Giorgio, C. R. Henry and C. Louis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7634–7642 CrossRef CAS .
M. Comotti, C. Della Pina, R. Matarrese and M. Rossi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5812–5815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Tang and H. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13362–13369 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma and H. C. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 44–53 RSC .
Q. L. Zhu, J. Li and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10210–10213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Müller, S. Hermes, K. Kähler, M. W. E. van den Berg, M. Muhler and R. a. Fischer, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4576–4587 CrossRef .
M. Müller, X. Zhang, Y. Wang and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5, 119–121 RSC .
P. Falcaro, R. Ricco, A. Yazdi, I. Imaz, S. Furukawa, D. Maspoch, R. Ameloot, J. D. Evans and C. J. Doonan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 237–254 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guan, Y. Hu, Y. Wang, H. Li, Z. Xu, T. Zhang, P. Wu, S. Zhang, G. Xiao, W. Ji, L. Li, M. Zhang, Y. Fan, L. Li, B. Zheng, W. Zhang, W. Huang and F. Huo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 2–6 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, T. Meng, Y. Fan, C. Chen, Z. Guo, H. Wang and Y. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 524, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Müller, S. Turner, O. I. Lebedev, Y. Wang, G. van Tendeloo and R. A. Fischer, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 2011, 1876–1887 CrossRef .
Y. Z. Chen, Y. X. Zhou, H. Wang, J. Lu, T. Uchida, Q. Xu, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2062–2069 CrossRef CAS .
P. Z. Li, K. Aranishi and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3173 RSC .
Y. K. Park, S. B. Choi, H. J. Nam, D. Y. Jung, H. C. Ahn, K. Choi, H. Furukawa and J. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3086–3088 RSC .
D. Esken, X. Zhang, O. I. Lebedev, F. Schröder and R. A. Fischer, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1314–1319 RSC .
M. Sabo, A. Henschel, H. Fröde, E. Klemm and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3827–3832 RSC .
M. Yadav and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3327–3329 RSC .
M. Zhao, K. Yuan, Y. Wang, G. Li, J. Guo, L. Gu, W. Hu, H. Zhao and Z. Tang, Nature, 2016, 539, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ling, J. Lei, L. Zhang and H. Ju, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 3957–3963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Lim, J. W. Yoon, K. Y. Ryu and M. P. Suh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9814–9817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schröder, D. Esken, M. Cokoja, M. W. E. van den Berg, O. I. Lebedev, G. Van Tendeloo, B. Walaszek, G. Buntkowsky, H. Limbach, B. Chaudret and R. a. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6119–6130 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wei, S. Han, D. A. Walker, P. E. Fuller and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7435–7439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Martis, K. Mori, K. Fujiwara, W. Ahn and H. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 22805–22810 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 RSC .
J. T. Hupp and K. R. Poeppelmeler, Science, 2005, 309, 2008–2009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aijaz, A. Karkamkar, Y. J. Choi, N. Tsumori, E. Rönnebro, T. Autrey, H. Shioyama and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13926–13929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dan Hardi, C. Serre, T. Frot, L. Rozes, G. Maurin, C. Sanchez and G. Férey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10857–10859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, D. Sun, Y. Chen, R. Huang, Z. Ding, X. Fu and Z. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3364–3367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, R. Wu, J. Zou, T. Zhang, S. Zhang, Z. Zhang, X. Hu, Y. Yan and X. Ling, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 116, 81–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ling, J. Lei, L. Zhang and H. Ju, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 3957–3963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zlotea, R. Campesi, F. Cuevas, E. Leroy, P. Dibandjo, C. Volkringer, T. Loiseau, G. Férey and M. Latroche, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2991–2997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, L. Chang, C. Bai, L. Chen, R. Luque and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5019–5023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Michalet, Science, 2005, 307, 538–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Alivisatos, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 47–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Somers, M. G. Bawendi and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 579 RSC .
F. Chen and D. Gerion, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1827–1832 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yang, J. Y. Choi, H. K. Chae, J. H. Cho, K. S. Nahm and C. R. Park, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1893–1897 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uemura, N. Yanai and S. Kitagawa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1228 RSC .
D. Buso, J. Jasieniak, M. D. H. Lay, P. Schiavuta, P. Scopece, J. Laird, H. Amenitsch, A. J. Hill and P. Falcaro, Small, 2012, 8, 80–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, J. Wu, W. Zhang, Y. Tan, J. Zhao and B. Tang, Mater. Lett., 2014, 128, 208–211 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, J. Hu, M. Deng, H. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Hu, H. L. Jiang, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Xie and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4783–4788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Esken, S. Turner, C. Wiktor, S. B. Kalidindi, G. Van Tendeloo and R. A. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16370–16373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Shinde and V. K. Pillai, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 12522–12528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Biswal, D. B. Shinde, V. K. Pillai and R. Banerjee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10556 RSC .
S. J. Qin and B. Yan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 272, 510–517 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, T. Wang, J. An, X. Li, L. Zhang, L. Li, G. Li, X. Wu, Z. Su and C. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 3259–3263 RSC .
S. T. Meek, J. A. Greathouse and M. D. Allendorf, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 249–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Tanabe and S. M. Cohen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 498–519 RSC .
D. Zhao, X. Wan, H. Song, L. Hao, Y. Su and Y. Lv, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 197, 50–57 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, H. J. Son, O. K. Farha, G. P. Wiederrecht and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 955–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Li, Y. J. Tang, S. L. Li, S. R. Zhang, Z. H. Dai, L. Si and Y. Q. Lan, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 1080–1085 RSC .
M. Anbia and V. Hoseini, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 191, 326–330 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Feng, L. Ren, Q. Piao, J. Zhong, Y. Wang, H. Li, Y. Chen and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4920–4923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Guo, Y. Zhu, Y. Y. Yan, Y. L. Min, J. C. Fan, Q. J. Xu and H. Yun, J. Power Sources, 2016, 316, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, J. Zhou and Z. Lin, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 146–150 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, Z. Lin, Z. Feng, L. Lin and J. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12546–12550 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sugikawa, Y. Furukawa and K. Sada, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3132–3134 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, W. Zhao, M. Zou, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Xu, H. Wu and A. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–11 Search PubMed .
S. Sohrabi, S. Dehghanpour and M. Ghalkhani, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 3624–3639 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar, K. Vellingiri, K. H. Kim, R. J. C. Brown and M. J. Manos, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 253, 251–265 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Huang, C. W. Kung, Y. Te Liao, S. Y. Kao, M. Cheng, T. H. Chang, J. Henzie, H. R. Alamri, Z. A. Alothman, Y. Yamauchi, K. C. Ho and K. C. W. Wu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
K. P. Prasanth, P. Rallapalli, M. C. Raj, H. C. Bajaj and R. V. Jasra, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 7594–7601 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiang, Z. Hu, D. Cao, W. Yang, J. Lu, B. Han and W. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 491–494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, Y. Zhu, Y. Yan, Y. Min, J. Fan, Q. Xu and H. Yun, J. Power Sources, 2016, 316, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2160 RSC .
X. Xiao, S. Zheng, X. Li, G. Zhang, X. Guo, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 5234–5239 RSC .
Y. Jin, C. Zhao, Z. Sun, Y. Lin, L. Chen, D. Wang and C. Shen, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 30763–30768 RSC .
Y. Zhou, Z. Mao, W. Wang, Z. Yang and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28904–28916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bonakala, A. Lalitha, J. E. Shin, F. Moghadam, R. Semino, H. B. Park and G. Maurin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 33619–33629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, M. Hassan, X. Bo and L. Guo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 801, 373–380 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Y. Yan, Z. Cai, S. Lin and X. Hu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701548 CrossRef .
A. A. Ibrahim, A. Lin, F. Zhang, K. M. AbouZeid and M. S. El Shall, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 469–480 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tanhaei, A. R. Mahjoub and V. Safarifard, Mater. Lett., 2018, 227, 318–321 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, L. Yu, F. Xiao, X. You, C. Yang and J. Cheng, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 724, 625–632 CrossRef CAS .
C. Petit, B. Mendoza and T. J. Bandosz, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 15302–15309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Tan, Y. Gao, J. Wu, J. Hu, A. Stein and B. Tang, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2016, 46, 441–450 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, H. Luo and H. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 40435–40438 RSC .
S. Furukawa, K. Hirai, K. Nakagawa, Y. Takashima, R. Matsuda, T. Tsuruoka, M. Kondo, R. Haruki, D. Tanaka, H. Sakamoto, S. Shimomura, O. Sakata and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1766–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, C. Deng, D. Qi, C. Liu, J. Liu, X. Zhang and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1377–1382 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, S. Kowarik, F. Schreiber, M. Paulus, M. Tolan, C. Sternemann, F. Evers, D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer and C. Wöll, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15118–15119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer and C. Wöll, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5038–5041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, B. Zhu, F. Peng, X. Yu, Y. Jia, J. Wang, L. Kong, Z. Jin, T. Luo and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7686–7689 RSC .
X. Chen, N. Ding, H. Zang, H. Yeung, R. Zhao, C. Cheng, J. Liu and T. W. D. Chan, J. Chromatogr. A, 2013, 1304, 241–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, Q. Liu, Y. Xie and C. Deng, Talanta, 2018, 190, 298–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Xiong, L. Peng, Y. Gan, Y. Zhao, J. Shen, J. Qian, L. Zhang and W. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16338–16347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Lee, W. Cho and M. Oh, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 221–223 RSC .
X. Sun, G. Gao, D. Yan and C. Feng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 405, 52–59 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Li, F. Ke, L. G. Qiu, X. Jiang, Y. M. Wang and X. Y. Tian, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 3554 RSC .
K. M. Choi, D. Kim, B. Rungtaweevoranit, C. A. Trickett, J. T. D. Barmanbek, A. S. Alshammari, P. Yang and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 356–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Koh, A. G. Wong-Foy and A. J. Matzger, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6162 RSC .
T. Zhou, Y. Du, A. Borgna, J. Hong, Y. Wang, J. Han, W. Zhang and R. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3229–3234 RSC .
Z. M. Zhang, T. Zhang, C. Wang, Z. Lin, L. Long and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3197–3200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, K. Wang, T. Lei, T. Xiao and L. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2018, 216, 243–247 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, C. Qu, W. Guo, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1702891, 1–39 Search PubMed .
L. Shen, L. Huang, S. Liang, R. Liang, N. Qin and L. Wu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 2546–2549 RSC .
H. Mistry, A. S. Varela, S. Kühl, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16009 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Guo, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2877–2887 CrossRef .
B. Nohra, H. El Moll, L. M. Rodriguez Albelo, P. Mialane, J. Marrot, C. Mellot-Draznieks, M. O'Keeffe, R. Ngo Biboum, J. Lemaire, B. Keita, L. Nadjo and A. Dolbecq, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13363–13374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Freire, D. M. Fernandes, M. Nunes and V. K. Abdelkader, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 1703–1730 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, Q. Chang, H. Chen and M. Shao, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 198–219 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Li, P. Guo, H. Ma and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8497–8511 RSC .
M. Tahir, L. Pan, F. Idrees, X. Zhang, L. Wang, J. J. Zou and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 136–157 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
Y. Lee, J. Suntivich, K. J. May, E. E. Perry and Y. Shao Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 399–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tao, Y. Gao, N. Talreja, F. Guo, J. Texter, C. Yan and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7257–7284 RSC .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, Z. Liang, R. Zou and S. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2650–2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shao, Q. Chang, J.-P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Kang, Q. Zhu, X. Sun, J. Hu, J. Zhang, Z. Liu and B. Han, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 266–273 RSC .
M. Jahan, Z. Liu and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5363–5372 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Qin, D. Y. Du, W. Guan, X. J. Bo, Y. F. Li, L. P. Guo, Z. M. Su, Y. Y. Wang, Y. Q. Lan and H. C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7169–7177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, X. Li, F. Li, X. Lin, M. Tian, X. Long, X. An, Y. Fu, J. Jin and J. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 50–59 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhu, J. Ding, Y. Xu, J. Yang, Q. Xu and H. Pang, Small, 2018, 14, 1803576 CrossRef PubMed .
X. He, F. Yin and G. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 9713–9722 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, J. Du, H. Zhang and C. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 623–629 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, F. Yin, B. Chen and G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16168–16176 RSC .
K. Cho, S. H. Han and M. P. Suh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15301–15305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13925–13931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, H. Wang, D. Kong, K. Yan, P. C. Hsu, G. Zheng, H. Yao, Z. Liang, X. Sun and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, Q. Kuang, S. Yang, F. Xiao, S. Wang and L. Guo, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2300 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song, C. Gong, D. Su, Y. Shen, Y. Song and L. Wang, Anal. Methods, 2016, 8, 2290–2296 RSC .
J. Yang, H. Ye, F. Zhao and B. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20407–20414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, J. Zhuang, L. Nie, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, N. Gu, T. Wang, J. Feng, D. Yang, S. Perrett and X. Yan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 577–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saraf, R. Rajak and S. M. Mobin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16432–16445 RSC .
X. J. Zhang, F. Z. Su, D. M. Chen, Y. Peng, W. Y. Guo, C. S. Liu and M. Du, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 1843–1849 RSC .
S. Sundriyal, H. Kaur, S. K. Bhardwaj, S. Mishra, K. H. Kim and A. Deep, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 369, 15–38 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Jingling, R. Fengzhang, W. Guangxin, X. Yi, L. Yaqiong and W. Jiuba, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 11654–11661 CrossRef .
F. Li, J. Song, H. Yang, S. Gan, Q. Zhang, D. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 455602 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Jeong, W. R. Lee, D. W. Ryu, Y. Kim, W. J. Phang, E. K. Koh and C. S. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2329 RSC .
M. W. Xu, S. J. Bao and H. L. Li, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2006, 11, 372–377 CrossRef .
L. L. Zhang, R. Zhou and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5983 RSC .
S. Guo, Y. Zhu, Y. Yan, Y. Min, J. Fan, Q. Xu and H. Yun, J. Power Sources, 2016, 316, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Tan, W. Zhang and B. Tang, Ionics, 2016, 22, 2545–2551 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, G. Jia, Z. Li, C. Yuan, Y. Bai and D. Fu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1601241 CrossRef .
K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Park, Y. Zhang and J. K. Kang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Bloom, L. Trahey, A. Abouimrane, I. Belharouak, X. Zhang, Q. Wu, W. Lu, D. P. Abraham, M. Bettge, J. W. Elam, X. Meng, A. K. Burrell, C. Ban, R. Tenent, J. Nanda and N. Dudney, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 509–514 CrossRef CAS .
I. Belharouak, C. Johnson and K. Amine, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 983–988 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Fei, Q. Lin, B. Yuan, G. Chen, P. Xie, Y. Li, Y. Xu, S. Deng, S. Smirnov and H. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5330–5335 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, W. Zhang and F. Ren, Appl. Sci., 2017, 8, 22 CrossRef .
F. Y. Yi, R. Zhang, H. Wang, L. F. Chen, L. Han, H. L. Jiang and Q. Xu, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700187 CrossRef .
R. Van Noorden, Nature, 2013, 498, 416–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, C. Qu, W. Guo, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–39 Search PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Liu, M. Li, H. Huang, H. M. Xu, R. J. Hong and H. Shen, Optoelectron. Adv. Mater., Rapid Commun., 2010, 4, 1166–1169 CAS .
J. Zheng, J. Tian, D. Wu, M. Gu, W. Xu, C. Wang, F. Gao, M. H. Engelhard, J. G. Zhang, J. Liu and J. Xiao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2345–2352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei Seh, W. Li, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell, P. C. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1331 CrossRef PubMed .
E. S. Shin, K. Kim, S. H. Oh and W. Il Cho, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2004–2006 RSC .
S. Bai, X. Liu, K. Zhu, S. Wu and H. Zhou, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16094 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, R. Li, X. Fan, Y. Chen, R. Han, W. Li, J. Zheng, B. Wang and X. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2715 RSC .
R. Demir Cakan, M. Morcrette, F. Nouar, C. Davoisne, T. Devic, D. Gonbeau, R. Dominko, C. Serre, G. Férey and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16154–16160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Huan Pang	Huan Pang received his PhD degree from Nanjing University in 2011. Currently, he is a University Distinguished Professor in Yangzhou University. In the past 10 years, his group has been engaged in the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials, especially MOF-based materials. He is on the editorial board of FlatChem and Managing Editor of EnergyChem, Elsevier. He has published more than 200 papers in peer-reviewed journals including Nature Catalysis, Chemical Society Reviews, Energy Environ. Sci., and Advanced Materials, with 6000 citations (H-index = 45). His research interests include the development of inorganic nanostructures and their applications in nanoelectrochemistry with a focus on energy devices.

 	Scheme 1  Overview of MOF/composites and their electrochemical applications.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic illustration of MOF/composites including MOF/0D, MOF/1D, MOF/2D and MOF/3D.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Synthetic strategy for yolk–shell Co3O4@MOF nanocomposites. (b) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of yolk–shell Co3O4@MOFs. (c) Possible mechanism for the degradation of 4-CP in the Co3O4@MOFs nanoreactor. (d) HRTEM image showing the small ZnO NPs on the surface of ZIF-8. (e) Schematic illustration of the preparation of SnO2@MIL-101(Cr). (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 58 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 60 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the preparation of the GR-5/(Fe–P)n-MOF probe. (b) TEM images of Au/MIL-101(CD/PVP). (c) Schematic representation of the immobilization of AuNi nanoparticles in the MIL-101 matrix using DSM combined with the liquid-phase CCR strategy. (d) Fringe contrast from poorly crystallized TiO2 at the surface of the MOF-5 crystal (indicated by arrows). (e) Micrographs of Au/ZnO@MOF-5: bright-field TEM (BFTEM) image of the Au/ZnO@MOF-5 crystal showing the presence of large Au NPs and inset: rotationally averaged diffraction pattern showing only rings corresponding to the cubic structure of the Au NPs. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 67 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 43 copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 76 copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d-e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 82 copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis of FeTCPP@MOF-SA composite. (b) TEM image of Mg@SNU-90′b. (c) Schematic representation of the synthesis of Pt NPs inside the MIL-101 matrix using the double-solvent method. (d) Synthesis of Pd–NH2-MIL-125 composite. (e) TEM images of Pd–NH2-MIL-125. (f) Images of the MIL-100(Al)/Pd composite. (g) Incorporation of Pt NPs in MOFs through a kinetically modulated in situ one-step strategy. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 91 copyright 2012, WILEY-VCH. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 97 copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 102 copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 103 copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the synthetic procedure for QD@MOF-5. (b) Schematic representation of Pi detection based on the interactions among ZnO QDs, MOFs and Pi. (c) SEM image of ZnO QDs + MOFs. (d) TEM image of the synthesized Cu3(BTC)2@TiO2 core–shell structure. (e) Schematic of the structure and light harvesting of a QD@MOF composite formed by surface modification of a porphyrin-containing framework with CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs. (f) Schematic representation of the synthesis of GQDs@ZIF-8 composite, where the green spheres (left) represent GQDs (their location denoted as a red circle in the TEM image) situated inside the spherical-shaped ZIF-8 nanocrystals and the white circle represents the ZIF-8 nanocrystal (tilted image of ZIF-8 on the right). (g) Conceptual representation of the confined formation of GaN QDs in the ZIF-8 matrix. (h) Illustration of C-dots@MOF composites. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 110 copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH. (b and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 120 copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 copyright 2014, Advanced Materials. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 121 copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 115 copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 113 copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 122 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of ZnO@ZIF-8 NRs via the self-template strategy. (b) Schematic illustration of SERS-active MOFs embedding AuNRs. (c) Scheme of MOF-525-PEDOT NTs composite. (d) SEM images of CNTs@Mn-MOF in different views (white arrows indicate CNTs). (e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the sandwich structure of carbonized Zn-MOF/PANI composites. (f) SEM images of the carbon cloth fibers after coating with ZIF-67 and after electropolymerization of aniline. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 28 copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 128 copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 135 copyright 2016, Elsevier. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 29 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of electron and electrolyte conduction in MOF and MOF interwoven by PANI. (b) Schematic illustration of the formation process of nanosheet@MOF and metal NP-nanosheet@MOF hybrid structures. (c) Illustration of in situ hybrid of Ni-MOFs with GO nanosheets. (d) Illustration of the preparation of MIL-88(Fe)@GO. (e) TEM images of ZIF-8/GO composite fabricated from a ZIF-8/GO ratio of 3/7. (f) SEM micrographs of ZIF-8/GO. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 36 copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 32 copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 148 copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 147 copyright 2016, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TEM micrograph of the Fe3O4@MIL-100 core–shell magnetic microspheres. (b) Preparation of polystyrene@ZIF-8 core–shell and hollow ZIF-8 microspheres from carboxylate-terminated polystyrene spheres. (c) Schematic representation of the LBL synthesis strategy and a unit structure in HKUST-1. (d) Illustration of the fabrication process of PS@MOF core–shell MOF nanospheres via a step-by-step assembly strategy, preparation of hollow MOF nanospheres from core–shell MOF nanospheres and representative TEM image of an individual hollow nanosphere of MIL100-Fe MOF. (e) Structure of Ren-MOF coated on an Ag nanocube. (f) Microscope images of core–shell MOFs, IRMOF-3(shell)-@MOF-5(core). (g) Schematic illustration of S@MOF-525(M) synthesized through the melt-diffusion method at 155 °C under an Ar atmosphere. MOF-525(2H), M = 2H+; MOF-525(FeCl), M = Fe3+–Cl; and MOF-525(Cu), M = Cu2+. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 154 copyright 2013, Elsevier B.V. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 157 copyright 2012, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 158 copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 159 copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 160 copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 161 copyright 2009, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of the design and preparation of the bifunctional electrocatalyst. (b) Electrochemical and sorption surface areas and electrochemical activity of the catalysts. Cyclic voltammograms of 10 mM Fe(CN)63−/4− in 1 M KCl using different materials drop casted on a glassy carbon electrode: (1) (GO 8 wt%) Cu-MOF, (2) (GO 6 wt%) Cu-MOF, (3) (GO 4 wt%) Cu-MOF, (4) (GO 2 wt%) Cu-MOF, (5) Cu-MOF, and (6) bare glassy carbon electrode, where the scan rate was 50 mV s−1. (c) (G-dye-FeP)n MOF and magnified view of the layers inside the framework of the (G-dye-FeP)n MOF showing how graphene sheets intercalated between the porphyrin networks. (d) Possible pathway for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH4 on the Zn-MOF/CP cathode in ionic liquids. (e) Synthesis of the Co-MOF@CNTs catalyst. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 186 copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 182 copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 181 copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 184 copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 


HER	(GO 8 wt%) Cu-MOF	GO	Cu-MOF	—	84	0.087	
182

NENU-500	Polymolybdate	NENU-5	10	96	0.18	
183

OER	Co-MOF@CNTs (5 wt%)	CNTs	Co-MOF	10	69	1.51	
184

(GO 8 wt%) Cu-MOF	GO	Cu-MOF	5.8	65	1.19	
182

HHTP@ZIF-67	HHTP	ZIF-67	10	104	1.47	
185

Co/MIL-101(Cr)	Co	MIL-101(Cr)	10	130	0.85	
186

Ti@TiO2/CdS/ZIF-67	Ti@TiO2/CdS	ZIF-67	10	42	—	
187

ORR	(GO 8 wt%) Cu-MOF	GO	Cu-MOF	—	69	0.29	
182

Co/MIL-101(Cr)	Co	MIL-101(Cr)	10	162	0.08	
186

ε-MnO2/MOF(Fe)	ε-MnO2	MOF(Fe)	5.56	120	—	
188


 	Fig. 9  (a) Electrochemical DNA sensing via allosteric switch of hairpin DNA. (b) Schematic illustration of the assembly and sensing of DA in POMOFs/RGO. (c) Scheme for the electrochemical detection of DA using MOF-525-PEDOT NT composite. (d) CV curves in 1 M Na2SO4 at 100 mV s−1. (e) Construction of nMOF supercapacitors. (f) Schematic of the nitrite sensor. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 206 copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 207 copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 196 copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


Fe-MOF/RGO	RGO	Fe-MOF	LIBs	1010.3	0.3	200	0.01–3.0	
36

Fe3O4@MOF	Fe3O4	HKUST-1	LIBs	∼1001.5	0.06	100	0.01–3.0	
158

SnO2@MIL-101(Cr)	SnO2	MIL-101(Cr)	LIBs	∼510	0.1	100	0.02–2.5	
60

S@S-ZIF-8@CNTs	CNTs, S	ZIF-8	Li–S	1104	0.1	100	1.7–2.8	
129

S@MOF-525(Cu)	S	MOF-525(Cu)	Li–S	700	0.5	200	1.5–3.0	
48

MOF-5@CNTs	CNTs	MOF-5	Li–S	540	0.5	50	1.5–3.0	
129

S@HKUST-1/CNT	CNT	HKUST-1	Li–S	880	2	40	1.7–2.8	
8

GNS-MIL-101(Cr)/S	GNS	MIL-101(Cr)	Li–S	809	0.8	134	1.0–3.0	
54


 	Fig. 10  (a) Cyclic voltammetry curves of Fe3O4@MOF at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (b) Cyclic voltammograms at 0.1 mV s−1 for SnO2@MIL-101(Cr). (c) Schematic model of the S/MOF system in the discharge process. (d) Cycling performance for Li–S batteries. (e) Schematic of MOF@GO separators in Li–S batteries. (f) Cycle performance of S@MOF-525(Cu). (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 158 copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 60 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 221 copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 222 copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 220 copyright 2016, Nature Energy. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 
MOFs	Metal–organic frameworks
PCPs	Porous coordination polymers
0D	MOF/zero-dimension
1D	MOF/one-dimension
2D	MOF/two-dimension
3D	MOF/three-dimension
NPs	Nanoparticles
QDs	Quantum dots
GQDs	Graphene quantum dots
PC	Propylene carbonate
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
MNPs	Metal nanoparticles
RGO	Reduced graphene oxide
GO	Graphene oxide
LBL	Layer-by-layer
TEM	Transmission electron microscope
HRTEM	High resolution transmission electron microscopy
TCPP	Tetrakis(4-carboxyl)-21H,23H-porphyrin
DMF	Dimethylformamide
MPTS	Mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane
TCEP	Tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine hydrochloride
AA	Ascorbic acid
CD/PVP	Colloidal deposition with PVP as protecting agent
IMP	Impregnating
DPSH	Deposition–precipitation with sodium hydroxide
CD/glucose	Colloidal deposition with glucose as protecting agent
CCR	Concentration-controlled reduction
CVI	Chemical vapor infiltration
MAA	Mercaptoacetic acid
BFTEM	Bright-field TEM
MesMOF-1	Mesoporous MOF
FeTCPP	Iron(III) meso-5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin chloride
SA	Streptavidin
Mg NCs	Magnesium nanocrystals
MgCp2	Bis(cyclopentadienyl) magnesium
PXRD	Powder X-ray diffraction
NRs	Nanorods
MWCNTs	Multi-walled carbon nanotubes
PANI	Polyaniline
FTO	Fluorine-doped tin oxide
PEDOT NTs	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) nanotubes
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
GAs	Graphene aerogels
MnTD	[(Terpy)Mn(μ-O)2Mn](terpy)]3+
HRP	Horseradish peroxidase
SPCE	Screen-printed carbon electrode
BET	Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
CP	Carbon paper
KSC	Kenaf stem-derived porous carbon
BDC	1,4-Benzene dicarboxylate
ABDC	2-Amino benzene-1,4-dicarboxylate
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
DA	Dopamine
LIBs	Lithium-ion batteries
Li–S batteries	Lithium sulfur batteries

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
