Nanocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reactions  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP06316D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP06316D
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 6777-6799Nanocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reactions

        
          
            Kasinath 
            Ojha
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Soumen 
            Saha
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Preeti 
            Dagar
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ashok K. 
            Ganguli
          
          
        
      *ab
aInstitute of Nano Science and Technology, Habitat Center, Phase-10, Sector-64, Mohali, Punjab 160062, India
bDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016, India. E-mail: ashok@chemistry.iitd.ac.in
Received 
      14th September 2017
    , Accepted 29th January 2018First published on 29th January 2018AbstractHydrogen fuel is among the cleanest renewable resources and is the best alternative to fossil fuels for the future. Hydrogen can be best produced by means of electrolysis or photoelectrolysis of water among the various routes available for hydrogen production. So far, Pt has been recognized as the best electrode material for electrochemical hydrogen production. However, the cost of the catalyst, activity, and durability make Pt-catalyzed hydrogen production unsuitable on a commercial scale. It has hence become imperative to explore low-cost, highly active and durable HER catalysts to replace platinum as a catalyst. This perspective provides key concepts and the current status of the research on the properties of nanocatalysts that influence the hydrogen evolution reaction. Important structural features controlling the surface chemistry (i.e. facets, defects, dopants), nature of supports (graphene, CNTs, black phosphorus), role of heteroatoms, media and morphology are the key points of discussion in this perspective.
Kasinath Ojha
Dr Ojha received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India, in 2016. He worked as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Institute of Nano Science and Technology, Mohali, India, during 2016–2017. Currently, he is a GTEP Outstanding Post-Doctoral fellow at the Eisenberg lab for Electrochemistry and Energy at the Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, Technion. His long-term research interest is on heterogeneous catalysis, electrochemistry, photoelectrochemical energy conversion and storage, and renewable and clean energy systems.
Soumen Saha
Dr Saha received his MSc degree in chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur and PhD degree in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi in 2017. His research work under Prof. Ashok K. Ganguli was synthesis of binary/ternary alloy nanostructures and their applications for electrochemical water splitting (HER/OER) for generation of renewable energy. He is currently a research associate at the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Delhi.
Preeti Dagar
Ms Dagar completed her BSc degree (Chemistry, Hons.) in 2014 from Delhi University and MSc degree (Physical chemistry) in 2016 from Jamia Millia Islamia University, New Delhi, India. Currently she is working as a PhD student under Prof. Ashok K. Ganguli at the Institute of Nanoscience and Technology, Mohali, India. Her research focuses on 2D|3D semiconductor heterojunctions for photo-electrochemical applications including water splitting, oxygen evolution reactions and solar energy conversion.
Ashok K. Ganguli
Dr Ganguli is the founding Director of the Institute of Nano Science and Technology in Mohali and Professor of Chemistry, IIT Delhi. His areas of interest are in the design of nanostructured materials and high temperature superconductivity. He has published over 250 papers and has filed four patents. He is a recipient of the National Award of Nano Science and Nanotechnology given by the DST, Government of India. He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, London, Indian Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Sciences, India. Dr Ganguli is also a very keen speaker for science education in schools and colleges and is spearheading an Outreach program at INST, Mohali, for rural school students in remote parts of India in which he has visited more than 250 schools in the last two years.
Introduction
As global energy requirements are increasing, keeping pace with traditional power generation may lead to environmental deterioration. The development of sustainable and environment friendly energy production is a mandatory challenge for future generations.1–5 Environmental issues caused by fossil fuels have attracted wide attention and countless efforts are currently underway to find a cheap, carbon-less and abundant energy replacement.6–8 As we all know, hydrogen is one of the most striking molecular fuels and has the highest energy density which makes it an excellent energy-carrier.9–13 Hydrogen is being actively pursued as a clean and green energy source for the replacement of conventional fossil fuels due to its recyclability and pollution-free by-products.11,14,15 Molecular hydrogen gas can be produced through the electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in the presence of an inexpensive catalyst using renewable energy sources like solar energy, wind, geothermal heat, tides, biomass, etc. It is the most viable way for hydrogen production economically and efficiently in high purity and large quantities.16 Like any chemical reaction, there is an energy barrier in electrochemical processes to produce hydrogen from water which is called the overpotential. A suitable catalyst is required to minimize the activation energy by reducing the overpotential of the system for efficient hydrogen production. At present, noble metals like Pt-based catalysts and their derivatives are the most active HER catalysts17 due to their optimum hydrogen binding (ΔGH*) and low activation energy for H desorption from the surface of Pt.18 Pt catalyzed HER requires ∼zero onset overpotential and leads to high cathodic current density in acid solution. However, bulk application of these catalysts is restricted due to their high cost.18,19 Thus, the development of earth-abundant electrocatalysts exhibiting high catalytic efficiency and high electrochemical stability is essential to replace Pt and other expensive metals like Pd, Ir, Rh, etc. 3d-Transition metal-based compounds (TMCs) are probably a good replacement of these noble metal-based catalysts. Identification of electrocatalysts composed of earth abundant materials is crucial and of great importance to maintain the demand for hydrogen energy in solar water-splitting devices, fuel cells and metal air batteries. The literature shows that electrocatalytic studies have been carried out on several hundreds of compositions for HER. The hydrogen evolution reaction is characterized based on overpotential, exchange current density, Tafel slope, turn over frequency (TOFs) and Gibbs free energy. There are several reviews that have been written from different perspectives on the hydrogen evolution reaction including synthesis, characterization, catalyst surfaces, physical, chemical and catalytic properties, atomic and electronic structures and applications.20,21 In this perspective, we have discussed key characteristics of nanoparticles/nanocrystals that influence significantly the hydrogen evolution and water splitting processes. The fundamental concepts, materials and mechanism of hydrogen evolution reactions have been discussed in the light of recent advancements in this area.
Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)
The electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is the reduction of protons or water to hydrogen molecules (H2) on applying external potential or electrochemical energy. The overall HER can be written as
In acidic medium,2H+ + 2e− → H2
In alkaline medium,2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−
Hydrogen can be generated electrochemically from water splitting,22 NH3 splitting,23 hydrazine-borane reduction24 and amine-borane reduction.24,25 However, the easiest and cheapest way to produce hydrogen is by the splitting of water.
Impact of hydrogen evolution reactions on the energy sector
The energy sector is facing significant challenges in moving towards sustainable energy and a clean environment and in preventing depletion of natural resources, volatile international oil prices, intense pressure on energy security and deteriorating air quality.26 Decisive measures are needed to bring about low-carbon energy options. Hydrogen is emerging as a notable future alternative for replacing oil and natural gas delivering high-quality and clean energy for all sectors across the energy spectrum.26,27 The reason for hydrogen to emerge as a suitable energy carrier is because it can be generated from a variety of primary energy sources, renewable and non-renewable, and it is a clean, renewable, light, nonpolluting, and abundant source of energy with high calorific value compared to other sources of energy.26,28,29 An increasing number of reports show that hydrogen can have a role in almost every possible energy generation system—including electricity and transportation. Though hydrogen as a fuel has significant potential in the energy sector, there are also some challenges due to which the technology cannot be commercialized easily everywhere. There are challenges in production, storage, transportation and distribution.27 Currently, it is stored in high pressure tanks in the form of compressed gas which is highly expensive, requires large volume and also has safety issues.30 The drawback of storing hydrogen in liquid form is that it requires a low temperature and high pressure, which can be dangerous. New technologies or additional safety measures added to the current procedures are required to turn H2 into a consumer-friendly fuel which can be utilized in a safe and responsible manner.31 Recently, several materials have been developed for hydrogen storage due to their high hydrogen adsorption–desorption reversibility and stability. However, the production of hydrogen locally will be much more accepted with respect to the safety and cost of transportation. Current hydrogen economy is more focused on local and low-cost production and transportation. In this context, electrochemical hydrogen production via water splitting is one of the best ways to produce H2 locally.
Electrochemistry behind HER
The current density resulting during any electrochemical reactions can be understood from the well-known Butler–Volmer equation. When the surface concentrations of the oxidized and reduced species do not differ from the bulk concentration, the overall current density (j) at an applied overpotential (η = E − Eeq) can be expressed asj = j0[e−αfη − e(1−α)fη] where f = F/RTj0 is called the exchange current density and α is the transfer coefficient which varies from 0 to 1.
Relevance of the Tafel slope in the HER process
If we consider only the forward reaction rate, i.e. the backward reaction rate is significantly smaller than that of the forward reaction (or the other way), the following equation can be derived from the Butler–Volmer equation:j = j0[e−αfη]Therefore,  or  Simply,η = a + bln(j)where b is the Tafel slope and from “a” the exchange current density can be derived. The Tafel slope (b) gives an insight of the reaction mechanism and the exchange current density (j0) suggests the catalytic activity.
The Tafel slope is the key parameter indicating the mechanism of the HER process.32 When the discharge reaction (Volmer reaction) is fast and chemical desorption (combination) is the rate limiting step, then the Tafel slope is given by  
The Tafel slope of 29 mV dec−1 is observed in the case of Pt and Pd.
When the discharge reaction (Volmer reaction) is fast and electrochemical desorption (Heyrovsky reaction) is the rate limiting step, then the Tafel slope is given by  
When the discharge reaction (Volmer reaction) is the slowest step and the surface coverage Θ < 0.1, then the Tafel slope is given by  
The same Tafel slope of 116 mV dec−1 is observed when the Volmer reaction is very fast with very high surface coverage (Θ → 1) and the desorption step is the rate determining step.
The concept of exchange current density arises when anodic and cathodic reactions are in equilibrium.33 The rates of both the reactions are equal.
The exchange current density (j0) is dependent on
(a) Nature of the redox process
(b) Concentration ratio of oxidized (Co) and reduced (CR) species
(c) Electrode composition/surface
(d) Temperature
From Fig. 1a, it is evident that when the transfer coefficient α = 0.5, the forward and backward reactions are in equilibrium. When α = 1, only the forward reaction (a steep reductant potential energy surface with a flat oxidant potential energy surface) is favorable, whereas at α = 0, the opposite is observed. Large current density at low overpotentials is possible when the exchange current density (j0) is high (Fig. 1b). This indicates that the kinetics of the reaction is quite fast. When the transfer coefficient varies, the Tafel slope changes which indicates different reaction mechanisms at different transfer coefficients (Fig. 1c).
 Fig. 1  (a) The current density vs. overpotential plot at varying transfer coefficient, (b) current density of the process having different exchange current density (j0) and (c) Tafel plot showing varying slopes at different transfer coefficients. (Adapted from ref. 33 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Mechanism of the HER process and kinetics
The mechanism of the HER processes on the catalyst's surface follows two steps:34 (i) electrochemical adsorption process (Volmer reaction) where a proton binds to the catalyst's surface and (ii) electrochemical discharge process (Heyrovsky reaction) where one proton combines with the adsorbed proton and then is desorbed from the surface or (iii) chemical desorption process (Tafel reaction) where two adsorbed protons are combined together and released from the surface.
In the Volmer reaction:H+ + e− + M(active site) ⇄ MHads (acidic media)orH2O + e− + M(active site) ⇄ MHads + OH− (alkaline media)In the Heyrovsky reaction:H+ + e− + MHads ⇄ M + H2 (acidic media)orH2O + e− + MHads ⇄ M + OH− + H2 (alkaline media)And in the Tafel reaction:2MHads ⇄ 2M + H2
Therefore, the HER process can follow either the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism or the Volmer–Tafel mechanism.
The HER process involves H adsorption on the catalyst's surface and the kinetics of the process can be understood from the Langmuir adsorption isotherm for H atoms. The rate equations (vi) of the process are a function of surface concentration of adsorbed H (ΓH) and free adsorption sites (Γs).35
The surface coverage  and .
And the rate equations can be written asv1 = k1(1 − Θ) − k−1Θv2 = k2Θ − k−2(1 − Θ)v3 = k3Θ2 − k−3(1 − Θ)2when η = 0,  And in the steady state, v1 − v2 − 2v3 = 0.
Therefore, surface coverage .
There are six rate constants. So, it is very difficult to determine the HER kinetics. However, electrochemical impedance spectroscopic measurements can be carried out to determine the kinetics.
HER with transition metals as catalysts: theoretical aspects
Generally, metals and alloys are used for electrochemical water splitting (electrolysis) because of their lower electronegativity compared to that of hydrogen. Metals have lower hydrogen binding energy compared to semiconductors and insulators which favors the chemisorption process as well as desorption process in HER. It has been shown that HER activity of the transition metals also depends on the work-function (Φ) of the metals and M–H bond strength.36log(j0) = 6.7Φ − 36.6
Generally, it is easier to extract an electron from metals having lower work-function (Φ). This could lead to the higher HER activity of the metals having lower work-function. But experimentally, the reverse effect has been observed.36 There are two factors as mentioned below which are additive factors to the HER activity of the metals.
(a) Direct strong interaction of the proton with the metal surface.
(b) Electrical double layer effect: at equilibrium, the potential at the outer Helmholtz layer is more positive for metals having lower Φ. This would lead to a decrease in the proton concentration at the interface (metal/electrolyte) with decreasing Φ, resulting in lower HER activity.
This correlation with work-function suggests that all the metals fall in a single group and their HER activity can be explained by a single theory. Therefore, metal–hydrogen binding energy has been considered for their HER activity which divides the metals into groups. Due to the variation of hydrogen binding energies of metals, the HER activity differs from metal to metal. This has led to the evolution of the well-known Volcano plot.37 However, the platinum group metals and their alloys are among the most effective catalysts for the hydrogen evolution reactions because of their optimum hydrogen binding energy (−5.8 kJ mol−1)38 and higher work-function (Φ).
HER activity and the Volcano plot
The HER activity of the metals can be correlated in terms of chemisorption energy (M–H binding energy) and their exchange current density where an optimum M–H binding energy (not too week and not too strong) is very important for hydrogen evolution reactions.36 The Volcano plot is shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Volcano plot of different metals (a) in acidic medium and (b) in alkaline medium (figure a has been adapted from ref. 39 and figure b has been adapted from ref. 40 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
This Volcano plot suggests that metals having nearly zero value of Gibbs free energy change (ΔGH) and having higher exchange current density (j0) are more active for hydrogen evolution reactions. Pt has the highest exchange current density and slightly negative ΔGH (near to zero) in both acidic and alkaline medium which supports its highest HER activity.
H-Coverage (ΘH) of metal surface and rate constant
Surface coverage with hydrogen on metal surface is one of the key factors that controls the rate of the reactions. The degree of surface coverage with adsorbed hydrogen can be determined from the polarization curve. For the hydrogen evolution reactions following the discharge–recombination mechanism, the rate of the Volmer reaction (jc) is related to the rate of the recombination process (jr).41jc = jr + jawhere ja is the steady-state rate of hydrogen permeation. Generally, ja is insignificant with respect to jc during the measurement of the steady state polarization curve. Therefore, the surface coverage (ΘH) can be obtained from the equation below:  where k2 is the recombination (Tafel) rate constant and it can be derived from the equation below:  where  and j0 is the exchange current density. θeH is the equilibrium coverage with hydrogen. From the slope and intercept of the linear relation of vs. √jc, j0′ and k2 can be calculated.  Therefore,j0 = Fk1CH+(1 − ΘeH)when ΘeH = 0, j0 = Fk1CH+.
Therefore, from the exchange current density, the rate constant k1 can be estimated.
Theoretical calculation of HBE and surface coverage
The hydrogen binding energy has been calculated using density functional theory (DFT) applying a plane wave pseudopotential to represent the ionic core. The surface coverage can be considered by n number of hydrogens. Therefore, the adsorption energy (chemisorption energy)37 is given by  
The Gibbs free energy of the adsorbed state is given byΔGH = ΔEH + ΔEZPE − TΔSHΔEZPE is the change in zero-point energy between adsorbed and gas phase. ΔSH ∼ −1/2SH2, where SH2 is the entropy of H2 in gas phase under standard conditions.
The rate equation of the Volmer process,v1 = Fk1CH+(1 − Θ)where k1 is the rate constant and Θ is the surface coverage with H. Therefore, surface coverage can be calculated from the equation  where  
Now for an exothermic proton transfer, ΔGH < 0, therefore, k1 = k0 and it is independent of ΔGH. In this case, the exchange current density  When proton transfer is via an endothermic process, then ΔGH > 0, and  
The exchange current density37 is given by  
Therefore, the chemisorption rate constant (k1) and exchange current density (j0) can be calculated theoretically.
Transition metal-based nanostructures as catalysts for HER: experimental studies
Nanostructures of metals, metal chalcogenides, nitrides, carbides, phosphides, and borides have been investigated extensively for hydrogen evolution studies. The properties of these nanocrystals vary significantly based on their surface structure, elemental environment, medium of catalysis and supporting templates which are discussed below.
Properties of nanoparticles
Surface chemistry
Electrocatalysis is a surface phenomenon and is highly influenced by the surface chemistry of the nanostructures which includes the density of active sites present in their surfaces. Therefore, the HER performance of an electrocatalyst can be improved by tailoring the active sites. The surface engineering of nanocrystals due to crystal growth, polymorphs, facets, nanoscale surface modification, defects and doping with heteroatoms influences the HER activity dramatically. The surface energy controls the binding of adsorbates on the surfaces of the catalysts.42 For a particular surface slab of pure metals, the surface energy (Esurf) is defined by  where Eslab is the total energy of a surface slab and Ebulk is the energy per atom of the bulk. N is the number of atoms in the slab. Now for transition metal-based compounds (TMCs) like MX (where M = metal and X = anion), Esurf is given by  where NM and NX are the number of metal atoms and anions in the slab respectively. μ is the chemical potential. Therefore, the surface energy is dependent on the chemical potential of the anions in TMCs. For hydrogen binding on TMCs, the surface energy follows a volcano type curve (Fig. 3a).42 The anions play a significant role in controlling the surface energy of the TMCs and hence control the HER activity. It was found that Pt has an optimal surface energy which is consistent with the superior HER activity of Pt (Fig. 3a).
 Fig. 3  (a) Volcano plot of TMCs and metals based on the surface energies, (b) variation in the current density and terminal S22− and S2− as a function of carbon black (CB) content and (c) variation in the current density (HER activity) as a function of MoS2 edge length density showing linear dependence. Figures a, b and c were adapted with permission from ref. 42, 47 and 48 respectively. Copyright (2016) and copyright (2017) the American Chemical Society. 
The surface chemistry of CoxNi4−xS4 (220) facets in HER processes has been explored recently. When the Co/Ni ratio changes from 3 to 1, then there is a shift in the X-ray diffraction peak of the (220) plane which suggests that the surface chemical environment of the (220) facet has changed.43 In Co2Ni2S4, the Gibbs free energy for H-binding43 at Co sites is 548.7 kJ mol−1, whereas at the Ni site it is 506 kJ mol−1. The subtle variation in the surface chemical state influences the hydrogen adsorption properties of CoxNi4−xS4. Layered structures of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have important features that make them excellent candidates for electrocatalysis. Vertically oriented MoS2 and MoSe2 layers exhibit remarkable HER activity due to their exposed edge sites.44 The basal plane of MoS2 is electrocatalytically inactive45 due to its unfavorable ΔGH of 2 eV. Jaramillo et al. showed that the electrocatalytic activity of MoS2 is linearly proportional to the number of layers.46 The exposed edges of layered TMDs have been shown to exhibit remarkable HER activity. For example in MoS2 having ∼5 layers, the current density follows the terminal sulphur content (STerminal), where the ratio of STerminal/STotal is very crucial for HER activity.47 It has been observed that the maximum terminal sulphide and disulphide content results in high current density (Fig. 3b). The edge orientation of MoS2 is also very important for its HER activity. The density of the MoS2 edges of particular length is highly influential in enhancing the HER activity and the current density increases linearly with the edge length density (Fig. 3c).48
When the edge orientation changes and results in interlayer expansion, the current density enhances significantly.48 Stepped edges of MoS2 were developed in a vertical array of MoS2 which exhibited 10 mA cm−2 current density for HER at 104 mV of overpotential with an exchange current density of 0.2 mA cm−2. These stepped edges showed almost thermo-neutral H-adsorption facilitating HER processes.45 The stepped edge surface terminated MoS2 and flat edge surface terminated MoS2 were developed by using microwave hydrothermal treatment for 2 h and 50 min respectively (Fig. 4a and d). Stepped edges and flat edges were confirmed from electron microscopic images (Fig. 4b, c and e). The HBE calculations suggest that stepped edge terminated MoS2 has lower free energy compared to that of flat edge terminated MoS2 (Fig. 4f). There is medium range to long range ordered p–π resonance due to aligned disulphide (S22−) ligands through interlayers in flat edge terminated MoS2 whereas long range ordered p–π resonance is absent in stepped edge terminated MoS2 (Fig. 4g). The absence of long range ordered p–π resonance enhances electron density at the edge sites which facilitates the hydrogen binding and results in high HER activity.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of stepped edge terminated MoS2, (b) TEM image showing stepped edges, (c) SEM image of stepped edges. (d) Schematic representation of flat edge terminated MoS2, (e) SEM image of flat edge terminated MoS2. (f) Free energy diagram of hydrogen binding on stepped edges and flat edges and (g) p–π resonance in flat and stepped edge terminated MoS2. The figures were adapted from ref. 45 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Hinnemann et al.49 theoretically proved that unstable edges of layered MoS2 nanocrystals are the catalytically active sites for HER. Since then researchers have focused on finding ways to increase the number of active edge sites of MoS2 to make excellent electrocatalysts. Jaramillo et al. have carried out experimental investigations with varying density of edge sites present on MoS2 nanoplates for HER to prove the above phenomenon,46 where the exchange current density of MoS2 is directly proportional to the length of the edge. Xie et al.50 also proved experimentally that defect-rich ultrathin nanosheets of MoS2 display the largest cathodic current density with a small overpotential compared to either defect-rich MoS2 or calcined MoS2 nanosheets. This is due to the more unique active edge sites available in defect rich MoS2 nanosheets compared to others.
In general, MoS2 is known to be an active HER catalyst because of its active edge sites. Nørskov et al.51 first reported the activation and optimization of the basal plane for the enhancement of HER activity by creating sulfur vacancies and strain on the basal plane of MoS2. Theoretical and experimental studies also support the fact that by creating pores and strain, new catalytic sites can be generated in the basal plane of MoS2, where hydrogen can bind directly to the exposed Mo atoms. Theoretical calculations were carried out to demonstrate the S-vacancy engineered hydrogen binding on MoS2, where the free energy of hydrogen binding becomes negative with increasing S-vacancies (Fig. 5a). Again strain-engineered electrocatalytic activity of m-MS2 (m = metal terminated) (M = Mo and Nb) in both 1H and 1T phases52 was demonstrated. However, strained MoS2 having S-vacancies exhibits much higher HER activity compared to only strained MoS2 or MoS2 having S-vacancies (Fig. 5b). The stable bulk structure of MoS2 has a trigonal prismatic structure and this phase is known as 2H-MoS2 where two stoichiometric S–Mo–S layers with a hexagonal atomic arrangement are present in the structure. This 2H-MoS2 phase can be further exfoliated into 1H-MoS2 phase which contains only one layer of S–Mo–S.53 These 1H and 2H phases are semiconducting where the 1H phase is a direct band gap semiconductor and the 2H phase is an indirect band gap semiconductor. The single layer of MoS2 with an octahedral 1T atomic arrangement is known as the 1T-MoS2 phase. The distorted version of 1T-MoS2 is known as the 1T′-MoS2 phase.53 The 1T-MoS2 phase is metallic in nature but 1T′-MoS2 is non-metallic with a band gap of 0.1–0.2 eV.53 It has been found that 1H-MoS2 and 1T-MoS2 phases are not as active as the metastable 1T′-MoS2 phase.53 Strain induces more active centers on the inert basal plane of TMDs due to stretching of the plane. It has been shown that tensile strain enhances the HER activity of MS2, whereas compressive strain decreases the HER activity. Again, in tensile strain, biaxial tensile strain influences the HER activity more significantly compared to uniaxial tensile strain.52 The role of defects in MoS2 in HER performance can be best understood by the studies carried out by Ajayan and co-workers.54 The electrochemical activity of the MoS2 monolayer before and after plasma treatment suggests that MoS2 on plasma exposure for 20 s results in a larger cathodic current density with a small onset potential compared to that without plasma treatment (Fig. 5c), indicating that more defects are created with plasma exposure. More defects create more exposed active sites in MoS2 and hence plasma treatment is expected to improve hydrogen adsorption and catalysis. Similarly, defects can also be generated using annealing methods to improve the catalytic properties of MoS2. The annealing temperature affects the defects in MoS2 and hence the HER activity (Fig. 5d). The lowest onset overpotential for HER was observed for MoS2 annealed under 500 °C, whereas MoS2 annealed at 400 °C (∼470 mV) and 600 °C (∼450 mV) results in higher onset overpotential.54
 Fig. 5  (a) Free energy diagram of hydrogen binding on MoS2 having S vacancies, (b) LSV curve of MoS2 with S vacancy and strain showing current density due to HER (figures a and b were adapted from ref. 51 with the permission of Nature Publishing Group), (c) LSV curves before and after oxygen plasma treatment of MoS2 and (d) LSV curves showing better HER activity of MoS2 under 500 °C hydrogen annealing compared to that of 400 and 600 °C (figures c and d were adapted from ref. 54 with the permission of the American Chemical Society). 
Oxygen plasma treatment was used to introduce high density atomic scale pores in TaS2 nanosheets where it increases the defect density and controls the HER activity.55 Higher defects enhance the HER activity of TaS2, lowering the Tafel slopes.55 However, the HER activity depends on an optimal defect concentration and hence on the plasma treatment (10 min). Finally, it can be concluded that oxygen plasma creates a large number of cracks with certain angles and annealing creates numerous micrometer- and nanometer-scale triangular holes which are the reasons behind the increase in exposed edges and boosting the HER activity. Guo et al. have synthesized defect- and S-rich MoS2 embedded on N-doped carbon nanofibers where more edges (active sites) were exposed and hence led to enhancement of the HER activity.56
The morphology of the nanostructures defines the exposed facets and surfaces of the crystals and hence surface|electrolyte interfaces which would have an impact on their overall electrocatalytic HER activity. The array of nanostructures (nanowires, particles and sheets) were shown to exhibit much better electrocatalytic activity compared to the corresponding nanostructures. Wang et al.57 have demonstrated that the vertical array of VS2 nanoplates exhibit high HER activity with a η10 of 42 mV with a Tafel slope of 36 mV dec−1 and an exchange current density of 0.955 mA cm−2. Our group have shown that variation in the morphology of Mo2N nanostructures controls the HER activity. Mo2N nanostructures with varying morphologies of hexagons, triangles, and nanowires were investigated for HER activity in acidic media where the highest apparent electrocatalytic activity was found in Mo2N having hexagonal morphology.58 Mo2N with hexagonal morphology having a high surface area and a large number of particle–particle voids exhibits better contacts between the surface and electrolytes which is responsible for the high HER activity. Our group has reported the synthesis of MoP particles using two different complexation routes using citric acid and aniline as the complexing agents.59 Citric acid complexation leads to the formation of MoP microparticles whereas the aniline complexation route results in interconnected nanoparticles. It has been shown that interconnected MoP nanoparticles exhibit good HER activity compared to the MoP microparticles due to exposed surfaces and surface area accessible to the electrolyte.59
Role of heteroatoms
The atomic environment around the active centers is one of the crucial factors that controls the electronic properties of the active center and hence the catalytic activity. The hydrogen evolution reactions catalyzed by metals and alloys are restricted for widespread applications due to several factors like high cost, availability from natural resources, poor stability in electrolytes and lower electrocatalytic activity. Some of the non-precious transition metal based compounds like borides,60 carbides,61–64 nitrides,65–67 chalcogenides39,68–72 and phosphides have shown high stability, corrosion resistance, high mechanical strength and high melting point. Recently, these transition metal-based compounds have been shown to be promising catalysts for the replacement of Pt for hydrogen production from water. The HER processes with transition metal compounds (where the active center is the metal ion) are highly influenced by the anions (heteroatoms) which is quite interesting.
Understanding the electronic structure of these transition metal compounds is a key factor in designing catalysts for HER activity. Both the mechanisms (Volmer–Heyrovsky and Volmer–Tafel) involve first the hydrogen adsorption (Volmer reaction) which depends on the hydrogen binding energy (HBE) of the compounds or metals. The Volcano plot for the metals suggests that superior HER activity can be possible if the catalyst exhibits an optimum HBE (neither too strong nor too weak). Therefore, the HBE is the key parameter of the electrocatalyst for exhibiting high HER activity and depends on the electronic structure of the materials. Non-metallic atoms like C, N, P, S or Se in transition metal-based compounds modify the electronic structure of the compounds which directly affect the HER activity of the metals. In transition metals, the d orbitals have significant contribution to the binding of adsorbates on the metal surface. These metal d orbitals are hybridized with the s and p orbitals of the heteroatoms (C, N, S, P, etc.) which broadens the d band structure. This affects the position of the d-band center due to charge transfer from the metal to the heteroatom center which alters the hydrogen binding energy. Generally, the downward shift of the d-band center of the metal relative to its Fermi level decreases the HBE. This favors the desorption process in HER and enhances the catalytic activity.
The primary principle of the d-band center theory is based on the variation in the coupling between adsorbate levels and transition metal d-bands. There are two contributions in adsorbate–metal surface interactions.73ΔE = ΔEsp + ΔEhyb-d
In the case of hydrogen binding, the first one is the interaction of the hydrogen 1s electron with the electrons on the metals, which results in a filled, low-lying bonding molecular orbital (σ) and an empty anti-bonding MO (σ*). This interaction does not vary significantly among the transition metals implying similar contribution in HER from different metals. In Fig. 6a, the projected densities of states (DOS) are shown for the adsorbate and metal centers. Now in hydrogen binding, another contribution is from a metal's d-electrons. The metal d-band hybridizes with the adsorbate (σ) orbital and forms (d–σ) bonding and (d–σ)* antibonding states as shown in Fig. 6b. Now the d–σ bonding orbitals are filled with electrons whereas the filling of the antibonding state depends on the surface electronic structure of the metals. The metal–adsorbate bonding becomes weak with the increase in the filling of the antibonding state. Now the d-band center plays a crucial role in the filling of the antibonding state.
 Fig. 6  Theoretical aspect of HER catalyzed by transition metals, (a) adsorbate–metal bond formation showing metal projected density of states, (b) overlap of adsorbate sigma orbitals and the metal d-band, (c) shift in the d-band center with bandwidth (figures a and c were adapted from ref. 73 with the permission of Elsevier) and (d) variation of the d-band center in alloys (adapted from ref. 75 with the permission of the American Chemical Society). 
The upward shift of the d-band center with respect to the Fermi level shifts the antibonding state to higher energy which decreases the occupancy of the state. This implies that the metal–adsorbate bond strength becomes stronger. The modification in the d-bandwidth significantly influences the d-band center as the bandwidth (w) is related to band filling (fd).74
As shown in Fig. 6c, the d-band center shifts upward with respect to the Fermi level as the bandwidth decreases. A linear relationship is shown in Fig. 6d for Pt–Sn alloys. Now the d-band center plays a key role in hydrogen binding on the metal surface. It is evident that the d-band centers of the (111) surface of Cu and Au are far apart from the Fermi level whereas Pt and Ni have the d-band center close to the Fermi level (Fig. 7a). It also shows that the antibonding orbitals of the M–H bond are occupied in the case of Cu and Au. This implies that Cu and Au do not form a M–H bond whereas Pt and Ni form a M–H bond.76 This appears to be the main reason for the known HER inactivity of Cu and Au.
 Fig. 7  d-Band center in different metals, (a) metal projected density of states showing the position of the antibonding state with respect to the Fermi level (adapted from ref. 76), (b) variation of hydrogen binding energy in different metals with the d-band center and (c) variation of HBE with the d-band center upon alloying of different metals. (Figures b and c were adapted from ref. 33 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Thus, the d-band center varies with metals and the metals having d-band center closer to the Fermi level exhibit stronger hydrogen binding (Fig. 7b). Fig. 7c shows the shift in the d-band center on alloying the surface and these surfaces exhibit higher binding energy. In the case of transition metal based compounds, the heteroatoms shift the metal d-band center downward resulting in weaker M–H binding which in turn accelerates the desorption process.33
H-Coverage and H-adsorption
The hydrogen binding energy strongly depends on the surface coverage with hydrogen atoms. The adsorption energy can be expressed as  where n is the number of hydrogen atoms adsorbed on the surface.
It is evident that with the increase in the surface coverage, the interaction with metal surface becomes weak and the Gibbs free energy change crosses the thermo-neutral condition (Fig. 8). This results in weaker adsorption on metal surface. Similar observations were made (Fig. 8b and c) in the case of transition metals, TMDs, metal phosphides and metal phosphosulphides.78–80
 Fig. 8  Relation between surface coverage and hydrogen binding energy, (a) H adsorption energy decreases with the increase in surface coverage (the figure was adapted from ref. 77 with the permission of PCCP Society), (b) H adsorption energy of different metal phosphides with surface coverage and (c) H adsorption energy for different metals. (Figures b and c were adapted from ref. 78 and 79 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Several doped transition metal based compounds (TMCs) were developed where significant effects of the dopant were found to control the electronic properties of metal centers. Mo2C has strong hydrogen adsorption (strong Mo–H bonding) which decreases the HER activity. However, cobalt doping in Mo2C structures increases the electron density around the Fermi level of Mo which reduces the Mo–H bond strength.81 An increase in the electron density around the Fermi level (EF) results in electron transfer into anti-bonding orbitals of the Mo–H bond. A decrease in the electron density around EF reduces electrons in the bonding orbitals. Therefore, in both cases, the Mo–H bond strength decreases which is favorable for the desorption step. In metal phosphides, P atoms act as proton and hydride acceptors along with the metal centers.
The Gibbs free energy of hydrogen binding on MoS2 is 0.08 eV (Mo edges) and 0.18 eV (S edges), whereas it is 0.22 eV for both W and S edges in WS2. When a Co atom is introduced into the MS2 system (M = Mo, W), the ΔGH (S-edges) is drastically lowered to 0.07 eV in WS2 (Fig. 9a). Therefore, in MS2 systems, the HER activity of MoS2 is higher than that of WS2, but after Co addition (Co–MS2 systems) the HER activity of Co-doped WS2 is much better than that of Co-doped MoS2 systems (Fig. 9b).82 Cobalt incorporation in 2D WS2 as CoxW1−xS2 lowers the overpotential for 10 mA cm−2 from 236 mV to 121 mV and nearly a 10 times decrease in the charge transfer resistance which is quite significant in HER activity.83
 Fig. 9  (a) HBE of various sites of MS2 before and after Co doping, (b) LSV curves showing the enhanced current density after Co doping in WS2 and (c) LSV curves showing enhanced current density after Co doping in MoS2. The figures were reproduced from ref. 82 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Several metals have been shown to be beneficial for H-adsorption as the doped edges have thermo-neutral H-binding compared to MoS2 S-edges or Mo-edges.79 S-Doped MoP thin films exhibit better proton adsorption compared to MoS2 films.84 MOF derived carbon supported metal clusters (Ni species)85 have been shown to exhibit very high HER activity with a η10 (overpotential required to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2) of 34 mV. TMDs with different anions, e.g. NiX2 (X = S, Se, Te), have been shown to exhibit variation in the HER activity in the order of NiSe2 > NiS2 > NiTe2. The Gibbs free energy of hydrogen binding at the Ni sites is lower than that of S and Se sites in NiS2 and NiSe2 respectively, whereas it is higher than that of Te sites in NiTe2. The hydrogen binding at Ni sites is influenced significantly by anions and surface structures.86 The crystal phases (2H and 1T phases) of TMDs are very crucial for their HER activity where the 2H phase is semiconducting due to the complete filling of d-orbitals whereas in the 1T phase, incomplete d-orbital filling leads to metallic nature in TMDs. The 1T phase of MoS2 has a ΔGH of 0.12 eV and the 2H phase has a ΔGH of 1.96 eV. Jiang et al.87 have shown that the hydrogen adsorption energies of various TMDs with varying chalcogens are dependent on the crystal phases (Fig. 10a). Various dopants were also introduced in MoS2 systems and it was observed that B, N, and P doping significantly lowers the HBE of the neighboring S atoms (Fig. 10b). S-Vacancy dependency on the HBE in MoS2 was also shown and it suggested that higher vacancy lowers the HBE (Fig. 10c).
 Fig. 10  (a) The HBE of various transition metal dichalcogenides with 2H and 1T phase, (b) free energy diagram of various heteroatom doped MoS2 and (c) change in the Gibbs free energy with vacancy concentration in MoS2. The figures were reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. 
2D-TMDs, e.g. MX2 (M = V, Nb, Ta and X = S, Se, Te), were theoretically shown to be good proton adsorbers for hydrogen production.88 Pan et al.88 predicted that MS2 is a better HER catalyst than MSe2 and MTe2 and among the metal disulphides, VS2 is the best HER catalyst compared to NbS2 and TaS2. However, experimentally,89 it has been shown that VTe2 is the best HER electrocatalyst and the catalytic activity follows the order of VS2 < VSe2 < VTe2 whereas in metal ditellurides (MTe2), the HER activity follows the order of VTe2 > NbTe2 > TaTe2.
Transition metal phosphides (TMPs) were recently explored as the star catalytic materials for electrochemical hydrogen evolution reactions. Nickel phosphide (Ni2P) nanocrystals were synthesized from the hot-injection method and were demonstrated as excellent HER catalysts in acidic media almost similar to Pt.90 The role of the phosphorus atom in nickel phosphides demonstrated that Ni5P4 is the most active for HER compared to Ni12P5, Ni2P and Ni.91 With increasing P:Ni ratio, the Ni–Ni bond distance increases which contributes to the electronic structure and bonding of the active metal centers.91 It weakens the M–H adsorption processes. Again, the weak adsorption of the hydrogen atom on P-sites in metal phosphides also contributes to the higher HER activity. Theoretical investigations suggest that Ni5P4 has abundant P3-hollow sites and that in Ni2P, the P-rich surfaces are less stable.92 These TMPs exhibited high exchange current density like Pt. Co doping on Ni2P also weakens the H adsorption, facilitating the H2 desorption from the surface leading to high HER activity.93,94 NiCoP nanostructures supported on Ni foam exhibited HER activity with 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 32 mV in alkaline media.94 Nest like nickel cobalt phosphide on carbon cloth (NiCoP/CC) exhibited 10 mA cm−2 current density for HER at overpotentials of 44 mV and 62 mV in acidic media and alkaline media respectively.95 Bimetallic metal phosphides/sulphides (NiFeSP) were explored for HER with an overpotential of 91 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in alkaline media.96 CoP and Co2P were also explored and were found to be remarkable electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution. Cobalt phosphide exhibits higher exchange current density compared to nickel phosphide as shown in the review.91 Iron phosphide (FeP) nanoparticles coated with a carbon shell exhibited high stability during HER in acidic media with an overpotential of 71 mV to drive 10 mA cm−2 current density.97 A rugae-like FeP nanocrystal assembly on a carbon cloth was shown to exhibit HER activity with 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential as low as 34 mV.98 However, other metal phosphides like MoP and WP exhibit HER activity at much higher overpotentials. The Volcano plot based on the TOF of various metal phosphides suggests that Fe0.5Co0.5P exhibits thermo-neutral H-binding and the highest TOF of HER activity. Ni2P, Co2P and FeP exhibit high HER activity due to weak H-adsorption energies leading to higher H2 desorption.78 Again, MoP, WP, CoP, Fe2P, etc. having stronger H-adsorption exhibit less HER activity.78 Metal phosphides exhibit extraordinary HER activity in both acidic and alkaline media. Metal phosphides have the following key features which are beneficial for HER activity.
(i) Contribution of P atoms to the metal's electronic structure and H-binding, i.e. P atoms weaken M–M bonding which in turn weakens M–H bonding leading to low adsorption energies and fast H2 desorption processes.
(ii) P atoms are also involved in bonding with H atoms. Weak P–H bonding facilitates H2 desorption processes leading to higher HER activity.
(iii) Extraordinary electrochemical stability in both acidic and alkaline media.
(iv) Very high exchange current density and high TOF in HER activity.
The role of non-metallic atoms in metal phosphides, nitrides, carbides and sulfides is not clearly evident. Theoretical investigations suggested the modification of the metal d-band center in these compounds which significantly affected the electrocatalytic performance. However, doping with hetero anions like N in carbide,99 S in phosphide,100 S in carbide101 and N in sulphides significantly enhances the electrocatalytic performance. For example, cobalt phosphosulphides102 and molybdenum phosphosulphide100 exhibit remarkable HER activity compared to the bare CoS2 and MoP respectively. In mixed anion catalysts like molybdenum phosphosulphides, the synergistic effects between S and P result in increased number of electrochemically active sites.100 Cobalt phosphosulphides exhibit 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 48 mV with an exchange current density of 1.14 mA cm−2 which is in the same order as that of Pt.102 Co|P|S is a distinct ternary pyrite type phase featuring P–S bonds without any S–S bonds as observed in CoS2 (pyrites).103 In CoS2 pyrite structures, some of the S atoms were substituted by P atoms randomly which does not change the lattice parameters.103 There is a positive correlation between P content and electrocatalytic activity in iron phosphosulphides (Fe|P|S) where higher HER activity was observed at the Fe atoms coordinated with P atoms.104 It is evident that P substitution in FeS drastically enhances the HER activity, while S substitution in FeP slightly deteriorates the activity.104 Ni|P|S nanocrystals exhibit 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 52 mV in alkaline media which is quite impressive.105 The high HER activity of Ni|P|S is because of the presence of electronegative P–S species and theoretically it has been shown that S incorporation in the NiP system shifts the ΔGH value to the thermo-neutral position balancing the H-adsorption and desorption.105 In a mixed metal sulphide like NiCoSx, the surface S atoms are easy to oxidize where P atom doping decreases this oxidation possibility. Nickel and phosphorus co-doping in CoS2 nanowires exhibits good HER activity and durability and exhibits lower charge transfer resistance.106 P being less electronegative enhances the metal-anion covalence which enhances the electrochemical stability of the materials.106 P doping in Mo2C increases the electron density around the Fermi level of Mo which weakens the Mo–H bonds and promotes the HER kinetics.107 Thermo-neutral hydrogen binding (ΔGH ∼ 0) was observed with optimal doping with P (2.9%).107 Similarly, in tungsten carbonitride, N-bound W sites are the more positively charged centers and behave as the active sites for HER. The d-band centers of N-bound W atoms are shifted downwards which facilitates the H-adsorption.108 Introducing heteroatoms can tune the electron donating/withdrawing capability which makes M–N–C like materials promising electrocatalysts. Ni-Doped Mo|C|N exhibits 10 mA cm−2 current density at an overpotential of 110 mV where the synergistic interaction of Mo, Ni, C and N reduces the M–H bond strength.109 Ni–C|N composites were derived from polyoxometalates where Ni sites are the active sites as confirmed from thiocyanate110 and the catalysts exhibit a η10 of 61 mV and a remarkable TOF of 6.67 s−1 at 200 mV. C and N hybrid coordination in the Co–C–N complex leads to charge distribution and enhances the electron transport.111 These result in higher HER activity of Co|C|N catalysts. In molybdenum carbide nitride composites, the synergistic effect of Mo2C and Mo2N influences the charge transfer leading to better HER activity of the composites.99,112 An amorphous structure, a disordered lattice, and edges having unsaturated coordination are some characteristics which lead to the efficiency of an electrocatalyst. These hetero anions not only contribute to the electronic structure of the metals, but also contribute significantly to hydrogen binding on the surfaces.
Demonstration of two-electrode water splitting
On a laboratory scale, the overall water splitting was investigated using the electrocatalysts as cathode and anode in a two-electrode glass cell assembly. When these electrocatalysts are bifunctional, i.e. active for both HER and OER, then these catalysts were assembled as both cathode and anode. Otherwise, an active OER catalyst can be integrated with these HER catalysts in a two-electrode configuration. These extraordinary electrocatalysts like TMPs are generally active for both HER and OER, i.e. bifunctional electrocatalysts. NiCoP/CC was demonstrated for practical application in a two electrode assembly for overall water splitting95 where NiCoP/CC acts as a bi-functional electrocatalyst for both cathode and anode. It generates a cell voltage of 1.52 V at 10 mA cm−2. NiCoP hybrids with reduced graphene oxide (rGO)93 were used to fabricate a two-electrode assembly for overall water splitting which yielded 10 mA cm−2 at 1.59 V in 1.0M KOH and was stable over 75 h with a Faradic efficiency of ≈100%. NiCoP nanostructures on Ni foam were used in overall water splitting in a two-electrode configuration94 which exhibited a cell voltage of 1.58 V at 10 mA cm−2 in alkaline media. However, Cu3P on Ni foam113 exhibited a higher cell voltage of 1.67 V in overall water splitting at 10 mA cm−2. Fe and O doped Co2P grown on Ni foam exhibited 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage as low as 1.56 V in overall water splitting.114 Bi-functional electrocatalysts like nickel iron phosphide/sulphide (NiFeSP) were integrated with photoactive materials like photocathode Cu2O and photoanode BiVO4 to get overall water splitting in two electrode configuration using solar light.96 It exhibited a cell voltage of 1.58 V at a current density of 10 mA cm−2.
Role of conducting supports
Conducting substrates play a very crucial role in supporting the electrocatalysts in the hydrogen evolution activity in terms of enhancing the electrochemical stability, active surface area and facile charge transport. Carbon based materials have unique advantages due to their high electron mobility, tunable molecular structures, abundance and strong tolerance to acidic/alkaline environments.115 Various non-metallic heteroatom (N, B, O, S, P, F) doped graphene were coupled with HER catalysts and their efficiencies were investigated. The orbitals of C atoms at the active sites overlap with the adsorbed H* to form bonding and antibonding levels.115 Heteroatoms having higher electronegativity decrease the charge density on active centers which reduces the ΔGH and enhances HER. It was predicted that N,P co-doped graphene surfaces can have low ΔGH* and high HER activity.115 N,S co-doped graphene surfaces were synthesized and investigated for HER activity (Fig. 11).116 These N,S co-doped graphene surfaces were synthesized using pyridine and thiophene in a H2/Ar atmosphere (Fig. 11a) and were confirmed using elemental mapping (Fig. 11c). The HBE of the N, S co-doped graphene is similar to that of Pt and is reflected in HER activity (Fig. 11d). It exhibits the lowest charge transfer resistance during HER activity which also corroborates with the HER activity (Fig. 11e and f).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of N,S co-doped graphene and schematic representation of the defect structures, (b) TEM images showing sheet morphology, (c) elemental mapping showing the presence of N,S in graphene sheets, (d) free energy diagram showing that the HBE of N,S co-doped graphene is similar to that of Pt. (e) LSV curves showing the HER activity of various doped graphene systems and (f) Nyquist plot showing lower charge transfer resistance in N,S co-doped graphene. (The figures were adapted from ref. 116 with the permission of John Wiley and Sons.) 
Therefore, the role of graphene in the composites/hybrids with electrocatalysts can be understood from various studies like graphene–Mo2C,117–119 graphene–MoP,59,120 graphene–MoS2,121etc. The following have been found as the key role of graphene/other carbon materials.
(1) Heteroatom doped graphene/other carbon materials are involved as a co-catalyst in the composites and contribute directly to the HER performance of the composites/hybrids.
(2) It provides good support to the primary electrocatalysts.
(3) It enhances the air-stability as well as electrochemical stability to the electrocatalysts.
(4) In hybrids, the interfaces between graphene and electrocatalysts provide a better electronic environment to the metal centers at the interfaces which facilitates the HER activity.
(5) It provides a high surface area and more number of catalysts|electrolyte interfaces which lead to better HER performances.
(6) It lowers the cost of the catalysts and enhances the durability of the catalysts.
Our group has developed rGO–Mo2C and rGO–MoP composites (Fig. 12a) and has clearly indicated the role of rGO in the composites.59,117 In rGO–Mo2C composites, Mo2C rods were coupled with rGO where the ratio of rGO/Mo2C contributes significantly to the HER activity and stability of Mo2C (Fig. 12b). Higher rGO content in the composite reduces the HER activity due to low content of the primary catalyst (Mo2C). The graphene–MoP composite exhibits good HER activity in both acidic and alkaline media and it has been confirmed that the presence of rGO in the composite enhances the current density drastically (Fig. 12c and d). This indicates the significant contribution of rGO in the composite to HER activity.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the graphene–MoP composite for HER, (b) LSV curves of various graphene–Mo2C composites showing that the amount of graphene is important in the composite (adapted from ref. 117 with the permission of Elsevier). (c) LSV curves of graphene–MoP in acidic and alkaline media and (d) LSV curve of MoP showing drastically enhanced current density in the composite with graphene (figures a, c and d were adapted from ref. 59 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
MoS2 particles/sheets normally aggregate when synthesized using wet chemical methods. Graphene acts as an important substrate/support for the nucleation and subsequent growth of highly dispersed MoS2 without agglomeration. The strong chemical and electronic coupling between the graphene sheets and MoS2 leads to good HER activity121 with a small overpotential of ∼0.1 V, a large cathodic current, and a small Tafel slope of 41 mV decade−1. The interconnected conducting network of graphene sheets facilitates electron transport from the active catalyst (MoS2 nanoparticles) to the electrodes.121 The extremely low conductivity and aggregation in MoSx materials is an inherent problem for HER applications.122 However, introducing conducting supports like graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and other mesoporous carbon materials to MoSx nanostructures by making composites, heterojunctions, core–shell, etc. dramatically improves the electrocatalytic activity. MoS2/rGO hybrids121 have been developed where small MoS2 crystals were embedded on the conducting reduced graphene oxide. The rGO support significantly enhanced the electrocatalytic activity of MoS2 with a small onset overpotential of 100 mV and a low Tafel slope of 41 mV dec−1. This is attributed to the increase in the number of edges (active sites) due to the reduced sizes of MoS2 crystals as well as the enhanced electrical conductivity.122 Since rGO and MoS2/rGO become agglomerated due to restacking of the layers during the hydrothermal process, a ternary composite of MoS2/WC-rGO was developed where WC acts as the conductive dispersant to prevent the restacking of layers.123,124 This results in higher exposed surfaces leading to the excellent HER activity. The presence of WC contributes to the dispersion of MoS2 as well as generates a synergistic effect between WC/rGO and MoS2 layers in the form of conductivity and porosity. Jaramillo et al.125 reported the growth of core–shell MoO3/MoS2 nanowire catalysts where the sub-stoichiometric MoO3 (MoO3−x) serves as a conducting core and the MoS2 shell acts as both a HER catalyst and a protective layer. To further improve the electrocatalytic HER efficiency, research on three dimensional (3D) electrodes was carried out where mesoporous graphene foam (MGF) supports MoS2 nanocrystals.126 This 3D-MGF provides a very high specific surface area to grow MoS2 nanocrystals in a well dispersed manner with rich edge sites where conducting and mesoporous graphene allows the diffusion of electrons and ions.126 This in turn results in the high HER activity of the MoS2/MGF nanocomposite with a low onset overpotential of 100 mV and a small Tafel slope of 42 mV dec−1. Li et al.127 have realized the formation of MoSx (x ≥ 2) on graphene-protected nickel foam (MoSx/graphene/3D Ni) where excellent catalytic activity was observed due to the conductivity with the use of a 3D graphene/Ni foam support and the presence of bridging S22− or apical S2−. Banerjee et al.128 used interface engineering to enhance the HER performance of low-dimensional materials. The 3D array of MoS2 nanosheets interfaced with nC60 was proven to be an excellent catalyst compared to the bulk or nanostructured MoS2 in terms of HER performance. Density functional theory calculations of C60/MoS2 also agreed with the experimental results. Hexagonal rings of C60 were placed above the S sites of MoS2 basal planes which allowed buckminsterfullerene to rotate freely on the surface.129 This helps in the charge transfer process from C60 to MoS2 upon interfacing and increases the electron density on MoS2 and hence reduces the resistance of the hybrid materials. Electrons can easily be donated from C60 to MoS2 making the interfacial layer conductive as well as polarize the Mo–S bonds which helps to enhance the catalytic activity.
The hybrids of transition metal phosphides (TMPs) with carbonaceous materials like carbon nanotubes (CNTs), mesoporous carbon, graphite, graphene, etc. can not only increase the dispersion of the active components due to their high surface area and the conductivity of the hybrid catalysts, but also modulate the electron density and the distribution of electronic potential in the hybrid materials which significantly enhances their HER activity and stability.130,131
CoNi encapsulated by graphene layers exhibited good HER activity where HBE calculations suggest that CoNi@C exhibits thermoneutral hydrogen binding compared to bare CoNi and CoNi@NC (Fig. 13a). A schematic has been shown to represent the CoNi@C where graphene layers were coated on CoNi (Fig. 13b). The role of graphene layers on CoNi alloy particles was analyzed in detail using DFT and electron density analysis.131 It was observed that the Gibbs free energy (Fig. 13c) decreases in the presence of graphene layers. The change in the Gibbs free energy follows the Volcano plot (Fig. 13d) where graphene encapsulated CoNi exhibited thermo-neutral hydrogen binding. The differential electron density (Fig. 13e) clearly indicates that electrons from CoNi can penetrate through a maximum of three graphene layers. The difference in the Gibbs free energy ΔΔGH*(ΔGwithout metal − ΔGwith metal) in the presence and absence of CoNi is 0.8 eV in the presence of single layer graphene and it decreases with the number of graphene layers. Simultaneously, the electronic potential decreases with the number of graphene layers. This suggests that graphene layer thickness has a significant role in HER where higher graphene thickness deteriorates the HER activity of the electrocatalysts.131
 Fig. 13  (a) Free energy diagram showing the thermo-neutral HBE of CoNi@C, (b) schematic representation of graphene layers on CoNi, (c) change in the Gibbs free energy ΔΔGH*(ΔGwithout metal − ΔGwith metal) and electronic potentials with the number of graphene layers, (d) Volcano curve where CoNi@C is on the top of the curve suggesting higher HER activity and (e) differential electron density mapping with number of graphene layers. (The figures were adapted from ref. 131 with the permission of John Wiley and Sons). 
Other than graphene, carbon nanotubes and nanofibers were used to hybridize with electrocatalysts for enhancing the charge transport and hence to enhance the HER activity.56,132,133 CNTs decorated with CoP nanocrystals were shown to exhibit remarkable enhancement in the HER activity than bare CoP nanocrystals due to the excellent conductivity of CNTs which facilitate the charge transport.133 Recently, black phosphorus (BP) was used to support MoS2 and the supported MoS2 was demonstrated as a superior electrocatalyst for HER.134 The Fermi level of black phosphorus is at higher energy than that of MoS2 which results in electron transfer from black phosphorus to MoS2. This leads to higher HER activity with an exchange current density of 0.66 mA cm−2 which is 22 times higher134 than that of bare MoS2. Polymer binders are important in electrode preparation where the binders increase the series resistance, block the active sites and inhibit diffusion which results in poor performance in electrocatalysis. In recent years, binder free 3D self-supported electrodes are becoming more and more popular in electrochemical research and exhibit much better electrochemical performance. Common 3D current collectors like metal foam (Cu, Ni, Ti, etc.), carbon cloth (CC), etc. possess excellent conductivity, large surface area, etc. and thus effectively increase the electrode|electrolyte interface. Sun and coworkers have successfully developed a series of well-designed transition metal phosphides (TMPs) like FeP,135 CoP,136 WP,137etc. on carbon cloth which exhibit remarkable HER activity and stability. The self-supported Ni2P138 array on Ni foam was shown to hold promise as an efficient, scalable, low-cost electrode for HER application. The use of 3D self-supported electrodes can increase the current density by nearly 5–6 times at the same overpotential.21
Role of media
Hydrogen evolution reactions are highly dependent on the type of electrolytes. NiCo2Px exhibits a current density of 1 mA cm−2 and 10 mA cm−2 due to HER at an overpotential of 11 mV and 58 mV respectively in KOH media, whereas Pt exhibits 1 mA cm−2 at 23 mV overpotential. In 1 M phosphate buffer (PBS) (pH = 7.0) and 0.5 M H2SO4 media, NiCo2Px requires a higher overpotential of 63 mV and 104 mV respectively to realize a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in HER.139 If we look at the Tafel slopes in various media, it is found that the HER process follows the Volmer–Tafel mechanism in KOH media, whereas the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism is indicated in PBS and H2SO4. In acidic media, the Volmer reaction in the HER process was effectively accelerated.139
In the mechanism of the water splitting processes139 using NiCo2Px as a catalyst (i) first, H2O molecules near the electrochemical double layer at the surface are affected. H–OH bond weakening occurs by coordination to the metal centers (Mδ+) with O atoms. The interactions between P atoms (Pδ−) having dangling bonds and hydrogen atoms are very crucial for metal phosphide based electrocatalysts. (ii) H–OH bond breaking with the aid of free electrons. (iii) OH− is adsorbed on Mδ+ sites while the hydrogen atom is adsorbed on the nearby vacant Mδ+ site. This whole process is kinetically controlled. (iv) OH− desorption from the metal sites. Now Niδ+ is more effective for OH− desorption in alkaline solution compared to Coδ+ which has higher activity in Heyrovsky and Tafel steps compared to Niδ+. In NiCo2Px, the surface Niδ+ sites assist in the dissociation of water while the surface Coδ+ sites facilitate H2 generation.139
The HER processes in neutral media are not so effective for most of the electrocatalysts. However, activated Ni3S2@NPC exhibited remarkable HER activity in neutral media.140 This is an excellent pH-universal electrocatalyst. It required an overpotential of 91.6 mV to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with a Tafel slope of 63.5 mV dec−1.140 WP2 showed excellent HER activity in a wide range of pH.141 The hydrogen binding energy is proportional to the pH value.142 Yan et al.143 have shown the polarization curves for Pt in buffer solutions of varying pH values and compared the overpotential at a fixed current density of 1 mA cm−2. It was found that with increasing pH of the media, the HER activity decreases. The overpotential value changes drastically from 3 mV to 20 mV to reach a current density of 1 mA cm−2 when the pH changes from 0 to 13 (Fig. 14a). It was found that the hydrogen binding energy of Pt increases with the increase in the pH of the electrolyte (Fig. 14b). This results in stronger hydrogen binding on the Pt surface which leads to slow desorption of hydrogen. However, the role of the anions present in various electrolytes was not discussed in the hydrogen binding energies (HBE) of the Pt electrode. This suggests that the site poisoning of the Pt electrode which might result in higher overpotential was neglected.
 Fig. 14  HER activity of Pt over the full range of pH. (a) Steady state polarization with positive-going sweeps of Pt showing increasing overpotential with increasing pH and (b) HBE of Pt at various pH of the solution. The figures were adapted from ref. 143 with the permission of Nature Publishing Group. 
Role of wettability of the catalyst
Interface engineering gives us a new direction to control the catalyst|electrolyte interfaces which remarkably influences the electrocatalytic activity. Generation of gas bubbles at the flat surface of the catalyst is a big issue for most of the electrocatalysts causing an ohmic drop and lowering the current density by blocking the diffusion of the electrolyte.
Jiang et al.144 have reported that MoS2 nanostructures with a superaerophobic surface show excellent HER performance compared to their flat MoS2 counterpart. The HER activity was even better than expected from Pt/C (20 wt%) at high overpotentials. This superaerophobic architecture does not allow gas bubbles to adhere on the MoS2 surface during the hydrogen evolution reaction.144,145 In contrast, the flat MoS2 shows poor HER activity due to the accumulation of bubbles on its surface. In Fig. 15a and b, the schematic representations of flat MoS2 and textured MoS2 and their corresponding SEM images are shown. The superior HER activity of textured MoS2 (Fig. 15c) was reflected due to better electrode|electrolyte interfaces. Now the bubble formation disturbs the electrode|electrolyte interfaces. Smaller bubbles disturb less compare to that of larger bubbles. The size of the bubbles on the electrodes was observed using digital images (Fig. 15d and e) where smaller bubble formation can be observed on the nanostructured MoS2 electrode indicating superaerophobic surface. Girault and co-workers146 reported hydrogen evolution at the aqueous|organic interface where MoS2 on mesoporous carbon particles exhibits better HER activity compared to that of either graphene supported MoS2 or nanocrystalline MoS2. The mechanism of hydrogen evolution is as follows. (i) In the first step, protons were adsorbed on the edge sites (S sites) of MoS2via pumping across the interface. (ii) Electrons were transferred to MoS2 from mesoporous carbon via nano-Schottky junctions. (iii) Band bending occurs due to the excess negative charge transfer from graphene to MoS2. The schematic diagram suggests that the electrons are injected from decamethylferrocene (DMFc) to graphene close to the Fermi level and then are transferred to an empty state in the conduction band of MoS2. (iv) Finally, the electrons are transferred to the adsorbed hydrogen atom at a catalytic edge site (H*).
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic representation of the adhesion behavior of gas bubbles on nanostructured and flat films. (b) SEM images of flat and nanostructured MoS2 films. (c) LSV curves showing the HER activity of nanostructured MoS2 and flat MoS2. Digital images showing bubble formation on (d) flat MoS2 film and (e) nanostructured MoS2 film. Scale bar: 500 μm. The corresponding statistics of size distribution of releasing bubbles are shown at the right (the figures were adapted from ref. 144 with the permission of John Wiley and Sons). 
Robinson et al. have reported the role of hydrophobicity of the MoS2 electrodes in HER activity147 where MoS2 flowers on graphite are at different surface wetness with the range of contact angle from 30° to 160°. Controlling the contact angle by treating the MoS2 surface using UV-ozone results in lowering of the contact angle and hence enhanced HER activity with a lower Tafel slope.147 Hydrophilic electrodes have a large electrochemical active surface area and hence there are higher areas of contact between the catalysts and electrolyte. This lowers the adhesion force to a gas bubble compared to that of hydrophobic electrodes. Therefore, in case of hydrophilic surfaces, more protons can interact with the active sites, and the lower adhesion force leads to the quick release of H2 bubbles from the electrode surfaces148 which maintains the contact between the catalysts and electrolyte. The hydrophilicity reduces the size of the gas bubbles sticking on the electrode surfaces which leads to higher HER activity. Hydrophilic carbon papers combined with electrolytes having strong adhesion forces can lead to a better electrocatalyst.149 MoS2 flowers exhibit a higher contact angle of ∼160° ± 10° which suggests their superhydrophobic nature. After O2 etching, the edges were modified which results in increased surface wettability. The wettability in MoS2 flowers was investigated by tuning the morphology and creating mechanical strain. Higher mechanical strain (0–200%) can result in contact angles150 of 115°–150°. The thickness of the electrodes also influences the wettability of the electrode. Lower thickness results in higher contact angles.151 Pine shaped Pt nanostructures exhibit superaerophobic nature leading to ultra-high HER activity. It has lower the bubble adhesion force (11.5 ± 1.2 μN) and higher bubble contact angle (161.3° ± 3.4°) in water. This results in smaller bubble formation which are released from the Pt surfaces.152
Summary
In this perspective, the importance of hydrogen evolution and its fundamental aspects were discussed in the light of advancement in this specific area. The fundamental electrochemistry behind the HER processes was covered. Most importantly, the properties of the nanostructures/nanocrystals which play a crucial role in controlling the HER activity of the nanocrystals were discussed. These properties include surface chemistry of the nanostructures (facets, surface energy, doping, edges, etc.), the role of heteroatoms (doping with hetero metal ions, anions), the role of supports, the role of media (electrolytes, pH) and the role of surface wettability. Each of these properties significantly contributes to the HER activity of the nanocatalysts and were discussed in detail with examples. It has been shown that surface energies, defects and exposed facets/edges are very important to control the HER activity. To design better electrocatalysts, the incorporation of heteroatoms and providing conducting supports are very important. It has been shown that the number of layers of graphene (an important substrate) plays a very crucial role. Most importantly, the surface wettability is very crucial to get better electrocatalysts.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
AKG thanks DST, Govt. of India, for financial support. KO and PD thank INST and SS thanks CSIR for fellowship.
References
J. A. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 687–689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pu, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, Y. Luo, X. Sun and Y. He, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 168, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balat and H. Balat, Energy Sources, Part A, 2009, 31, 1280–1293 CrossRef CAS .
D. Merki and X. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3878 CAS .
W. H. Hu, X. Shang, G. Q. Han, B. Dong, Y. R. Liu, X. Li, Y. M. Chai, Y. Q. Liu and C. G. Liu, Carbon, 2016, 100, 236–242 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Han, X. Shang, S. S. Lu, B. Dong, X. Li, Y. R. Liu, W. H. Hu, J. Bin Zeng, Y. M. Chai and C. G. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 5132–5138 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Dresselhaus and I. L. Thomas, Nature, 2001, 414, 332–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Benck, T. R. Hellstern, J. Kibsgaard, P. Chakthranont and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3957–3971 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, N. Cheng, Z. Pu, W. Xing and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9351–9355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chia, A. Y. S. Eng, A. Ambrosi, S. M. Tan and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11941–11966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, R.-S. Liu, L. Zhang, J. Zhang and D. P. Wilkinson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5654–5671 RSC .
J. Greeley, J. K. Nørskov, L. A. Kibler, A. M. El-Aziz and D. M. Kolb, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 1032–1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Gray, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 112 CrossRef CAS .
W.-F. Chen, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8896–8909 RSC .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hanada, S. Hino, T. Ichikawa, H. Suzuki, K. Takai and Y. Kojima, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7775–7777 RSC .
K. Yang, Q. Yao, W. Huang, X. Chen and Z.-H. Lu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 42, 6840–6850 CrossRef .
N. Cao, T. Liu, J. Su, X. Wu, W. Luo and G. Cheng, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 4032–4035 RSC .
M. Moreno-Benito, P. Agnolucci and L. G. Papageorgiou, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2017, 102, 110–127 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Brandon and Z. Kurban, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2017, 375, 201604000 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Coontz and B. Hanson, Science, 2004, 305, 957 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jain, Y. Shin and K. A. Persson, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15004 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jena, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 206–211 CrossRef CAS .
I. Dincer and C. Acar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 14843–14864 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. N. Thomas, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1961, 57, 1603–1611 RSC .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
J. O. Bockris and E. C. Potter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1952, 99, 169–186 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Lasia, in Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, ed. B. E. Conway and R. E. White, Kluwer/Plenum, New York,  2002, vol. 35, pp. 1–49 Search PubMed .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1972, 39, 163–184 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. R. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov and U. Stimming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, J23–J26 CrossRef .
A. B. Laursen, A. So, F. Dionigi, H. Fanchiu, C. Miller, O. L. Trinhammer, J. Rossmeisl and S. Dahl, J. Chem. Educ., 2012, 89, 1595–1599 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L.-A. Stern and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555–6569 RSC .
W. Sheng, M. Myint, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1509–1512 CAS .
M. H. Abd Elhamid, B. G. Ateya, K. G. Weil and H. W. Pickering, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2148–2150 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhuang, A. J. Tkalych and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 23698–23706 CAS .
H. Gao, W. Zhen, J. Ma and G. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 353–363 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kong, H. Wang, J. J. Cha, M. Pasta, K. J. Koski, J. Yao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1341–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, B. Huang, C. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. An, D. Zhou, H. Lin, M. K. H. Leung, S. Yang, J. Lou, M. Chhowalla, G. Sumanasekera, A. D. Mohite, M. K. Sunkara and G. Gupta, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 593–603 CAS .
M. Nanocatalysts, T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Xue and P. Diao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14413–14425 CAS .
Y. Sun, F. Alimohammadi, D. Zhang and G. Guo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1963–1969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. Wang, X. Sun, M. Zhou, J. Zhou, X. W. D. Lou and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5807–5813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Nørskov and X. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2015, 15, 48–53 CrossRef PubMed .
X. B. Chen and G. J. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 9388–9395 RSC .
X.-L. Fan, Y. Yang, P. Xiao and W.-M. Lau, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20545–20551 CAS .
G. Ye, Y. Gong, J. Lin, B. Li, Y. He, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1097–1103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Tan, P. Liu, C. Guo, M. Luo, J. Han, T. Lin, F. Huang and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8945–8949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Zhang and T. You, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15927–15934 CAS .
H. Liang, H. Shi, D. Zhang, F. Ming, R. Wang, J. Zhuo and Z. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5587–5591 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ojha, S. Saha, B. Kumar, K. S. Hazra and A. K. Ganguli, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 1218–1225 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ojha, M. Sharma, H. Kolev and A. K. Ganguli, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 668–676 CAS .
H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12703–12706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xiao, Y. Yan, X. Ge, Z. Liu, J. Y. Wang and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 154–155, 232–237 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan, Y. N. Regmi and B. M. Leonard, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6407–6410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Michalsky, Y. Zhang and A. A. Peterson, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1274–1278 CrossRef CAS .
W.-F. Chen, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8896–8909 RSC .
B. Cao, G. M. Veith, J. C. Neuefeind, R. R. Adzic and P. G. Khalifah, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19186–19192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, S. Li, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, R. Wang, H. Zhang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4615–4620 RSC .
W.-F. Chen, K. Sasaki, C. Ma, A. I. Frenkel, N. Marinkovic, J. T. Muckerman, Y. Zhu and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6131–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Li, G. Zhang, T. Xu, P. Wan and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6306–6310 CAS .
P. Kln, T. Nareshkumar and N. Chandrasekaran, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5052–5055 RSC .
H. Zhang, L. Lei and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54344–54348 RSC .
C. Xu, S. Peng, C. Tan, H. Ang, H. Tan, H. Zhang and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5597–5601 CAS .
M. a. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, C. R. English, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2608–2613 CAS .
T. Bligaard and J. K. Norskov, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 5512–5516 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kitchin, J. K. Norskov, M. A. Barteau and J. G. Chen, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 10240–10246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Yang, Y. A. Zhu, X. G. Zhou, Z. J. Sui and D. Chen, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1247–1258 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hammer and J. K. Norskov, Nature, 1995, 376, 238–240 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gudmundsdottir, E. Skulason, K.-J. Weststrate, L. Juurlinkb and H. Jonsson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6323–6332 RSC .
J. Kibsgaard, C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. D. Benck, J. K. Nørskov, F. Abild-pedersen and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3022–3029 CAS .
C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov and F. Abild-Pedersen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 246–253 CAS .
H. Pan, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–6 RSC .
H. Lin, N. Liu, Z. Shi, Y. Guo, Y. Tang and Q. Gao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5590–5598 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bonde, P. G. Moses, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskovb and I. Chorkendorff, Faraday Discuss., 2008, 140, 219–231 RSC .
T. A. Shifa, F. Wang, K. Liu, K. Xu, Z. Wang, X. Zhan, C. Jiang and J. He, Small, 2016, 3802–3809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chang Kwon, S. Choi, J. Lee, K. Hong, W. Sohn, D. M. Andoshe, K. S. Choi, Y. Kim, S. Han, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15534–15542 CAS .
L. Fan, P. F. Liu, X. Yan, L. Gu, Z. Z. Yang, H. G. Yang, S. Qiu and X. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ge, S.-P. Gao, P. Dong, R. Baines, P. M. Ajayan, M. Ye and J. Shen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5538–5544 RSC .
J. Wang, J. Liu, B. Zhang, X. Ji, K. Xu, C. Chen, L. Miao and J. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 10125–10132 RSC .
H. Pan, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chia, A. Ambrosi, P. Lazar, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14241–14253 CAS .
E. J. Popczun, J. R. Mckone, C. G. Read, A. J. Biacchi, A. M. Wiltrout, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9267–9270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Callejas, C. G. Read, C. W. Roske, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6017–6044 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Wexler, J. M. P. Martirez and A. M. Rappe, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7718–7725 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, M. Yan, X. Zhou, Z. Q. Huang, Z. Xia, C. R. Chang, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6785–6796 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, A. N. Gandi, D. H. Anjum, X. Wang, U. Schwingenschlögl and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7718–7725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Du, L. Yang, F. Yang, G. Cheng and W. Luo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4131–4137 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xin, X. Kan, L. Y. Gan and Z. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10303–10312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Chung, S. W. Jun, G. Yoon, H. Kim, J. M. Yoo, K. S. Lee, T. Kim, H. Shin, A. K. Sinha, S. G. Kwon, K. Kang, T. Hyeon and Y. E. Sung, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6669–6674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, A.-Y. Lu, Y. Zhu, S. Min, M. N. Hedhili, Y. Han, K.-W. Huang and L.-J. Li, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10974–10981 RSC .
W.-F. Chen, S. Iyer, S. Iyer, K. Sasaki, C.-H. Wang, Y. Zhu, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1818–1826 CAS .
J. Kibsgaard and T. F. Jaramillo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14433–14437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, W. Wang, A. Sun, C. Qi, D. Zhang, Z. Wu and D. Wang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6956–6963 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cabán-Acevedo, M. L. Stone, J. R. Schmidt, J. G. Thomas, Q. Ding, H.-C. Chang, M.-L. Tsai, J.-H. He and S. Jin, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1245–1251 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Liu, E. Hu, H. Jiang, Y. Xiang, Z. Weng, M. Li, Q. Fan, X. Yu, E. I. Altman and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, X. Li, W. Liu, Y. Zhong, Q. Gan, X. Li and H. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4026–4032 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, H. Wang, G. Su, Y. Tang, H. Liu, F. Tian and D. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14865–14872 CAS .
J. Li, Z. Xia, X. Zhou, Y. Qin, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 814–825 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shi, K. Nie, Z.-J. Shao, B. Gao, H. Lin, H. Zhang, B. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Sun, X.-M. Cao, P. Hu, Q. Gao and Y. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1262–1271 CAS .
Y. Zhao, K. Kamiya, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13638–13641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Y. Sun, Y. He, L. Liu, J. Xu, X. Zhao, G. Yin, L. Zhang, S. Li, Q. Mao, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, Q. Fan, Y. Li, F. Cheng, P. Zhou, P. Xi and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14546–14549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, X. F. Hao, Z. Jiang, X. P. Sun, D. Xu, J. Wang, H. X. Zhong, F. L. Meng and X. B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15070–15073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, R. Rai, S. Gautam, A. De Sarkar, N. Tiwari, S. N. Jha, D. Bhattacharyya, A. K. Ganguli and V. Bagchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7764–7768 CAS .
A. Han, H. Zhang, R. Yuan, H. Ji and P. Du, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2240–2248 CAS .
J. Duan, S. Chen, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8738–8745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. H. Li, T. Xing, Y. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5290–5296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ito, W. Cong, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2131–2136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ojha, S. Saha, H. Kolev, B. Kumar and A. K. Ganguli, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 193, 268–274 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cui, N. Cheng, Q. Liu, C. Ge, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2658–2661 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Pan, Y. H. Li, S. Yang, P. F. Liu, M. Q. Yu and H. G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13135–13137 RSC .
W. Cui, Q. Liu, Z. Xing, A. M. Asiri, K. A. Alamry and X. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 164, 144–150 CrossRef .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, B. Xia, Z. Xu and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1693–1705 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, B. Xia, X. Qi, H. Wang, R. Xu, J.-Y. Wang, H. Zhang and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4884 RSC .
L. H. Bennett, J. R. Cuthill, A. J. McAlister, N. E. Erickson and R. E. Watson, Science, 1974, 181, 563–565 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, D. Cummins, B. N. Reinecke, E. Clark, M. K. Sunkara and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4168–4175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liao, J. Zhu, X. Bian, L. Zhu, M. D. Scanlon, H. H. Girault and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5326–5333 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Chang, C. Te Lin, T. Y. Chen, C. L. Hsu, Y. H. Lee, W. Zhang, K. H. Wei and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 756–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Choi, J. Lee, A. Parija, J. Cho, S. V. Verkhoturov, M. Al-Hashimi, L. Fang and S. Banerjee, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6246–6254 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Gan, Q. Zhang, Y. Cheng and U. Schwingenschlögl, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1445–1449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wu, J. Zhang, Y. Shi, D. Liu and B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6983–6986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, P. Ren, D. Deng and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2100–2104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, Y. Zhao, D. Fu and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5783–5788 CAS .
Q. Liu, J. Tian, W. Cui, P. Jiang, N. Cheng and A. M. Asiri, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6710–6714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. He, J. Hua, A. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Peng, W. Chen and J. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4311–4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun and Y. Luo, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 4065–4069 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7587–7590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pu, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21874–21879 CAS .
X. Wang, Y. V. Kolen’Ko, X. Q. Bao, K. Kovnir and L. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8188–8192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, X. Wang, S. Yu, T. Wen, X. Zhu, F. Yang, X. Sun, X. Wang and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605502 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yang, M. Y. Gao, Q. B. Zhang, J. R. Zeng, X. T. Li and A. P. Abbott, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 85–94 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, S. Gu, R. Liu and C. M. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 540–545 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sheng, Z. Zhuang, M. Gao, J. Zheng, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sheng, Z. Zhuang, M. Gao, J. Zheng, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, W. Zhu, X. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Sun, X. Wang, H. Wang, J. Wang, J. Luo, X. Lei and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2683–2687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie and Y. Xie, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2568–2580 CrossRef CAS .
D. Scanlon, P. Peljo, X. Bian, H. Vubrel, A. O. Neill, J. N. Coleman, M. Cantoni, X. Hu, B. Liu and H. H. Girault, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6484–6486 RSC .
G. R. Bhimanapati, T. Hankins, Y. Lei, R. A. Viliá, I. Fuller, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 22190–22195 CAS .
C. Meng, B. Wang, Z. Gao, Z. Liu, Q. Zhang and J. Zhai, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-W. Chen, S.-Y. Lin and C.-Y. Chiang, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 4638–4646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, J. Mun, M. C. Wang, A. Ashraf, S. W. Kang and S. W. Nam, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1756–1761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. S. Gaur, S. Sahoo, M. Ahmadi, S. P. Dash, M. J. F. Guinel and R. S. Katiyar, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4314–4321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, T. Xu, Z. Lu, X. Wu, P. Wan, X. Sun and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1737–1744 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
Table Content:

Kasinath Ojha
	Dr Ojha received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India, in 2016. He worked as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Institute of Nano Science and Technology, Mohali, India, during 2016–2017. Currently, he is a GTEP Outstanding Post-Doctoral fellow at the Eisenberg lab for Electrochemistry and Energy at the Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, Technion. His long-term research interest is on heterogeneous catalysis, electrochemistry, photoelectrochemical energy conversion and storage, and renewable and clean energy systems.

Soumen Saha
	Dr Saha received his MSc degree in chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur and PhD degree in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi in 2017. His research work under Prof. Ashok K. Ganguli was synthesis of binary/ternary alloy nanostructures and their applications for electrochemical water splitting (HER/OER) for generation of renewable energy. He is currently a research associate at the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Delhi.

Preeti Dagar
	Ms Dagar completed her BSc degree (Chemistry, Hons.) in 2014 from Delhi University and MSc degree (Physical chemistry) in 2016 from Jamia Millia Islamia University, New Delhi, India. Currently she is working as a PhD student under Prof. Ashok K. Ganguli at the Institute of Nanoscience and Technology, Mohali, India. Her research focuses on 2D|3D semiconductor heterojunctions for photo-electrochemical applications including water splitting, oxygen evolution reactions and solar energy conversion.

Ashok K. Ganguli
	Dr Ganguli is the founding Director of the Institute of Nano Science and Technology in Mohali and Professor of Chemistry, IIT Delhi. His areas of interest are in the design of nanostructured materials and high temperature superconductivity. He has published over 250 papers and has filed four patents. He is a recipient of the National Award of Nano Science and Nanotechnology given by the DST, Government of India. He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, London, Indian Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Sciences, India. Dr Ganguli is also a very keen speaker for science education in schools and colleges and is spearheading an Outreach program at INST, Mohali, for rural school students in remote parts of India in which he has visited more than 250 schools in the last two years.
2H+ + 2e− → H2
2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−
j = j0[e−αfη − e(1−α)fη] where f = F/RT
j = j0[e−αfη]

 		 

 		 
η = a + bln(j)

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 1  (a) The current density vs. overpotential plot at varying transfer coefficient, (b) current density of the process having different exchange current density (j0) and (c) Tafel plot showing varying slopes at different transfer coefficients. (Adapted from ref. 33 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 
H+ + e− + M(active site) ⇄ MHads (acidic media)
H2O + e− + M(active site) ⇄ MHads + OH− (alkaline media)
H+ + e− + MHads ⇄ M + H2 (acidic media)
H2O + e− + MHads ⇄ M + OH− + H2 (alkaline media)
2MHads ⇄ 2M + H2
v1 = k1(1 − Θ) − k−1Θ
v2 = k2Θ − k−2(1 − Θ)
v3 = k3Θ2 − k−3(1 − Θ)2

 		 
log(j0) = 6.7Φ − 36.6

 	Fig. 2  Volcano plot of different metals (a) in acidic medium and (b) in alkaline medium (figure a has been adapted from ref. 39 and figure b has been adapted from ref. 40 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 
jc = jr + ja

 		 

 		 

 		 
j0 = Fk1CH+(1 − ΘeH)

 		 
ΔGH = ΔEH + ΔEZPE − TΔSH
v1 = Fk1CH+(1 − Θ)

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Volcano plot of TMCs and metals based on the surface energies, (b) variation in the current density and terminal S22− and S2− as a function of carbon black (CB) content and (c) variation in the current density (HER activity) as a function of MoS2 edge length density showing linear dependence. Figures a, b and c were adapted with permission from ref. 42, 47 and 48 respectively. Copyright (2016) and copyright (2017) the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of stepped edge terminated MoS2, (b) TEM image showing stepped edges, (c) SEM image of stepped edges. (d) Schematic representation of flat edge terminated MoS2, (e) SEM image of flat edge terminated MoS2. (f) Free energy diagram of hydrogen binding on stepped edges and flat edges and (g) p–π resonance in flat and stepped edge terminated MoS2. The figures were adapted from ref. 45 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Free energy diagram of hydrogen binding on MoS2 having S vacancies, (b) LSV curve of MoS2 with S vacancy and strain showing current density due to HER (figures a and b were adapted from ref. 51 with the permission of Nature Publishing Group), (c) LSV curves before and after oxygen plasma treatment of MoS2 and (d) LSV curves showing better HER activity of MoS2 under 500 °C hydrogen annealing compared to that of 400 and 600 °C (figures c and d were adapted from ref. 54 with the permission of the American Chemical Society).	 
ΔE = ΔEsp + ΔEhyb-d

 	Fig. 6  Theoretical aspect of HER catalyzed by transition metals, (a) adsorbate–metal bond formation showing metal projected density of states, (b) overlap of adsorbate sigma orbitals and the metal d-band, (c) shift in the d-band center with bandwidth (figures a and c were adapted from ref. 73 with the permission of Elsevier) and (d) variation of the d-band center in alloys (adapted from ref. 75 with the permission of the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  d-Band center in different metals, (a) metal projected density of states showing the position of the antibonding state with respect to the Fermi level (adapted from ref. 76), (b) variation of hydrogen binding energy in different metals with the d-band center and (c) variation of HBE with the d-band center upon alloying of different metals. (Figures b and c were adapted from ref. 33 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  Relation between surface coverage and hydrogen binding energy, (a) H adsorption energy decreases with the increase in surface coverage (the figure was adapted from ref. 77 with the permission of PCCP Society), (b) H adsorption energy of different metal phosphides with surface coverage and (c) H adsorption energy for different metals. (Figures b and c were adapted from ref. 78 and 79 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) HBE of various sites of MS2 before and after Co doping, (b) LSV curves showing the enhanced current density after Co doping in WS2 and (c) LSV curves showing enhanced current density after Co doping in MoS2. The figures were reproduced from ref. 82 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The HBE of various transition metal dichalcogenides with 2H and 1T phase, (b) free energy diagram of various heteroatom doped MoS2 and (c) change in the Gibbs free energy with vacancy concentration in MoS2. The figures were reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of N,S co-doped graphene and schematic representation of the defect structures, (b) TEM images showing sheet morphology, (c) elemental mapping showing the presence of N,S in graphene sheets, (d) free energy diagram showing that the HBE of N,S co-doped graphene is similar to that of Pt. (e) LSV curves showing the HER activity of various doped graphene systems and (f) Nyquist plot showing lower charge transfer resistance in N,S co-doped graphene. (The figures were adapted from ref. 116 with the permission of John Wiley and Sons.)	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the graphene–MoP composite for HER, (b) LSV curves of various graphene–Mo2C composites showing that the amount of graphene is important in the composite (adapted from ref. 117 with the permission of Elsevier). (c) LSV curves of graphene–MoP in acidic and alkaline media and (d) LSV curve of MoP showing drastically enhanced current density in the composite with graphene (figures a, c and d were adapted from ref. 59 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Free energy diagram showing the thermo-neutral HBE of CoNi@C, (b) schematic representation of graphene layers on CoNi, (c) change in the Gibbs free energy ΔΔGH*(ΔGwithout metal − ΔGwith metal) and electronic potentials with the number of graphene layers, (d) Volcano curve where CoNi@C is on the top of the curve suggesting higher HER activity and (e) differential electron density mapping with number of graphene layers. (The figures were adapted from ref. 131 with the permission of John Wiley and Sons).	 

 	Fig. 14  HER activity of Pt over the full range of pH. (a) Steady state polarization with positive-going sweeps of Pt showing increasing overpotential with increasing pH and (b) HBE of Pt at various pH of the solution. The figures were adapted from ref. 143 with the permission of Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic representation of the adhesion behavior of gas bubbles on nanostructured and flat films. (b) SEM images of flat and nanostructured MoS2 films. (c) LSV curves showing the HER activity of nanostructured MoS2 and flat MoS2. Digital images showing bubble formation on (d) flat MoS2 film and (e) nanostructured MoS2 film. Scale bar: 500 μm. The corresponding statistics of size distribution of releasing bubbles are shown at the right (the figures were adapted from ref. 144 with the permission of John Wiley and Sons).	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
