Bio-electrochemical conversion of industrial wastewater-COD combined with downstream methanol synthesis – an economic and life cycle assessment   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8GC00543E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8GC00543E
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2018, 20, 2742-2762Bio-electrochemical conversion of industrial wastewater-COD combined with downstream methanol synthesis – an economic and life cycle assessment†

        
          
            J. 
            Streeck
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            C. 
            Hank
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Neuner
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            L. 
            Gil-Carrera
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Kokko
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Pauliuk
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Schaadt
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Kerzenmacher
          
        
      df and 

        
          
            R. J. 
            White
          
        
      *a
aFraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE, Heidenhofstr. 2, 79110 Freiburg, Germany. E-mail: robin.white@ise.fraunhofer.de
bAlbert-Ludwig-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Environment and Natural Resources, Tennenbacherstraße 4, 79106 Freiburg, Germany
cKarlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Engelbert-Arnold-Str. 4, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
dLaboratory for MEMS Applications, IMTEK – Department of Microsystems Engineering, University of Freiburg-University of Freiburg, Georges-Koehler-Allee 103, 79110 Freiburg, Germany
eTampere University of Technology, Laboratory of Chemistry and Bioengineering, P.O. Box 541, 33101 Tampere, Finland
fUniversity of Bremen, Center for Environmental Research and Sustainable Technology (UFT), Leobener Str. 6, 28359 Bremen, Germany
Received 
      16th February 2018
    , Accepted 19th March 2018First published on 21st March 2018AbstractHerein, a techno-economic and environmental performance evaluation (i.e. Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)) of a 45 kW Microbial Electrolysis Cell (MEC) system is presented in the context of industrial wastewater remediation. This system produces H2 and CO2 – suitable for downstream CH3OH synthesis – based on the bio-electrochemical conversion of chemical industry wastewater with an organic content of 3.9 g(COD) L−1. A cost–benefit analysis indicates that the MEC system hardware costs, share of CO2 captured from the MEC and MEC operating current density (i.e. 1.0 mA cm−2) are crucial parameters influencing the total cost and represent areas for potential cost reductions. It was established based on the present study that MEC system operation with renewable electricity leads to H2 production costs of 4–5.7€ kg(H2)−1 (comparable to H2O electrolysis) and CH3OH production costs of 900€ t(CH3OH)−1. At the current CH3OH market prices, however, the production is currently not profitable. In turn, the cost-efficient construction of the MEC system and the use of less expensive materials could lead to improved CH3OH production economics based on this route. Our results indicate that the use of low-cost materials has greater potential with regard to cost reduction compared to reducing the internal resistance and polarization losses via the use of expensive high-performance materials in MEC construction. A complementary LCA of the proposed system, based on a “cradle-to-gate” definition, indicates that waste-based is superior to fossil-based CH3OH production with respect to global warming potential and cumulated fossil energy demand, provided the system is operated with 100% renewable electricity and CO2 sourced only from the MEC. However, with regard to the impact categories Metal Depletion and Freshwater Eutrophication Potential, the system was found to perform less satisfactorily (i.e. in comparison with fossil-based CH3OH production).
1. Introduction
The establishment of a circular economy is an ever increasing component of European Union (EU) politics, as indicated by the adoption of the circular economy package by the European Commission in 2015 and the implementation of associated national roadmaps (e.g. in Finland).1,2 At its core, the concept aims to identify and recognise the problems generated by our current, typically linear economy: namely environmental pollution (and its consequences) and resource depletion. One goal of the EU circular economy package is the recycling of wastes and cascading of renewable resources,3 opening scope to establish sustainable and integrated industrial production concepts. In this context, wastewater is one form of municipal or industrial waste known to contain potentially recyclable resources which, besides metals and nutrients such as phosphorus, also include stored chemical energy. Heidrich et al. have reported that the energy content of domestic wastewater is about 7.6 kJ L−1, and Rittmann et al. calculated a power of 23 W per capita in typical sewage.4,5 Currently, this energy is mostly wasted in the aerobic oxidation of organic wastewater components. Interestingly, according to McCarty et al., the use of the inherent energy content of wastewater could potentially compensate for electricity consumption of wastewater treatment,6 in turn accounting for ca. 3–5% of total electricity consumption in western countries.7 With regard to the recovery of energy from wastewater, a widely applied approach relies on the anaerobic digestion of excess sludge (e.g. leading to CH4 and CO2 production).8,9 However, sludge handling is problematic and costly.8,10 Alternative technologies include direct anaerobic digestion of wastewater and the comparatively newer application of the so-called “bio-electrochemical systems” (BES).6,11 BES are capable of producing either electrical power or a variety of chemical compounds through bio-electrochemical redox reactions. Both of these approaches offer scope to increase energy recovery whilst decreasing excess sludge formation.6,12 According to McCarty et al. direct anaerobic digestion might be more effective in terms of costs and energy recovery than microbial fuel cells (MFCs),6 a specific variation of BES technology, but requires wastewater with very high COD. Furthermore, improvements in BES performance and the recovery of products others than CH4 in microbial electrolysis cells (MECs) might make an economic case for BES. As for anaerobic digestion, the application of MECs in wastewater treatment offers potential advantages in comparison with the aerobic carbon oxidation, namely, electricity savings for aeration,12 reduced sludge production12 and the recovery of valuable products13 potentially leading to cost savings14 and a better environmental performance.15
A quantitative assessment of the economic viability and environmental performance of MECs in the literature has been scarcely found and to the authors’ knowledge has, for large scale systems, been evaluated so far only by Escapa et al.16 and Foley et al.15 Escapa et al. calculated a MEC target price of 1220€ m−3Anode-chamber (at 5 A cm−2, 0.9 kWh kgCOD removed−1) at which H2-MECs for wastewater treatment break even financially after 7 years. Foley et al. investigated a MEC producing hydrogen peroxide from industrial wastewater. The authors found environmental benefits of the product system at a CD of 1000 A m−3 in comparison with the conventional production by the Riedl–Pfleiderer anthraquinone auto-oxidation (AO) process. The combination of a H2-MEC and CH3OH synthesis has so far not been assessed. Therefore the assessment of the environmental and economic performance of this system is necessary and additionally promises deeper insights regarding cost and emission categorisation of MECs. Potentially, the combined wastewater treatment and chemical production promises synergistic effects. For instance, the synthesis of CH3OH based on the MEC output gases allows for CO2 to be (temporarily) captured in this simplest of alcohols. In contrast, conventional CH3OH production is based on fossils, typically from syngas mixtures derived from reforming of natural gas,17 a process that comes with all the problems attached to fossil extraction, fossil carbon emissions and energy demand (e.g. in the reformation step). In this context, this paper addresses the economic and ecological evaluation of a synergistic approach of H2-MEC and CH3OH synthesis with the overall process concept, referred to herein as the “BioMethanol” system. As will be discussed, the system may present environmental benefits with regard to substitution of fossil-based CH3OH production and conventional wastewater treatment. Therefore with reference to the presented “BioMethanol” system, this paper addresses the following objectives:

• Assess the profitability of H2 production in MEC and its combination with CH3OH synthesis (according to NPV)

• Compare the ecological impact of fossil CH3OH production with the impact of the BioMethanol system, given the indicators defined in Table 6.
The article is structured into five compartments:

• The description of the BioMethanol system

• The methodology applied for the technical process evaluation as well as the economic and the life cycle assessment of the system

• The scenarios applied for evaluation

• The presentation and discussion of the economic- and life cycle assessment results, accompanied by sensitivity studies

• Conclusions and outlook regarding the MEC technology
2. The BioMethanol system
The product system's name BioMethanol corresponds to the identically named research consortium BioMethanol.18 The basis of the BioMethanol system is an acidic (pH 2.4) industrial wastewater flow of 950 m3 d−1, with a load of 3900 mg COD per L and 420 mg TN per L that originates from chemical production processes (Fig. 1). Currently, wastewater is neutralized and disposed of to a municipal wastewater treatment plant (WWTP). In comparison with this, the proposed BioMethanol system transfers the wastewater flow into a MEC system (1) via a wastewater pump (2) where wastewater COD is oxidised into CO2 by the anodic biofilm. At the MEC cathode, hydrogen is evolved. The system components are supplied with electricity (3) which for the MEC has to pass through the rectifier and transformer (4). The pre-treated wastewater, partially cleared from organic load (5) – the first system product – exits the MEC to a municipal WWTP. The MEC output gases are purified through an activated carbon filter, compressed (6) and used in the synthesis of CH3OH (7) – considered here as the 1° product (9). Potentially, the CO2-formation of COD oxidation in the MEC anodic chambers is ca. 4 times higher than the amount of CO2 necessary for the conversion of MEC cathodic H2. However, depending on the pH, a significant share of the potential CO2 yield is chemisorbed in the effluent wastewaters as HCO3−, an issue that requires practical investigation. Therefore, if necessary, further CO2 can be added to the system (e.g. as waste or purchase) (8). In addition to the aforementioned products, sludge is formed in the MEC. This is transferred via sludge pumps (10) to a storage pit (11) and subsequently undergoes anaerobic digestion in a biogas digester (12). Here, CH4 is formed, which is in turn burned in a combined heat and power plant (CHP; 13). The recovered electricity is used to partially cover the electricity demand of the BioMethanol system. CHP heat formation is not accounted for. The biogas digestate is dewatered in a sludge press (14) to reduce the total volume in advance of transportation to further sludge drying and incineration (15). In this study a system lifetime of 20 years is assumed with 8500 h of operation per year. Further system parameter details are provided in Table 1.
 Fig. 1  The BioMethanol system – graphical depiction of the main operational flows indicated by coloured arrows between system components. The wastewater treatment process, as well as the incineration of the MEC sludge is considered in both economic and LCA but not depicted here. The use and end-of-life phase of CH3OH are excluded. 
Table 1 System parameters for the BioMethanol system




Parameter
Value
Unit
Reference





a Depending on the CO2 source. Lower compression/cooling energy for CO2 sourced from MEC at 1 bar (4-stage compressor), higher compression/cooling energy for purchased CO2 at 9 bar (2-stage compressor).





MEC size
310
m3

Eqn (9)



Electrode surface
12400
m2

Eqn (8)



CODr, CE, CCE
60, 40, 90
%

cf. 2.1


Current density
1
mA cm−2

cf. 2.1



U
Cell

365
mV

cf. 2.1


System current
124
kA

Eqn (6)




η power electronics
90%
%

22



H2 formation
35.7
t a−1

Eqn (10)



CO2 formation potential
1055
t a−1

Eqn (14)



Sludge formation
22.3
t a−1

cf. 3.1.4


Sludge formation, specific
∼0.03
g(TSS) g(COD)−1

cf. 3.1.4


MEA lifetime
5
Years

16, 23 and 24



H2 production, specific
3.6
Nm3 H2 per m3 reactor




Electricity consumption, specific
1.2
kWh Nm−3 H2




0.6
kWh kg−1 CODox




Gas cleaning, compression and CH3OH production


Gas H2S content
200
ppm

cf. 2.2


Compressor power (sum)
98.5–103.8a
MWh a−1

cf. 3.1.3


CO2 demand
286.5
t a−1

cf. 3.1.3


Cooling demand
209.3–214.6a
MWh a−1

cf. 3.1.3


Catalyst lifetime
4
a

17



CH3OH yield
185.3
t a−1

cf. 3.1.3


Periphery system components


Digester retention
25
d

25



CH4 formation
2.8
t a−1

Eqn (11)



CHP electricity
12.8
MWh a−1

Eqn (11)



Sludge press consumption
0.25
kWh m−3 sludge

25



Pump capacity
5.5
kW
ESI S7


Sludge pump operation
52
h a−1

15



Transport to sludge drying
24
km
Google maps




2.1 Microbial electrolysis cell system
The MEC considered in this work is constructed in flat-plate design, using polypropylene as a housing material and electrodes based on carbon nanotubes. Current collectors made either from stainless steel or copper as well as different membrane materials are considered. The complete MEC material demand is depicted in the ESI S7.† All cells of the MEC system are connected to the power electronics in parallel to avoid an ionic short circuit across the common electrolyte.19 Furthermore, the MEC considered in this work is operated with a pH gradient between the anode and the cathode: the acidic industrial waste water (pH 2.4) is first fed to the cathode, and only afterwards neutralized and fed to the anode. From a thermodynamics perspective, this operation mode is beneficial since the pH gradient effectively lowers the voltage required to drive the electrolysis process.20 The neutralization is currently performed at the industrial site prior to delivery to the municipal WWTP. At the foreseen hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 3 h, a stable anodic pH of ca. 7–8 and a cathodic pH of ca. pH 3 are expected in the MEC system. Regarding the voltage of the MEC, a linearized polarization curve was estimated based on the literature data (see ESI S2†). It is centred on an operating current density of 1 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 365 mV. Similarly, a cathodic conversion efficiency (CCE) of 90% was based on the experimental results for the industrial wastewater,20 and a coulombic efficiency (CE) of 40% has been assumed, which lies in the range of the literature review.21 To ensure that sufficient wastewater COD remains for nitrogen removal in the municipal WWTP the COD removal of the MEC system was set at 60%.
2.2 Gas cleaning and CH3OH production
Before CH3OH synthesis, the MEC output gases are cleaned and compressed. According to a gas analysis, the H2S content of the gases has been <200 ppm, so that a worst case impurity of 200 ppm H2S has been assumed in this study. Gas cleaning is conducted in an activated carbon bed filter (to <1 ppm H2S), after which gases undergo compression. CH3OH production is performed via heterogeneous catalysis in a two stage reactor setting, an isentropic followed by a quasi-isothermal reactor with a recycling loop of unreacted educts (S3†). Furthermore, the plant encompasses several heat exchangers and a distillation column, details of which can be found in the ESI S7.† Excess heat from the methanol plant and compression is removed via a water cooling pump. For methanol synthesis stoichiometric ratios of eqn (1) and (2) were applied, so that the CO2:H2 ratio of MEC gases needed to be adjusted before synthesis: CO2 mol:H2 mol = 1:2.7(1)(1) CH3OHmol:H2 mol = 1:3.1(2)
2.3 Wastewater treatment plant reference system
In the MEC, besides gas production, wastewater COD and TN is removed. Therefore, in the LCA the wastewater treatment has been compared to a conventional wastewater treatment plant system. The structure of this system is briefly explained in the following. The WWTP reference system was modelled in accord with a generic municipal wastewater treatment plant. Fig. 2 depicts the configuration of the WWTP reference system with an activated sludge process (2), a secondary clarifier (3), sludge recirculation (4) and sludge management (biogas digestion (5), CHP (6), and sludge drying (7), transport (8) and incineration (9)). The electricity produced via sewage sludge incineration (9) is considered to be provided to the German electricity grid. Information on energy consumption and LCA system boundaries is depicted in section 3.1.10 and Fig. 3.
 Fig. 2  The wastewater treatment plant reference system. Graphical depiction of main operational flows as indicated by coloured arrows between the system components. 
 Fig. 3  Cradle-to-gate LCA system boundaries for evaluation of the BioMethanol system. The impacts of the wastewater treatment plant reference system (WWTP reference system) are transferred to the BioMethanol system according to the substitution of COD and Total Nitrogen (TN) treatment, following the “avoided burden approach” (system expansion). The same approach is applied to electricity production from the process of “sludge incineration”, with its impacts credited to the respective adjacent process, following a consequential approach. The use and end-of-life (EoL) phase of the functional unit (1 tonne of CH3OH) have been excluded. Furthermore, the following modelling assumptions applied: (1) in the WWTP reference system only those elements have been regarded that fulfilled the same function in the BioMethanol and the WWTP reference system (i.e. COD-, TN-removal and sludge treatment). (2) Hardware of the BioMethanol system was included via material needs, three manufacturing processes, and as represented in the background datasets of the Ecoinvent v.3.4 database (cf. ESI S12†). Manufacturing of the MEC electrodes, MEC membrane and methanol catalyst was not accounted for. (3) The hardware of combined heat and power plant (CHP), sludge storage, sludge drying and -incineration as well as from the wastewater treatment plant reference system (WWTP reference system) has not been considered, as the components represent existing infrastructure and are not part of hypothetical construction of the BioMethanol system. (4) The EoL phase of sludge incineration ash and H2O flows were excluded. (5) The EoL phase of the foreground system hardware was only included if part of the Ecoinvent v.3.4 database. (6) The BioMethanol system and the WWTP reference system are considered to be supplied with electricity from the defined electricity supply scenarios (e1/e2). Exceptions are the processes connected to German grid electricity as depicted in the figure. Another exception in the BioMethanol system is the process of sludge drying in “sludge transport and drying” which is modelled in operation with German grid electricity. The processes connected to the German grid have been assumed to be operated with grid mix electricity in reality. 
3. Methods
3.1 Process evaluation
The process inputs and outputs have been calculated according to:
• Chemical stoichiometry
• Technology specific parameters
• CHEMCAD simulation
• Estimates based on scientific and official publications
The definition of variables in the equations can be found in the List of abbreviations at the end of this document and as a separate variable list in the ESI S1.†

3.1.1 Assumptions. 
For the calculation of system inputs and outputs one central assumption had to be made, which is outlined in the following:
Assumption 1. 
The chemical specification of wastewater was required to calculate carbon emissions and allocate the burden of aeration electricity of the WWTP reference to COD and nitrogen oxidation. The original mix of wastewater contains numerous different compounds, i.e. sugars, organic acids, and esters. Acetate was the dominant component with ca. 68–71 wt% of all organics. In order to simplify the calculations it was assumed that all wastewater COD consists of acetate.


3.1.2 Microbial electrolysis. 
The electron and current flow generated in the microbial electrolysis cells has been calculated using the COD molar flow that is oxidised ΔCODmol, and the fraction of electrons recovered at the anode, reflected by the coulomb efficiency ηCE (eqn (3)–(6)): (3) ΔCODmol = CODr × CODmol(4)and e = epot × ηCE(5) IMEC = e × qe(6)
The calculation of the MEC cell voltage (eqn (7)) is based on a conservatively estimated linearized polarization curve (see ESI S2†). Together with the system current (eqn (4)), the power requirement could be calculated. (7)
The electrode surface area AE and the system volume VS that was required to treat the wastewater COD have been calculated using eqn (8) and (9): (8) (9)
The H2 yield H2 mol was calculated using the electron flow e obtained at the anode, the cathodic conversion efficiency ηCCE, and the number of electrons required to form one molecule of H2 from protons (eqn (10)): (10)


3.1.3 Gas cleaning, gas compression and methanol synthesis. 
The cleaning of the MEC output gases has been considered in accord with biogas purification via an activated carbon filter. The consumption of activated carbon has been estimated from the data of filter providers, the details of which can be found in the ESI S7.† For CH3OH synthesis, the carbon dioxide demand and CH3OH yield have been simulated in CHEMCAD based on the cathodic H2 formation in the MEC (cf.eqn (1)). The CHEMCAD model comprised two stage reactor types, an isentropic reactor followed by a quasi-isothermal reactor. The educt and product flows have been calculated in a thermodynamic equilibrium model. Furthermore, the following parameters have been calculated in CHEMCAD:
• Electricity demand for compression of H2 and CO2 according to isentropic compression for four stage (1–50 bar) and two stage (9–50 bar) compressors. Intermediate cooling to 30 °C and an overall efficiency of compression of 75% have been assumed
• Excess heat of compressors, CH3OH synthesis and distillation via isentropic compression and reaction enthalpy
• Estimation of the heat exchanger surface for the thermal integration of methanol synthesis and distillation


3.1.4 Excess sludge formation. 
Regarding sludge formation in the MEC, only a few experimental results are available. The cell yield for the bacterial group present in the MEC, exoelectrogens, has been reported to be 0.07–0.16 gvolatile suspended solids (VSS) gCOD−1 and depicts the upper boundary for biological sludge production.26 In their theoretical studies of large MEC systems Foley et al.15 and Escapa et al.16 assumed a sludge formation of 0.12 gVSS gCOD−1 and 0.3 gCOD biomass gCOD−1, respectively. In their experiments Huggins et al.27 found a solid production of ∼0.02 gTSS gCOD−1, which is ca. 6–15 times lower than the values mentioned before. The large variance of the literature values kept us from using the literature average. Therefore excess sludge formation has been estimated using the same method used to estimate sludge formation in the activated sludge process (also see ESI S4†).28 The calculation of biomass formation in this method relies on the general equations for bacterial growth and decay. When choosing anaerobic parameters and eliminating the influence of sludge age, the method seems fit to at least approximate excess sludge formation in the MEC. To account for error, the sensitivity of the results to sludge formation was checked (Fig. 5).


3.1.5 Biogas formation and electricity demand. 
The methane formation in anaerobic digestion was calculated using eqn (11) with the values depicted in ESI S5:† YCH4 = ES × oDM/DM × COD/oDM × ΔoDM × YCH4/COD(11)
The electricity demand for digester operation was calculated with 4–6% of the gross energy content of the formed biogas via an average value for a mesophilic biogas plant by Schlowin et al.29 In this study, the exact composition of the biogas was not specified. For that reason the electricity demand of the biogas digester has been estimated based on the lower heating value (LHV) of the formed CH4. This inaccuracy can be tolerated as electricity consumption of the digester was low compared to other system components and is of minor importance for the final results.


3.1.6 Electricity production – combined heat and power plant. 
The electricity formation in the CHP has been calculated using eqn (12). Heat formation has not been contemplated in the assessments. Wel = CH4-LN × CH4-LHV × ηelectrical(12)


3.1.7 Cooling pump. 
The electricity demand of the pump as used in the cooling of compressors, CH3OH synthesis and distillation was calculated based on the technical work of the pump with an efficiency of 75%. The excess heat of the system defined the necessary H2O flow for heat removal. To cover the system internal hydraulic losses an overall pump height of 20 m was assumed.


3.1.8 Sludge incineration. 
The electricity yield after incineration of the dewatered sludge (15% H2O) has been calculated via the approach applied by Schaum.34 He estimated the energy content of 1 kg of sludge COD to be similar to the LHV of 0.35 m3 CH4, i.e. 3.49 kWh kg−1 sludge COD. The energy content was corrected for the energy used for H2O heating (12 to 100 °C) and evaporation. The electricity yield was subsequently calculated via 25% electrical efficiency of a steam turbine/generator.35


3.1.9 Carbon dioxide formation. 
CO2 formation resulting from the oxidation of wastewater and sludge COD in MEC and WWTP reference was calculated based on eqn (13) and (14). Therefore it was assumed that all COD consisted of acetate (cf. 3.1.1). Furthermore, an average CODBiomass of 1.42 g(COD) g(biomass)−1 was assumed.28 CODOx = ΔCODAcetate − CODAcetate in biomass(13) (14)
The CO2 formation of excess sludge digestion (including the final methane oxidation) was calculated using eqn (15) and (16). In accord with Freguia et al.36 the composition of bacterial sludge of (CH1.8O0.5N0.2)n with a molecular weight of 24.6 g mol−1 was adopted. (15) CO2, Sludge = ΔmBiomass × CO2, Biomass spec(16)


3.1.10 Wastewater treatment plant reference. 
For the LCA model, the electricity consumption of the different steps of conventional wastewater treatment was calculated. It was based on the shares of a sample (n = 62) of wastewater treatment plants, size class 3–5 in the German Federal State of Baden–Württemberg with: aeration: 37%; sludge recirculation: 6%; secondary settler and excess sludge: 2% and sludge treatment: 15% of overall electricity consumption.37 The base value for the calculations has been the aeration electricity of the WWTP where the industrial wastewater flow is currently treated (0.2 kWh kg−1 CODremoved at 95% COD removal efficiency).


3.1.11 
            BioMethanol system hardware. 
The material and energy in the production of system hardware is important for modelling process impacts in the LCA. A detailed documentation of the hardware and material needs can be found in the ESI S7 and S12.†

3.2 Scenario analysis
In this paper, the influence of special technical and economic parameters on economic and environmental performance has been investigated via a scenario analysis. On the one hand, two electricity supply scenarios are accounted for in both assessments (Table 2). On the other hand, the so-called “market scenarios” have been developed (Table 3). In the market scenarios the assumptions for methanol price, electricity price, electricity price inflation and CO2-source are varied. Furthermore, to get a grip on the uncertainty attached to the LCA results, three “technological scenarios” have been developed (Tables 4 and 5). In the technological scenarios, technological parameters of processes with a large impact on LCA results have been varied in their estimated range of occurrence.
Table 2 Electricity supply scenarios for the BioMethanol system and the WWWTP reference system; for “e1”, the base years of 2016/2014 for the economic and life cycle assessments have been considered, respectively. For “e2”, the electricity mix is considered to consist of 70% onshore wind power and 30% solar power




Electricity supply scenarios




e1
German electricity grid mix (economic/LCA year: 2016/2014)


e2
German certified renewable electricity mix




Table 3 Market scenarios for the BioMethanol system




Parameter/scenario
Pessimistic
Moderate
Optimistic





a Pessimistic to optimistic assumption of the average CH3OH price over 20 years, based on a long term upwards trend, CH3OH European posted contract price in Jan. 2018: 380€ tCH3OH−1.30
b Price for Germany in 2016 without electricity tax.31
c Specific price calculated from an offer for 500 MWh.32
d Extrapolation from the German price development in 1998–2016.31
e Average inflation forecast until 2030.33
f Average inflation forecast until 2050.33





CH3OH price [€ t−1]
400a
560a
650a


Electricity price [ct€ kWh−1]
13.5b/16.8c
13.5b/16.8 c
6.6b/9.1c


Electricity inflation [% a−1]
3d
1.6e
1.3f


CO2 source
Purchase
50% purchase
MEC




Table 4 Base-, best- and worst case scenarios for the BioMethanol system




Item
Base
Best
Worst




MEC current density [mA cm−2]38
1
2
0.5


Sludge transport [km]
200
600
100


MEC power38
±0
−20%
+20%


WWTP electricity [kWh kg−1 CODdeg]37
0.36
0.3
0.75


Biogas power37,39,40
±0
−15%
+25%


Incineration turbine efficiency35
25%
20%
30%




Table 5 Core economic parameters for the assessment of the BioMethanol system




Item
Value





a Value in agreement with industrial operators.
b Average inflation in Germany in 2006–2015.41
c Wastewater price for business as usual (1.99€) and the BioMethanol system, calculated from the wastewater regulation of Freiburg, Germany.42
d Inflation for the German household wastewater price in 2005–2010.43





Discount rate [%]
7.4%a


Inflation rate [%]
1.46b


Wastewater price [€ m−3]
1.99/1.64c


Wastewater price inflation [%]
1.9d




3.3 Economic evaluation methodology
The economic evaluation is based on the Net Present Value (NPV) criterion. The NPV transfers future cash flows to their present value and is based on the supposition of discounting, which assumes future cash flows to be of lower value than current ones.44 A positive NPV represents a profitable project. The calculation of the NPV (eqn (17)) considers the sum of the initial investment, together with aggregated annual costs and benefits, corrected with a set discount rate: (17)with I0 = initial investment, r = discount rate, n = year, B = benefits, and C = operational costs.
Furthermore, the methanol production costs (MPC) have been calculated viaeqn (18) based on electricity production costs (as described in ref. 45). The BioMethanol system, besides CH3OH, supplies pre-treated wastewater. In order to calculate the MPC of CH3OH, the savings from wastewater pre-treatment have been subtracted from system costs. (18)with E = savings of wastewater treatment fees and M = methanol yield.

3.3.1 Price data and cost estimation. 
Price data were requested from providers (I), estimated from the literature values (II) and scaled by the six-tenth power rule46 (III) if price data for another capacity were available. If price data from years prior to 2015 were used, it was adjusted to the current price level using the Chemical Engineering Plant Cost Index (CEPCI). A detailed documentation of the price data and cost estimation can be found in the ESI S8.†


3.3.2 Revenues. 
The revenues of the BioMethanol system have been derived from (a) product sale (CH3OH/H2) and (b) savings of wastewater treatment costs (Tables 3 and 5).


3.3.3 Assumptions and limitations. 
The central assumption concerning the local wastewater treatment costs of highly polluted wastewaters determines the savings of wastewater costs regarding implementation of the BioMethanol system. They were determined via a base price and the concentrations of COD-BOD2, N and P.42 For the BioMethanol system it was assumed that a reduction in COD of 60% (Table 1) in the MEC results in a reduction of COD-BOD2 of the same percentage. In reality this assumption has to be demonstrated experimentally as the effluent of the BioMethanol system has been subject to bacterial degradation already. Therefore in a second bacterial degradation, it might contain a higher degree of difficult to degrade COD than the original industrial effluent. However, for the reference wastewater flow this might not be the case, as COD primarily consists of easily degradable sugars and acetate.


3.3.4 Methodology of result interpretation. 
The economic results were analysed via:
1. Description of cash flow distribution
2. Scenario analysis
3. Sensitivity analysis
For the scenario analysis the influence of the type of electricity production (Table 2) and the different market scenarios (Table 3) on NPV was investigated. In the sensitivity analysis, central input parameters face a variation of ±100%, enabling an analysis of their influence on the system's NPV in the techno-economic model.

3.4 Life cycle assessment methodology
The objective of the LCA was to compare the impact of the proposed BioMethanol system with the impact of fossil CH3OH synthesis. The reference process for fossil CH3OH synthesis was the product system “methanol production [GLO]” from the Ecoinvent v.3.4 database.47 The global dataset has been selected so that the product represents the methanol found on global markets. The Ecoinvent process describes the production of CH3OH from natural gas by steam reforming. It was designed with data from various plants. It includes raw material extraction and manufacturing, plant construction/operation, electricity generation, estimate on catalyst use and emissions to air/H2O from the process. To ensure comparability, the electricity for the process was sourced from the same process applied for the BioMethanol system. For the technical implementation the software Umberto LCA+ 10.0.3 and the background database Ecoinvent v.3.4 have been used.

3.4.1 Product system and system boundaries. 
The product system and the associated system boundaries for the described studies are outlined in detail in Fig. 3. The functional unit (FU) was chosen to be 1 tonne of CH3OH at the factory gate. A cradle-to-gate approach was applied for the system boundaries. This takes into account all the important emissions resulting from the construction and operation of the BioMethanol system, as well as upstream processes for the procurement of system inputs. The end-of-life phase (EoL) of system hardware was only included for upstream activities when part of the Ecoinvent v.3.4 process database. In the cradle-to-gate system boundaries, the GWP of carbon dioxide emissions from COD-oxidation was accounted for with a GWP of 1. Therefore due to the temporary capture of MEC-anodic CO2 in CH3OH until gate a negative GWP results. Upon EoL of CH3OH (grave; not included in the system boundaries) the formerly captured CO2 molecules are in turn released again.


3.4.2 Allocation choices and system expansion. 
In the BioMethanol system two processes have co-products, which link the system back to the larger economy:
1. The microbial electrolysis provides the synthesis gases, as well as the treatment of wastewater COD and TN
2. The process of sludge incineration provides a sludge treatment service, as well as electricity
The just assessment of the impact of these co-products requires additional modelling assumptions. In both of these cases the “avoided burden approach”, a special case of “product substitution allocation” was applied.48,49 This approach credits the potential emission savings from the co-product COD and TN removal and electricity provision to the BioMethanol system. The credit is quantified by the replacement of a dedicated supply of these products from the background economy. It has been criticized for its sensitivity regarding the choice of which primary producer is avoided, the possible occurrence of negative impacts, and full allocation of environmental impacts and benefits to one of several outputs.49
In this case, however, the industrial wastewater flow is already treated in an existing wastewater treatment plant. Therefore the choice of the primary process displaced is clear, and substitution credit can be assigned depending on the performance of the substituted WWTP (e.g. specific electricity consumption). To assess a wider range of potential WWTPs substituted, a sensitivity analysis was performed. We argue that this consequential approach to LCA fits best this specific BioMethanol case as it can better depict the environmental consequences of a decision for or against the BioMethanol system than an attributional allocation criterion that depicts the BioMethanol system in isolation from its economic surroundings.


3.4.3 Wastewater treatment plant ref. system boundaries. 
In the WWTP reference system (Fig. 3), the treatment of COD, TN and the resulting sewage sludge management has been modelled (Fig. 3: “wastewater treatment”, “sludge treatment and CHP”). For the operation of “wastewater treatment” and “sludge treatment and CHP” the same electricity mix as for the BioMethanol system has been integrated (e1/e2). The downstream “sludge incineration” (Fig. 3) produces electricity, which is considered to be provided to the German electricity grid.
Furthermore, the wastewater treatment step was considered to constitute a multi-product process, providing two outputs: (1) COD removal and (2) TN removal. Therefore, the system impacts required allocation between these two product flows. For allocation, the partitioning allocation, according to the mass of oxygen consumed to remove COD/TN, has been used. In this specific case, partitioning allocation can be regarded as meaningful, as oxygen consumption directly relates to aeration electricity demand.
The partitioning allocation itself required two assumptions: (1) it was assumed that all nitrogen in the wastewater consists of NH3. Regarding the impact of the BioMethanol system, this assumption represents a worst case scenario as NH3 consumes a maximum amount of oxygen in nitrification (compared to the other wastewater nitrogen species). These result in the maximum allocation of wastewater treatment impact to the product of TN-removal in the LCA of the WWTP reference system (cf. S6†). Consequently, a minimum burden is transferred to COD removal. As the MEC system primarily treats COD, comparatively smaller credit is given to the BioMethanol system for substitution of COD treatment than with any other form of nitrogen species. The calculation of the O2-demand for NH3 oxidation can be found in the ESI S6.†
(2) For the treatment of municipal wastewater in the WWTP reference system, assumption 1 (cf. 3.1.1) has been applied, considering total wastewater COD to consist of acetate. In comparison with the project's industrial wastewater, this assumption is less appropriate for municipal wastewater as it most likely contains diverse kinds of carbon species. To prevent a strong bias of results by this assumption, a sensitivity analysis has been performed, considering carbon species other than acetate. The results show that the impacts are only marginally affected by the assumptions made (the results in ESI S11†).


3.4.4 System model of the industrial background. 
All background processes have been modelled according to the cut-off principle. This system model allocates the total potential impact of a product system to the producer, meaning that recyclable material output comes as burden free. Also waste treatment is allocated to the waste-producer.47 By-products are included in the allocation. One input of the BioMethanol system itself is a “waste”-water stream, which is why the allocation of the impacts to the waste-producer or to the BioMethanol system products can be contested. In this study the BioMethanol system is regarded as a recycling system. Therefore, according to the cut-off approach the burden of recycling is transferred to the BioMethanol system products.


3.4.5 Data quality and representation. 
The data sources have mostly been secondary sources. As far as possible, alongside peer-reviewed journals, official documents have been consulted. In a few cases data of equipment vendors have been accessed. Regarding the corresponding time scale, data which were published before 2001 have not been used in the calculations. Geographically, materials most likely purchased from a global market have been represented with global background datasets. Manufacturing activities were modelled with European datasets and electricity production processes have been modelled with German datasets. For a better overview of the utilized background processes and their quality, we provide a rating of and the process quality and representation in the ESI S9/S10.†


3.4.6 Limitations. 
The following limitations applied:
• MEC and sludge treatment hardware was modelled using material requirements. Manufacturing processes have, except for metal working and injection moulding, only been considered if they are part of the Ecoinvent v.3.4 database
• The exact representation of system processes via the Ecoinvent v.3.4 database could not always be achieved. Therefore proxy processes were used
• Most EoL processes have been neglected (only those upstream and comprised in Ecoinvent v.3.4 datasets are included)
• The H2O flows for cooling and CH3OH synthesis and distillation wastewater have been excluded
• As discussed before, results are dependent on the credit resulting from the substituted primary production processes due to the avoided burden approach
• The impacts of sludge treatment in the WWTP reference system have been allocated completely to COD removal (in reality, also sludge formation in TN removal)
• NOx emissions from sludge incineration have not been considered (but would in any case lead to more credit to the BioMethanol system via substitution of conventional WWTP)


3.4.7 Methodology of impact assessment and impact categories. 
ReCiPe 2008 (H) and the cumulated energy demand, as implemented in the software Umberto LCA+, have been selected as methods for the impact assessment. The investigated impact categories can be found in Table 6.
Table 6 Impact categories used in the life cycle impact assessment




Impact category
Standard unit




Global warming potential 100
kg CO2-eq.


Terrestrial acidification potential 100
kg SO2-eq.


Photochemical oxidant formation pot.
kg NMVOC-eq.


Metal depletion potential
kg Fe-eq.


Freshwater eutrophication potential
kg P-eq.


Cumulated energy demand fossil
MJ


Cumulated energy demand renewable
MJ






3.4.8 Methodology of result interpretation. 
The LCA results have been interpreted via:
1. Sensitivity/scenario analysis
2. Analysis of the system processes’ share on total impact
3. Analysis of the relationship of impact to MEC current density.
In the sensitivity/scenario analysis, the expected variation of model input parameters has been represented in the “technological scenarios” (cf.Table 4). Furthermore, the impact of (a) different electricity production scenarios for the BioMethanol system and WWTP reference system (e1/e2; Table 4), (b) CO2-source (MEC or external purchase) and (c) the choice of MEC hardware materials has been considered.

4. Results and discussion
4.1 Economic evaluation

4.1.1 Net present value and CH3OH production costs. 
The economic analysis shows that, under the applied market scenarios of Table 3, none of the electricity production cases exhibits a positive NPV and hence no case is profitable (Table 7). In the following economic analysis, focus is laid on the scenario with renewable electricity supply (e2), since the grid mix (e1) resulted in unfavourably high environmental impacts (see the LCA results). Furthermore, besides the focus on renewable electricity scenario e2, focus is laid on the most economic setup (the highest NPV), the optimistic market scenario with an NPV of −0.5 M€ (Table 7).
Table 7 Net present value [NPV, M€] and CH3OH production costs [MPC, € tCH3OH−1] of BioMethanol system electricity supply (e1/e2) and market scenarios (pessimistic–optimistic)




NPV [M€]
Pessimistic
Moderate
Optimistic




e1 = electricity from the German grid mix, e2 = German certified renewable electricity (70% wind power, 30% solar power).




e1
−1.8
−1.2
−0.3


e2
−2
−1.4
−0.5


MPC [€ tCH3OH−1]
Pessimistic
Moderate
Optimistic


e1
1350
1190
820


e2
1480
1300
900


CH3OH market price 1/18 [€ tCH3OH−1]30
380








Besides the NPV, the costs of the BioMethanol system do also mirror in the CH3OH production costs. The lowest cost of CH3OH production with renewable electricity is achieved at 900€ tCH3OH−1 (Table 7). The current European market price for CH3OH (1/2018) with 380€ tCH3OH−1 is roughly half of the production costs of the BioMethanol system.30 In comparison with this, the average CH3OH production costs in 2013 have been 51–408€ tCH3OH−1 in Saudi Arabia and Europe, respectively.50 An example of other waste-derived methanol is the work of Iaquaniello et al., who investigated the economics of methanol production from refuse-derived-fuel of municipal waste in a 300 tCH3OH d−1 plant and found competitive CH3OH production costs as low as 110€ tCH3OH−1.51 This might be attributed to the lower specific investment costs (1800 vs. 6600€/(tCH3OH year−1)), lower electricity costs (5 ct€ kWh−1vs. 9 ct€ kWh−1) and lower maintenance and insurance costs (1–3 vs. 4.5% a−1 (CAPEX)) of Iaquaniello et al. compared to the BioMethanol system. In the following paragraph, cost structure is investigated in order to discuss the conditions under which a positive NPV for the BioMethanol system can be achieved.


4.1.2 Capital and operational expenditures. 
For the renewable energy scenario e2, the discounted costs of the BioMethanol system over its life time consist of 30–42% of capital costs (CAPEX) and 58–70% of operational costs (OPEX; all market scenarios in Table 3).
Inside the CAPEX, the biggest share of costs with 53–54% results from the MEC reactor including electronics and pumps, plus 7% MEA additionally. The rest of the investment can be divided into 15–16% gas cleaning system, compressors and CH3OH synthesis, 9% biogas digester, 6% planning and 9% contingency. CAPEX of the different scenarios only differed insignificantly due to different costs for CO2 compressors when using a different CO2 source (from MEC: 1 bar and purchase: 9 bar).
Inside the OPEX, 30–44% of the costs originate from electricity purchase, 20–33% from maintenance and insurance, 0–14% from external CO2 purchase, 9–16% from staff costs, 4–6% from sludge disposal, 3–5% from MEA exchange every 5 years, 1% from gas cleaning filter and catalyst exchange and 9% from contingency (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Discounted operational costs of the BioMethanol system over 20 years operation for the three different market scenarios (Table 3). 


4.1.3 Influence of the membrane-electrode-assembly price on NPV. 
At a MEA price of 7€ m−2 the cost share of MEA investment and exchange accounts for only 4–6% of the total BioMethanol system costs. However, the low price of 7€ m−2 MEA is an optimistic notion which can only be achieved if system designers can technically implement the use of low cost materials. At MEA prices of 100€ m−2, which seem reasonable given the use of conventional ion-exchange membranes, the MEA investment and exchange accounts for ∼38% of the total BioMethanol system expenditures (renewable electricity e2 + optimistic market scenario; data not shown). The price of 7€ m−2 was chosen following the suggestion of Sievers et al.,52 who stated the electrode target costs of 7.5€ m−2Anode for electricity producing microbial fuel cells (at 2 W m−2). The costs for MFCs are not directly transferable to MECs producing chemicals but have been adopted as a general target value. Kokko et al.20 show that well performing electrode materials can be obtained at a material price as low as ca. US $2.40 m−2Electrode. The implementation of low-cost membranes would be the next step to strive for low MEA costs.


4.1.4 Sensitivity of the net present value. 
In the sensitivity analysis (Fig. 5), different cost parameters have been varied to ±100% in order to identify their effect on NPV in the cost model. In turn, the slope of a parameter-function depicts the sensitivity of the NPV to the respective parameter. The analysis reveals a very high sensitivity of the NPV to five parameters: (1) MEC reactor and periphery costs, (2) methanol price, (3) wastewater price, (4) methanol yield and (5) MEC current density. Three more parameters have a considerable influence on NPV: (1) maintenance and insurance (4.5% a−1 (CAPEX)), (2) electricity price (9.1 ct€ kWh−1) and (3) the discount rate for the calculation of NPV (7.4%). The remaining input parameters have shown a rather moderate to low impact on NPV.
 Fig. 5  Sensitivity of Net Present Value (NPV) to the variation of input parameters for ±100% and under the conditions of the optimistic market scenario (Table 7) and renewable electricity supply scenario e2. In the legend, the values in brackets are the original input value followed by the parameter value, at which a NPV = 0€ is reached [original value, value for NPV = 0]. 
Current density: antagonistic effects for cost optimization. 
All parameter-functions, except for the functions of MEC current density and discount rate, are linear. The discount rate is part of an exponential function (eqn (17)). The non-linear character of the current density function can be explained by two developments that are antagonistic in terms of costs:
• On the one hand, rising current densities allow for a smaller electrode surface/MEC system to treat the same industrial wastewater flow (lower investment).
• On the other hand, the MEC's specific electricity demand increases with rising current density due to rising overpotentials at the electrodes (higher electricity costs).
Some of the parameters of the BioMethanol system could potentially be optimized via system engineering and a change in market regulations. The opportunity for the improvement of NPV through parameter optimization is discussed in the next sections.
Potential leverage through politics and engineering. 
On the basis of the parameter sensitivity in Fig. 5, recommendations on MEC system design and market conditions beneficial to system profitability can be made. The guiding question in this regard is which parameter changes are attainable in reality.
Microbial electrolysis reactor, electronics and pumps. 
The specific MEC system costs (including the reactor and periphery) in the BioMethanol system have been estimated to be ∼3200€ m−3reactor or 72€ m−2Cell. The capital costs estimated in the literature range from ∼130053 or ∼180016 to over 5000€ m−3reactor23 or 100€ m−2Cell54 for different system sizes. The calculated system costs of this study lie somewhere in between the literature values. The high costs in comparison with Escapa et al.16 and Trapero et al.53 partially originate from the expensive power electronics for parallel connection of MEC single cells, which has not been considered in the mentioned publications (without power electronics the cost for the MEC reactor and periphery would amount to only ∼1900€ m−3reactor). The components of the “MEC reactor and periphery” and their costs are listed in Table 8. The most expensive components are the MEC power electronics. The requirement of such an expensive equipment results from the necessity to operate the MEC single cells in parallel interconnection in order to avoid short-circuit of hydraulically connected cells.19 Furthermore, the cell potential of each single cell can be optimized to cell performance, possibly leading to electricity savings.55 A system design that allows for an electrical serial connection could reduce this matter of expense to ca. €10000.56 This cost reduction alone (∼42% of MEC system costs) could almost yield a positive NPV. Therefore a corresponding reactor design for serial cell connection could be a focus to optimize MEC profitability.
Table 8 Hardware cost details for the “MEC reactor and periphery”




Matter of expense
Costs [k€]




Power electronics
287


Installation
98


Measurement and control
69


Endplates
68


Piping
56


Current collectors
43


Manufacture
28


Pumps
13


 


Sum
662




Furthermore, MEC component endplates might also be suitable for cost optimization by using different or fewer materials.
The high impact of material costs on NPV in this study is also connected with the methodological notion of factoring the maintenance and insurance costs on initial investment. A lower factor results in a lower impact of hardware costs on the NPV.
Microbial electrolysis current density. 
Besides reactor costs, the optimization of MEC current density (CD) could facilitate cost reductions, as rising CDs lead to a reduced system size. For now, what seems most important is the achievement of the goal current density of 1 mA cm−2, as the non-linear character of the NPV-CD relationship shows a significant decrease of system NPV below 1 mA cm−2 (Fig. 5). The goal of 1 mA cm−2 seems achievable, with a demonstrated CD of 0.5 mA cm−2.57 However, new reactor designs like the fluidized bed reactor might help to further increase CD.58,59 In contrast, Fig. 5 indicates that too high CDs (beyond ca. 1.6 mA cm−2) are not desirable either, as they can lead to a cost increase. The latter results due to the observed antagonistic behaviour between decreasing MEC hardware costs and rising electricity costs with high electrode overpotentials (cf. the section “Current density: antagonistic effects for cost optimization”).
The relationship of CD to NPV is strongly dependent on the total hardware and electricity costs, electricity consumption (i.e. electrode polarization behaviour and overpotential losses), the maintenance and insurance factor and the discount rate. Therefore the generalisation of the stated suggestion has to be regarded with caution and an evaluation of other cases is suggested.
Hardware costs vs. electricity consumption. 
One result on the sensitivity analysis that draws attention is the comparatively low sensitivity of NPV to electricity consumption in contrast to MEC reactor and periphery costs (Fig. 5). The two parameters are related in the sense that high-performance materials with a capability for MEC power decrease are potentially also expensive. An example would be copper current collectors, having a higher conductivity, but coming at an estimated cost of ca. 124000€ in comparison with ca. 43000€ for stainless steel collectors (details in ESI S8†). The higher sensitivity of NPV to reactor costs than to electricity consumption points towards the premise that the use of cheap materials for wastewater MECs instead of expensive high-performance materials is economically preferable. However, this suggestion can be case specific and influenced by assumptions for electricity price and consumption, material costs as well as annual maintenance and insurance costs.
Furthermore, the rather low electricity consumption of this specific case, credited to the favourable thermodynamics of hydrogen evolution at low cathode pH,20 might make the case for the dominance of hardware costs over electricity costs. For this case, the sensitivity of NPV to electricity consumption is equal to the sensitivity to reactor and assembly costs at an electricity price of 23 ct€ kWh−1.
Market conditions. 
CH3OH price and wastewater price as a source of revenue show a high influence on system profitability. The CH3OH price has been quite volatile throughout the last few years, so that its development is difficult to predict.30 However, since the start of the used records, an average trend of rising prices can be observed that might well increase if political promises for a transition towards renewables will also include the cut in fossil subsidies.30
Also the certification of renewably produced fuels, like that in Germany already existent for “Green H2”,60 could help to achieve higher prices for CH3OH by establishing a market for renewable CH3OH. Regarding the wastewater price it seems unlikely that an increase higher than the already included price increase (1.9% a−1) can be expected.
Regarding the electricity price the applied value of 9.1 ct€ kWh−1 for renewable electricity reflects a rather low value. However, if exempted from value-added tax, the renewable electricity costs could be further decreased to as low as 6 ct€ kWh−1.
While significant benefits from a change in market conditions is difficult to count on, benefits from a reduction of MEC hardware costs and an increase in current density among others might be possible through ongoing and improved system engineering.
Other parameters. 
While maintenance and insurance costs show a large potential for optimisation, this potential cannot be analysed in this study. The costs had to be estimated via the mentioned factor on CAPEX (4.5% of CAPEX per a) which prevents a detailed investigation.
The discount rate is a methodological choice that in this case has been agreed upon with the potential system operator and is justified by the specific opportunity costs of capital.
Apart from the sensitivity analysis, the influence of two other parameters needs to be discussed: (1) MEA prices higher than ±100% and (2) external CO2-purchase. Regarding the first, the NPV shows high sensitivity to significantly higher MEA prices (cf. section 4.1.3). Second, the purchase of CO2 for CH3OH synthesis results in a loss or gain of ∼0.4 M€ over 20 years. Therefore the achievement of low MEA costs and CO2-extraction from the MEC should be one of the main targets of systems engineering.
The achievable quantity of CH3OH yield is an important input parameter and in turn a key assumption for this study. It is based on a CHEMCAD simulation and reflects 90% H2-conversion efficiency, also on the basis of the results obtained for the methanol-mini-plant at Fraunhofer ISE. Furthermore, the conversion efficiency also reflects the value reported for the emissions-to-liquids technology by Carbon Recycling International.61


4.1.5 Economics of H2 production. 
If considering only the MEC system with adjacent gas cleaning and compressor, the H2 production costs (H2 at 50 bar, <1 ppm H2S) of the system are ca. 4–5.7€ kgH2−1 (renewable electricity provision e2, prices for market scenarios optimistic and pessimistic and a MEA price of 7€ m−2). For H2O electrolysis, Machhammer et al.62 estimate production costs of ca. 5.2–6.8€ kgH2−1 (wind power), and 1.9–3.3 and 6.8–8.2€ kgH2−1 with German grid electricity (without and with electricity taxes). Parra et al.63 found costs of ca. 6.7€ kgH2−1 (25 kW electrolysis), 5.2€ kgH2−1 (100 kW electrolysis), 3.7€ kgH2−1 (1 MW) for Swiss grid electricity ($ to € exchange 2016).64 For conventional hydrogen production via steam methane reforming (SMR), values of 1.4–2.5€ kgH2−1 (ref. 62 and 63) are mentioned. The comparison shows that for some cases, hydrogen production costs for the BioMethanol system are comparable to those of H2O electrolysis.

4.2 Life cycle inventory, impact assessment and interpretation
The complete life cycle inventory can be found in the ESI S12,† while the results of the impact assessment are shown in Table 9. According to the definition of “technology scenarios” (Table 4), base-, best- and worst case scenarios for the BioMethanol system are shown. The best and worst cases have been calculated to estimate the uncertainty attached to the result of the BioMethanol base case. They have been generated by varying the parameters of the process evaluation in their likely occurrence range (Table 4).
Table 9 Results of the consequential LCA of the BioMethanol system and the reference process of global CH3OH production, both for 1 tonne of CH3OH at the factory gate. All values include avoided emissions by the substitution of conventional wastewater treatment through the BioMethanol system, thereby also showing negative impacts, which are to be interpreted as system-wide improvements. Actual emissions of the BioMethanol system are depicted graphically in Fig. 6. The fields are indicated in colour to illustrate the comparison of fossil CH3OH and BioMethanol CH3OH with red = highest impact(s) and green = lowest impact(s). For a definition of the ‘best’, ‘base’, and ‘worst’ cases cf. Table 4











Besides the potential impacts of the BioMethanol system, Table 9 shows the values for the reference process of CH3OH production. The reference process from the Ecoinvent® v.3.4 database represents an average global CH3OH production facility using natural gas as a base for CH3OH synthesis. As for the electricity supply the same renewable electricity mix as that for the BioMethanol system (e2) has been modelled.
The potential environmental impacts for one tonne of CH3OH at the factory gate for the BioMethanol system were lower compared to the reference process of fossil CH3OH production for the categories GWP (210–280%), CEDF (70–90%) and CEDT (30–60%). In comparison, the impacts were higher for the categories TAP (10–110%), FEP (600–900%) and MDP (500–1000%). For the impact category POFP, two-thirds of the BioMethanol cases showed lower impacts (30–80%), while the worst case showed an equal impact to the reference process (Table 9).
In this study, a benefit of the BioMethanol process is found if impacts of the BioMethanol system FU are significantly lower, in all three cases, than reference values. The significance was determined via a significance heuristic due to insufficient information on the uncertainty of model components and in accordance with a widely applied practice in LCA.65 In the course of this study, the lowest deviation that was deemed significant was 70% lower than the reference's impact in all cases. The next margin of impact results was 30% lower than reference impacts (CEDT), which is likely too close to model uncertainty.
The results suggest a benefit of CH3OH production via the BioMethanol system in comparison with fossil CH3OH production in the impact categories GWP and CEDF. A disadvantage is suggested for the impact categories TAP, FEP and MDP. For the remaining impact categories no clear conclusion can be drawn due to insignificant deviation from reference impacts in at least one case. In the following, the origin of the impact on the WWTP reference system and the BioMethanol system, as well as their sensitivity, is discussed.

4.2.1 The WWTP reference system. 
The WWTP reference system significantly influences the BioMethanol system impacts by transferring a credit or a burden via the “avoided burden approach” (Fig. 6). The WWTP reference system model, on the one hand, results in direct emissions through COD-oxidation, sludge digestion/incineration and sludge transport. On the other hand, it causes indirect impacts from the electricity delivering process in the background system.
 Fig. 6  Impact assessment results for 1 tonne of CH3OH at factory gate for the BioMethanol system and fossil CH3OH production, disaggregated for the BioMethanol system components, as well as the WWTP reference system processes (WWTP reference system electricity processes, WWTP reference system sludge transport, WWTP reference system COD oxidation). The point “BioMethanol periphery hardware procurement” in the legend comprises the hardware for power electronics for MEC, compressors, methanol synthesis and anaerobic digester + sludge press. Net emissions of the consequential LCA are indicated with a solid red line for each case. Ref = reference – fossil CH3OH synthesis, base = BioMethanol base case, worst = BioMethanol worst case, best = BioMethanol best case (Table 4). 
The origin of the impacts in the WWTP reference system is depicted in Fig. 6. For a lot of the selected impact categories, the electricity flows in the WWTP reference system significantly influence the BioMethanol system impacts. The electricity production for the processes “wastewater treatment” and “sludge treatment and CHP” (Fig. 3) is based on the renewable electricity mix e2 (corresponding to the BioMethanol system supply). The electricity production in the process “sludge incineration” is considered to provide electricity to the German grid (Mix 2014) and is credited to the WWTP reference system (cf.Fig. 3). Due to the high specific impact of grid electricity, the impacts of “sludge incineration” dominated the total impacts in most impact categories. Together with the rather low specific impact of renewable electricity e2, a burden (not a credit) of avoided grid electricity production is transferred from the WWTP reference system to the BioMethanol system (for all impact categories except for MDP and POFP, 1 case; Fig. 6). In other words: The partial cleaning of wastewater in the BioMethanol system causes less sludge development in the WWTP and therefore less electricity production in sludge incineration. The missing grid electricity is burdened to the BioMethanol system (minus renewable electricity for the operation of “wastewater treatment” and “sludge treatment and CHP”).
However, in between the BioMethanol system “technological scenarios” (Table 4), the change of impact results could also be significantly influenced by other variables:
• The strongest influence in the categories TAP and MDP resulted from variance in renewable electricity consumption of the WWTP reference (0.3–0.36–0.75 kWh kgCOD−1)
• The strongest influence in the category POFP resulted from variance in distance for sludge transport (100–200–600 km)
• The strongest influence in the category FEP resulted from variance in sludge incineration electric efficiency (20–25–30%)
• The strongest influence in the category FEP resulted from variance in sludge incineration electric efficiency and sludge transport distance
In the following, the origin of impacts in the BioMethanol system is further elaborated.


4.2.2 Global warming potential (GWP). 
The GWP of the BioMethanol system largely results from emissions of wastewater COD oxidation in the MEC system (88–87% of BioMethanol system impact; Fig. 6). However, the equal impact count is credited to the BioMethanol system via the substitution of conventional wastewater treatment (allocation system, Fig. 3). Furthermore, in the BioMethanol system a part of the CO2 from COD-oxidation is captured and used for CH3OH synthesis. Therefore more impact is credited to the substitution of COD-oxidation in the WWTP reference system than that released in the BioMethanol system until the factory gate. The CO2 sequestered in the produced CH3OH is only released if the FU is oxidised in utilization. However, due to the exclusion of this phase (cradle-to-gate), a part of the impacts from COD-oxidation are temporarily stored in the functional unit (FU) CH3OH, resulting a negative GWP of the BioMethanol system. In comparison with COD-oxidation the other system components only contribute a small share to the GWP of the BioMethanol system. CO2-Equivalents are emitted by CO2 in CH3OH synthesis purge (3%), electricity generation (3%), MEC material procurement (1–5%), sludge treatment (3–4%) and the provision of periphery hardware components (0.5%). Furthermore, the “avoided burden approach” transfers a burden to the BioMethanol system which originates from the avoided sludge incineration electricity production in the WWTP reference system. Following a consequential approach, the electricity substituted for sludge incineration is likely to be the grid electricity mix. Per unit of electricity, the grid mix results in a ca. 13-fold higher GWP than the renewable electricity mix e2. Therefore the sum of GWP of wastewater treatment and sludge incineration leads to a transfer of burden, instead of a credit, to the BioMethanol system.


4.2.3 Other impact categories. 
For the remaining impact categories, the processes “BioMethanol MEC hardware procurement”, “BioMethanol periphery hardware procurement”, electricity generation, as well as a transferred burden from avoided sludge incineration in the substituted WWTP reference system, contribute significantly to impact (Fig. 6). The components that can be influenced immediately by system developers are MEC and periphery hardware. This might offer the possibility for improved environmental performance. The impact for MEC hardware in the BioMethanol system base-, best and worst scenarios originates from:
• Terrestrial Acidification Potential (TAP): MEC hardware: 14–31% of total impact of which 31% originate from chromium steel purchase, 20% from polypropylene purchase, 17% from metal working and 14% each from injection moulding and polysulfone (membrane) purchase
• Photochemical Oxidant Formation Potential (POFP): MEC hardware: 38–53% of total impact of which 30% originate from polypropylene purchase, 26% from steel purchase and 17% from polysulfone (membrane) purchase
• Freshwater Eutrophication Potential (FEP): MEC hardware: 10–25% of total impact of which 66% originate from molybdenum (H2-evolution catalyst) purchase, 11% from steel purchase and 10% from injection moulding
• Metal Depletion Potential (MDP): MEC hardware: 29–60% of total impact of which 60% originate from steel purchase, 25% from molybdenum purchase and 14% from metal working.
The “BioMethanol periphery hardware procurement” impacts are dominated by the power electronics in the categories TAP, POFP, FEP and MDP (46–80% of total impact). In the category CEDF, 86% of the impact was shared in roughly equal parts between power electronics, metal working of steel and steel purchase.
Metal depletion potential. 
The MDP is one of the impact categories in which the BioMethanol system shows a significantly higher impact than fossil CH3OH production. 60% of the impacts are caused by chromium steel, purchased for the MEC current collectors. So far, the recycled content of the steel considered has been ca. 27% (Ecoinvent v.3.4). If containing a higher recycled content, MDP in the cut-off approach would be lower. However, the global end-of-life recycling rate for stainless steel is with 66% (2000) and 77% (2005) rather high,66 and a rising global stainless steel production might inhibit a rising average recycled content in the near future. Furthermore, the use of recycled material for a specific product might lead to additional ore extraction for a product somewhere else (consequential perspective). The distribution of impacts on multiple-use products via recycling is a matter of ongoing discussion and cannot be covered here.


4.2.4 Sensitivity of impact results. 
Electricity source. 
The GWP is strongly affected by the operating electricity source that is chosen for the operation of (1) the BioMethanol product system and (2) the substituted conventional WWTP. The exchange of the renewable electricity source (e2) for the German grid mix (e1) in the BioMethanol system and the WWTP reference system has a major impact on GWP, resulting in a GWP change from negative emissions with −810 kg-CO2-eq per tCH3OH to positive 730 kg-CO2-eq per tCH3OH (base case). Besides the adverse effect on GWP-impact, the German Grid Mix also has a detrimental effect on all other impact categories except the Metal Depletion Potential (Table 10). Hence, the operation of the BioMethanol system with electricity from the German grid mix is not recommended under the consideration of sustainability.
Table 10 Sensitivity of the BioMethanol system impact results (base case) to the exchange of electricity source (e2: renewable electricity mix – exchanged for e1: German Grid mix 2014). Box colouration indicates comparatively better (green) and worse (red) performance











Carbon dioxide source. 
For the BioMethanol system, CO2 can either be extracted from the MEC, or purchased. The extraction of CO2 from MEC might be hampered by an alkaline operating pH in the anode chamber. However, the results show that the purchase of CO2 (100% external purchase as represented in Ecoinvent v.3.4. “market for carbon dioxide, liquid [RER]”) significantly increases impact in all categories (Table 11). Regarding the GWP, the effect primarily results from two mechanisms:
1. The CO2 that is not used for CH3OH synthesis is blown off into the atmosphere, thereby increasing emissions from COD-oxidation (from 4.2 to 5.7 t CO2-eq per tCH3OH)
2. The process of CO2 purchase, represented by the Ecoinvent process “market for carbon dioxide, liquid [RER]”, in itself causes emissions of ∼1.2 t CO2-eq per tCH3OH through CO2 capture and transport (∼0.7 t CO2-eq per t CO2 purchased).
Table 11 Influence of the CO2 source (purchase from the CO2-market or extraction from MEC) on the impact results of 1 tCH3OH based on the BioMethanol system











The impact of the second mechanism might, however, be reduced by the utilization of another CO2-source, e.g. a local biogas plant.
Microbial electrolysis current density and hardware. 
The impact of MEC hardware on system emissions is influenced on the one hand by material type and on the other hand by material amount. The latter is dependent on MEC current density, as it determines the electrode surface area required to treat the reference wastewater flow and thereby total system size (eqn (8)).
The potential impact of the BioMethanol system at different MEC current densities in relation to the impact at a current density of 1 mA cm−2 is compared in Fig. 7. A change in current density has two effects: (1) rising current density allows for a smaller MEC system to treat the industrial wastewater flow, by a higher COD degradation per membrane surface (equals less material need), and (2) increasing current density leads to rising MEC electricity consumption due to increasing polarization losses at the MEC electrodes. The latter mechanism leads to the rise of impact values of CED_Solar and CED_Wind (PV and wind power are electricity sources for the system). Furthermore, the higher electricity demand also leads to higher impacts in the other impact categories. However, this effect is overcompensated by the shrinking MEC system size (less material need) and leads to a decline of impacts from 0.2 mA cm−2 to 1 mA cm−2. Furthermore, the counteracting mechanisms lead to an optimal MEC current density at which impact is the lowest. The value varies for different impact categories: GWP and POFP (ca. 1.4 mA cm−2), TAP (1 mA cm−2) and FEP (1.6 mA cm−2). The impact of MDP decreases steadily until 2 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 7  Relation of the LCA impact results of BioMethanol system to the current density of microbial electrolysis for the base case (1 mA cm−2). 
Apart from the amount, also the type of material used for the MEC hardware has a significant effect on environmental impacts. Copper (Cu) current collectors, for instance, might have the potential to reduce MEC electricity consumption by lowering electrical resistance. However, in comparison with stainless steel collectors, copper current collectors significantly impair most of the impacts in the investigated categories (Table 12). This effect prevails when assuming 10% electricity savings through the application of copper current collectors with lower resistance (data not shown). Considering the cell membrane, a PTFE based material like Nafion® – a high performance polymeric proton conductor – worsens the GWP but performs slightly better in POFP. These findings suggest that, if supplied with renewable electricity, the use of low-impact MEC materials might be more important for environmental performance of the MEC system than optimised electricity consumption through the use of high-performance materials like copper current collectors. However, as the results for the PTFE-membrane reveal, this might not be true for every material and every impact category. Therefore the effects of different materials should be evaluated case by case when designing the MEC system.
Table 12 Influence of the exchange of stainless steel for copper (Cu) current collectors and polysulfon for the PTFE-membrane model on the investigated impact categories for 1 tCH3OH based on the BioMethanol system













4.2.5 Comparison with other studies. 
To date there has been only one peer-reviewed publication regarding the LCA of microbial electrolysis (i.e. Foley et al. concerning H2O2 production).15 However, the system products (wastewater treatment and H2O2) do not allow for a comparison with the ones of this study. Nevertheless, literature reports assessing CH3OH production on the basis of H2O electrolysis and different CO2-sources are available.
Bringezu and Hoppe67 have investigated a system combination of H2O electrolysis and CH3OH production, based on wind power and a CO2 source from either waste incineration or biogas. They found a GWP of −0.4 t-CO2-eq per tCH3OH (CO2 from waste) and ca. 0 t-CO2-eq per tCH3OH (CO2 from biogas) and a cumulated energy demand of ∼60 GJ tCH3OH−1 at the factory gate. Matzen and Demirel68 also reported impacts for methanol at the factory gate with a GWP of the impacts calculated to be GWP 5970 metric tons-CO2-eq per tCH3OH, TAP 13300 kg SO2-eq per tCH3OH and POFP of 13700 kg NMVOC per tCH3OH (heating value based results recalculated with a lower heating value (LHV) of 19.9 kJ gCH3OH−1 (ref. 17) for this study).
The results of this study with a GWP of −0.8 to −1 t-CO2-eq per tCH3OH and a total CED of 14.6 to 24 GJ tCH3OH−1 for the base case show a lower GWP and a CED around 60% to 86% lower than that of Bringezu and Hoppe.67 The lower CED is not surprising, as a part of the electricity for microbial electrolysis is supplied by microbes and an alternative anode reaction (COD degradation instead of oxygen evolution) lowers the energy demand for hydrogen production compared to abiotic water electrolysis.20
Regarding the TAP this study found a value of 1.8 to 3.4 kg SO2-eq per tCH3OH and a POFP of 0.4–1.8 kg NMVOC per tCH3OH. The values of Matzen and Demirel68 are in a totally different order of magnitude, which is surprising, and therefore cannot be adequately compared.


4.2.6 Uncertainty and limitations of the results. 
The impact results for the CH3OH produced in the BioMethanol system come with the following limitations:
• Impacts are likely to be a bit higher due to exclusion of end-of-life phases for materials (except if considered in Ecoinvent v.3.4 database processes)
• Emissions of MEC hardware may be higher, as mostly only material needs and no hardware manufacturing are considered (three average manufacturing processes considered, as well as manufacturing in background datasets). This results in a higher leverage for systems engineering to reduce impact
• The assumption of a steady renewable electricity provision for 8500 h a−1 operation of the BioMethanol system can be contested and might require electricity storage or grid extension. Comparatively lower operation hours result in higher impact values per unit of product
• The results have to be regarded in the delineated system. Consequences outside of the system are difficult to assess and would be a part of a fully consequential LCA which should form the basis for an informed decision on the benefit of BioMethanol on a larger scale.

5. Conclusions
In conclusion, a microbial electrolysis cell (MEC) has been shown to be responsible for a significant share of the presented BioMethanol system costs and potential environmental impacts. In comparison with abiotic electrolysis, the biological counterpart has a lower ratio of energy harvest to system volume, resulting in comparatively large systems. In comparison with H2O electrolysis, expenses for system construction have a high share in total lifetime expenses (economic and environmental). One central parameter determining system size and electricity consumption is MEC current density – it affects electricity consumption via electrode overpotentials and system size via the MEC surface area required to treat a fixed wastewater flow. The antagonistic influence of current density on these parameters leads to an optimal point of operation in economic and environmental terms (cf. “microbial electrolysis current density” and “microbial electrolysis current density and hardware”). Considering the study parameters, an operating current density of ca. 1 mA cm−2 can be regarded as ideal. Besides the MEC current density, the use of the MEC's anodic CO2 (instead of external purchase) is a crucial parameter for an environmentally and economically beneficial BioMethanol system.
The economic viability of the BioMethanol system was found to be largely dependent on MEC hardware costs and market electricity price for electricity, CH3OH and wastewater disposal. While the market price cannot be influenced immediately, systems engineering can be a lever for reducing MEC hardware costs. Due to the large system size of microbial electrolysis systems, construction with low cost materials is important for economic performance. In this context, the achievement of low MEA costs and cost-efficient system integration should be considered. Furthermore it appears that the use of low cost materials is a superior choice over the optimization of system performance through the use of costly high-performance materials. However, this suggestion depends on MEC electricity consumption (cf. section 4.1.5 “Hardware Costs vs. Electricity Consumption”) which might depict a special case in this study, due to low cell voltage (i.e. via favourable MEC thermodynamics at a low cathodic pH). Another option for significant cost reduction relates to system integration for an electrical serial connection of single MECs.
From an ecological point of view the presented results indicate the BioMethanol system to be potentially more sustainable as compared to fossil-based CH3OH production regarding the categories Global Warming Potential (GWP) and consumption of fossil fuels (CEDF). Critical components to achieve this are the system operation with renewable electricity and CO2-sourcing from the MEC system. However, also under the mentioned conditions, the BioMethanol system shows a rather high material demand for metals and synthetic materials per unit of product, in comparison with conventional CH3OH production from natural gas (i.e. a high specific metal depletion potential). Another point that generates a system burden relates to the avoided electricity production from sludge incineration in conventional wastewater treatment due to lower specific sludge formation in MEC (when considering substituting grid electricity).
Finally, it is concluded that the complementary application of microbial electrolysis and methanol synthesis for wastewater treatment shows potential for an ecologically and potentially economically sound technology if applied under defined conditions. Regarding the environmental performance, the system can help to mitigate certain environmental impacts (global warming potential and cumulated energy demand fossil). For other impact categories, the performance of the system might be less satisfactory (i.e. with regard to the reference process) – but is found to be strongly dependent on the construction materials for the microbial electrolysis system, as well as on the system context in which the technology is embedded.
List of abbreviations


A
E
Electrode surface area, MEC system, m2
BESBio-electrochemical system

B

n

Revenues in year n, €
CAPEXCapital expenditure, €
CODChemical oxygen demand, mg L−1
COD-BOD2Chemical oxygen demand minus biological oxygen demand after two days
CDCurrent density, mA cm−2, A m−2
CECoulombic efficiency, %
CCECathodic conversion efficiency, %
CEDCumulative energy demand
CEDFCumulative energy demand fossil
CEDTCumulative energy demand total
CH3OHmolMolar CH3OH flow, mol s−1
CHPCombined heat and power
CH4-LNMethane input (standard litres), LN
CH4-LHVMethane lower heating value, kWh Nm−3

C

n

Operational costs in year n, €
CODChemical oxygen demand, g
CODAcetate in biomassBacterial biomass expressed as acetate COD, g
CODoxCOD oxidized to CO2, g
CODrCOD removal rate, %
CODmolCOD molar flow in wastewater, mol s−1
ΔCODmolCOD molar flow in wastewater that is oxidized in MEC, mol s−1
CO2molMolar CO2 flow, mol s−1
CO2, Biomass specCarbon dioxide emissions per gram biomass, g
CO2, Wastewater CODCarbon dioxide emissions from wastewater COD oxidation, g
CO2, SludgeCarbon dioxide emissions from sludge digestion, g
DMDry matter, kg

E

n

Savings of wastewater treatment fees, €
EoLEnd-of-life phase
ESExcess sludge, kg
e−Electron

e
Actual electron flow from substrate, electrons per s

e
pot
Potential electron flow from substrate, electrons per s
FEPFreshwater eutrophication potential
FUFunctional unit – the unit of product in life cycle assessment to which all the impacts are related
GWPGlobal warming potential
H2 molH2 molar flow, mol s−1
HRTHydraulic retention time, h

I
MEC
MEC current, A, kA

I
0
Investment costs in year 0, €
LCALife cycle assessment
MDPMetal depletion potential
MEAMembrane electrode assembly
MECMicrobial electrolysis cell
MFCMicrobial fuel cell

M

n

Methanol production in year n, tonnes
MPCMethanol production costs, € tCH3OH−1

M
Biomass
Molar weight of biomass, g mol−1

M
C02
Molar weight of carbon dioxide, g mol−1

M
O2
Molar weight of oxygen, g mol−1

N
A
Avogadro's number, mol−1
NMVOCNon-methane volatile organic compound
NPVNet present value, €
oDMOrganic dry matter, kg
OPEXOperational expenditure, €
POFPPhotochemical oxidant formation potential

r
Discount rate

q
e
Elementary charge, Coulomb [C]
TAPTerrestrial acidification potential
TNTotal nitrogen, mg L−1
TSSTotal suspended solids, g, g L−1

U
Voltage, volts, mV

U
Cell
MEC cell voltage, mV

V
s
MEC system volume, m3

V
Cell
MEC cell volume, m3
VSSVolatile suspended solids, g, g L−1

W
el
Electric production, kWh

W
p
Electric power, watts, W
WWTPWastewater treatment plant

Y
CH4
Methane yield, Nm3
ΔCODAcetateRemoved wastewater COD, g
ΔCODmolRemoved wastewater COD (molar), mol
ΔoDMFraction of oDM digested during anaerobic process, kg
ΔmBiomassBacterial biomass metabolized in anaerobic digester, g

η
CE
Coulomb efficiency

η
CCE
Cathodic conversion efficiency

η
electrical
Electrical efficiency of CHP

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The BioMethanol project team would like to thank the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) for financial support through the programme “Future-oriented Technologies and Concepts for an Energy-efficient and Resource-saving Water Management - ERWAS” (Grant No. 02WER1314). The BioMethanol project team would also like to thank M. Hacker (AZV Staufener Bucht, Bad Krozingen, Germany) and S. Estelmann (DLR, Stuttgart, Germany) for helpful discussions and support. RJW would also like to thank the Fraunhofer Society and Fraunhofer ISE for financial support through a “Fraunhofer Attract” award.
References

          European Commission, Closing the loop: Commission adopts ambitious new Circular Economy Package to boost competitiveness, create jobs and generate sustainable growth,  2015, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-6203_en.htm Search PubMed (last accessed April 2017).
The Finnish Innovation Fund Sitra, Leading the cycle – Finnish road map to a circular economy 2016–2025, 2017, https://www.sitra.fi/en/projects/leading-the-cycle-finnish-road-map-to-a-circular-economy-2016-2025/#what-is-it-about (last accessed April 2017).

          European Commission, Closing the loop - An EU action plan for the Circular Economy, Brussels,  2015, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/resource.html?uri=cellar:8a8ef5e8-99a0-11e5-b3b7-01aa75ed71a1.0012.02/DOC_1andformat=PDF Search PubMed (last accessed 14.08.17).

          B. E. Rittmann, in Source Separation and Decentralization for Wastewater Management, ed. T. Larsen, K. Udert and J. Lienert, IWA, London,  2013 Search PubMed .
E. S. Heidrich, T. P. Curtis and J. Dolfing, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45(2), 827–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. McCarty, J. Bae and J. Kim, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45(17), 7100–7106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Curtis, in Environmental Microbiology, ed. R. Mitchell and J.-D. Gu, John Wiley and Sons, Inc, Hoboken, NJ, USA,  2009, p. 301 Search PubMed .
L. Appels, J. Baeyens, J. Degrève and R. Dewil, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2008, 34(6), 755–781 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Nghiem, K. Koch, D. Bolzonella and J. E. Drewes, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 72, 354–362 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Baeyens, L. Hosten and E. van Vaerenbergh, Afvalwaterzuivering, Wastewater treatment, Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands,  1997 Search PubMed .
S. Venkata Mohan, G. N. Nikhil, P. Chiranjeevi, C. Nagendranatha Reddy, M. V. Rohit, A. N. Kumar and O. Sarkar, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 215, 2–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hiegemann, D. Herzer, E. Nettmann, M. Lubken, P. Schulte, K.-G. Schmelz, S. Gredigk-Hoffmann and M. Wichern, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 218, 115–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kadier, M. S. Kalil, P. Abdeshahian, K. Chandrasekhar, A. Mohamed, N. F. Azman, W. Logroño, Y. Simayi and A. A. Hamid, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 61, 501–525 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu and Z. J. Ren, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 215, 254–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Foley, R. A. Rozendal, C. K. Hertle, P. A. Lant and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44(9), 3629–3637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Escapa, X. Gómez, B. Tartakovsky and A. Morán, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37(24), 18641–18653 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Bertau, H. Offermanns, L. Plass, F. Schmidt and H.-J. Wernicke, Methanol: The Basic Chemical and Energy Feedstock of the Future, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2014 Search PubMed .
Federal Ministry of Education and Research Germany, Sustainable synthesis of the energy-carrier methanol from waste water, https://bmbf.nawam-erwas.de/en/project/biomethanol (last accessed 12.09.17).
M. Oliot, L. Etcheverry, R. Mosdale and A. Bergel, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 246, 879–889 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kokko, F. Bayerköhler, J. Erben, R. Zengerle, P. Kurz and S. Kerzenmacher, Appl. Energy, 2017, 190, 1221–1233 CrossRef CAS .
A. Escapa, R. Mateos, E. J. Martínez and J. Blanes, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 55, 942–956 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Rombach, Plating electronic GmBH, Offer for rectifier and transformer for parallel supply of electrolysis cells of BioMethanol system, personal communication,  2016 Search PubMed .
R. A. Rozendal, H. V. M. Hamelers, K. Rabaey, J. Keller and C. J. N. Buisman, Trends Biotechnol., 2008, 26(8), 450–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Kim, H. S. Park, H. J. Kim, G. T. Kim, I. S. Chang, J. Lee and N. T. Phung, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2004, 63(6), 672–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Roskosch and S. Otto, Technical Guide on the Treatment and Recycling Techniques for Sludge from municipal Wastewater Treatment with references to Best Available Techniques (BAT),  2014, https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/publikationen/technical-guide-on-the-treatment-recycling-0 (last accessed April 2017) Search PubMed .

          B. E. Rittmann and P. L. McCarty, Environmental biotechnology: Principles and applications, McGraw-Hill, Boston, Mass. [u.a.],  2007 Search PubMed .
T. Huggins, P. Fallgren, S. Jin and Z. J. Ren, J. Microb. Biochem. Technol., 2013, 1–21 Search PubMed .
B. Teichgräber and M. Hetschel, Korresp. Abwasser, Abfall, 2016, 63(2), 97–102 Search PubMed .

          F. Schlowin, J. Liebertrau and W. Edelmann, in Energie aus Biomasse: Grundlagen, Techniken und Verfahren, Renewable Energy from Biomass, ed. M. Kaltschmitt, Springer, Dordrecht, Heidelberg, London, New York, NY, 2nd edn,  2009 Search PubMed .
Methanex Corporation, Methanex Monthly Average Regional Posted Contract Price History, https://www.methanex.com/our-business/pricing (last accessed 06.02.17).

          Federation for Energy- and Water Economy BDEW, BDEW Strompreisanalyse Mai 2016: Haushalte und Industrie, Analysis of Electricity Costs 2016: Households and Industry, Berlin,  2016 Search PubMed .

          N. Rees, EWS Elektrizitätswerke Schönau eG-Utility, Non-binding offer for renewable electricity provision, personal communication,  2016 Search PubMed .

          M. Schlesinger, D. Lindenberger and C. Lutz, Entwicklung der Energiemärkte– Energiereferenz-prognose, development of energy markets,  2014, https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/DE/Publikationen/Studien/entwicklung-der-energiemaerkte-energiereferenzprognose-endbericht.pdf?__blob=publicationFileandv=7 (last accessed April 2016) Search PubMed .

          C. Schaum, Abwasserbehandlung der Zukunft: Gesundheits-, Gewässer- und Ressourcenschutz, wastewater treatment of the future, Verein z. Förd. d. Inst. IWAR, Darmstadt,  2015 Search PubMed .

          J. Stubenvoll, S. Böhmer and I. Szednyj, Stand der Technik bei Abfallverbrennungsanlagen, state of the art in waste incineration,  2002, http://www.umweltbundesamt.at/fileadmin/site/umweltthemen/industrie/pdfs/endversion_deutsch.pdf (last accessed April 2017) Search PubMed .
S. Freguia, K. Rabaey, Z. Yuan and J. Keller, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41(8), 2915–2921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Ministry of Environment, Climate Protection and the Energy Sector, Baden Württemberg, Germany, Leitfaden Energieeffizienz auf Kläranalgen, Guide Energy Efficiency in Wastewater Treatment, 2015, https://um.baden-wuerttemberg.de/de/service/publikation/did/leitfaden-energieeffizienz-auf-kiaeranlagen/?tx_rsmbwpublications_pi35Btopics5D=59andtx_rsmbwpublications_pi35Bministries5D=4andcHash=07a19559c580f51a950940fbe5342ed5 (last accessed April 2017).

          S. Kerzenmacher, Potential scenarios for the performance of microbial electrolysis cells, personal conversation,  2018 Search PubMed .

          P. Cornel, in Neue maschinen- und verfahrenstechnische Möglichkeiten zur Einsparung von Betriebskosten bei der Abwasserbehandlung: Mit Ausstellung; [am 2. November 2006 in Darmstadt], New technological possibilities for savings of operation costs in wastewater treatment, Inst. WAR, Darmstadt,  2006 Search PubMed .
German Association for Water, Wastewater and Waste DWA, Merkblatt ATV-DVWK-M 368, Biologische Stabilisierung von Klärschlamm, Biological stabilisation of sewage sludge, 2003.
National Statistics Buro Germany, Verbraucherpreisindex für Deutschland: Veränderungen im gegenüber dem Vorjahr in %, Consumer price index for Germany: changes to year before, 2017, https://www.destatis.de/DE/ZahlenFakten/GesamtwirtschaftUmwelt/Preise/Verbraucherpreisindizes/Verbraucherpreisindizes.html (last accessed April 2017).
City of Freiburg, Germany, Stadtentwässerungssatzung, Statute for municipal drainage, https://www.freiburg.de/pb/site/Freiburg/get/documents_E1775422983/freiburg/daten/ortsrecht/15%20Entwaesserung/OrtsR_15_02.pdf (last accessed 21.04.017).
National Statistics Buro Germany, Wasserwirtschaft. Kosten für die Entsorgung von Abwasser aus privaten Haushalten 2005 bis 2010, Consumer price index for Germany: changes to year before,
2017, https://www.destatis.de/DE/ZahlenFakten/GesamtwirtschaftUmwelt/Umwelt/UmweltstatistischeErhebungen/Wasserwirtschaft/Tabellen/DurchschnittskostenAbwasserHaushalte2010.html (last accessed April 2017).

          A. Boardman, D. Greenberg, A. Vining and D. Weimer, Cost-benefit analysis: Concepts and practice, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J.,  2011 Search PubMed .

          C. Kost, J. Mayer, J. Thomsen, N. Hartmann, C. Senkpiel, S. Philipps, S. Nold, S. Lude and T. Schlegl, Stromgestehungskosten Erneurbarer Energien, Levelized Cost of Renewable Electricity,  2013, https://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/de/veroeffentlichungen/studien/studie-stromgestehungskosten-erneuerbare-energien.html (last accessed May 2017) Search PubMed .

          M. Baerns, A. Behr, A. Brehm, J. Gmehling, H. Hofmann, U. Onken and A. Renken, Technische Chemie, Technical Chemistry, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Bergstr,  2013 Search PubMed .
G. Wernet, C. Bauer, B. Steubing, J. Reinhard, E. Moreno-Ruiz and B. Weidema, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2016, 21(9), 1218–1230 CrossRef .
G. Majeau-Bettez, R. Wood and A. H. Strømman, J. Ind. Ecol., 2014, 18(5), 747–770 CrossRef CAS .
N. von der Assen, J. Jung and A. Bardow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6(9), 2721 CAS .
A. Boulamanti and J. A. Moya, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 68, 1205–1212 CrossRef CAS .
G. Iaquaniello, G. Centi, A. Salladini, E. Palo, S. Perathoner and L. Spadaccini, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 243, 611–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Sievers, O. Schläfer, H. Bormann, M. Niedermeiser, D. Bahnemann and R. Dillert, Machbarkeitsstudie für die Anwendung einer mikrobiellen Brennstoffzelle im Abwasser- und Abfallbereich, Feasibility study of the application of microbial fuel cells in waste- and wastewater treatment,  2010, https://www.dbu.de/OPAC/ab/DBU-Abschlussbericht-AZ-26580.pdf (last accessed May 2017) Search PubMed .
J. R. Trapero, L. Horcajada, J. J. Linares and J. Lobato, Appl. Energy, 2017, 185, 698–707 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. J. A. Sleutels, A. Ter Heijne, C. J. N. Buisman and H. V. M. Hamelers, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5(6), 1012–1019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tartakovsky, P. Mehta, G. Santoyo and S. R. Guiot, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36(17), 10557–10564 CrossRef CAS .

          Gleichrichterwerk Großräschen GmbH, Costs for AC/DC rectifier for MEC serial connection, personal communication,  2015 Search PubMed .

          L. Gil-Carrera, S. Epple and S. Kerzenmacher, Presented in part at The 24th International Symposium on Bioelectrochemistry and Bioenergetics, A novel inoculation and adaptation procedure to improve the performance of microbial anodes operated with complex industrial wastewater, Lyon, France,  2017 .
A. Deeke, T. Sleutels, T. Donkers, H. Hamelers, C. Buisman and A. Ter Heijne, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49(3), 1929–1935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Z. Ge and Z. He, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 167, 310–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
TÜV SÜD, Zertifizierung Green Hydrogen, Green Hydrogen Certification, 24.05.17, http://www.tuev-sued.de/anlagen-bau-industrietechnik/technikfelder/umwelttechnik/energie-zertifizierung/zertifizierung-greenhydrogen# (last accessed 24.05.17).

          K.-C. Tran, G. Harp, O. Sigurbjörnsson, C. Bergins and T. Buddenberg, Carbon Recycling for Converting Coke Oven Gas to Methanol for the Reduction of Carbon Dioxide at Steel Mills, n.d., http://www.mefco2.eu/pdf/ScanmetV_Harp.pdf (last accessed June 2017).
O. Machhammer, A. Bode and W. Hormuth, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2015, 87(4), 409–418 CrossRef CAS .
D. Parra, X. Zhang, C. Bauer and M. K. Patel, Appl. Energy, 2017, 193, 440–454 CrossRef .
Eurostat, ECU/EUR currency exchange against national currency, http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/tgm/table.do?tab=tableandinit=1andlanguage=deandpcode=tec00033andplugin=1 (last accessed June 2017).

          H. S. Matthews, C. Hendrickson and D. Matthews, Life Cycle Assessment: Quantitative Approaches for Decisions That Matter,  2015, http://www.lcatextbook.com/ Search PubMed .
B. K. Reck, M. Chambon, S. Hashimoto and T. E. Graedel, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44(10), 3940–3946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Hoppe and S. Bringezu, Vergleichende Ökobilanz der CO2-basierten und konventionellen Methan- und Methanolproduktion, in uwf Umwelt Wirtschafts Forum,  2016, pp. 1–5,  DOI:10.1007/s00550-016-0389-4 .
M. Matzen and Y. Demirel, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 139, 1068–1077 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8gc00543eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The BioMethanol system – graphical depiction of the main operational flows indicated by coloured arrows between system components. The wastewater treatment process, as well as the incineration of the MEC sludge is considered in both economic and LCA but not depicted here. The use and end-of-life phase of CH3OH are excluded.	 


MEC size	310	m3	
Eqn (9)

Electrode surface	12400	m2	
Eqn (8)

CODr, CE, CCE	60, 40, 90	%	
cf. 2.1
Current density	1	mA cm−2	
cf. 2.1

U
Cell
	365	mV	
cf. 2.1
System current	124	kA	
Eqn (6)


η power electronics	90%	%	
22

H2 formation	35.7	t a−1	
Eqn (10)

CO2 formation potential	1055	t a−1	
Eqn (14)

Sludge formation	22.3	t a−1	
cf. 3.1.4
Sludge formation, specific	∼0.03	g(TSS) g(COD)−1	
cf. 3.1.4
MEA lifetime	5	Years	
16, 23 and 24

H2 production, specific	3.6	Nm3 H2 per m3 reactor	

Electricity consumption, specific	1.2	kWh Nm−3 H2	

0.6	kWh kg−1 CODox	

Gas cleaning, compression and CH3OH production
Gas H2S content	200	ppm	
cf. 2.2
Compressor power (sum)	98.5–103.8a	MWh a−1	
cf. 3.1.3
CO2 demand	286.5	t a−1	
cf. 3.1.3
Cooling demand	209.3–214.6a	MWh a−1	
cf. 3.1.3
Catalyst lifetime	4	a	
17

CH3OH yield	185.3	t a−1	
cf. 3.1.3
Periphery system components
Digester retention	25	d	
25

CH4 formation	2.8	t a−1	
Eqn (11)

CHP electricity	12.8	MWh a−1	
Eqn (11)

Sludge press consumption	0.25	kWh m−3 sludge	
25

Pump capacity	5.5	kW	ESI S7
Sludge pump operation	52	h a−1	
15

Transport to sludge drying	24	km	Google maps
CO2 mol:H2 mol = 1:2.7(1)	(1)
CH3OHmol:H2 mol = 1:3.1	(2)

 	Fig. 2  The wastewater treatment plant reference system. Graphical depiction of main operational flows as indicated by coloured arrows between the system components.	 

 	Fig. 3  Cradle-to-gate LCA system boundaries for evaluation of the BioMethanol system. The impacts of the wastewater treatment plant reference system (WWTP reference system) are transferred to the BioMethanol system according to the substitution of COD and Total Nitrogen (TN) treatment, following the “avoided burden approach” (system expansion). The same approach is applied to electricity production from the process of “sludge incineration”, with its impacts credited to the respective adjacent process, following a consequential approach. The use and end-of-life (EoL) phase of the functional unit (1 tonne of CH3OH) have been excluded. Furthermore, the following modelling assumptions applied: (1) in the WWTP reference system only those elements have been regarded that fulfilled the same function in the BioMethanol and the WWTP reference system (i.e. COD-, TN-removal and sludge treatment). (2) Hardware of the BioMethanol system was included via material needs, three manufacturing processes, and as represented in the background datasets of the Ecoinvent v.3.4 database (cf. ESI S12†). Manufacturing of the MEC electrodes, MEC membrane and methanol catalyst was not accounted for. (3) The hardware of combined heat and power plant (CHP), sludge storage, sludge drying and -incineration as well as from the wastewater treatment plant reference system (WWTP reference system) has not been considered, as the components represent existing infrastructure and are not part of hypothetical construction of the BioMethanol system. (4) The EoL phase of sludge incineration ash and H2O flows were excluded. (5) The EoL phase of the foreground system hardware was only included if part of the Ecoinvent v.3.4 database. (6) The BioMethanol system and the WWTP reference system are considered to be supplied with electricity from the defined electricity supply scenarios (e1/e2). Exceptions are the processes connected to German grid electricity as depicted in the figure. Another exception in the BioMethanol system is the process of sludge drying in “sludge transport and drying” which is modelled in operation with German grid electricity. The processes connected to the German grid have been assumed to be operated with grid mix electricity in reality.	 
	(3)
ΔCODmol = CODr × CODmol	(4)
e = epot × ηCE	(5)
IMEC = e × qe	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
YCH4 = ES × oDM/DM × COD/oDM × ΔoDM × YCH4/COD	(11)
Wel = CH4-LN × CH4-LHV × ηelectrical	(12)
CODOx = ΔCODAcetate − CODAcetate in biomass	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
CO2, Sludge = ΔmBiomass × CO2, Biomass spec	(16)

e1	German electricity grid mix (economic/LCA year: 2016/2014)
e2	German certified renewable electricity mix


CH3OH price [€ t−1]	400a	560a	650a
Electricity price [ct€ kWh−1]	13.5b/16.8c	13.5b/16.8 c	6.6b/9.1c
Electricity inflation [% a−1]	3d	1.6e	1.3f
CO2 source	Purchase	50% purchase	MEC

MEC current density [mA cm−2]38	1	2	0.5
Sludge transport [km]	200	600	100
MEC power38	±0	−20%	+20%
WWTP electricity [kWh kg−1 CODdeg]37	0.36	0.3	0.75
Biogas power37,39,40	±0	−15%	+25%
Incineration turbine efficiency35	25%	20%	30%


Discount rate [%]	7.4%a
Inflation rate [%]	1.46b
Wastewater price [€ m−3]	1.99/1.64c
Wastewater price inflation [%]	1.9d
	(17)
	(18)

Global warming potential 100	kg CO2-eq.
Terrestrial acidification potential 100	kg SO2-eq.
Photochemical oxidant formation pot.	kg NMVOC-eq.
Metal depletion potential	kg Fe-eq.
Freshwater eutrophication potential	kg P-eq.
Cumulated energy demand fossil	MJ
Cumulated energy demand renewable	MJ


e1	−1.8	−1.2	−0.3
e2	−2	−1.4	−0.5
MPC [€ tCH3OH−1]	Pessimistic	Moderate	Optimistic
e1	1350	1190	820
e2	1480	1300	900
CH3OH market price 1/18 [€ tCH3OH−1]30	380	
	


 	Fig. 4  Discounted operational costs of the BioMethanol system over 20 years operation for the three different market scenarios (Table 3).	 

 	Fig. 5  Sensitivity of Net Present Value (NPV) to the variation of input parameters for ±100% and under the conditions of the optimistic market scenario (Table 7) and renewable electricity supply scenario e2. In the legend, the values in brackets are the original input value followed by the parameter value, at which a NPV = 0€ is reached [original value, value for NPV = 0].	 

Power electronics	287
Installation	98
Measurement and control	69
Endplates	68
Piping	56
Current collectors	43
Manufacture	28
Pumps	13
 
Sum	662




 	Fig. 6  Impact assessment results for 1 tonne of CH3OH at factory gate for the BioMethanol system and fossil CH3OH production, disaggregated for the BioMethanol system components, as well as the WWTP reference system processes (WWTP reference system electricity processes, WWTP reference system sludge transport, WWTP reference system COD oxidation). The point “BioMethanol periphery hardware procurement” in the legend comprises the hardware for power electronics for MEC, compressors, methanol synthesis and anaerobic digester + sludge press. Net emissions of the consequential LCA are indicated with a solid red line for each case. Ref = reference – fossil CH3OH synthesis, base = BioMethanol base case, worst = BioMethanol worst case, best = BioMethanol best case (Table 4).	 







 	Fig. 7  Relation of the LCA impact results of BioMethanol system to the current density of microbial electrolysis for the base case (1 mA cm−2).	 




A
E
	Electrode surface area, MEC system, m2
BES	Bio-electrochemical system

B

n

	Revenues in year n, €
CAPEX	Capital expenditure, €
COD	Chemical oxygen demand, mg L−1
COD-BOD2	Chemical oxygen demand minus biological oxygen demand after two days
CD	Current density, mA cm−2, A m−2
CE	Coulombic efficiency, %
CCE	Cathodic conversion efficiency, %
CED	Cumulative energy demand
CEDF	Cumulative energy demand fossil
CEDT	Cumulative energy demand total
CH3OHmol	Molar CH3OH flow, mol s−1
CHP	Combined heat and power
CH4-LN	Methane input (standard litres), LN
CH4-LHV	Methane lower heating value, kWh Nm−3

C

n

	Operational costs in year n, €
COD	Chemical oxygen demand, g
CODAcetate in biomass	Bacterial biomass expressed as acetate COD, g
CODox	COD oxidized to CO2, g
CODr	COD removal rate, %
CODmol	COD molar flow in wastewater, mol s−1
ΔCODmol	COD molar flow in wastewater that is oxidized in MEC, mol s−1
CO2mol	Molar CO2 flow, mol s−1
CO2, Biomass spec	Carbon dioxide emissions per gram biomass, g
CO2, Wastewater COD	Carbon dioxide emissions from wastewater COD oxidation, g
CO2, Sludge	Carbon dioxide emissions from sludge digestion, g
DM	Dry matter, kg

E

n

	Savings of wastewater treatment fees, €
EoL	End-of-life phase
ES	Excess sludge, kg
e−	Electron

e
	Actual electron flow from substrate, electrons per s

e
pot
	Potential electron flow from substrate, electrons per s
FEP	Freshwater eutrophication potential
FU	Functional unit – the unit of product in life cycle assessment to which all the impacts are related
GWP	Global warming potential
H2 mol	H2 molar flow, mol s−1
HRT	Hydraulic retention time, h

I
MEC
	MEC current, A, kA

I
0
	Investment costs in year 0, €
LCA	Life cycle assessment
MDP	Metal depletion potential
MEA	Membrane electrode assembly
MEC	Microbial electrolysis cell
MFC	Microbial fuel cell

M

n

	Methanol production in year n, tonnes
MPC	Methanol production costs, € tCH3OH−1

M
Biomass
	Molar weight of biomass, g mol−1

M
C02
	Molar weight of carbon dioxide, g mol−1

M
O2
	Molar weight of oxygen, g mol−1

N
A
	Avogadro's number, mol−1
NMVOC	Non-methane volatile organic compound
NPV	Net present value, €
oDM	Organic dry matter, kg
OPEX	Operational expenditure, €
POFP	Photochemical oxidant formation potential

r
	Discount rate

q
e
	Elementary charge, Coulomb [C]
TAP	Terrestrial acidification potential
TN	Total nitrogen, mg L−1
TSS	Total suspended solids, g, g L−1

U
	Voltage, volts, mV

U
Cell
	MEC cell voltage, mV

V
s
	MEC system volume, m3

V
Cell
	MEC cell volume, m3
VSS	Volatile suspended solids, g, g L−1

W
el
	Electric production, kWh

W
p
	Electric power, watts, W
WWTP	Wastewater treatment plant

Y
CH4
	Methane yield, Nm3
ΔCODAcetate	Removed wastewater COD, g
ΔCODmol	Removed wastewater COD (molar), mol
ΔoDM	Fraction of oDM digested during anaerobic process, kg
ΔmBiomass	Bacterial biomass metabolized in anaerobic digester, g

η
CE
	Coulomb efficiency

η
CCE
	Cathodic conversion efficiency

η
electrical
	Electrical efficiency of CHP
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8gc00543e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
