Transition metal nitrides for electrochemical energy applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00415D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00415D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 1354-1390Transition metal nitrides for electrochemical energy applications

        
          
            Hao 
            Wang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jianmin 
            Li†
b, 
      
        
          
            Ke 
            Li†
c, 
      
        
          
            Yanping 
            Lin
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jianmei 
            Chen
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Lijun 
            Gao
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Valeria 
            Nicolosi
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Xu 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Jong-Min 
            Lee
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637459, Singapore. E-mail: jmlee@ntu.edu.sg
bState Key Laboratory of Electronic Thin Film and Integrated Devices, School of Electronic Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan 610054, China. E-mail: xuxiao@uestc.edu.cn
cSchool of Chemistry, Centre for Research on Adaptive Nanostructures and Nanodevices (CRANN) & Advanced Materials Bio-Engineering Research Centre (AMBER), Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland. E-mail: nicolov@tcd.ie
dCollege of Energy, Soochow Institute for Energy and Materials Innovations, & Key Laboratory of Advanced Carbon Materials and Wearable Energy Technologies of Jiangsu Province, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China
eInstitute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China
Received 
      1st July 2020
    First published on 9th December 2020AbstractTransition metal nitrides (TMNs), by virtue of their unique electronic structure, high electrical conductivity, superior chemical stability, and excellent mechanical robustness, have triggered tremendous research interest over the past decade, and showed great potential for electrochemical energy conversion and storage. However, bulk TMNs usually suffer from limited numbers of active sites and sluggish ionic kinetics, and eventually ordinary electrochemical performance. Designing nanostructured TMNs with tailored morphology and good dispersity has proved an effective strategy to address these issues, which provides a larger specific surface area, more abundant active sites, and shorter ion and mass transport distances over the bulk counterparts. Herein, the most up-to-date progress on TMN-based nanomaterials is comprehensively reviewed, focusing on geometric-structure design, electronic-structure engineering, and applications in electrochemical energy conversion and storage, including electrocatalysis, supercapacitors, and rechargeable batteries. Finally, we outline the future challenges of TMN-based nanomaterials and their possible research directions beyond electrochemical energy applications.
Hao Wang
Hao Wang received his PhD degree in New Energy Science and Engineering from Soochow University under the co-guidance of Prof. Lijun Gao and Prof. Guifu Zou in 2018. During 2017–2018, he worked as a visiting researcher in the A. J. Drexel Nanomaterials Institute, Drexel University, under the guidance of Prof. Yury Gogotsi. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher at Nanyang Technological University under the guidance of Prof. Jong-Min Lee. His research interests focus on the topochemical synthesis of 2D materials for electrochemical energy applications.
Jianmin Li
Jianmin Li obtained his BS and PhD degree in Materials Science from Donghua University under the guidance of Prof. Hongzhi Wang in 2014 and 2019, respectively. From 2017 to 2018, he worked as a joint PhD student at the A. J. Drexel Nanomaterials Institute, Drexel University, under the guidance of Prof. Yury Gogotsi. He joined the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at National University of Singapore as a Postdoctoral Researcher in 2019. His research interests focus on the regulation of ionic intercalation toward supercapacitors and on-chip energy storage and multi-function devices.
Ke Li
Ke Li is currently a postdoctoral researcher in Prof. Valeria Nicolosi's group at Trinity College Dublin (Ireland). He received his PhD in Chemistry and Physics of Polymers from Fudan University (China) in 2019. During 2017–2018, he worked as a visiting researcher at the A. J. Drexel Nanomaterials Institute, Drexel University (USA) under the guidance of Prof. Yury Gogotsi. His research interests focus on the synthesis of nanomaterials for electrochemical energy applications.
Valeria Nicolosi
Valeria Nicolosi holds the Chair of Nanomaterials & Advanced Microscopy at the School of Chemistry, Trinity College Dublin. She received her BSc degree in Chemistry from the University of Catania (Italy) in 2001 and PhD in Physics from Trinity College Dublin (Ireland) in 2006. She moved to the University of Oxford in 2008 as a Marie Curie Fellow and she returned to Trinity College Dublin as an ERC Research Professor in 2012. Her research group works on the processing and cutting-edge electron microscopy characterization of low-dimensional nanomaterials, and their electrochemical energy applications.
Xu Xiao
Xu Xiao received his BS degree in Physics and PhD degree in Physical Electronics from Huazhong University of Science and Technology under the guidance of Prof. Jun Zhou in 2011 and 2016, respectively. He then joined the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Drexel University as a Postdoctoral Researcher under the guidance of Prof. Yury Gogotsi. Currently, he is a Professor in the School of Electronic Science and Engineering at University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. His research focuses on synthesis of two-dimensional transition metal nitrides and carbides for applications in terahertz/millimeter wave and energy storage.
Jong-Min Lee
Jong-Min Lee received his PhD degree at the Department of Chemical Engineering, Columbia University. He worked in the Chemical Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, and at the Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California at Berkeley, as a postdoctoral fellow. Currently, he is an Associate Professor in the School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering at Nanyang Technological University. His research interests are electrochemistry, green chemistry, and nanotechnology.
1. Introduction
Owing to the rapid development of modern society, the fourth industrial revolution (also known as Industry 4.0) is changing the way we live and work, which raises new requirements for high-efficiency energy supply.1 However, traditional fossil fuel (coal, petroleum, natural gas, etc.) combustion has already led to severe environmental pollution and it is unsustainable for the future. Contrarily, clean energy sources, such as wind, solar, hydrogen, and tidal, possessing easy accessibility and high energy density, are promising alternatives.2 Energy conversion and storage techniques, which may achieve efficient generation and storage of clean energy, have attracted great attention in both academic and industrial communities.3–5 Among various novel techniques, electrochemical approaches through converting or storing energy, such as the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), batteries and supercapacitors (SCs), are regarded as one of the most efficient approaches.6–10 The HER and OER can efficiently split water into hydrogen and oxygen, which can be directly used in fuel cells and rechargeable metal–O2 batteries by conducting the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) and ORR.11–17 In addition, various energy storage systems, such as metal-ion batteries, metal–sulfur batteries, and SCs, can store electric energy from the grid directly to power electronic appliances (electric vehicles, smartphones, portable computers, future wearable electronics, etc.).18–20
Transition metal nitrides (TMNs) are a class of interstitial compounds in which the nitrogen atoms are integrated into the interstitial sites of the parent metals, possessing the properties of covalent compounds, ionic crystals, and transition metals. As illustrated in Fig. 1a–c, TMNs exhibit face-centered cubic (e.g., NbN), hexagonal closed packed (e.g., Ti2N), or simple hexagonal (e.g., WN) structures. Till now, numerous TMNs composed of Group IVB–IB metal elements, such as TiN,21 ZrN,22 VN,23 NbN,24 TaN,25 CrN,26 Mo5N6,27 W2N3,28 Mn3N2,29 Fe2N,30 Co4N,31 Ni3N,32 and Cu3N,33 have been successfully explored (Fig. 1d). Because of the unique electronic structure, high electrical conductivity, superior chemical stability, fascinating electrocatalytic activity, and excellent mechanical robustness, TMNs have received tremendous research interest in many applications, especially for energy conversion and storage.34–36 In general, TMNs are dominated simultaneously by covalent, ionic and metallic bonding, in which the M–N bonding leads to expansion of the parent metal lattice and constriction of the metal d-band.37–40 Such a deficiency in the d-band and higher density of states (DOS) of the metal near the Fermi level allow noble metal-like behavior in electrocatalysis and ensure good adsorption between the surface of TMNs and reactants, making TMNs promising candidates for electrochemical energy conversion and storage materials. Notably, their chemical inertness allows TMNs to work in a wide pH range, expanding the utilization of various electrolytes.
 Fig. 1  Structure models of TMNs: (a) face-centered cubic; (b) hexagonal closed packed; and (c) simple hexagonal. The blue and brown balls represent transition metal and nitrogen atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Experimentally reported Group IVB to IB TMNs highlighted in gold. 
Although TMNs possess high electrochemical activity, the limited amount of electrochemically active sites of the bulk form significantly hampers their efficiency for catalysis and energy storage in practical implementation.14,35 Thus, nano-engineering of TMNs with tailored morphology and great dispersity is of great importance to enlarge the specific surface area, enrich the active sites, facilitate ion mass transport and shorten the electrolyte diffusion distance, and finally enhance their electrochemical performances. In this context, more than one hundred TMNs with diverse structures (zero-dimensional (0D) nanoparticles, one-dimensional (1D) nanowires, two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets, and three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical architectures) have been reported, including monometallic nitrides (Ni3N, Mo5N6, NbN, etc.),42–44 bimetallic nitrides (CoFeN, NiMoN, etc.),45–48 trimetallic nitrides (NiFeMnNx and NiCoFeNx),49,50 and even high-entropy metal nitrides,51 which have been synthesized by methods like chemical vapor deposition (CVD), the template method, and selective atomic substitution. Notably, benefiting from the coordination between metal atoms, bimetallic and high-entropy metal nitrides usually show superior bifunctional catalytic activities to monometallic nitrides. Thus, proper design toward the structural engineering and electronic modulation of TMN-based materials is crucially needed for future electrochemical energy applications.
In the following sections, a comprehensive overview of the most up-to-date research progress on the design of nanostructured TMNs for electrochemical energy conversion and storage is summarized (Fig. 2). We start from the well-developed synthetic strategies for different dimensional (0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D) TMNs, including carbon-confined synthesis, domain matching epitaxy, template method, topochemical transformation, and 3D scaffold incorporation. Then, the strategies for manipulating the electronic structures, such as heteroatom doping, defect engineering, alloying, and heterostructuring, are systematically summarized. Furthermore, the advances of TMNs in electrochemical energy applications, including electrocatalysis, supercapacitors, and rechargeable batteries, are introduced in detail. At the end of this review, perspectives on future challenges and possible research directions of TMN-based materials towards energy conversion and storage are outlined.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the topics covered in this review. 
2. Synthetic strategies for TMN nanostructures
Nanostructured TMNs are usually synthesized through nitridation of metal-based precursors in a nitrogen-rich atmosphere, e.g., the most commonly used ammonia gas,46 urea,22 dicyanamide,52 and even nitrogen.53 In this section, the synthetic strategies for designing different-dimensional (0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D) TMN nanostructures will be discussed in detail.
2.1 0D TMNs
The formation of TMNs requires high temperature to intercalate N into the metal or substitute the O in the oxide precursors with N due to the unfavorable thermodynamics. Meanwhile, pulverization and agglomeration caused by volume change usually occur during the nitriding process from transition metal oxides/hydroxides to the corresponding TMNs. For instance, the particle size (20–30 nm) and thickness (∼3.5 nm) of NiFe-based layered double hydroxide nanosheets significantly increased to 100 nm and ∼9 nm, respectively, after converting into Ni3FeN nanoparticles by annealing in NH3 at 500 °C.54 However, it is widely recognized that a smaller particle size benefits a larger active surface area, and thus better electrochemical performance. In this context, optimized strategies for synthesizing 0D TMN nanoparticles with weak coercion are highly desired. As a typical example, different from the traditional synthesis of ZrN by heating ZrO2 in NH3 at 1000 °C, Yuan et al.22 developed a urea-glass route to produce fine ZrN nanoparticles at moderate temperature (800 °C), which effectively hindered the aggregation and grain growth and resulted in an enlarged active surface area. To this end, carbonaceous materials, including as-formed carbon, e.g., reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs),55–57 and in situ formed carbon,58,59 are widely employed to support TMN nanoparticles. This approach shows several advantages: (i) the confinement effect promotes the dispersity of TMN nanoparticles to restrain diffusion or agglomeration; (ii) the excellent conductivity facilitates charge transfer to active sites; (iii) the porous structure improves the mass diffusion during electrochemical reactions; and (iv) the interfacial interaction can tune the electronic configurations of TMNs.
Vadahanambi and Park reported the synthesis of carbon encapsulated Mo2N nanoparticles anchored on rGO via a facile microwave technique.55 The rGO surface acted as an electrophile with 4-nitrobenzene diazonium grafted, while ammonium molybdates thermally decomposed into Mo nanoparticles under microwave irradiation and anchored onto the defects in rGO. Under further microwave irradiation, 4-nitrobenzene diazonium decomposed to nitrophenols and nitrophenyl moieties, which subsequently formed the carbon-covered Mo2N nanoparticles. Analogously, Zhang et al. prepared CNT-supported Fe2N nanoparticles by wet-impregnation followed by nitrogenization.57 A nanosized Fe3O4 nanocrystal dispersion was impregnated dropwise into a CNT suspension to form Fe3O4/CNT (Fig. 3a), which was further nitrogenated in NH3 to obtain Fe2N/CNT. The nanoparticles showed an average size of 5.3 nm, and the lattice spacing of 0.211 and 0.221 nm referred to the (011) and (002) facets of Fe2N (Fig. 3b and c). Note that with the increase of Fe3O4 mass percentage (15 wt%), the resulting Fe2N nanoparticles were obviously aggregated on CNTs, revealing the disadvantage of poor affinity to TMNs.
 Fig. 3  Synthetic strategies for the preparation of 0D TMNs. (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Fe2N NP/CNT; and (b) TEM (inset: size distribution of Fe2N NPs) and (c) HRTEM images of Fe2N NP/CNT. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the confined synthesis of VNND/CNS; and (e) TEM and (f) HRTEM images of VNND/CNS. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (g) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure for Co5.47N NP@N-PC polyhedra through simultaneous nitridation and carbonization of ZIF-67; and (h) TEM and (i) HRTEM images of Co5.47N NP@N-PC. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In contrast to as-formed carbon supports, in situ formed carbon is a carbon matrix simultaneously generated along with the formation of TMN nanoparticles, presenting advantages such as good affinity, tunable structure and low cost. For instance, Chen et al.59 synthesized uniform Co4N nanoparticles anchored on N-doped carbon with dopamine and melamine as carbon and nitrogen sources. Melamine played a key role in tuning the diameters and distribution of Co4N. During the preparation, Co species were coordinated and reacted with melamine to in situ form Co4N with good dispersibility and small particle size (20 nm), compared with the synthesis strategy without melamine. Additionally, spatially confined synthesis of VN nanodot intercalated carbon nanosheets (VNND/CNS) by using a V2O5/polyaniline inorganic–organic hybrid precursor was developed by Huo and co-workers.58 The aniline monomer was in situ intercalated and polymerized in the interlamellar space of V2O5·1.6H2O nanosheets (Fig. 3d). During the following nitridation, the intercalated polyaniline layers were in situ carbonized into CNSs, while the sandwiched V2O5 layers were nitridated into VNNDs by the spatial confinement effect of CNSs. Numerous VNNDs with diameters of 3–5 nm were uniformly dispersed on CNSs (Fig. 3e), showing a well-defined 0D-in-2D pillared lamellar architecture. The high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) image showed the crystalline VNNDs encapsulated in amorphous carbon layers (Fig. 3f). It is worth noting that the nanosized VNNDs show enriched electrochemically active sites. Meanwhile, the VNND intercalated CNS structure prevents the electrochemical oxidation of VN, enabling long-term stability towards electrochemical applications, e.g., pseudocapacitance. Other polymers, such as polyvinylpyrrolidone and polyacrylonitrile, have also been electrospun within metal sources to prepare carbon nanofiber confined TMN nanoparticles.61,62
Most recently, owing to the well-ordered pore and crystalline structures, metal–organic-framework (MOF) materials show promise for synthesizing ultrafine TMN nanoparticles. The metal in MOFs is isolated by the cage-like pores, which can significantly hinder their diffusion and agglomeration during pyrolysis. Thus, upon annealing in ammonia, ultrasmall TMN nanoparticles can be well obtained. For instance, the conversion of ZIF-67 MOFs to Co5.47N nanoparticle/N-doped porous carbon polyhedra (Co5.47N NP@N-PC) was achieved by Wu and co-workers.60 During the pyrolysis of ZIF-67 in NH3 at 700 °C (Fig. 3g), Co ions reacted with NH3 and formed Co5.47N nanoparticles, while the coordinated organic ligands were carbonized into N-doped porous carbon. TEM images (Fig. 3h and i) showed that crystalline Co5.47N nanoparticles were encapsulated by graphitic carbon layers, which were favorable for further enhancing the stability of nitrides in electrochemical reactions. Similarly, MoN nanoparticles embedded in N-doped carbon nano-octahedrons were prepared by direct ammoniation of the NENU-5 MOF,63 and mesoporous Co3N nanoparticles decorated amorphous N-doped carbon nanocubes were developed by in situ nitridation and calcination of Co3[Co(CN6)]2 Prussian blue analogue nanocubes.64 In addition, bimetallic MOFs, e.g., MOF-74-CoNi, were used to prepare bimetallic TMN nanoparticles/carbon composites as well.65 Based on previous literatures, we believe that more MOFs need to be explored for the synthesis of TMNs and TMN/carbon hybrids, since the reported species remain limited at the current stage.
2.2 1D TMNs
1D nanostructured (e.g., nanowires and nanorods) TMNs are particularly attractive in terms of abundant active sites, facilitating charge transfer, regulating electronic structure, and avoiding agglomeration. Han et al.66 synthesized single-crystalline TiN nanowires by a novel chemical vapor deposition method. Ion exchange resin D301 powder was exchanged with Co(NO2)63− and TiF62− ions to form a D301-Co-Ti precursor, which was subsequently annealed in N2 to obtain single-crystalline TiN nanowires on a graphite bar substrate (Fig. 4a and b). During the synthesis process, the carbon from anion exchange resin D301 reduced the Co(NO2)63− ions into elemental Co, and then Co acted as the catalyst for the following growth of TiN. Combined vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) and vapor–solid (VS) growth mechanisms were proposed to understand the synthesis of the TiN nanowires. In the beginning, the gaseous Ti element and N2 diffused onto the liquid Co surface and formed a Co–Ti–N alloy droplet. With a continuous supply of Ti and N2, TiN nanowires formed gradually while the Co in the Co–Ti–N droplet was gradually consumed and removed by the flowing gas. After the initial VLS growth, ultralong TiN nanowires were further grown via direct VS growth with continuing elemental Ti provided from the precursor powders and adequate N2 gas supply. Note that such a synthetic method is relatively complicated and requires a very high annealing temperature (1200 °C).
 Fig. 4  Synthetic strategies for the preparation of 1D TMNs. (a) Schematic illustration of the CVD strategy for synthesizing TiN nanowires; and (b) TEM image of a single TiN nanowire. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of P-doped NiMo4N5 nanorod arrays; and (d) TEM image of a single P-doped NiMo4N5 nanorod. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the preparation of NiMoN nanotubes; and (f) TEM image of a single NiMoN nanotube. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides that, 1D TMNs can also be prepared by nitridation of 1D transition metal oxides/hydroxides, which can be readily synthesized by the hydrothermal method.67–71 Lan's group developed twisted braid arrays of P-doped NiMo4N5 nanorods through ammonifying the oxide nanorod precursor (Fig. 4c).70 The TEM image (Fig. 4d) showed that the nanorod had a diameter of 100 nm. In the same way, NiMoN nanotubes were obtained by the ammoniation of NiMoO4 nanotubes (Fig. 4e and f). Enlighteningly, Zhang et al.68 converted Co3O4 nanowire arrays into CoN nanowires via N2 radio frequency plasma treatment, which was completed in a very short reaction time (∼1 min) at room temperature, compared to the traditional ammoniation, which requires several hours.
2.3 2D TMNs
With the maximal surface area compared to the bulk counterpart, 2D TMNs possess ultra-rich surficial active sites. Besides, 2D materials also show excellent flexibility and high mechanical strength, which provide potential for flexible and stretchable energy devices.49 However, the efficient synthesis of 2D TMNs remains challenging.73 Most recently, transition metal carbides/nitrides (MXenes), an emerging family of 2D materials, have attracted increasing attention for electrochemical energy applications.3,74 Although numerous carbide MXenes have been reported, a handful of nitride MXenes have been experimentally synthesized.75–77 In 2016, Gogotsi and co-workers for the first time prepared Ti4N3Tx MXene.75 Different from the conventional etching method in aqueous acid solutions, a molten fluoride salt approach was used to etch Al in Ti4AlN3 at 550 °C with the protection of Ar atmosphere (Fig. 5a). 2D few-layer or monolayer Ti4N3Tx MXene was finally obtained by delamination with tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH). Djire et al.76 as well synthesized Ti2NTx MXene using an oxygen-assisted molten fluoride salt under an Ar flow. In addition, MoN nanosheets with an atomic thickness of 1.3 nm were obtained by liquid exfoliation of the bulk in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone.78 Such hexagonal MoN exhibits a layered configuration, in which the N atoms are sandwiched in two Mo layers, unlike MoS2 with S atoms on the basal plane. It is worth noting that very few TMNs with layered structures that can be directly exfoliated into 2D nanosheets have been exploited.
 Fig. 5  Synthetic strategies for the preparation of 2D TMNs. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ti4N3Tx MXenes from Ti4AlN3 MAX. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of chemical conversion from MoS2 to Mo5N6. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of 2D W2N3; (d) STEM (inset: HRSTEM) and (e) AFM images of overlapping single-layer 2D W2N3 nanosheets; and (f) FT-EXAFS for the W L3-edge of bulk and 2D W2N3. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (g) TEM and (h) HRTEM images of 2D arrays of CrN nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
As reviewed in our previous work, topochemical transformation is a promising method to synthesize nonlayered 2D materials.80 To date, 2D TMNs are mostly transformed from other 2D materials, including oxides/hydroxides,49,53,81–84 sulfides,79,85,86 and even carbides.87,88 For instance, Wu et al.49 prepared molecularly thin trimetallic NiFeMn nitride nanosheets by ammoniating the trimetallic hydroxide nanosheet precursor. The strong interaction between Ti3C2 MXene and hydroxide sheets prevented restacking and agglomeration during ammoniation, finally resulting in molecularly thin nitride sheets. Recently, Cao et al.79 reported a general strategy of in situ selective atomic substitution (Fig. 5b), by which 2D TMNs, including Mo5N6, W5N6, and TiN, were synthesized from 2D MoS2, WS2, and TiS2, respectively. Taking the synthesis of 2D Mo5N6 as an example, MoS2 flakes on a SiO2/Si substrate were placed at the center of a furnace and heated at 750–800 °C. Urea as the ammonia gas source was placed in the upstream zone, which decomposed at 200 °C to release NH3. Following the carrier gas of Ar, the gaseous ammonia substituted the S in MoS2 flakes with N to form 2D Mo5N6. Consequently, one N atom replaced two S atoms and was sandwiched by two adjacent Mo layers; the thickness of the flake was thus depressed. The average thickness ratio of Mo5N6/MoS2 was determined to be 56%. The similar hexagonal structures of the two materials afforded a smooth transformation without structural collapse. Moreover, controlled experiments were conducted to elucidate that nitridation conversion started from the edge of the MoS2 flakes. Although such a strategy can produce high-quality 2D TMNs, showing promise in electronic and optoelectronic devices, the low yield may hinder their usage in electrochemical energy applications. In this context, scalable synthesis of 2D TMNs from carbide MXenes was developed, e.g., V2N and Mo2N from V2CTx and Mo2CTx, respectively.87
Besides, the salt-templating strategy is emerging as an ideal way to design 2D TMNs, which ammoniates the metal precursors on the salt surface with the assistance of domain matching epitaxy.27,28,89–92 For instance, 2D hexagonal N-rich W2N3 nanosheets were developed by Zhou and co-workers for the first time (Fig. 5c).28 2D W2N3 was prepared by ammoniation of the W source coated KCl precursor, followed by washing the salt with water. Experiments and theoretical calculations revealed that the atmospheric pressure synthesis of 2D W2N3 resulted from the strong interaction and domain matching epitaxy between W2N3 and KCl. The high transparency of the overlapped nanosheets and highly ordered atomic arrangement confirmed the ultrathin feature of 2D W2N3, which was determined by atomic force microscope (AFM) to be ∼1.5 nm (Fig. 5d and e). Synchrotron radiation X-ray absorption measurements (Fig. 5f) showed that the coordination numbers of W–W and W–N for 2D W2N3 decreased compared with the bulk counterpart, indicating the existence of partial dangling bonds and distortion on the surface, which was also observed in metallic Ni3N nanosheets.83 Analogously, Jin et al.27 prepared 2D N-rich Mo5N6 nanosheets by a nickel-induced salt-templating method.
In addition, with the help of a salt template, Xiao et al. synthesized a series of 2D arrays of TMN (e.g., CrN, TiN, and NbN) nanocrystals.42 The as-designed CrN sample was an ultrathin flake with a lateral size of several microns, which was actually “pseudo” 2D nanosheets consisting of interconnected nanosized nanocrystals with a cubic crystal structure (Fig. 5g and h). Distinctly, in this procedure, the metal precursors firstly formed TMO flakes on the salt surface, and then O was topochemically substituted by N via ammoniation. Due to the differences in crystal structures and volumes, the TMO flakes were etched and recrystallized to few-nanometer TMN nanocrystals with the overall 2D morphology retained.
2.4 3D nanostructured TMNs
For electrochemical reactions, the accessibility of active sites and charge transfer within the electrode materials are of key importance to achieve high performance. Superior activity is generally difficult to realize in commercial electrodes with a thickness over microns and mass loading over 10 mg cm−2. For this reason, 3D hierarchical architectures should be developed to alleviate the issues. To date, various approaches, such as templating,24,93–101 and 3D supporting,21,102–108 have been developed to fabricate 3D nanostructured TMNs.
Lai et al.46 reported strongly coupled NiCoN/carbon hybrid nanocages from NiCo-LDH nanoboxes. The ZIF-67 nanocubes were chemically etched by Ni2+ ions under sonication and converted into NiCo LDH nanoboxes (Fig. 6a), which were then transformed into strongly coupled NiCoN/C hybrid nanocages (Fig. 6b) via ammoniation treatment. In this procedure, the precursor with a designed structure served as the template, which could be defined as the self-templating method. Distinctly, sulfonated hollow polystyrene spheres (SPS) acted as the skeleton to host an amorphous TiO2 layer through a sol–gel method (Fig. 6c).97 After annealing in NH3 at 800 °C, TiO2 was transformed into mesoporous TiN while the SPS was converted into hollow carbon spheres. Such a hollow mesoporous structure (Fig. 6d) was an ideal host for lithium–sulfur batteries due to the tri-functions of physical confinement, chemical adsorption, and catalyzed sulfur species conversion. Besides polymer-based templates, silica-based templates that can be designed into various structures were also applied to fabricate 3D TMNs.93,94,98 For instance, an ordered mesoporous (om) silica, defined as KIT-6, was used as a template to prepare 3D om-CoN.94 As depicted in Fig. 6e, the Co precursor impregnated KIT-6 was calcined in air and subsequently etched by NaOH to obtain om-Co3O4. After nitridation in NH3, the targeted om-CoN was prepared. The TEM image and corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. 6f) revealed the periodic grid-like morphology and polycrystalline nature of om-CoN. It should be mentioned that, although the template method can produce highly ordered 3D TMNs, it is complicated and time-consuming due to the removal of the template.
 Fig. 6  Synthetic strategies for the preparation of 3D nanostructured TMNs. (a) Schematic illustration of the MOF-assisted synthesis of NiCoN/C nanocages; and (b) TEM image of NiCoN/C nanocages. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the polymer-templated synthesis of C@TiN; and (d) TEM image of C@TiN. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the KIT-6-templated synthesis of om-CoN; and (f) TEM image of om-CoN. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic illustration of the preparation of 3D PCF/VN; and (h) SEM image of PCF/VN. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to the templated synthesis of 3D TMNs, 3D monoliths with porous structures, e.g., carbon cloth,102,106,108 carbon fiber networks,103,104 and nickel foam,105,108 are widely used as scaffolds to support TMNs. Zhong et al. fabricated VN arrays on 3D porous carbon fiber (PCF) by a facile combined strategy.104 Typically, V2O5 arrays were first grown on PCF by a solvothermal treatment and then ammoniated into VN arrays on PCF (Fig. 6g). The scanning electron microscope (SEM) image showed that VN nanobelts, consisting of porous interconnected nanoparticles, were vertically aligned on the PCF (Fig. 6h).
It is worth mentioning that, except for CVD and liquid exfoliation, most of the synthesis methods are accomplished through the nitridation of the TMN precursors, which is based on the morphology and composition control of the precursors. Relatively, TMN-based nanoparticles, nanowires/nanorods, 2D nanosheets, and 3D architectures can be readily fabricated by topochemical conversion from the nanostructured precursors. Notably, due to the crystal structure difference between the targeted TMNs and the precursors, volume shrinkage or expansion usually occurs during the nitridation process, which may lead to the pulverization and agglomeration of TMNs. For instance, in our previous work,42 2D arrays of TMN nanocrystals were designed by nitridation of the 2D oxide precursors, in which the lattice mismatch contributed to the formation of a porous structure.
3. Electronic-structure engineering strategies for TMNs
The electronic structure plays a crucial role in the physical and chemical properties. To this end, it is of vital significance to manipulate the electronic structure of TMNs to realize optimized properties and favorable functionalities. So far, the electronic structures of designed TMNs can be tuned by heteroatom doping, defect induction, heterostructuring, and alloying. In this section, these strategies for optimizing the properties of TMNs will be systematically discussed.
3.1 Heteroatom doping
Heteroatom doping has been well demonstrated, both experimentally and theoretically, as an effective method for modifying the composition, and tailoring the electronic and physico-chemical properties of TMNs, which can highly improve their electrochemical performance in HER, ORR, OER, Li–S batteries, supercapacitors and so on.31,100,102,109–111 Heteroatom doping usually causes micromechanically derived disturbance, and thus induces subtle distortion of the atomic arrangement and redistribution of the electron density. It is generally divided into two categories: metal atom doping and nonmetal atom doping. For instance, Ge et al.112 reported enhanced Li–S battery performance of the NbN electrode via Co doping, which contributed to the facilitated conversion of sulfur species, a suppressed shuttle effect, and accelerated electrochemical kinetics. Among them, heteroatom-doped TMNs are most studied as HER catalysts, which usually can activate the TMNs or even induce new active sites.31,109,110,113
Wang et al.31 realized enhanced HER activity of Co4N by tailoring the d-band centers through transition metal doping. Compared with the pristine Co4N, the negative shift (∼0.3 eV) of the L peaks in the X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) Co L-edge spectra in V-doped Co4N suggested enriched electron density around the Co atoms (Fig. 7a). Besides, the ultraviolet photoemission spectra (UPS) revealed a maximum shift of the valence band from 1.34 V to 1.79 eV after V doping (Fig. 7b), consequently shifting the d-band center. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations (Fig. 7c and d) uncovered the downshift of the d-band center as the antibonding states were filled with more electrons after V doping, which decreased the adsorption energy of H and meanwhile facilitated the desorption of H from the V-doped Co4N surface. As a consequence, the V-doped Co4N nanosheets enabled highly efficient HER performance owing to the downshift of the d-band center of Co4N induced by doping V. Similar trends were also observed from Mo or W doping.
 Fig. 7  Electronic-structure manipulation of TMNs through heteroatom doping. (a) XANES Co L-edge and (b) valence-band spectra of Co4N and V-Co4N; (c) the geometric configuration of Co4N(111) with V atoms replacing the subsurface Co atoms; and (d) DOS of N as well as the corresponding schematic illustration of bond formation between the reaction surface and the adsorbate (Ads.) for Co4N and V-Co4N. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) NBO charge density distributions on Fe and N and (f) DOS of various samples. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) Structure model of the bare Mo2N and P-Mo2N(112) surface, one N atom was replaced by one P atom; the blue, cyan, and pink spheres are Mo, N, and P atoms, respectively; and DOS of the (h) N-p orbital in the bare Mo2N(112) surface, P-p orbital in the P-Mo2N(112) surface and (i) Mo-d orbital in the Mo2N and P-Mo2N(112) surface. (j) UPS of Mo2N and P-Mo2N. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. 
In another example, Yao et al.113 reported that the doping of Cr into Co4N delivered superior HER activity in alkaline medium. The Cr dopants could not only serve as oxyphilic sites for boosting water adsorption and dissociation, but also modulate the electronic structure of Co4N to endow optimized hydrogen binding abilities on Co atoms, thereby leading to accelerated alkaline Volmer and Heyrovsky reaction kinetics. Furthermore, Hu et al. systematically investigated the dual-metal (Co and Al) doping effects on the interfacial engineering and electronic modulation of Fe2N.114 DFT calculations revealed the regulation of the natural bonding orbital (NBO) charge distribution for different structure models (Fig. 7e), confirming that the NBO state of Co and Al was reduced in the dual doped sample. Moreover, the simultaneous doping of Co and Al could reduce the d-band center of Fe2N (Fig. 7f), leading to a lower H adsorption energy and adsorption energy of oxygen-containing intermediates towards optimized HER and OER activities.
Besides metal atom doping, nonmetal doping has also been demonstrated to be beneficial to the HER activity. For example, Mo2N exhibited moderate HER activity because of the high electronegativity of N (3.04), which could induce strong Mo–H bonds and thereby sluggish H2 formation.115 The substitution of N by more electronegative P (2.19) may lead to a weakened Mo–H bond. Inspired by this, Yan et al.110 developed P-doped Mo2N with a few-layer black phosphorus source, which exhibited HER activity outperforming many Mo-based catalysts. The p orbitals of P atoms showed a right shift compared with those of N atoms, while the d orbitals of Mo showed an opposite tendency (Fig. 7g–i), resulting in a more anti-bonding orbital of the P atom, which would hybridize with the s orbital of the H atoms, and thereby weaken the ΔGH value. On the other hand, the doping of P lowered the work function of Mo2N from 4.8 to 4.53 V, which could facilitate electron transfer in electrochemical reactions.
3.2 Defect engineering
The incorporation of defects into nanomaterials is recognized as an effective way to tailor the surface properties and modulate the electron configuration, further promoting the electrochemical performance. Defects have several categories including atom vacancies, dislocations, grain boundaries, lattice disorder, etc. To date, defect engineering in TMNs is still at the infant stage, in which only vacancies have been reported to optimize the electrocatalytic activities for the HER,32,116 OER117 and nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR).89,118 For instance, Yang et al. developed Mo-vacancy MoN nanocrystals embedded in a hierarchical porous N-doped carbon framework (MV-MoN@NC) by a sacrificial-hard-template route.118 During the leaching process, the Mo–O–Si bonds were removed, inducing rich Mo vacancies in the MoN nanocrystals (Fig. 8a). The more intense and broadened signal in the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra (Fig. 8b) of MV-MoN@NC compared with MoN@NC suggested plenty of unpaired electrons generated on N atoms, indicating the existence of more defects in the former. The introduction of Mo vacancies reduced the barrier of the potential-determining step for the NRR from 1.4 to 0.61 eV. With Mo vacancies, stronger hybridization between N2 molecular orbitals and Mo d orbitals with more pronounced charge redistribution was observed in the DOS spectra (Fig. 8c), which consequently reduced the bonding strength between N and Mo atoms and thereby lowered the energy barrier of the release of NH3. MV-MoN@NC exhibits excellent NRR activity with a yield of 76.9 μg h−1 mg−1. The Mo vacancy plays a key role in modulating the electronic structure of MoN and shifting the rate-limiting step of the NRR, which significantly reduces the reaction barrier of the NRR. As another instance, the role of cation vacancies in TMNs in the NRR performance was investigated by Wang and co-workers,118 which revealed that Mo vacancies could modulate the electronic structure of MoN and shift the rate-limiting step of the NRR. The designed strategy can be expanded to exploit efficient electrocatalysts for the NRR and beyond through the defect engineering of surface cations.
 Fig. 8  Electronic-structure manipulation of TMNs through defect engineering. (a) HRTEM images of MV-MoN@NC; (b) EPR spectra of MV-MoN@NC and MoN@NC; and (c) density of states of the N2 molecule, N2@MoN and N2@MV-MoN. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. XPS spectra of (d) W 4f and (e) N 1s, and FT-EXFAS plots (f) of NV-W2N3 and W2N3. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
As another instance, the effect of N vacancies (NV) in W2N3 nanosheets on the NRR activity was investigated.89 The W 4f peaks in NV-W2N3 were negatively shifted by 0.1 eV compared to pristine W2N3, suggesting a decreased valence state of W after H2 annealing (Fig. 8d). The intensity of the peak around 400.2 eV (referring to nitrogen vacancies) in the N 1s X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra for NV-W2N3 is higher than that of the pristine W2N3, evidencing a higher amount of nitrogen vacancies on NV-W2N3 (Fig. 8e). Furthermore, the stronger W–W bonding and weaker W–N bonding of NV-W2N3 than those of W2N3 observed in extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra (Fig. 8f), in good agreement with the XPS results, demonstrated the formation of NV in W2N3. Consequently, the NV on W2N3 provided an electron-deficient structure for facilitated N2 adsorption and lowered thermodynamic limiting potential toward the NRR.
3.3 Heterostructuring
Heterostructuring is another important protocol to develop high-performance electrode materials for electrochemical energy applications.119 The interactions of heterostructures between TMNs and other materials, e.g., metals,120 oxides,121 sulfides,122 carbides,123 nitrides, and phosphides,124 can simultaneously modify their electronic states and physical/chemical properties, thereby delivering enhanced electrochemical performance. So far, various TMN-based heterostructures have been developed, which can be divided into two types: lateral heterostructures,91 and vertical heterostructures.33,125 Among them, lateral heterostructures are most widely investigated.120,122,123,126–129 For example, Song et al.120 reported a unique Ni3N/Ni heterostructure, serving as the active sites, which exhibited exceptional hydrogen evolution/oxidation activities in aqueous electrolytes. Interestingly, Ye et al. developed a 2D lateral heterostructure of MoN–VN (Fig. 9a and b).91 Compared with pure MoN, the Mo LIII-edge and LII-edge peaks of MoN–VN showed a positive shift (Fig. 9c), implying a higher oxidation state of Mo. It could be attributed to the reduced electron density of Mo in the MoN–VN heterostructure induced by the strong interaction between MoN and VN. DFT calculations revealed that the electronic structure of MoN could be tuned by introducing V into the heterostructure (Fig. 9d), which contributed to the enhanced adsorption capability of lithium polysulfides, thereby delivering a highly active electrode for lithium–sulfur batteries.
 Fig. 9  Electronic-structure manipulation of TMNs through heterostructuring. (a) HAADF-STEM image and EDS elemental maps of the MoN–VN heterostructure; (b) high-resolution HAADF-STEM image of MoN–VN; (c) near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) Mo LIII/LII-edge spectra of MoN–VN and MoN; and (d) DOS of Mo on the surface of V–MoN and MoN. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) HAADF-STEM image of the TiN@VN core–shell heterostructure and the corresponding EDS element maps; and (f) XRD patterns for TiN@VN, VN, and TiN. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (g) N 1s and (h) Mo 3d XPS spectra of various catalysts. (i) Interfacial electron transfer in C3N4@MoN. The yellow and cyan iso-surfaces represent electron accumulation and electron depletion. Pink, blue, and green spheres represent Mo, N, and C atoms, respectively. (j) DOS of g-C3N4, MoN, and C3N4@MoN. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
On the other side, vertical core–shell heterostructures with various structures, e.g., particles33 and arrays,121 are also well explored. For instance, Li et al.130 fabricated a core–shell heterostructure of TiN@VN nanowire arrays. The energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) elemental maps and X-ray diffraction (XRD) results confirmed the core–shell structure and pure composition of TiN and VN (Fig. 9e and f). Besides, a van der Waals heterostructure consisting of 2D MoN and C3N4 was developed by Qiao and co-workers.125 The N 1s peak of C3N4@MoN showed a positive shift of 0.8 eV compared to MoN (Fig. 9g), suggesting decreased electron density around N atoms in MoN because of the strong interaction between Mo atoms and C3N4. Moreover, the valence state of Mo atoms in C3N4@MoN was higher than MoN and physically mixed C3N4/MoN (Fig. 9h). DFT calculations suggested that electron accumulation occurred at the interface, and overall electrons transferred from the MoN to the C3N4 layer (Fig. 9i). Such a strong interaction in the MoN–C3N4 heterostructure, coupled with more states near the Fermi level, could tailor the electronic structure and adsorption ability, which in turn facilitate the electrochemical reaction (e.g., HER) kinetics.
3.4 Alloying
Different from heterostructures, which usually contain two or more compounds with interfaces, alloying here refers to multi-metal nitrides in which two or more kinds of metal atoms are uniformly distributed in a unitary compound. Considering the various properties of different metals, it is expected that more promising properties could be potentially obtained in multi-metal nitrides. For instance, plenty of multi-metal TMNs have been reported as bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall water splitting,70,81,131,132 and oxygen electrocatalysis.48,49,133 Gu et al.132 reported Ni3FeN nanoparticle/rGO as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting. The Ni and Fe atoms were uniformly distributed in the highly crystalline nitride nanoparticles (Fig. 10a and b). While Ni3FeN, Ni3N, and Fe2N were all intrinsically metallic, the DOS value of Ni3FeN, contributed by two metal tracks, was higher than those of Ni3N and Fe2N, suggesting more electrons transferring from the nanoparticles to rGO (Fig. 10c). It should be noted that the electron accumulation on rGO can enhance the C–H binding and thereby the HER activity; on the other side, the hole accumulation on Ni3FeN can optimize the binding energies of intermediates for the OER.
 Fig. 10  Electronic-structure manipulation of TMNs through alloying. (a) HAADF-STEM image and EDS elemental maps and (b) HRTEM image of Ni3FeN/rGO; and (c) DOS calculated for Ni3FeN(111), Ni3N(001), and Fe2N(001). Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the enhancement of regeneration of Co–N bonds during the lithiation/de-lithiation process by Mn-alloying. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic illustration of mechanochemical assisted synthesis of high-entropy metal nitride (HEMN) via a soft urea strategy; and (f) XRD patterns and (g) HAADF-STEM image and EDS elemental maps of HEMN. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Besides electrocatalysis, multi-metal TMNs also show advances in energy storage devices.50,134–136 For instance, Balamurugan et al.135 developed nitrogen-doped graphene encapsulated ultrasmall nickel-cobalt nitride (NiCo2N) and nickel–iron nitride (NiFeN) core–shell architectures that were explored as advanced electrodes for flexible solid-state SCs. Zhu et al.134 reported Mn0.33Co0.67N as an anode electrode for LIBs with a much higher reversible capacity (∼900 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1) than the reference CoN. Such enhancement was attributed to the fact that Mn alloying facilitated the regeneration of Co–N bonds, which could inhibit the nitride electrode from undergoing a partial loss of charge capacity upon high rate cycling, in turn contributing to the extrinsic pseudocapacitance (Fig. 10d).
Recently, high entropy compounds are increasingly explored owing to their exceptional electronic and chemical properties.137,138 Inspiringly, for the first time, Jin et al.51 developed a mechanochemically-assisted soft urea method to synthesize cubic-structure high-entropy metal nitrides (HEMNs), including V, Cr, Nb, Mo, and Zr (Fig. 10e–g). Used as an electrode, a specific capacitance of 78 F g−1 was achieved at 100 mV s−1 in 1 M KOH, suggesting the promise of HEMNs in SC applications. This study paved a new way for fabricating HEMNs, which could lead to various types of HEMNs with interesting properties for specific applications.
The electronic structure establishes a direct correlation between the microscopic structure and the macroscopic physical and chemical properties. Thus, it is crucial to regulate the electronic structures of TMNs to achieve enhanced electrochemical properties. Till now, many strategies, including heteroatom-doping, defect engineering, heterostructuring, and alloying, have been developed to modulate the electronic structures. Accordingly, the electronic structures of TMNs can be properly controlled by tuning the doping content of heteroatoms, the content of induced defects, and the composition of the heterostructures or alloys.
4. Electrochemical energy applications
As we discussed above, electronic manipulation coupled with structural design can regulate the required physical and chemical properties of TMNs toward electrochemical energy applications, including increased DOS near the Fermi level, improved electrical conductivity, and enriched accessible active sites. In this section, we will give a detailed overview of their applications in energy conversion and storage, with emphasis on electrocatalysis (HER, OER, ORR, etc.), supercapacitors, and rechargeable batteries (LIBs, SIBs, LSBs, etc.).
4.1 Hydrogen evolution reaction
The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is a half-reaction in water electrolysis, which can translate the intermittent power produced from renewable energy sources into hydrogen. Electrocatalysts are required to lower the dynamic overpotential of the HER to save energy consumption.139 To date, platinum-based electrocatalysts show the best performance, but their high cost and low abundance seriously limit the scalable usage. It is thus of great importance to develop highly efficient HER electrocatalysts based on earth-abundant elements.140–143 Most recently, TMNs are widely demonstrated as promising alternatives owing to their high intrinsic activity, excellent conductivity, and earth abundance.14 Various binary and ternary TMNs (based on Mo, Co, Ni, etc.) with different morphologies and compositions have been explored as efficient HER electrocatalysts, some of which are summarized in Table 1. With the most studied Mo-based nitrides as typical examples, the strategies for optimizing the HER performance of TMNs will be systematically revealed in this section.
Table 1 Summary of selected TMN-based HER electrocatalysts




Electrocatalysts
Electrolyte
Overpotential@10 mA cm−2
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)




2D MoN nanosheets78
0.5 M H2SO4
∼230 mV
90


Defect-rich MoN nanosheets116
0.5 M H2SO4
125 mV
51.15


NiMoN nanoparticles on carbon cloth144
1 M KOH
109 mV
95


MoN nanocrystals in N-doped carbon63
0.5 M H2SO4
62 mV
54


P-Doped Mo2N nanoparticles110
0.5 M H2SO4
105 mV
43


Mo2N–CoO hollow heterostructure145
1 M KOH
65 mV
72


Mo2N–Mo2C heterostructure on holey graphene123
0.5 M H2SO4
157 mV
55




1 M KOH
154 mV
68


C3N4@MoN hybrid nanosheets125
1 M KOH
110 mV
57.8


2D N-rich Mo5N6 nanosheets27
1 M KOH
94 mV
66


2D N-rich W2N3 nanosheets28
0.5 M H2SO4
98.2 mV
59


P-Doped WN nanoparticles on reduced graphene oxide109
0.5 M H2SO4
85 mV
54


V-Doped Co4N nanosheets on nickel foam31
0.5 M H2SO4
37 mV
44


Cr-Doped Co4N nanorods on carbon cloth113
1 M KOH
21 mV
30.4


Ni3N1−x nanoparticles on nickel foam32
1 M KOH
55 mV
54


Ni3N/Ni heterostructure on nickel foam120
1 M KPi
19 mV
—


1 M KOH
12 mV
—


Ni3FeN nanoparticles54
1 M KOH
158 mV
42


NiCoN/carbon hybrid nanocages46
1 M KOH
103 mV
—


Ni–C–N nanosheets146
0.5 M H2SO4
60.5 mV
32


1 M KOH
30.8 mV
40


1 M PBS
92.1 mV
38


TiN nanowires66
1 M HClO4
∼180 mV
54


Porous Ni3N nanosheets on nickel foam53
1 M KOH
44 mV
46




Two-dimensional MoN nanosheets were first studied as HER electrocatalysts. Atomically thin MoN nanosheets were developed to exhibit efficient HER activity with an onset overpotential of 100 mV in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution, which is much superior to bulk MoN (180 mV).78 Theoretical and experimental analyses demonstrated the metallic nature of atomically thin MoN and the surface Mo atoms served as the active sites. To increase the number of active sites for the HER, defect-rich MoN nanosheets were prepared by incomplete ammoniation of MoO3 nanosheets,116 showing an onset overpotential of ∼10 mV and an overpotential of 125 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. Notably, TMNs with low nitrogen content (N/metal ratio ≤ 1) are vulnerable to oxidation during the electrocatalytic process due to the low valence state of metal atoms.147 To this end, Jin et al.27 synthesized atomically thin N-rich Mo5N6 nanosheets by a Ni-induced growth method, which is developed from the salt-templating method discussed in the prior section (Fig. 11a). The calculated d-band center position for Mo5N6 was closer to that of Pt than MoN, suggesting its more Pt-like electronic structure and thus favorable HER activity (Fig. 11b). Consequently, Mo5N6 exhibited enhanced HER performance in the whole pH range compared with MoN. Most strikingly, Mo5N6 showed better HER performance than Pt/C in natural seawater (Fig. 11c), only requiring an overpotential of 257 mV at 10 mA cm−2. In addition, the authors tuned the electronic structure of MoN with the incorporation of 2D C3N4 nanosheets using an interface engineering approach.125 It was demonstrated that the enhancement of the HER activity was attributed to the synergistic advantages of the optimized hydrogen adsorption energy on C3N4 sites and increased hydroxyl adsorption energy on MoN sites.
 Fig. 11  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts in the HER. (a) TEM image of N-rich Mo5N6 nanosheets; (b) d band position of Pt(111), Mo5N6 and MoN; and (c) HER polarization curves of different catalysts measured in Ar-saturated natural seawater. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) HRTEM image of the Mo2N–Mo2C heterojunction; (e) HER polarization curves of various samples in 0.5 M H2SO4; and (f) calculated free-energy diagram for the HER based on the various studied systems. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (g) TEM image of NiMoN (the inset is the HRTEM image); (h) XRD patterns of NiMoN and the precursor; and (i) HER polarization curves of various samples in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Although considerable achievements have been made in unitary TMNs, the steady metal–H bonding energy remains either too high (hard H2 deposition) or too low (hard adsorption of intermediate hydrogen) for the HER, thus lowering the catalytic activity. To alleviate this issue, tuning the valence and electronic states of the metal through heteroatom intercalation can be an effective method. Heteroatom doping has been well proved to tune the electronic structure and the orbital orientation of electrocatalysts and thus optimize the catalytic activity.148 In fact, P-doped Mo2N was designed to exhibit superior HER activity in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution with an overpotential of 105 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 43 mV dec−1.110 DFT results confirmed that P dopants induced more active sites with an optimized H adsorption free energy (ΔGH*), as well as lower carrier/proton migration resistance across the catalyst/solution interface. Yan et al.123 developed a small-sized Mo2N–Mo2C heterojunction supported on holey reduced graphene oxide (Mo2N–Mo2C/HGr) by an in situ catalytic etching strategy. The HRTEM image (Fig. 11d) confirmed the intimate contact of Mo2N and Mo2C crystals, contributing to a synergistic improvement towards the HER activity. Consequently, Mo2N–Mo2C/HGr delivered superior HER performance with an onset overpotential of 11 mV, much better than that of Mo2N/Gr (Fig. 11e). The origin of such excellent HER activity was further studied by DFT calculations (Fig. 11f), which revealed that the N site of the N–Mo–C interface served as the most active site with the smallest ΔGH* value of 0.046 eV. In addition to binary TMNs, ternary ones also showed potential as HER electrocatalysts.144,149–151 For instance, Zhang et al.144 synthesized 3D porous NiMoN on carbon cloth by an N2 plasma method. The TEM image (Fig. 11g) showed the porous structure and lattice fringes referring to Ni0.2Mo0.8N(100) planes. The XRD pattern (Fig. 11h) further confirmed the structure of Ni0.2Mo0.8N for the prepared samples. As shown in Fig. 11i, to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for the HER, NiMoN only required an overpotential of 109 mV in 1 M KOH, demonstrating outstanding catalytic activity.
4.2 Oxygen evolution reaction
The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is another half-reaction of water electrolysis. Since the OER is a four-electron anode reaction, it requires higher energy to overcome the kinetic barrier compared with the HER. Noble metal oxides, e.g., RuO2 and IrO2, are determined to be the most efficient OER electrocatalysts, which, however, are restricted by the high price and poor earth abundance. Recently, transition metal oxides/hydroxides are emerging as promising alternatives owing to their high catalytic activity as well as easy availability.152–156 For instance, Song and Hu developed NiFe layered double hydroxide nanosheets by an exfoliation method, which exhibited highly enhanced OER activity compared with the bulk counterparts.154 Nevertheless, one big problem of these electrocatalysts is the poor electronic conductivity because of their semiconducting or insulating nature, which resulted in sluggish reaction kinetics. Interestingly, TMNs with metallic conductivity may solve this issue. Many studies have demonstrated that nanostructured TMN-based electrocatalysts can efficiently catalyze the OER, some of which are listed in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of selected TMN-based OER electrocatalysts in 1 M KOH




Electrocatalysts
Overpotential@10 mA cm−2
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)




Co4N nanowires on carbon cloth67
257 mV
44


Porous Ni3N nanosheets83
256 mV
41


FeCo–Co4N on N-doped C157
280 mV
40


Mn3N2 particles29
∼270 mV
101


Defect-rich Ni3FeN nanocrystals on N-doped graphene117
250 mV
38


Holey Mo2C/Mo2N nanosheets158
276 mV
82


Ni3N nanoparticles on activated graphene–black phosphorus159
233 mV
42


Ni3N|Ni2P|black phosphorus heterostructure nanosheets127
247 mV
79


Porous (Ni3−xFex)FeN/Ni heterojunctions129
223 mV
68


CoMoNx nanosheets on 3D nanoporous gold160
∼240 mV
46


Fe3N/Fe4N nanoporous film on 3D microporous graphene/nickel foam161
238 mV
44.5




Ni, Co, and Fe-based nanostructured nitrides are demonstrated as the most promising OER electrocatalysts. DFT calculations revealed that the DOS of Co4N went across the Fermi level, indicating its metallic character.67 By a widely used nitridation method, arrays of porous Co4N nanowires grown on carbon cloth (Co4N NW/CC) were obtained. Serving as an OER electrocatalyst, the activated Co4N NW/CC after surface oxidation exhibited the lowest overpotential of 257 mV at 10 mA cm−2 compared to Co(OH)F/CC (375 mV) and Co3O4 NW/CC (320 mV). Similarly, metallic Ni3N porous nanosheets83 and a Fe3N/Fe4N nanoporous film161 were further designed as highly efficient OER electrocatalysts. Besides, ternary TMNs show high activity toward the OER as well.117,160,162,163 Typically, Yao et al.160 reported CoMoNx nanosheets vertically aligned on 3D flexible nanoporous gold as electrocatalysts to boost the sluggish reaction kinetics of the OER, in which the large accessible CoMoOx surface area contributed remarkable activity (Fig. 12a–c).
 Fig. 12  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts in the OER. (a) HRTEM image of CoMoNx with the inset showing the FFT pattern of the selected area; (b) OER polarization curves for various samples in 1 M KOH; and (c) HRTEM image of CoMoNx after the stability measurement. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) HRTEM image of the Ni3N/NiO nano-interface; (e) OER polarization curves for various catalysts; and (f) schematic illustration of the adsorption atomic structures during the OER process over Ni3N(111) and the Ni3N(111)/NiO(110) interface. (g) Free energy diagrams for the OER at 1.23 V bias over Ni3N and the Ni3N/NiO interface with the maximum energy barrier highlighted. (h) Energy barrier comparison for reaction step III. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Notably, Huang et al.126 defined an interface engineering strategy for constructing catalytic sites in Ni3N/NiO nanoparticles with a Ni–N–O interface (Fig. 12d), which exhibited a sixfold enhancement in catalytic efficiency compared with pristine Ni3N nanoparticles (Fig. 12e). Detailed theoretical analyses were performed on the Ni sites on the Ni3N(111) surface with or without NiO, as illustrated in Fig. 12f. The free energy diagrams (Fig. 12g) revealed that the step of forming *OOH was the rate-limiting energy barrier for those samples and Ni3N(111)/NiO(110) exhibited the lowest energy barrier of 0.313 eV (Fig. 12h). This study demonstrated the most active sites of the Ni–N–O interface in Ni3N/NiO nanoparticles, avoiding the surface generation of amorphous hydroxide as in typical nitride electrocatalysts.
As reviewed above, various TMNs are developed as highly efficient electrocatalysts for the HER and OER. There is no doubt that TMNs can serve as bifunctional electrocatalysts to drive overall water splitting, in which both good activity and stability towards the HER and OER in the same medium are required.14,164,165 For instance, Zou et al.166 reported amorphous CoNx nanoparticles coupled with a 3D N-doped graphene aerogel (CoNx/NGA). Owing to the hierarchical porous structure and abundant dual active sites, CoNx/NGA exhibited efficient activity towards the HER and OER, achieving 10 mA cm−2 with overpotentials of 198 and 296 mV, respectively. The CoNx/NGA-based electrolyzer reached 10 mA cm−2 by applying a voltage of 1.71 V across the two electrodes. Monometallic Ni, Co, Fe, and Cu, and bimetallic CoFe, NiFe, NiCu, and NiMo nitrides with various structures, such as nanoparticles, nanorods, nanowires, and nanosheets, have been engaged in full water splitting (Table 3). Among them, ternary TMNs with more favorable electronic structures exhibit superior performance compared with binary ones. Impressively, as mentioned before (Fig. 10a–c), the Ni3FeN/rGO bifunctional electrocatalyst showed a potential difference of 1.59 V between the HER and OER at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 13a).132 It was closely equal to the external voltage (1.6 V) required for driving 10 mA cm−2 in overall water splitting with Ni3FeN/rGO as both the anode and cathode electrodes, which exhibited robust stability over 100 h (Fig. 13b–d). Combining theoretical calculations and experiments, this work developed a simple and eco-friendly pathway to fabricate excellent bimetallic nitride electrocatalysts for overall water splitting.
Table 3 Summary of selected TMN-based bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall water splitting in 1 M KOH electrolyte




Electrocatalysts
Overpotential@10 mA cm−2 for the HER
Overpotential@10 mA cm−2 for the OER
Voltage@10 mA cm−2 for overall water splitting




Co5.47N nanoparticles in N-doped porous carbon60
149 mV
248 mV
1.62 V


CoAl co-doped Fe2N/Fe3N nanoparticles114
145 mV
307 mV
1.67 V


CoNx nanoparticles in a 3D N-doped graphene aerogel166
198 mV
295 mV
1.71 V


Co3FeNx nanowires on nickel foam47
23 mV
222 mV@20 mA cm−2
1.539 V


FeNi3N nanorods on nickel foam167
75 mV
202 mV
1.62 V


NiCo2N nanosheets on nickel foam163
290 mV
180 mV
1.7 V


Ni3FeN nanoparticles on reduced graphene oxide132
94 mV
270 mV
1.60 V


NiCu/NiCuN nanowires in N-doped carbon168
93 mV
232 mV
1.56 V


P-Doped NiMo4N5 arrays on nickel foam70
118 mV
297 mV@100 mA cm−2
1.66 V@100 mA cm−2


Interfacial Ni3N–Ni3S2 heterostructure122
197 mV@100 mA cm−2
404 mV@100 mA cm−2
1.73 V


Cu3N–Cu3P in N,P,S-doped carbon on nickel foam124
68 mV
240 mV
1.54 V




 Fig. 13  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts in overall water splitting. (a) Polarization curves of Ni3FeN/rGO for the HER and OER in 1 M KOH; (b) overall water splitting performance of Ni3FeN/rGO, Ni3Fe/rGO, Ni3N/rGO, Fe2N/rGO and Ni3FeN; (c) time-dependent current density curve and (d) photograph of the two-electrode electrolyzer using Ni3FeN/r-GO as both the anode and cathode at a voltage of 1.60 V.132 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
4.3 Oxygen reduction reaction
The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is one of the most studied topics in the electrocatalysis field due to its importance towards electrochemical energy conversion devices such as fuel cells and metal–air batteries. As the cathode reaction of fuel cells, the ORR has more sluggish kinetics than the anodic hydrogen oxidation reaction, making the activity of the ORR kinetic limiting for the device performance. Platinum-based materials are the most efficient ORR electrocatalysts; however, the high cost, scarce reserves, and unsatisfactory durability hinder their scalable application. Hence, it is highly required to explore non-noble metal-based ORR electrocatalysts with good efficiency and stability.169 Transition metal oxides, especially spinel oxides, have drawn much attention due to their potentially excellent activities. However, the low intrinsic conductivity limited their practical performance.170 Most recently, TMNs are increasingly studied owing to the metallically conducting nature and robust stability (Table 4). Although TMNs are also widely used as supports for platinum to catalyze the ORR, such as TiNiN@Pt,171 the related studies will not be discussed in this review since we focus on the direct use of TMNs as active materials.
Table 4 Summary of selected TMN-based ORR electrocatalysts




Electrocatalysts
Electrolyte
Onset potential (vs. RHE)
Half-wave potential (vs. RHE)
Limiting current density
Electron transfer number




Cu3N nanocrystals on CNTs172
0.1 M KOH
0.712 V
0.556 V
0.85 mA cm−2
3


NixN thin film173
0.1 M KOH
0.68 V
0.42 V
4 mA cm−2
2




0.1 M HClO4
0.68 V
0.49 V
6.1 mA cm−2
4


FexN nanoparticles on N-doped CNT–graphene174
0.1 M KOH
1.0 V
0.89 V
5.5 mA cm−2
4


Fe2N nanoparticle promoted Fe–N–C175
0.1 M HClO4
0.945 V
0.803 V
6 mA cm−2
4


CoN nanoparticles on carbon176
0.1 M KOH
0.85 V
0.8 V
4.6 mA cm−2
4


Co4N nanoparticles with an oxide shell177
1 M KOH
N.A.
0.875
3.8 mA cm−2
4


VN nanoparticles178
1 M KOH
0.824 V
0.724 V
1.25 mA cm−2
4


Co-Doped NbN nanogrid179
0.1 M KOH
0.81 V
0.6 V
4 mA cm−2
4


ZrN nanoparticles22
0.1 M KOH
0.89 V
0.8 V
5.3 mA cm−2
4


Co0.5Mo0.5Ny on N-doped carbon nanocages180
0.5 M H2SO4
0.808 V
∼0.57 V
4 mA cm−2
4


Co3ZnN nanoparticles on N-doped carbon black181
0.1 M KOH
0.9 V
0.829 V
5.3 mA cm−2
4


Ti0.8Co0.2N nanosheets182
0.1 M HClO4
0.96 V
0.79 V
5.9 mA cm−2
4


Co-Doped VN porous microflowers101
0.1 M KOH
0.903 V
0.802 V
5.7 mA cm−2
4


CoMo oxynitride on carbon black183
0.1 M KOH
0.918 V
0.758 V
4.8 mA cm−2
3.85


CrN nanoparticles on graphitic carbon184
0.1 M KOH
0.86 V
0.7 V
—
4.1




Fe group (Fe, Co, and Ni) based TMNs are the most investigated ORR electrocatalysts. For instance, Yang et al.177 studied the structure effect on the ORR activity based on a novel family of CoxN (x = 2, 3 and 4) with structures as illustrated in Fig. 14a, in which Co4N showed a similar cubic structure to cubic metallic Co. The high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image and corresponding elemental mapping (Fig. 14b) revealed a homogeneous distribution of Co and N in the Co4N nanoparticles covered with a thin oxide layer (∼2 nm), which should be ascribed to the surface oxidation upon exposure to air. Such a native oxidation layer not only served as a passivation layer preventing further oxidation, but also as the ORR active sites coupled with the metallic nitride core, which was previously demonstrated by theoretical calculations.185 These CoxN/C samples exhibited enhanced ORR activity compared with Co3O4/C, among which Co4N/C delivered the best performance (Fig. 14c). When normalized to the Co mass in the samples, Co4N/C showed a significant enhancement of the mass activity compared with the others (Fig. 14d). To manipulate the electronic structure, numerous ternary TMNs, such as Co0.5Mo0.5Ny,180 Co3ZnN,181 Ti0.5Nb0.5N,186 and Cu3PdN,187 are also experimentally explored, showing excellent ORR performance.
 Fig. 14  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts in the ORR. (a) Crystal models of Co, Co4N, Co3N, and Co2N; (b) HAADF-STEM image of Co4N and corresponding EELS elemental maps of Co + N and O + N; (c) ORR polarization curves of various samples in O2-saturated 1 M KOH; and (d) mass activity normalized to the Co content of the samples at 0.85 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Although TMN-based electrocatalysts have gained great improvement, most of them remain inferior to the commercial Pt/C. Impressively, Yang's group reported, for the first time, that ZrN surpassed Pt as an ORR electrocatalyst.22 A pure crystalline phase of ZrN with a cubic rock salt structure was obtained under a moderate annealing temperature by a urea-glass strategy, which was encapsulated by a thin oxynitride or oxide surface layer without distinct phases. ZrN as an ORR electrocatalyst showed a very similar polarization curve to Pt/C, having the same half-wave potential (0.8 V vs. RHE). Note that ZrN exhibited much better stability than Pt/C, making ZrN a promising practical alternative to Pt/C for the ORR. To understand the origin of the superior ORR activity of ZrN, the surface electronic structure was explored by theoretical calculations. The electron localization function plots showed high electron localization at a small Zr–O cluster around the surface oxide, while highly delocalized states were available at the nitride from the subsurface layer, providing the active sites for the ORR. Such work will undoubtedly stimulate further development of earth-abundant TMN-based ORR electrocatalysts that may not be just comparable but superior to Pt.
Zinc–air batteries (ZABs) have recently attracted much research attention due to their high theoretical energy density (1086 W h kg−1) with much lower cost (<$10 kW−1 h−1) than lithium-ion batteries ($ 400–800 kW−1 h−1).188 However, their scalable application is hindered by the high cost and scarcity of the ORR and OER electrocatalyst. Thus, the rational development of high-performance and low-cost bifunctional ORR/OER electrocatalysts is of importance to accelerate the reaction kinetics and lower the discharge/charge overpotentials.189,190 Among various electrocatalysts, TMN-based bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts have recently shown great potential for ZABs (Table 5). For instance, Zhang's group reported a flexible 3D self-standing bifunctional electrode consisting of Co4N nanoparticles embedded in a carbon fiber network supported by carbon cloth (Co4N/CNW/CC).191 Originating from the synergistic effect of Co4N and Co–N–C and the stable 3D interconnected conductive network structure, Co4N/CNW/CC exhibited a low overpotential (310 mV at 10 mA cm−2) for the OER and a positive half-wave potential (0.8 V) for the ORR. The ZABs using Co4N/CNW/CC as the air cathode with perfect bendable, twistable, and rechargeable properties showed a low discharge–charge voltage gap (1.09 V at 50 mA cm−2) and long cycle life (up to 408 cycles).
Table 5 Summary of selected TMN-based bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts in 0.1 M KOH and the performance of Zn–air batteries




Electrocatalysts

E
10/E1/2/ΔE (V vs. RHE)
Electrolyte of the Zn–air battery
Open circuit potential (V)
Power density (mW cm−2)





E
10 refers to the potential at 10 mA cm−2 for the OER; E1/2 refers to the half-wave potential for the ORR; ΔE is the difference of E10 and E1/2. N.A. means not applicable.




NC-Co/CoNx nanoparticles in N-doped carbon nanoarrays192
1.519/0.87/0.65
Solid-state
1.4
104


NiO/CoN porous interface nanowire arrays193
1.53/0.68/0.85
6.0 M KOH
1.46
79.6


CoNP nanoparticle@N-doped carbon on N-doped graphene194
1.62/0.87/0.84
6.0 M KOH + 0.2 M Zn(AC)2
1.43
87.3


Co4N nanoparticle/carbon fiber network on carbon cloth191
1.54/0.8/0.74
6.0 M KOH
1.4
174


FeNx nanoparticles on N-doped carbon195
2.0/0.9/1.1
6.0 M KOH
1.6
36


Fe2Ni2N/Co nanocrystals on N-doped CNTs48
1.51/0.8/0.71
6.0 M KOH
1.4
300


Ni0.5Co2.5N nanoparticles on N-doped CNTs133
1.554/0.85/0.704
6.0 M KOH + 0.2 M Zn(AC)2
∼1.38
147


Ni3FeN nanoparticles in a Co,N-codoped carbon nanoframe196
1.5/0.81/0.69
6.0 M KOH
1.43
200


Molecularly thin NiFeMn nitride sheets on N-doped Ti3C2 MXene49
1.53/0.84/0.68
6.0 M KOH + 0.2 M Zn(AC)2
1.495
N.A.




Most recently, Wu et al.49 developed molecularly thin trimetallic nitride sheets stabilized by Ti3C2 MXene (nitride/N-Ti3C2). The HRTEM image (Fig. 15a) showed hexagonal lattice fringes corresponding to the (10) plane for nitride and the (110) plane with an interplanar spacing of 0.154 nm for Ti3C2. Fig. 15b illustrates the structural model of nitride/N-Ti3C2 with M–N–Ti bonds at the interface. As shown in Fig. 15c, ΔE (defined in Table 5) of nitride/N-Ti3C2 was 0.68 V, even smaller than that of Pt/C-RuO2 (0.8 V). The assembled ZAB, as illustrated in Fig. 15d, exhibited better rechargeability and higher specific capacity (630 mA h gZn−1 at 10 mA cm−2) as well as long-term stability compared with the one employing Pt/C and RuO2 (Fig. 15e–g). Additionally, three series-connected flexible fiber batteries could be used to power an electroluminescent panel, which performed well in different bending states and even wrapped around a wrist.
 Fig. 15  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts in Zn–air batteries. (a) HRTEM image of molecularly thin trimetallic NiFeMn nitride sheets stabilized on N-doped Ti3C2 MXene (nitride-N-Ti3C2) and (b) corresponding structural illustration; (c) ORR and OER polarization curves for various samples in 0.1 M KOH; (d) schematic diagram of a ZAB; (e) charge and discharge polarization curves compared with Pt/C + RuO2; and (f) specific capacities for the batteries calculated with the consumed Zn mass. (g) Galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves of the batteries at 20 mA cm−2; and (h) photographs of a series-connected battery powering an electroluminescent panel (nominal voltage 3.0 V) in various bending states. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
4.4 Other electrocatalytic reactions
Most recently, TMNs are increasingly engaged in more electrochemical reactions, such as the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR),120,197–199 carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR)33,200–203 and NRR.23,89,118,204–206
The HOR is an important reaction for H2 utilization in proton-exchange membrane fuel cells. Similar to the HER, the HOR involves intermediate H* species on the surface of the catalyst, meaning that ΔGH* has been widely used as a descriptor for assessing the HOR activity. Recently, TMN-based catalysts showed promise toward the HOR. For instance, Hu's group demonstrated Ni3N/C as an active and robust HOR catalyst in alkaline medium, exhibiting the highest break-down potential (0.26 V vs. RHE) among earth-abundant catalysts.199 Through interface engineering, Sun's group demonstrated extraordinary HER and HOR activity of the Ni3N/Ni heterostructure.120 As shown in Fig. 16a, Ni3N/Ni/NF achieved a current density of 6.95 mA cm−2 at 0.09 V vs. RHE, higher than those of Pt/NF (5.25 mA cm−2) and Ni/NF (0.34 mA cm−2). Notably, Ni3N/Ni/NF demonstrated a much better resistance towards CO poisoning than Pt/NF (Fig. 16b and c). Considering the relatively low hardness of nickel, which makes it difficult to apply in producing structurally rigid electrodes, Sun's group extended the interfacing strategy to prepare a Co2N/Co catalyst and delivered extraordinary HOR activity and remarkable CO tolerance.197
 Fig. 16  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts in the HOR, CO2RR and NRR. (a) Steady-state polarization curves of Ni3N/Ni/NF, Ni/NF, and Pt/NF for the HOR in H2-saturated 0.1 M KOH; (b) comparison of the HOR polarization curves of Ni3N/Ni/NF and Pt/NF in 0.1 M KOH saturated with H2 or H2 with 2% CO (v/v); and (c) chronoamperometry curves of Ni3N/Ni/NF and Pt/NF in 0.1 M KOH saturated with H2 with 2% CO (v/v) measured at 0.09 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Faradaic efficiencies of CO and H2 at various applied potentials for Nb4N5/NC and Nb4N5-NO/NC. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) Product distribution of CO2 reduction catalyzed by Cu3N at different applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) Faradaic efficiency of the C2+ distribution on Cu-on-Cu3N at different potentials. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (g) Production rate and FE of VN for the NRR at different potentials for 1 h tests; and (h) proposed NRR pathway on the surface of VN0.7O0.45via a Mars–van Krevelen mechanism and the catalyst deactivation mechanism. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
For the CO2RR, various electrocatalysts have been developed for the generation of different products, such as CO, CH4, C2H4, C2H5OH, etc.207–209 For instance, N-vacancy enriched Nb4N5 on N-doped carbon (Nb4N5-NO/NC) was prepared by a self-enhanced oxygen doping strategy.203 It showed a much higher faradaic efficiency (FE) of CO production compared to the vacancy-free Nb4N5/NC, which gradually increased from −0.5 to −0.8 V, and achieved the highest FE (91%) around −0.8 V vs. RHE (Fig. 16d). The origin of the excellent CO2RR-to-CO activity of Nb4N5-NO/NC was revealed by DFT calculations, in which the rate determining step of *COOH formation for Nb4N5-NO/NC required a ΔG of 0.09 V, lower than that of Nb4N5/NC. Yin et al.202 reported a perovskite-type Cu3N nanocube with a size of 25 nm for a selective CO2RR to ethylene (C2H4), which showed high selectivity at 1.6 V vs. RHE with an FE of 60% and C2H4/CH4 molar ratio of >2000 (Fig. 16e). Moreover, Sargent's group reported a Cu-on-Cu3N CO2RR electrocatalyst for multi-carbon (C2+) products.33 Typically, Cu-on-Cu3N possessed a Cu shell/Cu3N core structure, in which the Cu3N support affected the electronic structure and oxidation state of the surface Cu, decreasing the energy barrier associated with CO dimerization during the CO2RR process. As a result, compared with the Cu and Cu-on-Cu2O samples, Cu-on-Cu3N delivered the highest C2+ production (Fig. 16f).
On the other side, Yang et al.23 demonstrated that VN nanoparticles were active, selective, and stable NRR catalysts with a yield rate and FE of 3.3 × 10−10 mol s−1 cm−2 and 6.0% at −0.1 V vs. RHE, respectively (Fig. 16g). The authors further proposed a mechanistic hypothesis that only surface N which is adjacent to surface oxygen in the VN0.7O0.45 phase is active in facilitating the catalytic turnover, as catalyst deactivation is accompanied by the accumulation of the VN phase (Fig. 16h). Note that the instability of the surface oxygen under a reducing environment could lead to the formation of the inactive VN phase. To this end, structure design and electronic manipulation are necessary to improve the density and stability of the surface oxygen of VN0.7O0.45 during the NRR process.
As reviewed above, TMN-based electrocatalysts have been well demonstrated toward various reactions including HER, OER, ORR, HOR, CO2RR, and NRR. With regard to TMN-based electrocatalysts, the catalytic activity is assumed to be attributed to the unique electronic structure that endows noble metal-like behavior and delivers proper adsorption between the surface of nitrides and the reactants during the catalytic processes. Besides, owing to the small atomic radius, the nitrogen atoms reside in the interstitial sites between metal atoms, resulting in a close-packed arrangement of metal atoms. Consequently, TMNs exhibit excellent electronic conductivity and robust resistance against corrosion, making them highly promising for electrochemical reactions. To optimize the catalytic activity of TMNs, structural and electronic regulation have been widely developed, such as (1) designing nanoarchitectures with high surface area and decreasing the size of crystals for an increased density of active sites; (2) an interconnected network or combining with conductive supports for facilitated charge transfer; and (3) element doping, defect induction, heterostructuring, and alloying for enhanced intrinsic activity. At the same time, despite the rapid development of TMN-based electrocatalysts, some issues still need to be addressed. Notable, the electrocatalytic performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts remains unsatisfactory compared to those of the state-of-the-art catalysts, particularly the long-term durability under high current density. Furthermore, the catalytic mechanisms are still unclear, for which more efforts on the reaction kinetics are required and advanced characterization approaches, such as operando techniques (e.g. Raman spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR), and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS)), need to be developed to reveal the reaction mechanisms.
4.5 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors, also called electrochemical capacitors, store energy using either ion adsorption (electrochemical double-layer capacitors) or fast surface redox reactions and ionic intercalation (pseudo-capacitors).210 Carbons,211–214 conducting polymers,215–219 transition metal oxides,220–223 dichalcogenides,224–227 nitrides92,135,228,229 and carbides20,230–233 are the most typical capacitive materials. Among them, TMNs, such as VN, MoxN, TiN, MnN, and ternary metal nitrides, have aroused great interest.73,234 Here, we mainly focus on the most recent progress in TMNs with well-designed geometric and electronic structure for supercapacitor applications (Table 6) as the earlier research (before 2017) has been summarized elsewhere.235–237
Table 6 Comparison of nitrides for supercapacitor applications




Electrodes
Electrolyte
Capacitance or capacity
Cycling stability




Porous VN238
6 M KOH
231 F g−1 (20 mV s−1)
80.0% (10000)


122 F g−1 (100 mV s−1)


3D porous VN/carbon membrane239
6 M KOH
392 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
83.5% (5000)


198 F g−1 (30 A g−1)


VN@single-VO2 particles240
2 M KOH
149.5 F g−1 (1 A g−1)
85.0% (1000)


∼110 F g−1 (5 A g−1)


Mo2N@carbon–rGO55
1 M H2SO4
365.6 F g−1 (25 mV s−1)
96% (3000)


219.8 F g−1 (100 mV s−1)


Porous MoN single crystals241
1 M KOH
8.8 F cm−2 (5 mA cm−2)
100% (10000)


3 F cm−2 (100 mA cm−2)


Porous TiN paper242
0.5 M Na2SO4
164.5 F g−1 (10 mV s−1)
100% (200000)


106.4 F g−1 (100 mV s−1)


TiN@VN nanowires on CNT fiber130
3 M KOH
1255.2 mF cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)
NA


854.6 mF cm−2 (10 mA cm−2)


Ti2NTx MXene76
1 M MgSO4
201 F g−1 (2 mV s−1)
100% (1000)


∼50 F g−1 (500 mV s−1)


3D sphere-like Ni3N nanosheets243
2 M KOH
92.7 mA h g−1 (1 A g−1)
80.0% (1500)


∼40 mA h g−1 (8 A g−1)


Co3N244
6 M KOH
449.2 mF cm−2 (2 mA cm−2)
100% (10000)


325.2 mF cm−2 (20 mA cm−2)


Porous CrN thin film26
0.5 M H2SO4
31.3 mF cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)
94.0% (20000)


26.5 mF cm−2 (5 mA cm−2)


Nb4N5/graphene245
1 M H2SO4
141 mF cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)
90.0% (6000)


60 mF cm−2 (100 mA cm−2)


MnN@graphene246
1 M Na2SO4
639.2 F g−1 (10 mV s−1)
95.0% (2000)


360.4 F g−1 (200 mV s−1)


W2N@P-doped carbon fabric247
1 M H2SO4
765 mF cm−2 (2 mA cm−2)
92.0% (10000)


477 mF cm−2 (20 mA cm−2)


Cu3N@CoFe-LDH248
2 M KOH
3078 mF cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)
93.9% (10000)


2641 mF cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)


Mesoporous TiVN powder249
1 M Na2SO4
221 F g−1 (0.05 A g−1)
99.4% (2000)


∼135 F g−1 (1 A g−1)


NiCo2N@N-doped graphene135
3 M KOH
265 mA h g−1 (1 A g−1)
86.2% (20000)


209 mA h g−1 (50 A g−1)


NiFeN@N-doped graphene135
262 mA h g−1 (1 A g−1)
97.7% (20000)


206 mA h g−1 (50 A g−1)




VN is one of the most extensively studied TMNs, showing excellent electrical conductivity (1.17 × 106 S m−1 at room temperature),250 low cost, and a wide operation window in a negative voltage range (−1.2 to 0 V vs. Hg/HgO).239,251,252 In addition, the multiple oxidation states (II–V) of vanadium render VN a high theoretical specific capacitance of 1350 F g−1 in alkaline electrolyte,253 which further demonstrates the great potential of VN for high-performance supercapacitors. For instance, a biotemplate-assisted strategy was used to prepared porous VN, which delivered specific capacitances of 231 F g−1 at 20 mV s−1 and 122 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH electrolyte, together with excellent cycling stability (80% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles).238 The introduction of carbonaceous materials that feature high conductivity and large surface area can further enhance the performance of VN by impeding VN nanoparticles and nanocrystals from undergoing aggregation and maintaining high electrical conductivity. The VN nanodots (size: 3–5 nm) on carbon nanosheets (VNND/CNS) electrode, as depicted in Fig. 3d–f, showed a remarkably enlarged specific surface area of 121.8 m2 g−1 and high electrical conductivity of 225.5 S cm−1.58 During the electrochemical process, the small-size VNNDs provided more electrochemically active sites for pseudocapacitive storage via fast redox reactions, while the 2D CNSs not only served as encapsulators to prevent the aggregation of VNNDs, but also rendered easy access of the electrolyte to the electrochemically active sites and mitigated electrochemical dissolution of VN. As a result, the VNND/CNS electrode exhibited an ultrahigh volumetric capacitance of 1203.6 F cm−3 at 1.1 A cm−3, an excellent rate capability of 703.1 F cm−3 at 210 A cm−3, and 90% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles. Even with a thickness of 150 μm and a mass loading of 31.1 mg cm−2, the film electrode still delivered a reversible volumetric capacitance as high as 867.1 F cm−3 at 1.1 A cm−3. Moreover, the flexible all-solid-state symmetrical device composed of VNND/CNS electrodes and gel-like KOH/PVA electrolyte outputted a high volumetric energy density of 30.9 W h L−1, a large power density of 64500 W L−1, and excellent cycle stability with 91% capacity retention after 10000 cycles (Fig. 17a–e). Besides the examples mentioned above, lots of other VN-based composite electrodes, such as VN@carbon,254–258 VN@carbon cloth,259,260 VN@graphene,56,261,262 VN@CNT fiber,263 VN@carbon fiber,264 and VN@VxOy,240,265 have also been developed in the recent three years.
 Fig. 17  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrodes in supercapacitors. (a) CV curves of the electrodes of VNND/CNS, VNNSs, and CNSs acquired at a scanning rate of 20 mV s−1. (b) Volumetric capacitances of VNND/CNS electrodes with different areal densities at different current densities. (c) Schematic illustration of the favorable features of VNND/CNS enabling excellent capacitive performances. (d) Schematic illustration and photographs of the flexible solid-state SC composed of the VNND/CNS electrodes. (e) Ragone plots of the VNND/CNS based SC and previously reported materials. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (f) SEM image of a porous MoN single crystal (the inset is the digital images of metallic porous MoN single crystals with dimensions of 20 × 10 × 0.5 mm). (g) High-resolution STEM image and the corresponding Mo and N atom distribution. The calculated adsorption energy of (h) H+ and (i) OH− adsorption on the MoN crystal surface. (j) CV curves at different scan rates and (k) areal capacitance as a function of current density of the porous MoN single crystal. Reproduced with permission.241 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (l) Schematic illustration of TiN@VN/NWA. (m) CV curves and (n) Nyquist plots of the three electrodes at various scan rates. (o) Specific capacitances of the three electrodes calculated from the GCD curves as a function of current density. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
MoxN is another promising pseudocapacitive material, which exhibits electrochemical features similar to those of ruthenium oxide,266 including high chemical stability, good electrical conductivity above 2800 S cm−1,92 and excellent resistance to electrochemical decomposition.267 The energy storage behaviour of MoxN varies with the electrolytes, but mainly involves faradic pseudocapacitance and electric double-layer capacitance.268,269 In acidic aqueous electrolytes, the reduction/oxidation of Mo endows Mo2N with a theoretical capacitance exceeding 1500 F g−1 within a 1.2 V working potential window,270,271 which surpasses lots of other electrode materials, such as graphene (550 F g−1),272 polyaniline (740 F g−1),273 and MnO2 (1370 F g−1).274 For example, in 0.1 M H2SO4, a large specific capacitance of about 390 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 was obtained for high-surface-area Mo2N (∼140 ± 0.2 m2 g−1).271 However, this value is inferior to the theoretical capacitance, mainly ascribed to the surface oxidation passivation layer causing proton adsorption reduction.270,275 More recently, Xi et al.241 reported three non-terminated porous TMN single crystals with unsaturated nitrogen. The pure metal surface exposes the most metal atoms for abundant redox reactions. Meanwhile, unsaturated metal–nitrogen active sites offered fast-redox reactions by chemisorption on the electrode surfaces and gave rise to enhanced pseudocapacitance.25,241 As a result, the porous MoN single crystals with a metal conductivity of 0.77 × 104 S cm−1 showed ultrahigh gravimetric capacitances of ∼2000 F g−1 in alkaline electrolyte and ∼800 F g−1 in acidic electrolyte. High areal capacitances of ∼8 F cm−2 in alkaline electrolyte and ∼5 F cm−2 in acidic electrolyte were also obtained. The higher capacitance in alkaline electrolyte is due to the higher adsorption energy of OH− than H+ on the MoN surface. Besides, the MoN single crystal also showed outstanding cycling stability without any degradation even after 10000 cycles (Fig. 17f–k).
Besides, TiN has also gained tremendous attention in recent years,276–280 due to its metallic conductivity of 4 × 103–5.55 × 104 S m−1 and great chemical durability.277,281 Compared with other pseudocapacitive materials, the main feature of TiN in electrochemistry is quite different. During the charge storage process, the outside oxygen vacancies favour the anchoring of ions and the inside TiN crystalline structures provide fast electron transport.278,280,282 Nevertheless, despite the ultrahigh rate capability raised by the high conductivity, TiN usually suffers from low capacitance.242 Hence, it was widely used as conductive hosts to enhance the electrochemical performance of other electrochemically active compounds (MnO2,283,284 V2O5,121 VN,130etc.). Compared with pure TiN, the core–shell structured TiN@MnO2 electrode could deliver a higher specific capacitance of 386 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. Even at a high current density of 10 A g−1, 288 F g−1 was retained. This TiN@MnO2 electrode also showed outstanding cycling stability without capacitance decay after 4000 cycles.284 Li et al.130 reported a TiN@VN electrode which exhibited the largest capacitance of 1255.2 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2, much higher than that of the pure TiN and VN electrodes. Furthermore, even at a high current density of 10 mA cm−2, the TiN@VN electrode still retained a high specific capacitance corresponding to 68.1% of the specific capacitance at 1 mA cm−2, demonstrating its great rate performance (Fig. 17l–o).
Other TMNs are also promising for high-performance supercapacitors, such as Ni3N,243 Co3N,244 CrN,26 Nb4N5,285 MnxNy,246,286 W2N,247,287 Cu3N248 and ternary metal nitrides.135,249,288 For instance, Co3N nanoparticles showed a high areal capacitance of 449.2 mF cm−2 at 2 mA cm−2 and an outstanding rate capability with 72.4% capacitance retention at 20 mA cm−2.244 Sputtered W2N films with compact structure also delivered high areal capacitances of 550 mF cm−2 at 2 mV s−1 and ∼150 mF cm−2 at 100 mV s−1 in 1 M KOH electrolyte.287 In terms of ternary metal nitrides, such as NiCo2N@N-doped graphene and NiFeN@N-doped graphene electrodes, excellent electrochemical performances were achieved as well.135
It is worth mentioning that, besides the geometric structure design, electronic structure regulation can also favour electrochemical energy storage improvement. One example is the TiNbN electrode.289 The incorporation of Nb into TiN induced the generation of more N vacancies, which changed the surface chemistry of TiN and provided coordinatively unsaturated sites, allowing ion adsorption/intercalation and altering the charge density distribution of the surrounding Ti and Nb. As a result, enhanced rate capability and power density were obtained.
4.6 Lithium-ion batteries
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are dominant in portable electronics and electric vehicles, with energy densities that have been increasing by 7–10% per year.290–292 There is a continuous demand for advanced LIBs with reduced weight, longer life spans, and higher capacity. However, conventional carbonaceous anodes are approaching their theoretical capacity limits.293 In this regard, TMNs have been considered as feasible alternatives for next generation LIB anodes (Table 7), due to their high conductivity, large theoretical capacity, and good lithium-ion diffusion capability.30,128,294,295 Moreover, the conversion reaction of TMNs results in the formation of metal nanoparticles embedded in a Li3N matrix, a lithium superionic conductor (6 × 103 S cm−1 at ambient temperature), which can further enhance the lithium storage performance of TMNs.296 For instance, Wang et al.295 synthesized ultrathin 2D MoN nanosheets via a low-temperature solid-state reaction, which revealed high capacities of 810 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after 100 cycles and 898 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 400 cycles, respectively. This excellent performance can be attributed to the high conductivity and unique 2D nanostructure of 2D MoN. Similarly, a high reversible capacity close to 900 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 was also achieved for a 2D Mn0.33Co0.67N electrode, together with a fascinating rate capability of 91% capacity retention when the current density increased ten-fold from 0.2 to 2.0 A g−1.134
Table 7 Comparison of nitrides for rechargeable battery applications




Electrodes
Types
Current density
Cycle number
Capacity retention (mA h g−1)




γ′′-FeN297
LIBs
0.2 A g−1
100
1020.4


2 A g−1
500
667.1


Fe2N@N-doped carbon fiber298
LIBs
0.2 A g−1
200
710


1 A g−1
1000
550


Fe4N/Fe2O3/Fe@N-doped carbon299
LIBs
0.1 A g−1
100
554


1 A g−1
300
389


3D ordered mesoporous CoN94
LIBs
1 A g−1
350
710


2 A g−1
2000
300


Co4N@carbon cloth300
LIBs
0.1 A g−1
150
1100


0.5 A g−1
300
770


NiCo2N@carbon-CNT301
LIBs
0.2 A g−1
300
750.6


2 A g−1
500
569.1


Ni3N-Co3N@CNT128
LIBs
0.4 A g−1
600
553.3


Ni3N@Ni3S2302
LIBs
0.25 A g−1
200
∼390


VN hollow spheres303
LIBs
0.2 A g−1
200
650


1 A g−1
1100
456


VN@N-doped carbon304
LIBs
0.1 A g−1
200
832


Si/SiOx@VN/carbon98
LIBs
0.5 A g−1
300
1237.1


2D MoN nanosheets295
LIBs
0.2 A g−1
100
810


1 A g−1
400
898


MoN@N-doped carbon305
LIBs
0.2 A g−1
200
760


1 A g−1
800
571


Mesoporous thin-wall Mo2N306
LIBs
0.1 A g−1
400
536


1 A g−1
2000
350


Mn0.33Co0.67N nanosheets134
LIBs
0.5 A g−1
150
900


Cu3N/CuO thin film on Ni foam307
LIBs
0.4 A g−1
300
605


1 A g−1
1000
534


TiN@MWCNT308
LIBs
0.3 A g−1
100
447


0.9 A g−1
500
385


Hierarchically porous TiN309
LSBs
0.5C
450
746


5C
1000
557


TiN@carbon cloth108
LSBs
1C
500
856


TiN@graphene310
LSBs
0.1C
180
1217


Carbon@TiN dual shell nanospheres97
LSBs
0.2C
100
884


2C
300
570


TiN@N-doped graphene311
LSBs
0.5C
100
1267


1C
200
957


VN@carbon fiber104
LSBs
0.1C
250
1052.5


VN@carbon69
LSBs
0.5C
100
789.5


1C
300
592.2


Co-doped VN@carbon100
LSBs
0.5C
200
715


1C
300
300


Co4N-carbon@carbon cloth312
LSBs
0.5C
100
1121


5C
500
598


MoNx modified separator313
LSBs
0.5C
500
566


2D MoN/VN heterostructure91
LSBs
2C
500
708


Mesoporous Mo2N314
LSBs
0.5C
200
771


Mo3Ni3N/Mo2C@carbon315
LSBs
0.1C
100
814


1C
500
500


WN@carbon cloth306
LSBs
0.1 A g−1
500
814.2


1 A g−1
100
540.8


WN@carbon316
LSBs
0.5C
100
743


2D arrays of CrN nanocrystals42
LSBs
0.2C
100
952


0.5C
300
820


2D arrays of TiN nanocrystals42
0.2C
100
1180


0.5C
300
965


2D arrays of NbN nanocrystals42
0.2C
100
1060


0.5C
300
952


1C
1000
797


NbN@graphene317
LSBs
1C
300
768


NbN@N-doped graphene318
LSBs
1C
400
598


Fe3N@C299
SIBs
2 A g−1
300
248


Layered VN319
SIBs
0.5 A g−1
7500
115


VN@rGO319
1 A g−1
10000
155


VN@N-doped carbon304
SIBs
0.1 A g−1
200
361


1 A g−1
1400
306


MnN@rGO246
SIBs
0.1 A g−1
180
716


Mo2N@carbon-rGO55
SIBs
0.2 A g−1
100
487.2


TiN@N-TiO2320
SIBs
1C
500
198.7


NbN@N-doped carbon24
PIBs
0.5 A g−1
2000
60


VN@N-doped carbon321
PIBs
0.1 A g−1
100
228


0.5 A g−1
500
215


Fe2N@N-doped carbon fiber298
PIBs
0.2 A g−1
100
102




3D ordered mesoporous structure design is another effective strategy to accommodate the large volume change of electrodes and retain structural integrity. Compared with bulk CoN, ordered mesoporous CoN (om-CoN) with 3D grid-like ordered mesopores (7.5 nm), superior thinness (<6 nm) and conductive skeletons delivered a high reversible capacity of 1050 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1, which is very close to its theoretical capacity (1102 mA h g−1) (Fig. 18a–c).94 Meanwhile, benefiting from the rational structural design, the electrode volume variation during the charging and discharging process was efficiently buffered, endowing om-CoN with excellent cycling stability, including a stable specific capacity of 710 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 350 cycles, and even 300 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 2000 cycles, demonstrating the great potential of 3D mesoporous TMNs for high-performance lithium storage.
 Fig. 18  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrodes in lithium ion batteries. (a) HRTEM image of om-CoN. (b) Cycling performance at 1 A g−1 and (c) long-cycling performance of om-CoN at 2 A g−1. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM and (e) HRTEM images of Fe2N@CNF. (f) Rate capability, (g) CV curve at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and corresponding pseudocapacitive contribution, (h) schematic illustration of the lithium storage mechanism and (i) long-term cycling stability of the Fe2N@CNF anode. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Introducing a carbon matrix can also contribute better lithium storage performance by buffering the volume change of TMNs, increasing the dispersibility of TMNs, and enhancing the electrical conductivity. For example, VN, by virtue of the high electrical conductivity (1.17 × 106 S m−1)250 and large theoretical specific capacity (1238 mA h g−1 for LIBs),322 is regarded as one of the most promising candidates for LIBs. However, its huge volume expansion (∼240%, calculated based on the density of VN, Li3N and V) leads to inferior practical performance.304,322 After embedding VN quantum dots in porous shells of N-doped carbon hollow spheres, the VN@N-doped carbon composite electrode delivered a reversible capacity of up to 832 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 after 200 cycles, and even a reversible capacity of 311 mA h g−1 over 2000 cycles, corresponding to a capacity decay of 0.017% per cycle.304 Likewise, Fe2N with a high theoretical capacity of 900 mA h g−130 suffered from a short cycling lifetime caused by repeated volume variation and unstable solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layers, together with easy oxidization in air.323 Benefiting from the well-confined Fe2N nanoparticles by graphene shells for alleviating structural pulverization and air sensitivity, and 3D carbon nanosheet porous frameworks for fast electrolyte ion diffusion and fast electron transport, the resulting Fe2N@carbon nanosheet framework (Fe2N@CNF) anodes exhibited a high reversible capacity of 587 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1, a remarkable rate capacity of 215 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 10 A g−1, and, most importantly, excellent durability with 95.4% capacity retention at 2 A g−1 after 500 cycles (Fig. 18d–i).99
4.7 Lithium–sulfur batteries
Lithium–sulfur batteries (LSBs) have gained considerable attention in recent years because of their ultrahigh theoretical energy density (2567 W h kg−1), as well as the affordable cost, natural abundance, and environmental friendliness of elemental sulfur.324–327 Nevertheless, the practical application of LSBs is still hindered by several critical issues: the electrically insulating nature of sulfur species,104,328 the significant volume change of sulfur (∼80%) during cycling,329 and the “shuttle effect” of soluble lithium polysulfide (LiPS) intermediates. Especially, the “shuttle effect” leads to anodic corrosion, low coulmbic efficiency (CE), and inferior cycling stability.330,331 To address these hurdles, various strategies, such as adopting porous/hollow host materials to accommodate sulfur particles and promoting the interaction between LiPSs and functional facets, have been undertaken. Nanostructured carbon materials are the prevalently employed host to physically confine LiPSs and improve sulfur utilization, due to their good adsorption ability and conductivity.332,333 Unfortunately, the cycling stability is not as good as expected due to the weak interactions between the nonpolar carbon surface and polar LiPSs. Polar materials, such as transition metal oxides and sulfides with a stronger chemical interaction with LiPSs than carbons, are promising to anchor LiPSs and suppress the shuttle effect. However, their poor electrical conductivity slows the conversion of adsorbed LiPSs and makes their surface useless in long cycling.334 TMNs, with good electrical conductivity, excellent mechanical properties, high chemical stability, and tunable electronic structure, show great potential to solve the above problems. First-principles calculations and experimental results have already demonstrated the ability of TMNs in boosting the cycle life and stability of the sulfur cathode (Table 7), even with high sulfur loading.97,108,312,335,336
For example, Lim et al.309 reported a hierarchical macro and mesoporous TiN/sulfur electrode, which showed a high reversible capacity of 557 mA h g−1 even after 1000 cycles at a 5C rate, with only 0.016% capacity decay per cycle. This outstanding performance is attributed to the synergistic effect between the multifunctional surface properties and hierarchical electrode structure: (i) the polar TiN surface exhibits high catalytic activity and high affinity with LiPSs; and (ii) the coexistence of macro- and mesopores enables the effective control of the shuttle effect, stable accommodation of large amounts of sulfur, and facile transport of electrons/lithium ions. Strong “physical blocking and chemical absorption” of LiPSs were also achieved in a porous carbon fiber/VN array/sulfur (PCF/VN/S) integrated electrode.104 The PCF with highly porous structure provided large space to accommodate active sulfur and possessed cross-linked maze channels to physically immobilize the LiPS species. The VN nanobelt arrays offered strong ability for chemically anchoring LiPSs, thus retarding the shuttle effect. As a result, a high reversible capacity of 1310.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, an extended cycle life (1052.5 mA h g−1 after 250 cycles), and an enhanced rate capability were obtained.104 More recently, interconnected 2D arrays of few-nanometer TMN (CrN, TiN, and NbN) nanocrystals, which provided high surface area (88–153 m2 g−1) and high electrical conductivity (250–261 S m−1), obtained by topochemical synthesis on the surface of a salt template, were reported (Fig. 19a–f).42 These few-nanometer TMN nanocrystals also showed significant absorption with sulfur and potentially strong affinity of LiPSs. Meanwhile, the 2D arrays of interconnected structure assured fast electron transport in between nanocrystals. Impressively, 2D arrays of several nitrides achieved a high initial capacity of >1000 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, and only about 13% degradation over 1000 cycles at 1C under a high areal sulfur loading (>5 mg cm−2).
 Fig. 19  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrodes in lithium–sulfur batteries. (a) TEM images of 2D arrays of interconnected NbN nanocrystals. (b) CV curves of a Li–S cell with an NbN/S cathode at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (c) Cycling performance of Li–S cells with CrN/S, TiN/S, and NbN/S cathodes. (d) Charge/discharge profiles, (e) rate capability and (f) cycling performance of a NbN/S cathode. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) Rate capabilities, (h) CV curves and (i) cycling performances of S/MoN–VN and S/MoN electrodes. (j) Optimized configurations of V–MoN–Li2S2, V–MoN–Li2S4, MoN–Li2S2 and MoN–Li2S4, in which green, red, purple, yellow and blue spheres represent Mo, V, Li, S and N, respectively. (k) In situ synchrotron XRD contour plot of S/MoN–VN with the corresponding discharge curve. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
It is worth noting that, except for one-component TMN hosts, 2D nitride heterostructures with modulated electronic properties also hold great promise for high-performance LSBs. For 2D heterostructured MoN–VN,91 theoretical calculations indicated that the electronic structure of MoN was tailored by the incorporation of V, which led to enhanced LiPS adsorption compared to MoN. Additionally, in situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction and electrochemical measurements also revealed effective regulation and utilization of LiPSs in MoN–VN. As a result, the MoN–VN-based LSBs demonstrated a capacity retention of 72% (555 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles) at 1C, and a capacity decay as low as 0.068% per cycle during 500 cycles at 2C with a sulfur loading of 3.0 mg cm−2 (Fig. 19j and k). Similarly, Co doping can modulate the electronic structure of NbN, thus leading to facilitated conversion of sulfur species, a suppressed shuttle effect, and accelerated electrochemical kinetics for advanced Li–S batteries.112
Besides functioning as sulfur hosts, TMNs can also modify separators of LSBs to enable better electrochemical performance. For example, owing to the 2D flat property, MoNx nanosheets were easily stacked on a Celgard separator by a simple filtration method, with an areal mass density of ∼0.086 mg cm−2. LSBs with the MoNx/Celgard separator delivered a high discharge capacity of 1298 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and sustained a capacity of 566 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at 0.5C, corresponding to a capacity fading rate of only 0.063% per cycle. In contrast, the cell using the pure Celgard separator experienced faster capacity fading, showing an overall capacity decay rate of 0.091% per cycle.313 Three advantageous features should be ascribed to the following reasons: (i) due to the synergistic effect of structural confinement and chemisorption, polar 2D MoNx nanosheets effectively suppressed the shuttle effect of LiPSs; (ii) the excellent electronic conductivity of MoNx enhanced the interfacial charge transfer and guaranteed high sulfur utilization; and (iii) the catalytic activity of MoNx promoted the sulfur redox reaction, ensuring fast reaction kinetics.
4.8 Other batteries
In addition to lithium ions, other alkali metal ions such as sodium and potassium ions with similar electrochemical properties to lithium can also react with TMNs and realize efficient energy storage properties (Table 7).24,306 For instance, Fe3N in a well-designed Fe3N@C electrode could react with Na+ ions and form a final product of Na3N (Fe3N + 3Na+ + 3e− ↔ 3Fe + Na3N).337 Meanwhile, this electrode depicted great structural advantages: (i) every Fe3N@C nano-unit has a well-formed yolk–shell structure, which can accommodate the volumetric expansion of Fe3N for good cycling stability; and (ii) all single Fe3N@C units are strung along the carbon fibers, which are further interconnected with each other to form an efficient 3D conductive network to provide excellent electron conductivity. Consequently, the Fe3N@C-based sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) delivered a reversible capacity of 280 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles (88% capacity retention versus the second cycle), with an average CE of >99% throughout the cycling (Fig. 20a–c). Mo2N also undergoes a similar conversion reaction with Na+ ions and results in excellent sodium storage performance, such as a high reversible capacity of 487.2 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after 100 cycles for Mo2N@carbon-rGO,55 and a steady specific capacity of 158 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles for mesoporous Mo2N.306 More recently, Wei et al.319 first reported an intercalation pseudocapacitive-type VN synthesized by one-step ammonification of V2C MXene for SIBs. Benefiting from a distinctive layered structure pillared by Al atoms in the layer spacing, the layered VN electrode delivered a high capacity of 372 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 and long cycling stability over 7500 cycles without capacity attenuation at 500 mA g−1. After compounding with rGO, a higher capacity of 400 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 was achieved for the VN@rGO electrode, together with a high reversible capacity of 155 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 10000 cycles.
 Fig. 20  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrodes in sodium/potassium ion batteries. (a) Schematic structural features of the Fe3N@C nano-necklace electrode for Na+ ion and electron transport. (b) Cycle life at 0.4 A g−1 of Fe3N@C nano-necklaces for sodium storage. (c) C-rate performance comparison between the Fe3N@C nano-necklaces and bulk particles. Reproduced with permission.337 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) SEM image, (e) schematic illustration of the K+ storage mechanism, (f) voltage profiles at different currents, (g) rate capability and (h) cycling performance of m-NbN/NC. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
TMNs also hold great potential for high-performance potassium-ion batteries (PIBs). As an example, a well-ordered mesoporous NbN/N-doped carbon hybrid (m-NbN/NC) exhibited negligible small strain during cycling and surface-controlled reaction characteristics, resulting in highly reversible potassium storage and high rate performance: a high reversible capacity of 143 mA h g−1 at 0.01 A g−1 and 49 mA h g−1 at a very high current of 1 A g−1. More impressively, the m-NbN/NC-based PIBs delivered superior stability with 100% capacity retention at 0.5 A g−1 after 2000 cycles (Fig. 20d–h).24 Similarly, excellent potassium storage performances were also achieved for VN quantum dot-based electrodes (228 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles, and 215 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 500 cycles),321 and Fe2N-based anodes (102 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after 100 cycles).298
Apparently, for both electrochemical energy conversion and storage applications, elaborate nanostructure design can remarkably improve the surface area, shorten the ion diffusion pathways, confine the electrode volume expansion, accelerate the reaction kinetics, and thus enhance the electrochemical performance of TMNs. Nevertheless, aggregation or restacking is always inevitable in 0D, 1D, and 2D TMNs. Relatively, the construction of a 3D porous architecture by uniformly anchoring TMNs (0D, 1D, and 2D) on 3D substrates (e.g. 3D carbon materials) or designing 3D porous TMNs directly can address this issue efficiently, which not only facilitates electrolyte ion transfer but also exposes more active sites for fast and efficient electrochemical reactions, and is one of the most promising directions for building more advanced TMN-based electrochemical energy devices. Meanwhile, rational electronic-structure manipulation also helps to enhance the intrinsic activity, create more active sites, and reduce thermodynamic barriers, favouring improved performance.
5. Conclusions and prospects
In the past few years, a variety of transition metal nitrides (TMNs), with inherent metallic nature and novel properties, have been widely explored as electrode materials for electrochemical energy applications. In this review, we have provided a comprehensive summary of the most up-to-date progress on TMNs including morphological-structure design, electronic-structure manipulation, and electrochemical energy conversion and storage applications.
First, we systematically introduced the synthetic strategies toward different dimensional TMNs. 0D TMN nanoparticles are usually composited with carbon materials, which benefits the good dispersity of TMN nanoparticles to restrain agglomeration. Anisotropic 1D TMNs can be prepared by the CVD method or transformed from other 1D transition metal oxides/hydroxides. 2D TMNs are most widely explored in recent years, which can be prepared by the salt-templating method with domain matching epitaxy, etching from layered nitride MAX precursors, and in situ selective atomic substitution of other layered materials (e.g., TMDs, hydroxides, and carbide MXenes). 3D TMNs are of significance to improve the accessibility of active sites and facilitate charge transfer, which have been widely developed by the templating method and introducing 3D supports.
Thereafter, we thoroughly discussed the emerging strategies for manipulating the electronic structures of TMNs, which mainly include heteroatom doping, defect engineering, heterostructuring, and alloying. (i) Heteroatom (metal or nonmetal) doping can not only shift the d-band center and tune the orbitals, but also induce more active sites, thus synergistically contributing to better electrochemical performance. (ii) Both the cation and anion vacancies in TMNs are beneficial to reduce the thermodynamic barriers of the potential-limiting steps in electrocatalysis, e.g., the NRR. (iii) TMN-based heterostructures, coupled with various compounds, can be divided into lateral and vertical heterostructures. The strong interaction induces electron accumulation at the interface, which tailors the electronic structure and adsorption ability, thus delivering high active electrodes for electrochemical devices. (iv) Moreover, multi-metal nitrides with two or more metals alloying simultaneously possess unique properties of each monometallic nitride, which can realize bifunctional activities for electrocatalysis. The advantages of nanostructures and electronic-structure modulation for TMNs lead to optimized performances in various electrochemical energy applications, including electrocatalysis (HER, OER, ORR, CO2RR, NRR, etc.), supercapacitors, and rechargeable batteries (Li-ion batteries, Li–S batteries, etc.).
Although TMNs have shown many advantages in the applications of electrochemical energy conversion and storage and have been developing rapidly in the past decade, there are still plenty of challenges and possible directions that need to be addressed. The chemical inertness makes TMNs stable during electrochemical reactions, which however may induce a shortage of active sites for electrochemical reactions for the original TMNs. Thus, efficient methods to modify TMNs are needed. Besides, their ultrahigh stiffness makes TMNs restricted for applications of flexible and even stretchable devices, demanding the synthesis of 2D TMNs and other TMN-based flexible composites. In this context, the understanding of the mechanisms of TMNs in electrochemical reactions will, in turn, guide the synthesis of materials purposefully. As a result, more efforts are crucially needed for future fundamental research and practical applications of nanostructured TMNs, as follows.
From the perspective of synthesis, the present synthetic strategies remain unsatisfactory for both universality and scalability. Moreover, besides a few investigations on vacancies, electronic-structure manipulation of 2D TMNs is still less frequently explored. In the future, theoretical calculations are highly recommended to guide and corroborate synthesis and modification directions. It may generate a new method for the large-scale synthesis of TMNs and also synthesis of novel TMNs that is unfeasible by traditional pathways. For instance, high-entropy metal alloy nitrides have shown great potential for high-efficiency and multi-functional electrochemical energy conversion and storage applications; however, the approaches that can achieve the convenient synthesis of high-entropy metal nitrides are still challenging. For electronic-structure manipulation, defect engineering beyond the introduction of vacancies needs to be further exploited, which includes but is not limited to dislocations, grain boundaries and lattice disordering. In addition, the deeper mechanisms of these modification methods and the relationship between the modification methods and electrochemical properties of TMNs need to be further explored, which may therefore direct the synthesis of TMNs toward specific applications.
For energy conversion applications, various TMNs as HER/OER/ORR electrocatalysts have been widely developed; however, they are still inferior to the state-of-the-art noble metal catalysts in terms of the catalytic activity and stability. The critical issue is that the reaction mechanisms remain unclear, which generally determine the catalytic performance. Accordingly, more efforts are suggested to reveal the inside mechanisms with the help of DFT calculations and advanced in situ characterizations, e.g., in situ XPS, in situ XAS, and in situ Raman spectroscopy. Additionally, the study of TMNs as CO2RR and NRR electrocatalysts is at the exploratory stage, in which the investigation of the catalytic efficiency and reaction mechanism is extremely lacking.
For energy storage applications: (i) the stability voltage window of supercapacitors is determined not only by the intrinsic properties of TMNs, but also by the electrolytes employed. Compared with the most commonly used aqueous electrolyte, ionic liquid media or organic electrolytes provide the feasibility of a higher output voltage and thus much higher energy density. (ii) TMNs are now mostly studied for lithium-ion batteries, but they cannot meet the demand for large-scale power consumption due to the constrained resources of lithium. Non-lithium-ion batteries that are based on richer and cheaper metals, such as sodium and potassium, are rarely reported. Especially, the application of TMNs in multivalent-metal-ion (magnesium, calcium, aluminium, etc.) batteries remains to be developed. (iii) TMNs with high conductivity and high catalytic activity are promising to enhance the redox kinetics between the captured LiPSs and insoluble Li2S2/Li2S. However, the detailed electrocatalytic mechanism is not totally clear at this stage. A deeper understanding of the catalytic mechanism is expected to provide a clearer design principle for higher-performance TMN/sulfur cathodes. (iv) Regarding the chemical composition, current efforts mainly focused on the hybridization of TMNs with inorganic and carbon components, and very few organics have been introduced. Given the diversity, multifunctionality, and molecular level tailoring of organics, the integration of organics into TMNs may lead to other new applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by an AcRF Tier 1 grant (RG105/19) from the Ministry of Education in Singapore; UESTC start-up funding (A1098531023601243); the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1401248, K121402819); the European Research Council (ERC 3D2Dprint); and postdoctoral start-up funding of Soochow University (3231703217).
References
H. Lasi, P. Fettke, H.-G. Kemper, T. Feld and M. Hoffmann, Bus. Inform. Syst. Eng., 2014, 6, 239–242 CrossRef .
Z. Abdmouleh, A. Gastli, L. Ben-Brahim, M. Haouari and N. A. Al-Emadi, Renewable Energy, 2017, 113, 266–280 CrossRef .
J. Pang, R. G. Mendes, A. Bachmatiuk, L. Zhao, H. Q. Ta, T. Gemming, H. Liu, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 72–133 RSC .
J. Qi, W. Zhang and R. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701620 CrossRef .
O. Schmidt, A. Hawkes, A. Gambhir and I. Staffell, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17110 CrossRef .
W. Li, J. Liu and D. Zhao, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16023 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, J. Wang, C. Wang, T.-T. Zhai, W.-J. Bao, J.-J. Xu, X.-H. Xia and H.-Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7365–7370 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Cui and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801993 CrossRef .
G. Fu and J.-M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9386–9405 RSC .
H. Wang and J.-M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10604–10624 RSC .
M. P. Browne, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 41–58 RSC .
X. Long, Z. Wang, S. Xiao, Y. An and S. Yang, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 213–226 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pang, A. Bachmatiuk, Y. Yin, B. Trzebicka, L. Zhao, L. Fu, R. G. Mendes, T. Gemming, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702093 CrossRef .
J. Xie and Y. Xie, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 3588–3598 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fu, X. Yan, Y. Chen, L. Xu, D. Sun, J.-M. Lee and Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704609 CrossRef .
G. Fu, J. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Tang, J. B. Goodenough and J.-M. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802263 CrossRef .
J. M. V. Nsanzimana, L. Gong, R. Dangol, V. Reddu, V. Jose, B. Y. Xia, Q. Yan, J.-M. Lee and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901503 CrossRef .
S. O. Amrouche, D. Rekioua, T. Rekioua and S. Bacha, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 20914–20927 CrossRef .
E. Pomerantseva and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17089 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Wang, W. J. Lu, Q. Z. Lai, P. C. Xu, H. M. Zhang and X. F. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904690 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, J. Wang, S. Adimi, H. Shen, T. Thomas, R. Ma, J. P. Attfield and M. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 282–286 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Nash, J. Anibal, M. Dunwell, S. Kattel, E. Stavitski, K. Attenkofer, J. G. Chen, Y. Yan and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13387–13391 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Kim, J. H. Park, C. Jo, J. Chun, Y. E. Sung, E. Lim and J. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3119–3127 RSC .
F. Zhang, S. Xi, G. Lin, X. Hu, X. W. Lou and K. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806552 CrossRef .
B. B. Wei, G. Mei, H. F. Liang, Z. B. Qi, D. F. Zhang, H. Shen and Z. C. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 385, 39–44 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, X. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12761–12769 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, X. Yang, X. Xiao, M. Chen, Q. Zhang, L. Huang, J. Wu, T. Li, S. Chen, L. Song, L. Gu, B. Y. Xia, G. Feng, J. Li and J. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805655 CrossRef .
C. Walter, P. W. Menezes, S. Orthmann, J. Schuch, P. Connor, B. Kaiser, M. Lerch and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 698–702 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Liu, X. M. Xu, J. Tan, J. X. Zhu, Q. Li, Y. Z. Luo, P. J. Wu, X. Zhang, C. H. Han and L. Q. Mai, Small, 2019, 15, 1803572 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Song, J. Cai, X. Zheng, D. Han, Y. Wu, Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Liu, J. Zhu, X. Liu and G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5076–5080 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, B. He, H.-Q. Peng, Y. Zhao, J. Cheng, J. Xia, J. Shen, T.-W. Ng, X. Meng, C.-S. Lee and W. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800406 CrossRef .
Z.-Q. Liang, T.-T. Zhuang, A. Seifitokaldani, J. Li, C.-W. Huang, C.-S. Tan, Y. Li, P. De Luna, C. T. Dinh, Y. Hu, Q. Xiao, P.-L. Hsieh, Y. Wang, F. Li, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Zhou, P. Chen, Y. Pang, S.-C. Lo, L.-J. Chen, H. Tan, Z. Xu, S. Zhao, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3828 CrossRef .
W. Bi, Z. Hu, X. Li, C. Wu, J. Wu, Y. Wu and Y. Xie, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 193–200 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gao, X. Li, K. Ding, C. Huang, Q. Li, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14–37 RSC .

          H. O. Pierson, Handbook of Refractory Carbides & Nitrides: Properties, Characteristics, Processing and Apps, William Andrew,  1996 Search PubMed .
J. L. Calais, Adv. Phys., 1977, 26, 847–885 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Didziulis, K. D. Butcher and S. S. Perry, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 7766–7781 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, X. Chen, X. Zhang and G. Cui, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1946–1956 CrossRef CAS .
D. Papaconstantopoulos, W. Pickett, B. Klein and L. Boyer, Phys. Rev. B, 1985, 31, 752 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, X. Xia, F. Shi, J. Zhan, J. Tu and H. J. Fan, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500286 CrossRef .
X. Xiao, H. Wang, W. Bao, P. Urbankowski, L. Yang, Y. Yang, K. Maleski, L. Cui, S. J. Billinge and G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902393 CrossRef .
B. You, X. Liu, G. Hu, S. Gul, J. Yano, D.-e. Jiang and Y. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12283–12290 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiao, P. Liu, J. Zhang, W. Song, Y. P. Feng, D. Gao and J. Ding, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602086 CrossRef .
B. Chang, J. Yang, Y. Shao, L. Zhang, W. Fan, B. Huang, Y. Wu and X. Hao, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3198–3207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lai, B. Huang, Y. Chao, X. Chen and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805541 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, D. Liu, Z. Liu, C. Xie, J. Huo and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 12614–12617 RSC .
M. Wu, G. Zhang, J. Qiao, N. Chen, W. Chen and S. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 86–95 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, H. Wang, P. Xiong, G. Li, T. Qiu, W.-B. Gong, F. Zhao, C. Li, Q. Li, G. Wang and F. Geng, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2892–2898 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ishaq, M. Jabeen, W. M. Song, L. Y. Xu, W. B. Li and Q. G. Deng, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 282, 913–922 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jin, X. H. Sang, R. R. Unocic, R. T. Kinch, X. F. Liu, J. Hu, H. L. Liu and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707515 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, X. Li, R. Xie, L. Xu and L. Liu, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 2580–2584 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, X. Wu, H. Guo, Y. Guo, H. Chen, Y. Wu, J. Zheng and X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 5951–5957 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, Y. Zhao, G. Chen, L. Shang, R. Shi, X. Kang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502585 CrossRef .
S. Vadahanambi and H. Park, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 5668–5673 RSC .
T. Q. He, Z. Wang, X. M. Li, Y. T. Tan, Y. Liu, L. B. Kong, L. Kang, C. M. Chen and F. Ran, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 781, 1054–1058 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Q. Gong, S. Ren, M. A. Arshid, W. Chu and C. Chen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 907–915 RSC .
Q. W. Li, Y. Chen, J. B. Zhang, W. F. Tian, L. Wang, Z. G. Ren, X. C. Ren, X. X. Li, B. Gao, X. Peng, P. K. Chu and K. F. Huo, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 128–136 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Long, S. Wang, X. Xu, M. Liu, W. Yang and J. Jia, Carbon, 2019, 151, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Ha, Y. Liu, H. Wang, H. Yang, H. Xu, Y. Li and R. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7134–7144 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Liao, J. W. Xiang, L. X. Yuan, Z. X. Hao, J. F. Gu, X. Chen, K. Yuan, P. K. Kalambate and Y. H. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37955–37962 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Tan, L. Meng, Y. Q. Wang, W. J. Dong, L. B. Kong, L. Kang and F. Ran, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 277, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, G. Chen, X. Xu, G. Yang, M. Liu and Z. Shao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3540–3547 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Kang, S. Y. Im, J. Lee, S. H. Kwag, S. B. Kwon, S. Tiruneh, M.-J. Kim, J. H. Kim, W. S. Yang and B. Lim, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1605–1611 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, H. Wang, X. Bo and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8018–8024 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, X. Yue, Y. Jin, X. Huang and P. K. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3673–3677 RSC .
P. Chen, K. Xu, Z. Fang, Y. Tong, J. Wu, X. Lu, X. Peng, H. Ding, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14710–14714 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Ouyang, J. Xu, G. Jia, S. Chen, R. S. Rawat and H. J. Fan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8670–8674 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, C. C. Li, W. J. Ren, M. Y. Qin and L. Q. Xu, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 5109–5116 RSC .
F.-C. Shen, S.-N. Sun, Z.-F. Xin, S.-L. Li, L.-Z. Dong, Q. Huang, Y.-R. Wang, J. Liu and Y.-Q. Lan, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 470–480 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, W. Qi, Y. Zhou, W. Kuang, T. Azhagan, T. Thomas, C. Jiang, S. Liu and M. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 122611 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, Y. Sun, C. Zhu, C. Li, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13648–13658 RSC .
Y. Zheng, X. X. Li, C. R. Pi, H. Song, B. Gao, P. K. Chu and K. F. Huo, Flatchem, 2020, 19, 100149 CrossRef .

          B. Anasori and Y. Gogotsi, 2D Metal Carbides and Nitrides (MXenes), Springer,  2019 Search PubMed .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, T. Makaryan, D. Er, S. Kota, P. L. Walsh, M. Zhao, V. B. Shenoy, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385–11391 RSC .
A. Djire, A. Bos, J. Liu, H. Y. Zhang, E. M. Miller and N. R. Neale, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2785–2795 CrossRef CAS .
B. Soundiraraju and B. K. George, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8892–8900 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, S. Li, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, R. Wang, H. Zhang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4615–4620 RSC .
J. Cao, T. Li, H. Gao, Y. Lin, X. Wang, H. Wang, T. Palacios and X. Ling, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaax8784 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, H. Wang, P. Urbankowski and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8744–8765 RSC .
H.-P. Guo, B.-Y. Ruan, W.-B. Luo, J. Deng, J.-Z. Wang, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9686–9696 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. F. Zhao, X. D. Jia, Y. X. Zhao, L. Shang, Q. Wang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. R. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702780 CrossRef .
K. Xu, P. Chen, X. Li, Y. Tong, H. Ding, X. Wu, W. Chu, Z. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4119–4125 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hou, K. Guo, H. Li and T. Zhai, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 3040–3047 RSC .
G. D. Sun, G. H. Zhang and K. C. Chou, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2018, 101, 2796–2808 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, K. Zhang, H. Pan, L. Wang, D. Wang, W. Dai, H. Qin, G. Li and J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 18936–18941 RSC .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, K. Hantanasirisakul, L. Yang, L. Zhang, B. Haines, S. J. May, S. J. Billinge and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17722–17730 RSC .
W. Y. Yuan, L. F. Cheng, H. Wu, Y. N. Zhang, S. L. Lv and X. H. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2755–2758 RSC .
H. Jin, L. Li, X. Liu, C. Tang, W. Xu, S. Chen, L. Song, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902709 CrossRef .
X. Xiao, P. Urbankowski, K. Hantanasirisakul, Y. Yang, S. Sasaki, L. Yang, C. Chen, H. Wang, L. Miao and S. H. Tolbert, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1809001 CrossRef .
C. Ye, Y. Jiao, H. Jin, A. D. Slattery, K. Davey, H. Wang and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16703–16707 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, H. Yu, H. Jin, M. Wu, Y. Fang, J. Sun, Z. Hu, T. Li, J. Wu, L. Huang, Y. Gogotsi and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Li, J. J. Shi, L. Zhu, Y. Y. Zhao, J. Lu and L. Q. Xu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 4302–4312 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Jiang, H. J. Han, W. Q. Zhuang, X. S. Xu, S. Kaskel, F. Xu and H. Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17561–17569 RSC .
J. Lai, B. Huang, Y. Chao, X. Chen and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805541 CrossRef .
R. J. Luo, Q. H. Yu, Y. Lu, M. J. Zhang, T. Peng, H. L. Yan, X. M. Liu, J. K. Kim and Y. S. Luo, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 531–539 RSC .
Y. K. Wang, R. F. Zhang, Y. C. Pang, X. Chen, J. X. Lang, J. J. Xu, C. H. Xiao, H. L. Li, K. Xi and S. J. Ding, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 228–235 CrossRef .
X. L. Zhang, L. W. Huang, Q. Q. Shen, X. R. Zhou and Y. G. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45612–45620 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Dong, Y. Li, H. D. Shi, J. Q. Qin, S. H. Zheng, R. H. He and Z. S. Wu, Carbon, 2020, 159, 213–220 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ren, L. Q. Xu, L. Zhu, X. Y. Wang, X. J. Ma and D. B. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11642–11651 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, J. Luo, X. L. Tian, Y. Dong, J. Li, M. Liu, L. Liu, H. Song and S. Liao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11604–11612 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Liu, W. J. Zang, C. Guan, L. Zhang, Y. H. Qian, A. M. Elshahawy, D. Zhao, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2462–2469 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Yoon, K. Shin, J. Park, S. H. Cho, C. Kim, J. W. Jung, J. Y. Cheong, H. R. Byon, H. M. Lee and I. D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 128–139 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, D. L. Chao, S. J. Deng, J. Y. Zhan, R. Y. Fang, Y. Xia, Y. D. Wang, X. L. Wang, X. H. Xia and J. P. Tu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706391 CrossRef .
L. Yu, Q. Zhu, S. Song, B. McElhenny, D. Wang, C. Wu, Z. Qin, J. Bao, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5106 CrossRef .
P. Wang, J. Qi, C. Li, X. Chen, T. Wang and C. Liang, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 745–752 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Zha, X. R. Zhu, J. Deng, Y. Zhou, Y. S. Li, J. M. Chen, P. Ding, Y. P. Hu, Y. F. Li and H. Y. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 40–45 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, J. Yu, J. Jia, F. Liu, Y. Zhang, G. Xiong, R. Zhang, R. Yang, D. Sun, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 118956 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, C. Tian, L. Wang, A. Wu, M. Meng, L. Zhao and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6325–6329 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, L. Kong, Y. Ji, Y. Li, J. White, S. Liu, X. Han, S.-T. Lee and T. Ma, Commun. Chem., 2018, 1, 95 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, Y. Sun, Y. Jiang, F. Yan, C. Zhu and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27751–27759 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ge, L. Wang, C. Li, C. Wang, D. Wang, Y. Qian and L. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6276–6282 RSC .
N. Yao, P. Li, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhao, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902449 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, D. Huang, J. Zhang, Y. Huang, M. S. J. T. Balogun and Y. Tong, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6051–6060 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, L. R. L. Ting, V. Molinari, C. Giordano and B. S. Yeo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8361–8368 RSC .
J. Xiong, W. Cai, W. Shi, X. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Yang, L. Feng and H. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24193–24198 RSC .
S. Zhao, M. Li, M. Han, D. Xu, J. Yang, Y. Lin, N. E. Shi, Y. Lu, R. Yang and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706018 CrossRef .
X. Yang, F. Ling, J. Su, X. Zi, H. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Li, M. Zhou and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118477 CrossRef CAS .
P. Prabhu, V. Jose and J.-M. Lee, Matter, 2020, 2, 526–553 CrossRef .
F. Song, W. Li, J. Yang, G. Han, P. Liao and Y. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4531 CrossRef .
J. B. Guo, Q. C. Zhang, Q. L. Li, J. Sun, C. W. Li, B. He, Z. Y. Zhou, L. Y. Xie, M. X. Li and Y. G. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29705–29711 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, B. Jin, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8117–8121 RSC .
H. Yan, Y. Xie, Y. Jiao, A. Wu, C. Tian, X. Zhang, L. Wang and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704156 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Zhao, J. Xiao, D. Manoj, F. Wei, F. Xiao, H. Wang and S. Wang, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 289–298 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, X. Liu, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 690–697 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Sun, X. Du, Y. Zhang, C. Wu, C. Yan, Y. Yan, G. Zou, W. Wu and R. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803367 CrossRef .
T. Wu, S. Zhang, K. Bu, W. Zhao, Q. Bi, T. Lin, J. Huang, Y. Li and F. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22063–22069 RSC .
H. Zhou, Z. Y. Li, K. Wang, M. Q. Gao and S. J. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1779–1784 RSC .
M. Yan, K. Mao, P. Cui, C. Chen, J. Zhao, X. Wang, L. Yang, H. Yang, Q. Wu and Z. Hu, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Li, Q. C. Zhang, J. Sun, C. L. Liu, J. B. Guo, B. He, Z. Y. Zhou, P. Man, C. W. Li, L. Y. Xie and Y. G. Yao, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801379 CrossRef .
P. Zhou, X. Lv, D. Xing, F. Ma, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Wang, Z. Zheng, Y. Dai and B. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118330 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, S. Chen, J. Ren, Y. A. Jia, C. Chen, S. Komarneni, D. Yang and X. Yao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 245–253 CrossRef CAS .
G. He, X. Han, B. Moss, Z. Weng, S. Gadipelli, F. Lai, A. G. Kafizas, D. J. L. Brett, Z. X. Guo, H. Wang and I. P. Parkin, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 380–387 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, Z. L. Chen, Y. Song, P. Wang, Y. C. Jiang, L. Jiang, Y. N. Zhou and L. F. Hu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5581–5590 RSC .
J. Balamurugan, T. T. Nguyen, V. Aravindan, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804663 CrossRef .
F. Liu, L. Zeng, Y. Chen, R. Zhang, R. Yang, J. Pang, L. Ding, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sarkar, Q. Wang, A. Schiele, M. R. Chellali, S. S. Bhattacharya, D. Wang, T. Brezesinski, H. Hahn, L. Velasco and B. Breitung, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806236 CrossRef .
M. W. Glasscott, A. D. Pendergast, S. Goines, A. R. Bishop, A. T. Hoang, C. Renault and J. E. Dick, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2650 CrossRef .
H. Wang and L. Gao, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 7, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Xia, J. Zhu, Q. Yi, H. Wang, J. Xiong, Y. Sun and G. Zou, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1010–1020 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Cao, G. Zou, Q. Yi, J. Guo and L. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 60–64 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Q. Yi, L. Gao, Y. Gao, T. Liu, Y.-B. Jiang, Y. Sun and G. Zou, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16342–16348 RSC .
H. Wang, L. Ouyang, G. Zou, C. Sun, J. Hu, X. Xiao and L. Gao, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9529–9536 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Ouyang, J. Xu, S. Chen, R. S. Rawat and H. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600221 CrossRef .
D. Su, X. Zhang, A. Wu, H. Yan, Z. Liu, L. Wang, C. Tian and H. Fu, NPG Asia Mater., 2019, 11, 78 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, Q. Fan, Y. Li, F. Cheng, P. Zhou, P. Xi and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14546–14549 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, H. Ge, S. Sun, J. Zhang, F. Liu, X. Wen, X. Yu, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Xu, J. C. Neuefeind, Z. Qin, C. Chen, C. Jin, Y. Li, D. He and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4815–4822 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Xiao, S. Liu, C.-L. Chiang, X. Kuai, C.-K. Peng, Y.-C. Lin, X. Meng, J. Zhao, J. Choi, Y.-G. Lin, J.-M. Lee and L. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18578–18584 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Chen, K. Sasaki, C. Ma, A. I. Frenkel, N. Marinkovic, J. T. Muckerman, Y. Zhu and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6131–6135 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cao, G. M. Veith, J. C. Neuefeind, R. R. Adzic and P. G. Khalifah, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19186–19192 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Wei, L. Chen, J. Shi and M. He, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5335 CrossRef .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grimaud, O. Diaz-Morales, B. Han, W. T. Hong, Y.-L. Lee, L. Giordano, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. T. Koper and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 457 CrossRef CAS .
F. Song and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4477 CrossRef CAS .
F. Song, L. Bai, A. Moysiadou, S. Lee, C. Hu, L. Liardet and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7748–7759 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Burke, L. J. Enman, A. S. Batchellor, S. Zou and S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7549–7558 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, T. Jin, C. Tian, C. Lu, X. Liu, M. Zeng, X. Zhuang, S. Yang, L. He and H. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704091 CrossRef .
Z. Kou, T. Wang, Q. Gu, M. Xiong, L. Zheng, X. Li, Z. Pan, H. Chen, F. Verpoort and A. K. Cheetham, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803768 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Q. Li, P. Shi, J. Fan, Y. Min and Q. Xu, Small, 2019, 15, 1901530 CrossRef CAS .
R. Q. Yao, H. Shi, W. B. Wan, Z. Wen, X. Y. Lang and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907214 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yu, H. Zhou, Z. Zhu, J. Sun, R. He, J. Bao, S. Chen and Z. Ren, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2052–2057 CrossRef CAS .
A. Saad, H. Shen, Z. Cheng, R. Arbi, B. Guo, L. S. Hui, K. Liang, S. Liu, J. P. Attfield and A. Turak, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–13 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, B. Zhang, W. Pan, H. Ma and J. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4170–4177 CrossRef CAS .
N. Han, P. Liu, J. Jiang, L. Ai, Z. Shao and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19912–19933 RSC .
X. Peng, C. Pi, X. Zhang, S. Li, K. Huo and P. K. Chu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 366–381 RSC .
H. Zou, G. Li, L. Duan, Z. Kou and J. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118100 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, C. Xiao, S. Xie, J. Liang, X. Chen and Y. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6934–6941 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, Y. Sun, Z. Li, B. Zhang, S. Cao, Y. Wu, Z. Gao and L. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803278 CrossRef .
H. T. Chung, D. A. Cullen, D. Higgins, B. T. Sneed, E. F. Holby, K. L. More and P. Zelenay, Science, 2017, 357, 479–484 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, Z. Yan, C. Chen and J. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10121–10211 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, J. Luo, H. Nan, H. Zou, R. Chen, T. Shu, X. Li, Y. Li, H. Song, S. Liao and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1575–1583 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Su, B. H. Liu, T. J. Lin, Y. M. Chi, C. C. Kei, K. W. Wang and T. P. Perng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18983–18990 RSC .
M. E. Kreider, A. Gallo, S. Back, Y. Liu, S. Siahrostami, D. Nordlund, R. Sinclair, J. K. Nørskov, L. A. King and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26863–26871 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Noh, J. H. Lee and J. S. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118415 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, H. Liu, C. Chen, L. Zou, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, B. Yang, Z. Zou and H. Yang, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1651–1657 CrossRef CAS .
L. An, W. Huang, N. Zhang, X. Chen and D. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 62–65 RSC .
Y. Yang, R. Zeng, Y. Xiong, F. J. DiSalvo and H. C. D. Abruña, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19241–19245 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huang, S. Mao, G. Zhou, Z. Wen, X. Huang, S. Ci and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9608–9613 RSC .
H. Tang, X. Tian, J. Luo, J. Zeng, Y. Li, H. Song and S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14278–14285 RSC .
T. Sun, Q. Wu, R. Che, Y. Bu, Y. Jiang, Y. Li, L. Yang, X. Wang and Z. Hu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1857–1862 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, L. Yang, B. He, E. Pervaiz, Z. Shao and M. Yang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6259–6263 RSC .
X. L. Tian, L. Wang, B. Chi, Y. Xu, S. Zaman, K. Qi, H. Liu, S. Liao and B. Y. Xia, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8970–8975 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cao, G. M. Veith, R. E. Diaz, J. Liu, E. A. Stach, R. R. Adzic and P. G. Khalifah, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10753–10757 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, L. Wang, P. Yu, D. Zhao, C. Tian, H. Feng, J. Ma and H. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12399–12402 RSC .
H. Abroshan, P. Bothra, S. Back, A. Kulkarni, J. K. Nørskov and S. Siahrostami, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 4783–4791 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cui, R. G. Burns and F. J. DiSalvo, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3782–3784 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Vaughn, Ii, J. Araujo, P. Meduri, J. F. Callejas, M. A. Hickner and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6226–6232 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 RSC .
Y. Guo, Y.-N. Chen, H. Cui and Z. Zhou, Chin. J. Catal., 2019, 40, 1298–1310 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, Y. Tong, X. Yan, J. Liang and S. X. Dou, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 743–765 CrossRef .
F. Meng, H. Zhong, D. Bao, J. Yan and X. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10226–10231 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guan, A. Sumboja, W. Zang, Y. Qian, H. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Liu, D. Zhao, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 243–250 CrossRef .
J. Yin, Y. Li, F. Lv, Q. Fan, Y.-Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, W. Wang, F. Cheng, P. Xi and S. Guo, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2275–2283 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhong, Y. Jiang, X. Chen, L. Wang, G. Zhuang, X. Li and J.-g. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10575–10584 RSC .
S. Han, X. Hu, J. Wang, X. Fang and Y. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800955 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, L. Shang, R. Shi, X. Zhang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 382–389 CrossRef CAS .
F. Song, W. Li, J. Yang, G. Han, T. Yan, X. Liu, Y. Rao, P. Liao, Z. Cao and Y. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1594–1601 CrossRef CAS .
A. Garg, M. Milina, M. Ball, D. Zanchet, S. T. Hunt, J. A. Dumesic and Y. Román-Leshkov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8828–8833 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ni, A. Krammer, C.-S. Hsu, H. M. Chen, A. Schüler and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7445–7449 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cheng, K. Mao, L. Ma, L. Yang, L. Zou, Z. Zou, Z. Hu and H. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1205–1211 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, P. Hou, Y. Wang, X. Xiang and P. Kang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 6106–6112 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, C. Yu, Z. Zhao, X. Guo, M. Shen, N. Li, M. Muzzio, J. Li, H. Liu, H. Lin, J. Yin, G. Lu, D. Su and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 8658–8663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, H. Bao, Y. Liu, Y. Mi, Y. Qiu, L. Zhuo, X. Liu and J. Luo, Small, 2020, 16, 1905825 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Abghoui and E. Skúlason, Catal. Today, 2017, 286, 69–77 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, S. Kattel, J. Nash, X. Chang, J. H. Lee, Y. Yan, J. G. Chen and B. Xu, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 13906–13910 CrossRef .
R. Manjunatha, A. Karajić, H. Teller, K. Nicoara and A. Schechter, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 438–443 CrossRef CAS .
K. Elouarzaki, V. Kannan, V. Jose, H. S. Sabharwal and J. M. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900090 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Birdja, E. Pérez-Gallent, M. C. Figueiredo, A. J. Göttle, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 732–745 CrossRef CAS .
P. Prabhu, V. Jose and J.-M. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910768 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480–483 CrossRef CAS .
R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 271 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Yamada, T. Hiraoka, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Kakudate, O. Tanaike, H. Hatori, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, K. Li, R. Liu, M. Sarfraz, I. Shakir and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19098–19106 RSC .
Q. Meng, K. Cai, Y. Chen and L. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 268–285 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, J. Liu, Y. Huang, F. Bu and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5466–5474 RSC .
K. Li, Y. Huang, J. Liu, M. Sarfraz, P. O. Agboola, I. Shakir and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1802–1808 RSC .
K. Li, X. Wang, S. Li, P. Urbankowski, J. Li, Y. Xu and Y. Gogotsi, Small, 2020, 16, 1906851 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, X. Wang, X. Wang, M. Liang, V. Nicolosi, Y. Xu and Y. Gogotsi, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104971 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, H. Song, S. Lin, Y. Zhou, X. Zhan, Z. Hu, Q. Zhang, J. Sun, B. Yang and T. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11296 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Salunkhe, Y. V. Kaneti and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5293–5308 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Zhang, Y. Cheng, B. Zhao, S. Dai, H.-H. Wu, K. Zhang, D. Ding and Y. Wu, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 22–33 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, X. Li, H. Xue, J. Shao, R. Zhu and H. Pang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701509 CrossRef .
Y. Da, J. Liu, L. Zhou, X. Zhu, X. Chen and L. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802793 CrossRef .
Q. Yun, Q. Lu, X. Zhang, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 626–646 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yun, L. Li, Z. Hu, Q. Lu, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1903826 CrossRef .
L. Lin, W. Lei, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, G. G. Wallace and J. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 408–423 CrossRef .
B. A. Gao, X. X. Li, K. Ding, C. Huang, Q. W. Li, P. K. Chu and K. F. Huo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14–37 RSC .
C. Zhu, P. Yang, D. Chao, X. Wang, X. Zhang, S. Chen, B. K. Tay, H. Huang, H. Zhang and W. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4566–4571 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, S. Kota, Z. Lin, M.-Q. Zhao, N. Shpigel, M. D. Levi, J. Halim, P.-L. Taberna, M. W. Barsoum and P. Simon, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17105 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, T. S. Mathis, K. Li, Z. Lin, L. Vlcek, T. Torita, N. C. Osti, C. Hatter, P. Urbankowski and A. Sarycheva, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 241–248 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, M. Liang, H. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Coelho, S. Pinilla, Y. Zhang, F. Qi, V. Nicolosi and Y. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000842 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhou, W. Guo and T. Li, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 21062–21076 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Balogun, Y. C. Huang, W. T. Qiu, H. Yang, H. B. Ji and Y. X. Tong, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 425–451 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Yue, P. X. Han, S. M. Dong, K. J. Zhang, C. J. Zhang, C. Q. Shang and G. L. Cui, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2012, 57, 4111–4118 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Balogun, W. T. Qiu, W. Wang, P. P. Fang, X. H. Lu and Y. X. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1364–1387 RSC .
Y. Y. Yi, L. H. Yu, Z. N. Tian, Y. Z. Song, Y. L. Shao, L. J. Gao, J. Y. Sun and Z. F. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805510 CrossRef .
Y. G. Wu, Y. L. Yang, X. N. Zhao, Y. T. Tan, Y. Liu, Z. Wang and F. Ran, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 63 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, L. Y. Liu, L. Kang and F. Ran, J. Power Sources, 2020, 450, 227687 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Xi, G. M. Lin, L. Jin, H. Li and K. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4727 CrossRef .
B. Yao, M. Y. Li, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Song, W. Xiao, A. Cruz, Y. X. Tong and Y. Li, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 3 CrossRef .
H. Peng, X. W. Dai, K. J. Sun, X. Xie, F. Wang, G. F. Ma and Z. Q. Lei, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 12623–12629 RSC .
J. F. Gao, W. B. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhao and L. B. Kong, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1178–1188 RSC .
C. Lv, C. Yan, G. Chen, Y. Ding, J. Sun, Y. Zhou and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1–5 CrossRef .
V. Sridhar and H. Park, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 808, 151748 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2019, 15, 1804104 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, X. H. Li, D. J. Chen, D. Y. Zhao and X. T. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24603–24613 RSC .
P. Liu, Y. N. Wei, S. Cui, H. Y. Wei, J. L. Bu, J. Ni, D. F. Lv and Y. Cui, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2019, 127, 728–735 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Sun, J. Q. Zhang, L. C. Yin, G. J. Hu, R. P. Fang, H. M. Cheng and F. Li, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14627 CrossRef .
D. Choi, G. E. Blomgren and P. N. Kumta, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1178–1182 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Lu, M. H. Yu, T. Zhai, G. M. Wang, S. L. Xie, T. Y. Liu, C. L. Liang, Y. X. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2628–2633 CrossRef CAS .
A. Djire, P. Pande, A. Deb, J. B. Siegel, O. T. Ajenifujah, L. L. He, A. E. Sleightholme, P. G. Rasmussen and L. T. Thompson, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 72–81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Y. Liu, Y. T. Tan, L. Y. Niu, L. B. Kong, L. Kang and F. Ran, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 262, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Yang, P. G. Ning, H. B. Cao, M. L. Yuan, J. P. Feng, J. X. Yue, Z. C. Liu, G. J. Xu and Y. P. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 332, 135387 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Zhang, Y. L. Yang, M. Ravi, L. B. Kong, L. Kang and F. Ran, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 306, 113–121 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Jia, Y. F. Cai, S. Li, X. H. Zheng, L. F. Miao, Z. Y. Wang, J. L. Qi, J. Cao, J. C. Feng and W. D. Fei, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 560, 122–129 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Tan, Y. Liu, Z. H. Tang, Z. Wang, L. B. Kong, L. Kang, Z. Liu and F. Ran, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 2915 CrossRef .
M. Y. Ma, Z. D. Shi, Y. Li, Y. F. Yang, Y. X. Zhang, Y. Wu, H. Zhao and E. Q. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4827–4835 RSC .
J. Huang, Z. Y. Peng, Y. B. Xiao, Y. Z. Xu, L. F. Chen, Y. S. Xiong, L. C. Tan, K. Yuan and Y. W. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900550 CrossRef .
H. H. Liu, H. L. Zhang, H. B. Xu, T. P. Lou, Z. T. Sui and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5246–5253 RSC .
J. H. Liu, F. F. Li, W. W. Liu and X. Li, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 164–171 RSC .
J. B. Guo, Q. C. Zhang, J. Sun, C. W. Li, J. X. Zhao, Z. Y. Zhou, B. He, X. N. Wang, P. Man, Q. L. Li, J. Zhang, L. Y. Xie, M. X. Li and Y. G. Yao, J. Power Sources, 2018, 382, 122–127 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ran, Y. G. Wu, M. H. Jiang, Y. T. Tan, Y. Liu, L. B. Kong, L. Kang and S. W. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 4128–4138 RSC .
Y. F. Zhang, X. F. Wang, J. Q. Zheng, T. Hu, X. Liu and C. G. Meng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 471, 842–851 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dubal, S. Abdel-Azeim, N. R. Chodankar and Y. K. Han, IScience, 2019, 16, 50–62 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Xie and F. Tian, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2017, 215, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. U. Shah, A. L. Hector and J. R. Owen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 266, 456–463 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Lee, Y. W. Lee, A. R. Ko, G. Cao and K. W. Park, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2013, 96, 37–39 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pande, A. Deb, A. E. S. Sleightholme, A. Djire, P. G. Rasmussen, J. Penner-Hahn and L. T. Thompson, J. Power Sources, 2015, 289, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
A. Djire, J. B. Siegel, O. Ajenifujah, L. L. He and L. T. Thompson, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 122–127 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, D. Santiago, P. Loyselle and L. Dai, Small, 2018, 14, 1800879 CrossRef .
J. Wang, J. Wu and H. Bai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2372–2382 RSC .
L. Yang, S. Cheng, J. Wang, X. Ji, Y. Jiang, M. Yao, P. Wu, M. Wang, J. Zhou and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 293–302 CrossRef CAS .
A. Djire, O. T. Ajenifujah, A. E. S. Sleightholme, P. Rasmussen and L. T. Thompson, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 159–166 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Lu, G. M. Wang, T. Zhai, M. H. Yu, S. L. Xie, Y. C. Ling, C. L. Liang, Y. X. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5376–5381 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, D. Chao, C. Zhu, X. Xia, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, P. Sun, B. K. Tay, Z. X. Shen and W. Mai, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500299 CrossRef .
A. Achour, J. B. Ducros, R. L. Porto, M. Boujtita, E. Gautron, L. Brizoual, M. A. Djouadi and T. Brousse, Nano Energy, 2014, 7, 104–113 CrossRef CAS .
K. Grigoras, J. Keskinen, L. Gronberg, E. Yli-Rantala, S. Laakso, H. Valimaki, P. Kauranen, J. Ahopelto and M. Prunnila, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 340–345 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Qi, S. Yick, O. Francis, A. Murdock, T. van der Laan, K. Ostrikov, Z. Bo, Z. J. Han and A. Bendavid, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 138–146 CrossRef .
B. G. Kim, C. Jo, J. Shin, Y. Mun, J. Lee and J. W. Choi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1736–1746 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, Y. Sohn, J. H. Park, S. Lee, B. S. Kim, I. S. Park and P. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2019, 19, 961–967 CrossRef .
S. M. Dong, X. Chen, L. Gu, X. H. Zhou, L. F. Li, Z. H. Liu, P. X. Han, H. X. Xu, J. H. Yao, H. B. Wang, X. Y. Zhang, C. Q. Shang, G. L. Cui and L. Q. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3502–3508 RSC .
K. B. Xu, Y. N. Shen, K. Zhang, F. Yang, S. J. Li and J. Q. Hu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 552, 712–718 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, Y. Yang, J. J. Fu, J. W. Wu, H. Song, X. M. Zhang, B. A. Gao, P. K. Chu and K. F. Huo, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 18, 30–38 CrossRef CAS .
G. Durai, P. Kuppusami, T. Maiyalagan, M. Ahila and P. V. Kumar, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 17120–17127 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ouendi, K. Robert, D. Stievenard, T. Brousse, P. Roussel and C. Lethien, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 243–252 CrossRef .
Y. L. Xu, J. Wang, B. Ding, L. F. Shen, H. Dou and X. G. Zhang, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 2020–2026 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wei, F. Ming, H. Liang, Z. Qi, W. Hu and Z. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2021, 481, 228842 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jeong, Y.-U. Kim, H. Kim, Y.-J. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1986–2002 RSC .
G. Crabtree, E. Kocs and L. Trahey, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 1067–1078 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1550 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ko, S. Chae, J. Ma, N. Kim, H.-W. Lee, Y. Cui and J. Cho, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16113 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Balogun, M. H. Yu, Y. C. Huan, C. Li, P. P. Fang, Y. Li, X. H. Lu and Y. X. Tong, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Wang, K. L. Zhang, H. L. Pan, L. Wang, D. Wang, W. C. Dai, H. F. Qin, G. R. Li and J. H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 18936–18941 RSC .
L. Wang, J. G. Sun, R. R. Song, S. B. Yang and H. H. Song, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502067 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Ma, Z. C. Li, Y. Zeng, P. F. Li and H. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 423, 159–165 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Jiang, L. Huang, Y. H. Wei, B. Y. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Zhang, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 56 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, G. S. Li, M. J. Yu, J. M. Fan, B. Y. Li and L. P. Li, J. Power Sources, 2018, 384, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, G. Chen, X. H. Liu, F. S. Chen, N. Zhang, J. H. Li, S. Q. Liang, R. Z. Ma and G. Z. Qiu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4432–4439 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Zou, M. D. Xu, S. A. He, X. Y. Han, R. J. Lin, Z. Cui, G. J. He, D. J. L. Brett, Z. X. Guo, J. Q. Hu and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19853–19862 RSC .
B. Long, M. S. Balogun, L. Luo, W. T. Qiu, Y. Luo, S. Q. Song and Y. X. Tong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701681 CrossRef .
J. B. Wang, C. Y. Yang, J. X. Wu, L. W. Zhang and M. D. Wei, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 848, 113360 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, X. Hu, J. X. Chen, Y. J. Liu, T. Z. Huang and Z. H. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9289–9296 RSC .
J. B. Wang, C. Y. Yang, J. J. Wang, L. J. Han and M. D. Wei, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 246–252 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Jiang, Y. Q. Qiu, Q. Q. Lu, W. Q. Zhuang, X. S. Xu, S. Kaskel, F. Xu and H. Q. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41188–41195 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Chen, H. Zhang, B. Yang, B. C. Li and Z. C. Li, Thin Solid Films, 2019, 672, 157–164 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Yang, Y. G. Shi, G. Yao, L. Yu and W. N. She, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 065514 CrossRef .
W. G. Lim, C. Jo, A. Cho, J. Hwang, S. Kim, J. W. Han and J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806547 CrossRef .
W. D. Zeng, M. M. C. Cheng and K. Y. S. Ng, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2796–2804 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Li, Q. He, X. Xu, Y. Zhao, X. W. Liu, C. Zhou, D. Ai, L. X. Xia and L. Q. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804089 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, D. X. Tian, Z. B. Zhao, X. G. Liu, Y. N. Hou, Y. J. Tang, J. J. Liang, Z. C. Zhang, X. Z. Wang and J. S. Qiu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 21, 210–218 CrossRef .
G. P. Chen, X. Song, S. Q. Wang, X. Z. Chen and H. H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 408, 58–64 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Jiang, F. Xu, S. H. Yang, J. P. Wu, B. Q. Wei and H. Q. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 395, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Liu, Y. L. Bai, X. Liu, C. Ma, X. Y. Wu, X. Wei, Z. Wang, K. X. Wang and J. S. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 378, 122208 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H. Shen, R. Li, S. Liu, A. Turak and M. Yang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2074–2079 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Shi, Z. H. Sun, W. Lv, S. J. Xiao, H. C. Yang, Y. Shi, K. Chen, S. G. Wang, B. S. Zhang, Q. H. Yang and F. Li, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 45, 135–141 CrossRef .
X. X. Li, B. Gao, X. Huang, Z. J. Guo, Q. W. Li, X. M. Zhang, P. K. Chu and K. F. Huo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2961–2969 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Wei, C. D. Wang, S. M. Chen, P. J. Zhang, K. F. Zhu, C. Q. Wu, P. Song, W. Wen and L. Song, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903712 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, J. L. Tian, F. Zhao, J. Yang and B. F. Wang, Ionics, 2018, 24, 3771–3779 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Wu, Q. Y. Yu, C. Y. Lai, M. L. Qin, W. Wang, Z. W. Liu, C. Man, L. Y. Wang, B. R. Jia and X. H. Qu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 43–50 CrossRef .
D. Kundu, F. Krumeich, R. Fotedar and R. Nesper, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 608–613 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, B. Wang, K. Zhao, Y. Yu, X. Wang, L. Mai and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5740–5746 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pang, X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16132 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xiong, X. Li, Z. Bai and S. Lu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703419 CrossRef .
H. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Xu and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707520 CrossRef .
C. Lin, C. Niu, X. Xu, K. Li, Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Qu, Y. Xu and L. Mai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 22146–22153 RSC .
S. Fan, S. Huang, M. E. Pam, S. Chen, Q. Wu, J. Hu, Y. Wang, L. K. Ang, C. Yan and Y. Shi, Small, 2019, 15, 1906132 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, E. Paek, G. S. Hwang and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7760 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, G. Zheng and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3018–3032 RSC .
H. Yuan, J. Q. Huang, H. J. Peng, M. M. Titirici, R. Xiang, R. Chen, Q. Liu and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802107 CrossRef .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Wen, Y. Zhu, K. Gaskell, K. A. Cychosz, B. Eichhorn, K. Xu and C. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4312–4320 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601759 CrossRef .
Z. J. Chen, W. Lv, F. Y. Kang and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 25025–25030 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wang, R. J. Luo, Y. G. Zhang, Y. Guo, Y. Lu, X. M. Liu, J. K. Kim and Y. S. Luo, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 3314–3322 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. J. Fang, J. T. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800525 CrossRef .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Hao Wang
	Hao Wang received his PhD degree in New Energy Science and Engineering from Soochow University under the co-guidance of Prof. Lijun Gao and Prof. Guifu Zou in 2018. During 2017–2018, he worked as a visiting researcher in the A. J. Drexel Nanomaterials Institute, Drexel University, under the guidance of Prof. Yury Gogotsi. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher at Nanyang Technological University under the guidance of Prof. Jong-Min Lee. His research interests focus on the topochemical synthesis of 2D materials for electrochemical energy applications.

Jianmin Li
	Jianmin Li obtained his BS and PhD degree in Materials Science from Donghua University under the guidance of Prof. Hongzhi Wang in 2014 and 2019, respectively. From 2017 to 2018, he worked as a joint PhD student at the A. J. Drexel Nanomaterials Institute, Drexel University, under the guidance of Prof. Yury Gogotsi. He joined the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at National University of Singapore as a Postdoctoral Researcher in 2019. His research interests focus on the regulation of ionic intercalation toward supercapacitors and on-chip energy storage and multi-function devices.

Ke Li
	Ke Li is currently a postdoctoral researcher in Prof. Valeria Nicolosi's group at Trinity College Dublin (Ireland). He received his PhD in Chemistry and Physics of Polymers from Fudan University (China) in 2019. During 2017–2018, he worked as a visiting researcher at the A. J. Drexel Nanomaterials Institute, Drexel University (USA) under the guidance of Prof. Yury Gogotsi. His research interests focus on the synthesis of nanomaterials for electrochemical energy applications.

Valeria Nicolosi
	Valeria Nicolosi holds the Chair of Nanomaterials & Advanced Microscopy at the School of Chemistry, Trinity College Dublin. She received her BSc degree in Chemistry from the University of Catania (Italy) in 2001 and PhD in Physics from Trinity College Dublin (Ireland) in 2006. She moved to the University of Oxford in 2008 as a Marie Curie Fellow and she returned to Trinity College Dublin as an ERC Research Professor in 2012. Her research group works on the processing and cutting-edge electron microscopy characterization of low-dimensional nanomaterials, and their electrochemical energy applications.

Xu Xiao
	Xu Xiao received his BS degree in Physics and PhD degree in Physical Electronics from Huazhong University of Science and Technology under the guidance of Prof. Jun Zhou in 2011 and 2016, respectively. He then joined the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Drexel University as a Postdoctoral Researcher under the guidance of Prof. Yury Gogotsi. Currently, he is a Professor in the School of Electronic Science and Engineering at University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. His research focuses on synthesis of two-dimensional transition metal nitrides and carbides for applications in terahertz/millimeter wave and energy storage.

Jong-Min Lee
	Jong-Min Lee received his PhD degree at the Department of Chemical Engineering, Columbia University. He worked in the Chemical Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, and at the Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California at Berkeley, as a postdoctoral fellow. Currently, he is an Associate Professor in the School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering at Nanyang Technological University. His research interests are electrochemistry, green chemistry, and nanotechnology.

 	Fig. 1  Structure models of TMNs: (a) face-centered cubic; (b) hexagonal closed packed; and (c) simple hexagonal. The blue and brown balls represent transition metal and nitrogen atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Experimentally reported Group IVB to IB TMNs highlighted in gold.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the topics covered in this review.	 

 	Fig. 3  Synthetic strategies for the preparation of 0D TMNs. (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Fe2N NP/CNT; and (b) TEM (inset: size distribution of Fe2N NPs) and (c) HRTEM images of Fe2N NP/CNT. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the confined synthesis of VNND/CNS; and (e) TEM and (f) HRTEM images of VNND/CNS. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (g) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure for Co5.47N NP@N-PC polyhedra through simultaneous nitridation and carbonization of ZIF-67; and (h) TEM and (i) HRTEM images of Co5.47N NP@N-PC. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Synthetic strategies for the preparation of 1D TMNs. (a) Schematic illustration of the CVD strategy for synthesizing TiN nanowires; and (b) TEM image of a single TiN nanowire. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of P-doped NiMo4N5 nanorod arrays; and (d) TEM image of a single P-doped NiMo4N5 nanorod. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the preparation of NiMoN nanotubes; and (f) TEM image of a single NiMoN nanotube. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Synthetic strategies for the preparation of 2D TMNs. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ti4N3Tx MXenes from Ti4AlN3 MAX. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of chemical conversion from MoS2 to Mo5N6. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of 2D W2N3; (d) STEM (inset: HRSTEM) and (e) AFM images of overlapping single-layer 2D W2N3 nanosheets; and (f) FT-EXAFS for the W L3-edge of bulk and 2D W2N3. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (g) TEM and (h) HRTEM images of 2D arrays of CrN nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  Synthetic strategies for the preparation of 3D nanostructured TMNs. (a) Schematic illustration of the MOF-assisted synthesis of NiCoN/C nanocages; and (b) TEM image of NiCoN/C nanocages. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the polymer-templated synthesis of C@TiN; and (d) TEM image of C@TiN. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the KIT-6-templated synthesis of om-CoN; and (f) TEM image of om-CoN. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic illustration of the preparation of 3D PCF/VN; and (h) SEM image of PCF/VN. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Electronic-structure manipulation of TMNs through heteroatom doping. (a) XANES Co L-edge and (b) valence-band spectra of Co4N and V-Co4N; (c) the geometric configuration of Co4N(111) with V atoms replacing the subsurface Co atoms; and (d) DOS of N as well as the corresponding schematic illustration of bond formation between the reaction surface and the adsorbate (Ads.) for Co4N and V-Co4N. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) NBO charge density distributions on Fe and N and (f) DOS of various samples. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) Structure model of the bare Mo2N and P-Mo2N(112) surface, one N atom was replaced by one P atom; the blue, cyan, and pink spheres are Mo, N, and P atoms, respectively; and DOS of the (h) N-p orbital in the bare Mo2N(112) surface, P-p orbital in the P-Mo2N(112) surface and (i) Mo-d orbital in the Mo2N and P-Mo2N(112) surface. (j) UPS of Mo2N and P-Mo2N. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  Electronic-structure manipulation of TMNs through defect engineering. (a) HRTEM images of MV-MoN@NC; (b) EPR spectra of MV-MoN@NC and MoN@NC; and (c) density of states of the N2 molecule, N2@MoN and N2@MV-MoN. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. XPS spectra of (d) W 4f and (e) N 1s, and FT-EXFAS plots (f) of NV-W2N3 and W2N3. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Electronic-structure manipulation of TMNs through heterostructuring. (a) HAADF-STEM image and EDS elemental maps of the MoN–VN heterostructure; (b) high-resolution HAADF-STEM image of MoN–VN; (c) near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) Mo LIII/LII-edge spectra of MoN–VN and MoN; and (d) DOS of Mo on the surface of V–MoN and MoN. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) HAADF-STEM image of the TiN@VN core–shell heterostructure and the corresponding EDS element maps; and (f) XRD patterns for TiN@VN, VN, and TiN. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (g) N 1s and (h) Mo 3d XPS spectra of various catalysts. (i) Interfacial electron transfer in C3N4@MoN. The yellow and cyan iso-surfaces represent electron accumulation and electron depletion. Pink, blue, and green spheres represent Mo, N, and C atoms, respectively. (j) DOS of g-C3N4, MoN, and C3N4@MoN. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Electronic-structure manipulation of TMNs through alloying. (a) HAADF-STEM image and EDS elemental maps and (b) HRTEM image of Ni3FeN/rGO; and (c) DOS calculated for Ni3FeN(111), Ni3N(001), and Fe2N(001). Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the enhancement of regeneration of Co–N bonds during the lithiation/de-lithiation process by Mn-alloying. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic illustration of mechanochemical assisted synthesis of high-entropy metal nitride (HEMN) via a soft urea strategy; and (f) XRD patterns and (g) HAADF-STEM image and EDS elemental maps of HEMN. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

2D MoN nanosheets78	0.5 M H2SO4	∼230 mV	90
Defect-rich MoN nanosheets116	0.5 M H2SO4	125 mV	51.15
NiMoN nanoparticles on carbon cloth144	1 M KOH	109 mV	95
MoN nanocrystals in N-doped carbon63	0.5 M H2SO4	62 mV	54
P-Doped Mo2N nanoparticles110	0.5 M H2SO4	105 mV	43
Mo2N–CoO hollow heterostructure145	1 M KOH	65 mV	72
Mo2N–Mo2C heterostructure on holey graphene123	0.5 M H2SO4	157 mV	55

	1 M KOH	154 mV	68
C3N4@MoN hybrid nanosheets125	1 M KOH	110 mV	57.8
2D N-rich Mo5N6 nanosheets27	1 M KOH	94 mV	66
2D N-rich W2N3 nanosheets28	0.5 M H2SO4	98.2 mV	59
P-Doped WN nanoparticles on reduced graphene oxide109	0.5 M H2SO4	85 mV	54
V-Doped Co4N nanosheets on nickel foam31	0.5 M H2SO4	37 mV	44
Cr-Doped Co4N nanorods on carbon cloth113	1 M KOH	21 mV	30.4
Ni3N1−x nanoparticles on nickel foam32	1 M KOH	55 mV	54
Ni3N/Ni heterostructure on nickel foam120	1 M KPi	19 mV	—
1 M KOH	12 mV	—
Ni3FeN nanoparticles54	1 M KOH	158 mV	42
NiCoN/carbon hybrid nanocages46	1 M KOH	103 mV	—
Ni–C–N nanosheets146	0.5 M H2SO4	60.5 mV	32
1 M KOH	30.8 mV	40
1 M PBS	92.1 mV	38
TiN nanowires66	1 M HClO4	∼180 mV	54
Porous Ni3N nanosheets on nickel foam53	1 M KOH	44 mV	46

 	Fig. 11  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts in the HER. (a) TEM image of N-rich Mo5N6 nanosheets; (b) d band position of Pt(111), Mo5N6 and MoN; and (c) HER polarization curves of different catalysts measured in Ar-saturated natural seawater. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) HRTEM image of the Mo2N–Mo2C heterojunction; (e) HER polarization curves of various samples in 0.5 M H2SO4; and (f) calculated free-energy diagram for the HER based on the various studied systems. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (g) TEM image of NiMoN (the inset is the HRTEM image); (h) XRD patterns of NiMoN and the precursor; and (i) HER polarization curves of various samples in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

Co4N nanowires on carbon cloth67	257 mV	44
Porous Ni3N nanosheets83	256 mV	41
FeCo–Co4N on N-doped C157	280 mV	40
Mn3N2 particles29	∼270 mV	101
Defect-rich Ni3FeN nanocrystals on N-doped graphene117	250 mV	38
Holey Mo2C/Mo2N nanosheets158	276 mV	82
Ni3N nanoparticles on activated graphene–black phosphorus159	233 mV	42
Ni3N|Ni2P|black phosphorus heterostructure nanosheets127	247 mV	79
Porous (Ni3−xFex)FeN/Ni heterojunctions129	223 mV	68
CoMoNx nanosheets on 3D nanoporous gold160	∼240 mV	46
Fe3N/Fe4N nanoporous film on 3D microporous graphene/nickel foam161	238 mV	44.5

 	Fig. 12  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts in the OER. (a) HRTEM image of CoMoNx with the inset showing the FFT pattern of the selected area; (b) OER polarization curves for various samples in 1 M KOH; and (c) HRTEM image of CoMoNx after the stability measurement. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) HRTEM image of the Ni3N/NiO nano-interface; (e) OER polarization curves for various catalysts; and (f) schematic illustration of the adsorption atomic structures during the OER process over Ni3N(111) and the Ni3N(111)/NiO(110) interface. (g) Free energy diagrams for the OER at 1.23 V bias over Ni3N and the Ni3N/NiO interface with the maximum energy barrier highlighted. (h) Energy barrier comparison for reaction step III. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

Co5.47N nanoparticles in N-doped porous carbon60	149 mV	248 mV	1.62 V
CoAl co-doped Fe2N/Fe3N nanoparticles114	145 mV	307 mV	1.67 V
CoNx nanoparticles in a 3D N-doped graphene aerogel166	198 mV	295 mV	1.71 V
Co3FeNx nanowires on nickel foam47	23 mV	222 mV@20 mA cm−2	1.539 V
FeNi3N nanorods on nickel foam167	75 mV	202 mV	1.62 V
NiCo2N nanosheets on nickel foam163	290 mV	180 mV	1.7 V
Ni3FeN nanoparticles on reduced graphene oxide132	94 mV	270 mV	1.60 V
NiCu/NiCuN nanowires in N-doped carbon168	93 mV	232 mV	1.56 V
P-Doped NiMo4N5 arrays on nickel foam70	118 mV	297 mV@100 mA cm−2	1.66 V@100 mA cm−2
Interfacial Ni3N–Ni3S2 heterostructure122	197 mV@100 mA cm−2	404 mV@100 mA cm−2	1.73 V
Cu3N–Cu3P in N,P,S-doped carbon on nickel foam124	68 mV	240 mV	1.54 V

 	Fig. 13  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts in overall water splitting. (a) Polarization curves of Ni3FeN/rGO for the HER and OER in 1 M KOH; (b) overall water splitting performance of Ni3FeN/rGO, Ni3Fe/rGO, Ni3N/rGO, Fe2N/rGO and Ni3FeN; (c) time-dependent current density curve and (d) photograph of the two-electrode electrolyzer using Ni3FeN/r-GO as both the anode and cathode at a voltage of 1.60 V.132 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

Cu3N nanocrystals on CNTs172	0.1 M KOH	0.712 V	0.556 V	0.85 mA cm−2	3
NixN thin film173	0.1 M KOH	0.68 V	0.42 V	4 mA cm−2	2

	0.1 M HClO4	0.68 V	0.49 V	6.1 mA cm−2	4
FexN nanoparticles on N-doped CNT–graphene174	0.1 M KOH	1.0 V	0.89 V	5.5 mA cm−2	4
Fe2N nanoparticle promoted Fe–N–C175	0.1 M HClO4	0.945 V	0.803 V	6 mA cm−2	4
CoN nanoparticles on carbon176	0.1 M KOH	0.85 V	0.8 V	4.6 mA cm−2	4
Co4N nanoparticles with an oxide shell177	1 M KOH	N.A.	0.875	3.8 mA cm−2	4
VN nanoparticles178	1 M KOH	0.824 V	0.724 V	1.25 mA cm−2	4
Co-Doped NbN nanogrid179	0.1 M KOH	0.81 V	0.6 V	4 mA cm−2	4
ZrN nanoparticles22	0.1 M KOH	0.89 V	0.8 V	5.3 mA cm−2	4
Co0.5Mo0.5Ny on N-doped carbon nanocages180	0.5 M H2SO4	0.808 V	∼0.57 V	4 mA cm−2	4
Co3ZnN nanoparticles on N-doped carbon black181	0.1 M KOH	0.9 V	0.829 V	5.3 mA cm−2	4
Ti0.8Co0.2N nanosheets182	0.1 M HClO4	0.96 V	0.79 V	5.9 mA cm−2	4
Co-Doped VN porous microflowers101	0.1 M KOH	0.903 V	0.802 V	5.7 mA cm−2	4
CoMo oxynitride on carbon black183	0.1 M KOH	0.918 V	0.758 V	4.8 mA cm−2	3.85
CrN nanoparticles on graphitic carbon184	0.1 M KOH	0.86 V	0.7 V	—	4.1

 	Fig. 14  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts in the ORR. (a) Crystal models of Co, Co4N, Co3N, and Co2N; (b) HAADF-STEM image of Co4N and corresponding EELS elemental maps of Co + N and O + N; (c) ORR polarization curves of various samples in O2-saturated 1 M KOH; and (d) mass activity normalized to the Co content of the samples at 0.85 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 


NC-Co/CoNx nanoparticles in N-doped carbon nanoarrays192	1.519/0.87/0.65	Solid-state	1.4	104
NiO/CoN porous interface nanowire arrays193	1.53/0.68/0.85	6.0 M KOH	1.46	79.6
CoNP nanoparticle@N-doped carbon on N-doped graphene194	1.62/0.87/0.84	6.0 M KOH + 0.2 M Zn(AC)2	1.43	87.3
Co4N nanoparticle/carbon fiber network on carbon cloth191	1.54/0.8/0.74	6.0 M KOH	1.4	174
FeNx nanoparticles on N-doped carbon195	2.0/0.9/1.1	6.0 M KOH	1.6	36
Fe2Ni2N/Co nanocrystals on N-doped CNTs48	1.51/0.8/0.71	6.0 M KOH	1.4	300
Ni0.5Co2.5N nanoparticles on N-doped CNTs133	1.554/0.85/0.704	6.0 M KOH + 0.2 M Zn(AC)2	∼1.38	147
Ni3FeN nanoparticles in a Co,N-codoped carbon nanoframe196	1.5/0.81/0.69	6.0 M KOH	1.43	200
Molecularly thin NiFeMn nitride sheets on N-doped Ti3C2 MXene49	1.53/0.84/0.68	6.0 M KOH + 0.2 M Zn(AC)2	1.495	N.A.

 	Fig. 15  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts in Zn–air batteries. (a) HRTEM image of molecularly thin trimetallic NiFeMn nitride sheets stabilized on N-doped Ti3C2 MXene (nitride-N-Ti3C2) and (b) corresponding structural illustration; (c) ORR and OER polarization curves for various samples in 0.1 M KOH; (d) schematic diagram of a ZAB; (e) charge and discharge polarization curves compared with Pt/C + RuO2; and (f) specific capacities for the batteries calculated with the consumed Zn mass. (g) Galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves of the batteries at 20 mA cm−2; and (h) photographs of a series-connected battery powering an electroluminescent panel (nominal voltage 3.0 V) in various bending states. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrocatalysts in the HOR, CO2RR and NRR. (a) Steady-state polarization curves of Ni3N/Ni/NF, Ni/NF, and Pt/NF for the HOR in H2-saturated 0.1 M KOH; (b) comparison of the HOR polarization curves of Ni3N/Ni/NF and Pt/NF in 0.1 M KOH saturated with H2 or H2 with 2% CO (v/v); and (c) chronoamperometry curves of Ni3N/Ni/NF and Pt/NF in 0.1 M KOH saturated with H2 with 2% CO (v/v) measured at 0.09 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Faradaic efficiencies of CO and H2 at various applied potentials for Nb4N5/NC and Nb4N5-NO/NC. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) Product distribution of CO2 reduction catalyzed by Cu3N at different applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) Faradaic efficiency of the C2+ distribution on Cu-on-Cu3N at different potentials. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (g) Production rate and FE of VN for the NRR at different potentials for 1 h tests; and (h) proposed NRR pathway on the surface of VN0.7O0.45via a Mars–van Krevelen mechanism and the catalyst deactivation mechanism. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

Porous VN238	6 M KOH	231 F g−1 (20 mV s−1)	80.0% (10000)
122 F g−1 (100 mV s−1)
3D porous VN/carbon membrane239	6 M KOH	392 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	83.5% (5000)
198 F g−1 (30 A g−1)
VN@single-VO2 particles240	2 M KOH	149.5 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	85.0% (1000)
∼110 F g−1 (5 A g−1)
Mo2N@carbon–rGO55	1 M H2SO4	365.6 F g−1 (25 mV s−1)	96% (3000)
219.8 F g−1 (100 mV s−1)
Porous MoN single crystals241	1 M KOH	8.8 F cm−2 (5 mA cm−2)	100% (10000)
3 F cm−2 (100 mA cm−2)
Porous TiN paper242	0.5 M Na2SO4	164.5 F g−1 (10 mV s−1)	100% (200000)
106.4 F g−1 (100 mV s−1)
TiN@VN nanowires on CNT fiber130	3 M KOH	1255.2 mF cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)	NA
854.6 mF cm−2 (10 mA cm−2)
Ti2NTx MXene76	1 M MgSO4	201 F g−1 (2 mV s−1)	100% (1000)
∼50 F g−1 (500 mV s−1)
3D sphere-like Ni3N nanosheets243	2 M KOH	92.7 mA h g−1 (1 A g−1)	80.0% (1500)
∼40 mA h g−1 (8 A g−1)
Co3N244	6 M KOH	449.2 mF cm−2 (2 mA cm−2)	100% (10000)
325.2 mF cm−2 (20 mA cm−2)
Porous CrN thin film26	0.5 M H2SO4	31.3 mF cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)	94.0% (20000)
26.5 mF cm−2 (5 mA cm−2)
Nb4N5/graphene245	1 M H2SO4	141 mF cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)	90.0% (6000)
60 mF cm−2 (100 mA cm−2)
MnN@graphene246	1 M Na2SO4	639.2 F g−1 (10 mV s−1)	95.0% (2000)
360.4 F g−1 (200 mV s−1)
W2N@P-doped carbon fabric247	1 M H2SO4	765 mF cm−2 (2 mA cm−2)	92.0% (10000)
477 mF cm−2 (20 mA cm−2)
Cu3N@CoFe-LDH248	2 M KOH	3078 mF cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)	93.9% (10000)
2641 mF cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)
Mesoporous TiVN powder249	1 M Na2SO4	221 F g−1 (0.05 A g−1)	99.4% (2000)
∼135 F g−1 (1 A g−1)
NiCo2N@N-doped graphene135	3 M KOH	265 mA h g−1 (1 A g−1)	86.2% (20000)
209 mA h g−1 (50 A g−1)
NiFeN@N-doped graphene135	262 mA h g−1 (1 A g−1)	97.7% (20000)
206 mA h g−1 (50 A g−1)

 	Fig. 17  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrodes in supercapacitors. (a) CV curves of the electrodes of VNND/CNS, VNNSs, and CNSs acquired at a scanning rate of 20 mV s−1. (b) Volumetric capacitances of VNND/CNS electrodes with different areal densities at different current densities. (c) Schematic illustration of the favorable features of VNND/CNS enabling excellent capacitive performances. (d) Schematic illustration and photographs of the flexible solid-state SC composed of the VNND/CNS electrodes. (e) Ragone plots of the VNND/CNS based SC and previously reported materials. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (f) SEM image of a porous MoN single crystal (the inset is the digital images of metallic porous MoN single crystals with dimensions of 20 × 10 × 0.5 mm). (g) High-resolution STEM image and the corresponding Mo and N atom distribution. The calculated adsorption energy of (h) H+ and (i) OH− adsorption on the MoN crystal surface. (j) CV curves at different scan rates and (k) areal capacitance as a function of current density of the porous MoN single crystal. Reproduced with permission.241 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (l) Schematic illustration of TiN@VN/NWA. (m) CV curves and (n) Nyquist plots of the three electrodes at various scan rates. (o) Specific capacitances of the three electrodes calculated from the GCD curves as a function of current density. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

γ′′-FeN297	LIBs	0.2 A g−1	100	1020.4
2 A g−1	500	667.1
Fe2N@N-doped carbon fiber298	LIBs	0.2 A g−1	200	710
1 A g−1	1000	550
Fe4N/Fe2O3/Fe@N-doped carbon299	LIBs	0.1 A g−1	100	554
1 A g−1	300	389
3D ordered mesoporous CoN94	LIBs	1 A g−1	350	710
2 A g−1	2000	300
Co4N@carbon cloth300	LIBs	0.1 A g−1	150	1100
0.5 A g−1	300	770
NiCo2N@carbon-CNT301	LIBs	0.2 A g−1	300	750.6
2 A g−1	500	569.1
Ni3N-Co3N@CNT128	LIBs	0.4 A g−1	600	553.3
Ni3N@Ni3S2302	LIBs	0.25 A g−1	200	∼390
VN hollow spheres303	LIBs	0.2 A g−1	200	650
1 A g−1	1100	456
VN@N-doped carbon304	LIBs	0.1 A g−1	200	832
Si/SiOx@VN/carbon98	LIBs	0.5 A g−1	300	1237.1
2D MoN nanosheets295	LIBs	0.2 A g−1	100	810
1 A g−1	400	898
MoN@N-doped carbon305	LIBs	0.2 A g−1	200	760
1 A g−1	800	571
Mesoporous thin-wall Mo2N306	LIBs	0.1 A g−1	400	536
1 A g−1	2000	350
Mn0.33Co0.67N nanosheets134	LIBs	0.5 A g−1	150	900
Cu3N/CuO thin film on Ni foam307	LIBs	0.4 A g−1	300	605
1 A g−1	1000	534
TiN@MWCNT308	LIBs	0.3 A g−1	100	447
0.9 A g−1	500	385
Hierarchically porous TiN309	LSBs	0.5C	450	746
5C	1000	557
TiN@carbon cloth108	LSBs	1C	500	856
TiN@graphene310	LSBs	0.1C	180	1217
Carbon@TiN dual shell nanospheres97	LSBs	0.2C	100	884
2C	300	570
TiN@N-doped graphene311	LSBs	0.5C	100	1267
1C	200	957
VN@carbon fiber104	LSBs	0.1C	250	1052.5
VN@carbon69	LSBs	0.5C	100	789.5
1C	300	592.2
Co-doped VN@carbon100	LSBs	0.5C	200	715
1C	300	300
Co4N-carbon@carbon cloth312	LSBs	0.5C	100	1121
5C	500	598
MoNx modified separator313	LSBs	0.5C	500	566
2D MoN/VN heterostructure91	LSBs	2C	500	708
Mesoporous Mo2N314	LSBs	0.5C	200	771
Mo3Ni3N/Mo2C@carbon315	LSBs	0.1C	100	814
1C	500	500
WN@carbon cloth306	LSBs	0.1 A g−1	500	814.2
1 A g−1	100	540.8
WN@carbon316	LSBs	0.5C	100	743
2D arrays of CrN nanocrystals42	LSBs	0.2C	100	952
0.5C	300	820
2D arrays of TiN nanocrystals42	0.2C	100	1180
0.5C	300	965
2D arrays of NbN nanocrystals42	0.2C	100	1060
0.5C	300	952
1C	1000	797
NbN@graphene317	LSBs	1C	300	768
NbN@N-doped graphene318	LSBs	1C	400	598
Fe3N@C299	SIBs	2 A g−1	300	248
Layered VN319	SIBs	0.5 A g−1	7500	115
VN@rGO319	1 A g−1	10000	155
VN@N-doped carbon304	SIBs	0.1 A g−1	200	361
1 A g−1	1400	306
MnN@rGO246	SIBs	0.1 A g−1	180	716
Mo2N@carbon-rGO55	SIBs	0.2 A g−1	100	487.2
TiN@N-TiO2320	SIBs	1C	500	198.7
NbN@N-doped carbon24	PIBs	0.5 A g−1	2000	60
VN@N-doped carbon321	PIBs	0.1 A g−1	100	228
0.5 A g−1	500	215
Fe2N@N-doped carbon fiber298	PIBs	0.2 A g−1	100	102

 	Fig. 18  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrodes in lithium ion batteries. (a) HRTEM image of om-CoN. (b) Cycling performance at 1 A g−1 and (c) long-cycling performance of om-CoN at 2 A g−1. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM and (e) HRTEM images of Fe2N@CNF. (f) Rate capability, (g) CV curve at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and corresponding pseudocapacitive contribution, (h) schematic illustration of the lithium storage mechanism and (i) long-term cycling stability of the Fe2N@CNF anode. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrodes in lithium–sulfur batteries. (a) TEM images of 2D arrays of interconnected NbN nanocrystals. (b) CV curves of a Li–S cell with an NbN/S cathode at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (c) Cycling performance of Li–S cells with CrN/S, TiN/S, and NbN/S cathodes. (d) Charge/discharge profiles, (e) rate capability and (f) cycling performance of a NbN/S cathode. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) Rate capabilities, (h) CV curves and (i) cycling performances of S/MoN–VN and S/MoN electrodes. (j) Optimized configurations of V–MoN–Li2S2, V–MoN–Li2S4, MoN–Li2S2 and MoN–Li2S4, in which green, red, purple, yellow and blue spheres represent Mo, V, Li, S and N, respectively. (k) In situ synchrotron XRD contour plot of S/MoN–VN with the corresponding discharge curve. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  Electrochemical performance of TMN-based electrodes in sodium/potassium ion batteries. (a) Schematic structural features of the Fe3N@C nano-necklace electrode for Na+ ion and electron transport. (b) Cycle life at 0.4 A g−1 of Fe3N@C nano-necklaces for sodium storage. (c) C-rate performance comparison between the Fe3N@C nano-necklaces and bulk particles. Reproduced with permission.337 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) SEM image, (e) schematic illustration of the K+ storage mechanism, (f) voltage profiles at different currents, (g) rate capability and (h) cycling performance of m-NbN/NC. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
