Manufacture, integration and demonstration of polymer solar cells in a lamp for the “Lighting Africa” initiative  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B918441D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B918441D
(Analysis)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 512-525Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsManufacture, integration and demonstration of polymer solar cells in a lamp for the “Lighting Africa” initiative

        
          
            Frederik C. 
            Krebs
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Torben D. 
            Nielsen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jan 
            Fyenbo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mads 
            Wadstrøm
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Marie S. 
            Pedersen
          
        
      c
aRisø National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy, Technical University of Denmark, Frederiksborgvej 399, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark. E-mail: frkr@risoe.dtu.dk
bMekoprint Electronics, Hermesvej 4, DK-9530, Støvring, Denmark
cCopenhagen Business School, Solbjerg Plads 3, DK-2000, Frederiksberg, Denmark
Received 
      7th September 2009
    , Accepted 8th February 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      17th March 2010
    AbstractSemitransparent flexible polymer solar cells were manufactured in a full roll-to-roll process under ambient conditions. After encapsulation a silver based circuit was printed onto the back side of the polymer solar cell module followed by sheeting and application of discrete components and vias. The discrete components were white light LEDs, a blocking diode, a lithium ion battery, vias and button contacts in two adjacent corners. The completed lamp has outside dimensions of 22.5 × 30.5 cm, a weight of 50 g and a very flat outline. The battery and components were the thickest elements and measured < 1 mm. A hole with a ring was punched in one corner to enable mechanical fixation or tying. The lamp has two states. In the charging state it has a completely flat outline and will charge the battery when illuminated from either side while the front side illumination is preferable. When used as a lamp two adjacent corners are joined via button contacts whereby the device can stand on a horizontal surface and the circuit is closed such that the battery discharges through the LEDs that illuminate the surface in front of the lamp. Several different lamps were prepared using the same solar cell and circuitry while varying the amount of white LEDs employed and by variation of the number of batteries and the individual battery capacity. The lamp prototype was developed through two early prototypes and the final and serially produced prototype was subjected to field tests in Zambia. Some of the lamps were recovered and the experiences gained with the prototype are presented allowing for further development that takes systemic factors such as the immediate response and spontaneous handling of the lamp by someone with no prior knowledge of the lamp or its workings.

Broader context
The World Bank initiative “Lighting Africa” aims at finding sustainable lighting solutions to millions of people in Africa. Solar cell systems that charge batteries are plenty but common to all is a too high cost compared to the annual budget of the average user in the sub-Saharan part of Africa. The commonly chosen lighting solution is instead the kerosene lamp with all its drawbacks such as carbon dioxide emission, fire- and health-hazards. The polymer solar cell potentially offers a low cost solution to this problem provided that it can be combined with a storage element and a light source. In this work we prepare an ultra-lightweight reading lamp the size of an A4 sheet of paper comprising a polymer solar cell with integrated lithium battery and white light emitting diodes. We demonstrate industrial manufacture, cost analysis and use of the reading lamp in field tests in Zambia during summer 2009. The cost of the lamp when manufactured on a small scale was 17.9 € with a potential for cost reduction to 7 € by usage of a smaller solar cell. This approaches the required cost of < 3 € corresponding to the typical bi-weekly budget available for lighting purposes.

1. Introduction
1.1 Polymer solar cells—a very brief overview
Polymer and organic solar cells1 distinguish themselves from all other photovoltaic technologies by enabling preparation under ambient conditions using low temperature coating and printing of liquid polymer solutions and dispersions onto flexible substrates using roll-to-roll methods.2 This mode of preparation is known to allow for both high speed and low cost manufacture. The polymer solar cell technology is, however, still faced with challenges of a high materials cost and a relatively poor operational stability.3 The most recent progress has addressed these concerns well and the manufacture of polymer solar cells on an industrial scale is now possible and the operational stability is sufficient to allow for demonstrations4 and round robins.5 The technology is thus potentially ready for niche products and consumer electronics in its current form. One aspect of polymer solar cells is the potential for integration directly into processes normally employed within the field of flexible and printed electronics. In terms of application of the polymer solar cell technology for on-grid electrical energy production, some analysis has been made based on the scarce data available. Powell6 and Baker7 have independently analysed the potential for use of polymer solar cells for electricity generation and have estimated the levelized cost of electricity. Both studies have shown that the technology needs to see significant improvements before it can be expected to contribute significantly in the context of on-grid electrical energy production. In the context of niche products, the technology is, however, ready for meaningful evaluation through upscaling and demonstration.6,7
1.2 Lighting Africa—a brief introduction
Lighting Africa (http://www.lightingafrica.org) is a World Bank Group – International Finance Corporation initiative established with the purpose of supporting the international lighting industry to catalyze market development for off-grid lighting products designed for an African context.8–14 In direct terms the initiative is to “…make affordable, environmentally sustainable, durable, and safe lighting available to the masses, who currently depend on kerosene lanterns and candles to satisfy their lighting needs”.9 The use of kerosene and paraffin wig lamps carries with it fire hazard, polluted air, burning eyes, head ache, nausea and a financial burden from buying the fuel. Substitute light sources have been explored by the Lighting Africa initiative and others.15,16 Some of the suggested solutions are based on solar power. Common to all the solutions put forward are that they generally do not show a sufficient understanding of the African environment for which they were intended. Many of the solutions are of a very high quality but also have an unrealistically high cost (Fig. 1).9–15 In addition, the solutions involving solar energy are bulky and comprise two discrete units (solar cell and lamp).
 Fig. 1  Two pictures of a market place under a paraffin lamp (top left) and the same stand with a LED lamp (top right) highlighting the significant variance in colour reproduction of the displayed products by the two light sources (courtesy of www.lightingafrica.org). A selection of lanterns tested by GTZ, displaying the similarity in shape to the petroleum lantern13 (bottom). Photo by Jürgen Gocke, Fraunhofer ISE (reprinted with permission). 
It should be understood that the introduction of well designed affordable solar powered light in often remote rural off-grid areas provides not only light, but also has the power to introduce economic growth by adding a few extra hours with light to every day.8,9,16 Substituting kerosene light with solar powered solutions provides improved indoor climate, poses little if any fire hazard, creates the possibility of school children studying after sunset and prolonged opening hours at the market stand upon which many livelihoods depend (Fig. 1).9,11,13,17
1.3 The matching of the product requirement to the capability of the solar cell
In the first public demonstration of polymer solar cells in 2008 it was noted that the performance of the cells was too low to allow for lighting applications.4 It was also noted that the short operational stability and unexplored processing requirement of polymer solar cells should in no way prohibit attempts to evaluate the technology in a real context as long as:
1) the polymer solar cell performance meets the requirements of the application.
2) the expectations of the consumer are met.
With recent improvements in the efficiency and speed of roll-to-roll manufacturing small scale personal lighting applications are now within reach. The typical power conversion efficiency of devices with an active area of 320 cm2 based on the ProcessOne technology2a is around 1% while smaller active areas of 120 cm2 gave significantly higher efficiencies. Practical application and prototype building is fairly straightforward on a laboratory basis and shows that the application of polymer solar cells as a power source for small scale lighting such as reading lamps for school children and room lighting is a worthy pursuit. To meet market requirements for lighting in developing countries various factors must be considered, among those are: product cost, design (durability, quality of light, ease of use) and cultural induced behaviour of the end user. To evaluate and better understand these factors two prototypes were prepared prior to a workshop and a final prototype underwent serial production and was subsequently field tested in Zambia. This served to investigate the suitability of polymer solar cells as a power source for lighting in rural environments. The workshop had the purpose of combining field observations and experiences of the Danish Children's Fund (Børnefonden) in Africa with an effort to integrate this valuable knowledge into the design of the lamp. The field test was established to test the lamp concept in a rural setting conducted by Copenhagen Business School (CBS). One of the strengths of the polymer solar cell technology is that it is very easy to prototype new ideas. Standard modules of various shapes and sizes are readily available and it is quick to cut and paste the solar cell into a simple application such as the solar lamp contemplated here. The first quickly prepared and fully functional prototypes that are shown in Fig. 2 were used as inspiration at the workshop.
 Fig. 2  The initial prototype—two 8 striped Risø DTU ProcessOne modules, wiring, flat outline Li-ion battery (left). The second prototype—one 16 striped Risø DTU ProcessOne module, conductive copper tape, white light LED and metal click button as a means of creating electrical contact illuminating a work station at the Risø DTU laboratory (right). 
1.4 Motivation and aim of this work
The motivation of this work is based on the observation that polymer solar cells might serve as a possible low cost power source for lighting applications in developing areas currently depending on kerosene lighting. The World Bank established the http://www.lightingafrica.org initiative which, at Risø DTU, initiated the formulation of a technology demonstration project with the aim of investigating whether polymer solar cells are a viable low cost solution when applied as a low cost integrated power source for lighting purposes in rural environments. To address this aim we undertook a broad study spanning polymer solar cell research, integration into flexible circuitry, implementation of polymer solar cells, energy storage, design, manufacture, demonstration and field studies. Secondary aims were to conceive a lamp design that was in stark contrast to all the existing solutions outlined in Fig. 1 meaning that the lamp had to be very light weight, should have a flat outline so that it could be kept with school books and comprise a single component (e.g. lamp and solar cell should be integrated into one unit). In addition the lamp should be intuitive to use correctly. The lamp was tested in a rural environment in Zambia in July 2009 as a reading light for school children or as a small room or navigational light. The field study gave feedback on the cost, applicability, materials, construction, intuitive understanding of the lamp functionality with feedback on the usefulness of the polymer solar cell technology in this context.
2. Experimental
2.1 General materials
Copper tape from 3M was used for prototyping circuitry. It easily allows for soldering discrete components and can be easily contacted using the button contacts employed in this study. The nickel free button contacts (male/female) were purchased from Prym and were simply applied by piercing through the foil, thereby creating the required electrical connections and vias. The tested lithium-polymer batteries ranged in capacity from 67 mAh to 200 mAh and had a nominal voltage of 3.7 V. In the end a 105 mAh and a 200 mAh battery were chosen. The white light LEDs were of the surface mount type in a 1208 case style. The blocking diode was a 1N4148 type in a SOD123 case style. The blocking diode was chosen due to the low reverse current (25 nA) and relatively high current handling capability (500 mA). The conducting paste employed for the printed electronic circuit was Dupont PV410. The overlaminating foil that was applied after mounting the electronic circuitry was a 25 micron thick PET with a pressure sensitive acrylic adhesive.
2.2 Production of polymer solar cells
The manufacture of the polymer solar cells followed ProcessOne that has been described in the literature.2a Inspired by the work of Dennler et al. the solar cells should be used in conjunction with a Li-ion battery.18
Since the solar cell had to charge the Li-polymer battery (3.7V) through a blocking diode (1 V loss) the maximum power point for the solar cell had to be around 4.7 V to charge the system optimally. Through experiments with various series connected stripes (available as 1, 2, 3 and 8 stripe modules) it was found that 16 serially connected solar cells were most suitable and was employed in the chosen module. The total module area was 20 cm × 25 cm (500 cm2) and the active area was 320 cm2. The geometric fill factor was higher than the previous (64% versus 45%) but efficiency was lower due to resistive losses and a lower fill factor than the previous (typically 1% versus 1.7%). After manufacture the devices were encapsulated in a full roll-to-roll process using a barrier material as described previously.5 An IV-curve showing the typical performance of a module under illumination is shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  IV-curve of a typical 16-stripe module under irradiation with simulated sunlight corresponding to 1 sun (AM1.5G, 1000 W m−2, 72 °C). 
2.3 Lamp design process
Over the course of the project a workshop was held at Risø DTU to develop the initial lamp prototypes into a prototype apt for pilot scale manufacturing. Børnefonden presented their field experience in Africa and a baseline understanding of cultural, environmental and economic factors was established among the workshop participants. Designers together with the field test group from Copenhagen Business School prepared a number of design prototypes of which the original prototype with minor adaptations was chosen as the pilot scale test design.
2.4 Lamp production
One of the objectives of this work was to test if printed electronics could be employed in conjunction with the polymer solar cell technology. The roll of completed and encapsulated polymer solar cells (100 metres∼450 modules) was thus used as a substrate for printing the electronic circuit. The circuit was designed so that it was possible to incorporate different types of batteries. In addition, 1 or more batteries could be applied. In the same manner, 1 or more white light LEDs could be applied without changing the circuitry. The printed circuit with an indication of the placement of discrete components (battery, LEDs, blocking diode, vias and contacts) and as an overlay with the solar cell is shown in Fig. 4. The components (LEDs, batteries and blocking diodes) were mounted onto the circuit after printing the circuit and cutting the roll into individual sheets using thermosetting 2-component silver epoxy. After mounting, the devices were cured in an oven at 50 °C for 12 h.
 Fig. 4  The printed circuit with an indication of where the discrete components were mounted. The solar cell with the printed circuit overlaid is shown as an inset. The various types of lamps described in Table 3 photographed from the back side. 
The individual lamps were then laminated on the side of the printed circuit with an overlaminating foil (25 micron thick PET foil with acrylic adhesive). The completion of the lamp was achieved by applying the metal button contacts at the two corners and two vias serving the purpose of connecting the terminals of the solar cell to the printed electronic circuit.
The final lamp design for the initial field test was established as can be seen in Fig. 4 and 5. The typical charging current for the lamps under illumination with 1 sun was in the range of 60–80 mA for front side illumination and 10–15 mA for back side illumination. For the lamps employed in the field test an adhesive label was applied to the backside for writing notes during use of the particular lamp. The label gave rise to an additional shadow loss and the backside charging current with the label was 8–12 mA. When illuminating from the back side the typical charging current in the case of a solar cell with no printed circuit is 30–40 mA, as shown in Fig. 6. The observed reduction is due to shadow loss from the printed electronic circuit and the asymmetry in the shadow loss in the areas where the battery is situated. A total of 196 lamps were produced from the 450 solar cells modules. The relatively low technical yield was due to some problems with adjustment of printing the circuitry correctly on the completed solar cells and malfunction of one or more parts of the circuitry. All of the 196 solar cells with printed circuitry that were chosen for assembly into lamps were functional after completion. While the technical yield of the solar cells can be viewed as low (44%), the technical yield of assembly into lamps can be viewed as very high (100%) underlining that the solar cell should be handled as a component.
 Fig. 5  An IV-curve of a solar cell module on its own and when integrated into the circuit are shown together where charging is clearly seen as a steep rise in forward current (left). A collection of the lamps in the illuminating state (on-state) are shown during testing before the field study (right). 
 Fig. 6  IV-curves with charging onset observed with illumination from the front and the back side (left) and for a completed lamp with circuit, components and label (right). The label and components lead to a significant shadow loss while the devices still allow for charging the battery through (unintended) back side illumination. 
2.5 Field test in Zambia
Students at the Copenhagen Business School studying International Business established a summer school in Africa at the Danish managed coffee farm Chulumenda 30 km from Lusaka, Zambia. The purpose of the summer school was to introduce the local school children of families working at the coffee farm to sustainable energy, among other things, over a 3 week period in July 2009. The Zambia lamp test was conducted by using a field test guide which included durability of the lamp by daily handling and observation of the initial introduction of the lamp to the school children. The lamps were tested by distributing them among a group of school children during a workshop at the local Chulumenda village school. The area is largely grid connected and supplied by central and de-central power generation of unknown source. Despite this availability, power cuts from 10 min to several hours are seen 1–2 times daily. All the school children had light in the main room of their house, but in general all activity stops at sunset, ∼19:00 h, due to lack of light.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 International approaches to off-grid lighting in developing countries
This overview condenses observations made in the context of rural lighting projects in a choice of projects in developing countries. The developing world is heavily under electrified compared to the developed world.19 As an example of the electrification in the developing world Fig. 7 provides a visual presentation of the African population with access to electric grid services and Table 1 provides numbers to a selection of regions: Africa, developing Asia, Middle East and a total world overview, clearly indicating the need to seek suitable solutions to establishing electricity and access to lighting. Electricity may be applied for things other than lighting, but in the following, lighting will be the primary focus.
 Fig. 7  Electrification rates in the parts of Africa where data is available.20 
Table 1 Examples of electricity access in 2008—regional aggregates for Africa, developing Asia and Middle East. Numbers in millions. PWE: population without electricity, ER: electrification rate, UER: urban electrification rate, RER: rural electrification rate23




Electricity access in 2008: regional aggregates
PWE millions
ER (%)
UER (%)
RER (%)




North Africa
2
98.9
99.6
98.2


Sub-Saharan Africa
587
28.5
57.5
11.9



Africa


589


40.0


66.8


22.7



China & East Asia
195
90.2
96.2
85.5


South Asia
614
60.2
88.4
48.4



Developing Asia


809


77.2


93.5


67.2




Middle East


21


89.1


98.5


70.6



Developing countries
1453
72.0
90.0
58.4


Transition economies & OECD
3
99.8
100.0
99.5



World


1456


78.2


93.4


63.2





Establishing grid electricity in developing countries is difficult because the public as well as private infrastructure is inadequate to support the development of a grid and continue a sustained system maintenance effort. As an example, the Millennium Development Goals estimate that if the World by 2015 is to half the number of people living on 1 US$ a day, electrification investments in excess of 200 billion US$ are needed.21,22 For sub-Saharan African countries alone the investments amount to 50 billion US$ (2006 numbers). The practicality of grid electricity in Africa and other developing regions seems to have an insurmountable complexity and as an alternative numerous small, medium and large scale stand alone solar electricity projects have been established since the late 1960s. The experience from these and other projects have been condensed and established as guidelines by the World Bank. Stand alone rural solar electrification takes the form of solar lanterns, solar home systems (SHS), solar street light and mini grids among others. Each of these solar products (except the solar lantern) provide the user with access to electricity that by choice can be applied for lighting, powering electrical appliances or equipment for value creation in a business setting.

3.1.1. Solar energy as a developing tool. 
Bringing solar light to rural communities often springs from a local government policy proposal to increase rural population access to electrical lighting and/or from a policy approved donor/development project with the same aim.24 Introducing technology projects to rural communities is termed innovation dispersion—in this case solar lighting represents the dispersion of technology.25 Off grid lighting projects in developing countries is perceived to be an empowering action (empowering in the sense that bringing light to rural regions endorses the possibility of development by promoting safety through street lighting, education and study after sunset and light to stimulate social activities, gatherings and trade26–29) that has effects beyond changing the preferred method of lighting.8 Lighting is currently provided by burning kerosene and other hydrocarbon fuels in low efficiency lamps causing severe indoor pollution leading to respiratory diseases, fire hazard and in general provide insufficient light. Solar projects are also seen to have an effect on reducing these issues.30–35 There are numerous solar development projects and each of them are subject to local variation and resulting issues. Regions as far apart as Nepal and sub-Saharan Africa experience solid development effects of implementation of solar systems in rural areas, but also provide advice for improvements.36–38


3.1.2 Recommendations and project examples. 
Across projects, regions and continents, implementing solar lighting systems have shown to have an overall positive impact on security and social well being of rural communities if the supporting and operational framework is an integral and sustained part of the solar initiative. Proponents of solar energy as a tool for development, like http://www.teriin.org/, http://www.lightingafrica.org, http://www.gshakti.org/ and others, have all faced the inherent challenges associated with innovation dispersion and thus advocate similar ideas on how to handle these challenges when setting up solar projects in developing countries. As examples, the World Bank have, with their Renewable Energy tool kit for development, provided an operational guide for renewable energy electrification projects, Grameen Shakti with their revolutionary micro credit programs and The Energy and Resource Institute (TERI) with their educational approach bring forward a number of key observations from the implementation of solar projects. Six overall challenges are typically present in renewable energy projects: 1) delivery infrastructure; 2) access to finance; 3) rural electrification policy; 4) guarantees for minimum quality; 5) understanding of customer needs; and 6) scaling up capacity building.39–42
1) Delivery infrastructure defines the method of innovation dispersion into the community: Two direct non exclusive methods have been identified. i) “dealer sales” in which a dealer acquires solar systems and sells them directly to a household or a community. In this case ownership belongs to the household which is now responsible for the maintenance of the system and ii) “energy service company” (ESCO) in which a company establishes a lease function with a customer. In this case the ESCO owns and maintains the system against a recurring fee, liberating the customer from a service obligation. Both Grameen Shakti and TERI, with their Lighting a Billion Lives project (LABL), have had success with local variations of these approaches.43,44
2) Access to finance defines the economic functionality needed locally to accomplish the installation and maintenance of the solar system: There is a clear ability to pay for solar energy and lighting products are available. The market is significant but there are some key issues of the consumer pattern of small purchases of lighting products and the structure of income that does not allow for the initial large investment in solar power. One way to address this has been the introduction of consumer credits that are thus seen as a necessity to create a market based approach. Consumer credits can take the form of dealer-extended credits, credit access through a microfinance institution or credit through local or international development finance institution often depending on the size of the project. A classic example of the microfinance function is the Grameen Bank and the nonprofit Grameen Shakti where the latter provides lending schemes directed towards one investment in a consumable. The Grameen Shakti approach focuses on providing soft credit through instalments making solar systems affordable, providing advocacy and promotion, community involvement and social acceptance (often gender based approaches), effective after sale service and an effort in blending technology with market forces.45,46 This translates to the operational elements of no direct subsidies, innovative use of micro-credits to reduce cost and establishing economy of scale. Combined with a vast rural network with 300 unit offices all over Bangladesh that provide trained staff, motivation and community involvement, local technician training, linking technology with income generation and local manufacturing of solar system accessories—this must be viewed as a success and all-in-all represents the essence of empowering through innovation dispersion.47 In this manner the bottom of the pyramid family or community can be empowered through a well balanced and reasonable term loan and access to innovation. A key element in using credit financing for exchange of goods is a focus on risk, thus it is vital to establish functionality and flexibility in financing terms.
3) Rural electrification policy defines the necessity for a government or local policy existence to support local development: The chain of command from government to local community must be established to build understanding and local competences to establish and maintain the solar initiative. This can be done in numerous ways and examples include: regulatory assistance, rural planning, rural policy and industrial participation.
4) Guarantees for minimum quality: Defines the significant effort in ensuring the quality of the materials and service. Local competence building in sales, system adaptation, installation, technology and service are prerequisite together with quality of installed equipment. A typical reason for project failure is due to the lack of knowledge. Poor dimensioning of installations may result in overloading. Low quality installations associated with no education/training of the end user in maintenance and so forth leads to failure and disruption of the solar initiative.
5) Understanding of customer needs defines the necessity to learn what the customers are in need of: The system must match the economic service potential and consumption.
6) Scaling up and capacity building: The customer or village in fact becomes its own utility and with utility comes the need of service and maintenance. But few if any of the customers have previous experience with solar cells. That is why the ESCO idea brings forward good functionality if the locality can handle the ESCO duties and maintain not only installed systems, but also their own competencies.
A survey of solar projects in Nepal has mapped the development of solar projects since the first instalment of 3 solar systems in 1989 to the proposed 450000 solar systems of variable size to be installed over a 5 year period beginning in 2008.48 The Nepalese solution suggests establishing sustainable and replicable business models supported by regulatory and policy strategies that, through management of the above 6 key issues, fulfil the potential of solar energy as a tool for development. To do so, a backdrop of support from government, NGO's, local community members, private sector and donors have shown to promote solar projects.49,50
The Risø DTU Lighting Africa OPV lamp, a product prototype, operates below the radar compared to existing solar projects, which primarily are focused on SHS. A project like the TERI LABL seeks to establish, among other solutions, solar lanterns for the lowest income segment. This is where the first market based application of OPV in developing countries may be justifiable.
In this sense, organic PV is not competitive in any business model yet, due to low the performance/cost ratio caused by the low power conversion efficiency, short lifetime and high cost. Cost projections, however, point to significant improvements in performance/cost ratio and within a reasonable future horizon, OPV will reach a market potential. The Risø DTU Lighting Africa demonstration must be perceived as an early front runner for cheap solar lighting in developing countries.

3.2 Lamp design and manufacture
The lamp prototype presented here is a multilayer structure. The materials consumed in each layer are detailed in Table 2 along with the time spent in applying them and the associated cost of materials/man power. The choice of having one multilayer structure and using the full available area for both solar cell and circuitry was made in order for the system to exhibit some redundancy in the available power such that the system would perform well even when not used correctly (e.g. by charging upside down) or during seasons with no direct sunlight. It should be stressed that the figures in Table 2 represent the cost at the scale of this experiment where a total of 196 lamps were prepared. The technical yield of solar cells and lamps is not taken into consideration due to the small scale of the experiment. The design using a multilayer structure was found to be problematic on the scale of this experiment as many of the technically functional solar cell modules had to be discarded due to misalignment of the subsequently printed circuit. Based on the relatively high cost of the solar cell with respect to the overall cost of the lamp it would seem to be most rational to handle the solar cell as a discrete component and insert it into a lamp circuit after manufacture. Only in cases where the solar cell has a significantly lower cost than the overall cost would it be advisable to use the solar cell as a substrate for printing the circuitry. While it must be assumed that printing directly on the solar cell entails extra handling, we did not observe any destruction or failure induction of the solar cell modules in spite of this, which comprised:
- One printing step (circuitry) including drying
- Mounting of discrete components and drying of conducting epoxy in an oven
- Mounting of vias and contacts.
Table 2 Lamp multilayer structure, material type, consumption and cost. The cost for man power is based on a flat rate of 80 € h−1. The investment in man power and cost is given per lamp for the basic lamp with 1 battery, two white light LEDs and a single blocking diode (type 3). Costs are quoted as the actual costs on the scale of this experiment. The first layer is the front of the lamp with components on the backside.




Layer
Material
Amount
Cost
Time/cost (s/€)
Total cost (€)





a Units: cm2
b Units: g





1
Barrier
686a
0.514
0.642/0.0143
0.5283


2
Adhesive
686a
0.238
0.642/0.0143
0.2523


3
PET
686a
—
—
—


4
ITO
416a
2.998
9.0/0.2
3.198


5
ZnO
468a
0.868
9.64/0.214
1.082


6
P3HT:PCBM
468a
1.148
8.43/0.187
1.335


7
PEDOT
468a
1.574
45/1
2.574


8
Silver
1.26b
0.655
4.5/0.1
0.755


9
PET overlamination
686a
0.376
0.642/0.0143
0.3903


10
Adhesive
686a
0.238
0.642/0.0143
0.2523


11
Barrier
686a
0.514
0.642/0.0143
0.5283


12
Printed circuit
0.55b
0.286
4.5/0.1
0.386


13
Battery
1
0.8
45/1
1.8


White LEDs
2
0.245
90/2
2.245


Blocking diode
1
0.033
45/1
1.033


Conducting glue
0.013b
0.053
—
0.053


14
Back protection
686a
0.376
0.642/0.0143
0.3903


Contacts/vias
4
0.106
32/0.711
0.817


Total
11.02
296.9/6.598
17.62




Provided that the mounting of the solar cell as a discrete component could be automated this should not increase the overall cost significantly. The mounting of the discrete components was in this experiment carried out in a semiautomatic fashion (automatic glue dispensing and manual placement of components) which necessarily slows down the manufacturing speed. When examining Table 2 it is clear that there are two steps that account for most of the processing time. For the manufacture of the solar cell modules the application of the thick PEDOT:PSS layer accounts for half of the total processing cost of the solar cell module. This is one of the distinct weaknesses of ProcessOne and is linked to the drying conditions and drying time. With the machinery employed in this experiment (1 m drying length) this limitation cannot be overcome. A longer oven would solve this (e.g. an oven length of 10 m would bring the processing time for application of the PEDOT:PSS layer down by a factor of 10).
Also the cost of the ZnO layer is likely to be significantly reduced provided that it is possible to fully eliminate the use of the costly solvent WS-1.51 In terms of lamp assembly, the manual placement of components accounts for about a third of the total cost of the lamp. With fully automated placement of components it is anticipated that this could be brought down by a factor of 10. Without the manual placement of components, the materials cost accounts for more than 80% of the lamp, meaning that further cost reductions should most rationally be sought through elimination or limitation of the usage of expensive materials. For the solar cell on its own, ITO and PEDOT:PSS are the most expensive ingredients. A further cost reduction could be sought by processing the solar cell directly on the barrier material thus avoiding one adhesive layer and two lamination cycles. In addition, one could limit the amount of solar cell such that it matches the lighting conditions better. In the case of the lamp presented in Table 2 with one 105 mAh battery, the typical charging time under full sun is less than two hours (Table 3) and one could thus employ significantly less solar cell area and still achieve full charging provided that full sun light applies. The total manufacturing time for the solar cell is around 80 s, with the PEDOT:PSS layer accounting for more than half of the processing time. The lamination processes were by far the fastest with the printing and coating of the layers accounting for the majority of the processing time. Upscaling to higher coating and printing speeds can easily be anticipated provided that the drying length is increased accordingly. The limitation would, in this instance, be the flat bed screen printing that was employed for patterning the ITO layer and for printing the silver electrode. The flat bed screen printing was, in these experiments, run at 800 prints h−1. With flat bed screen printing the speed cannot be increased much beyond this and the only way to increase throughput would be by increasing the web width and the stroke length. Alternatively, a rotary screen printer could be employed which would enable much higher processing speeds compatible with slot-die coating. The total manufacturing time for the basic lamp outlined in Table 2 was 296.9 s (∼5 min).
Table 3 Technical data for the different lamps prepared in this study. The data reflect laboratory observations and do not represent field testing results. The illumination conditions were 1000 W m−2, AM1.5G, 45 °C




Type
Weight/g
Batteries (LEDs)
Capacity/mAh
Operating time/ha
Charging time front/back/h
Charging cycles
On/off cycles





a it was pointed out that none of the lamps provided useful reading light for more than 1 h during the field test.





1
50.0
1 (2)
105
> 1
1.7/9.5
> 30
> 500


2
52.7
2 (2)
210
> 2
3.3/19
> 30
> 500


3
53.6
1 (2)
200
> 2
3.1/18
> 30
> 500


4
60.0
2 (4)
400
> 2
6.3/36
> 30
> 500




3.3 Cost analysis of a PV lamp in the context of Lighting Africa
Burning of kerosene for lighting purposes is a daily activity in large parts of the developing world. The market for kerosene is very large by any standard, but is based on small scale sales, leaving little room for high cost products. The World Bank estimates that 27 billion € are spent annually on a global scale for lighting purposes, while Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) also highlight that the annual 77 billion litres of fuel for lighting purposes result in emission of 190 million tons of CO2, increased fire hazard and severe local air pollution causing health effects.8,15 This illustrates the necessity for introduction of a novel technology that can provide light at a reasonable cost. By looking at the fuel consumption for lighting purposes one can estimate the end user’s economic capability for investment in products for lighting purposes. Both GTZ and the World Bank estimate the average annual cost of kerosene for lighting for a typical household to be 28–56 € per year with significant regional variation. In theory, this leaves 28–56 € to invest in a PV lighting solution with a one year lifetime. However, the potential consumers are not able to operate on a 1 year timescale in a financial context.15,17 To achieve a large degree of penetration it is necessary to reduce the cost of the lamp solution such that it matches the weekly or biweekly spending for a typical household. The cost thus has to reach below 7 € and preferably as low as 3 €. It is also possible that microfinancing schemes could help to overcome the financial barrier.

3.3.1 Current PV solutions. 
During the last 10 years the market has seen a significant development in PV products capable of providing light through (mainly) compact fluorescent lights powered by a solar charged battery. GTZ recently provided a qualitative analysis of a variation of solar lanterns and identified numerous challenges for the currently available product portfolio. The GTZ findings were based on an initial screening of 12 solar lanterns and an in depth test of the 7 best candidates. The two overall GTZ test categories “technical” and “price to performance” indicate several quality problems with the lamps in the cheap range, but also a very high cost of high quality lamps. The cost of the investigated solar lanterns ranged from 25–350 € with a significant correlation between price and quality. The Indian Aishwarya NEST-6543 solar lantern at 36 € was chosen as the most competitive product based on the overall score from the two categories.15 GTZ also indicated that the low quality (at a too high cost) of the currently available solutions could inhibit the penetration and spread of better future products as trust among consumers has been lost with the spread of low cost low quality products. This is confirmed by the solar lantern test conducted by the Lighting Africa project where as many as 188 products were identified. Of these, 70% were of Chinese or Indian origin. Common to them was that they were in the lower half of the cost range.52 The high cost high quality PV lighting solution is too significant a barrier for large scale deployment and penetration. One way to address this challenge has been proposed through application of micro finance schemes to accommodate access to PV lighting for rural dwellers.53,54 Another way would be through attempts to develop generically different PV lighting solutions with inherently lower cost such as the integrated polymer PV solution that we suggest here.


3.3.2 The polymer PV lamp solution. 
When looking at Table 2 it is evident that the prototype presented here is quite far from the mark in terms of manufacturing cost on the scale employed. The total cost of the lamp as prepared here is 17.9 € with the solar cell accounting for about half of the total cost. The solar cell module cost is 9.41 € in terms of materials and total at 11.28 € when including the time consumption. When considering the scale employed here and the possibilities for further cost reduction outlined above, it is likely that a cost well below 7 € can be reached through upscaling with manufacturing equipment with a longer drying path, reduction of the amount of solar cell employed by a factor of three and automation of the positioning of components, vias and contacts. It is estimated that the mounting of discrete components could be reduced by a factor of 10 and the application of the PEDOT:PSS layer would be possible at speeds similar to the other layers. With these three changes, the total cost of the lamp would be around 7.1 € which shows that a very low cost solution is within reach on a very low manufacturing scale. It is reasonable to assume that the high volume cost would be significantly below the figures reported here and we conclude that a solution costing less than 3 € should be possible. The polymer solar cell as a power source for a lamp has not been tried before in a public setting and it is clear that the polymer solar cell at this point in time is not a substitute for crystalline or thin film silicon solar cells as a power source for solar lanterns since these technologies are much more powerful and provide much more light than the light from the polymer solar lamp. We view the polymer solar lamp presented here as an initial demonstration of the technology applied as power source for a lamp. The polymer solar lamp approach is significantly different from all of the existing solar lanterns to qualify as a novel and generic approach towards very low cost products. The polymer solar lamp is lightweight (50 g), has a very flat outline (< 1 mm), is flexible, easy to transport and intuitive to use. It provides the user with a solar lamp where the battery and LEDs have been integrated on the solar cell. From a market point of view the low cost solar lamp can become very interesting if scaled production can be established. Even with the compromises and shortcomings of the polymer PV lamp as compared to the known solutions, the significantly lower cost leaves plenty of room to justify these sacrifices.

3.4 Lamp performance
Cost analysis with the aim of cost reduction does not on its own grant success in the application of polymer PV in a demonstration but should be viewed as a prerequisite for success. It is clear that the polymer PV technology has the potential to reach the goals of a very low cost (even on a relatively small scale). The stability and robustness of the technology in the application, however, also has to meet the expectations of the consumer and even though a low cost solution does leave a larger room for understanding with the consumer in the case of failure, it is important that the application is as reliable and robust as possible while being intuitive to use and resilient towards situations it was not intended for. In terms of performance in the laboratory, the polymer PV lamp performed very well with much faster charging than required. The use of more than one LED ensured that the lamp will work even in the event that one of the LEDs fail. The very low leakage current of the blocking diode limits battery discharge upon storage. In terms of the design, it is very evident if the lamp is in the illuminating state or the charging state as the folding of the device when switching on the lamp is quite distinct from the flat outline in the charging state. It is possible to successfully charge the lamp even if the front side is facing downwards during charging (albeit somewhat more slowly, Table 3). From these points of view the lamp design and solution was viewed as fulfilling upon leaving the laboratory in terms of design, performance and cost.

3.4.1 Stability of the solar cell versus the operational stability of the lamp. 
The stability of the solar cell when stored is very good and is expected to last many years if kept under indoor conditions in the dark (25 ± 5 °C, 40 ± 10% rh). During illumination it is anticipated that the solar cell will successfully charge the battery and fulfil the task of sufficiently charging the battery and provide reading light for about 1 year. In Fig. 8 the short circuit current for a typical device is shown under accelerated conditions. Since the lamp will acquire temperatures in the range of 50–70 °C when placed on a horizontal surface in the sun, the lifetime of the device is expected to have at least the lifetime performance as defined by the curve in Fig. 8. From April to November, the daily hours of sunlight in Zambia is between 8 and 10 h. This means that the photochemical stability of the solar cell should enable operation for about one year provided that it is used correctly (i.e. for a given battery/solar cell combination it should only be left to charge for the required amount of time etc.).
 Fig. 8  Charging current as a function of time under accelerated conditions comprising continuous illumination under simulated sunlight (AM1.5G, 1000 W m−2, 80 ± 5 °C, 45 ± 5% relative humidity). 
It should be emphasized that there are many possible failure mechanisms for the lamp prepared here and the mechanical failure mechanisms were dominant during the field test and therefore these would have to be improved significantly before the photochemical stability of the polymer becomes a problem.


3.4.2 The quality of light. 
Since no discharging circuit was included, the battery simply discharges through the LEDs when switching the lamp on. When the battery is fully charged, this implies that the intensity of the emitted light is quite strong while it drops relatively quickly in intensity. In Fig. 9 the light provided by the lamp at the reading surface is shown as a function of time. The light was measured using a silicon photodiode. On the plot, the light levels as perceived by a standard user is indicating the region where reading is comfortable, where navigation is comfortable and where the light is visible. It is clear that the discharge is fast and the light quickly becomes dim as expected with no electronic control of the current passing through the LED. The reason for not including a discharge control circuit was to keep the cost down. One of the simplest circuits that provides some control of the current is to use a resistor in conjunction with a bipolar transistor or a JFET. This would require the mounting of two discrete components and we estimate that the additional cost would be 3–3.5 €. Since it is always possible to make a more expensive and better performing product, it must be remembered that this almost always results in an increased cost. The aim here was to develop a technical solution that met the objectives while keeping the cost as low as possible.
 Fig. 9  The intensity of the light as a function of time when switching on a fully charged lamp of type 3 (2 white LEDs and 200 mAh battery). The intensity was measured using a silicon photodiode (Hamamatsu) and the quality of light is defined as reading light level, navigational level and visibility level. 

3.5 Use of the lamp in the field
The most important criteria for success of an application is when it is in use and therefore field testing was undertaken in the setting for which the lamp application was intended. This naturally includes a lot of considerations of interaction between humans and the technology at hand. In the case of the polymer PV lamp the recipient was not a priori skilled in the art of polymer PV and lamps and perhaps not knowledgeable of how electricity, nanotechnology or polymer materials are most rationally constituted, used and disposed. As outlined above, we attempted to encompass this in the design with the aim that any human should be able to use the lamp regardless of educational background and without instruction. One of the aims was to be able to provide a solution that does not require separate instructions or packaging to avoid the environmental impact and cost issues associated with packaging a product for delivery. Ideally, it should be a self contained ready to use application. The possibility for printing a pictographic user guide on the back side of the solar cell was contemplated and the requirements to this possible pictographic user guide were also sought through the field test.
 

3.5.1  Intuitive understanding of the product among the children.
          The intuitive understanding of the polymer PV lamp was tested to understand the need and form of a user guide for the lamp—describing purpose and charging. Several questions were answered. Firstly, would the school children understand the purpose of the lamp and know how to apply it just by handling it, with no instructions given?
To test this, the school children were gathered at a table and one solar lamp was handed out to each of them while observing their reaction. Immediately, the function of the device was understood and within 30 s all lamps were turned on by buttoning the contacts as anticipated. However, the topology of the lamp is such that it can be folded in two ways (either with the LEDs on the inside or with the LEDs on the outside). This is seen clearly in Fig. 10 where a group of school children are photographed immediately after being confronted with the lamp. This point has to be addressed in the event of a future design where the topology of the lamp and its closure to the illuminating state must be possible in only one manner. This can possibly be achieved by placing the button contacts more towards the centre of the lamp such that folding is only possible in one manner.
 Fig. 10  Picture of the initial test of intuitive application of the solar lamp among school children at the Chulumenda Village (left). Placement of the lamp with use of the ring for fixation as intended while placing the lamp with the battery facing up which was not the intention (right). 
The same activity was observed with a group of adults who took slightly longer to understand the lamp. After intuitively getting to know the lamp by physical exposure and no instructions, the lamp was introduced and its function explained with respect to charging, storage of energy in the battery and its use as a source of light. The intuitive approach on how to charge the battery on the lamp is also shown in Fig. 10 where it is illustrated that the ring in the corner was applied as intended for fixation. However, the understanding was that the battery should face towards the sun as the battery was the source of power. This was found to be a natural response by someone that has not been introduced to the science of solar cells. Since charging using backside illumination was made possible through the design of the lamp, this must clearly be viewed as an undesirable use of the lamp. Also, one of the responses on how to use the lamp after having been explained that it stores light energy in the battery was an attempt to charge the lamp in front of the camp fire (which destroyed the lamp). There are clearly some challenges with disseminating such a product as the OPV based flexible solar lamp in a developing country and some level of instruction/training is needed. It is likely that it can be done sufficiently by printing pictograms on the back side.

 

3.5.2  Lamp functionality—does the lamp give enough light for any practical use? A key purpose of the field test was to test the lamp functionality in the environment it was intended for. At Risø DTU the lamps showed acceptable usability as a reading lamp when fully charged. But real time testing proved that the light intensity of the LEDs decreased in a nonlinear fashion with high intensity for 10–20 min and then a long period of low light intensity for several hours. The children testing the lamps stated that 1–2 h of quality light was better than 4–5 h of bad light. In addition, they would like the light to be more focused or concentrated to create better directional use of the light instead of the quite diffuse light distribution from the lamp. The constancy was not addressed in the lamp demonstrated here to simplify the circuit as much as possible. It is, of course, possible to procure a very fulfilling constant current generator that can provide a constant light but is difficult to find a low cost solution. With respect to the focusing of concentration of the light, it might be possible to employ a suitable reflector with a diffuser such that the little light available is not lost while giving more comfort during use (e.g. when reading or eating).
 

3.5.3  Does the choice of contacting prove durable for prolonged use? Only some of the lamps were recovered after the experiment while most were naturally lost in the process of the test since they were handed out freely. During the three weeks that the field test endured, 40% of the lamps were reported to fail during operation by the users. No record of the particular use of the individual lamps was made aside from short notes written on the adhesive label for each lamp. A total of 14 lamps were recovered and 10 of those still worked. One of those was tested for endurance in contacting and it was possible to make 453 properly controlled on/off contacting cycles before intermittent contact failure was observed. This is well within the specified durability of one year provided that the lamp is only subjected to one on/off switching cycle per day. A general observation was that the school children subjected the lamps to larger mechanical stress than needed when handling the lamps. Particularly, when switching the lamp off, the contacts were pulled apart rather than gently separated.
 

3.5.4  Is the design user friendly? The design was in many ways inspired by the flexibility of the polymer solar cell. Flexibility is very useful when producing polymer solar cells and flexible electronics, but when applied in a product, the repetitive flexing of the cell was found to be a significant source of malfunction. In the case of the lamp, 7% of them malfunctioned due to excessive bending whereby delamination is observed. The idea of the flexible cell being the structure of the lamp is intriguing. However, the self supporting half dome created when the cell is flexed and contacted needs a flat surface to stand on. This was not available at the homes of any of the school children, resulting in the lamp constantly falling over. At the same time, the position of the ring with the dual purpose of fixing and hanging did not fulfil the criteria for hanging as it was not possible to place the ring at the centre. As a result of this imbalance, the lamp hung in a skewed fashion making the direction of the light difficult to control. This point clearly needs to be addressed in any future version of the lamp. When it comes to transport and shipping, the design is ideal: it is (almost) paper thin and can fit in among books or folders and can easily be used for travelling. The choice of contacting was initially seen as an intuitive and user friendly on/off function, but also houses the possibility to connect many lamps in series. The lamps will all switch on as long as the circle is closed and should enable many people to gather and with each participant contributing one lamp, illumination of large rooms or market places should be possible. The only danger is that the potential across the contacts when switching the lamp on is in principle as high as the battery voltage and high voltages could build up if many lamps are connected in series. Interestingly, the serial connection of all the lamps was intuitively realised by the school children in just a few minutes (without instruction) as shown Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  The serial connection of all the lamps within a group was observed within a few minutes (without instruction). 

3.6 Field trial findings
The Zambia test proved that the concept of a polymer solar cell powered lamp is a viable solution in terms of potential low cost, simple design, functionality and ease of use. There are, however, several shortcomings in terms of constancy of light during use and durability. Low cost solutions to these challenges are likely to be found through simple circuitry and careful design of the lamp such that the solar cell is subject to as little deformation as possible during use. In the present form, the contacts extend from the corners close to the solar cell. It is likely that a design employing a smaller solar cell as a discrete element will enable placement of the solar cell away from the areas where excessive bending takes place. Other less mechanically demanding contacting solutions may also be a possibility. One particularly reassuring aspect of the trial was that the polymer solar cells sustained being tested in a real outdoor setting in an application that relies on both exposure to natural sunlight and to the mechanical flexing/bending of the device. All of the returned solar cells were subject to delamination at the corners where contacting was made and this is clearly one of the most important problems to address. This naturally leads to degradation in the performance of the device due to loss of function in the delaminated area. It was, however, reassuring that the solar cell maintained its function when tested. The lamp failures were, as stated above, mostly due to catastrophic loss of electrical connection between the button contact and the printed silver. It is likely that this can be solved by creating the contact before lamination to a part of the silver. The contact to between the buttons and the printed silver was made when piercing the contact through the laminate. The printed silver circuit was encapsulated prior to this to avoid oxidation of the silver. Since the silver layer is only about 6–10 microns thick and the contact is made by piercing the 5 metal studs of the button contact through the laminate at a direction normal to the surface of the printed silver, the area of contact is limited to around 5 mm by 6–10 microns. Upon mechanical flexing and bending of the button, the material deforms and contact is lost. It was also found that a printed pictographic description of how the lamp is to be operated would be helpful. In Zambia, which has an elevation (over sea level) of more than 1 kilometre, the use of camp fires is quite widespread. Thus, for deployment in a region like Zambia, a pictogram showing that the cell should not be charged in front of the camp fire would be helpful. It is likely that such a pictogram would not be needed in other regions where the use of campfires is not widespread.
All the testing of the lamps and devices had been carried out prior to the field test and no equipment for testing could be brought to the testing site. The results from the field test thus relied fully on qualitative observations made by the users. Future large scale tests should possibly include some degree of testing (IV measurements) in the actual field test. The poor access to electricity is, however, a limiting factor. The field testing is an important instrument to test any new development but the field testing of products intended for developing countries are particularly challenging since the experimenter is limited in access to the advanced technology on which the device under test relies during the field test itself.
3.7 Sustainability issues and how the user should dispose of the lamp
It is obvious that the lamp is not suited for disposal in the environment. The amount of toxic elements in the lamp is limited since lithium-ion batteries are used. There is, however, silver from the electrode employed in the solar cell. The environmental issues with this kind of solar cell has been discussed earlier where an attempt to make biodegradable polymer solar cells was reported.55 The largest part of the solar cell is the carrier substrate and barrier material and this is mainly polyethyleneterphthalate (PET) in the current lamp. If it was possible to use biodegradable polymers for the substrate, such as polylactic acid as described previously,55 the effect of the unintended disposal in nature would be limited to the active materials of the solar cell and the discrete components. The button contacts are nickel free steel based contacts and pose little danger to the environment. It should be emphasized that the disposal in the environment of a product such as the solar lamp described here should never be advised or sought but the consequences in case it happens should be minimized through careful design of the lamp and the careful choice of environmentally friendly and, as much as possible, sustainable materials. The best protocol for avoiding unintended disposal would be to introduce some vendor policy whereby a user gets a new lamp at a significantly reduced cost when turning in the old one. Such a scheme naturally adds cost to the product while it efficiently addresses the sustainability issue. It also provides a means for ensuring that the returned number of lamps remains high by adjustment of the exchange rate between old and new lamps.
4. Future directions and suggestions for improvement
Design coupled with experience from field tests is likely to be the most powerful tool for the further development of a durable and functional design that would be needed for market entry. From the field tests and general observations made during development of the prototype presented here, it is possible to highlight several points that would greatly improve the lamp provided that efficient and convincing solutions could be found.
1) User instructions—problems arise when the battery has to be recharged and instructions must be developed that provide in enough detail a clear method of application, e.g. it cannot be charged by a campfire (as observed during the field test), it should be charged in sunlight for hours and the solar cell should face the sun during charging).
2) The position of the ring—if the user decides that the ring is in the wrong place, it could lead to destruction of the lamp if the user decided to make a new more suitable hole for hanging the lamp (this was observed during the field test).
3) The flexibility—an overall design with flexibility as a central aspect should be revised as the product durability is compromised by the repetitive bending and flexing when turning the lamp on/off.
4) Constancy of illumination—the light must shine with constant intensity regardless of use (e.g. reading or navigation) thus amplifying the possible applications of the lamp. A simple constant current generator should be devised.
5) Unique switching—a topology that allows for only one way of switching the lamp on/off should be developed.
6) Light quality—a simple scheme for directionality of the light should be developed while achieving an even diffuse light in the area that is illuminated.
The best solution was the lamp of type 3 (Table 3) which was found to offer the best performance in terms of ease of manufacture, charging time and cost. With the requirement for e.g. 1 h of reading light, lamps of type 3 are fully charged after a little over 3 h, which means that it will work all year in a region like Zambia with 5 h of average sunlight in winter and 8 to 10 h during summer. This naturally assumes that the user charges the lamp correctly in more or less direct sunlight (e.g. on a flat surface in Africa). It is clear that a lamp of type 4 (Table 3) will not be useful during winter time with a requirement for 6.3 h of charging and while it is likely to operate well during summertime, it is questionable whether the additional light it provides is balanced by the increase in cost and poorer charging performance with the solar cells at hand. With higher performing solar cells, lamps of this type might become justifiable.
Provided that the next version of the lamp efficiently encompasses all the points above at a lower cost, it is likely that further field trials are needed before a final competitive lamp can be prepared. The most important lesson learned is that unintended use always leads to loss of some fraction of the lamps and it is likely that as much as half of the challenge is to plan the deployment and dissemination of the lamps to reduce the loss in use. This planning will need to include considerations of cultural behaviour and a simple way of modifying the lamp according to the cultural requirements for the region of deployment.
5. Conclusions
Polymer solar cells were manufactured and integrated into a lamp design comprising solar cell, white light LEDs, battery, blocking diode, vias and contacts. The lamp was fully functional at the laboratory scale and demonstrated the potential for a low cost solution with a flat outline and light weight. In order to further test the application of polymer solar cells in practical use, field tests were conducted in Zambia (Africa) and documented. The results showed that the lamp was functional and that it is possible to meet small scale rural lighting requirements with a polymer solar cell based LED lamp while some modifications and adjustments are desirable for improved functionality. In addition, a detailed cost analysis of the actual cost of the experiment was made. This showed that the cost of the solar cell still accounts for the majority of the total cost for the lamp and some possible routes for cost reductions were identified. Finally, the integrated design where the solar cell served as substrate for the flexible electronic (printed) circuitry was found not to be viable as long as the cost of the polymer solar cell constitutes a significant part of the total cost for the lamp.
6. Acknowledgements
This project was conducted within the framework of the Innovation Laboratory for Polymer Solar Cells at the Program for Solar Energy at Risø DTU – National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy. The project was partly financed by the Zealand Region, the Gap-funding secretariat at Risø DTU and supported by the Danish Strategic Research Council (2104-07-0022), the PV ERA-NET transnational POLYMOL project PolyStaR and by EUDP (j. nr. 64009-0050). Students at Copenhagen Business School conducted field testing of the solar lamp. Designers Faktor 3 ApS and Loop.ph LLC together with Børnefonden all provided valuable input to the form and function of the lamp, but also in developing intuitive instructions of use and marketing material.
References

  (a) S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef ; 
  (b) E. Bundgaard and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 954–985 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef ; 
  (d) F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 347–363 RSC ; 
  (f) G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442–5451 RSC ; 
  (b) F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1636–1641 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) F. C. Krebs, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 761–768 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, O. Hagemann, J. Alstrup, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, K. Larsen and J. Kristensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 422–441 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan, B. Gholamkhass, S. Holdcroft, C. Schlenker, M. E. Thompson, B. C. Thompson, D. Olson, D. S. Ginley, S. E. Shaheen, H. N. Alshareef, J. W. Murphy, W. J. Youngblood, N. C. Heston, J. Reynolds, S. Jia, D. Laird, S. M. Tuladhar, J. G. A. Dane, P. Atienzar, J. Nelson, J. M. Kroon, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen, K. Tvingstedt, F. Zhang, M. Andersson, O. Inganäs, M. Lira-Cantu, R. de Bettignies, S. Guillerez, T. Aernouts, D. Cheyns, L. Lutsen, B. Zimmermann, U. Würfel, M. Niggemann, H. -F. Schleiermacher, P. Liska, M. Grätzel, P. Lianos, E. A. Katz, W. Lohwasser and B. Jannon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1968–1977,  DOI:10.1016/j.solmat.2009.07.015 .
C. Powell, T. Bender and Y. Lawryshyn, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 1977–1984 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kalowekamo and E. Baker, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 1224–1231 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.lightingafrica.org/
        .

Ethiopia Qualitative Off-Grid Lighting Market Assessment, International Finance Corporation – The World Bank,  October 2008, p. 3 Search PubMed .

Lighting Africa Market Assessment Results Quantitative Assessment, International Finance Corporation – The World Bank, Ethiopia,  2008 Search PubMed .

Ghana Qualitative Off-Grid Lighting Market Assessment, International Finance Corporation – The World Bank,  October 2008 Search PubMed .

Lighting Africa Market Assessment Results Quantitative Assessment, International Finance Corporation – The World Bank,  October 2008 Search PubMed.

          Kenya Qualitative Off-Grid Lighting Market Assessment, International Finance Corporation – The World Bank,  October 2008 .

Lighting Africa Market Assessment Results Quantitative Assessment, International Finance Corporation – The World Bank,  October 2008 Search PubMed.

          R. Grüner, S. Lux, K. Reich, T. Schmitz-Gunther, Solar Lanterns Test: Shades of Light, Deutche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH, Eschborn, Germany,  2009 Search PubMed .
The Lumina Project, http://light.lbl.gov/light.html.

          Presentation at Workshop 1 at Risø DTU,  2009, http://www.bornefonden.dk/.
G. Dennler, S. Bereznev, D. Fichou, K. Holl, D. Ilic, R. Koeppe, M. Krebs, A. Labouret, C. Lungenschmied, A. Marchenko, D. Meissner, E. Mellikov, J. Méot, A. Meyer, T. Meyer, H. Neugebauer, A. Öpik, N. S. Sariciftci, S. Taillemite and T. Wöhrle, Sol. Energy, 2007, 81, 947–957 CrossRef CAS .
World Energy Outlook, The Energy Access Database, International Energy Agency, http://www.iea.org/weo/database_electricity/electricity_access_database.htm.
M. Gustavsson and A. Ellegaard, Renewable Energy, 2004, 29, 1059–1072 CrossRef .

The Millennium Development Goals Report, United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA),  2008,  Search PubMed.

          Energy for Development, The Potential Role of Renewable Energy in Meeting the Millennium Development Goals, prepared for the REN21 Network by the Worldwatch Institute, Washington, DC,  2005. http://www.ren21.net/pdf/REN21Report%20RETs%20for%20MDGs.pdf and The Energy Challenge for Achieving the Millennium Development Goals at http://esa.un.org/un-energy/pdf/UNENRG%20paper.pdf Search PubMed.

          World Energy Outlook, The Energy Access Database, International Energy Agency. http://www.iea.org/weo/database_electricity/electricity_access_database.htm Search PubMed.
M. Bond, R. J. Fuller and Lu Aye, Energy Policy, 2007, 35, 6535–6545 CrossRef .
M. McEachern and S. Hanson, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 2578–2590 CrossRef .

          GEF-FAO Workshop on Productive Uses of Renewable Energy, Experience, Strategies, and Project Development Summary, FAO Headquarters, Rome, Italy. http://207.190.239.143/GEFFAO_productive_uses_workshop_summary.pdf Search PubMed.
R. Anil Cabraal, Douglas F. Barnes and Sachin Agarwal, Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour., 2005, 30, 117–144 CrossRef .
Mohamed Ali Hamid, PV Based Rural Electrification in Sudan, Private Consultant, Small PV-Applications, Rural electrification and commercial use, Conference Proceedings, OTTI, ISBN 978-3-934681-97-2.
F. van der Vleuten, N. Stam and R. van der Plas, Energy Policy, 2007, 35, 1439–1451 CrossRef .

          G. Loois and B. van Hemert, Stand-Alone Photovoltaic Applications: Lessons Learned, James and James, London,  1999 Search PubMed .

          A. Cabraal, M. Cosgrove Davies and L. Schaeffer, Best Practices for Photovoltaic Household Electrification Programs: Lessons from Experiences in Selected Countries, World Bank Technical Paper No. 324, World Bank, Washington, DC,  1996 Search PubMed .

          G. Foley, Photovoltaic Applications in Rural Areas of the Developing World, World Bank Technical Paper No. 304, World Bank, Washington, DC,  1995 Search PubMed .
A. Cabraal, M. Cosgrove-Davies and L. Schaeffer, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 1998, 6, 297–306 Search PubMed .
K. Kapadia, Renewable Energy World, 1999, 2, 22–33 Search PubMed .
D. Kammen, Environment, 1999, 41(5), 11–15 Search PubMed ; D. Kammen, Environment, 1999, 41(5), 34–41 Search PubMed .
S. Karekezi and W. Kithyoma, Energy Policy, 2002, 30, 1071–1086 CrossRef .
N. Wamukonya, Energy Policy, 2007, 35, 6–14 CrossRef .

          S. Rai, Sustainable dissemination of solar home systems for rural development: experiences in Nepal, Alternative Energy Promotion Centre (AEPC)/Energy Sector Assistance Programme (ESAP), Energy for Sustainable Development l Volume VIII No. 2,  l June 2004 Search PubMed .

Renewable Energy Toolkit (REToolkit), World Bank,  2006 Search PubMed .

The Little Data Book 2006, World Bank, Washington,  2006 Search PubMed .

          E. Martinot and A. Cabraal, World Bank Solar Home Systems PROJECTS: EXPERIENCES and LESSONS LEARNED 1993–2000 World Bank, Rural and Renewable Energy Thematic Group, 1818 H St. NW, Washington, DC 20433 USA, Renewable Energy, proceedings of the World Renewable Energy Congress VI, ed. A. A. M. Sayigh, Elsevier Science, Oxford, UK,  2000, http://www.martinot.info/Martinot_Cabraal_WREC2000.pdf Search PubMed .

          http://www.gshakti.org/keys_to_success.html
        .

          http://labl.teriin.org/
        .

          http://labl.teriin.org/index.php%3Foption%3Dcom_content%26task%3Dview%26id%20%3D%202
        .

          http://www.gshakti.org/
        .

          http://connect.in.com/microfinance/play-video-grameen-shakti-bangladesh-microfinance-solar-home-systems-4b705f9ffb4610f335eff4791aba54a1e29ca1d5.html
        .

          http://www.gshakti.org/keys_to_success.html
        .

          M. Adhikari, R. Munankami and G. R. Pokharel, Solar PV as a viable alternative to remote & rural electricity: a case study of Nepalese experience, Proceedings ISES Solar World Congress 2007. Solar Energy and Human Settlement, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg,  2007 Search PubMed .

          http://www.greenstar.org/pressroom/Solar-NYTimes-901.htm
        .
M. Alam, A. Rahman and M. Eusuf, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2003, 7, 88–96 Search PubMed .

  (a) 
            F. C. Krebs and M. Jørgensen, WO Pat., 2007118850 A1,  2007; 
  (b) M. Jørgensen, O. Hagemann, J. Alstrup and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 413–421 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Cabraal, Solar Lantern Testing to PVGAP PVRS11A – Main results and lessons learnt, Lighting Africa,  2009 Search PubMed .

          http://www.grameenfoundation.org/
        .

  (a) 
            http://www.solarbuzz.com/StatsCountries.htm
          ; 
  (b) 
            http://inspirationcampafrica.dk/
          .
M. Strange, D. Plackett, M. Kaasgaard and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 805–813 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Broader context
The World Bank initiative “Lighting Africa” aims at finding sustainable lighting solutions to millions of people in Africa. Solar cell systems that charge batteries are plenty but common to all is a too high cost compared to the annual budget of the average user in the sub-Saharan part of Africa. The commonly chosen lighting solution is instead the kerosene lamp with all its drawbacks such as carbon dioxide emission, fire- and health-hazards. The polymer solar cell potentially offers a low cost solution to this problem provided that it can be combined with a storage element and a light source. In this work we prepare an ultra-lightweight reading lamp the size of an A4 sheet of paper comprising a polymer solar cell with integrated lithium battery and white light emitting diodes. We demonstrate industrial manufacture, cost analysis and use of the reading lamp in field tests in Zambia during summer 2009. The cost of the lamp when manufactured on a small scale was 17.9 € with a potential for cost reduction to 7 € by usage of a smaller solar cell. This approaches the required cost of < 3 € corresponding to the typical bi-weekly budget available for lighting purposes.


 	Fig. 1  Two pictures of a market place under a paraffin lamp (top left) and the same stand with a LED lamp (top right) highlighting the significant variance in colour reproduction of the displayed products by the two light sources (courtesy of www.lightingafrica.org). A selection of lanterns tested by GTZ, displaying the similarity in shape to the petroleum lantern13 (bottom). Photo by Jürgen Gocke, Fraunhofer ISE (reprinted with permission).	 

 	Fig. 2  The initial prototype—two 8 striped Risø DTU ProcessOne modules, wiring, flat outline Li-ion battery (left). The second prototype—one 16 striped Risø DTU ProcessOne module, conductive copper tape, white light LED and metal click button as a means of creating electrical contact illuminating a work station at the Risø DTU laboratory (right).	 

 	Fig. 3  IV-curve of a typical 16-stripe module under irradiation with simulated sunlight corresponding to 1 sun (AM1.5G, 1000 W m−2, 72 °C).	 

 	Fig. 4  The printed circuit with an indication of where the discrete components were mounted. The solar cell with the printed circuit overlaid is shown as an inset. The various types of lamps described in Table 3 photographed from the back side.	 

 	Fig. 5  An IV-curve of a solar cell module on its own and when integrated into the circuit are shown together where charging is clearly seen as a steep rise in forward current (left). A collection of the lamps in the illuminating state (on-state) are shown during testing before the field study (right).	 

 	Fig. 6  IV-curves with charging onset observed with illumination from the front and the back side (left) and for a completed lamp with circuit, components and label (right). The label and components lead to a significant shadow loss while the devices still allow for charging the battery through (unintended) back side illumination.	 

 	Fig. 7  Electrification rates in the parts of Africa where data is available.20	 

North Africa	2	98.9	99.6	98.2
Sub-Saharan Africa	587	28.5	57.5	11.9

Africa
	
589
	
40.0
	
66.8
	
22.7

China & East Asia	195	90.2	96.2	85.5
South Asia	614	60.2	88.4	48.4

Developing Asia
	
809
	
77.2
	
93.5
	
67.2


Middle East
	
21
	
89.1
	
98.5
	
70.6

Developing countries	1453	72.0	90.0	58.4
Transition economies & OECD	3	99.8	100.0	99.5

World
	
1456
	
78.2
	
93.4
	
63.2



1	Barrier	686a	0.514	0.642/0.0143	0.5283
2	Adhesive	686a	0.238	0.642/0.0143	0.2523
3	PET	686a	—	—	—
4	ITO	416a	2.998	9.0/0.2	3.198
5	ZnO	468a	0.868	9.64/0.214	1.082
6	P3HT:PCBM	468a	1.148	8.43/0.187	1.335
7	PEDOT	468a	1.574	45/1	2.574
8	Silver	1.26b	0.655	4.5/0.1	0.755
9	PET overlamination	686a	0.376	0.642/0.0143	0.3903
10	Adhesive	686a	0.238	0.642/0.0143	0.2523
11	Barrier	686a	0.514	0.642/0.0143	0.5283
12	Printed circuit	0.55b	0.286	4.5/0.1	0.386
13	Battery	1	0.8	45/1	1.8
White LEDs	2	0.245	90/2	2.245
Blocking diode	1	0.033	45/1	1.033
Conducting glue	0.013b	0.053	—	0.053
14	Back protection	686a	0.376	0.642/0.0143	0.3903
Contacts/vias	4	0.106	32/0.711	0.817
Total	11.02	296.9/6.598	17.62


1	50.0	1 (2)	105	> 1	1.7/9.5	> 30	> 500
2	52.7	2 (2)	210	> 2	3.3/19	> 30	> 500
3	53.6	1 (2)	200	> 2	3.1/18	> 30	> 500
4	60.0	2 (4)	400	> 2	6.3/36	> 30	> 500

 	Fig. 8  Charging current as a function of time under accelerated conditions comprising continuous illumination under simulated sunlight (AM1.5G, 1000 W m−2, 80 ± 5 °C, 45 ± 5% relative humidity).	 

 	Fig. 9  The intensity of the light as a function of time when switching on a fully charged lamp of type 3 (2 white LEDs and 200 mAh battery). The intensity was measured using a silicon photodiode (Hamamatsu) and the quality of light is defined as reading light level, navigational level and visibility level.	 

 	Fig. 10  Picture of the initial test of intuitive application of the solar lamp among school children at the Chulumenda Village (left). Placement of the lamp with use of the ring for fixation as intended while placing the lamp with the battery facing up which was not the intention (right).	 

 	Fig. 11  The serial connection of all the lamps within a group was observed within a few minutes (without instruction).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
