Catalytic layer-membrane electrode assembly methods for optimum triple phase boundaries and fuel cell performances  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA07470E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA07470E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 11096-11123Catalytic layer-membrane electrode assembly methods for optimum triple phase boundaries and fuel cell performances

        
          
            Imen 
            Fouzaï
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Solène 
            Gentil
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Victor Costa 
            Bassetto
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wanderson Oliveira 
            Silva
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Raddaoui 
            Maher
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Hubert H. 
            Girault
          
        
      *a
aLaboratoire d'Électrochimie Physique et Analytique, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, EPFL Valais Wallis, Rue de l'industrie 17, Case Postale 440, CH-1951 Sion, Switzerland. E-mail: solene.gentil@epfl.ch; hubert.girault@epfl.ch
bUnité de Recherche: Physique, Mathématique et Informatique, Faculté des Sciences de Gafsa, Cité Sidi Ahmed Zarroug, 2112 Gafsa, Tunisia
cInstitut National des Sciences Appliquées et de Technologie, B.P. No. 67 6, 1080 Tunis Cedex, Tunisia
Received 
      30th July 2020
    , Accepted 9th March 2021First published on 23rd March 2021AbstractProton-exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC), designed mainly for mobility applications, converts chemical energy to electrical energy. The formation of electrodes for PEMFC is a delicate balance of transport media. The diffusion of gas, electrons, and protons, known as a triple phase boundary (TPB), plays a key role in the fuel cell operation and performance. Currently, in order to overcome the performance limitations in a practical PEMFC operation, R&D strategies have been focused on replacing Pt with non-noble based metal catalysts or by decreasing the overall Pt loading to below 0.1 mgPt cm−2 by 2030 (DOE targets), as well as the optimization of the TPB structure. Furthermore, we present here a critical overview from different deposition techniques used in the fabrication of MEA and the effects on the TPB formation. In particular, we have discussed print-light synthesis as a new emerging technology for the catalyst deposition and nanostructure formation onto a broad range of supports.
1. Introduction
Fuel cells (FCs) play a major role in the development of carbon neutral energy strategies.1–4 When dealing with mobility applications, proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are the most widely developed due to their low temperature operation (80–100 °C), high-power density (0.5–2.5 W cm−2), fast starting-up ability, and suitability for discontinuous operation.5
A single cell PEMFC is composed of four major components: (i) current collectors and end plates, equipped with gas inputs and outputs, (ii) graphite or metallic bipolar plates with gas diffusion channels, (iii) gaskets, and (iv) a membrane electrode assembly (MEA). MEAs can be of different geometries. They may, for example, include two catalytic layers (CLs), gas diffusion layers (GDLs), and a proton exchange membrane (PEM). As we shall discuss in this review, the catalytic layer can be either deposited directly on the membrane or on the gas diffusion layer as a function of the deposition techniques used.
A PEMFC converts chemical energy into electrical energy using hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) gases as reactants. The hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) take place at the anode and cathode sides, respectively. HOR and ORR occur at confined spatial sites called “Triple Phase Boundaries” (TPB), where a proton-conducting electrolyte, a gas reactant, and the electrically-connected catalyst nanoparticles are simultaneously in contact, as shown in Fig. 1. H2 is oxidized into protons, thereby generating electrons at the anode side. Protons cross the membrane to the cathode, while electrons are conducted to the external circuit connect to a load (i.e., electric motor). At the cathode, the protons and electrons recombine with O2 to form water. The catalytic layer is often composed of 20–50 nm of carbon conductive nanoparticles (e.g., carbon black Vulcan), providing an electron supply to the 2–10 nm size-electrocatalytic nanoparticles (e.g., Pt) and a spatial homogeneity to the catalytic layer. The membrane thickness ranges between 20 to 200 μm according to its porosity, ionic conductivity, hydrophilic properties (water content and uptake), elongation at break, and tear resistance. Thin PEM are efficient in providing short proton pathways between the anode to the cathode, leading to a decrease in the internal cell resistance as well as the total volume and weight of the fuel cell stack system.6
 Fig. 1  Figure of the membrane electrode assembly composed of several important part: (i) the gas diffusion layer (GDL) at both the anode and cathode sides; (ii) the catalytic layer (CL) composed of carbon support and platinum; (iii) the proton-exchange membrane (PEM). 
Different approaches have been undertaken in recent years to understand the complex interplay at the triple phase boundary to significantly optimize the electrocatalytic performances, as reviewed in the work of Ioroi et al.,7 Xing et al.,8 and Zhang et al.5 Optimal electrochemical activity at the TPB strongly depends on a good supply of gaseous reactants, bearing in mind the low solubility of hydrogen in water, a low electronic resistance to avoid heating effects, and a good ionic conductivity (Fig. 1). A good transport of reactants and products is required to avoid the accumulation of chemicals. This structure is impacted by several parameters: (i) electrolyte and GDL properties; (ii) the type and content of ionomer; (iii) catalyst composition and loading; (iv) catalyst support; and (v) MEA preparation. Hence, a good adhesion of the membrane to the catalyst layer is required for improving the electrochemical properties as it decreases the degradation rate after long operating times (Fig. 2a and b). A uniform distribution of the catalyst particles without agglomeration is ideal for promoting high ionic and electronic conductivities and, consequently, high catalytic activity (Fig. 2c and d).
 Fig. 2  SEM images of (a) a fresh MEA cross-section, (b) an MEA after ageing and long cycling operation,9 and (c) a catalyst layer surface.10 (d) HR-TEM images of carbon-supported Pt catalysts11 Adapted with permission from ref. 6–8. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society, Elsevier (license number 4846430569714) and RSC Publishing. 
The supported catalyst layer plays a critical role in the overall performance of PEMFC, especially for the ORR, which is considered as the rate limiting reaction.12 The electrocatalyst has to fulfill several requirements:8 (i) high electrochemical surface area (ECSA): the bonding interaction between the catalyst and the carbon support will drive the catalytic reaction depending on the adsorption enthalpies, as described by Jaksic et al.;13 (ii) selectivity: formation of by-products should be avoided. For instance, hydrogen peroxide can be formed at the cathode side, leading to membrane degradation; (iii) stability and durability; (iv) good electrical conductivity; (v) good adhesion to the catalyst support: catalyst supports with a high percentage of mesopores are used to achieve a high accessible surface area of the catalyst and the monomeric units of the Nafion ionomers in order to boost the supply of reactants; (vi) resistance to poisoning: carbon monoxide and sulfur based-species are impurities contained in the hydrogen gas, which are known to inhibit the catalytic activities. An overview of catalyst supports for Pt-based catalysts was reported with more detail in the work of Antolini14 and the review of Du et al.15
The membrane conducts the protons and minimizes H2 and O2 crossovers between both the compartments. Thus, its chemical structure must allow high proton conductivity, good chemical and thermal stabilities, strength, flexibility, low gas permeability, low water drags, low cost, and good availability.5 Nafion® (DuPont™), a membrane widely used in PEMFCs, is manufactured from perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA), a type of polymer that shows that CF2 and SO3H groups are responsible for the chemical stability and proton conduction through the membrane, respectively.16 Several reports have been dedicated to the TPB's structure by investigating the effect of the Nafion ionomer content and distribution. While a low ionomer content led to insufficient ionic conductivity, a high ionomer content decreased the gas transport because of the thickness of the film. As a consequence, it is highly important to maintain homogeneous distribution by controlling the ionomer dispersion's solvent.17–23
PEMFC large deployment in fuel cell vehicles (FCEV) is affected by several factors such as high cost, insufficient durability, recyclability concerns, and the challenges of mass production.2,24–26 The use of noble metal-based electrocatalysts, such as platinum, corresponds to 41% of the total price for PEMFCs' material cost, while 8% is attributed to the membrane, 28% to bipolar plates, 6% to gas diffusion layers, and 17% to MEA frame/gaskets and the balance of the stack.7 Platinum-based electrocatalysts7 are the most employed materials for anodes and cathodes in PEMFCs. Pt is a relatively stable metal that can efficiently catalyze both the reactions, in particular, the slow ORR kinetic at the cathode side.5,27 Hence, as a function of the expected performances, the cathode determines the stacks' size and costs. The US Department of Energy (DOE) has set the target for 2030 in its most recent fuel cell technology: (i) less than 40% loss of the initial mass activity under automotive load cycles and (ii) a total platinum group metal (PGM) loading of less than 0.125 mgPt cm−2. The long-term cost target for the PEMFC system set by the DOE is $30 per kW ultimate beyond 2050 with a PGM loading of <0.1 g kW−1.24,28 In Europe, the cost target for PEMFC set by The Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH JU) is 40€ per kW by 2030 with an overall loading of 0.05 g kW−1.29 For the detailed explanations of targets and costs, see the work of Whiston et al.,28 Guerrero Moreno et al.,30 and Pollet et al.24
The degradation of PEMFCs' depends on the durability of the cell components. For instance, membrane degradation can be caused by mechanical, thermal, chemical, or electrochemical sources. GDL degradation is often due to oxidation and decrease in the electronic conductivity and hydrophobicity.31 The degradation of platinum nanoparticles (Pt NPs) is caused by several mechanisms:32 (i) growth via modified Ostwald ripening: dissolved Pt NPs from smaller particles redeposit onto surfaces of larger particles; (ii) coalescence of Pt NPs; (iii) detachment or agglomeration of Pt NPs, causing corrosion of the carbon-based gas diffusion electrode, (iv) dissolution and precipitation in the cationic exchange membrane: Pt2+ ions are reduced and precipitated out in the polymer phase by the chemical reduction by hydrogen. The PEMFC lifetime is also influenced by several operating conditions such as impurities originating from the supply reactants (presence of carbon monoxide), cell temperature, humidity of fuels, subfreezing temperature, and fuel starvation.
In order to make PEMFC cost-competitive, it is important to enhance the cell durability, maintain the activity over the whole PEMFC lifetime, and play on both the catalysts loading and composition. Some examples are briefly summarized below but will not be discussed in detail as they are out of the scope of this review.5 Pt alloys (Pt–Ru, Pt–Co, Pt–Pd, Pt–Co–Cr) were employed to decrease the Pt content inside the CL.8,33 Non-platinum metal group catalysts (Fe–N/C, Co–N/C, …) at the cathode side were intensively studied with the aim of increasing the catalytic kinetic for ORR and completely substitute Pt NP.34,35 Bio-inspired molecular catalyst36 from enzymes' active sites (e.g., hydrogenases37 and copper oxidases38) are interesting alternatives to Pt NPs in bio-inspired H2/air fuel cells.12,39,40 Other studies have focused on the type of the catalyst support,26,41,42 the degradation mechanism of Pt electrocatalyst,32 the membrane electrode assembly manufacturing methods,43,44 and the fabrication techniques of the catalytic layer deposition.45–47 The deposition techniques of the catalytic layer must be carefully selected to maintain the proton, electron, and gas transports and allow the coating of a uniform active layer. In order to reduce the ohmic losses and support the high mechanical stress produced during operation, the catalytic layer should adhere strongly to both the membrane and the gas diffusion layers.
The present work reviews different catalytic layer deposition techniques such as printing, spray, sputtering, and electrodeposition. These deposition techniques are utilized to apply Pt-based electrocatalyst onto the substrates (i.e., directly onto the membrane or onto the GDL). The main goal is to prepare MEAs with a low Pt loading in the catalytic layer in the range from 0.008 to 0.5 mgPt cm−2. The downside of most of these techniques is the necessity of a suitable medium (e.g., inks and pasts) containing the electrocatalyst. This is achieved by dispersing appropriate amounts of the electrocatalyst, conducting additives, and ionomer solutions in a mixture of organic solvent, giving a uniform suspension after vigorous stirring (e.g., ultrasonic bath). Hence, to enhance the electronic and ionic conductivities close to the TPB and maximize Pt utilization, a good selection of catalyst support, solvent, Nafion content, and fabrication processes is required.
Manufacturing and characterization methods will be discussed, highlighting the advantages and disadvantages of each technique to obtain a well-structured TPB. Finally, we aim at giving the latest trends within this large topic in order to give more insights regarding the technology, which could be easily commercialized for mobility applications, giving Pt loading close to FCH JU and DOE targets: <0.1 mgPt cm−2 by 2030.24,29 Previous review articles have presented the deposition methods without much consideration about the TPB organization.48,49 Also, this review discusses a new and recently introduced technique for nanostructured catalyst deposition: Print-Light Synthesis (PLS).
2. MEA preparation towards optimized triple-phase boundaries and fuel cell performances
The crucial steps of MEA fabrication are (i) catalyst deposition, (ii) drying, and (iii) membrane electrode assembly by hot-pressing. As the first step will be illustrated by various techniques in the subsequent sections of the review, it is relevant to understand the two most common MEA architectures, namely, catalyst-coated membrane (CCM – Fig. 3a) and catalyst-coated substrate (CCS – Fig. 3b), in which the catalytic layer is either directly deposited onto the membrane or on the GDL, respectively. The literature is not clear as to which architecture is the most suitable since it depends on the deposition techniques used; some works show that CCM-based MEAs perform better,50–52 while others show good performance for CCS-based MEAs.53,54
 Fig. 3  (a and b) Schematic overview of CCM and CCS deposition methods; SEM images (cross-sectional view) of ten printed layers of Pt/C ink deposited onto the Nafion membrane (c) and carbon paper substrate (d). Adapted from ref. 53. Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Furthermore, the differences between CCM or CCS preparations methods are more important when the catalyst loading is low. As the membrane is a planar surface, a thin catalytic layer can be uniformly deposited without material loss. When the catalyst is deposited with the same loading onto the porous surface of the GDL, penetration of particles and material losses are often observed. The functionalization of the GDL with microporous layers (MPLs) eases the diffusion of the reactants to the catalytic site by reducing contact resistance between CL and the macroporous carbon substrate and forming a flat and uniform layer.55 Also, it has been extensively reported55 that MPL enhances water management in the MEA, resulting in an improvement in the fuel cell performance.
On the one hand, CCS-based MEAs can be fabricated faster by roll-to-roll manufacturing than CCMs due to more the robust mechanical properties of the GDLs and avoidance of membrane swelling and wrinkling during the deposition of CL. On the other hand, CCM-MEA ensures good contact between the catalytic layer and the electrolyte, which greatly decreases the membrane interfacial resistance. However, CCM is a complex manufacturing process with difficulties in achieving uniformity in large-scale productions. The challenge with CCS is that the catalyst layer/membrane interface is usually inferior to that of CCMs, leading to lower performances.
Adding to the substrate on which the catalyst is deposited, the drying step of the CL is a very important process for electrode fabrication as it plays a role in both the porosity and PEMFCs' performances. Recently, Talukdar et al.56 investigated the influence of diverse drying techniques (oven drying, vacuum drying, and freeze drying). It was demonstrated that the freeze-drying technique enhanced the oxygen transport properties throughout the ionomer and reduced significantly the mass transport resistance. It allows more gas reactants to access the reactive interface and improves the porosity along with the tortuosity of the CL microstructure (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  SEM images obtained after the cross-sections of MEAs prepared with different drying techniques. Copyright 2020 Elsevier B.V.56 
Hot-pressing, the last step of MEA fabrication, allows better interaction between the CL, membrane, and electrodes. The operating conditions (pressure, temperature, and time) are strongly dependent on the type of membrane and electrodes used and should be investigated for each type of MEA. Recently, Meyer et al.57 investigated the impact of hot-pressing temperatures of 100 °C, 130 °C, and 170 °C on the electrodes' structure by applying a pressure of 2757 kPa for 3 minutes. It was proved that optimum contact between the CL and Nafion membrane was obtained after hot-pressing at 130 °C. In comparison, the cell hot-pressed at 100 °C creates a non-ideal interfacial bond with poor contact between the catalyst and the membrane, whereas hot pressing at 170 °C leads to membrane delamination, pin-hole formation, and gas crossovers. Table 1 illustrates the microstructural change in the MEA before applying temperature and after applying different temperatures.
Table 1 Summary of the parameters describing the microstructural changes before and after hot-pressing at 100 °C, 130 °C, and 170 °C. Reproduced from ref. 57






Properties before hot-pressing
After hot-pressing at 100 °C
After hot-pressing at 130 °C
After hot-pressing at 170 °C




Nafion 212 thickness (μm)
50.8
44 ± 3
43 ± 6
29 ± 19


Nafion 212 roughness factor (μm2/μm2)
1.02 ± 0.02
1.15
1.33
2.98


MPL/catalyst (MPLC) outer surface roughness factor (μm2/μm2)
1.54
1.26
1.32
1.48


Normalized contact area (μm2/μm2)

A
GDL/MPLC

0.35
0.39
0.83
0.76



A
GDL/Nafion

—
0
2.1 × 10−3
0.4



A
MPLC/Nafion

—
0.59
1.28
1.45


Width of the surface cracks in the MPLC (μm)
14 ± 4
12 ± 3
7 ± 3
13 ± 7




It should be pointed out that many publications do not report the pressure used to assemble the MEA or even the stack. If this parameter is well controlled at the industrial level, it was often overlooked in academic publications, where emphasis is given to the chemical aspects with respect to the physical ones. For example, pressure uniformity is a key parameter for control to ensure the parallel mounting of different components of the stack. This may explain some of the scatter of data in the literature.
3. Pt-based electrocatalyst deposition using printing, spray, sputtering, and electrodeposition techniques
The second section in this review highlights the principal methods for depositing Pt-based catalyst either by CCM or CCS methods. For each technique, the working principle, adjusting the parameters, as well as the pro and cons are presented. The given thicknesses are only approximate as it is difficult to obtain accurate values since it depends on: (i) the catalyst ink formulation and viscosity, (ii) the number of deposited layers, and (iii) the desired catalyst loading. Thus, a thin film is defined for a given thickness below 20 μm. In the second part, a discussion of the effect of various deposition techniques on the formation of TPB and their limits and a comparison of the performance according to the TPB properties are presented, outlining the most promising work to reach the 2030 DOE and FCH JU targets.
3.1 Printing technologies
Printing technologies are increasingly used for the fabrication processes of energy storage and conversion devices. Many printing techniques have been developed and used to fabricate MEA after the early work of Wilson et al.58,59 in 1992 reporting a Pt/C catalyst ink composed of 0.12 mgPt cm−2. In 1998, screen printing was used by Kim et al.60 and Chun et al.61 to deposit the Pt/C inks. For research purposes, inkjet printing remains the most employed technique. Flexography was recently patented by Michelin to fabricate large-scale PEMFC.62

3.1.1 Screen printing by CCM or CCS. 
3.1.1.1 Working principle. 
Screen printing allows for full 2D or 3D patterning of the printed layer. In this process, the ink or paste is pressed over a porous surface (i.e., mask), allowing its transfer on the desired substrate and generating a pattern. Fig. 5 shows the schematic illustration of the main steps involved in the screen-printing process.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the screen-printing technique. 
During deposition, a screen frame is placed a few millimeters above the surface of the substrate. Upon loading the paste onto the screen, a rubber “squeegee” is then swept with a velocity of several centimeters per second across the surface of the screen. At this point, the solution is pushed through the screen to the substrate's surface. As the squeegee then passes over a region, the screen separates from the substrate, leaving behind an homogeneous film after drying.63
All the fabrication parameters must be well-tuned to guarantee reproducible film deposition.2 Yet, other parameters of screen printing that can affect the performance of the deposited layer are the force at which the squeegee is pushed into the screen, the snap-off distance, and the speed of the squeegee. The resolution of the screen-printed films depends on the mesh size and the ink rheology. In addition, the uniformity of the deposited CL is not easily controlled and can vary depending on the manufacturing of the catalytic material.
3.1.1.2 Influence on the triple-phase boundary. 
The activity of the TPB in the screen-printed catalyst layer depends on (i) the type of the substrate and (ii) the viscosity and surface tension of the catalytic solution. Recently, Wang et al.52 evaluated a series of pastes containing different solvents for MEA manufacturing by CCM in order to define the best adhesion between the CL and the Nafion® membrane. A mixture of cyclohexanol and ethylene glycol was selected as the best solvent to avoid the swelling of the Nafion® membrane and mud-cracking in the CL. Viscosity and surface tension adjustments were recommended to obtain efficient gas permeability and ionic conductivity. The repetition of printing steps favored crack formation in the catalytic sub-layers. Thus, applying a single printing step with a controlled surface tension enhances the adhesion between the CL and the membrane, and produces a uniform layer with no cracks.64
3.1.1.3 Applications. 
For fuel cell applications, screen printing is well used by many researchers.52,65–71 In 2011, Hwang et al.71 demonstrated that the coating methods affect the catalytic layer in terms of the morphology and the porosity. The CCM method gave a very uniform pore size of 85 nm, which is efficient for gas transport, compared to CL obtained by spraying technique. In 2015, Wang et al.52 developed a new catalytic paste deposited onto the Nafion® membrane and reach a power density of 702 mW cm−2 with a catalyst loading of 0.5 mgPt cm−2 at both the anode and the cathode.
Screen-printing creates extremely thick printed layers (≥20 μm), which is the reason why it is used for the printing of many kinds of functional inks. For example, it has also been extensively applied to the design of Solid Oxid Fuel Cell (SOFC) components, which are thick electrolyte films composed of yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ).72,73
In addition, screen-printing is suitable for a large variety of substrate, including paper or glass.63 As compared to IJP, it allows the use of a paste with high viscosity, extending its scope of applicability to many functional inks with an extremely high ratio of dry matter, as in the case of slurry. However, this method can be relatively slow, requiring iterations of printing and drying to achieve the desired catalyst loading.


3.1.2 Inkjet-printing by CCM or CCS. 
3.1.2.1 Working principle. 
Inkjet-printing (IJP) is a well-known and digital deposition method used to precisely deposit droplets of inks without contact to form patterns on the substrate (membrane or GDL). This technique is widely used for fabricating a vast range of sensors and electronic circuits mainly due to the recent advances in printable metallic, insulating, semiconducting materials, and mature printing techniques.74 For PEMFCs, catalyst inks are typically composed of Pt/C and proton exchange ionomer (e.g., Nafion®) dispersed in an organic solvent mixture. The ink is pushed through a small hole and is ejected as individual pL to nL size drops from a nozzle orifice. Inkjet printing inks have the limitation were the maximum particle size should not exceed 1/100 of the nozzle diameter (nozzle diameter varies within manufactures and printing technologies).
For droplet generation, two types of IJP technologies have been developed: the continuous (CIJ) and drop-on-demand (DOD) inkjets.75 Developed from the 70's, CIJ was first applied for the printing of industrial packaging and labelling due to its relatively high-operation speed.75 The continuous stream of droplets can be interrupted by deflecting the charged droplets, applying an external electric field and catching it in a collector. In principle, the collected ink could be recycled if the application is not sensitive to traces of impurities, which is not the case in material science and especially for PEMFC applications. Consequently, DOD inkjet-printing has been developed in the 90's and successfully applied to energy storage and conversion devices.76
DOD process printheads (Fig. 6) is based on a pressure pulse generated by thermal, piezoelectric, or electrohydrodynamic actuation, leading to the ejection of a droplet from the liquid filling the nozzle chamber. The released ink volume is compensated by a refill from the ink reservoir. Thermal print heads contain a heated resistor inside the ink chamber, which evaporates the solvent from the ink and generates the pulse pressure. This entire process occurs within a few microseconds. A piezoelectric-based system contains a piezoelectric element that pulsates upon electrical excitation, which forms a pressure wave that forces the ink out of the chamber. For electrohydrodynamic (EHD) inkjet printing, an electrode is located inside the ink chamber while a conductive substrate is used as the counter electrode.75 For each type, three main steps are necessary to obtain the final dried film: (i) droplet ejection, (ii) droplet spreading, and (iii) pattern solidification. Firstly, the print head is moved to the desired position, where droplets are ejected through the nozzle and deposited on the substrate. Secondly, droplet spreading along the substrate's surface formed a thin film of liquid ink (0.01–5 μm thickness per single layer). Thirdly, the solvent evaporates and the ink's solid contents are deposited on the surface.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of DOD inkjet-printing technique. 
To achieve a successful printing pattern, the control of some physicochemical ink properties, mainly viscosity and surface tension, is required. The ink viscosity must be low enough for each nozzle to expel a droplet of ink. The catalyst nanoparticles must be well dispersed into an organic solvent to avoid aggregation. Furthermore, the ink surface tension can be controlled by the solvent surface tension, which has to be lower than the printing substrate surface tension to avoid problems of wetting and adhesion, causing the printing of an inhomogeneous film.64
Thermal inkjet printers are generally cheaper and require less maintenance than a piezoelectric printer because they do not contain moving parts. If the nozzle becomes clogged or broken in the cartridge, it can easily be replaced by the user at relatively low costs. However, the use of thermal print heads is normally limited to aqueous inks due to the nucleation temperature required for droplet ejection. Piezoelectric print heads typically need more expensive maintenance procedures if their piezoelectric crystals become damaged. However, a large range of solvents (water, oils, and organic solvents) and functional materials can be used at room temperature, avoiding the degradation of the active materials.77
3.1.2.2 Influence on the triple-phase boundary. 
Catalyst layers obtained by IJP are uniform and repeatable with a homogeneous distribution of the carbon support, the ionomer, and the catalyst nanoparticles. As the thickness of the CL decreases, discontinuities in the catalytic region statistically decrease, leaving a larger amount of platinum within the TPB available for reaction.45,78–80 Hence, the TPB structure is enhanced by allowing uniform impregnation in between the CL and the substrate with the optimization of the triple phase region's porosity, ionic, and electronic conductivities.45 In 2015, Shukla et al.45 investigated the effect of Nafion loading on the TPB structure and demonstrated one of the lowest mass activities/performance ratio using 0.026 mgPt cm−2 at the both electrodes, reaching a power density of 1237 mW cm−2.
3.1.2.3 Applications. 
In 2007, Taylor et al.80 employed IJP to deposit the catalyst layer onto carbon cloth, giving an ultra-low loading of 0.02 mgPt cm−2 at the anode. Here, this Pt loading provided more than 16000 mW mg−1 Pt with a power density of 320 mW cm−2. In the same year, Towne et al.79 deposited catalysts directly onto a Nafion membrane to reach a loading of 0.2 mgPt cm−2 and a power density of 155 mW cm−2. In 2015, Klingele et al.81 introduced the Direct Membrane Deposition (DMD) technique to fabricate thin ionomer films (8–15 μm) deposited onto the catalyst layer using inkjet printing. A high-power density of 4 W cm−2 was achieved with only 0.5 mgPt cm−2 at both the anode and cathode sides.
In 2019, Bezerra et al.53 investigated the effect of the deposition substrate of inkjet-printed MEAs. Three types were fabricated using CCM-based MEA, CCS-based MEA, and a bilateral sandwich of a CCM and CCS. The catalyst loadings were 0.061 and 0.5 mgPt cm−2 at the anode and the cathode, respectively. The power density achieved with the CCS-based MEA was 1067 mW cm−2, exceeding the value achieved with the CCM-based MEA (579 mW cm−2) and the bilateral sandwiched MEA (792 mW cm−2). The higher performance of the CCS-based MEA was unexpected because other works showed that even after hot-pressing, the CCM performed better. It was explained that the excellent performance of the CCS may be due to a combination of three factors: (i) low resistance at the substrate/catalyst interfaces after hot-pressing, (ii) a higher surface area of the catalyst layer printed on the carbon substrate, and (iii) a higher interfacial area of the catalyst layer printed on the carbon substrate (due to penetration into the MPL).
In the same year, Park et al.82 deposited catalytic layers with low ratios of ionomer to carbon for Pt/C and silica-coated Pt/C to reduce oxygen diffusion resistance. The power density was 480 mW cm−2 with a catalyst loading of 0.2 mgPt cm−2 at the anode and 0.15 mgPt cm−2 at the cathode.
Over the past ten years, many works have been published in this field45,53,63,82–89 thanks to the numerous advantages of this technology that combine high performance, low catalyst loading, and reproducibility in terms of catalytic layer deposition. IJP has been widely adopted in industry as a fabrication technique to deposit thin and uniform films, which can be controlled by the number of printed layers. It provides minimal waste of ink/reactants and hence can be considered as a great technique to manufacture expensive materials. For fuel cell applications, inkjet printing shows uniform distribution of the catalyst ink onto the surface of the GDL or the membrane by reducing the amount of ionomer and controlling Pt loading.57,58


3.1.3 Flexography by CCM or CCS. 
3.1.3.1 Working principle. 
Flexography (or roll-to-roll printing) is one of the most productive traditional printing methods for large volumes. It is a continuous printing process, working as a rotary stamp. As shown in Fig. 7, a “flexo” system is composed of a fountain roller, a doctor blade, an anilox roller, a plate cylinder, a flexo plate, a substrate, an impression cylinder, and an ink tray. The printing ink is lifted with an engraved anilox or steel roll to a patterned printing cylinder made of polymer materials. Thus, the inked pattern is pressed between the printing form and a printing cylinder against the substrate. The ink, whose amount is mainly controlled by the engraved cylinder parameters, is then transferred from the printing plate to the printing substrate. Thus, the engraved roller is used to transfer a uniform thickness of the ink to the flexible printing plate, the size of the engraved cells determining the amount of ink transferred. A doctor blade scrapes the engraved roller surface to ensure that the only ink delivered to the printing plate comes from the engraved cells. Ink transfer is performed by controlling the gaps between the form cylinder and the engraved roller, and the form cylinder and the printing cylinder.
 Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the flexography process. Legends correspond to (1) fountain roller, (2) doctor blade, (3) anilox roller, (4) plate cylinder, (5) flex plate, (6) substrate, (7) impression cylinder, and (8) ink tray. (b) Picture of a FlexiProof device. Adapted from ref. 90. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Flexographic presses can be adapted to various flexible substrates from uncoated to coated papers, carton board, liner board, aluminum foil, and different types of plastic films, including low-density polypropylene (LDPE), polypropylene (PP), bio-oriented polypropylene (BOPP), and polyester (PET). They can also print on non-woven fabrics and different types of laminates. However, this technique cannot be used for solid substrates such as metallic or graphite bipolar plates.
3.1.3.2 Influence on the triple-phase boundary. 
The homogeneity of the printed layer can be affected by the high speed in the roll way. The control of this parameter is recommended to avoid crack formation, which can limit the adhesion of the catalyst layer to the substrate and as a result, limit the ionomer continuity in the catalyst layer, the proton migration, and the electronic conductivity. Also, the choice of the deposition method (CCM or CCS) is critical, as evaluated by Bois et al.90,91 An investigation of the adhesion of the inks to the substrate was presented to understand the effect of flexography on the electrochemical activity of the TPB. For the CCM-based MEA, water based-inks have undesirable effects on the membrane as water wets the membrane surface poorly and causes the membrane to bulge outwards significantly. Thus, the printability was improved by membrane pre-treatment via water immersion for short periods, which maintained the flexible structure of the membrane. Hence, it was proved that the dimensional instability of the Nafion® membrane was the critical parameter limiting the ink transfer.
3.1.3.3 Application. 
Flexography has been used by the French company Michelin in the patent of Blanc et al.62 and in the patent of O'Brien92 to deposit the catalytic layer in PEMFC. The main advantage of this method is its high speed (can reach 20–99 m min−1) and flexibility, low-cost, low-pressure imposed on the substrate, and its high repeatability.


3.1.4 Spray-coating by CCS or CCM. 
Spray deposition has emerged as a promising coating alternative method for the formation of active layers with thin films below 10 μm.93 Pressurized air is used to atomize the liquid flow coming from the syringe into small droplets finally deposited onto the substrate. Various passes can be performed to obtain appropriate loading. The most commonly used are air-assisted spraying and electrospraying. Ultrasonic spraying has become popular since its first application for PEMFC in 2009.93
The basic requirements of the ink are broadly similar in all spraying methods: low surface tension, use of a solvent with high boiling point, and a viscosity below 5 × 10−3 Pa s−1 to produce small droplets in the liquid phase during the flight trajectory.
3.1.4.1 Working principle. 

Table 2 summarizes the main working principle, the control parameters, and the advantages of each spraying technique.
Table 2 Comparison and description of several spraying techniques applied for spray coating fabrication




Spray sources
Air-assisted spraying
Electrospraying
Ultrasonic spraying




Scheme











Working principle
The liquid ink is sprayed by the fast-moving nitrogen gas stream when exiting the liquid flow nozzle, forming a wide distribution of fragment sizes, which are finally deposited onto the substrate and dried
Electrospraying consists of the pulverization of a liquid under the influence of a strong electric field applied between the ejector needle and the substrate. It maintains the formation of a mist of ionized droplets and particles, which deposit very homogeneously
A pinpoint spray shaper is connected to the ultrasonic narrow spray atomizer nozzle and a gas inlet port at the side of the spray shaper forces the catalyst ink droplet into the pinpoint spray pattern


Parameters to control the thickness and uniformity
• Initial angle
• DC voltage
• Ultrasonic spray nozzle height (distance between the membrane and the nozzle)


• Total ink flow rate
• Flow rate
• Spray path


• Transporting gas velocity
• Ejector geometry
• Flow rate of the solution


• Distance from the nozzle to the substrate94
• Solvent composition
• Speed of the nozzle




• Needle-substrate distance
• Frequency of the ultrasound generator






• Air pressure


Advantages
• Easy operation
• The trajectory of the charged droplets is determined by the parameters of the electrostatic field. During the flight from the nozzle to the collector, the charge of the droplets prevents coagulation97
• More precise, more controllable, and tighter drop distribution98


• Low requirement for the solubility of solution and high speed of preparation95,96
• The experimental set-up is inexpensive and simple as it only requires a high voltage power supply and a pump-needle system
• Minimal bounce-back and overspray of the liquid onto the substrate


• Extremely thin layers: 2 to 5 μm


• No clogging


• Reduced amount of expensive materials such as the Pt catalyst.


• Uses small-to-moderate amounts of material (e.g., catalyst and ionomer)


• Can handle high viscosity solutions by adjusting the nitrogen pressure


• Possible automation: reproducibility




3.1.4.2 Influence on the triple-phase boundary. 
Spraying methods maintain the separation of the ink as tiny droplets by applying high energy, which is ideal for the formation of the TPB by exhibiting a porous architecture and homogeneous agglomeration of carbon particles, avoiding cracks.99 Electrospray coating is powerful in reducing the agglomeration of carbon-supported Pt NPs and achieve more uniform pore distributions by simply increasing the spraying voltage, which is beneficial for generating an efficient triple phase interface between the Nafion ionomer and platinum particles.97 For ultrasonic spraying, the spray atomizer vibrates at a high frequency to produce highly repeatable and homogeneous thin films of micron-sized droplets with a tight drop distribution compared to the air spray technique (Fig. 8). Recently, it was proved that the increase in the CL thickness fabricated by ultrasonic spray decreases the porosity and not the pore size distribution. This provides an increase in the mass transport resistance for thicker CLs but not in an increase in the charge transfer resistance for the oxygen reduction reaction.100 Therefore, ultrasonic spray coating is highly suitable to fabricate ultra-low Pt loading MEAs. However, the cost of the ultrasonic spraying system is higher than air-assisted spray and screen-printing systems, which is the main disadvantage of ultrasonic spray coating.
 Fig. 8  Schematic of the deagglomeration of nanoparticles by the ultrasonic spray method compared with the air spray method. Adapted from ref. 98. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
3.1.4.3 Applications. 
Air-assisted spray deposition. 
In 2009, Leimin et al.101 developed a modified CCM method, called catalyst-sprayed membrane under irradiation. A catalyst ink is sprayed directly onto the membrane and an infrared light was used simultaneously for solvent evaporation. They showed that the performance of the MEA prepared with this approach was better than the conventional method. The power density was 650 mW cm−2 with catalyst loadings of 0.1 mgPt cm−2 and 0.2 mgPt cm−2 at both the cathode and the anode side, respectively. In 2016, Peng et al.99 developed a low-cost air-assisted cylindrical liquid jets spraying (ACLJS) system, allowing the uniform deposition of porous Pt NPs and homogeneity in the carbon support agglomeration, which is good for the formation of the TPB. They succeeded in enhancing the performance of the prepared MEA to achieve 1330 mW cm−2 with 0.3 mgPt cm−2 as the catalyst loading at both the electrodes. In 2019, Deschamps et al.102 simulated the topography of the catalyst layers deposited by spray coating for PEMFCs applications. Bayer et al.54 proposed a new MEA design by spraying the catalytic layer first on the electrode and then the Nafion membrane over the top. The power density output of the sprayed electrode-supported MEA (581 mW cm−2) was significantly higher compared to the conventional membrane-supported MEA (435 mW cm−2).
Electrospray deposition. 
Electrospray deposition has been extensively used by Martin et al.47,103,104 and Chaparro et al.105–107 to achieve ultra-low Pt loading (0.01 mgPt cm−2) and optimize the ionomer content in PEMFCs. In 2019, Liu et al.97 investigated the influence of the spraying voltage on the morphology, elemental composition of the catalyst layer, and performances of the PEMFC. They found that increasing the voltage could reduce the agglomeration of the carbon-supported platinum particles by generating a three-phase reaction interface between the Nafion ionomer and the platinum particles. In this way, the utilization of the catalysts can be effectively improved, leading to more uniform pore distribution. A significantly high-power density was obtained (1408 mW cm−2) with 0.3 mgPt cm−2 at the anode and 0.4 mgPt cm−2 at the cathode.
Ultrasonic spray deposition. 
Several groups98,100,108,109 reported the use of ultrasonic spray-coating to fabricate and optimize the performance of PEMFCs. Ultrasonic spray coating technique is replacing air-spray coating in a wide range of industrial and R&D applications, such as photoresist coating, solar cells, and fuel cell industries.108 A well-conducted study of the parameters that affect the droplets size can be found in the work of Dalmoro et al.110 A novel ultrasonic-spray method for preparing CCS was adopted by Millington et al.98 in 2011. CCS exhibited better performances (677 mW cm−2) compared to those prepared by the hand-painting method (386 mW cm−2), especially at low Pt loadings (0.4 mgPt cm−2 and 0.15 mgPt cm−2 at the anode and the cathode, respectively). Recently, Sassin et al.100,109 used the ultrasonic spray method to deposit the catalyst layers onto the polymer electrolyte membrane and investigated the interplay between the cathode catalytic layer (CL) porosity/thickness and the mass transport limitations in single cell fuel cells comprised of Pt/C-based CLs.

3.2 Sputtering deposition by CCS or CCM

3.2.1 Working principle. 
The basic sputtering process consists of depositing metals, plastics, and ceramics into a substrate using a high vacuum environment, allowing atom ejection from a target material. This is based on the generation of a glow discharge between two electrodes in a confined vacuum chamber. To generate the discharge, the chamber is pumped down to a pressure of 10−4 Pa or below and a sputter gas, usually argon, is introduced into the chamber. Emitted particles flow through the chamber and are deposited as a thin film onto the surface of the substrates. Plasma and magnetron sputtering are developed to enhance the basic sputtering process.
3.2.1.1 Plasma sputtering. 
Plasma sputtering is a vacuum evaporation process, consisting of the removal of portions of a coated material to deposit a thin film onto the substrate by the aid of a Transfer Coupled Plasma (TCP) antenna composed of argon. The biased target is sputtered by energetic argon ions accelerated by inductive plasma excited by a planar coil through a dielectric window (transformer coupled plasma (TCP), which is powered by a DC or RF generator with a fixed input power). The electrodes are placed on a movable grounded substrate holder in front of the sputtering target with a fixed target–substrate distance. The pressure of argon could be achieved using a primary/turbomolecular pump combination and the argon flow is fixed using a mass flow meter (Fig. 9). Because different parameters are adjustable (targets' number, deposition time, power, …), the plasma sputtering technique is very powerful for preparing catalysts by simultaneous deposition using two targets to obtain different structure and atomic ratios.111
 Fig. 9  Scheme of the plasma sputtering process. 
3.2.1.2 Magnetron sputtering. 
Magnetron sputtering deposition (MSD) is based on four main processes: (i) energetic bombardment of argon ions on the target; (ii) ejection of the sputtered particles from the target; (iii) transport of the sputtered particles through the gas phase; and (vi) condensation and deposition of atoms on the substrate (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the magnetron sputtering process. 
MSD applies a magnetic field around the target in order to energize argon atoms for bombarding it and trapping electrons created around it. This results in higher ionization of argon atoms and bombarding rate, which finally increases the deposition rate. The coating growth depends on the sputtering parameters, such as inert gas pressure, substrate temperature, vacuum, sputtering time, generator power, and target–substrate distance. MSD is a physical approach that has drawn increasing attention because of its simple and flexible preparation, controllable catalyst particles size, high productivity, low cost, and environmental friendliness.


3.2.2 Influence on the triple-phase boundary. 
Platinum and its alloys are easily deposited by these techniques. The success of the sputtering methods in reducing platinum loading depends heavily on the reduction in the size of the catalyst NPs along with increasing accessibility of the gas to the TPB. The deposition of a thin film of Pt by the sputtering method on the front surface of the carbon backings prior to ionomer impregnation enhances proton access to the catalytic sites.112
For PEMFC applications, plasma sputtering takes advantage of an atom source with controlled energy distribution lighting a porous support for acting on the electrocatalyst distribution. Hence, it becomes easy to localize and control the catalyst depth profile in the electrode region in contact with the polymer electrolyte.113 The use of the MSD for the preparation of carbon-supported-Pt catalysts in fuel cells will allow tedious chemical approaches to be replaced, as well as the enhancement of the Pt specific surface area and the creation of new effective nanostructured electrocatalysts.114


3.2.3 Applications. 
Plasma sputtering deposition has been extensively used by Caillard et al.111,115–118 At first, a low pressure inductive high-density plasma sputtering system has been employed to deposit catalyst onto the PEMFC gas diffusion layer and control the catalyst content and its distribution between the membrane and the GDL. Then, a simulation of the deposition method was developed and compared to the experimental results. In 2008, the same author investigated the electrical performance achieved by three designs of plasma-prepared Pt/C electrodes with low Pt loadings at the cathode (from 0.01 to 0.1 mgPt cm−2). The maximum power density was 310 mW cm−2.117 One year later, Cavarroc et al.119 investigated the performance of plasma sputtering with two different Pt loadings (0.16 and 0.01 mgPt cm−2). A maximum power density of 400 mW cm−2 was obtained with the lowest Pt content (700 mW cm−2 with 10 times more Pt). In 2011, Mougenot et al.120 deposited an alloy of the Pd–Pt catalyst at the cathode (0.001 mgPt cm−2 and 0.02 mgPd cm−2) and pure Pd (0.01 mgPd cm−2) at the anode. The ultralow Pt loading provided a power density of 250 mW cm−2. In a recent study,121 plasma co-sputtering was established to lead to an effective method for preparing thin oriented and porous active layers. It was used to deposit the Pt–Ag/C alloy catalyst on the carbon paper. A power density of 503 mW cm−2 was obtained at a loading of 0.05 mgPt cm−2 at the anode and 0.09 mgPt cm−2 at the cathode.
Magnetron sputtering has been extensively used for PEMFC applications.46,114,122–125 Recently, Ostroverkh et al.46,125 investigated the ultra-low-platinum catalyst based on finely dispersed platinum (Pt) deposited on a highly porous complex microporous layer as a durable anode catalyst for hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR). In addition, it demonstrated the accuracy and tunability of MSD for the preparation of homogeneous and highly efficient ionomer-free PEMFC Pt catalysts with metal loadings in a wide range spanning from units to hundreds of mgPt cm−2. The MEAs were fabricated with Pt/CeOy/CNx (anode) and Pt/C (cathode) with an ultralow platinum loading of 0.0085 mgPt cm−2 and 0.4 mgPt cm−2 at the anode and the cathode side, respectively. In this system, a power density of 1.3 W cm−2 was achieved. In 2019, Fu et al.114 used MSD to deposit 0.05 and 0.08 mgPt cm−2 at the anode and the cathode respectively, achieving a power density of 1.87 W cm−2.

3.3 Direct electrochemical deposition by CCS

3.3.1 Working principle. 
As compared to other electrodeposition techniques using a magnetic field to deposit cobalt nanowires onto a porous membrane126 or an alternate electric force to modify the chemical surface of the anionic exchange membrane,127 electrochemical deposition is performed in a plating bath containing a concentrate solution of platinum electrocatalyst salts (e.g., K2PtCl4 or H2PtCl6). By applying an external electrical current, Pt nanoparticles are electrochemically deposited onto the surface of a conductive electrode (e.g., carbon black supported-electrodes) by reducing Pt2+ to metallic Pt0 nanoparticles.
In this process, a thin metallic coating is deposited onto a conductive substrate. Electrochemical deposition can be divided into direct current electrodeposition (DC) and pulse current (PC) electrodeposition according to the current supply mode. During the reaction, the instantaneous energy associated with a PC is higher than that of a DC, leading to a reduction of metal ions at an extremely high over-potential. Pulse electrodeposition is characterized by two different voltages Eon and Eoff applied during the ‘on’ and ‘off’ times, respectively. The on and off cycles are repeated until the desired deposition layer is achieved (Fig. 11). Electrodeposition has attracted attention due to its ease and speed of preparation at room temperature and its low-cost requirement. Compared to DC, PC electrodeposition has many advantages in terms of the control of growth rate, nucleation density, and morphology.
 Fig. 11  Schematic comparison of pulsed current and direct current electrodeposition. 


3.3.2 Influence on the triple-phase boundary. 
Electrodeposition has been reported as a technique to better localize Pt in the TPB and to decrease the catalytic layer thickness, thus increasing the overall PEMFC efficiency. This technique allows the strong control of the particle size and distribution by applying various deposition parameters such as the potential/current. Electrodeposition can be performed only on a conductive substrate; therefore, it was not investigated for CCM-based MEA.


3.3.3 Applications. 
The first publication using the electrodeposition of the catalyst was proposed in 1971 by Feltham and Spiro128 when they performed platinum electrodeposition from chloroplatinic acid. In 1986, Itaya et al.129 developed the electrodeposition of platinum particles onto Nafion films on a glassy carbon electrode. In 1992, Taylor et al.130 evaluated an electrochemical catalysis technique to produce gas-diffusion electrodes for proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells (PEMFC) and succeeded in reducing the amount of platinum. Since these studies, platinum electrodeposition for fuel cell systems have been reported by several researchers131–138 to achieve the same goal: deposition of small particles in the TPB with high platinum utilization. Recently, Cooper et al.132 optimized the off-time in the pulse electrodeposition to deposit very small Pt NPs with a narrow size distribution (1.36 ± 0.360 nm) on amorphous carbon supports. The power density was 582 mW cm−2 with only 0.057 mgPt cm−2 at the anode and 0.5 mgPt cm−2 at the cathode. Most recently, Pt NPs were directly deposited on the carbon-coated gas diffusion layer electrode (C-GDL) after a single-step electrodeposition.133 An optimal power density of 780 mW cm−2 was achieved with an anode loading of 0.15 mgPt cm−2 and a cathode loading of 0.21 mgPt cm−2.

3.4 Other deposition techniques
Though many techniques have been developed by many groups to fabricate PEMFCs electrodes, there still does not exist a standard technique that is commonly used to enhance the fuel cell performance. In order to decrease the catalyst loading and increase its utilization, numerous deposition techniques other than the methods described above are used to prepare CCMs or CCS: (i) modified thin film method,139 (ii) Ion Beam Assisted Deposition IBAD,140,141 (iii) atomic layer deposition,142 (iv) electrospinning,143 (v) Pulsed Laser Deposition PLD,144,145 and (vi) electrophoretic deposition.146 Despite their good performance in lab-scale productions, the mass production using these methods is still challenged by the high cost systems, difficulties in control and automation, the small area that can be coated, the waste of expensive materials, and the coating production time.
4. Performances of various deposition techniques
To compare the performance of different deposition techniques, it is essential to understand and identify different energy losses. The voltage losses for PEMFCs mainly come from (i) the high overpotential for the sluggish oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) kinetic in the cathode side, (ii) the ohmic losses due to electron conduction and protons diffusion, and (iii) the mass-transfer limitation of gas, where the latter is highly dependent on the electrodes' microstructures, fuel cell operating conditions, and water evacuation from the MEA after ORR at the cathode side.
The primary parameters for characterizing the TPB are the pore size distribution, porosity, and tortuosity in the CL structure (tortuosity is a ratio that characterizes the convoluted pathways of gas diffusion and electrical conduction through porous media). These parameters play a crucial role in the rates of electrochemical reactions and the electrochemical active surface area ECSA, which provides important information regarding the number of available active sites in the CL (ECSA was obtained from the charge required for hydrogen adsorption–desorption from the Pt electrocatalyst).
Microstructure studies of catalyst layers have shown that the carbon support mainly consists of primary carbon particles of diameters ranging from 20 to 50 nm and secondary carbon particles in the sub-micron scale resulting from the aggregation of primary carbon particles (Fig. 12). Accordingly, two types of pores are known: (i) primary pores (micropores) > 20 nm, and (ii) secondary pores (mesopores) ranging from 20 to 100–300 nm depending on the I/C ratio. Pore sizes decrease with increasing of I/C ratios because the ionomer fills up or blocks some pores.148
 Fig. 12  SEM image of a catalyst layer showing secondary and primary pores, agglomerates, and carbon support particles. Adapted from ref. 147 under the license number 495414494132 © 2019 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. 
The porous structure of the catalytic layer and the degree of penetration of the catalyst into the selected substrate are basically due to the deposition method and the type of substrates.

Table 3 presents the main advantages and limits of deposition techniques that can affect the TPB and pore size distribution.
Table 3 Effects of various deposition technique on the formation of TPB and their limits






Effects on the formation of TPB
Limits




Screen-printing
• Uniform pore size distribution with no cracks when applying a single printing step
• Mud-cracking in the CL and discontinuity of the film with an increase in the tortuosity




• Thick printed layers (≥20 μm)


Inkjet printing
• Uniform and repeatable deposition
• Ink viscosity and controllable parameters has to be maintained


• Homogeneous distribution of carbon support, ionomer and catalyst nanoparticles




• Ultra-thin low loading is possible with high Pt utilization




• No cracks on catalyst layer




• The ability to create a graded structure of varying catalyst/Nafion ratios




Flexography
• Uniform thickness of the catalyst layer
• Crack formation and problem of ionomer continuity


• Repeatable and rapid deposition
• Difficult for CCM-based MEA due to membrane swelling


Air-spray coating
• Porous distribution of ink
• The size of the droplets can vary, a limitation that has consequences for the uniformity of the film


• Tunable to desired catalyst loading
• The way of deposition must be maintained to have homogeneous distribution




• Agglomeration of particles


Electrospray
• Reduce the agglomeration of carbon-supported Pt NPs and achieve more uniform pore distributions by simply increasing the spraying voltage
• Many controllable variables can influence the coating (solvent, solution viscosity, injection rate, spray pressure, distance from sample)


• Higher Pt utilization




Ultrasonic spray
• Highly repeatable and homogeneous thin films of micron-sized droplets with a tight drop distribution by the ultrasound energy
• Many controllable variables can influence the coating


• Fabricate ultra-low Pt loading MEAs




Sputtering
• High Pt utilization
• Increased RF power led to increased deposition rates, which caused damage to the crystalline structures, leading to higher kinetic resistance


• Desired particle size




• Uniformity distribution and easy to localize and control the catalyst depth




Electrochemical deposition
• High control of the particles' size and distribution by applying the appropriate potential
• Produce secondary ions (e.g. Cl− by using the H2PtCl6), which are known to have a poisoning effect on Pt catalysts


• Uniformity and ultra-low loading






As suggested by Lange et al.,149 the non-uniformity in ionomer distribution significantly changes the pore morphology, increases the tortuosity of diffusing gases, and limits O2 and H2 diffusion at the anode and cathode sides (Fig. 13). As a consequence, significant voltage losses at high current densities are often observed. Thus, during inkjet printing, ultrasonic-spray, and electrospray deposition, strong agglomeration for secondary pores of the CL can be dissociated to promote the homogeneous distribution of the carbon support and ionomer by the formation of thin layers, thus enhancing the active sites and catalyst utilization.45,150,151 Also, sputtering and electrochemical deposition maintain a uniform pores distribution with high control of the particle size.
 Fig. 13  Diffusion paths for oxygen in PSD with different ionomer distributions (green): (a) uniform ionomer distribution, (b) non-uniform ionomer distribution. Adapted from ref. 149 under the license number. Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
Huang et al.108 investigated the effect of spray coating and screen printing on the structures of CL surface, pore distributions, and electrochemical performances. It was shown that catalyst clusters on CL were formed by spraying methods, whereas cracks appeared on CL formed by screen printing methods. Such discontinuity limited the diffusion of gas and decreased the number of TPB.
Martin et al.152 used different catalyst deposition methods ultrasonic spray, air brushing, and electrospray in order to investigate their influence on the performance of the cell. The study of the surface microstructure of the different catalytic layers showed that ultrasonic spray coating exhibits a smooth surface dotted with a number of Pt/C aggregates (ca. 50–80 μm size), a granular-like catalytic layer with Pt/C aggregates covering a wider range of sizes obtained with air brush spray and with a porosity less than 50%. On the contrary, a homogeneous distribution of pores sizes was obtained with electrospray with a porosity more than 70%, which was favor for TPB creation. Hence, the highest performance is exhibited by the electro-spraying based MEA.
Chaparro et al.151 studied the influence of air spray and electrospray deposition on the morphology of the CL. It was demonstrated that a dendritic morphology was obtained by electrospray deposition, with enhanced meso- and macro-porosity and it is observed that the porosity increases on electro-sprayed films, whereas it decreases on airbrushing with the aggregate's formation. As consequence, the highest ECSA (44 m2 gPt−1) is found for electrodes prepared by electrospray, which correspond to the highest porosity film.
In addition, Shukla et al.45 compared IJP CCM to a spray coated CCM and studied the effect of Nafion loading on the CL microstructure and ECSA after inkjet printing. It was observed that as the ionomer content in the CL increases with a relatively constant solid content mass fraction, the porosity decreases due to the ionomer filling the secondary pores in the CL. For a Pt loading of 0.026 mgPt cm−2 for IJP CCM and 0.1 mgPt cm−2 for spray coated CCM, the resulted ECSA was 65.4 m2 gPt−1 and 56.5 m2 gPt−1, respectively. It was proved that thin, low loading catalyst layers fabricated using inkjet printing electrodes show an increased catalyst mass activity of almost ten times when compared with a conventional spray-coated CCM at high current densities due to improved porosity and proton and oxygen transport across the CL. The same observation was obtained in the work of Saha et al.78 The ECSA in the MEA printed with 10 layers with Pt loading of 0.12 mgPt cm−2 and the sprayed CCM with a loading of 0.14 mgPt cm−2 were found to be 33.9 m2 gPt−1 and 28.5 m2 gPt−1, respectively.
In fact, the porous structure of the catalyst layer is basically due to the carbon black support, the major component, modified with platinum nanoparticles, and the intercalated ionomer phase. The carbon support essentially modifies the electrical conductivity and effective distributions of Pt nanoparticles, whereas the porosity of the support avoids mass transport limitations. Typical carbon supports (e.g., Ketjen Black and Vulcan XC-72) have a high specific surface area (∼900 and 220 m2 g−1, respectively) due to a PSD diameter < 2 nm within the carbon particles. However, the necks of the micropores serve as nucleation sites for Pt particle deposition, thus rendering a large fraction of the internal PSD as a dead volume inaccessible to TPB. Moreover, the distribution of the ionomer on the surface of carbon particles' agglomerates (i.e., in mesopores, >20 nm diameter) affect the TPB structuration. The ionomer is not able to alter the primary pores of the deposited film and is mostly located within the secondary pores. Pt particles deposited at the center of the carbon agglomerate (pores < 20 nm) are not accessible for ORR or HOR because of the lack of direct contact with the ionomer, which reduces the proton conductivity and as result, the number of TPB and decreasing the ECSA.148,153,154
Recently, Sassin et al.155 investigated the interplay between the porosity and thickness on mass transport limitations for electrodes fabricated via ultrasonic spray deposition by CCM. The pore size distribution (PSD) remains unchanged as the CL thickness increases (from 3.8 to 11.8 μm) but the porosity decreases from 63 to 40%. This observation results in an increase in mass transport resistance for thicker CLs and not in an enhancement in the charge transfer resistance for ORR. For air-spray deposition, Gode et al.156 reported a porosity of 31% for a 7.7 μm-thick CL, a significantly lower value than the one reported by Sassin et al. In the case of IJP, a loss of porosity from 51 to 29% (for the same Pt loading and ionomer content) was observed and explained by an increase in the catalyst thickness (from 1 to 5.5 μm), attributed to solvent evaporation.157 These results revealed that the deposition technique has a major impact on the catalyst layer porosity.
It is crucial to know that pore size distribution, porosity, and tortuosity in the CL structure are not only determined by the deposition method but also by the carbon support, the ionomer-to-carbon weight ratio (I/C), and the catalyst loading.
Soboleva et al.158 investigated the effects of carbon microstructure and ionomer loading on water vapor sorption and retention. Pores of <20 nm diameter facilitate water uptake by capillary condensation in the intermediate range of relative humidities (60–100%). A broad PSD is found to enhance water retention in Ketjen Black-based CLs, whereas narrower mesopores of Vulcan-based CLs enhance the water repelling action. Water sorption increases the electrochemical properties such as the ECSA and proton conductivity, particularly when the ionomer content is very low.
The effect of Pt loading and catalyst types on the PSD of porous electrodes after spray deposition were investigated by Zhao et al.159 For the same type of catalysts, the porosity and mean pore size decrease for high Pt loadings, whereas the pore surface area increases. For a constant Pt loading, a lower Pt/C ratio results in a thicker electrode resulting in smaller porosity, pore size, and larger surface area. In addition, ultra-low catalyst loadings present a loss in the ECSA after fuel cell continuous operation due to dissolution, agglomeration, or/and Ostwald ripening.
Shahgaldi et al.160–162 focused their works on the electrodes' microstructure to study the effect of catalyst deposition by CMM and CCS on the pore structure, mass transport, and operating performance. It was proved that CCS electrodes fabricated with spray gun are thinner, yielding larger porosity, smaller geometric pore surface area, smaller diffusion and permeation resistivity, and lower cell performance. At high Pt loading (0.4 mg cm−2), the maximum power densities are the same. However, at lower Pt loading (0.1 mg cm−2), a performance drop is observed for the CCS electrodes due to nanoparticle deposition into the pores of the gas diffusion layer, even though the mass transfer resistivity is smaller than their CCM counterparts. The CCS method is therefore unsuitable for low-Pt-loading electrodes (<0.1 mg cm−2) unless the material penetration and the resulting performance deterioration can be inhibited.
In order to compare the PEMFC performances obtained by various deposition techniques, a detailed description of electrodes' structuration (TPB, PSD, porosity, rugosity, etc.) is essential as it directly affects the electrochemical performances and ECSA. Most of the research work does not mention these parameters, which makes the right comparison between all existing coating methods difficult because of a large difference of the type of materials, the ratio and loadings, and the deposition method (CCM or CCS). The authors described the employed deposition method as the most reliable and widely applied for catalyst deposition without mentioning its real drawbacks and give a specific explanation of its limits.

Table 4 summarized the performance of several MEAs fabricated by the various deposition techniques described in the last sections. A highest power density was obtained with the MEA fabricated using magnetron sputtering (1.87 W cm−2) under 80 °C and H2/O2 despite the ultralow loading of 0.05 and 0.08 mgPt cm−2 at the anode and the cathode, respectively. Also, a significant power density (1.2 W cm−2) was reported when 0.026 mgPt cm−2 was deposited by IJP onto the membrane at both the electrodes. At the same operating conditions (80 °C and H2/O2 (humid)), air-assisted spray and electrospray techniques show promising results with MEAs prepared with low platinum loading.
Table 4 Examples of most recent coating techniques applied to PEMFC




Coating technique
Catalyst (anode/cathode)
Solvent
MEA fabrication methods (CCM or CCS)
Anode Pt loading (mgPt cm−2)
Cathode Pt loading (mgPt cm−2)
Membrane
GDL
Thickness of deposited catalyst layer (μm)
Temperature and gas
OCV (V)
Power density (W cm−2)
Ref.





a The catalyst ink was prepared by mixing Pt/C powder, Nafion ionomer, and solvent.
b Power density calculated at 0.6 V. Thicknesses of the mentioned membranes: Nafion 212: 50.8 μm; Nafion 211: 25.4 μm; Nafion XL: 27.5 μm; Gore membrane: 15 μm; Nafion HP: 22 μm.





Screen printing
Pt/C
Cyclohexanol + ethylene glycola
CCM
0.5
0.5
Nafion 212
Toray carbon fiber paper
21
65 °C H2/air (humid)
0.95
0.70b

52



Inkjet printing
Pt/C
Isopropanol + glycerola
CCM
0.026
0.026
Nafion 211
SGL Sigracet 24 BC
1.7
80 °C H2/O2 (humid)
0.9
1.23

45



Pt/C
1-Propanol + propylene glycola
CCS
0.061
0.5
Nafion 211
Toray carbon paper
0.66
50 °C H2/O2 (humid)
0.95
1.06

53



Flexography (roll-to-roll)
Pt/C
Watera
CCM
0.2
0.2
Nafion 212
SGL Sigracet 24 BC
4–6
80 °C H2/air (humid)
0.9
0.45b

91



Air-assisted spray
Pt/C
Isopropanol + DI watera
CCM
0.3
0.3
Nafion 212
SGL Sigracet 25 BC
5
80 °C H2/O2 (humid)
0.95
1.33

99



Electrospray
Pt/C
Isopropanola
CCM
0.3
0.4
Nafion 211
Toray carbon paper
—
80 °C H2/O2 (humid)
0.99
1.41

97



Pt/C
Isopropanola
CCM
0.25
0.17
Nafion 212
ELAT GDL LT1200W
18
80 °C H2/O2 (humid)
0.97
0.90

163



Ultrasonic spray
Pt/C
DI water + ethanola
CCM
0.34
0.34
Nafion HP
SGL Sigracet 25 BC
7.5
80 °C H2/air (humid)
0.9
0.60

100



Plasma sputtering
Pt–Ag/C
No solvent
CCS
0.05
0.15 (0.09 Pt and 0.06 Ag)
Nafion 212
Carbon paper (EC-TP1-030T)
—
60 °C H2/O2 (humid)
0.9
0.50

121



Magnetron sputtering
Pt/C
No solvent
CCS
0.05
0.08
Gore membrane
SGL Sigracet 25 BC
—
80 °C H2/O2 (humid)
0.9
1.87

114



Pt/CeOy/CNx (anode) Pt/C (cathode)
No solvent
CCS
0.0085
0.4
Nafion 212
Carbon toray paper
0.005 (anode catalyst layer)
70 °C H2/O2 (humid)
0.95
1.30

46



Pulse electrodeposition
Pt/C
H2PtCl6 in H2SO4
CCS
0.057
0.554
Nafion 212
Woven carbon cloth (ELAT® 1400 W)
8
75 °C H2/air (humid)
0.87
0.58

132



Direct current electrodeposition
Pt on C-GDL
H2PtCl6 in H2SO4
CCS
0.15
0.21
Nafion XL
BC-35 gas diffusion layer
—
60 °C H2/O2 (humid)
0.88
0.78

133





The electrochemical activity of the TPB was largely influenced by several parameters: the ink preparation, the thickness of catalyst layer, the type of GDLs, the MEA fabrication methods (CCM or CCS), temperature, the use of air or oxygen as fuel, and the TBP structure (Table 3). Finally, magnetron sputtering and IJP are very promising methods due to the given performances that are already below the FCH JU and DOE targets.
Despite the difference between all these techniques, a main challenge is shared: obtaining high performance with ultra-low loading by enhancing the catalyst dispersion and maintain a great TPB activity. To achieve these goals, new research continues to grow with developing new methods, which can be a new path in fuel cell evolution. Hence, print-light synthesis was recently established as a novel technique for catalyst nanoparticles structuration.
5. Nanostructured catalyst layers using print-light synthesis: a novel technique
Nanoparticles can be synthesized with a vast range of different methods, from wet chemical synthesis such as chemical reduction of precursor salts,164 electrodeposition,165 thermal decomposition,166 sputtering,167 to photochemical synthesis.168 Such methods have been applied successfully for the growth of Pt NPs over many substrates.169 Recently, a novel method for the thermal sintering and synthesis of particles was introduced. It is based on the selective heat absorption of a metal-based precursor film in contact with the substrate; this method is known as white-light-sintering.170 The radiation emitted as the white-light from a xenon flash lamp promotes, in few milliseconds, the heating (i.e., several hundred degrees centigrade) of the thin precursor film, leading to the evaporation of solvents and sintering of the micro- or nanoparticles that lead to low or no degradation of the substrate.171–173 This effect is explained by the difference in the substrate thermal mass and thin film. As the substrate is several orders of magnitude larger than the thin film, therefore, it's mass and the heat generated in the thin film are also larger. Thus, the depth of the thermal penetration is extremely small (i.e., few μm) and the high temperatures are not fully transmitted into the substrate.172,173 In addition, the small penetration of the heat can lead to the melting of few μm of the substrate (i.e., PET, PEN, and Kapton) and increases the adhesion of the sintered film. The relation between the dimension of the particles and the melting temperature is presented in eqn (1). (1)where Tm is the melting temperature of the metal nanoparticles, T0 is the melting temperature of the bulk metal, rs is the density of the metal in the solid state, rl is the density of the metal in the liquid state, gs is the surface tension of the metal in the solid state, gs is the surface tension of the metal in the liquid state, L is the latent heat of fusion, and d is the diameter of the metal nanoparticles. Moreover, with profound knowledge of the material absorption characteristics, the curing parameters (i.e., energy density, pulse frequency, and pulse repetition) can be adequate to improve the absorption, leading to highest efficiency in terms of conversion. Our group has recently applied this sintering technique in order to fabricate conductive tracks for sensors fabricated in thermally sensitive substrates such as polyimide and PET.174–176
Due to the similar characteristics of photochemical synthesis of NPs, efforts have been dedicated to produce Pt, Ni, NiFe, Fe, Au, Au:Ag, Ag, and Prussian Blue (PB) nanostructures utilizing the combination of manipulating pL volumes with flash light sintering.173,177–179 In this case, the solution composition during irradiation led to the reduction or oxidation of the metal precursor salts; such phenomena are still not completely understood, yet are very similar to the findings of Abid et al.180 The light-induced reduction mechanism occurs due to the presence of alcohols in the ink acting as the sacrificial electron donors. During irradiation, alcohol is oxidized to CO2, ketones, and aldehydes, and the metal precursors are reduced from Mx+ to M0. After the nucleation of metal centers and the formation of clusters, the thermal degradation follows the mechanism presented in the work of Druffel.172 Lesch173 successfully synthesized thin films containing ultra-low loading of Pt nanoparticles and their micrometric aggregates (1 μg mm−2 Pt) (Fig. 14a); in this synthetic process, a chloroplatinic acid-based ink, without reducing or capping agents, was deposited as a thin film on ITO using inkjet printing (IJP) and then sintered using flash light sintering (FLS) and generating Pt metallic nanostructures. Herein, the whole process, conjugated in two sequential steps, is denoted as Print Light Synthesis (PLS). Costa Bassetto et al.181 applied PLS for the synthesis of NiFe nanoparticles supported on carbon nanotubes (CNT) for OER (Fig. 14b). In this work, the authors were able to induce the reduction of non-noble metals with the utilization of alcohols as the electron donor during the irradiation process. The obtained nanostructures were smaller than 2.5 nm and had a high electrocatalytic activity with a turn over frequency (TOF) of 6.53.177 The light induced mechanism of reduction was not only able to induce the reduction of metal cations in the solution but also that of stable oxides such as spinel Co3O4.182 PLS based on an oxidation mechanism was recently introduced by Silva et al.179 and describes the synthesis of Prussian blue from a single precursor iron salt and an acid solution ink (HCl or H2SO4); here, during flash light irradiation, the protons act as sacrificial electron acceptors that promote the partial oxidation of Fe2+ in the K4[Fe(CN)6]·3H2O precursor to Fe3+, generating the  structure, also known as Prussian blue. Thus, considering the practical applications in energy storage devices such as K, Na, and Mg ion batteries, PLS can be employed as a powerful technique to synthesize thin PB films (and possibly PBAs) directly on the battery current collectors (anode and/or cathode). In this scenario, the same approach can be designed with the aim of synthesizing a vast range of other catalysts on GDL for fuel cell applications.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic representation of the combined inkjet printing and photonic curing process to fabricate platinum nanostructures on an ITO electrode;173 (b) print-light synthesis to create nanoscale electrocatalysts on large-scale electrodes using combined inkjet-printing and flash light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Unlike photochemical synthesis induced by a laser, the flash-light-synthesis process, PLS, has a much wider irradiation area in the range of 100 cm2. Hence, the combination of millisecond exposure to light and large irradiation area leads to an increase in the number of NPs produced by this method. Such a characteristic is of great interest in the area of fuel cell research and leads to CL fabrication. Thus, one can plan the direct synthesis of Pt nanoparticles with the three-phase boundary instead of the complicated deposition of nanoparticle materials, especially as formulations including nanoparticles, which have the compromise between formulation stability with activity compromise due to the presence of additives.
5.1 Influence on the triple-phase boundary
Currently, Pt/C is considered the state-of-the-art commonly employed catalyst in proton-exchange membrane fuel cells. However, despite its great electrocatalytic performance for HER and ORR reactions at the anode and cathode, respectively, it still presents some performance limitations, in particular, one of them is related to its deposition method on the gas diffusion layer. The conventional deposition methods cannot provide a direct contact of all the deposited Pt nanoparticles and the proton exchange membrane, which decreases the number of Pt nanoparticles that are effectively involved in the HER and ORR reactions. This promotes a decrease in the triple phase boundary sites, thus limiting the fuel cell performance. Therefore, in order to overcome these drawbacks, print-light synthesis has emerged as a promising technique that can maximize the catalyst utilization and the number of TPB sites. The inkjet printing step can precisely deposit inks containing a low loading of precursor salt, which after the flash light irradiation process provides an ultralow loading of catalyst (2 μg cm−2) with small nanoparticle sizes (2.5 nm), as evidenced by Costa Bassetto et al.181 (Fig. 15a–c). In this protocol inks, can be formulated and printed using mixed precursor salt and carbon support, or individual inks deposited separately in two sequential steps: (i) carbon support and (ii) precursor salt, respectively. Both approaches have the advantage of providing higher catalyst dispersion on the GDL and a more uniform catalyst film compared to the conventional deposition methods. Such characteristics improve the catalyst utilization and the number of TPB sites, and hence, the high TOF numbers reported. In addition, this protocol can also directly deposit the proton exchange ionomer (e.g., Nafion®) and the precursor salt generated after FLS on a thinner catalyst film (10 μm) with in situ immobilized nanoparticles on the substrate/support, as illustrated in Fig. 15d–f.183 Moreover, we can also speculate that FLS may increase the catalytic film porosity since several gaseous products are removed during the light pulse process, which can generate vacancies in the printed catalytic layer and then increase the TPB zones, as shown in Fig. 15g–m.184 Therefore, PLS brings new insights for electrocatalyst deposition on the gas diffusion layer in PEMFCs. Moreover, it provides not only a sintering protocol of in situ carbon-supported nanoparticles with small sizes and loadings on the GDL but also homogeneous and thin catalyst films with high porosity; herein, all these parameters can increase the number of TPB zones and also improve the accessibility to fuels (H2), which promotes a gain in the PEMFC performance.
 Fig. 15  Bright-field (a) and high-angle annular dark-field (b) STEM images of Ni0.45Fe0.55 NPs as formed on CNTs by print-light synthesis. The area indicated in part (b) by the white rectangle was used for particle size distribution analysis (c). The dashed line in part (c) indicates the lower cutoff value that was set for the image-based particle size analysis.181 Printed films of the K4[Fe(CN)6]·3H2O precursor and its respective Prussian blue patterns obtained after photonic curing on different substrates: (d) ITO, (e) PET, and (f) titanium.183 SEM observation in (g–k) of the top view and (l and m) cross-section of nanoparticulate coatings exposed to different energies of IPL. All scale bars are 500 nm. In the cross-sectional images, the substrate, CuO, and Cu are color coded in green, brown, and red, respectively.185 
6. Conclusion
This review outlined various catalytic layer deposition techniques that are most relevant to PEMFC manufacturing at the industrial and laboratory scale. These techniques are reviewed with a focus on ultra-low loading of Pt catalysts and their effect on the TPB. Print-light synthesis (PLS) is presented and described as a novel nanostructured catalyst method that has become promising for rapid and efficient catalytic layer fabrication. As compared to others, this method has the great advantage of providing full control for nanostructure formation of the CL by playing on different parameters.
More generally, the perfect control of the TPB plays a significant role on the fuel cell performances as (i) enough water content must be present at the cathode to allow the good wetting of the membrane and ensure the diffusion of protons; (ii) humidified H2 and O2 gases must easily access the catalytic site in order to avoid MEA drying, which consequently decreases protons migration within the TBP and inhibits the catalytic activity; (iii) MEA fabrication by hot-pressing is a key step for an optimized assembly, ensuring a physical contact in between the GDL, the catalytic layer, and the PEM, which are responsible for both electron and proton conductivities.
Considering this background, the role of the deposition method is critical as it should satisfy the above-mentioned conditions along with low manufacturing cost, high reproducibility, and low catalyst loading, thus ensuring high performance and long lifetime. The nature of the deposited substrate (GDL or membrane), its mechanical stability, and handling abilities influence the choice of the deposition methods, whether flexible GDL and membrane are suitable for roll-to-roll printing, porous materials (e.g., microporous layers of the GDL) are more convenient for sputtering or spraying techniques, as their efficiency is not dependent on the substrates' roughness. Overall, inkjet-printing, spray, and sputtering techniques are the most suitable technique for catalytic layer deposition, which ensure good porosity, homogeneity, and nanoparticle distribution at the same time.
Fuel cell assembly is another important point that strongly affects the overall performances. Mechanical strength applied on bipolar plates is a key element that ensures electrical contact between each single MEA at the stack level. Misalignment, pressure depletion in between MEA interfaces, and poor water drainage are responsible for PEMFC damage. The future success of PEMFC implementation in our everyday life will strongly depend on the way we revisit this technology from the physical, material sciences, and engineering point of view.
To this end, it will be important to review our previous understanding of favorable conditions for MEA preparation. Adding to their high performance in fuel cell fabrication, inkjet printing, spraying, and sputtering technologies are widely used in the manufacture of various industries and have gradually achieved full automation. Thus, we strongly believe that a combination of these methods with PLS and the full comprehension of the TPB structure according to the various deposition steps can take place to achieve ultra-low catalyst loading and have powerful applications in commercial fuel cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References

Energy Technology Perspectives 2017, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, S.l Search PubMed.
L. Pan, S. Ott, F. Dionigi and P. Strasser, Current Challenges Related to the Deployment of Shape-Controlled Pt Alloy Oxygen Reduction Reaction Nanocatalysts into Low Pt-Loaded Cathode Layers of Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 18, 61–71,  DOI:10.1016/j.coelec.2019.10.011 .
M. Blal, A. Benatiallah, A. NeÇaibia, S. Lachtar, N. Sahouane and A. Belasri, Contribution and Investigation to Compare Models Parameters of (PEMFC), Comprehensives Review of Fuel Cell Models and Their Degradation, Energy, 2019, 168, 182–199,  DOI:10.1016/j.energy.2018.11.095 .
L. Xing, W. Shi, H. Su, Q. Xu, P. K. Das, B. Mao and K. Scott, Membrane Electrode Assemblies for PEM Fuel Cells: A Review of Functional Graded Design and Optimization, Energy, 2019, 177, 445–464,  DOI:10.1016/j.energy.2019.04.084 .

PEM Fuel Cell Electrocatalysts and Catalyst Layers, ed. J. Zhang, Springer, London,  2008,  DOI:10.1007/978-1-84800-936-3 .
C. H. Park, C. H. Lee, M. D. Guiver and Y. M. Lee, Sulfonated Hydrocarbon Membranes for Medium-Temperature and Low-Humidity Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells (PEMFCs), Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36(11), 1443–1498,  DOI:10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2011.06.001 .
T. Ioroi, Z. Siroma, S. Yamazaki and K. Yasuda, Electrocatalysts for PEM Fuel Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(23), 1801284,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201801284 .

          W. Xing, Catalyst Layer Composition Optimization, in PEM Fuel Cell Electrocatalysts and Catalyst Layers: Fundamentals and Applications, ed. J. Zhang, Springer, London,  2008, pp. 1003–1040,  DOI:10.1007/978-1-84800-936-3_22 .
L. Guétaz, S. Escribano and O. Sicardy, Study by Electron Microscopy of Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell Membrane-Electrode Assembly Degradation Mechanisms: Influence of Local Conditions, J. Power Sources, 2012, 212, 169–178,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.03.096 .

Catalyst Layer of a Fuel Cell Membrane, http://www2.optics.rochester.edu/workgroups/cml/opt307/spr05/paul/, accessed Jun 9, 2020 Search PubMed.
J. Park, S. Oh, J.-Y. Kim, S. Young Park, I. Kyu Song and J. Weon Choi, Comparison of Degradation Features of Lignin to Phenols over Pt Catalysts Prepared with Various Forms of Carbon Supports, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(21), 16917–16924,  10.1039/C5RA21875F .
A. Morozan, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Low-Platinum and Platinum-Free Catalysts for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction at Fuel Cell Cathodes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4(4), 1238–1254,  10.1039/C0EE00601G .
J. M. Jaksic, N. M. Ristic, N. V. Krstajic and M. M. Jaksic, Electrocatalysis for Hydrogen Electrode Reactions in the Light of Fermi Dynamics and Structural Bonding FACTORS—I. Individual Electrocatalytic Properties of Transition Metals, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1998, 23(12), 1121–1156,  DOI:10.1016/S0360-3199(98)00014-7 .
E. Antolini, Carbon Supports for Low-Temperature Fuel Cell Catalysts, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 88(1), 1–24,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2008.09.030 .
L. Du, Y. Shao, J. Sun, G. Yin, J. Liu and Y. Wang, Advanced Catalyst Supports for PEM Fuel Cell Cathodes, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 314–322,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2016.03.016 .
D. J. Kim, M. J. Jo and S. Y. Nam, A Review of Polymer-Nanocomposite Electrolyte Membranes for Fuel Cell Application, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 21, 36–52,  DOI:10.1016/j.jiec.2014.04.030 .
S. Ma, Q. Chen, F. H. Jøgensen, P. C. Stein and E. M. Skou, 
            19F NMR Studies of Nafion™ Ionomer Adsorption on PEMFC Catalysts and Supporting Carbons, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178(29), 1568–1575,  DOI:10.1016/j.ssi.2007.10.007 .
O. J. Curnick, B. G. Pollet and P. M. Mendes, Nafion®-Stabilised Pt/C Electrocatalysts with Efficient Catalyst Layer Ionomer Distribution for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, RSC Adv., 2012, 2(22), 8368–8374,  10.1039/C2RA21071A .
S. Ott, A. Orfanidi, H. Schmies, B. Anke, H. N. Nong, J. Hübner, U. Gernert, M. Gliech, M. Lerch and P. Strasser, Ionomer Distribution Control in Porous Carbon-Supported Catalyst Layers for High-Power and Low Pt-Loaded Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19(1), 77–85,  DOI:10.1038/s41563-019-0487-0 .
R. Sharma, L. Grahl-Madsen and S. M. Andersen, Influence of Dispersion Media on Nafion® Ionomer Distribution in Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell Catalyst Carbon Support, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 226, 66–72,  DOI:10.1016/j.matchemphys.2019.01.015 .
S. Shahgaldi, I. Alaefour, J. Zhao and X. Li, Impact of Ionomer in the Catalyst Layers on Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell Performance under Different Reactant Flows and Pressures, Fuel, 2018, 227, 35–41,  DOI:10.1016/j.fuel.2018.04.076 .
D. Lee and S. Hwang, Effect of Loading and Distributions of Nafion Ionomer in the Catalyst Layer for PEMFCs, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33(11), 2790–2794,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2008.03.046 .
S. Mu and M. Tian, Optimization of Perfluorosulfonic Acid Ionomer Loadings in Catalyst Layers of Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 60, 437–442,  DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2011.11.108 .
B. G. Pollet, S. S. Kocha and I. Staffell, Current Status of Automotive Fuel Cells for Sustainable Transport, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 16, 90–95,  DOI:10.1016/j.coelec.2019.04.021 .
R. L. Borup, A. Kusoglu, K. C. Neyerlin, R. Mukundan, R. K. Ahluwalia, D. A. Cullen, K. L. More, A. Z. Weber and D. J. Myers, Recent Developments in Catalyst-Related PEM Fuel Cell Durability, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2020, 21, 192–200,  DOI:10.1016/j.coelec.2020.02.007 .
C. S. Gittleman, A. Kongkanand, D. Masten and W. Gu, Materials Research and Development Focus Areas for Low Cost Automotive Proton-Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 18, 81–89,  DOI:10.1016/j.coelec.2019.10.009 .
X. Yu and S. Ye, Recent Advances in Activity and Durability Enhancement of Pt/C Catalytic Cathode in PEMFC: Part I. Physico-Chemical and Electronic Interaction between Pt and Carbon Support, and Activity Enhancement of Pt/C Catalyst, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172(1), 133–144,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.07.049 .
M. M. Whiston, I. L. Azevedo, S. Litster, K. S. Whitefoot, C. Samaras and J. F. Whitacre, Expert Assessments of the Cost and Expected Future Performance of Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells for Vehicles, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116(11), 4899–4904,  DOI:10.1073/pnas.1804221116 .

Fuel cell light duty vehicles (including cars), www.fch.europa.eu, https://www.fch.europa.eu/content/fuel-cell-light-duty-vehicles-including-cars, accessed Apr 7, 2020 Search PubMed.
N. Guerrero Moreno, M. Cisneros Molina, D. Gervasio and J. F. Pérez Robles, Approaches to Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells (PEMFCs) and Their Cost, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 52, 897–906,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2015.07.157 .
J. Wu, X. Z. Yuan, J. J. Martin, H. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Shen, S. Wu and W. Merida, A Review of PEM Fuel Cell Durability: Degradation Mechanisms and Mitigation Strategies, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184(1), 104–119,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2008.06.006 .
Y. Shao-Horn, W. C. Sheng, S. Chen, P. J. Ferreira, E. F. Holby and D. Morgan, Instability of Supported Platinum Nanoparticles in Low-Temperature Fuel Cells, Top. Catal., 2007, 46(3), 285–305,  DOI:10.1007/s11244-007-9000-0 .
H. A. Gasteiger, S. S. Kocha, B. Sompalli and F. T. Wagner, Activity Benchmarks and Requirements for Pt, Pt-Alloy, and Non-Pt Oxygen Reduction Catalysts for PEMFCs, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56(1), 9–35,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2004.06.021 .
M. Lefèvre, E. Proietti, F. Jaouen and J.-P. Dodelet, Iron-Based Catalysts with Improved Oxygen Reduction Activity in Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells, Science, 2009, 324(5923), 71–74,  DOI:10.1126/science.1170051 .

          F. Jaouen, D. Jones, N. Coutard, V. Artero, P. Strasser and A. Kucernak, Toward Platinum Group Metal-Free Catalysts for Hydrogen/Air Proton-Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/matthey/jmtr/2018/00000062/00000002/art00012;jsessionid=4dfnh4bcfsecm.x-ic-live-03, accessed May 11, 2020,  DOI:10.1595/205651318X696828.
S. Dey, B. Mondal, S. Chatterjee, A. Rana, S. Amanullah and A. Dey, Molecular Electrocatalysts for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1(12), 1–20,  DOI:10.1038/s41570-017-0098 .
W. Lubitz, H. Ogata, O. Rüdiger and E. Reijerse, Hydrogenases, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114(8), 4081–4148,  DOI:10.1021/cr4005814 .
N. Mano and A. de Poulpiquet, O2 Reduction in Enzymatic Biofuel Cells, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118(5), 2392–2468,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00220 .
G. S. Tasic, S. S. Miljanic, M. P. Marceta Kaninski, D. P. Saponjic and V. M. Nikolic, Non-Noble Metal Catalyst for a Future Pt Free PEMFC, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11(11), 2097–2100,  DOI:10.1016/j.elecom.2009.09.003 .
S. Gentil, J. K. Molloy, M. Carrière, A. Hobballah, A. Dutta, S. Cosnier, W. J. Shaw, G. Gellon, C. Belle, V. Artero, F. Thomas and A. Le Goff, A Nanotube-Supported Dicopper Complex Enhances Pt-Free Molecular H2/Air Fuel Cells, Joule, 2019, 3(8), 2020–2029,  DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2019.07.001 .
T. Soboleva, K. Malek, Z. Xie, T. Navessin and S. Holdcroft, PEMFC Catalyst Layers: The Role of Micropores and Mesopores on Water Sorption and Fuel Cell Activity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3(6), 1827–1837,  DOI:10.1021/am200590w .
M. Kim, J.-N. Park, H. Kim, S. Song and W.-H. Lee, The Preparation of Pt/C Catalysts Using Various Carbon Materials for the Cathode of PEMFC, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163(1), 93–97,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2006.05.057 .
O. Okur, Ç. İyigün Karadağ, F. G. Boyacı San, E. Okumuş and G. Behmenyar, Optimization of Parameters for Hot-Pressing Manufacture of Membrane Electrode Assembly for PEM (Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells) Fuel Cell, Energy, 2013, 57, 574–580,  DOI:10.1016/j.energy.2013.05.001 .
A. Therdthianwong, P. Manomayidthikarn and S. Therdthianwong, Investigation of Membrane Electrode Assembly (MEA) Hot-Pressing Parameters for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell, Energy, 2007, 32(12), 2401–2411,  DOI:10.1016/j.energy.2007.07.005 .
S. Shukla, K. Domican, K. Karan, S. Bhattacharjee and M. Secanell, Analysis of Low Platinum Loading Thin Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cell Electrodes Prepared by Inkjet Printing, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 156, 289–300,  DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2015.01.028 .
A. Ostroverkh, M. Dubau, P. Kúš, S. Haviar, M. Václavů, B. Šmíd, R. Fiala, Y. Yakovlev, Y. Ostroverkh and V. Johánek, Durable Ultra-low-platinum Ionomer-free Anode Catalyst for Hydrogen Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44(6), 4641–4651,  DOI:10.1002/er.5245 .
S. Martin, P. L. Garcia-Ybarra and J. L. Castillo, Electrospray Deposition of Catalyst Layers with Ultra-Low Pt Loadings for PEM Fuel Cells Cathodes, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195(9), 2443–2449,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2009.11.092 .
A. Ganesan and M. Narayanasamy, Ultra-Low Loading of Platinum in Proton Exchange Membrane-Based
Fuel Cells: A Brief Review, Mater. Renew. Sustain. Energy, 2019, 8(4), 18,  DOI:10.1007/s40243-019-0156-x .
A. Strong, C. Thornberry, S. Beattie, R. Chen and S. R. Coles, Depositing Catalyst Layers in Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells: A Review, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2015, 12(6) DOI:10.1115/1.4031961 .
S. Shahgaldi, I. Alaefour and X. Li, Impact of Manufacturing Processes on Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell Performance, Appl. Energy, 2018, 225(C), 1022–1032 CrossRef CAS .
K. Talukdar, S. Delgado, T. Lagarteira, P. Gazdzicki and K. A. Friedrich, Minimizing mass-transport loss in proton exchange membrane fuel cell by freeze-drying of cathode catalyst layers, J. Power Sources, 2019, 427, 309–317,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.04.094 .
W. Wang, S. Chen, J. Li and W. Wang, Fabrication of Catalyst Coated Membrane with Screen Printing Method in a Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40(13), 4649–4658,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2015.02.027 .
C. A. G. Bezerra, L. J. Deiner and G. Tremiliosi-Filho, Unexpected Performance of Inkjet-Printed Membrane Electrode Assemblies for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2019, 21(11), 1900703,  DOI:10.1002/adem.201900703 .
T. Bayer, H. C. Pham, K. Sasaki and S. M. Lyth, Spray Deposition of Nafion Membranes: Electrode-Supported Fuel Cells, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 319–326,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.07.059 .
S. Park, J.-W. Lee and B. N. Popov, A Review of Gas Diffusion Layer in PEM Fuel Cells: Materials and Designs, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37(7), 5850–5865,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.12.148 .
K. Talukdar, M. A. Ripan, T. Jahnke, P. Gazdzicki, T. Morawietz and K. A. Friedrich, Experimental and Numerical Study on Catalyst Layer of Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell Prepared with Diverse Drying Methods, J. Power Sources, 2020, 461, 228169,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2020.228169 .
Q. Meyer, N. Mansor, F. Iacoviello, P. L. Cullen, R. Jervis, D. Finegan, C. Tan, J. Bailey, P. R. Shearing and D. J. L. Brett, Investigation of Hot Pressed Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cell Assemblies via X-Ray Computed Tomography, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 242, 125–136,  DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2017.05.028 .
M. S. Wilson and S. Gottesfeld, Thin-Film Catalyst Layers for Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cell Electrodes, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1992, 22(1), 1–7,  DOI:10.1007/BF01093004 .
M. S. Wilson, High Performance Catalyzed Membranes of Ultra-Low Pt Loadings for Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139(2), L28,  DOI:10.1149/1.2069277 .
C. S. Kim, Y. G. Chun, D. H. Peck and D. R. Shin, A Novel Process to Fabricate Membrane Electrode Assemblies for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1998, 23(11), 1045–1048,  DOI:10.1016/S0360-3199(98)00021-4 .
Y.-G. Chun, C.-S. Kim, D.-H. Peck and D.-R. Shin, Performance of a Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell with Thin Film Catalyst Electrodes, J. Power Sources, 1998, 71(1), 174–178,  DOI:10.1016/S0378-7753(97)02792-4 .

          C. Blanc and A. Grand-Jean, Method for Producing a Membrane Electrode Assembly for a Fuel Cell, US Pat., 2020075970A1,  March 5, 2020 Search PubMed .
J. Milewski, A. Sienko, T. Wejrzanowski, A. Jaworski, L. Szablowski, K. Cwieka, A. Olszewski, A. Szczesniak, J. Skibinski and O. Dybinski, The Investigation of Cathode Layer of Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell Manufactured by Using Printing Techniques, J. Power Technol., 2019, 99(2), 82–91 CAS .
R. N. Bonifácio, J. O. A. Paschoal, M. Linardi and R. Cuenca, Catalyst Layer Optimization by Surface Tension Control during Ink Formulation of Membrane Electrode Assemblies in Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(10), 4680–4685,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.01.010 .
H.-K. Lee, J.-H. Park, D.-Y. Kim and T.-H. Lee, A Study on the Characteristics of the Diffusion Layer Thickness and Porosity of the PEMFC, J. Power Sources, 2004, 131(1), 200–206,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2003.12.039 .
N. Rajalakshmi and K. S. Dhathathreyan, Catalyst Layer in PEMFC Electrodes—Fabrication, Characterisation and Analysis, Chem. Eng. J., 2007, 129(1), 31–40,  DOI:10.1016/j.cej.2006.10.035 .
R. N. Bonifácio, J. O. A. Paschoal, M. Linardi and R. Cuenca, Catalyst Layer Optimization by Surface Tension Control during Ink Formulation of Membrane Electrode Assemblies in Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(10), 4680–4685,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.01.010 .
E. Lee, D.-H. Kim and C. Pak, Effects of Cathode Catalyst Layer Fabrication Parameters on the Performance of High-Temperature Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 510, 145461,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2020.145461 .
J. W. Ihm, H. Ryu, J. S. Bae, W. K. Choo and D. K. Choi, High Performance of Electrode with Low Pt Loading Prepared by Simplified Direct Screen Printing Process in PEM Fuel Cells, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39(14), 4647–4649,  DOI:10.1023/B:JMSC.0000034162.92123.96 .
C.-H. Wan and Q.-H. Zhuang, Novel Layer Wise Anode Structure with Improved CO-Tolerance Capability for PEM Fuel Cell, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52(12), 4111–4123,  DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2006.11.045 .
D. S. Hwang, C. H. Park, S. C. Yi and Y. M. Lee, Optimal Catalyst Layer Structure of Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36(16), 9876–9885,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.05.073 .
P. V. Dollen and S. Barnett, A Study of Screen Printed Yttria-Stabilized Zirconia Layers for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88(12), 3361–3368,  DOI:10.1111/j.1551-2916.2005.00625.x .
P. Ried, C. Lorenz, A. Brönstrup, T. Graule, N. H. Menzler, W. Sitte and P. Holtappels, Processing of YSZ Screen Printing Pastes and the Characterization of the Electrolyte Layers for Anode Supported SOFC, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 28(9), 1801–1808,  DOI:10.1016/j.jeurceramsoc.2007.11.018 .
Y. Khan, A. Thielens, S. Muin, J. Ting, C. Baumbauer and A. C. Arias, A New Frontier of Printed Electronics: Flexible Hybrid Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(15), 1905279,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201905279 .
A. Lesch, F. Cortés-Salazar, V. C. Bassetto, V. Amstutz and H. H. Girault, Inkjet Printing Meets Electrochemical Energy Conversion, Chimia, 2015, 69(5), 284–289,  DOI:10.2533/chimia.2015.284 .

          S. D. Hoath, Fundamentals of Inkjet Printing: The Science of Inkjet and Droplets, John Wiley & Sons,  2016 Search PubMed .
S. Lawes, A. Riese, Q. Sun, N. Cheng and X. Sun, Printing Nanostructured Carbon for Energy Storage and Conversion Applications, Carbon, 2015, 92, 150–176,  DOI:10.1016/j.carbon.2015.04.008 .
M. S. Saha, D. Malevich, E. Halliop, J. G. Pharoah, B. A. Peppley and K. Karan, Electrochemical Activity and Catalyst Utilization of Low Pt and Thickness Controlled Membrane Electrode Assemblies, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158(5), B562,  DOI:10.1149/1.3559188 .
S. Towne, V. Viswanathan, J. Holbery and P. Rieke, Fabrication of Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell MEAs Utilizing Inkjet Print Technology, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171(2), 575–584,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.07.017 .
A. D. Taylor, E. Y. Kim, V. P. Humes, J. Kizuka and L. T. Thompson, Inkjet Printing of Carbon Supported Platinum 3-D Catalyst Layers for Use in Fuel Cells, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171(1), 101–106,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.01.024 .
M. Klingele, M. Breitwieser, R. Zengerle and S. Thiele, Direct Deposition of Proton Exchange Membranes Enabling High Performance Hydrogen Fuel Cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(21), 11239–11245,  10.1039/C5TA01341K .
K. Park, T. Ohnishi, M. Goto, M. So, S. Takenaka, Y. Tsuge and G. Inoue, Improvement of Cell Performance in Catalyst Layers with Silica-Coated Pt/Carbon Catalysts for Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45(3), 1867–1877,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.11.097 .
I. Bae, B. Kim, D.-Y. Kim, H. Kim and K.-H. Oh, In-Plane 2-D Patterning of Microporous Layer by Inkjet Printing for Water Management of Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cell, Renewable Energy, 2020, 146, 960–967,  DOI:10.1016/j.renene.2019.07.003 .
M. S. Saha, D. Paul, D. Malevich, B. Peppley and K. Karan, Preparation of Ultra-Thin Catalyst Layers by Piezo-Electric Printer for PEMFCs Applications, ECS Trans., 2009, 25(1), 2049,  DOI:10.1149/1.3210761 .
L. Hakola, A. Parra Puerto, A. Vaari, T. Maaninen, A. Kucernak, S. Viik and M. Smolander, Anode Ink Formulation for a Fully Printed Flexible Fuel Cell Stack, Flexible Printed Electron., 2020, 5 DOI:10.1088/2058-8585/ab7e16 .
M. Yazdanpour, A. Esmaeilifar and S. Rowshanzamir, Effects of Hot Pressing Conditions on the Performance of Nafion Membranes Coated by Ink-Jet Printing of Pt/MWCNTs Electrocatalyst for PEMFCs, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37(15), 11290–11298,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.04.139 .
Z. Wang and Y. Nagao, Effects of Nafion Impregnation Using Inkjet Printing for Membrane Electrode Assemblies in Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 129, 343–347,  DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2014.02.133 .
Y. Guo, Y. Ono and Y. Nagao, Modification for Uniform Surface of Nafion Ultrathin Film Deposited by Inkjet Printing, Langmuir, 2015, 31(37), 10137–10144,  DOI:10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b02395 .
V. Costa Bassetto, J. Xiao, E. Oveisi, V. Amstutz, B. Liu, H. H. Girault and A. Lesch, Rapid Inkjet Printing of High Catalytic Activity Co3O4/N-RGO Layers for Oxygen Reduction Reaction, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 563, 9–17,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcata.2018.06.026 .
C. Bois, A. Blayo, D. Chaussy, R. Vincent, A.-G. Mercier and C. Nayoze, Catalyst Layers for PEMFC Manufactured by Flexography Printing Process: Performances and Structure, Fuel Cells, 2012, 12(2), 199–211,  DOI:10.1002/fuce.201100059 .
C. Bois, P. J. J. Dumont, A. Blayo, R. Vincent, C. Nayoze and D. Chaussy, Evaluating the Effectiveness of Using Flexography Printing for Manufacturing Catalyst-Coated Membranes for Fuel Cells, Fuel Cells, 2014, 14(4), 614–625,  DOI:10.1002/fuce.201300245 .

          W. G. O'Brien, Continuous Production of Catalyst Coated Membranes, US Pat., 7316794B2,  January 8, 2008 Search PubMed .
B. G. Pollet, A Novel Method for Preparing PEMFC Electrodes by the Ultrasonic and Sonoelectrochemical Techniques, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11(7), 1445–1448,  DOI:10.1016/j.elecom.2009.05.027 .
X. Dong, X. Pan, X. Gao and H. Fang, Theoretical Uniformity Analysis and Improvement of Spray Deposition by Mixing Nozzles with Heating Conditions, Coatings, 2020, 10(1), 81,  DOI:10.3390/coatings10010081 .
Y. Jang, Y. D. Park, J. A. Lim, H. S. Lee, W. H. Lee and K. Cho, Patterning the Organic Electrodes of All-Organic Thin Film Transistors with a Simple Spray Printing Technique, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89(18), 183501,  DOI:10.1063/1.2372583 .
D. Khim, K.-J. Baeg, B.-K. Yu, S.-J. Kang, M. Kang, Z. Chen, A. Facchetti, D.-Y. Kim and Y.-Y. Noh, Spray-Printed Organic Field-Effect Transistors and Complementary Inverters, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1(7), 1500–1506,  10.1039/C2TC00085G .
R. Liu, W. Zhou, L. Wan, P. Zhang, S. Li, Y. Gao, D. Xu, C. Zheng and M. Shang, Electrostatic Spraying of Membrane Electrode for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2020, 20(1), 11–17,  DOI:10.1016/j.cap.2019.09.016 .
B. Millington, V. Whipple and B. G. Pollet, A Novel Method for Preparing Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell Electrodes by the Ultrasonic-Spray Technique, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(20), 8500–8508,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.06.024 .
X. Peng, T. Omasta, W. Rigdon and W. E. Mustain, Fabrication of High Performing PEMFC Catalyst-Coated Membranes with a Low Cost Air-Assisted Cylindrical Liquid Jets Spraying System, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163(14), E407,  DOI:10.1149/2.0981614jes .
M. B. Sassin, Y. Garsany, R. W. Atkinson, R. M. E. Hjelm and K. E. Swider-Lyons, Understanding the Interplay between Cathode Catalyst Layer Porosity and Thickness on Transport Limitations En Route to High-Performance PEMFCs, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(31), 16944–16955,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.04.194 .
X. Leimin, L. Shijun, Y. Lijun and L. Zhenxing, Investigation of a Novel Catalyst Coated Membrane Method to Prepare Low-Platinum-Loading Membrane Electrode Assemblies for PEMFCs, Fuel Cells, 2009, 9(2), 101–105,  DOI:10.1002/fuce.200800114 .
F. L. Deschamps, J. G. Mahy, A. F. Léonard, S. D. Lambert, A. Dewandre, B. Scheid and N. Job, A Practical Method to Characterize Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell Catalyst Layer Topography: Application to Two Coating Techniques and Two Carbon Supports, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 695, 137751,  DOI:10.1016/j.tsf.2019.137751 .
S. Martin, B. Martinez-Vazquez, P. L. Garcia-Ybarra and J. L. Castillo, Peak Utilization of Catalyst with Ultra-Low Pt Loaded PEM Fuel Cell Electrodes Prepared by the Electrospray Method, J. Power Sources, 2013, 229, 179–184,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.12.029 .
S. Martin, P. L. Garcia-Ybarra and J. L. Castillo, Ten-Fold Reduction from the State-of-the-Art Platinum Loading of Electrodes Prepared by Electrospraying for High Temperature Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 93, 57–61,  DOI:10.1016/j.elecom.2018.06.007 .
A. M. Chaparro, P. Ferreira-Aparicio, M. A. Folgado, A. J. Martín and L. Daza, Catalyst Layers for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells Prepared by Electrospray Deposition on Nafion Membrane, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(9), 4200–4208,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2010.09.096 .
A. M. Chaparro, B. Gallardo, M. A. Folgado, A. J. Martín and L. Daza, PEMFC Electrode Preparation by Electrospray: Optimization of Catalyst Load and Ionomer Content, Catal. Today, 2009, 143(3), 237–241,  DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2008.12.003 .
A. M. Chaparro, P. Ferreira-Aparicio, M. A. Folgado, E. Brightman and G. Hinds, Study of Superhydrophobic Electrosprayed Catalyst Layers Using a Localized Reference Electrode Technique, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 609–619,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.06.077 .
T.-H. Huang, H.-L. Shen, T.-C. Jao, F.-B. Weng and A. Su, Ultra-Low Pt Loading for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells by Catalyst Coating Technique with Ultrasonic Spray Coating Machine, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37(18), 13872–13879,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.04.108 .
M. B. Sassin, Y. Garsany, B. D. Gould and K. E. Swider-Lyons, Fabrication Method for Laboratory-Scale High-Performance Membrane Electrode Assemblies for Fuel Cells, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89(1), 511–518,  DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03005 .
A. Dalmoro, M. d’Amore and A. A. Barba, Droplet Size Prediction in the Production of Drug Delivery Microsystems by Ultrasonic Atomization, Translational Medicine @ UniSa, 2013, 7, 6–11 Search PubMed  , ISSN 2239-9747.
A. Caillard, C. Coutanceau, P. Brault, J. Mathias and J.-M. Léger, Structure of Pt/C and PtRu/C Catalytic Layers Prepared by Plasma Sputtering and Electric Performance in Direct Methanol Fuel Cells (DMFC), J. Power Sources, 2006, 162(1), 66–73,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2006.07.009 .
S. Y. Cha, Performance of Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell Electrodes Prepared by Direct Deposition of Ultrathin Platinum on the Membrane Surface, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146(11), 4055,  DOI:10.1149/1.1392591 .
P. Brault, Review of Low Pressure Plasma Processing of Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell Electrocatalysts, Plasma Processes Polym., 2016, 13(1), 10–18,  DOI:10.1002/ppap.201500171 .
K. Fu, L. Zeng, J. Liu, M. Liu, S. Li, W. Guo, Y. Gao and M. Pan, Magnetron Sputtering a High-Performance Catalyst for Ultra-Low-Pt Loading PEMFCs, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 815, 152374,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2019.152374 .
A. Caillard, P. Brault, J. Mathias, C. Charles, R. W. Boswell and T. Sauvage, Deposition and Diffusion of Platinum Nanoparticles in Porous Carbon Assisted by Plasma Sputtering, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2005, 200(1), 391–394,  DOI:10.1016/j.surfcoat.2005.01.033 .
A. Caillard, C. Charles, R. Boswell, A. Meige and P. Brault, Deposition of Platinum Catalyst by Plasma Sputtering for Fuel Cells: 3D Simulation and Experiments, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., 2008, 17(3), 035028,  DOI:10.1088/0963-0252/17/3/035028 .
A. Caillard, C. Charles, R. Boswell and P. Brault, Improvement of the Sputtered Platinum Utilization in Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells Using Plasma-Based Carbon Nanofibres, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41(18), 185307,  DOI:10.1088/0022-3727/41/18/185307 .
P. Brault, A. Caillard, A. L. Thomann, J. Mathias, C. Charles, R. W. Boswell, S. Escribano, J. Durand and T. Sauvage, Plasma Sputtering Deposition of Platinum into Porous Fuel Cell Electrodes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2004, 37(24), 3419–3423,  DOI:10.1088/0022-3727/37/24/010 .
M. Cavarroc, A. Ennadjaoui, M. Mougenot, P. Brault, R. Escalier, Y. Tessier, J. Durand, S. Roualdès, T. Sauvage and C. Coutanceau, Performance of Plasma Sputtered Fuel Cell Electrodes with Ultra-Low Pt Loadings, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11(4), 859–861,  DOI:10.1016/j.elecom.2009.02.012 .
M. Mougenot, A. Caillard, P. Brault, S. Baranton and C. Coutanceau, High Performance Plasma Sputtered PdPt Fuel Cell Electrodes with Ultra Low Loading, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36(14), 8429–8434,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.04.080 .
I. Farid, A. Boruah, J. Chutia, A. R. Pal and H. Bailung, Low Loaded Platinum (Pt) Based Binary Catalyst Electrode for PEMFC by Plasma Co-Sputtered Deposition Method, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 236, 121796,  DOI:10.1016/j.matchemphys.2019.121796 .
M. Alvisi, G. Galtieri, L. Giorgi, R. Giorgi, E. Serra and M. A. Signore, Sputter Deposition of Pt Nanoclusters and Thin Films on PEM Fuel Cell Electrodes, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2005, 200(5), 1325–1329,  DOI:10.1016/j.surfcoat.2005.07.093 .
Y.-H. Cho, S. J. Yoo, Y.-H. Cho, H.-S. Park, I.-S. Park, J. K. Lee and Y.-E. Sung, Enhanced Performance and Improved Interfacial Properties of Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells Fabricated Using Sputter-Deposited Pt Thin Layers, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53(21), 6111–6116,  DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2007.12.008 .
M. D. Gasda, G. A. Eisman and D. Gall, Sputter-Deposited Pt/CrN Nanoparticle PEM Fuel Cell Cathodes: Limited Proton Conductivity Through Electrode Dewetting, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 157(1), B71,  DOI:10.1149/1.3247351 .
A. Ostroverkh, V. Johánek, M. Dubau, P. Kúš, I. Khalakhan, B. Šmíd, R. Fiala, M. Václavů, Y. Ostroverkh and V. Matolín, Optimization of Ionomer-Free Ultra-Low Loading Pt Catalyst for Anode/Cathode of PEMFC via Magnetron Sputtering, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(35), 19344–19356,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.12.206 .
N. B. Chaure, P. Stamenov, F. M. F. Rhen and J. M. D. Coey, Oriented Cobalt Nanowires Prepared by Electrodeposition in a Porous Membrane, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2005, 290–291, 1210–1213,  DOI:10.1016/j.jmmm.2004.11.387 .
Y. Zhao, K. Tang, H. Liu, B. Van der Bruggen, A. Sotto Díaz, J. Shen and C. Gao, An Anion Exchange Membrane Modified by Alternate Electro-Deposition Layers with Enhanced Monovalent Selectivity, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 520, 262–271,  DOI:10.1016/j.memsci.2016.07.026 .
A. M. Feltham and M. Spiro, Platinized Platinum Electrodes, Chem. Rev., 1971, 71(2), 177–193,  DOI:10.1021/cr60270a002 .
K. Itaya, H. Takahashi and I. Uchida, Electrodeposition of Pt Ultramicroparticles in Nafion Films on Glassy Carbon Electrodes, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1986, 208(2), 373–382,  DOI:10.1016/0022-0728(86)80544-7 .
E. J. Taylor, Preparation of High-Platinum-Utilization Gas Diffusion Electrodes for Proton-Exchange-Membrane Fuel Cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139(5), L45,  DOI:10.1149/1.2069439 .
Y. Saejeng and N. Tantavichet, Preparation of Pt–Co Alloy Catalysts by Electrodeposition for Oxygen Reduction in PEMFC, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2009, 39(1), 123–134,  DOI:10.1007/s10800-008-9644-x .
C. D. Cooper, J. J. Burk, C. P. Taylor and S. K. Buratto, Ultra-Low Pt Loading Catalyst Layers Prepared by Pulse Electrochemical Deposition for PEM Fuel Cells, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2017, 47(6), 699–709,  DOI:10.1007/s10800-017-1071-4 .
P. Dhanasekaran, K. Lokesh, P. K. Ojha, A. K. Sahu, S. D. Bhat and D. Kalpana, Electrochemical Deposition of Three-Dimensional Platinum Nanoflowers for High-Performance Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 572, 198–206,  DOI:10.1016/j.jcis.2020.03.078 .
A. Egetenmeyer, I. Radev, D. Durneata, M. Baumgärtner, V. Peinecke, H. Natter and R. Hempelmann, Pulse Electrodeposited Cathode Catalyst Layers for PEM Fuel Cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42(19), 13649–13660,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.01.212 .
D.-K. Kim, H. Kim, H. Park, S. Oh, S. H. Ahn, H.-J. Kim and S.-K. Kim, Performance Enhancement of High-Temperature Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells Using Pt Pulse Electrodeposition, J. Power Sources, 2019, 438, 227022,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.227022 .
S. Lertviriyapaisan and N. Tantavichet, Sublayers for Pt Catalyst Electrodeposition Electrodes in PEMFC, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35(19), 10464–10471,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2010.07.112 .
N. Rajalakshmi and K. S. Dhathathreyan, Nanostructured Platinum Catalyst Layer Prepared by Pulsed Electrodeposition for Use in PEM Fuel Cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33(20), 5672–5677,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2008.05.100 .
S. D. Thompson, L. R. Jordan and M. Forsyth, Platinum Electrodeposition for Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46(10), 1657–1663,  DOI:10.1016/S0013-4686(00)00767-2 .
L. Xiong and A. Manthiram, High Performance Membrane-Electrode Assemblies with Ultra-Low Pt Loading for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50(16), 3200–3204,  DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2004.11.049 .
N. Ramaswamy, T. M. Arruda, W. Wen, N. Hakim, M. Saha, A. Gullá and S. Mukerjee, Enhanced Activity and Interfacial Durability Study of Ultra Low Pt Based Electrocatalysts Prepared by Ion Beam Assisted Deposition (IBAD) Method, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54(26), 6756–6766,  DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2009.06.040 .
M. S. Saha, A. F. Gullá, R. J. Allen and S. Mukerjee, High Performance Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells with Ultra-Low Pt Loading Electrodes Prepared by Dual Ion-Beam Assisted Deposition, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51(22), 4680–4692,  DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2006.01.006 .
Z. Song, M. Norouzi Banis, H. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Zhao, J. Li, K. Doyle-Davis, R. Li, S. Knights, S. Ye, G. A. Botton, P. He and X. Sun, Ultralow Loading and High-Performing Pt Catalyst for a Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell Anode Achieved by Atomic Layer Deposition, ACS Catal., 2019, 9(6), 5365–5374,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.8b04504 .
X. Wang, F. W. Richey, K. H. Wujcik and Y. A. Elabd, Ultra-Low Platinum Loadings in Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell Electrodes Fabricated via Simultaneous Electrospinning/Electrospraying Method, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 42–48,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.04.052 .
N. Cunningham, E. Irissou, M. Lefèvre, M.-C. Denis, D. Guay and J.-P. Dodelet, PEMFC Anode with Very Low Pt Loadings Using Pulsed Laser Deposition, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6(7), A125,  DOI:10.1149/1.1574232 .
W. Mróz, B. Budner, W. Tokarz, P. Piela and M. L. Korwin-Pawlowski, Ultra-Low-Loading Pulsed-Laser-Deposited Platinum Catalyst Films for Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 885–893,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.09.173 .
G. Adilbish, J.-W. Lee, Y.-S. Jang, H.-G. Lee and Y.-T. Yu, Preparation of Pt/C Electrode with Double Catalyst Layers by Electrophoresis Deposition Method for PEMFC, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39(7), 3381–3386,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.11.044 .
A. Malekian, S. Salari, J. Stumper, N. Djilali and M. Bahrami, Effect of Compression on Pore Size Distribution and Porosity of PEM Fuel Cell Catalyst Layers, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(41), 23396–23405,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.07.036 .
Z. Yu, R. N. Carter and J. Zhang, Measurements of Pore Size Distribution, Porosity, Effective Oxygen Diffusivity, and Tortuosity of PEM Fuel Cell Electrodes, Fuel Cells, 2012, 12(4), 557–565,  DOI:10.1002/fuce.201200017 .
K. J. Lange, P.-C. Sui and N. Djilali, Pore Scale Modeling of a Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell Catalyst Layer: Effects of Water Vapor and Temperature, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(6), 3195–3203,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2010.11.118 .
B. Millington, V. Whipple and B. G. Pollet, A Novel Method for Preparing Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell Electrodes by the Ultrasonic-Spray Technique, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(20), 8500–8508,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.06.024 .
A. M. Chaparro, M. A. Folgado, P. Ferreira-Aparicio, A. J. Martín, I. Alonso-Álvarez and L. Daza, Properties of Catalyst Layers for PEMFC Electrodes Prepared by Electrospray Deposition, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157(7), B993,  DOI:10.1149/1.3425740 .
S. Martin, J. O. Jensen, Q. Li, P. L. Garcia-Ybarra and J. L. Castillo, Feasibility of Ultra-Low Pt Loading Electrodes for High Temperature Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells Based in Phosphoric Acid-Doped Membrane, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(52), 28273–28282,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.09.073 .
Z. Yu and R. Carter, Measurements of Effective Oxygen Diffusivity, Pore Size Distribution, and Porosity in PEM Fuel Cell Electrodes, ECS Trans., 2019, 19(17), 1–15,  DOI:10.1149/1.3242364 .
H. Yu, J. M. Roller, W. E. Mustain and R. Maric, Influence of the Ionomer/Carbon Ratio for Low-Pt Loading Catalyst Layer Prepared by Reactive Spray Deposition Technology, J. Power Sources, 2015, 283, 84–94,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.02.101 .
M. B. Sassin, Y. Garsany, R. W. Atkinson, R. M. E. Hjelm and K. E. Swider-Lyons, Understanding the Interplay between Cathode Catalyst Layer Porosity and Thickness on Transport Limitations En Route to High-Performance PEMFCs, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(31), 16944–16955,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.04.194 .
P. Gode, F. Jaouen, G. Lindbergh, A. Lundblad and G. Sundholm, Influence of the Composition on the Structure and Electrochemical Characteristics of the PEFC Cathode, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48(28), 4175–4187,  DOI:10.1016/S0013-4686(03)00603-0 .
S. Shukla, D. Stanier, M. S. Saha, J. Stumper and M. Secanell, Analysis of Inkjet Printed PEFC Electrodes with Varying Platinum Loading, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163(7), F677,  DOI:10.1149/2.1111607jes .
T. Soboleva, K. Malek, Z. Xie, T. Navessin and S. Holdcroft, PEMFC Catalyst Layers: The Role of Micropores and Mesopores on Water Sorption and Fuel Cell Activity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3(6), 1827–1837,  DOI:10.1021/am200590w .
J. Zhao, A. Ozden, S. Shahgaldi, I. E. Alaefour, X. Li and F. Hamdullahpur, Effect of Pt Loading and Catalyst Type on the Pore Structure of Porous Electrodes in Polymer Electrolyte Membrane (PEM) Fuel Cells, Energy, 2018, 150, 69–76,  DOI:10.1016/j.energy.2018.02.134 .
S. Shahgaldi, A. Ozden, X. Li and F. Hamdullahpur, Cathode Catalyst Layer Design with Gradients of Ionomer Distribution for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 171, 1476–1486,  DOI:10.1016/j.enconman.2018.06.078 .
A. Ozden, S. Shahgaldi, J. Zhao, X. Li and F. Hamdullahpur, Degradations in Porous Components of a Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell under Freeze-Thaw Cycles: Morphology and Microstructure Effects, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45(5), 3618–3631,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.10.209 .
J. Zhao, S. Shahgaldi, A. Ozden, I. E. Alaefour, X. Li and F. Hamdullahpur, Effect of Catalyst Deposition on Electrode Structure, Mass Transport and Performance of Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells, Appl. Energy, 2019, 255, 113802,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113802 .
J. J. Conde, M. A. Folgado, P. Ferreira-Aparicio, A. M. Chaparro, A. Chowdhury, A. Kusoglu, D. Cullen and A. Z. Weber, Mass-Transport Properties of Electrosprayed Pt/C Catalyst Layers for Polymer-Electrolyte Fuel Cells, J. Power Sources, 2019, 427, 250–259,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.04.079 .
S. Panigrahi, S. Kundu, S. Ghosh, S. Nath and T. Pal, General Method of Synthesis for Metal Nanoparticles, J. Nanopart. Res., 2004, 6(4), 411–414,  DOI:10.1007/s11051-004-6575-2 .
S. Niu, Y. Sun, G. Sun, D. Rakov, Y. Li, Y. Ma, J. Chu and P. Xu, Stepwise Electrochemical Construction of FeOOH/Ni(OH)2 on Ni Foam for Enhanced Electrocatalytic Oxygen Evolution, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2(5), 3927–3935,  DOI:10.1021/acsaem.9b00785 .
A. M. Pasqualeti, P. Y. Olu, M. Chatenet and F. H. B. Lima, Borohydride Electrooxidation on Carbon-Supported Noble Metal Nanoparticles: Insights into Hydrogen and Hydroxyborane Formation, ACS Catal., 2015, 5(5), 2778–2787,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.5b00107 .
Y. Hatakeyama, K. Onishi and K. Nishikawa, Effects of Sputtering Conditions on Formation of Gold Nanoparticles in Sputter Deposition Technique, RSC Adv., 2011, 1(9), 1815–1821,  10.1039/c1ra00688f .
P. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Qin, S. Mo, G. Chen, L. Gu, D. M. Chevrier, P. Zhang, Q. Guo, D. Zang, B. Wu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Catalysis: Photochemical Route for Synthesizing Atomically Dispersed Palladium Catalysts, Science, 2016, 352(6287), 797–801,  DOI:10.1126/science.aaf5251 .
C. Jackson, G. T. Smith, D. W. Inwood, A. S. Leach, P. S. Whalley, M. Callisti, T. Polcar, A. E. Russell, P. Levecque and D. Kramer, Electronic Metal-Support Interaction Enhanced Oxygen Reduction Activity and Stability of Boron Carbide Supported Platinum, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15802,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms15802 .
H.-W. Cui, J.-T. Jiu, S. Nagao, T. Sugahara, K. Suganuma, H. Uchida and K. A. Schroder, Ultra-Fast Photonic Curing of Electrically Conductive Adhesives Fabricated from Vinyl Ester Resin and Silver Micro-Flakes for Printed Electronics, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(31), 15914–15922,  10.1039/C4RA00292J .
G. L. Draper, R. Dharmadasa, M. E. Staats, B. W. Lavery and T. Druffel, Fabrication of Elemental Copper by Intense Pulsed Light Processing of a Copper Nitrate Hydroxide Ink, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(30), 16478–16485,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.5b03854 .
T. Druffel, R. Dharmadasa, B. W. Lavery and K. Ankireddy, Intense Pulsed Light Processing for Photovoltaic Manufacturing, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 359–369,  DOI:10.1016/j.solmat.2017.09.010 .
A. Lesch, Print-Light-Synthesis of Platinum Nanostructured Indium-Tin-Oxide Electrodes for Energy Research, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3(2), 1700201,  DOI:10.1002/admt.201700201 .

          A. Lesch, S. Maye, M. Jović, F. Gumy, P. Tacchini and H. H. Girault, Analytical Sensing Platforms with Inkjet Printed Electrodes, in Advanced Materials - TechConnect Briefs,  2016, vol. 3, pp. 121–124 Search PubMed .
A. Bananezhad, M. Jović, L. F. Villalobos, K. V. Agrawal, M. R. Ganjali and H. H. Girault, Large-Scale Fabrication of Flexible Solid-State Reference Electrodes, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 847, 113241,  DOI:10.1016/j.jelechem.2019.113241 .
M. Jović, Y. Zhu, A. Lesch, A. Bondarenko, F. Cortés-Salazar, F. Gumy and H. H. Girault, Inkjet-Printed Microtiter Plates for Portable Electrochemical Immunoassays, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 786, 69–76,  DOI:10.1016/j.jelechem.2016.12.051 .
V. Costa Bassetto, M. Mensi, E. Oveisi, H. H. Girault and A. Lesch, Print-Light-Synthesis of Ni and NiFe-Nanoscale Catalysts for Oxygen Evolution, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2(9), 6322–6331,  DOI:10.1021/acsaem.9b00957 .
V. Costa Bassetto, W. Oliveira Silva, C. M. Pereira and H. H. Girault, Flash Light Synthesis of Noble Metal Nanoparticles for Electrochemical Applications: Silver, Gold, and Their Alloys, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2020, 24, 1781–1788,  DOI:10.1007/s10008-020-04521-5 .
W. O. Silva, V. C. Bassetto, D. Baster, M. Mensi and E. Oveisi, Oxidative Print-Light-Synthesis Thin Film Deposition of Prussian Blue, 2020, 2, 927–935,  DOI:10.1021/acsaelm.9b00854 .
C. Bauer, J.-P. Abid and H. H. Girault, Size Dependence Investigations of Hot Electron Cooling Dynamics in Metal/Adsorbates Nanoparticles, Chem. Phys., 2005, 319(1), 409–421,  DOI:10.1016/j.chemphys.2005.06.040 .
V. Costa Bassetto, M. Mensi, E. Oveisi, H. H. Girault and A. Lesch, Print-Light-Synthesis of Ni and NiFe-Nanoscale Catalysts for Oxygen Evolution, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2(9), 6322–6331,  DOI:10.1021/acsaem.9b00957 .
V. Costa Bassetto, J. Xiao, E. Oveisi, V. Amstutz, B. Liu, H. H. Girault and A. Lesch, Rapid Inkjet Printing of High Catalytic Activity Co3O4/N-RGO Layers for Oxygen Reduction Reaction, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 563, 9–17,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcata.2018.06.026 .
W. O. Silva, V. Costa Bassetto, D. Baster, M. Mensi, E. Oveisi and H. H. Girault, Oxidative Print Light Synthesis Thin Film Deposition of Prussian Blue, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2(4), 927–935,  DOI:10.1021/acsaelm.9b00854 .
A. Lesch, Print-Light-Synthesis of Platinum Nanostructured Indium-Tin-Oxide Electrodes for Energy Research, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3(2), 1700201,  DOI:10.1002/admt.201700201 .
F. Paglia, D. Vak, J. van Embden, A. S. R. Chesman, A. Martucci, J. J. Jasieniak and E. Della Gaspera, Photonic Sintering of Copper through the Controlled Reduction of Printed CuO Nanocrystals, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(45), 25473–25478,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.5b08430 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Figure of the membrane electrode assembly composed of several important part: (i) the gas diffusion layer (GDL) at both the anode and cathode sides; (ii) the catalytic layer (CL) composed of carbon support and platinum; (iii) the proton-exchange membrane (PEM).	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of (a) a fresh MEA cross-section, (b) an MEA after ageing and long cycling operation,9 and (c) a catalyst layer surface.10 (d) HR-TEM images of carbon-supported Pt catalysts11 Adapted with permission from ref. 6–8. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society, Elsevier (license number 4846430569714) and RSC Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a and b) Schematic overview of CCM and CCS deposition methods; SEM images (cross-sectional view) of ten printed layers of Pt/C ink deposited onto the Nafion membrane (c) and carbon paper substrate (d). Adapted from ref. 53. Copyright © 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images obtained after the cross-sections of MEAs prepared with different drying techniques. Copyright 2020 Elsevier B.V.56	 

Nafion 212 thickness (μm)	50.8	44 ± 3	43 ± 6	29 ± 19
Nafion 212 roughness factor (μm2/μm2)	1.02 ± 0.02	1.15	1.33	2.98
MPL/catalyst (MPLC) outer surface roughness factor (μm2/μm2)	1.54	1.26	1.32	1.48
Normalized contact area (μm2/μm2)	
A
GDL/MPLC
	0.35	0.39	0.83	0.76

A
GDL/Nafion
	—	0	2.1 × 10−3	0.4

A
MPLC/Nafion
	—	0.59	1.28	1.45
Width of the surface cracks in the MPLC (μm)	14 ± 4	12 ± 3	7 ± 3	13 ± 7

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the screen-printing technique.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of DOD inkjet-printing technique.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the flexography process. Legends correspond to (1) fountain roller, (2) doctor blade, (3) anilox roller, (4) plate cylinder, (5) flex plate, (6) substrate, (7) impression cylinder, and (8) ink tray. (b) Picture of a FlexiProof device. Adapted from ref. 90. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Scheme	

	

	


Working principle	The liquid ink is sprayed by the fast-moving nitrogen gas stream when exiting the liquid flow nozzle, forming a wide distribution of fragment sizes, which are finally deposited onto the substrate and dried	Electrospraying consists of the pulverization of a liquid under the influence of a strong electric field applied between the ejector needle and the substrate. It maintains the formation of a mist of ionized droplets and particles, which deposit very homogeneously	A pinpoint spray shaper is connected to the ultrasonic narrow spray atomizer nozzle and a gas inlet port at the side of the spray shaper forces the catalyst ink droplet into the pinpoint spray pattern
Parameters to control the thickness and uniformity	• Initial angle	• DC voltage	• Ultrasonic spray nozzle height (distance between the membrane and the nozzle)
• Total ink flow rate	• Flow rate	• Spray path
• Transporting gas velocity	• Ejector geometry	• Flow rate of the solution
• Distance from the nozzle to the substrate94	• Solvent composition	• Speed of the nozzle

	• Needle-substrate distance	• Frequency of the ultrasound generator

	
	• Air pressure
Advantages	• Easy operation	• The trajectory of the charged droplets is determined by the parameters of the electrostatic field. During the flight from the nozzle to the collector, the charge of the droplets prevents coagulation97	• More precise, more controllable, and tighter drop distribution98
• Low requirement for the solubility of solution and high speed of preparation95,96	• The experimental set-up is inexpensive and simple as it only requires a high voltage power supply and a pump-needle system	• Minimal bounce-back and overspray of the liquid onto the substrate
• Extremely thin layers: 2 to 5 μm	
	• No clogging
• Reduced amount of expensive materials such as the Pt catalyst.	
	• Uses small-to-moderate amounts of material (e.g., catalyst and ionomer)
• Can handle high viscosity solutions by adjusting the nitrogen pressure	
	• Possible automation: reproducibility

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of the deagglomeration of nanoparticles by the ultrasonic spray method compared with the air spray method. Adapted from ref. 98. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Scheme of the plasma sputtering process.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the magnetron sputtering process.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic comparison of pulsed current and direct current electrodeposition.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM image of a catalyst layer showing secondary and primary pores, agglomerates, and carbon support particles. Adapted from ref. 147 under the license number 495414494132 © 2019 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC.	 

Screen-printing	• Uniform pore size distribution with no cracks when applying a single printing step	• Mud-cracking in the CL and discontinuity of the film with an increase in the tortuosity

	• Thick printed layers (≥20 μm)
Inkjet printing	• Uniform and repeatable deposition	• Ink viscosity and controllable parameters has to be maintained
• Homogeneous distribution of carbon support, ionomer and catalyst nanoparticles	

• Ultra-thin low loading is possible with high Pt utilization	

• No cracks on catalyst layer	

• The ability to create a graded structure of varying catalyst/Nafion ratios	

Flexography	• Uniform thickness of the catalyst layer	• Crack formation and problem of ionomer continuity
• Repeatable and rapid deposition	• Difficult for CCM-based MEA due to membrane swelling
Air-spray coating	• Porous distribution of ink	• The size of the droplets can vary, a limitation that has consequences for the uniformity of the film
• Tunable to desired catalyst loading	• The way of deposition must be maintained to have homogeneous distribution

	• Agglomeration of particles
Electrospray	• Reduce the agglomeration of carbon-supported Pt NPs and achieve more uniform pore distributions by simply increasing the spraying voltage	• Many controllable variables can influence the coating (solvent, solution viscosity, injection rate, spray pressure, distance from sample)
• Higher Pt utilization	

Ultrasonic spray	• Highly repeatable and homogeneous thin films of micron-sized droplets with a tight drop distribution by the ultrasound energy	• Many controllable variables can influence the coating
• Fabricate ultra-low Pt loading MEAs	

Sputtering	• High Pt utilization	• Increased RF power led to increased deposition rates, which caused damage to the crystalline structures, leading to higher kinetic resistance
• Desired particle size	

• Uniformity distribution and easy to localize and control the catalyst depth	

Electrochemical deposition	• High control of the particles' size and distribution by applying the appropriate potential	• Produce secondary ions (e.g. Cl− by using the H2PtCl6), which are known to have a poisoning effect on Pt catalysts
• Uniformity and ultra-low loading	


 	Fig. 13  Diffusion paths for oxygen in PSD with different ionomer distributions (green): (a) uniform ionomer distribution, (b) non-uniform ionomer distribution. Adapted from ref. 149 under the license number. Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 


Screen printing	Pt/C	Cyclohexanol + ethylene glycola	CCM	0.5	0.5	Nafion 212	Toray carbon fiber paper	21	65 °C H2/air (humid)	0.95	0.70b	
52

Inkjet printing	Pt/C	Isopropanol + glycerola	CCM	0.026	0.026	Nafion 211	SGL Sigracet 24 BC	1.7	80 °C H2/O2 (humid)	0.9	1.23	
45

Pt/C	1-Propanol + propylene glycola	CCS	0.061	0.5	Nafion 211	Toray carbon paper	0.66	50 °C H2/O2 (humid)	0.95	1.06	
53

Flexography (roll-to-roll)	Pt/C	Watera	CCM	0.2	0.2	Nafion 212	SGL Sigracet 24 BC	4–6	80 °C H2/air (humid)	0.9	0.45b	
91

Air-assisted spray	Pt/C	Isopropanol + DI watera	CCM	0.3	0.3	Nafion 212	SGL Sigracet 25 BC	5	80 °C H2/O2 (humid)	0.95	1.33	
99

Electrospray	Pt/C	Isopropanola	CCM	0.3	0.4	Nafion 211	Toray carbon paper	—	80 °C H2/O2 (humid)	0.99	1.41	
97

Pt/C	Isopropanola	CCM	0.25	0.17	Nafion 212	ELAT GDL LT1200W	18	80 °C H2/O2 (humid)	0.97	0.90	
163

Ultrasonic spray	Pt/C	DI water + ethanola	CCM	0.34	0.34	Nafion HP	SGL Sigracet 25 BC	7.5	80 °C H2/air (humid)	0.9	0.60	
100

Plasma sputtering	Pt–Ag/C	No solvent	CCS	0.05	0.15 (0.09 Pt and 0.06 Ag)	Nafion 212	Carbon paper (EC-TP1-030T)	—	60 °C H2/O2 (humid)	0.9	0.50	
121

Magnetron sputtering	Pt/C	No solvent	CCS	0.05	0.08	Gore membrane	SGL Sigracet 25 BC	—	80 °C H2/O2 (humid)	0.9	1.87	
114

Pt/CeOy/CNx (anode) Pt/C (cathode)	No solvent	CCS	0.0085	0.4	Nafion 212	Carbon toray paper	0.005 (anode catalyst layer)	70 °C H2/O2 (humid)	0.95	1.30	
46

Pulse electrodeposition	Pt/C	H2PtCl6 in H2SO4	CCS	0.057	0.554	Nafion 212	Woven carbon cloth (ELAT® 1400 W)	8	75 °C H2/air (humid)	0.87	0.58	
132

Direct current electrodeposition	Pt on C-GDL	H2PtCl6 in H2SO4	CCS	0.15	0.21	Nafion XL	BC-35 gas diffusion layer	—	60 °C H2/O2 (humid)	0.88	0.78	
133

	(1)

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic representation of the combined inkjet printing and photonic curing process to fabricate platinum nanostructures on an ITO electrode;173 (b) print-light synthesis to create nanoscale electrocatalysts on large-scale electrodes using combined inkjet-printing and flash light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Bright-field (a) and high-angle annular dark-field (b) STEM images of Ni0.45Fe0.55 NPs as formed on CNTs by print-light synthesis. The area indicated in part (b) by the white rectangle was used for particle size distribution analysis (c). The dashed line in part (c) indicates the lower cutoff value that was set for the image-based particle size analysis.181 Printed films of the K4[Fe(CN)6]·3H2O precursor and its respective Prussian blue patterns obtained after photonic curing on different substrates: (d) ITO, (e) PET, and (f) titanium.183 SEM observation in (g–k) of the top view and (l and m) cross-section of nanoparticulate coatings exposed to different energies of IPL. All scale bars are 500 nm. In the cross-sectional images, the substrate, CuO, and Cu are color coded in green, brown, and red, respectively.185	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
