Internal photoemission from plasmonic nanoparticles: comparison between surface and volume photoelectric effects  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR06679G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR06679G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4716-4727Internal photoemission from plasmonic nanoparticles: comparison between surface and volume photoelectric effects

        
          
            Alexander V. 
            Uskov
          
        
      *abcd, 
      
        
          
            Igor E. 
            Protsenko
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Renat S. 
            Ikhsanov
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Viktoriia E. 
            Babicheva
          
        
      fg, 
      
        
          
            Sergei V. 
            Zhukovsky
          
        
      fg, 
      
        
          
            Andrei V. 
            Lavrinenko
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Eoin P. 
            O'Reilly
          
        
      h and 

        
          
            Hongxing 
            Xu
          
        
      cd
aP. N. Lebedev Physical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, Leninsky pr. 53, 119991 Moscow, Russia. E-mail: alexusk@lebedev.ru;  Fax: +7-495-9382251;   Tel: +7-499-1326139
bAdvanced Energy Technologies Ltd, Skolkovo, Novaya ul. 100, 143025, Moscow Region, Russia
cSchool of Physics & Technology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, P. R. China
dInstitute of Physics, Chinese of Academy of Sciences, P. O. Box 603-146, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China
eResearch Institute of Scientific Instruments, State Nuclear Energy Corporation “Rosatom”, Moscow, Russia
fDTU Fotonik, Technical University of Denmark, Ørsteds Plads 343, DK-2800 Kgs., Lyngby, Denmark
gNational Research University for Information Technology, Mechanics, and Optics, Kronverkskiy, 49, St. Petersburg 197101, Russia
hTyndall National Institute, Cork, Ireland
Received 
      17th December 2013
    , Accepted 11th February 2014First published on 14th February 2014AbstractWe study the emission of photoelectrons from plasmonic nanoparticles into a surrounding matrix. We consider two mechanisms of electron emission from the nanoparticles – surface and volume ones – and use models for these two mechanisms which allow us to obtain analytical results for the photoelectron emission rate from a nanoparticle. Calculations have been carried out for a step potential at the surface of a spherical nanoparticle, and a simple model for the hot electron cooling has been used. We highlight the effect of the discontinuity of the dielectric permittivity at the nanoparticle boundary in the surface mechanism, which leads to a substantial (by ∼5 times) increase of the internal photoelectron emission rate from a nanoparticle compared to the case when such a discontinuity is absent. For a plasmonic nanoparticle, a comparison of the two photoeffect mechanisms was undertaken for the first time which showed that the surface photoeffect can in the general case be larger than the volume one, which agrees with the results obtained for a flat metal surface first formulated by Tamm and Schubin in their pioneering development of a quantum-mechanical theory of photoeffect in 1931. In accordance with our calculations, this possible predominance of the surface effect is based on two factors: (i) effective cooling of hot carriers during their propagation from the volume of the nanoparticle to its surface in the scenario of the volume mechanism and (ii) strengthening of the surface mechanism through the effect of the discontinuity of the dielectric permittivity at the nanoparticle boundary. The latter is stronger at relatively lower photon energies and correspondingly is more substantial for internal photoemission than for an external one. We show that in the general case, it is essential to take both mechanisms into account in the development of devices based on the photoelectric effect and when considering hot electron emission from a plasmonic nanoantenna.
I Introduction
A recent publication by Chalabi and Brongersma1 was entitled “Harvest season for hot electrons”, and this title excellently illustrates a boom of interest in the generation of hot photoelectrons in plasmonic nanostructures which is occurring at present. Indeed, the enhanced photoelectron emission from single plasmonic nanoantennas and from ensembles of such nanoantennas is under intensive study for application in Schottky barrier photodetectors in order to achieve higher device sensitivity;2–14 in solar cells with the goal to enhance their photovoltaic efficiency by harvesting solar photons below the semiconductor bandgap energy;2,4,6,11,14–21 in (nano-)photoelectrochemistry and (nano-)photochemistry,2,4,22–30 including, in particular, water splitting;25,26,28–30 for the realization of new photoconductive plasmonic metamaterials;6 and in molecular electronics31 – i.e. in all areas of science and technology where the generation of hot photoelectrons and their subsequent utilization play a principal role. In addition, the emission of hot electrons can enhance the characteristics of solar concentrator systems.32 Developments and proposals based on the use of the emission of photoelectrons from plasmonic nanoantennas (nanotips, first of all) into vacuum – including novel nanometer-sized femtosecond electron sources,33 femtosecond photoelectron emission spectroscopy,34 and the attosecond nanoplasmonic-field microscopy are also worth noting.35
Obviously, understanding the physical mechanisms that result in the emission of photoelectrons from plasmonic nanoparticles and nanostructures is essential for the development of devices based on this phenomenon. Research on this topic dates back to the pioneering work on a quantum-mechanical theory of the photoelectric effect from metals written in 1931 by Tamm and Schubin,36 who introduced and described two mechanisms contributing to the effect – see Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the two mechanisms of the photoelectric effect. (a) Surface effect: an electron collides with the Schottky barrier, absorbs the photon energy ℏω, and leaves the metal. (b) Volume effect: electron 1 receives energy ℏω, moves to the Schottky barrier, and overcomes it, leaving the metal; electrons 2 and 3 do not have sufficient energy when they reach the barrier and remain in the metal. Wb is the work function of the metal to semiconductor; εF is the Fermi level. 
(A) A surface mechanism (or the surface photoelectric effect, see Fig. 1a), in which an electron absorbs a photon during its collision with the metal surface (boundary) and, if the energy received by the electron is sufficient to overcome the potential barrier at the boundary (Schottky barrier if the metal is in contact with a semiconductor), then the electron is emitted from the metal into the matrix surrounding the metal (semiconductor, for instance) during this inelastic collision with the metal surface. In this case, the electron also can be reflected back into the metal after photon absorption during the collision.37 In the surface mechanism for the photoeffect, the rate of photoelectron emission from the metal is proportional to the square of the electromagnetic field component normal to the metal surface36 – see below.
(B) A volume (or bulk) mechanism (or the volume photoelectric effect, see Fig. 1b), which consists of three phases (see ref. 38 for a comprehensive review primarily devoted to this bulk mechanism).
(1) An electron absorbs a photon inside the metal during its collision with an impurity, phonon, lattice defect, etc.39 or due to its coupling to the periodic lattice potential36,40 and becomes “hot”;
(2) then the electron moves to the boundary of the metal (this “electron transport” phase is absent in the surface mechanism), colliding with phonons and cold electrons and losing energy in the process;
(3) if the electron reaches the metal surface with energy that is still sufficient to overcome the potential barrier at the boundary of the metal, the electron may be emitted into the matrix (semiconductor) surrounding the metal.
Obviously, the photoelectron emission rate from the metal in the scenario of the bulk photoeffect is proportional to the light absorption coefficient of the bulk metal; it depends on the energy distribution of hot electrons after their generation and also on the cooling rate of electrons during their motion to the nanoparticle boundary.
Having identified and compared these two mechanisms, Tamm and Schubin in ref. 36 considered mechanism (A) as dominating in the visible and IR ranges. Nevertheless, for several decades after the publication of ref. 36, researchers returned to the discussion on the above mechanisms for photoelectron emission from a metal (see ref. 38 and 41–50 and references therein), and in particular, to the arguments as to which of the two mechanisms is more important. The main argument against the surface mechanism (A) in those discussions was that the component of field normal to the surface (to the square of which the photoelectron emission rate in the surface mechanism is proportional) is absent if light is incident normally on a flat metal surface, as was relevant in many practical cases. However, it became clear in the 1960s and 70s (see ref. 46–50 and references therein) that the roughness of a metal surface can lead to the appearance of a normal component to the metal surface (in particular, due to the conversion of an incident plane wave into a surface plasmonic wave49), so that mechanism (A) can be essential even for macroscopically flat structures with normal incidence of light.
Nevertheless, the question as to which of the two mechanisms of photoelectron emission is dominant has been left open until the present time, with various groups adopting different approaches. Several years ago, Berini with his co-authors used the volume mechanism (B) as the basis for their consideration of thin-film Schottky barrier photodetectors,7–9 and very recently Halas and Nordlander with their colleagues3,12,13 have used the description of the volume mechanism given in ref. 7 to analyze the emission of photoelectrons from plasmonic nanoantennas. On the other hand, the theory of photoelectron emission from metallic nanoparticles developed in ref. 6 and then used in calculations in ref. 11 and 14 is based primarily on the surface mechanism (A). In ref. 51 Govorov and co-authors developed an approach to the theory of photoelectron emission from a plasmonic nanoparticle starting from a quantum microscopic description of the non-equilibrium carrier population in a localized plasmon wave. As nanostructures of more and more intricate shapes are introduced, the discussion on a proper description of photoelectron emission from metals in general and from metal nanostructures in particular is again of current importance.
In this paper, we compare the surface and volume mechanisms of internal photoelectron emission from plasmonic nanoparticles. Using spherical particles as a simple and analytically tractable example, we derive comparable metrics for each of the two mechanisms. Comparing these metrics, we conclude that the volume mechanism could only prevail if hot electrons were able to reach the nanoparticle surface without energy loss. In realistic cases, the “cooling” processes during “hot” electron transport often lead to the prevalence of the surface photoelectric effect, especially for smaller nanoparticles and lower photon energies.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we provide a detailed account on the theory of internal photoelectron emission from plasmonic nanoparticles. In particular, in Section II-A, the problem is formulated, and the concept of the cross-section of photoelectron emission from a nanoparticle is introduced. In Section II-B, formulae are presented to calculate the internal photoelectron emission rate from a nanoparticle and the photoelectron emission cross-section of a spherical nanoparticle for the surface photoelectric effect, based on the work in ref. 6 and using a simple model with a step potential at the nanoparticle boundary. In Section II-C, a model is presented to calculate the internal quantum efficiency for the volume photoelectric mechanism of photoeffect, including the derivation of an expression for the photoelectron emission cross-section for the volume mechanism. In Section III, numerical results are presented to compare the two mechanisms, and the basic assumptions of the calculations are discussed in detail. Finally, Section IV formulates the conclusions.
II Theory of the photoelectric effect
A Formulation of the problem
The following problem is under consideration – see Fig. 2. A plane light wave of frequency ω and with intensity S propagates along the z′-axis in a background matrix (dielectric or semiconductor) with relative permittivity εe. The amplitude Eo of the electric field of the light is polarized along the y′ direction. The wave is incident on an imbedded metal nanoparticle with relative permittivity εi(ω). For simplicity, we consider a spherical nanoparticle with radius a so that in the quasistatic approximation52 the field Ei inside the nanoparticle is homogeneous, parallel to Eo and can be expressed as:52 (1)
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of a spherical metallic nanoparticle (with permittivity εi) imbedded in a dielectric (or semiconductor) matrix (with permittivity εe). The incident plane wave with an electrical field Eo causes an electric field Ei inside the nanoparticle. Red arrows illustrate the surface photoelectric mechanism, while the blue arrow shows the volume (bulk) photoelectric mechanism. 
When the light frequency ω approaches the localized plasmonic frequency ωlpr which satisfies the Fröhlich conditions52 Re[εi(ωlpr)] + 2εe = 0(1a)then, as one can see from (1), a resonant enhancement of the field takes place (the localized plasmonic resonance). One should stress that the quasistatic approximation makes the resonance frequency ωlpr independent of the nanoparticle size, and the increase of εe lowers ωlpr approximately as . Note that the homogeneous field assumption may be violated in the presence of a strong plasmonic resonance and/or for nanoparticles of more complex shapes (e.g., nanoantennas), where strong field localization effects can lead to field inhomogeneity inside the nanoparticle. However, the presented formalism is straightforwardly generalized to the case of an inhomogeneous field, albeit at the cost of no longer being analytically tractable.
The electrons in the metal absorb photons with energy ℏω (A) during their collisions with the nanoparticle surface (surface photon absorption) and (B) inside the nanoparticle (volume photon absorption)36,37 and can leave the nanoparticle in either case. For the volume mechanism, our model is limited by the case when the imaginary part ε′′i(ω) of the metal permittivity εi(ω) includes only the contribution of free electrons, but not contributions from interband transitions in metal. Therefore, it is applicable only for ℏω ≤ 1.9 eV (for gold) and for higher energies, the contribution of interband transitions becomes important.52
Our goal is to calculate and to compare the photoelectron emission rates from the nanoparticle due to the surface and the volume absorption of photons. In the next two subsections, we present separately our calculations for the surface and volume (bulk) photoelectric effects from a metal nanoparticle.
The ability of plasmonic nanoparticles to emit photoelectrons can be characterized by the photoelectron emission cross-section of the nanoparticle.6 Namely, the photoelectron emission cross-section is: σem = Rem/(S/ℏω)(2)where Rem is the rate of emission of photoelectrons from the nanoparticle in (1/s), and S/ℏω is the photon flux [in 1/(m2 s)] incident on the nanoparticle. Below we calculate Rem and σem for both the surface and volume photoelectric effects.
B Theory of the surface photoelectric effect
In this subsection, we briefly introduce the theory of the surface mechanism for photoelectron emission, following the approach used in ref. 6 where the theory is presented in more detail. If the de Broglie electron wavelength ƛ in the metal is much smaller than the characteristic nanoparticle size Lnano, ƛ ≪ Lnano (one should note that in silver and gold ƛ ≈ 0.5 nm), then we can safely neglect quantum-confinement effects in the metal. In other words, the electron gas is uniformly distributed with an equilibrium density given by that of the bulk metal. Furthermore, we can calculate the rate u(r) of electron emission per unit area of the nanoparticle surface [1/(s m2)], by considering the nanoparticle surface at the coordinate r (see Fig. 2) as being flat and by using the theory of photoelectron emission due to collisions of metal electrons with a flat boundary. Within this approximation, the rate u(r) is proportional to the square of the normal component E(n)i(r) = n(r)·Ei of the field Ei:6,36,41–43 u(r) = Csurfaceem·|E(n)i(r)|2(3)where n(r) is the unit vector normal to the nanoparticle surface. The coefficient Csurfaceem is calculated quantum-mechanically (see below) and depends, in particular, on the electron density in the metal, on the photon energy ℏω, on the potential barrier for electrons at the nanoparticle boundary, and on any discontinuities in the permittivity and the electron mass at the interface between the metal and the surrounding matrix. Correspondingly, the photoelectron emission rate due to electron collisions with the total nanoparticle surface is: (4)where the integral extends over the entire nanoparticle surface. Since the field inside a spherical nanoparticle is homogeneous, we get easily: Rsurfaceem = Csurfaceem·Anano|Ei|2/3(5)where Anano = 4πa2 is the area of the nanoparticle surface.
The coefficient Csurfaceem in (2) can be found by solving the quantum-mechanical problem for the collision of a single electron with a metal boundary, and then subsequently summing over all metal electrons undergoing such collisions with the surface. Fig. 3 illustrates this problem. The metal boundary is modelled by the 1D potential barrier U(z) where the axis z is normal to the boundary and, in this section, we perform the calculation for an abruptly changing (at z = 0) potential (a step potential) with a step of height Ub, as indicated in Fig. 3. The potential step Ub can be written as Ub = εF + Wb where εF is the Fermi energy in the metal, and Wb is the work function of the metal, bordering the surrounding medium. The electron masses in the metal mi and in the surrounding medium (barrier) me can be different from each other, in general. We consider an electron plane wave in the metal incident on the metal boundary with wave vector ki = (kix,kiy,kiz). In the absence of an electromagnetic field, electron scattering from the barrier is elastic and furthermore the parallel wave vector component is conserved (since the surface is assumed to be locally flat). On the other hand, the electron may scatter inelastically in the presence of an electromagnetic field, i.e. by absorbing a photon with energy ℏω. While the parallel momentum of the electron is still conserved (neglecting the vanishing momentum of the photon itself), it may either scatter back into the metal or out into the surrounding matrix – see Fig. 3. We denote the corresponding probabilities by pin and pout, respectively. Both probabilities pin and pout are proportional to the square of the normal component E(n)i(r) of the field Ei in the metal:6,36,41–45 pin = cin·|E(n)i(r)|2(6) pout = cout·|E(n)i(r)|2(7)
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of inelastic scattering of an electron at a metal boundary in the presence of an optical field. The potential energy profile U(z) is plotted along the direction z normal to the metal boundary. An electron incident on the boundary (wave vector kz) scatters inelastically, by absorption of a photon (energy ℏω). In the collision with the boundary, the electron can be partly back-reflected into the metal or be forward scattered into the dielectric matrix (photoelectron emission). The blue line is a step potential with height Ub = εF + W where εF is the Fermi energy in the metal; W is the work function; the green curve illustrates an example of a gradually changing potential U(z). 
Note that the normal component E(n)i inside the metal is related to the normal component E(n)e in the surrounding medium by: εiE(n)i = εeE(n)e(8)
We concentrate below on the calculation of the photoelectron emission probability pout. Obviously, with a step potential as in Fig. 3, the photoelectron emission from the metal can occur (i.e., cout > 0) only if the electron gains sufficient energy to overcome the barrier, i.e. only if ℏ2kiz2/(2mi) + ℏω > Ub.
Although the probability pout can be calculated using various quantum-mechanical methods, it was found in ref. 6 through direct solution of the Schrödinger equation for an electron in the presence of the field using perturbation theory (see also a very detailed description in ref. 41). In this solution, the electron wave function in the barrier far from the boundary (z → ∞) contains the component: (9)describing an electron of initial energy in the metal ε(ki) = ℏ2(kix2 + kiy2 + kiz2)/(2mi)(10)which absorbed a photon of energy ℏω and left the metal for the surrounding medium. The z-component k+ez of the electron wave vector after the electron is emitted outside the metal after absorption of the photon is determined from the energy conservation law: (11)
The amplitude C+(∞) is proportional to the normal component E(n)i of the field in the metal and can be written as C+(∞) = (bVUb + bmΔm + bεΔε) E(n)i(12)where Δm = me − mi and Δε = εe − εi; and bV, bm, and bε are some coefficients, which are in general complex numbers. The emission probability pout is expressed through the amplitude C+(∞) as: (13)where we assume the unit probability amplitude for the electron plane wave wavefunction incident from the metal to the barrier. Correspondingly, (14)

Eqn (14) demonstrates clearly that photon absorption by an electron with emission from the metal takes place due to (a) the jump Ub in the potential, (b) the discontinuity Δm of the electron mass, and (c) the discontinuity Δε of the dielectric constant at the nanoparticle surface. Photon absorption due to a nonzero Δε can be considered as the inverse to the transit radiation effect, where an electron crosses the boundary between two media with different dielectric constants and emits light.53 Below, we show that nonzero Δε substantially increases the surface photoelectric effect.
We assume for simplicity that Δm = 0, so that me = mi ≡ m. In this case, calculating the coefficients bV and bε as in ref. 6, we derive the formula: (15)where e is the electron charge, X = εiz(kiz)/Ub with εiz(kiz) = ℏ2kiz2/(2m) so that the coefficient cout depends only on the z-component kiz of the initial vector ki, normal to the boundary: cout = cout[εiz(kiz)]; (16)and the coefficient (17)describes the effect of the discontinuity Δε on the photon absorption and photoelectron emission – if εe = εi, we have KΔε ≡ 1.
Summing over all electrons in the metal that collide with the surface in the metal, one can obtain the coefficient in eqn (3) as: (18)where fF(ki) = {1 + exp[(ε(ki) − εF)/kBTe]}−1 is the Fermi–Dirac equilibrium distribution function of electrons in the metal, Te is the electron temperature, and viz = ℏkiz/m is the electron velocity component normal to the metal boundary. Since the coefficient cout depends only on kiz (not on kix and kiy), the 3D integrals in (18) can be easily converted into 1D-integrals over kiz.
Let us introduce the dimensionless coefficient ηo related to Csurfaceem as:6 (19)through which the external quantum efficiency (the quantum yield) for devices based on photoelectron emission from ensembles of nanoantennas can be expressed.11,14 The parameter ηo itself can be interpreted as the external quantum efficiency of a device in which the incident light with intensity Svac = 2εoc|Evac|2 in vacuum (Evac is the electric field of light) creates the normal component E(n)i = Evac. Correspondingly, from eqn (15), (18) and (19) we have for Te = 0: (20)where αf-s = e2/(4πεoℏc) = 0.007297 ∼ 1/137 is the fine-structure constant, and we assume that ℏω < εF. The blue curve in Fig. 4 illustrates the dependence of ηo on the photon energy ℏω. In our calculations, we assumed that a gold nanoparticle is surrounded with a medium with εe = 13 (like GaAs). For gold, we used the dielectric constant εi(ω) from ref. 54. Correspondingly, [see condition (1a)], the plasmonic resonance in a spherical nanoparticle occurs at ℏωlpr = 1.48 eV (we reiterate that in the quasistatic approximation used here the frequency ωlpr does not depend on the radius a). We also used the values εF = 5.51 eV and Wb = 0.8 eV. One can see that the parameter ηo changes from zero at the threshold (ℏω = 0.8 eV) to ∼0.002 at ℏω ∼ 1.6 eV. The red curve illustrates eqn (21) obtained from (20) by approximate integration: (21)where  = 0.5 [1 + (εF − ℏω)/Ub]. Formula (21) shows clearly that, near the threshold, when the photon energy ℏω approaches the work function Wb, ηo ∝ (ℏω − Wb)5/2(22)
 Fig. 4  Spectral dependence of the photoelectron emission parameter ηo = ηo(ℏω). The blue curve is calculated from eqn (20), the red one is the approximation (21). The green curve is obtained by assuming Δε = 0 [i.e., KΔε(X) ≡ 1 in eqn (20)]. ℏωlpr is the photon energy where the plasmonic resonance occurs in the nanoparticle. 

Eqn (22) is different from the parabolic Fowler's law where ηo ∝ (ℏω − Wb)2 (ref. 55) and is found, in general, when the potential U(z) at the metal boundary changes sharply rather than gradually. In contrast, the parabolic Fowler's law works well for gradually changing potentials (see for example the green curve in Fig. 3; see also ref. 43–45, for instance).
The green curve in Fig. 4 shows the parameter ηo when Δε = 0 [i.e., KΔε(X) ≡ 1 in eqn (20)]. A comparison of the blue and green curves demonstrates that a nonzero discontinuity Δε of the dielectric constant ε at the boundary between the metal and surrounding medium substantially (by 3–10 times) increases the surface photoelectron emission parameter ηo.
The blue and green curves in Fig. 4 show also that the initial fast growth of ηo saturates with increasing photon energy ℏω and, after this saturation, the parameter ηo decreases (not shown). This behaviour is due to the strong suppression of the interaction of an electron with the electromagnetic field with increasing photon energies ℏω – see the 1/ω4 dependence in eqn (15). This circumstance, in particular, leads to a diminished role of the surface mechanism compared to the bulk mechanism with increasing photon energy ℏω – see Section III.
Following the definition of (2) and using (5) and (19), we can obtain a formula for the photoelectron emission cross-section due to the surface photoelectric effect: (23)where we have used the expression S = 2εoεe1/2c|Eo|2. The enhancement of the photoelectron emission cross-section due to plasmonic nanoantenna effects is included in eqn (23) through the factor |F|2 (see also eqn (1)). Examples of the calculation of σsurfaceem can be found in ref. 6.
C Calculation of the volume photoelectric effect
In our modeling of the volume photoelectric effect from a metal nanoparticle we follow closely the approach taken by Chen and Bates56 (see also the three-step description of the volume mechanism in ref. 38 and 57, and references therein). The power absorbed inside the nanoparticle is given by:52 (24)where Vnano = 4πa3/3 is the nanoparticle volume. Correspondingly, the photon absorption rate (in 1/s) in the whole nanoparticle is: Rvolumeabs ≡ P/ℏω = 2ℏ−1εoε′′i·|Ei|2Vnano = rvolabs·Vnano(25)where rvolabs = 2ℏ−1εoε′′i·|Ei|2(26)is the volume density for the photon absorption rate [1/(s m3)] in the nanoparticle. We assume that electrons in the metal before excitation by light have zero temperature, Te = 0, so that cold electrons occupy the Fermi sphere in k-space with radius , see Fig. 5a. Then the excited (“hot”) electrons occupy a spherical layer above the Fermi sphere in k-space: (27)(see Fig. 5a). If a hot electron, in its final state after photon absorption, has the energy Ef = ℏ2kf2/(2mi) (kf is the wave vector of the hot electron) larger than the height Ub of the potential barrier, i.e. Ef = ℏ2kf2/(2mi) > Ub ≡ ℏ2kbar2/(2mi)(28)(see Fig. 5a), then it has a chance to leave the nanoparticle. The ratio of the emission rate Rvolumeem for hot electrons from the nanoparticle to the excitation rate for hot electrons inside the nanoparticle, which simply equals the photon absorption rate Rvolumeabs, is, by definition, the internal quantum efficiency ηi of the volume photoelectric effect7, ηi = Rvolumeem/Rvolumeabs(29)
 Fig. 5  (a) Distribution of electrons in k-space. The blue colour shows the volume in k-space occupied by unexcited (cold) electrons; the pink colour illustrates excited (hot) electrons after photon absorption. Hot electrons outside the dashed line can be emitted from the nanoparticle. (b) Illustration of propagation of a hot electron in a spherical nanoparticle of radius a. A hot electron is generated at point 1 at a distance r from the centre 0 with wave vector kf and with angle θ to the axis z′′. In the absence of collisions, the electron moves along a straight line parallel to kf and collides with the nanoparticle surface at point 2. L is the length of the electron path before its collision with the nanoparticle boundary. α is the incidence angle of the electron to the surface. ks is the wave vector of the electron as it collides with the surface. 
Below we calculate ηi for a spherical nanoparticle.
We assume in our calculations that the distribution of hot electrons in the layer in k-space is uniform and isotropic. This assumption is a key point in Fowler's statistical theory of photoelectric emission from metals;55 we are adopting this assumption here (see also the modeling in ref. 7). Then, the density of the electron excitation rate in k-space, in units of m3/(s m3) = 1/s, is (30)where (31)is the volume occupied in k-space by hot electrons.
If pem(r,kf) is the probability of a hot electron (with wave vector kf, generated in the nanosphere at the position r) to be emitted from the nanoparticle, the photoelectron emission rate from the nanosphere is: (32)where ηi is the internal quantum efficiency, (33)
In our derivation of eqn (32) and (33), we used eqn (26) and (30). While the electron moves towards the boundary of the nanoparticle, it can experience elastic and inelastic collisions with phonons and cold electrons – finding pem(r,kf) is quite a complicated physical kinetics problem. References to papers, where various approaches to solve this problem were employed, can be found in ref. 7, 38, 56 and 57. In this paper, we use the simple model, presented in ref. 56, in order to find the probability pem(r,kf) and to calculate the efficiency ηi. Let us consider first the case where an electron moves to the boundary freely, i.e. without collisions. Fig. 5b illustrates this. A hot electron is generated with wave vector kf at point 1 in the sphere at a distance r < a from its centre (0). The vector kf is directed at an angle θ to the axis z′′, which goes from the centre 0 and passes through point 1. Because we assume “collisionless” motion of the electron, it moves along a straight line parallel to the vector kf. The electron collides with the spherical nanoparticle boundary at point 2 with incidence angle α – see Fig. 5b.
In general, if the electron arrives at the boundary with wave vector ks, the probability pem(r,kf) is equal to the quantum mechanical (transmission) probability tbar(ks) for this electron to overcome the potential barrier at the boundary between the metal and surrounding medium, pem(r,kf) ≡ tbar(ks). The transmission tbar(ks) is a function of the component k(n)s of the vector ks normal to the nanoparticle surface at the point of collision between the electron and the surface: tbar(ks) ≡ tbar(k(n)s). It is well-known that the transmission tbar(k(n)s) depends strongly on the shape of the potential at the nanoparticle boundary.
In the “collisionless” case of electron motion which we consider at first, the wave vector ks is equal to kf. Therefore, k(n)s = kfcosα and: pno collem(r,kf) = tbar(kfcosα)(34)
In this case, the six-fold integral in (33) can be easily converted into a triple integral: (35)where the incidence angle α is related to the angle θ by the theorem of sines: α = arccos(rsinθ/a)(36)
The integral in (35) can be calculated analytically for some shapes of the potential – see below.
Now, having considered the simplest collision-free case, we move on to consider a more realistic and more complicated case when the electron can experience collisions during its motion to the surface and is therefore cooled. It is well-known that the dominating mechanism for cooling of hot electrons is their collisions with cold electrons.58–60 In fact, just one collision of a hot electron with a cold electron renders the hot electron unable to overcome the potential barrier between the metal and surrounding medium. Therefore, in order to calculate the photoelectron emission probability pem(r,kf) in the case when hot electron collisions are possible, we can simply multiply the “collisionless” probability pno collem(r,kf) [see eqn (34)] by the probability Pt(r,kf) that the hot electron reaches the surface without collisions: pem(r,kf) = Pt(r,kf)·tbar(kfcosα)(37)
Following ref. 56, the probability Pt(r,kf) can be written as Pt(r,kf) = exp[−L(r,θ)/le(Ef)](38)where (39)is the distance between generation point 1 and point 2 where the electron collides with the nanoparticle surface, as it moves in the metal without collisions (see Fig. 5b); the mean free path le(Ef), generally speaking, depends on the hot electron energy Ef.56–60 Correspondingly, from (33) and taking (37) into account, we have: (40)
Obviously, if le = ∞, eqn (40) coincides with eqn (35).
Using (2), (1), (32) and (25), we can finally express the photoelectron emission cross-section for the volume photoelectric effect through the internal quantum efficiency ηi as: (41)where λo = 2πc/ω is the light wave length in vacuum.
As mentioned above, the probability tbar(k(n)s) depends on the shape of the potential U(z) at the nanoparticle surface. Since we aim to compare surface and volume photoelectric effects, and the surface effect has been calculated above for a step potential (see Fig. 3), we calculate below the internal quantum efficiency ηi firstly for this shape of potential. In this case, the probability tbar is: (42)where (43)

Fig. 6 illustrates the dependence of the transmission tbar on the energy E(n)s = ℏ2(k(n)s)2/(2m). When E(n)s > Ub, the transmission at first increases sharply and then tends to 1 gradually. On the other hand, many papers (see for instance ref. 7) assume a simpler model dependence: (44)(see the dashed line in Fig. 6), which is a suitable model for a smoothly changing potential (see the dashed green line in Fig. 3) rather than for a sharply changing one. Below we refer to the model in (44) as “model 0-1”.
 Fig. 6  The (transmission) probability tbar for an electron to leave a metal with a step barrier potential with Ub = 6.31 eV as a function of the electron energy E(n)s, i.e. tbar = tbar(E(n)s) (solid blue curve). The dashed blue curve shows the probability given by eqn (44) (“model 0-1”). 
The thick solid curves in Fig. 7 show the spectral dependence of the internal quantum efficiency ηi(ℏω), obtained by numerical integration of eqn (40) with the barrier transmission tbar(E(n)s) for a step potential [see eqn 42 and 43] and for various radii a of the spherical nanoparticle: namely a = 25 nm (red line), a = 50 nm (green line), and a = 100 nm (brown line). In the calculations we used the same material parameters for the nanoparticle and the barrier as shown in Fig. 4. For gold, the mean free path le(Ef) changes very weakly, from ∼42 to ∼40 nm (ref. 60) for the range of hot electron energies Ef being considered. Therefore, we have taken the value of le to be constant and used le = 41 nm. For comparison, the thick blue line shows the efficiency ηi for the mean free path le = ∞, i.e. for the “collisionless” propagation of hot electrons in a nanoparticle. One sees that electron collisions decrease the efficiency ηi by several times for the shown values of radius a.
 Fig. 7  The spectral dependence of the internal quantum efficiency ηi(ℏω) for the volume photoelectric effect for nanoparticles with different radii a and different potential shapes at the nanoparticle surface. Red, green and brown solid curves are calculated for a = 25, 50 and 100 nm, respectively, by numerical integration of eqn (40) for a step potential [see eqn (42) and (43)] and using a mean free path le = 41 nm; the dashed curves are obtained using the approximation (45). The blue and black curves are obtained for le = ∞ (i.e. for collisionless electron propagation in the nanoparticle) for a step potential and for the ‘model 0-1’ [see eqn (44)], respectively. The blue and black solid lines are exact results given by eqn (40) and (47), respectively, while the blue and black dashed curves are obtained with approximations (45) and (48), respectively. ℏωlpr is the photon energy at which the plasmonic resonance occurs in the nanoparticle. 
Close to the photoeffect threshold (ℏω → Wb), one can do the integration in eqn (40) analytically and obtain an approximate formula for the internal efficiency for ηi: (45)where (46)is the structural function describing the dependence of the efficiency ηi on the nanoparticle size a. The dependence (45) is illustrated in Fig. 7 by the dashed blue, red, green and brown curves. The parameters used in the calculation of these curves are the same as in the calculations for the solid curves of the same colour. Thus, ηi ∝ (ℏω − Wb)5/2 close to the threshold – this behaviour coincides with the behaviour of the parameter ηo calculated also for the surface effect [see eqn (21) and (22)], with a step potential.
As noted above the model dependence (44) for the transmission tbar(E(n)s) is used often. With tbar(E(n)s), the integral in eqn (40) can be calculated analytically for arbitrary excess energy (ℏω − Wb) above the photoeffect threshold and is expressed through the exponential integral function Ei(z) – we do not give the result here due to its bulkiness. But for le = ∞ (“collisionless” electron propagation in a nanoparticle) we can derive a simple approximate formula: (47)
On the other hand, for arbitrary le, but near the threshold we have the approximation: (48)
These analytic results (47) and (48) for le = ∞ are illustrated in Fig. 7 by the black solid and dashed curves, respectively. Obviously, near the photoeffect threshold, eqn (48) yields the parabolic Fowler's law: ηi ∝ (ℏω − Wb)2. Formulae (47) and (48) with le = ∞ are spherical analogues of the corresponding formulae for the internal quantum efficiency for bulk photoelectron emission from thin films which can be found in ref. 7 when electron collisions are neglected.

Fig. 8 shows the dependence of the internal efficiency ηi on the nanoparticle radius a for different photon energies: ℏω = 1.0 and 1.2 eV, and at the plasmonic resonance ℏω = ℏωlpr = 1.48 eV. The behaviour of the curves is described, at least qualitatively, by the structural function (46), and for large a, the efficiency follows ηi ∝ 1/a. This last relationship originates from the fact that within the quasistatic approximation the photon absorption rate Rvolumeabs is proportional to the nanoparticle volume Vnano [see eqn (25)] while for large radii a ≫ le, the photoelectron emission rate Rvolumeem is proportional to the nanoparticle surface Anano. Correspondingly, ηi ∝ Anano/Vnano ∝ 1/a. Thus, the behaviour ηi ∝ 1/a is a consequence of the fact that the “surface to volume” ratio decreases with increasing nanoparticle size a. On the other hand, for a smaller radius a when Rvolumeem ∝ Vnano, the efficiency ηi tends to its value in the “collisionless” case – see eqn (35).
 Fig. 8  Dependence of the internal quantum efficiency ηi on the nanoparticle radius a for three different photon energies: ℏω = 1.0, 1.2 and 1.48 eV. The mean free path le = 41 nm. The plasmonic resonance takes place in the gold spherical nanoantenna for ℏω = 1.48 eV. 
III Comparison of surface and volume mechanisms and discussion
The surface and volume mechanisms for internal photoelectron emission from nanoparticles can be compared by considering the ratio of their photoelectron emission cross-sections: (49)where we have used eqn (23) and (41) to determine this ratio. Fig. 9 shows the spectral dependence of the ratio Kv–s(ℏω) for different nanoparticle radii: a = 100, 50 and 25 nm for the blue, red and brown curves, respectively. The dashed curves are obtained when electron collisions are neglected (le = ∞), and the solid lines are calculated with le = 41 nm.
 Fig. 9  Spectral dependence on the ratio Kv–s = σvolumeem/σsurfaceem for various values of the nanoparticle radius a and the mean free path le. For the plasmonic resonance, ℏω ≈ ℏωlpr = 1.48 eV. 
The dashed curves show that if cooling of hot electrons is absent, the volume photoeffect from nanoparticles can predominate, at least for larger nanoparticles far from the photoeffect threshold. However, if we take into account hot electron cooling during their propagation in a nanoparticle (see solid curves in Fig. 9), we obtain that the surface mechanism is stronger than the volume one throughout almost all of the considered spectrum ranges, and only at ℏω > 1.5 eV does the ratio Kv–s become larger than one. One should note that in the case considered of a gold nanosphere embedded in a medium with εe = 13 the localized plasmonic resonance occurs at ℏω ≈ ℏωlpr = 1.48 eV (shown in Fig. 9). Thus, at the plasmonic resonance frequency for the structures considered, the surface and volume mechanisms give comparable contributions to the photoelectron emission rate.
One should stress that the results shown in Fig. 9, and in particular, the dashed curves for “collisionless” electron propagation in the nanoparticle are obtained in the quasistatic approximation,52 when the electromagnetic field efficiently penetrates into the nanoparticle. In this case, the volume photoelectron emission rate increases proportional to the nanoparticle volume if we neglect electron cooling. On the other hand, the surface photoelectron emission rate increases proportional to the nanoparticle surface area. Correspondingly, if we neglect the electron collisions, the growing role of the volume mechanism with increasing nanoparticle sizes can be attributed to the quasistatic approximation. In fact, this approximation works only for relatively small plasmonic nanoparticles, and already for a = 100 nm the field penetrates into the nanoparticle volume only partially.52 Thus, the model used here can seriously overestimate the volume mechanism for large nanoparticles if we neglect the hot electron cooling, as shown by the dashed curves in Fig. 9.

Fig. 10 shows the ratio Kv–s as a function of the nanoparticle radius a for different photon energies: ℏω = 1.0, 1.2 eV and for the case of plasmonic resonance ℏω = ℏωlpr = 1.48 eV. One sees that the ratio Kv–s tends to zero with decreasing radius a. Such a behaviour again results from the scaling of the “surface to volume” ratio at small a. Namely, for a ≪ le the volume photoelectron emission rate is Rvolumeem ∝ Vnano, while the surface photoelectron emission rate is Rsurfaceem ∝ Anano. Therefore, Kv–s = Rvolumeem/Rsurfaceem ∝ Vnano/Anano ∝ a. On the other hand, one sees from Fig. 10 that for larger values of the radius a (a ≫ le) when the hot electrons generated far from the surface cannot reach it due to cooling by collisions, both the rates Rvolumeem and Rsurfaceem become proportional to the nanoparticle surface area Anano, and correspondingly, the ratio Kv–s does not change with the radius a any more.
 Fig. 10  Dependence of the ratio Kv–s = σvolumeem/σsurfaceem on the nanoparticle radius a for three different photon energies: ℏω = 1.0, 1.2 and 1.48 eV. The mean free path le = 41 nm. 
Now we would like to discuss the assumptions made in the calculation of the volume mechanism in more detail. The first one is the quasistatic approximation, which leads to an overestimation of the volume effect for larger nanoparticles, as discussed above. Another assumption concerns the distribution of hot electrons in k-space – see eqn (30) and (31). In fact, we ascribe the light absorption, which is defined by the experimentally measured value of the imaginary part ε′′i(ω) of the metal relative permittivity, uniformly to all possible optical transitions from the states under the Fermi level; as a result, the hot electrons populate the volume in k-space, given by eqn (27), equally. This means that the dependence of the hot electron distribution on the energy Ef is proportional to . On the other hand, Chen and Bates56 considered that the distribution is proportional to the “joint density of states” which is . Our analysis shows that use of the latter distribution instead of the Fowler's one can increase the volume effect but only slightly – by 2–7%.
Furthermore, it is well-known that optical transitions from deeper states under the Fermi level can contribute to the optical absorption more strongly than the transitions from states that lie closer to the Fermi level.38,61 It is clear that transitions from deeper levels populate states above the Fermi level with lower energies than is the case for transitions from less deep levels. Hence, lower-energy states above the Fermi level are populated with hot electrons more strongly than the higher-energy levels; it is only from these latter levels that electron emission from the metal is in principle possible. In other words, transitions from deeper levels can contribute strongly to light absorption in metals but not to photoelectron emission, since such transitions do not generate hot electrons of sufficient energy so as to overcome the barrier. Thus, the assumption of a homogeneous population (30) of the layer (27) (the assumption by Fowler) can lead, generally speaking, to an overestimation of the internal quantum efficiency ηi for the volume mechanism. This can particularly impact the metal interband transitions.61 Note that the realisation that optical transitions of electrons in the bulk can determine the optical absorption of a metal, but are unable to provide photoelectron emission, was one of the basic ideas of the paper by Tamm and Schubin.36 However, these strong transitions from deeper energy levels in gold appear to become substantial only at photon energies higher than ∼1.5–2 eV,54,61 so that for the photon energy range under consideration (i.e. ℏω < 1.6 eV) the assumption of uniform population of states by hot electrons looks rather reasonable.
On the other hand, the model (37)–(39) for hot electron cooling due to collisions with cold electrons can underestimate the electron cooling rate. Indeed, the model neglects, in some sense, the role of elastic collisions of the hot electron. Such collisions do not affect the hot electron energy directly, but can make the electron path in the nanoparticle longer than the straight line (39), which can lead to a stronger electron cooling.
Nevertheless, despite the limitations brought about by the above assumptions, we can suggest that it appears unlikely that more precise models would significantly alter the conclusion that we draw from the calculations in this work, namely, that the cooling of hot electrons leads to a serious decrease of the photoelectron emission rate due to the volume mechanism. Together with the fact that the surface mechanism of the photoelectric effect does not suffer from electron collisions in the bulk at all, this lets us conclude that the surface mechanism prevails over the volume one in plasmonic nanoantennas for the majority of considered conditions.
Let us finally recall that the case when the surface and volume mechanisms appear to be comparable to each other, i.e., under the plasmonic resonance conditions (see Fig. 9 and 10), is obtained here for spherical nanoparticles. It is well known that the plasmonic resonance in oblate spheroids, which are good models for nanoparticles in many experimental configurations, is red-shifted if incident light is polarized along the longer axis.6,52 In accordance with Fig. 9, one could assume that in such nanoantennas the surface photoelectric effect can prevail also in the case of plasmonic resonance. Numerical calculations of photoelectron emission from nanoparticles with shapes more complicated than spherical, as well as from ensembles of nanoparticles, are the subject of forthcoming planned studies.
IV Conclusion
We have carried out calculations of internal photoelectron emission from plasmonic nanoparticles into a surrounding semiconductor matrix for the IR range of photon energies for two mechanisms of the effect – surface and volume ones. We have shown that the surface photoeffect would prevail over the volume one in the case of internal photoelectric effect from small nanoparticles, which extends the initial conclusion made by Tamm and Schubin in 1931 from a single flat interface to nanostructures. From our calculations, this predominance of the surface effect is a result of the effective cooling of hot carriers generated by the volume mechanism during their propagation from the inside of the nanoparticle to its surface. Calculations have been carried out for a step potential at the nanoparticle surface, and a simple model for the hot electron cooling has been used. Nevertheless, it is unlikely that these model limitations would change the overall conclusion. To our knowledge such a comparison of the two mechanisms for the photoeffect from plasmonic nanoparticles has been undertaken here for the first time.
We also stress the important effect of the discontinuity of the dielectric permittivity at the nanoparticle boundary in the surface mechanism, which leads to a substantial (by ∼5 times) increase in the photoelectron emission rate from a nanoparticle compared to the case when such a discontinuity is absent.
Confidence in the predominance of the surface mechanism can be useful in the design of devices based on the photoelectric effect and on the use of hot electrons from plasmonic nanoantennas. In particular, it is clear that the angular pattern of photoelectrons can be different for the surface and volume photoeffect. For instance, for spherical nanoparticles, in the case of the volume mechanism electrons are emitted in all directions equally, while in the case of the surface one, electrons are emitted mainly in a direction parallel to the electric field polarization of the incident light, because the photoelectron emission rate in the surface mechanism is proportional to the square of the electric field component normal to the nanoparticle surface. Correspondingly, parts of a nanoantenna surface where the normal component is maximal must have good contact with the surrounding matrix in order for efficient electron emission to occur. It appears that this circumstance played a key role in ref. 12, where a substantial increase of the responsivity of the device was reached by proper embedding of the nanoantennas into the semiconductor substrate.
Acknowledgements
A.V.U. and I.E.P. acknowledge financial support from the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (Project no. 14-02-00125) and the Russian MSE State Contract N14.527.11.0002 and support from the CASE project (Denmark). V.E.B. acknowledges financial support from SPIE Optics and Photonics Education Scholarship, as well as Otto Mønsteds and Kaj og Hermilla Ostenfeld foundations. S.V.Z. acknowledges financial support from the People Programme (Marie Curie Actions) of the European Union's 7th Framework Programme FP7-PEOPLE-2011-IIF under REA grant agreement no. 302009 (Project HyPHONE). E.P.O'R. acknowledges support from Science Foundation Ireland (project no. 06/IN.1/I90).
References
H. Chalabi and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nishijima, K. Ueno, Y. Yokota, K. Murakoshi and H. Misawa, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2031 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Knight, H. Sobhani, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Science, 2011, 332, 702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Takahashi and T. Tatsuma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 182110 CrossRef .
Y. K. Lee, C. Ho Jung, J. Park, H. Seo, G. A. Somorjai and J. Y. Park, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. E. Protsenko and A. V. Uskov, Phys.-Usp., 2012, 55, 508 CrossRef CAS .
C. Scales and P. Berini, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2010, 46, 633 CrossRef CAS .
A. Akbari and P. Berini, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 021104 CrossRef .
P. Berini, Laser Photonics Rev., 2014, 8, 197 CrossRef CAS .
I. Goykhman, B. Desiatov, J. Khurgin, J. Shappir and U. Levy, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Novitsky, A. V. Uskov, C. Gritti, I. E. Protsenko, B. E. Kardynał and A. V. Lavrinenko, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2014, 22, 422 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Knight, Y. Wang, A. S. Urban, A. Sobhani, B. Y. Zheng, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1687 CAS .
A. Sobhani, M. W. Knight, Y. Wang, B. Zheng, N. S. King, L. V. Brown, Z. Fang, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1643 CrossRef PubMed .
S. V. Zhukovsky, V. E. Babicheva, A. V. Uskov, I. E. Protsenko and A. V. Lavrinenko, Plasmonics, 2013 DOI:10.1007/s11468-013-9621-z .

          S. V. Zhukovsky, V. E. Babicheva, A. B. Evlyukhin, I. E. Protsenko, A. V. Lavrinenko and A. V. Uskov, Photogalvanic Effect in Plasmonic Non-Centrosymmetric Nanoparticles, http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.2428.
E. A. Moulin, U. W. Paetzold, B. E. Pieters, W. Reetz and R. Carius, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 144501 CrossRef .
T. P. White and K. R. Catchpole, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 073905 CrossRef .
F. Wang and N. A. Melosh, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Pradhan, T. Holloway, R. Mundle, H. Dondapati and M. Bahoura, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 061127 CrossRef .
F. P. Garcia de Arquer, A. Mihi, D. Kufer and G. Konstantatos, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. B. Atar, E. Battal, L. E. Aygun, B. Daglar, M. Bayindir and A. K. Okyay, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 7196 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef PubMed .
E. W. McFarland and J. Tang, Nature, 2003, 421, 616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Renzas and G. A. Somorjai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17660 CAS .
Y. Li and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Thomann, B. A. Pinaud, Z. Chen, B. M. Clemens, Th. F. Jaramillo and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, F. Libisch, N. Large, O. Neumann, L. V. Brown, J. Cheng, J. B. Lassiter, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2012, 13, 240 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133 CAS .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Krämer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, R. Jiang, F. Wang, C. Fang, J. Wang and J. C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5790 CAS .
D. Conklin, S. Nanayakkara, T.-H. Park, M. F. Lagadec, J. T. Stecher, X. C. Chen, M. J. Therien and D. A. Bonnell, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Schwede, I. Bargatin, D. C. Riley, B. E. Hardin, S. J. Rosenthal, Y. Sun, F. Schmitt, P. Pianetta, R. Howe, Z.-X. Shen and N. A. Melosh, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ropers, T. Elsaesser, G. Giulio Cerullo, M. Zavelani-Rossi and C. Lienau, New J. Phys., 2007, 9, 397 CrossRef .
F.-J. Meyer zu Heringdorf, L. I. Chelaru, S. Möllenbeck, D. Thien and M. Horn-von Hoegen, Surf. Sci., 2007, 601, 4700 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Stockman, M. F. Kling, U. Kleineberg and F. Krauz, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 539 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tamm and S. Schubin, Z. Phys., 1931, 68, 97 CrossRef CAS .

          U. Kreibig and M. Vollmer, Optical Properties of Metal Clusters, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg,  1995 Search PubMed .
N. V. Smith, CRC Crit. Rev. Solid State Sci., 1971, 2, 45 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Kittel, Quantum Theory of Solids, John Willey & Sons, 2nd edn,  1989 Search PubMed .

          J. M. Ziman, Principles of the Theory of Solids, Cambridge University Press, 2nd edn,  1972 Search PubMed .
K. Mitchell, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1934, 146, 442 CrossRef .
R. E. B. Makinson, Phys. Rev., 1949, 75, 1908 CrossRef .
A. M. Brodsky and Y. Y. Gurevich, Sov. Phys. JETP, 1968, 27, 114 Search PubMed .
A. M. Brodsky, Y. Y. Gurevich and V. G. Levich, Phys. Status Solidi, 1970, 40, 139 CrossRef .

          A. M. Brodsky and Y. Y. Gurevich, Theory of Electron Emission from Metals, Nauka, Moscow,  1973 Search PubMed .
J. G. Endriz and W. E. Spicer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1971, 27, 570 CrossRef CAS .

          J. G. Endriz, Photoemission studies of surface-plasmon oscillations on controlled-roughness aluminum films, Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University,  1970 .
J. G. Endriz, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1973, 7, 3464 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Maradudin and D. L. Mills, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1975, 11, 1392 CrossRef CAS .
H. Petersen, Z. Physik B, 1978, 31, 171 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Govorov, H. Zhang and Y. K. Gun'ko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16616 CAS .

          S. A. Maier, Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer Science+Business Media LLC,  2007 Search PubMed .
V. L. Ginzburg and I. M. Frank, J. Exp. Theor. Phys., 1946, 16, 15 Search PubMed .

          M. J. Weber and J. Marvin, Handbook of optical materials, CRC Press LLC,  2003 Search PubMed .
R. H. Fowler, Phys. Rev., 1931, 38, 45 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Y. Chen and C. W. Bates, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1986, 57, 2737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Berglund and W. E. Spicer, Phys. Rev., 1964, 136, 1030 CrossRef CAS .
R. Stuart, F. Wooten and W. E. Spicer, Phys. Rev., 1964, 135, 495 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Quinn, Phys. Rev., 1962, 126, 1453 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Frese and C. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 3234 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Hartland, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the two mechanisms of the photoelectric effect. (a) Surface effect: an electron collides with the Schottky barrier, absorbs the photon energy ℏω, and leaves the metal. (b) Volume effect: electron 1 receives energy ℏω, moves to the Schottky barrier, and overcomes it, leaving the metal; electrons 2 and 3 do not have sufficient energy when they reach the barrier and remain in the metal. Wb is the work function of the metal to semiconductor; εF is the Fermi level.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of a spherical metallic nanoparticle (with permittivity εi) imbedded in a dielectric (or semiconductor) matrix (with permittivity εe). The incident plane wave with an electrical field Eo causes an electric field Ei inside the nanoparticle. Red arrows illustrate the surface photoelectric mechanism, while the blue arrow shows the volume (bulk) photoelectric mechanism.	 
Re[εi(ωlpr)] + 2εe = 0	(1a)
σem = Rem/(S/ℏω)	(2)
u(r) = Csurfaceem·|E(n)i(r)|2	(3)
	(4)
Rsurfaceem = Csurfaceem·Anano|Ei|2/3	(5)
pin = cin·|E(n)i(r)|2	(6)
pout = cout·|E(n)i(r)|2	(7)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of inelastic scattering of an electron at a metal boundary in the presence of an optical field. The potential energy profile U(z) is plotted along the direction z normal to the metal boundary. An electron incident on the boundary (wave vector kz) scatters inelastically, by absorption of a photon (energy ℏω). In the collision with the boundary, the electron can be partly back-reflected into the metal or be forward scattered into the dielectric matrix (photoelectron emission). The blue line is a step potential with height Ub = εF + W where εF is the Fermi energy in the metal; W is the work function; the green curve illustrates an example of a gradually changing potential U(z).	 
εiE(n)i = εeE(n)e	(8)
	(9)
ε(ki) = ℏ2(kix2 + kiy2 + kiz2)/(2mi)	(10)
	(11)
C+(∞) = (bVUb + bmΔm + bεΔε) E(n)i	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
	(21)
ηo ∝ (ℏω − Wb)5/2	(22)

 	Fig. 4  Spectral dependence of the photoelectron emission parameter ηo = ηo(ℏω). The blue curve is calculated from eqn (20), the red one is the approximation (21). The green curve is obtained by assuming Δε = 0 [i.e., KΔε(X) ≡ 1 in eqn (20)]. ℏωlpr is the photon energy where the plasmonic resonance occurs in the nanoparticle.	 
	(23)
	(24)
Rvolumeabs ≡ P/ℏω = 2ℏ−1εoε′′i·|Ei|2Vnano = rvolabs·Vnano	(25)
rvolabs = 2ℏ−1εoε′′i·|Ei|2	(26)
	(27)
Ef = ℏ2kf2/(2mi) > Ub ≡ ℏ2kbar2/(2mi)	(28)
ηi = Rvolumeem/Rvolumeabs	(29)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Distribution of electrons in k-space. The blue colour shows the volume in k-space occupied by unexcited (cold) electrons; the pink colour illustrates excited (hot) electrons after photon absorption. Hot electrons outside the dashed line can be emitted from the nanoparticle. (b) Illustration of propagation of a hot electron in a spherical nanoparticle of radius a. A hot electron is generated at point 1 at a distance r from the centre 0 with wave vector kf and with angle θ to the axis z′′. In the absence of collisions, the electron moves along a straight line parallel to kf and collides with the nanoparticle surface at point 2. L is the length of the electron path before its collision with the nanoparticle boundary. α is the incidence angle of the electron to the surface. ks is the wave vector of the electron as it collides with the surface.	 
	(30)
	(31)
	(32)
	(33)
pno collem(r,kf) = tbar(kfcosα)	(34)
	(35)
α = arccos(rsinθ/a)	(36)
pem(r,kf) = Pt(r,kf)·tbar(kfcosα)	(37)
Pt(r,kf) = exp[−L(r,θ)/le(Ef)]	(38)
	(39)
	(40)
	(41)
	(42)
	(43)
	(44)

 	Fig. 6  The (transmission) probability tbar for an electron to leave a metal with a step barrier potential with Ub = 6.31 eV as a function of the electron energy E(n)s, i.e. tbar = tbar(E(n)s) (solid blue curve). The dashed blue curve shows the probability given by eqn (44) (“model 0-1”).	 

 	Fig. 7  The spectral dependence of the internal quantum efficiency ηi(ℏω) for the volume photoelectric effect for nanoparticles with different radii a and different potential shapes at the nanoparticle surface. Red, green and brown solid curves are calculated for a = 25, 50 and 100 nm, respectively, by numerical integration of eqn (40) for a step potential [see eqn (42) and (43)] and using a mean free path le = 41 nm; the dashed curves are obtained using the approximation (45). The blue and black curves are obtained for le = ∞ (i.e. for collisionless electron propagation in the nanoparticle) for a step potential and for the ‘model 0-1’ [see eqn (44)], respectively. The blue and black solid lines are exact results given by eqn (40) and (47), respectively, while the blue and black dashed curves are obtained with approximations (45) and (48), respectively. ℏωlpr is the photon energy at which the plasmonic resonance occurs in the nanoparticle.	 
	(45)
	(46)
	(47)
	(48)

 	Fig. 8  Dependence of the internal quantum efficiency ηi on the nanoparticle radius a for three different photon energies: ℏω = 1.0, 1.2 and 1.48 eV. The mean free path le = 41 nm. The plasmonic resonance takes place in the gold spherical nanoantenna for ℏω = 1.48 eV.	 
	(49)

 	Fig. 9  Spectral dependence on the ratio Kv–s = σvolumeem/σsurfaceem for various values of the nanoparticle radius a and the mean free path le. For the plasmonic resonance, ℏω ≈ ℏωlpr = 1.48 eV.	 

 	Fig. 10  Dependence of the ratio Kv–s = σvolumeem/σsurfaceem on the nanoparticle radius a for three different photon energies: ℏω = 1.0, 1.2 and 1.48 eV. The mean free path le = 41 nm.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
