Design of advanced porous graphene materials: from graphene nanomesh to 3D architectures  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR04555B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR04555B
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1922-1945Design of advanced porous graphene materials: from graphene nanomesh to 3D architectures

        
          
            Lili 
            Jiang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zhuangjun 
            Fan
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Superlight Materials and Surface Technology, Ministry of Education, College of Material Science and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China. E-mail: fanzhj666@163.com;  Fax: +86 451 82569890
Received 
      27th August 2013
    , Accepted 13th October 2013First published on 16th October 2013AbstractIn order to make full utilization of the high intrinsic surface area of graphene, recently, porous graphene materials including graphene nanomesh, crumpled graphene and graphene foam, have attracted tremendous attention and research interest, owing to their exceptional porous structure (high surface area, and high pore volume) in combination with the inherent properties of graphene, such as high electronic conductivity, good thermal stability, and excellent mechanical strength. Interestingly, porous graphene materials and their derivatives have been explored in a wide range of applications in the fields of electronic and photonic devices, energy storage, gas separation/storage, oil absorption and sensors. This article reviews recent progress in the synthesis, characterization, properties, and applications of porous graphene materials. We aim to highlight the importance of designing different porous structures of graphene to meet future challenges, and the trend on future design of porous graphene materials is analyzed.Lili JiangLili Jiang is pursuing PhD at the College of Material Science and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Engineering University. Her current research is focused on the design and synthesis of functional carbonaceous nanomaterials, as well as their applications for energy conversion and storage devices.Zhuangjun FanZhuangjun Fan received his PhD in 2003 at the Institute of Coal Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He became full professor at the College of Material Science and Chemical Engineering in 2006, and now he is the director of the Institute of Advanced Carbon Based Materials at Harbin Engineering University. His research interests focus on the design and controlled synthesis of carbon nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes and graphene, and their application in energy-related areas such as supercapacitors, Li ion batteries, and full cells.
1. Introduction
Graphene, a one-atom-thick two-dimensional (2D) carbon material, has attracted increasing attention in the past several years due to its high surface area, remarkable thermal conductivity, excellent electronic conductivity and mechanical properties.1,2 The unique structure and outstanding properties render graphene highly promising for a wide range of applications in the fields of electronics, sensor, and energy storage/conversion.3–5
Different from most porous carbon materials, the surface area of graphene depends on its solid surface, but not the porosity. However, graphene sheets tend to form irreversible agglomerates or even restack to form graphite due to their strong π–π stacking and van der Waals interactions between the intersheet of graphene, resulting in a dramatic decrease of the surface area. Additionally, the full utilization of graphene sheets is the limited cross-plane ion diffusion due to their large sheet aspect ratio. To fully utilize and further explore the new functions of graphene, many researchers try to design out-of-plane space by introducing “spacers” in-between graphene layers, such as carbon black,6 carbon nanotubes,7–11 carbon nanofibers,12 metal oxides,13,14 metal hydroxide,15,16 and conducting polymer,17–19 which makes the electroactive area more accessible, resulting in enhanced electrochemical performances for supercapacitors and Li-ion batteries.
Recently, porous graphene materials including graphene nanomesh (GNM, in-plane pores in graphene sheets), crumpled graphene (CG) and graphene foam (GF, the construction of macroscopic architectures using graphene sheets as building blocks) have been extensively studied. Due to their unique porous structure combined with the inherent properties of graphene, porous graphene materials have a higher surface area and much more “space” for the transportation or storage for the electron/ion, gas and liquid. For instance, Ruoff synthesized a novel porous graphene through KOH activation of microwave exfoliated graphene oxide, which showed ultrahigh energy density (∼70 W h kg−1), power density (∼250 kW kg−1) and specific capacitance (166 F g−1 at 5.7 A g−1).20 N,S-doped hierarchically porous graphene as the electrode for lithium ion batteries (LIBs) could deliver a high-power density of 116 kW kg−1 and energy density as high as 322 W h kg−1.21 Recently, Ning and Fan synthesized porous graphene through a template chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method, which was favourable for gas storage (methane: 236 v/v at 9 MPa and carbon dioxide: 240 v/v at 3.1 MPa),22,23 as well as high reversible capacity (1723 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C), excellent high-rate capability (203 mA h g−1 at 20 C) and long cycling stability for LIBs.24 More interestingly, 3D ultralight graphene foam exhibited remarkable sensitivity of 619.6 μA mM−1 cm−2 as electrochemical sensor for detection of dopamine, excellence cycling stability for energy storage and high oil absorption of 100 g g−1.25–29 In short, with the ever-increasing development of science and technology, the properties of pure graphene sheets can't satisfy the special requirements for some applications. Compared to original graphene sheets, porous graphene materials have exhibited outstanding properties for applications in electrochemical devices (supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries, fuel cells, etc.), sensors, gas separation/storage, and oil absorption. As we known, porous graphene materials can be classified according to their pore diameters as microporous (pore size < 2 nm), mesoporous (2 nm < pore size < 50 nm), and/or macroporous (pore size > 50 nm).30 Usually, graphene nanomesh has a high specific surface area (SSA) with the pore sizes ranging from several angstroms to the nano-scale, crumpled graphene has a mesoporous or macroporous structure, and graphene foam has a macroporous structure. Consequently, several challenges remain in developing porous graphene, such as to: (i) precisely control the pore shape, size and group functionality in order to meet the requirements for the applications in different fields, (ii) maintain structural stability and high conductivity, (iii) select a suitable method for large scale and low cost synthesis.
In this review, a brief summary of recent research progress on the synthesis and properties of porous graphene materials is presented, mainly including graphene nanomesh, crumpled graphene and graphene foam architectures. Their advantages and disadvantages are compared and summarized according to the available literature to date. In addition, new trends in materials development have also been proposed.
2. Graphene nanomesh (GNM)
Graphene sheets prepared from reduced graphene oxide always contain intrinsic defects with typically subnanometers in size, such as Stone–Wales (pentagon–heptagon pairs) or vacancy sites on the graphene surface. Recently, there have been reports on novel types of graphene structures with high density of the nanoscale pores (holes) on the conjugated carbon surface, which is named graphene nanomesh (GNM). GNM exhibits a direct band gap, open porous structure with high surface area, as well as the combination with the inherent properties of graphene, which have great potential applications in the fields of energy storage, gas separation/storage, magnetism, optical properties and electronics devices. It is worth mentioning that GNM membrane for gas separation has been investigated by the first-principles density function theory.31 According to the kinetic diameter of the target molecules, the GNM membrane can be designed for different pore sizes and shapes to separate different gas molecules, such as H2, He, N2, O2, NO, CO2 and CH4.32–41 Additionally, Li-decorated or other metal-dispersed GNM membrane can also be applied for hydrogen storage.42–44 In this part, the focus of this review concerns synthesis methods including polymer building blocks, plasma, electron, photo-etching, template method, and chemical etching, which are related to recent developments in synthesizing porous graphene sheets with a well-controlled pore size and distribution, and geometry shape.
2.1 Organic building blocks
Bottom-up approach is essential for the generation of robust crystalline porous architectures with a well-defined pore structure that result from the self-assembly nature of various macromolecular architectures.45,46 Recently, Bieri et al. used the hexaiodo-substituted macrocycle cyclohexa-m-phenylene (CHP) as precursor, for the first time fabricated the regular two-dimensional (2D) polyphenylene networks with single-atom wide pores and sub-nanometer periodicity by surface-assisted aryl–aryl coupling on the Ag (111) crystal surface (Fig. 1).47 Therefore, graphene nanomesh can be regarded as a new 2D covalently linked hydrocarbon superhoneycomb networks designed from atomic scales to tailor the pore size and pore spacing through appropriate chemical design of the molecular precursors. Substantially similar work was done by Kuhn et al., they introduced a new dynamic polymerization system to create porous 2D sheets through reversible ionothermal trimerization of aromatic polynitriles.48 The as-prepared material presented surface area and porosity up to 3300 m2 g−1 and 2.4 cm3 g−1, respectively. Furthermore, the high nitrogen content found in this material could yield possible coordination sites for transition metal catalysts or pseudocapacitance.
 Fig. 1  (A) Mechanism of the silver-promoted aryl–aryl coupling of iodobenzene to biphenyl. (B) Structure of CHP. (C) Structure of a fraction of the polyphenylene superhoneycomb network. (D) Structural relationship of the polyphenylene superhoneycomb network (bold lines) and graphene (thin lines). (E) STM image (−1 V, 50 pA) of an edge of the polymer network, where the structure of the CHP backbone (overlaid chemical structure) can most clearly be recognized. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. 
Another interesting advance in the synthetic strategies of porous graphene is the development of block copolymer lithography. Bai et al. prepared GNM with variable periodicities and neck widths down to 5 nm (the “periodicity” defined as the center-to-center distance between two neighboring nanoholes, and the “neck width” defined as the smallest edge-to-edge distance between two neighboring nanoholes in the nanomesh).49 They used the poly(styrene-block-methyl methacrylate) (P(S-b-MMA)) block copolymer thin film as the etching template, and CHF3 plasma based reactive ion etch (RIE) process followed by oxygen plasma etch was employed to punch holes into the graphene layer (Fig. 2). Through the block copolymer lithography to fabricate GNM film with continuous semiconducting features could fabricate integrated devices/circuits under specific circuit requirements. However, this method is limited by relying on the etching reaction which uses toxic gas CHF3, high cost and low production. The organic building block method is advantageous in the design of a porous structure with a designed pore size, shape and functional groups on the sheets, and the control over the chemical nature and properties of the resulting networks.
 Fig. 2  (a–g) Schematic of making graphene nanomesh. (a) A pristine graphene flake on top of silicon oxide substrate as starting material. (b) The graphene flake is covered by a thin layer of evaporated SiOx and a thin film of spin-coated block copolymer poly(styrene-block-methacrylate) (P(S-b-MMA)). The SiOx here is used as a protecting layer and the grafting substrate for the following block copolymer nanopatterning. (c) The P(S-b-MMA) block copolymer film is annealed and developed, leaving the porous PS matrix as nanomesh template for further patterning. (d) Fluoride based reactive ion etching (RIE) to penetrate the oxide layer and partially degrade the PS film, and form SiOx nanomesh hard mask. (e) Graphene in the exposed area is etched away by O2 plasma. (f) After HF dip to remove oxide mash, a GNM is obtained. (g) Free standing GNM can be lifted off from the substrate by etching away the underlying silicon oxide. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. 
2.2 Photo-, electron-, and plasma-etching
Recently, several research efforts have been made to synthesize porous graphene through local oxidation or degradation of defects on graphene sheets using photo, electron beam and oxygen plasma-etching methods.50–52 For instance, Akhavan et al. described the formation of GNM with a pore size of ∼200 nm by UV-assisted photodegradation of graphene oxide (GO) sheets at the contact place of the tip of ZnO nanorods with the sheets (Fig. 3).53 The GO sheets were physically attached to the tip of the ZnO nanorods by assembling the sheets on the nanorods, and the as-produced pore sizes were in accordance with the diameter of ZnO nanorods. The obtained GNM with a macroporous structure presented p-type semiconducting behavior without any doping. In addition, the pore size of GNM can be adjusted by the diameter of ZnO nanorods, and the density of pores on GNM needs to be increased in the future.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanism describing formation of graphene nanomeshes by using the photocatalytic property of the ZnO nanorods. (b) AFM image of the graphene nanomeshes on quartz substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. 
Additionally, the suspended graphene sheets could be controllably nanosculpted under the electron-beam irradiation. This technique can be accomplished within a few seconds, and a variety of features including nanometer-scale pores, slits, and gaps on the graphene sheets can be observed (Fig. 4).54 Although it is easy to synthesize GNM applying the above method in an environment-friendly manner, precise control of the shape, size and distribution of the created porous structure may be challenging.
 Fig. 4  (a and b) TEM images of a suspended graphene sheet. (a) Higher magnification image of the nanopore. (b) Multiple nanopores made in close proximity to each other. (c) Two ∼6 nm lines cut into a graphene sheet. (d) Higher resolution of the bridge shows clear atomic order (scale bars are 2, 10, 20, 5 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. 
Recently, Zhang et al. described the formation of GNM using an anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) membrane as an etch mask with poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) as the adhesion layer between the AAO template and reduced GO (rGO) sheets on the Si/SiO2 wafer (Fig. 5).55 Under O2 plasma etching, periodic and uniform pore size of GNM could be tuned by using different AAO templates. They demonstrated that transistors with GNM as the conductive channel showed driving current almost 100 times larger than those obtained in the individual graphene nanoribbon-based transistors. Therefore, a large-area, continuous semiconducting GNM may be a promising material for applications in electric devices and sensors.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the GNM fabrication process. (b) SEM image of an AAO membrane with pore size of ca. 80 nm and cell wall thickness of ca. 20 nm. (c) SEM image showing the cross section of an AAO template with membrane thickness of 1 μm. (d) SEM image of large-area GNM. Inset: magnified SEM image of GNM with pore size of ca. 67 nm and neck width of ca. 33 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. 
2.3 Template method
Jung et al. reported the direct growth of GNM on insulating substrates using Au metal nano-network as catalyst through a CVD process (Fig. 6).56 The preparation of Au metal nano-network with hexagonal honeycomb shapes was crucial to serve as catalyst for the growth of GNM, and Ag film (thickness of ∼200 nm) was also important to further enhance the connectivity of the network and avoid undesirable wrinkles or rips on the film. The as-prepared GNM had a high mobility (233.78 cm2 V−1 s−1) and current ON/OFF ratio (∼6.3) as a semiconducting channel in field effect transistors.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Au nano-network and CVD-grown graphene nanomesh, respectively. (b–d) FESEM images of (b) anodized aluminum oxide template, (c) Au nano-network with ca. 18 nm of neck widths, and (d) graphene nanomesh after etching gold in aqua regia. Insets in ((b)–(d)) show high-magnification images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. 
By an in situ constructing strategy, macroporous graphene can be fabricated using GO as a carbon precursor and polymer as template such as polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) spheres, and polystyrene (PS) colloidal particles.21,57,58 For example, Wang and coworkers prepared doped hierarchically porous graphene (DHPG) on nickel foam using graphene oxide (GO), sulfonated polystyrene (S-PS) spheres, and poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) as precursors.21 GO sheets could be deposited on the surface of S-PS and assemble into 3D continuous structure with the assistance of PVP. Moreover, nitrogen atoms from PVP and sulfur atoms from S-PS were doped into the graphene during pyrolysis of the precursor (Fig. 7). Due to its macroporous structure, graphene electrodes with hierarchically porous architectures were beneficial for ion transport, and also provided sufficient contact area between the electrode and electrolyte. Additionally, N,S-codoping simultaneously increased electrical conductivity and electrochemical activity of graphene in the high-rate electrochemical process. As an electrode material for lithium ion batteries it delivered a high-power density of 116 kW kg−1, while the energy density remained as high as 322 W h kg−1 at 80 A g−1.
 Fig. 7  (a) Illustration of the fabrication of a macroporous bubble graphene film (MGF). (b) High magnification SEM images of the cross-section of a MGF and digital images of as-prepared MGF. (c–e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedures of the DHPG electrodes. (f) Illustration of the features in the interior structure of DHPG electrodes. (g) SEM images of DHPG electrodes. (h) TEM images of DHPG electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57 (a and b) and ref. 21 (c–h). 
Additionally, Ning and Fan synthesized GNM with only one to two graphene layers using porous layered MgO as template through a CVD approach.59 The as-obtained GNM had SSA up to 1654 m2 g−1, total pore volumes of 2.35 cm3 g−1, and a narrow pore size distribution ranging from 6 to 10 nm. Meanwhile, it also had extraordinary ferromagnetism with a saturation magnetization of 0.04 emu g−1.60 Surface corrugations on the GNM effectively inhibited the agglomeration and restacking of the sheets. Due to its unique porous structure, GNM as a supercapacitor electrode exhibited a high electrochemical capacitance of 255 F g−1, excellent cycling stability and outstanding rate performance.59 Afterwards, the assembled asymmetric supercapacitor using GNM as a negative electrode and Ni(OH)2–graphene hybrid material as a positive electrode, showed extraordinary performances with a maximum specific capacitance of 218.4 F g−1 and high energy density of 77.8 W h kg−1.61 As an electrode for Li-ion battery, GNM showed high reversible capacity (1723 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C), excellent high-rate capability (203 mA h g−1 at 20 C), and good cycling stability.24 Therefore, the simple CVD approach offers a new way for large-scale production of porous graphene materials for energy storage.
Moreover, we explored corrugated porous graphene with a specific surface area-lossless tightly stacking manner (Fig. 8).22 The reaction time was increased to 30 min and carbon deposition temperature was down to 875 °C as compared to our previous work the obtained GNM had a flat box-like structure with its SSA up to 2038 m2 g−1 and micropores of ∼1 nm. Such structure provided not only a slice layer with <10 nm pores but also an interior space between layers. Therefore, the box-like porous graphene was favourable for the gas storage (methane: 236 v/v at 9 MPa and carbon dioxide: 240 v/v at 3.1 MPa). Additionally, Hu and coworkers reported an in situ MgO template method to prepare carbon nanocages (CNCs).62 The as-prepared CNCs had large SSA (2053 m2 g−1), good mesoporosity and regular structure and applied as supercapacitor electrode materials with excellent capacitance performance.
 Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of the formation and porous structure of GNMs. (b–d) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of the GNMs. (e) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) and (f) TEM images of the GNMs prepared by a 30 min carbon deposition. (g) TEM images of the GNMs prepared by 10 min carbon deposition. The arrows indicate the side views of the GNMs, which have a box structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22 (a–f) and ref. 59 (g). 
Also we used porous MgO sheets as template and coal tar pitch as a carbon source for the large-scale production of 3D pillared-porous carbon nanosheet (PPCN) architecture in which two carbon layers were fully separated or supported by the carbon pillars (Fig. 9).63 The resulting porous carbon nanosheet possessed interconnected open-pore surfaces, self-supporting mesoporous and conductive network. As a result, those unique features not only overcame the sheet aggregation that could effectively make full use of the graphene layer, but also facilitated ion transport or diffusion with nanometer-scale diffusion distances, resulting in excellent electrochemical performances.
 Fig. 9  (a and b) SEM images of PPCN, showing numerous mesopores with sizes of about 6–8 nm, and a layered structure composed of two layers and narrow pore channels. (c and d) TEM images reveal the sandwich morphology and mesoporous structure of PPCN. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. 
2.4 Chemical-etching method

2.4.1 KOH activation. 
Chemical active agents such as KOH, ZnCl2 and H3PO4 were widely used for the preparation of porous carbon materials. Usually, activated carbon prepared by KOH activation had well-defined pore size distribution and high SSA.64,65 Recently, Ruoff and coworkers used KOH activation of microwave exfoliated graphite oxide (MEGO) to synthesize a novel porous graphene with well-defined micropores and mesopores, and its SSA was up to 3100 m2 g−1 (Fig. 10).20 Moreover, porous graphene had a narrow pore size distribution ranging from 0.6 to 5 nm in the graphene plane as well as high electrical conductivity (∼500 S m−1) and low oxygen and hydrogen content. As an electrode material for supercapacitor in organic and ionic liquid electrolytes, it showed ultrahigh energy density (∼70 W h kg−1), power density (∼250 kW kg−1) and specific capacitance (166 F g−1 at a current of 5.7 A g−1).
 Fig. 10  (A) Schematic showing the microwave exfoliation/reduction of GO and the following chemical activation of microwave exfoliated GO (MEGO) with KOH that creates pores while retaining high electrical conductivity. (B) Low magnification SEM image of an activated MEGO (α-MEGO) piece. (C) High-resolution SEM image of a different sample region that demonstrates the porous morphology. (D) ADF-STEM image of the same area as (C), acquired simultaneously. As seen, α-MEGO contains micro- and mesopores with a distribution of sizes between ∼1 and ∼10 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. 
Subsequently, Chen and coworkers reported that 3D porous graphene-based bulk material was synthesized by hydrothermal polymerization/carbonization of the mixture of GO and carbon precursors such as biomass, phenol-formaldehyde (PF), and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), and subsequently followed by chemical KOH activation (Fig. 11).66 Biomass or polymer played a role in the interval of graphene nanosheets that had a single layer, defective, wrinkled and porous structure, the as-prepared porous graphene-based materials simultaneously showed ultrahigh SSA (3523 m2 g−1) and excellent bulk conductivity (303 S m−1). Meanwhile, those materials exhibited high specific capacitance (231 F g−1) and high energy density (98 W h kg−1) for a supercapacitor in ionic liquid. However, using strongly alkaline KOH as active agent may cause side effects to the equipment and environment in large-scale industrial production. Recently, Wang and coworkers used CO2 to activate reduced graphene oxide (RGO) and obtained highly porous and metal-free materials for adsorptive removal of organics from water.67 Without introducing any solid or aqueous active agent, this process can avoid the shortage of KOH activation.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic show of the simple and green process of synthesizing porous 3D graphene-based materials. (b) Low magnification and (c) high-resolution SEM images of products from the mixtures of PF and GO with optimized ratios, which exhibited sponge-like morphology and a porous structure. (d) TEM image of products from the mixtures of PF and GO with optimized ratios, which also showed a dense 3D pore structure with a highly curved or wrinkled surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. 


2.4.2 HNO3 oxidation. 
Several research efforts were made to synthesize GNM through HNO3 oxidation of GO followed by the reduction of GO.68,69 For example, Zhao et al. prepared GNM using nitric acid oxidation and ultrasonic vibration of GO and subsequent thermal reduction of porous GO (Fig. 12).68 The sizes of the pores were controlled by changing the acid concentration and ultrasonic time. With an increase of HNO3 content, the sizes of the pores increased from 7 to 600 nm. HNO3 can react with carbon atoms at the existing edge sites and defect sites of the GO sheet, leading to partial removal and detachment of carbon atoms from the GO sheet. Moreover, the ultrasonic wave at sufficient acoustic pressures engendered high strain rates and frictional forces that attacked the carbon surface and broke the framework, resulting in the formation of pores in the GO sheets. During the thermal treatment process, rapid evaporation of water between the layers also produced pores, and interconnected graphene network formed like-paper 3D architecture by reconstituting from partial overlap and coalescing of sheets. As a consequence, these vacancy defects (pores) onto graphene provided a high density of ion diffusion channels, which facilitated charge storage and transport at high rates for high-performance energy storage devices.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic drawing of the formation of holey graphene oxide paper (HGO). Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. 
Recently, Shi et al. reported a one-step method for large scale preparation of GNM by refluxing rGO sheets in concentrated HNO3 solution.69 The GNM had irregular shape of pores, and the pore sizes can be readily controlled from several to hundreds of nanometers by changing the time of acid treatment (Fig. 13). The experimental results suggested that the number density of nanopores decreased, while the total area of nanopores and the pore sizes of GNM increased with the time of nitric acid treatment increasing from 4 to 9 h. Moreover, the GNM were broken up into tiny sheets after treatment for 11 h. Therefore, according to the different sizes of pores, GNM can be adapted to different potential applications including catalysis, electronic devices and environmental protection.
 Fig. 13  Evolution of the nanopores in GNMs. (a) AFM images of the GNMs prepared by treating rGO sheets with nitric acid for 4 h (GNM-4), (b) GNM-6, (c) GNM-9, (d) GNM-11. Scale bar is 1 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. 


2.4.3 Catalytic oxidation. 
Recently, GNM can also be prepared by the catalytic oxidation of graphene using metal,70,71 metal oxide72 or nonmetal oxide.73 For instance, a 3D Au nanoparticles embedded porous graphene (AuEPG) thin film was fabricated by an electrostatic layer-by-layer assembly of Au nanoparticles and graphene nanosheets functionalized with bovine serum albumin (BSA) and subsequent thermal annealing (Fig. 14a and b).70 Silver (Ag) nanoparticles with catalytic properties were also used to fabricate porous graphene through a chemical-etching method.71 The graphene sheets in contact with Ag nanoparticles were selectively oxidized into gaseous byproducts, such as CO or CO2, resulting in producing pores on the sheet surface. The average pore diameter size could be controlled within ranging from ∼5 nm to tens of nanometer by varying the Ag catalyst loading level. However, as-obtained porous graphene by Ag catalytic oxidative method was hard to control the geometries, periodicities and size distribution of pores (Fig. 14c–f). Another attempt to synthesize GNM by enzyme treatment of GO was reported by Star and coworkers.74 It was found that horseradish peroxidase could catalyze the oxidation of GO, the pore size of porous GO sheets gradually increased during the reaction. More interestingly, the same enzyme treatment was ineffective for reduced-GO due to less dynamic enzyme functions.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of AuEPG. (b) SEM image of AuEPG film-modified. Inset: magnification image of a selected area in the white box. Scale bar: 100 nm. Electron microscopy images of a 1 mol% precursor of silver sample (c and d), and a 10 mol% precursor of silver sample (e and f). The SEM images (c and e) and TEM images (d and f) were acquired at the exactly the same location as the corresponding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70 (a and b) and ref. 71 (c–f). 
Interestingly, our group took advantage of the chemical-etching method using the reaction between KMnO4 and carbon to easily synthesize porous graphene nanosheets.72 After the microwave treatment of GO and KMnO4 solution in a short time, subsequently followed by the chemical reduction of GO, the as-obtained GNM had a high surface area of 1374 m2 g−1 and a mesoporous structure (Fig. 15). The carbon atoms served as a sacrificial reductant and converted aqueous permanganate (MnO4−) to insoluble MnO2. Then nanoscale pores (∼2.4 nm) and wrinkled structures were generated on graphene sheets. It is suggested that the MnO2 chemical-etching process is as follows:4MnO4− + 3C + H2O ↔ 4MnO2 + CO32− + 2HCO3−
 Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of the formation of porous graphene material with pores on the surface of the sheet. (b and c) TEM images of different magnifications of PGNs. The inset in (c) is the SAED of PGNs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. 
These mesoporous structures could effectively promote contact with the electrolytes and electrode material, and shorten the diffusion pathway of ions through the porous sheets, resulting in an excellent specific capacitance of 154 F g−1 at 500 mV s−1 and a low capacitance loss of 12% after 5000 cycles.
Yi and coworkers used self-assembled monolayer silica sphere arrays as a metal-catalyst layer template and synthesized GNM on Cu foils by CVD.73 This can be interpreted as the dissociation of graphene between the Cu foils and silica spheres layer interface by catalytic hydrogenation of the graphene lattice. The reaction is given as follows:  
This approach could control the size and interval of pores by changing the size of silica spheres and the shrinkage depth of silica spheres. Because the degree of silica shrinkage essentially depends on the softening of Cu metal, the size of each hole in the graphene meshes was strongly temperature-dependent. According to the result that the hole intervals remained the same size as silica spheres (∼600 nm), the average pore diameter decreased steadily from ∼290 to 170 nm when the growth temperature decreased from 1000 to 900 °C, respectively (Fig. 16). The synthetic method not only provided controlled GNMs, but also avoided unintentional contamination and atomic disordering that generally occurred during conventional lithography and etching processes. However, these existed in a low density of microporous or mesoporous and large distance of pore intervals.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustrating CVD synthesis of GNMs. (b–d) Graphene meshes with various hole diameters but with a fixed interval of 600 nm. SEM images of graphene meshes prepared under different temperatures: (b) 1000, (c) 950, and (d) 900 °C. Scale bars: 200 nm. (e) Temperature versus hole diameter for series of samples. (f) Schematic of a possible mechanism for hole formation in graphene mesh. (g) SEM image of amorphous carbonaceous layers around silica spheres after thermal annealing under hydrogen atmosphere. Scale bar: 500 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. 
Notably, the current chemical-etching method for the synthesis of GNM is relatively easy to prepare on a large scale, however, chemical agents or reaction might introduce considerable defects in the graphene structures, affecting their conductivity and mechanical properties. Therefore, the control of porous graphene sheets with a relatively low defect density under this method should be considered.

3. Crumpled graphene (CG)
To prevent aggregation of the graphene sheets and increase their surface area, the structural construction of graphene from pore generation to morphology transformation, has drawn growing attention. Crumpled graphene (CG) is a kind of the reconstruction for graphene from the bending and folding of a sheet into a crumpled configuration, resulting in a high surface area and high pore volume.20,75–84 More interestingly, CG can undergo most processes such as solvent dispersion, molding and pelleting without significantly deteriorating properties, therefore would be beneficial for many applications in the fields of polymer composites,75,77 catalytic supports,85 and electrodes.20,82,86–88 For instance, as compared to flat graphene sheets, crumpled graphene balls had both high free pore volume and high compressive strength, showing almost no loss of the area of accessible surface even under tight compression.82 Therefore, the degree of crumpling can strongly affect the properties and performance of graphene-based devices and materials. In this part, we reviewed recent developments of synthesis methods for CG and its properties.
3.1 Thermal expansion
Crumpled graphene can be synthesized through thermal expansion of graphite oxide due to the expansion of evolved gases trapped between the graphene sheets.89–92 The vacancies and topological defects from the release of carbon dioxide on the graphene sheets are important for the binding or crumpling of sheets. For instance, the crumpled graphene sheets prepared through a thermal exfoliation process, had more wrinkles caused by the crumpling of graphene rather than the stacking of graphene, and a mesoporous structure with high BET surface area in the range of 700–1500 m2 g−1.93 However, if GO was not adequately dried, it would result in a low surface area due to delay of the heating process originated from endothermic vaporization of water. After that, the same group further confirmed that exfoliation would occur when the decomposition rate of the epoxy and hydroxyl sites of GO exceeded the diffusion rate of the evolved gases, suggesting that the self-yielding pressure should be higher than the van der Waals forces between the sheets, and the critical temperature was 550 °C (Fig. 17).94 Notably, Akhavan reported that the obtained reduced graphene oxide through fast heating of GO exhibited a relatively smooth planar structure, the reasons may be related to inadequately dried GO or adding more GO during the heat treatment.95
 Fig. 17  (a) Pseudo-3D representation of a 600 × 600 nm AFM scan of an individual graphene sheet showing the wrinkled and rough structure of the surface. (b) SEM image of dry, as-produced functionalized single graphene sheets powder. The sheets are highly agglomerated, and the particles have a fluffy morphology. (c) TEM image of functionalized single graphene sheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93 (a) and ref. 94 (b and c). 
3.2 Cooling contraction
Recently, our group reported that highly crumpled graphene sheets (HCGS) were synthesized by a low cost and scalable approach through the thermal reduction of graphite oxide at 900 °C, followed by rapid cooling using liquid nitrogen.96 Compared to the crumpled graphene by a thermal expansion method, the HCGS displayed a BET surface area of 518 m2 g−1, and a fluffy and corrugated morphology with more wrinkles and folded regions. As a result, such crumpled graphene afforded an excellent capacitive performance, such as low diffusion resistance, high specific capacitance (349 F g−1) and high rate performance in the application of supercapacitors. Additionally, we represented that crumpled graphene was prepared by a facile and rapid route through rapid freezing a chemically reduced graphene oxide aqueous suspension using liquid nitrogen.97 Such crumpled graphene showed an obvious mesoporous structure with highly folded regions in their basal planes as compared to reduced graphene oxide by freezing at −4 °C, meaning that fast growth speed of ice crystals was favorable for the formation of crumpled and folded graphene. More interestingly, there were abundant pores with sizes of ∼2 nm on the sheets due to punching by tiny ice crystal during the cooling process, which was favorable for the diffusion and transport of electrolyte ions during the rapid charge/discharge process (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  (a and b) SEM images of HCGS samples, (b) enlargement of the dashed frame region in (a). (c and d) TEM images of HCGS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96 (a and b) and ref. 97 (c and d). 
3.3 Substrate regulation
Theoretical predictions have shown that the curvature associated with such corrugations is predicted to alter graphene's electronic and structural properties.98,99 Therefore, the precise control of the orientation, height and density of wrinkles in graphene is crucial in enabling future applications in the pseudo-magnetic field,100 chemically reactive sites,101 and optical lenses.102
More interestingly, the wrinkles in graphene could be controlled through a substrate regulation method, which depended on the substrate surface roughness or the interfacial bonding energy of graphene and substrate. Calado and coworkers reported that the wrinkles in graphene could be controlled through wet transfer onto a hydrophilic polymer substrate, followed by draining of water, as shown in Fig. 19.103 The density and height of the wrinkles in graphene were controlled by tuning the polymer film thickness and polymer concentration in a covering film, and the orientation of the wrinkles was adjusted by the surface morphology of the polymer. Additionally, Zhao and coworkers presented the controlled folding and unfolding of crumpled graphene films through harnessing the mechanical instabilities of graphene adhered on a biaxially pre-stretched polymer substrate.84 Graphene films were crumpled by controlling the relaxation of the pre-strains in a particular order, and if the relaxed substrate was biaxially stretched back, the crumpled graphene film could be unfolded to a relatively flat state. It is a promising process for the synthesis of the controlled crumpled graphene, however, the large-scale production of those materials faces a big challenge.
 Fig. 19  (a) A SiO2 substrate with graphitic flakes covered with a polymer (cellulose acetate butyrate). (b) and (c) The polymer film is “wedged off” the substrate and floats on water. (d)–(f) Film-strip of a wet transfer process seen through an optical microscope (the time stamps are approximate). The arrow points at a large corrugation that is already present when the flake is floating on water. The scale-bar is 50 μm. The schematics in the insets show the water level. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. 
Recently, Feng and coworkers developed an efficient and facile strategy to fabricate highly crumpled nitrogen-doped graphene using C3N4 polymer coating as a soft template that in situ strongly coupled with GO during heat treatment (Fig. 20).104 After the decomposition of C3N4 polymer, the reduced graphene displayed interconnected crumpled wrinkles and an ultra-high pore volume up to 3.42 cm3 g−1. Moreover, the doped-nitrogen concentration in crumpled graphene could be controlled by adjusting the amount of C3N4 or the annealing temperatures. As expected, the crumpled graphene supercapacitor delivered high specific capacitance (302 F g−1), excellent rate capability and good cycle performance due to its highly wrinkled structures, high pore volume, nitrogen concentration, and enhanced electrical conductivity.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration for fabricating crumpled nitrogen-doped graphene. (b–d) SEM and TEM images of the crumpled nitrogen-doped graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. 
3.4 Capillary compression
As known, 2D graphene sheets easily stack together to form lamellar microstructures parallel to the current collectors, especially in the compressed state as electrodes application for energy storage, resulting in loss of their surface area and poor ion transportation.105 In order to make full utilization of the high intrinsic surface area of graphene, it is a promising research direction for the design and synthesis of crumpled graphene ball that has high free volume, high surface area and high compressive strength, which can tightly pack without significantly reducing the area of the accessible surface by an aerosol-assisted capillary compression process (Fig. 21).82,88,106 Therefore, the as-obtained crumpled graphene ball can be used as an electrode for a supercapacitor and a microbial fuel cell with high energy density of 85.6 W h kg−1,88 and high power density of 3.6 W m−3,106 respectively.
 Fig. 21  (a–d) SEM images of crumpled graphene. The scale-bar of (a) is 10 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 (a), ref. 82 (b), ref. 106 (c) and ref. 105 (d). 
Crumpled graphene ball can be synthesized by rapid drying of aerosolized GO suspension.107 The sizes of a crumpled ball were determined by the initial sheet size, the applied confining force, and the physical properties of the sheets. Moreover, the extent of crumpling can be influenced by the conformation of the sheet in solution. Interestingly, Huang and coworkers used aqueous dispersion of GO sheets and Si nanoparticles to fabricate crumpled CG–Si composition capsules by an aerosol assisted capillary compression approach (Fig. 22a and e).108 In addition, Chen et al. also used a similar approach to fabricate CG decorated with precious metals (e.g., Pt, Ag) and metal oxides (e.g., SnO2, Mn3O4) (Fig. 22b–d, f and g).109 The performance of these CG hybrid materials attracted applications for supercapacitor and lithium-ion battery due to their high electron conductivity and high accessible surface area, as well as the folded and wrinkled open structure that helped to prevent volume expansion of coated particles and contributed to rapid mass transfer of the electrolyte ion.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic drawings illustrating aerosol-assisted capillary assembly of crumpled-graphene-wrapped Si nanoparticles. Bottom panel: aqueous dispersion of GO and Si particles is nebulized to create a mist of aerosol droplets, which are passed through a preheated tube furnace. Top panel: during evaporation, GO sheets first migrate to the surface of the droplets due to their amphiphilicity, and then tightly wrap the Si particles upon complete evaporation. GO can also be reduced upon further heating. Since the lateral dimension of the initial GO sheets is much larger than the Si nanoparticles, the graphene shell would be heavily crumpled due to capillary stress. SEM images of bare CG ball (b), CG–SnO2 nanocrystal hybrids (c), CG–Mn3O4 nanocrystal hybrids (d), CG–Si composite capsules (e), CG–Pt nanocrystal hybrids (f), CG–Ag nanocrystal hybrids (g). Reproduced with permission from ref. 108 (a and e) and ref. 109 (b–d, f and g). 
Additionally, Lee and coworkers used a different anti-solvent approach to fabricate highly crumpled non-stacked graphene from non-stacked GO.110 Hydrophobic hexane was used as a non-polar aprotic anti-solvent that cannot react with oxygen containing functional groups on the surface of GO, which effectively inhibited the agglomeration of GO sheets. The as-prepared CG had a high surface area (1435.4 m2 g−1) and ultrahigh pore volume (4.11 cm3 g−1), simultaneously exhibited high specific capacitance (236.8 F g−1 at 1 A g−1), high rate capability and long cycle life in the application of supercapacitor.
Based on the above discussion, although crumpled graphene exhibits high gravimetric capacitance for a supercapacitor due to its high surface area, its volumetric capacitance, an important parameter to evaluate the real application for a supercapacitor, is very low because of its ultrahigh pore volume. Therefore, the design and synthesis of crumpled graphene with a low pore volume and high SSA, as well as the incorporation of metal oxides or other hybrid materials into crumpled graphene, are promising directions for further applications in energy storage.
4. Graphene foam (GF)
Graphene foam (GF) is a 3D macroscopic graphene architecture by a self-assembly of the 2D flexible graphene nanosheets building blocks or by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) methodology.25,111–115 Furthermore, the pore sizes of the GF are in the range of sub-micrometer to several micrometers, which bring about ultralight, high mechanical strength and compressibility, excellent conductivity and adsorption characteristics. The macroporous morphology not only prevents individual graphene sheets from aggregating and restacking during the process of assembling, but also ensures a sufficient contact area between the electrolyte and electrode and the adsorption space. Moreover, 3D porous frameworks endowed high-rate transportation of the electrolyte ions and provided multidimensional electron transport pathways, resulting in excellent electrochemical performance. What is more, this kind of freestanding GF has shown unique electrochemical, mechanical, oil-absorbing and biocompatible properties, which were attractive in the fields of electronic devices (supercapacitor, lithium ion batteries, fuel cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, electrochemical sensor and electromagnetic interference shielding), environmental clean-up, shock damping, biomedical sciences and nanocomposites.
4.1 Hydrothermal method
Recently, Shi and coworkers reported a self-assembled GF with interconnected 3D porous network using a hydrothermal method at 180 °C for 12 h.111 The framework was formed by partial overlapping or coalescing of flexible graphene sheets with physical cross-linking sites (Fig. 23). The formation of foam was driven by π–π stacking interactions of graphene sheets. Using GO as a precursor, the morphology and structure of the foam greatly depended on the GO concentration and hydrothermal reduction time. When the GO concentration was lower than 0.5 mg mL−1, there were few cross-linking sites that cannot form the monolithic cylinder. As an electrode material for supercapacitors, the obtained GF had electrical conductivity of 5 × 10−3 S cm−1, and exhibited a specific capacitance of 175 F g−1 in an aqueous electrolyte. Subsequently, in order to obtain higher conductivity of GF, the same authors used a reducing agent (hydrazine or hydroiodic acid) for further reduction of the foam.116 In this case, the chemically reduced GF possessed high conductivity of 1.3–3.2 S m−1, high specific capacitance of 220 F g−1 and high rate capability as compared to their previous work.
 Fig. 23  (a) Photographs of a 2 mg mL−1 homogeneous GO aqueous dispersion before and after a hydrothermal reduction at 180 °C for 12 h; (b) photographs of a strong GF allowing easy handling and supporting weight; (c–e) SEM images with different magnifications of the SGH interior microstructures; (f) room temperature–V curve of the SGH exhibiting Ohmic characteristics, inset shows a two-probe method for conductivity measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. 
Since this pioneering work, hydrothermal treatment had been generally applied for the fabrication of 3D macroscopic graphene architecture. However, the monolithic solid GF was directly freeze-dried or heat dried, resulting in a collapse of 3D framework and a loss of its mechanical strength due to the expansion of ice, evaporation of water vapor and loss of hydrogen bond during the drying process. Recently, Ruoff et al. demonstrated that the compact graphene architecture with various shapes was synthesized by a hydrothermal reduction of GO suspension using ammonia or NaOH.112 The authors mentioned that the proper ammonia content (pH = 10.1) was beneficial for ionizing the carboxyl functional groups into COO– on GO nanosheets. Therefore, it was hard for further aggregation due to the majority of homodeisterse GO nanosheets with negative charges owing to the electrostatic repulsion forces. With the extension of hydrothermal time for further removal of oxygen-containing functional groups, the graphene sheets were only cross-linked together by van der Waals forces instead of strong partial aggregation. The process was favorable for synthesizing uniform graphene foam with remarkable electrical conductivity and high compressive strength.
On the other hand, Yang and coworkers117 prepared 3D graphene foam with high mechanical strength and a macroporous structure by soaking GF (obtained by Shi's method111) in ammonia solution at 90 °C for only 1 h. It is worth noting that the mechanical strength of the self-assembled graphene foam was greatly enhanced. The reason was that ammonia solution decreased the freezing point of the aqueous solution and mitigated the structure damage during freeze drying, and formed covalent bonds between the graphene sheets (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic process of the formation of GF through hydrothermal and freeze drying methods. (a) GO dispersed in water with a concentration of 2 mg mL−1. (b) Formation of GF and the forming force including van der Waals force, π–π stacking and hydrogen bonds in GF. (c) Abundant hydrogen bonds lost in GF, and expansion of ice induced the destruction of the porous structure. (d) GF was treated by ammonia solution, C–N formed between graphene sheets besides the van der Waals force, π–π stacking and hydrogen bonds. (e) Ammonia treated GF, porous structure of GF was preserved and there were some covalent bonds formed between the graphene sheets. (f) Photographs show compressibility of ammonia treated GF. (g) SEM image of ammonia treated GF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. 
As we know, nitrogen-doped graphene has recently been in the research spotlight because nitrogen-doping can enhance the electrochemical properties, such as specific capacitance, cycle life and high power capability. Recently, heteroatom-doped graphene foam was prepared by using different precursors such as amine, pyrrole, ammonia boron trifluoride and thiourea through a hydrothermal method.26,118–122 For example, Yu et al. used GO and organic amine as precursors to synthesize N-doped GF by a hydrothermal method at 180 °C for 12 h.118 The introduced amine acted not only as nitrogen sources to achieve N-doped GF, but also as a modifier for the reaction with oxygen-containing functional groups to reduce GO and increase the activity of GO sheets for assembling 3D interconnected foam. The tail chain of the organic amine and forming of hydrogen bond on the graphene sheets could effectively prevent graphene sheets from π–π stacking interactions and simultaneously expand the space between the graphene sheets. Therefore, a 3D porous graphene network with submicrometer and micrometer pores was advantageous for the electrolyte transport and storage, resulting in ultrahigh supercapacitor performances (specific capacitance of 113.8 F g−1 and power density of 205.0 kW kg−1).
In addition, pyrrole was also used for the synthesis of N-doped GF as a nitrogen source and a swelling agent. Because the pyrrole monomer has a typical conjugated structure with electron-rich N atom as spacer between GO sheets, it may effectively preclude the self-stacked behavior of GO during the hydrothermal process. Qu and coworkers prepared N-doped, ultralight 3D graphene framework based on mixing a low concentration of homogeneous GO aqueous suspension and 5 vol% pyrrole followed by hydrothermal treatment, freeze-dried and annealed at 1050 °C under Ar atmosphere.119 The as-obtained graphene framework showed high porosity, ultra-low density of 2.1 ± 0.3 mg cm−3 and high adsorption capacity (as high as 200–600 times its own weight) for common oil pollution and organic solvents as well as high capacitance of 484 F g−1 in the supercapacitors application. In a subsequent work, Qu and coworkers directly electrodeposited polypyrrole on the hydrothermally treated sample in order to form in situ polymerized polypyrrole–graphene (PPy–G) foam.120 This process not only provided polypyrrole uniformly coated on the graphene sheets, but also increased the SSA of graphene foam (463 m2 g−1), much higher than that from their previous work (280 m2 g−1),119 as well as the mechanical compression performance. As a deformable electrode for a compressed supercapacitor, it showed a specific capacitance of 350 F g−1 at a constant current of 1.5 A g−1 (Fig. 25). More interestingly, polypyrrole–graphene foam had an interconnected 3D porous network, suggesting good oil absorption capabilities. For example, Liu and coworkers fabricated 3D polypyrrole–graphene foam by cross-linking, polymerization and hydrothermal reduction of the GO using pyrrole and alkylsilanes.26 The as-prepared polypyrrole–graphene foam showed noticeable capability to remove oil (>100 g g−1) very quickly and efficiently. There are synergetic functions between polypyrrole and 3D GF for enhanced electrochemical, mechanical and oil absorptive properties.
 Fig. 25  (a) Photographs of an as-prepared superlight graphene framework with size of 1.8 cm × 1.1 cm × 1.2 cm standing on a dandelion. (b and c) SEM images of the sample in (a). (d) Graphene framework adsorbing gasoline dyed with Sudan III. (e–g) The compression-recovery processes of PPy–G foam. (h–j) SEM images of the inner microstructures of PPy–G foam corresponding to the unloading-loading-unloading status in (e–g). Reproduced with permission from ref. 119 (a–d) and ref. 120 (e–j). 
Wu et al. similarly used GO and ammonia boron trifluoride (NH3BF3) as precursors to fabricate nitrogen and boron co-doped monolithic graphene aerogels (BN-GAs) with 3D interconnected macroporous architecture through a hydrothermal reaction and freeze-drying processes.121 The pore sizes ranged from a few hundred nanometers to several micrometers, which was beneficial for ion diffusion and electron transport. The BN-GAs foam could be readily processed into thin electrode plates with a desirable size upon physical pressing in order to assemble all-solid-state supercapacitors (ASSSs). For this device, the BN-GAs acted as an additive/binder-free electrode material, and a polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)/H2SO4 gel was used as solid-state electrolyte and separator (Fig. 26). Therefore, the as-assembled ASSSs showed high specific capacitance (∼62 F g−1), good rate capability, and enhanced energy density (∼8.65 W h kg−1) or power density (1600 W kg−1). To some extent, the ASSSs are ideal candidates for miniaturized electronics.
 Fig. 26  (a) Fabrication illustration of ASSSs based on BN-GAs that was involved by a combined hydrothermal process and freeze-drying process. The as-fabricated supercapacitors with a diameter of 7 mm indicated by the dotted green ring and a simplified schematic of ASSSs based on aerogels are shown (below left). (b) Digital images of two pairs of GO solutions with different volumes in the vials and N/B co-doped graphene hydrogels before and after hydrothermal self-assembly. Inset: digital images of the BN-GAs obtained after freeze-drying. (e) Low- and (f) high-magnification SEM images of the as-prepared BN-GAs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. 
Usually, graphene macroscopic architecture always loses its mechanical strength induced by the loss of hydrogen bond and expansion of ice after being directly freeze dried, resulting in a partial rupture of the 3D structure. Therefore, adding a cross-linker is helpful for the enhanced mechanical strength of 3D building during a hydrothermal process. For example, the GF could also be obtained by hydrothermal treatment of GO aqueous suspension under the assistance of thiourea.122 Adding thiourea not only separated the GO sheets attribution to the producing gases (ammonia, hydrogen) from the decomposition of thiourea and formed the porous structure, but also introduced many new functional groups (amino –NH2, sulfonic acid –SO3H) in order to further strengthen crosslinking between the neighboring sheets. Consequently, this GF showed excellent mechanical properties, superior processability and structural stability. At the same time, it also showed efficient and repeatable adsorption and desorption ability for various water contaminations (dyes, oils and many other organic solvents). Recently, it was found that single-layered GO foam has been successfully prepared by using noble-metal nanocrystals (Au, Ag, Pb, Ir, Rh, Pt, etc.) as linker.123 These extra agents acted as strengthening agents and enhanced the mechanical properties of the GO-base materials. Moreover, divalent ions could also facilitate the self-assembly of graphene to form a 3D architecture. For instance, Jiang et al. used a divalent ion (Ca2+, Ni2+, or Co2+) to drive the self-assembly of graphene by a hydrothermal method, and then immersed this 3D building in polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) solution in order to strengthen the graphene aerogel architecture.124
To some extent, graphene foams incorporated with transition metal oxides, hydroxide and sulfides have also been given attention in the application as energy storage devices.15,16,125,126 Those kinds of composites showed high reversible capacitance (derived from transition metal oxides, hydroxide or sulfides) and high electrical conductivity and chemical stability (derived from graphene foam). As regards 3D graphene foam with high SSA, porous structure and continuous graphene backbone, these features can not only buffer the volume change of transition metal oxides, hydroxide and sulfides, restraint strong aggregation between the graphene nanosheets, and decrease contact resistance among the active nanosheets, but also promote rapid transmission of electrons and shorten the transport path of the electrolyte during high rate processes. Nitrogen-doped graphene aerogel with Fe3O4 nanoparticles (Fe3O4/N-GAs) was synthesized by mixing of GO aqueous suspension, iron acetate and polypyrrole (as nitrogen source) via a combined hydrothermal method, freeze-drying and a thermal treatment process (Fig. 27a–e).125 The as-prepared Fe3O4/N-GAs showed an interconnected macroporous framework and uniform deposition of Fe3O4 nanoparticles (with sizes of 20–80 nm) on the graphene sheets. However, the SSA was only 110 m2 g−1, indicating a serious aggregation phenomenon between the graphene nanosheets. Recently, Qiao and coworkers used porous GO and Ni(NO3)2 to synthesize hierarchically porous graphene–Ni(OH)2 hybrid foam by hydrothermal treatment (Fig. 27f and g).15 The graphene–Ni(OH)2 hybrid foam exhibited high specific capacitance of 1250.3 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1 and excellent electrochemical stability. The excellent electrochemical properties of porous graphene–Ni(OH)2 hybrid foam was an attribution to the synergic effect for the full utilization of pseudocapacitive Ni(OH)2 and conductive framework assembled by porous graphene resulting in greatly enhancing the charge storage capacitance and kinetic processes.16 In addition, Ajayan and coworkers synthesized 3D porous MoS2–graphene or FeOx–graphene hybrid architectures using GO aqueous suspension and (NH4)2MoS4 or FeCl3 as precursors through a hydrothermal reaction (Fig. 27h).126 Those composite materials showed remarkable electrochemistry performances with high specific capacity (1100–1200 mA h g−1 at 0.5 C) and excellent rate capabilities.
 Fig. 27  (a–c) Fabrication process for the 3D Fe3O4/N-GAs catalyst. (d) SEM image of Fe3O4/N-GAs revealing a 3D macroporous structure and uniform distribution of Fe3O4 nanoparticles in the GAs. (e) HRTEM image of Fe3O4/N-GAs revealing Fe3O4 nanoparticles wrapped by graphene layers. (f) Optical image of the formation of hGN. (g) SEM images of freeze-dried hGN showing large out-of-plane macropores. (h) Typical SEM images of 3D MoS2–graphene or FeOx–graphene architectures reveal the thin and continuous walls and typical photograph of obtained architecture shows the centimeter scale size (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 (a–e), ref. 15 (f and g) and ref. 126 (h). 
Although graphene macroscopic architecture could be obtained through a hydrothermal reaction, GO was partially reduced in mild reduction conditions. Therefore, some oxygen-containing functional groups on GO sheets would result in the decreased electrochemical and oil absorptive properties. Given their practical application, the next reduction treatment of the as-obtained GF should be considered.
4.2 Chemical reduction method
Because there are some oxygen-containing functional groups (hydroxyl, carboxyl and epoxy groups) on GO sheets, the multifunctional reduction reagent can combine with these oxygen-containing functional groups, which not only reduce the GO into graphene but also can impel graphene layer crosslink together by chemical bonding.
Chen and coworkers reported the synthesis of GF with open porous and continuous cross-linked structure through the reduction of GO films on a porous AAO membrane using hydrazine monohydrate.127 In this procedure, due to the rapid evolution of gaseous species (e.g. H2O and CO2) during the chemical reduction process, the gases entranced into the compact layered films to form GF. The open porous and continuous cross-linked network structure not only effectively overcame the problem of restacking of graphene sheets, but also provided better conductive contacts between the graphene sheets for low resistance of the foams. It was found that the resulting GF showed enhanced performance as flexible electrode materials for supercapacitors (specific capacitance of 110 F g−1 for a two-electrode cell), and selective absorption of oil and organic solvents (Fig. 28).
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic drawings illustrating the leavening process to prepare rGO foams. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of rGO foams formed after 10 h in an autoclave at 90 °C with 80 L hydrazine monohydrate and freestanding paper-like rGO foam (inset). (c) Schematic diagram of the flexible rGO foam supercapacitor. The distance between two sides of the rGO foam supercapacitor characterizes its bending degree. (d) Optical image of the flexible rGO foam supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. 
Recently, Gao and coworkers fabricated CNTs and graphene hybrid ultra-flyweight aerogels (UFAs) through chemical reduction of the freeze-dried CNTs and GO using hydrazine vapor.128 The UFA not only exhibited ideal structures such as 3D interconnected porous framework, and crinkly sheets with continuous macropores ranging from hundreds of nanometers to tens of micrometers, but also showed integrated properties such as outstanding temperature-invariant elasticity, ultralow density, excellent thermal stability, good electrical conductivity and extremely high absorption capacities for organic liquids, due to the cooperative effect between elastic CNT ribs and giant graphene cell walls (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 29  (a) A 100 cm3 UFA cylinder standing on a flower like dog's tail. (b) SEM image and photograph (inset in (b)) of the lightest neat graphene aerogel (ρ = 0.16 mg cm−3, i.e., 1.38 mg in 8.6 cm3). (c and d) A circuit constructed with the UFA as lightweight conductive bulk and filled with n-hexane, respectively. The brightness fluctuates upon compressing and releasing UFA. (e) Absorption process of toluene (stained with Sudan Black B) on water by the UFA within 5 s. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. 
In addition, Lu et al. demonstrated that 3D graphene foam with macroporous structure was prepared by a hydrazine chemical reduction of GO under the assistance of water-soluble grafted polymer polyfluorene-grafted-poly(sulfobetaine methacrylate) (PF-g-PSBMA).129 Interestingly, PF-g-PSBMA had a rigid aromatic backbone and flexible branched ionic chains, which could stably disperse hydrophobic graphene sheets in aqueous solutions, resulting in the foam being easily re-dissolved in water (Fig. 30a). Recently, some novel reducing agents such as NaHSO3, Na2S, L-ascorbic acid (Vitamin C), HI, hydroquinone, sodium ascorbate, hypophosphorous acid–iodine, and ethylene diamine (EDA) were used as reducing agents for the chemical reduction of GO.130–133 For example, Yan and coworkers achieved self-assemble of graphene foam through the reduction of the GO suspension using NaHSO3, Na2S, Vitamin C, HI and hydroquinone, respectively, under atmospheric pressure without stirring (Fig. 30b).130 Shi and coworkers fabricated graphene foam with excellent electrochemical performance by the chemical reduction of GO suspension using sodium ascorbate (Fig. 30c).131 And Kim et al. prepared graphene foam with superior electrical conductivity (∼500 S m−1) and high C/O atomic ratio (14.7) through chemical reduction of GO aqueous suspension using hypophosphorous acid–iodine (HPA–I) (Fig. 30d).132 What is more, this operation only required lower temperature and atmospheric pressure processing without further reduction or thermal treatment. However, as-prepared graphene foam often required lengthy dialysis in order to remove the excess reducing agents and absorbed water by freeze-drying.
 Fig. 30  (a) SEM image of 3D rGO/PF-g-PSBMA composite and its digital photograph (inset). (b) SEM cross-section image of the as-prepared graphene foam via a one-step self-assembly of graphene from in situ reduction of GO aqueous suspension using NaHSO3 (41 mmol L−1) as reducing agent and its digital photograph (inset). (c) SEM image of an aqueous mixture of GO (2 mg mL−1) and sodium ascorbate after chemical reduction at 90 °C for 1.5 h and its digital photograph (inset). (d) SEM image of the reduction of GO (3 mg mL−1) by using HPA-I solution as reducing agent and its digital photograph (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 129 (a), ref. 130 (b), ref. 131 (c) and ref. 132 (d). 
Worsley et al. demonstrated that GO aqueous suspension can also be cross-linked with resorcinol-formaldehyde (RF) using sodium carbonate as catalyst by sol–gel chemistry, followed by supercritical CO2 drying and pyrolysis at 1050 °C under nitrogen atmosphere.134 The as-prepared macroscopic 3D graphene foam exhibited excellent electrical conductivity (∼102 S m−1), high surface area (584 m2 g−1) and large pore volume (2.96 cm3 g−1). Subsequently, the porous structure of graphene foam was adjusted by increasing the RF content, and as a result, the obtained foam had a high surface area of 1200 m2 g−1 and a large pore volume of 6 cm3 g−1, and maintained its high conductivity.135 During this synthesis, RF played a significant role as an organic binder to covalently cross-link GO sheets, and thermal treatment not only could reduce the GO, but also convert the sol–gel cross-links to a conductive carbon bridges in the graphene network. If RF was replaced by NH4OH, 3D graphene foam fabricated under the same follow-up experimental conditions showed a surface area of 1314 m2 g−1 but still less than the theoretical surface area of graphene (∼2600 m2 g−1) due to partial layering or overlapping of sheets in the process of self-assembly.136
Zhang et al. fabricated graphene aerogels with hierarchically porous structure by only heating GO with L-ascorbic acid (Vitamin C) followed by supercritical CO2 drying or freeze drying.137 Vitamin C served as a reducing agent for the reduction of GO, and the as-prepared foam showed light weight (12–96 mg cm−3), large SSA (512 m2 g−1), and large pore volume (2.48 cm3 g−1). The GF was mechanically strong and electrically conductive (∼102 S m−1) and could support at least 14000 times its own weight, and showed a specific capacitance of 128 F g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1. Subsequently, the same authors introduced multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) into the PGF by heating mixtures of GO and MWCNT (either pristine or acid functionalized) using reducing agent Vitamin C and a catalytic amount of hydrochloric acid and subsequently supercritical CO2 drying.138 Carbon nanotubes (CNT) could bridge the defects for electron transfer and strengthen the porous structure, exhibiting a unique synergistic effect. The as-prepared hybrid foam as an electrode for capacitive deionization (CDI) application, showed high desalination capacity of 633.3 mg g−1 with the NaCl concentration up to 35 g L−1, as well as excellent scavenging capability for basic dyes and heavy metal ions (Pb2+, Hg2+, Cu2+, Ag+, etc.) in the field of water purification (Fig. 31).
 Fig. 31  SEM images of supercritical CO2 dried (a) and freeze dried (b) graphene aerogels and their digital photograph (inset). (c) A 7.1 mg graphene aerogel pillar with the diameter of 0.62 cm and the height of 0.83 cm supporting a 100 g counterpoise, more than 14000 times its own weight. (d) SEM image of the resulting graphene with acid treated MWCNT hybrid aerogel and its digital photograph (inset). Arrows in (d) is the indication of the CNTs. Adsorption of dyes (A: methylene blue, B: fuchsin, C: rhodamine B, D: acid fuchsin) by graphene–CNT hybrid aerogels (e) and binding of heavy metal ions with graphene–CNT hybrid aerogels (f). For comparison, the related data collected with graphene alone aerogel were also shown in (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 137 (a–c) and ref. 138 (d–f). 
Additionally, metal ions could also help to improve the reduction of GO sheets to form macroscopic graphene foam. For instance, Yu et al. reported that self-assembled graphene/α-FeOOH and magnetic graphene/Fe3O4 foam were fabricated by using ferrous ions (FeSO4) as reducing agent, simultaneously, in situ deposition of α-FeOOH nanorods and magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles on graphene sheets under mild conditions.139 Additionally, after burning the oil-saturated graphene/α-FeOOH foam, 3D hematite α-Fe2O3 monolith with porous structures was prepared. The as-prepared graphene-based foam exhibited excellent adsorption capability for removal of oils and heavy ions in industrial water purification (Fig. 32).
 Fig. 32  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of the graphene/iron oxide hydrogels. (b) and (c) Low- and high-magnified SEM images of graphene/FeOOH foam and its digital photograph (inset (b)). (d) TEM image of the microstructures of the freeze-dried graphene/FeOOH hydrogel. (e) Photographs showing the process of the graphene/α-FeOOH aerogel absorbing gasoline. The gasoline was labeled with Sudan III for clear presentation. (f) SEM images of the three-dimensional microstructures of the product α-Fe2O3 by burning the oil-saturated graphene/α-FeOOH aerogel and its digital photograph (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. 
Moreover, Hur and coworkers demonstrated that a graphene foam was fabricated by the crosslinking reaction between GO and ethylene diamine (EDA), and then submerged into hydrazine at 90 °C for 2 days followed by freeze-drying.133 The as-prepared graphene foam showed high electrical conductivity of 1351 S m−1, high SSA of 745 m2 g−1, high break strength of 10.3 MPa and high specific capacitance of 232 F g−1 in the supercapacitor application. In another example, Qiu et al. used EDA modified GO to synthesize ultralight graphene aerogel (ULGA) under microwave treatment.140 GO was modified by reducing agent EDA, resulted in the restoration of a portion of sp2 regions, and simultaneously caused steric hindrance, and the functional groups could be removed under microwave treatment. Therefore, the obtained graphene foam had a porous, hierarchical, folded and crumpled structure. Obviously, the unique structure could not only inhibit the restacking of graphene sheets, but also enhance the mechanical compressibility of the monolithic foam (Fig. 33).
 Fig. 33  (a) Illustration of the fabrication process of the ultralight graphene aerogel (ULGA) (functionalized graphene hydrogel (FGH), functionalized graphene aerogel (FGA)). (b) SEM images of wall structure of ULGA. (c) SEM images of cellular structure of ULGA. (d) and (e) The digital images showing compressibility of FGA and ULGA, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. 
Furthermore, the synergistic effect between graphene foam (as power source) and pseudo-capacitive materials including conductive polymers or transition metal compounds (as energy source) may effectively improve the capacity of the supercapacitor. In order to further improve the specific capacitance of graphene foam, Shi and coworkers have synthesized macroporous graphene hydrogels using 2-aminoanthraquinone (AAQ) molecules as modifier grafting onto graphene.141 AAQ is a kind of redox active small organic molecule with reversible electrochemical properties under appropriate conditions. The foam-like AAQ modified self-assembled graphene hydrogel showed high specific capacitance (258 F g−1, at 0.3 A g−1), good rate performance and long cycle life. However, the organic modifier may cause fire and be potentially dangerous in the supercapacitors application.
4.3 Template directed CVD method
The GF and its derivatives can be prepared by a hydrothermal method, chemical reduction method or a combination of both, but sometimes they would suffer from poor electrical conductivity and structural instability due to severe structural defects in the graphene sheets and high inter-sheet junction contact resistance during the self-assembly process. Recently, Cheng and coworkers first obtained 3D graphene foam (GF) using porous nickel foam as a template for the deposition of graphene by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) CH4 at 1000 °C under ambient pressure.113 The as-prepared GF inherited the interconnected 3D scaffold of the nickel foam template with a macroporous structure, which can be used as a gas-sensing device due to its high sensitivity detection of NH3 and NO2 at room temperature and atmospheric pressure.142 There was large porosity in the foam and only few-layer graphene on the walls of the foam, resulting in the gas molecules uniformly infiltrating the entire porous structure, and in charged carrier transport through the foam. Furthermore, the GF sensor exhibited a fully reversible response by Joule-heating to expel chemisorbed gas molecules during the desorption step. It is worth noting that there were more ripples and wrinkles on the graphene due to the difference between the thermal expansion coefficients of nickel and graphene.143 Coincidentally, these ripples and wrinkles not only increased SSA of the GF (up to ∼850 m2 g−1) but also improved the mechanical interlocking with polymer chains for GF–polymer composite materials.113 For example, it was mentioned that GF–poly(dimethyl siloxane) composites showed excellent flexibility that could be bent, stretched and twisted without breaking. In addition, the GF composites showed extraordinary electrical conductivity of ∼10 S cm−1 with an ultralow loading of ∼0.5 wt% graphene (∼0.22 vol%) because the charge carriers can move rapidly with a small resistance in the seamlessly interconnected 3D GF network. Additionally, the GF composites could also be applied as high-performance electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding materials with an outstanding specific shielding effectiveness up to 500 dB cm3 g−1.144 Noticeably, its EMI shielding effectiveness was as high as 30 dB with a very low graphene loading of less than 0.8 wt% in the 30 MHz to 1.5 GHz and 20 dB in the X-band frequency range, respectively. Moreover, Cheng and coworkers also fabricated a kind of superhydrophobic graphene foams by coating Teflon onto GF.145 The GF–Teflon composites had extremely water repellent nature with an advancing contact angle of ∼163°, and showed potential applications from self-cleaning and anti-fouling technologies to anti-corrosion and low-friction coatings (Fig. 34). Furthermore, GF could also significantly improve the voltammetric signatures in non-aqueous media (ionic liquids) for application in the field of electrochemistry.146
 Fig. 34  (a–f) Synthesis of a GF and integration with PDMS. (a and b) CVD growth of graphene films (Ni-G, b) using a nickel foam (Ni foam, a) as a 3D scaffold template. (c) An as-grown graphene film after coating a thin PMMA supporting layer (Ni-G–PMMA). (d) A GF coated with PMMA (GF–PMMA) after etching the nickel foam with hot HCl (or FeCl3/HCl) solution. (e) A free-standing GF after dissolving the PMMA layer with acetone. (f) A GF–PDMS composite after infiltration of PDMS into a GF. All the scale bars are 500 μm. (g) SEM image of a GF and photograph of a 170 × 220 mm2 free-standing GF (inset). (h and i) SEM image of the GF–PDMS composite and photograph of a bent GF–PDMS composite showing its good flexibility (inset). (j) Electrical conductivity of GFs and GF–PDMS composites as a function of the number of graphene layers (corresponding to different weight fractions of GFs in the composites). The average conductivity of GFs and GF–PDMS composites was calculated over five specimens for each sample and error bars for standard deviation are shown. (k) SEM image of Teflon coated graphene foam showing similar pore structure and dimensions to the original graphene foam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113 (a–g, i and j), ref. 142 (g (inset)), ref. 144 (h) and ref. 145 (k). 
Since the groundbreaking work for synthesis of 3D GF done by Cheng and coworkers, some other scientists have also used this foam as the basis for a more far-reaching research. Due to its excellent conductivity, large SSA and unique macroporous structure (porosity of 99.5 ± 0.2%, pore size of 100–300 μm and width of the graphene skeleton of 100–200 μm),147 3D GF had remarkable biocompatibility in the field of tissue engineering. Recently, Li and coworkers used 3D GF as a scaffold to provide growth microenvironments in vitro for neural stem cells (NSC) and as a conductive platform for cell electrical stimulation.147 It is worth noting that the 3D GF could not only support NSC growth and keep the cell in an active proliferation state but also enhance the NSC differentiation towards astrocytes and especially neurons. In another example, Sung and coworkers reported that the 3D GF acted as culture substrates to promote osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells.148 It is possible to assert that the 3D GF has a great potential to develop novel graphene-based strategies for regenerative medicine.
The 3D GF synthesized by a CH4 CVD process on Ni foam also had good thermal transport properties, as reported by Shi and coworkers.149 It was found that room-temperature thermal conductivity (κGF) of GF depended on different etching agents for the removal of Ni foam. Both ferric nitrate (Fe(NO3)3) and ammonium persulfate ((NH4)2S2O8) as etching agents were much slower and gentler than dilute hydrochloric acid (HCl), therefore, the few-layered ultrathin GF with low crystalline defects was beneficial for eliminating internal contact thermal resistance in the interconnected GF.
Apart from CH4, ethanol is also a good choice as a carbon source for the synthesis of graphene because it can avoid toxic gas emissions during CVD process. Chen and coworkers25,150 demonstrated that 3D GF was synthesized by CVD under atmospheric pressure using nickel foam as the growth substrate and ethanol as carbon source. The as-obtained freestanding 3D GF can be used as the electrode of the electrochemical sensor for detection of dopamine, and exhibited remarkable sensitivity (619.6 μA mM−1 cm−2) and a low detection limit (25 nM at a signal-to-noise ratio of 5.6).25 The 3D GF electrode can be easily distinguished from uric acid that is a common interferent to dopamine detection. Furthermore, dopamine is a critical neurotransmitter, the deficiency of which leads to various neurological diseases, such as Parkinson's disease. Subsequently, the same authors also reported 3D graphene–CNT hybrid foam through a two-step CVD method as novel electrochemical electrodes for detecting dopamine (Fig. 35).151 The as-formed 3D graphene–CNT hybrid foam exhibited high sensitivity (∼470.7 mA M−1 cm−2) and a low detection limit (∼20 nM with S/N ≈ 9.2) for dopamine detection. Moreover, 3D graphene–CNT hybrid foam also exhibited superhydrophobic properties due to its bulk porous structure, surface nano-roughness and nanoscopic voids, and hydrophobicity of CNTs.152 So the hybrid foam can be used to selectively remove oils and organic solvents from the surface of water with high absorption capacity and good recyclability.
 Fig. 35  (a) SEM images of bare 3D graphene. (b) SEM image on the surface of graphene skeleton. The inset is a higher magnification display. (c) SEM image of the skeleton of the 3D graphene–CNT hybrid. (d) SEM image of CNT mesh grown on graphene foam. The inset depicts the TEM image of individual CNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. 
In addition, some transition metal oxides and conducting polymer can also be introduced into the CVD grown graphene foam to form hybrid graphene foam for the application of energy storage. Because transition metal oxides possessed high pseudocapacitance and integrated with the novel GF scaffold with remarkable conductivity, unique porous structure and large SSA, the hybrid GF materials exhibited excellent performance as electrodes in both supercapacitors and electrochemical sensing. For example, Zhang and coworkers synthesized 3D NiO–graphene hybrid foam using NiO electrochemically deposited on ethanol CVD grown GF.28 The obtained NiO–graphene hybrid foam as a supercapacitor electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of 816 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 and a stable cycling performance without any decrease of its specific capacitance after 2000 cycles. Chen and coworkers demonstrated that MnO2 nanostructures were in situ synthesized on the ethanol CVD grown GF using KMnO4 as precursor by a hydrothermal approach.29 Interestingly, the morphology of the MnO2 nanostructures on the GF can be easily controlled by the diluted HCl solution acidity. The 3D free-standing composite as a supercapacitor electrode exhibited a remarkable specific capacitance of 560 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 and excellent cycling stability. Additionally, graphene–ZnO or graphene–Co3O4 hybrid foam as the monolithic free-standing electrode for supercapacitor application, exhibited high specific capacitance of ∼400 F g−1 at 6.7 A g−1 for graphene–ZnO hybrid foam,153 and ∼1100 F g−1 at a current density of 10 A g−1 for graphene–Co3O4 hybrid foam.154 Moreover, Mn3O4 grown on the surface of 3D GF by an electrochemical deposition method,155 as freestanding biosensor for nonenzymatic determination of glucose or hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), exhibited high sensitivity of 360 μA mM−1 cm−2 and 1.03 mA mM−1 cm−2, respectively, and large linear ranging from 0.1 mM to 8 mM and 2 μM to 6.5 mM, respectively, and low detection limit of 10 μM and 1 μM, respectively (Fig. 36). Chen and coworkers27,156 also demonstrated that 3D graphene–polyaniline (PANI) hybrid foam was synthesized by in situ polymerization of aniline monomers using ammonium persulfate (APS) as catalyst on ethanol CVD grown 3D GF. The GF hybrid material was highly hydrophobic that was adverse for bacteria adhesion, while hydrophilic conducting polymer PANI was favorable for bacteria adhesion and biofilm formation. Moreover, this composite as the microbial fuel cell (MFC) anode showed excellent performance owing to its high bacterial biofile loading and high extracellular electron transfer (EET) efficiency.156 Additionally, as the electrode for supercapacitor application, it also exhibited high specific capacitance (346 F g−1 at 4 A g−1) and good cycling stability.27
 Fig. 36  (a) SEM image of 3D graphene foam. (b–d) SEM images of graphene–ZnO hybrids with different magnifications. The inset of (d) shows the morphology of a single ZnO nanorod at a high magnification. (e–g) SEM images of 3D graphene–Co3O4 nanowire composite with different magnifications. Inset panel (g) shows an enlarged view. (h) High- and low-resolution (inset) TEM images of Co3O4 nanowire grown on the surface of 3D graphene foam. (i and j) Low- and high-magnification SEM images of the Mn3O4–GF composite. (k and l) SEM and TEM images of the hierarchically structured Mn3O4 nanomesh grown on the surface of the 3D GF skeleton. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153 (a–d), ref. 154 (e–h) and ref. 155 (i–l). 
3D GF fabricated by a CVD process had a macroporous and monolithic interconnected skeleton and superior electrical conductivity, which was beneficial for electrodes for different applications from electrochemical sensors to fuel cells up to supercapacitors.25,27–29,151,153–156 For the application in lithium-ion batteries, the GF can also enhance its electronic conductivity, specific capacity and rate performance simultaneously. For example, using ultrathin GF with highly conductive (∼1.3 × 105 S m−1) and 3D lightweight structure (∼9.5 mg cm−3) loaded with LiFePO4 as a cathode of a lithium ion battery not only overcame the poorly conductive LiFePO4, but also showed high specific capacity and good rate performance (70 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 1280 mA g−1).157
Generally speaking, the mechanical strength of GF synthesized using the above mentioned methods, especially in a radial plane, is not satisfactory, and should be improved for practical applications. Additionally, the GF has a macroporous structure with pore sizes of a few hundred micrometres. Given its extendable applications, GF with nanometer or even smaller size pores is needed.
5. Outlook and future directions
Graphene as a “rising star” has attracted more and more attention due to its high surface area, remarkable thermal conductivity, excellent electronic conductivity, and mechanical properties. However, graphene sheets tend to form irreversible agglomerates or even restack to form graphite due to their strong π–π stacking and van der Waals interactions between the intersheet of graphene, resulting in a dramatic decrease of the surface area. Therefore, the full utilization of the unique structure of graphene is important for its further application. Owing to their exceptional porous structure combining with the inherent properties of graphene, porous graphene materials including graphene nanomesh, crumpled graphene and graphene foam, have attracted tremendous attention and research interest. Although the porous structures and morphologies of porous graphene materials highly depend on the processing conditions used, the precise control of surface area, interconnected pore structure, pore size distribution remains a large scientific and technological challenge.
In view of graphene nanomesh, the ability to tailor periodic and uniform pore sizes with a high density of the tailored pores on the graphene sheets prepared on a large scale and at low cost is still unsatisfactory. On the other hand, the chemical-etching method is a promising process for large scale preparation of graphene nanomesh, but the introduced defects are harmful for their conductivity and mechanical properties. Thus, future research should be directed towards the development of (1) heteroatom doped graphene nanomesh or its derivatives with high surface area and conductivity in a cost effective way; (2) narrow graphene nanomesh ribbons for high performance electronics devices; (3) new types of porous graphene with varied pore shapes, sizes and group functionalities for novel properties that are greatly expected to bring new and exciting results in the fields of gas separation/storage and catalysis.
Despite many great efforts in obtaining graphene foam and crumpled graphene, challenges still exist. We would like to mention that the inherent properties of these materials need to be explored. Future research is likely to focus on: how to increase the surface area of graphene foam and crumpled graphene due to its macroporous structure with pore sizes of a few hundred micrometres, limiting its further application in the field of energy storage; how to control the distribution, density, the kind of chemical bonding, as well as the 3D arrangement of graphene for enhancing their strength of the foam; how to characterize precisely and clarify the atomic structures of GO as well as remove effectively the oxygen groups during the reduction process to enhance electrical conductivity; how to combine graphene foam and crumpled graphene together with metal oxides and conductive polymers utilizing their synergistic effects.
In conclusion, due to their unique porous structure and electronic properties, porous graphene materials attract great attention in the fields of energy storage (supercapacitors, lithium ion batteries, fuel cells, etc.), gas separation/storage, electronic devices, oil absorption, etc. When more researchers are devoting ever-increasing efforts to the search for new graphene-related functional materials, we are strongly convinced that those novel graphene based materials would bring more exciting results.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation of China (51077014, 21003028 and 51202043), Fundamental Research funds for the Central Universities, Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-10-0050) and Excellent Youth Foundation of Heilongjiang Province of China.
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Xue, M. Zhang and L. Dai, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 1265–1272 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, T. Wei, B. Shao, F. Ma, Z. Fan, M. Zhang, C. Zheng, Y. Shang, W. Qian and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1731–1737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2009, 1, 467–470 CrossRef .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, L. Zhi, Q. Zhang, T. Wei, J. Feng, M. Zhang, W. Qian and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Q. Zhao, X.-F. Liu, Q. Zhang, G.-L. Tian, J.-Q. Huang, W. Zhu and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10759–10769 CAS .
J. J. Shao, W. Lv, Q. Guo, C. Zhang, Q. Xu, Q. H. Yang and F. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3706–3708 RSC .
M.-Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J.-Q. Huang, G.-L. Tian, T.-C. Chen, W.-Z. Qian and F. Wei, Carbon, 2013, 54, 403–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Fan, J. Yan, T. Wei, G.-Q. Ning, L.-J. Zhi, J.-C. Liu, D.-X. Cao, G.-L. Wang and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2787–2794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Rakhi and H. N. Alshareef, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8858–8865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Rakhi, W. Chen, D. Cha and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 381–389 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Duan, Y. Tang and S. Zhang Qiao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 7118–7124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Duan, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9409–9413 CAS .
J. Yan, T. Wei, B. Shao, Z. Fan, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 487–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-C. Chen, W. Wei, W. Lv, F.-Y. Su, Y.-B. He, B. Li, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5904–5906 RSC .
J. Yan, T. Wei, Z. Fan, W. Qian, M. Zhang, X. Shen and F. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3041–3045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, H.-G. Wang, Z. Wu and X.-B. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2422–2430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ning, C. Xu, L. Mu, G. Chen, G. Wang, J. Gao, Z. Fan, W. Qian and F. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6815–6817 RSC .
G. Ning, H. Wang, X. Zhang, C. Xu, G. Chen and J. Gao, Particuology, 2013, 11, 415–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, G. Ning, T. Wei, L. Zhi and F. Wei, Carbon, 2013, 60, 558–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, X. Wang, L. Wang, H. Song, H. Zhang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3129–3133 CAS .
H. Li, L. Liu and F. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3446 CAS .
X. Dong, J. Wang, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, X. Li, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 134, 576–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Yan, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, X. Wang, J. Wang, H. Song, X. Li, L. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, C. M. Li and P. Chen, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4865–4870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liang, Z. Li and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3696–3717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4541 RSC .
D. E. Jiang, V. R. Cooper and S. Dai, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4019–4024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Blankenburg, M. Bieri, R. Fasel, K. Mullen, C. A. Pignedoli and D. Passerone, Small, 2010, 6, 2266–2271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Zhou, P. Shen and Z. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3672–3674 RSC .
J. Schrier, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2284–2287 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, J. Li, J. Zhang, G. Su, X. Li and Y. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23261–23266 CAS .
M. Hankel, Y. Jiao, A. Du, S. K. Gray and S. C. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6672–6676 CAS .
A. W. Hauser and P. Schwerdtfeger, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13292–13298 RSC .
M. Shan, Q. Xue, N. Jing, C. Ling, T. Zhang, Z. Yan and J. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5477–5482 RSC .
C. Si and G. Zhou, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 184309 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jungthawan, P. Reunchan and S. Limpijumnong, Carbon, 2013, 54, 359–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Du, Z. Zhu and S. C. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2876–2877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-h. Huang, L. Miao, Y.-j. Xiu, M. Wen, C. Li, L. Zhang and J.-j. Jiang, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 124312 CrossRef .
P. Reunchan and S.-H. Jhi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 093103 CrossRef .
J. Cai, P. Ruffieux, R. Jaafar, M. Bieri, T. Braun, S. Blankenburg, M. Muoth, A. P. Seitsonen, M. Saleh, X. Feng, K. Mullen and R. Fasel, Nature, 2010, 466, 470–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Talirz, H. Sode, J. Cai, P. Ruffieux, S. Blankenburg, R. Jafaar, R. Berger, X. Feng, K. Mullen, D. Passerone, R. Fasel and C. A. Pignedoli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2060–2063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bieri, M. Treier, J. Cai, K. Ait-Mansour, P. Ruffieux, O. Groning, P. Groning, M. Kastler, R. Rieger, X. Feng, K. Mullen and R. Fasel, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6919–6921 RSC .
P. Kuhn, A. l. Forget, D. Su, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13333–13337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bai, X. Zhong, S. Jiang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 190–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, Y. S. Jung, S. Wu, A. Ismach, D. L. Olynick, S. Cabrini and J. Bokor, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2454–2460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, N. S. Safron, E. Han, M. S. Arnold and P. Gopalan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1125–1131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sinitskii and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14730–14732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Akhavan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4174–4180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Fischbein and M. Drndić, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 113107 CrossRef .
Z. Zeng, X. Huang, Z. Yin, H. Li, Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, J. Ma, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4138–4142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jung, H. Young Jang and S. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 023105 CrossRef .
C. M. Chen, Q. Zhang, C. H. Huang, X. C. Zhao, B. S. Zhang, Q. Q. Kong, M. Z. Wang, Y. G. Yang, R. Cai and D. Sheng Su, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7149–7151 RSC .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ning, Z. Fan, G. Wang, J. Gao, W. Qian and F. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5976–5978 RSC .
G. Ning, C. Xu, L. Hao, O. Kazakova, Z. Fan, H. Wang, K. Wang, J. Gao, W. Qian and F. Wei, Carbon, 2013, 51, 390–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, Z. Fan, W. Sun, G. Ning, T. Wei, Q. Zhang, R. Zhang, L. Zhi and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2632–2641 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xie, X. Qin, X. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Tao, Q. Wu, L. Yang and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 347–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, Y. Liu, J. Yan, G. Ning, Q. Wang, T. Wei, L. Zhi and F. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 419–424 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23710 RSC .
L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, M. D. Stoller, Y. Zhu, H. Ji, S. Murali, Y. Wu, S. Perales, B. Clevenger and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1806–1812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, F. Zhang, X. Yang, G. Long, Y. Wu, T. Zhang, K. Leng, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, A. Yu and Y. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1408 Search PubMed .
W. Peng, S. Liu, H. Sun, Y. Yao, L. Zhi and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5854 CAS .
X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8739–8749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Jiao, K. Sheng, C. Li, L. Dai and G. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1996 Search PubMed .
Q. Xi, X. Chen, D. G. Evans and W. Yang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9885–9892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, K. A. Watson, J.-W. Kim, D. W. Baggett, D. C. Working and J. W. Connell, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7814–7824 RSC .
Z. Fan, Q. Zhao, T. Li, J. Yan, Y. Ren, J. Feng and T. Wei, Carbon, 2012, 50, 1699–1703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yi, D. H. Lee, W. W. Lee and W. I. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2099–2104 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Kotchey, B. L. Allen, H. Vedala, N. Yanamala, A. A. Kapralov, Y. Y. Tyurina, J. Klein-Seetharaman, V. E. Kagan and A. Star, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2098–2108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Meyer, A. K. Geim, M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth and S. Roth, Nature, 2007, 446, 60–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ramanathan, A. A. Abdala, S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, M. Herrera-Alonso, R. D. Piner, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, X. Chen, R. S. Ruoff, S. T. Nguyen, I. A. Aksay, R. K. Prud'Homme and L. C. Brinson, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 327–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bao, F. Miao, Z. Chen, H. Zhang, W. Jang, C. Dames and C. N. Lau, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 562–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Miller, R. A. Outlaw and B. C. Holloway, Science, 2010, 329, 1637–1639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Cranford and M. J. Buehler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205451 CrossRef .
J. Luo, H. D. Jang, T. Sun, L. Xiao, Z. He, A. P. Katsoulidis, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. M. Gibson and J. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8943–8949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, F. Guo, A. Jachak, S.-P. Kim, D. Datta, J. Liu, I. Kulaots, C. Vaslet, H. D. Jang, J. Huang, A. Kane, V. B. Shenoy and R. H. Hurt, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1996–2002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zang, S. Ryu, N. Pugno, Q. Wang, Q. Tu, M. J. Buehler and X. Zhao, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 321–325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kou, Y. Shao, D. Mei, Z. Nie, D. Wang, C. Wang, V. V. Viswanathan, S. Park, I. A. Aksay, Y. Lin, Y. Wang and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2541–2547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. C. Vivekchand, C. Rout, K. S. Subrahmanyam, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, J. Chem. Sci., 2008, 120, 9–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Poh, F. Sanek, A. Ambrosi, G. Zhao, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3515–3522 RSC .
L. Yang, J. Kong, W. A. Yee, W. Liu, S. L. Phua, C. L. Toh, S. Huang and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4968–4971 RSC .
C.-M. Chen, Q. Zhang, M.-G. Yang, C.-H. Huang, Y.-G. Yang and M.-Z. Wang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 3572–3584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, Y. Wang, C. Xu, F. Qiu, C. An, L. Li, L. Jiao and H. Yuan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1074–1081 RSC .
H. C. Schniepp, J.-L. Li, M. J. McAllister, H. Sai, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. H. Adamson, R. K. Prud'homme, R. Car, D. A. Saville and I. A. Aksay, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8535–8539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. McAllister, J.-L. Li, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, A. A. Abdala, J. Liu, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. L. Milius, R. Car, R. K. Prud'homme and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4396–4404 CrossRef CAS .
O. Akhavan, Carbon, 2010, 48, 509–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, J. Liu, Z. Fan, T. Wei and L. Zhang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2179–2188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, Y. Xiao, G. Ning, T. Wei and Z. Fan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2566 RSC .
F. Guinea, B. Horovitz and P. Le Doussal, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 205421 CrossRef .
V. M. Pereira, A. H. Castro Neto, H. Y. Liang and L. Mahadevan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 156603 CrossRef .
N. Levy, S. A. Burke, K. L. Meaker, M. Panlasigui, A. Zettl, F. Guinea, A. H. Castro Neto and M. F. Crommie, Science, 2010, 329, 544–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Balog, B. Jorgensen, L. Nilsson, M. Andersen, E. Rienks, M. Bianchi, M. Fanetti, E. Laegsgaard, A. Baraldi, S. Lizzit, Z. Sljivancanin, F. Besenbacher, B. Hammer, T. G. Pedersen, P. Hofmann and L. Hornekaer, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 315–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Georgiou, L. Britnell, P. Blake, R. V. Gorbachev, A. Gholinia, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi and K. S. Novoselov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 093103 CrossRef .
V. E. Calado, G. F. Schneider, A. M. M. G. Theulings, C. Dekker and L. M. K. Vandersypen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 103116 CrossRef .
Z. Wen, X. Wang, S. Mao, Z. Bo, H. Kim, S. Cui, G. Lu, X. Feng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5610–5616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, H. D. Jang and J. Huang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1464–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiao, J. Damien, J. Luo, H. D. Jang, J. Huang and Z. He, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 187–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, M. R. Zachariah and C. D. Zangmeister, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 486–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, X. Zhao, J. Wu, H. D. Jang, H. H. Kung and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1824–1829 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mao, Z. Wen, H. Kim, G. Lu, P. Hurley and J. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7505–7513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoon, K. Lee, C. Baik, H. Yoo, M. Min, Y. Park, S. M. Lee and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4437–4444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bi, K. Yin, X. Xie, Y. Zhou, N. Wan, F. Xu, F. Banhart, L. Sun and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5124–5129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549–5563 RSC .
Z. Li-fang, W. Wei, W. Lu, J.-j. Shao, H.-d. Du and Q.-H. Yang, New Carbon Mater., 2013, 28, 161–171 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17206–17212 CAS .
Z. Han, Z. Tang, P. Li, G. Yang, Q. Zheng and J. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5462–5467 RSC .
P. Chen, J.-J. Yang, S.-S. Li, Z. Wang, T.-Y. Xiao, Y.-H. Qian and S.-H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 249–256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Hu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11371–11375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Liu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, C. Hu, C. Jiang, L. Jiang, A. Cao and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, W. Ren and H.-M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20197 RSC .
Z. Tang, S. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4603–4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, Y. Ma, J. Li, Q. Fan and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22462–22465 CAS .
Z. S. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, S. Yang, Z. Liu, L. Ma, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3979–3984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, J. Chen, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2554–2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, A. Wei, Q. Fan, L. Wang, P. Chen, X. Dong and W. Huang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 4335–4339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen and L. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3132–3137 RSC .
K.-x. Sheng, Y.-x. Xu, C. Li and G.-q. Shi, New Carbon Mater., 2011, 26, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Pham, V. H. Pham, T. V. Cuong, T. D. Nguyen-Phan, J. S. Chung, E. W. Shin and S. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9672–9674 RSC .
V. H. Luan, H. N. Tien, L. T. Hoa, N. T. M. Hien, E.-S. Oh, J. Chung, E. J. Kim, W. M. Choi, B.-S. Kong and S. H. Hur, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 208 CAS .
M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Worsley, T. Y. Olson, J. R. I. Lee, T. M. Willey, M. H. Nielsen, S. K. Roberts, P. J. Pauzauskie, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 921–925 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Worsley, S. O. Kucheyev, H. E. Mason, M. D. Merrill, B. P. Mayer, J. Lewicki, C. A. Valdez, M. E. Suss, M. Stadermann, P. J. Pauzauskie, J. H. Satcher, Jr, J. Biener and T. F. Baumann, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8428–8430 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. Sui, B. Xu, S. Yue, Y. Luo, W. Zhan and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6494 RSC .
Z. Sui, Q. Meng, X. Zhang, R. Ma and B. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8767–8771 RSC .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2693–2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, Z. Zhao, W. Wan, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2219–2223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, Y. Sun, H. Bai and G. Shi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11193–11198 RSC .
F. Yavari, Z. Chen, A. V. Thomas, W. Ren, H. M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Sci. Rep., 2011, 1, 166 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Chae, F. Güneş, K. K. Kim, E. S. Kim, G. H. Han, S. M. Kim, H.-J. Shin, S.-M. Yoon, J.-Y. Choi, M. H. Park, C. W. Yang, D. Pribat and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2328–2333 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, C. Xu, C. Ma, W. Ren and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1296–1300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Singh, Z. Chen, F. Houshmand, W. Ren, Y. Peles, H. M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Small, 2013, 9, 75–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. C. Brownson, L. C. S. Figueiredo-Filho, X. Ji, M. Gómez-Mingot, J. Iniesta, O. Fatibello-Filho, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5962 CAS .
N. Li, Q. Zhang, S. Gao, Q. Song, R. Huang, L. Wang, L. Liu, J. Dai, M. Tang and G. Cheng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1604 CAS .
S. W. Crowder, D. Prasai, R. Rath, D. A. Balikov, H. Bae, K. I. Bolotin and H. J. Sung, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4171–4176 RSC .
M. T. Pettes, H. Ji, R. S. Ruoff and L. Shi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2959–2964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, P. Wang, W. Fang, C.-Y. Su, Y.-H. Chen, L.-J. Li, W. Huang and P. Chen, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3672–3678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, Y. Ma, G. Zhu, Y. Huang, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17044 RSC .
X. Dong, J. Chen, Y. Ma, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, X. Liu, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10660–10662 RSC .
X. Dong, Y. Cao, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4364 RSC .
X.-C. Dong, H. Xu, X.-W. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Si, X.-C. Dong, P. Chen and D.-H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 110 RSC .
Y.-C. Yong, X.-C. Dong, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Song and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2394–2400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ji, L. Zhang, M. T. Pettes, H. Li, S. Chen, L. Shi, R. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2446–2451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Lili Jiang	Lili Jiang is pursuing PhD at the College of Material Science and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Engineering University. Her current research is focused on the design and synthesis of functional carbonaceous nanomaterials, as well as their applications for energy conversion and storage devices.
Zhuangjun Fan	Zhuangjun Fan received his PhD in 2003 at the Institute of Coal Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He became full professor at the College of Material Science and Chemical Engineering in 2006, and now he is the director of the Institute of Advanced Carbon Based Materials at Harbin Engineering University. His research interests focus on the design and controlled synthesis of carbon nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes and graphene, and their application in energy-related areas such as supercapacitors, Li ion batteries, and full cells.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Mechanism of the silver-promoted aryl–aryl coupling of iodobenzene to biphenyl. (B) Structure of CHP. (C) Structure of a fraction of the polyphenylene superhoneycomb network. (D) Structural relationship of the polyphenylene superhoneycomb network (bold lines) and graphene (thin lines). (E) STM image (−1 V, 50 pA) of an edge of the polymer network, where the structure of the CHP backbone (overlaid chemical structure) can most clearly be recognized. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–g) Schematic of making graphene nanomesh. (a) A pristine graphene flake on top of silicon oxide substrate as starting material. (b) The graphene flake is covered by a thin layer of evaporated SiOx and a thin film of spin-coated block copolymer poly(styrene-block-methacrylate) (P(S-b-MMA)). The SiOx here is used as a protecting layer and the grafting substrate for the following block copolymer nanopatterning. (c) The P(S-b-MMA) block copolymer film is annealed and developed, leaving the porous PS matrix as nanomesh template for further patterning. (d) Fluoride based reactive ion etching (RIE) to penetrate the oxide layer and partially degrade the PS film, and form SiOx nanomesh hard mask. (e) Graphene in the exposed area is etched away by O2 plasma. (f) After HF dip to remove oxide mash, a GNM is obtained. (g) Free standing GNM can be lifted off from the substrate by etching away the underlying silicon oxide. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanism describing formation of graphene nanomeshes by using the photocatalytic property of the ZnO nanorods. (b) AFM image of the graphene nanomeshes on quartz substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) TEM images of a suspended graphene sheet. (a) Higher magnification image of the nanopore. (b) Multiple nanopores made in close proximity to each other. (c) Two ∼6 nm lines cut into a graphene sheet. (d) Higher resolution of the bridge shows clear atomic order (scale bars are 2, 10, 20, 5 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 54.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the GNM fabrication process. (b) SEM image of an AAO membrane with pore size of ca. 80 nm and cell wall thickness of ca. 20 nm. (c) SEM image showing the cross section of an AAO template with membrane thickness of 1 μm. (d) SEM image of large-area GNM. Inset: magnified SEM image of GNM with pore size of ca. 67 nm and neck width of ca. 33 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Au nano-network and CVD-grown graphene nanomesh, respectively. (b–d) FESEM images of (b) anodized aluminum oxide template, (c) Au nano-network with ca. 18 nm of neck widths, and (d) graphene nanomesh after etching gold in aqua regia. Insets in ((b)–(d)) show high-magnification images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Illustration of the fabrication of a macroporous bubble graphene film (MGF). (b) High magnification SEM images of the cross-section of a MGF and digital images of as-prepared MGF. (c–e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedures of the DHPG electrodes. (f) Illustration of the features in the interior structure of DHPG electrodes. (g) SEM images of DHPG electrodes. (h) TEM images of DHPG electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57 (a and b) and ref. 21 (c–h).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of the formation and porous structure of GNMs. (b–d) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of the GNMs. (e) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) and (f) TEM images of the GNMs prepared by a 30 min carbon deposition. (g) TEM images of the GNMs prepared by 10 min carbon deposition. The arrows indicate the side views of the GNMs, which have a box structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22 (a–f) and ref. 59 (g).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) SEM images of PPCN, showing numerous mesopores with sizes of about 6–8 nm, and a layered structure composed of two layers and narrow pore channels. (c and d) TEM images reveal the sandwich morphology and mesoporous structure of PPCN. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Schematic showing the microwave exfoliation/reduction of GO and the following chemical activation of microwave exfoliated GO (MEGO) with KOH that creates pores while retaining high electrical conductivity. (B) Low magnification SEM image of an activated MEGO (α-MEGO) piece. (C) High-resolution SEM image of a different sample region that demonstrates the porous morphology. (D) ADF-STEM image of the same area as (C), acquired simultaneously. As seen, α-MEGO contains micro- and mesopores with a distribution of sizes between ∼1 and ∼10 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic show of the simple and green process of synthesizing porous 3D graphene-based materials. (b) Low magnification and (c) high-resolution SEM images of products from the mixtures of PF and GO with optimized ratios, which exhibited sponge-like morphology and a porous structure. (d) TEM image of products from the mixtures of PF and GO with optimized ratios, which also showed a dense 3D pore structure with a highly curved or wrinkled surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic drawing of the formation of holey graphene oxide paper (HGO). Reproduced with permission from ref. 68.	 

 	Fig. 13  Evolution of the nanopores in GNMs. (a) AFM images of the GNMs prepared by treating rGO sheets with nitric acid for 4 h (GNM-4), (b) GNM-6, (c) GNM-9, (d) GNM-11. Scale bar is 1 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of AuEPG. (b) SEM image of AuEPG film-modified. Inset: magnification image of a selected area in the white box. Scale bar: 100 nm. Electron microscopy images of a 1 mol% precursor of silver sample (c and d), and a 10 mol% precursor of silver sample (e and f). The SEM images (c and e) and TEM images (d and f) were acquired at the exactly the same location as the corresponding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70 (a and b) and ref. 71 (c–f).	 
4MnO4− + 3C + H2O ↔ 4MnO2 + CO32− + 2HCO3−

 	Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of the formation of porous graphene material with pores on the surface of the sheet. (b and c) TEM images of different magnifications of PGNs. The inset in (c) is the SAED of PGNs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustrating CVD synthesis of GNMs. (b–d) Graphene meshes with various hole diameters but with a fixed interval of 600 nm. SEM images of graphene meshes prepared under different temperatures: (b) 1000, (c) 950, and (d) 900 °C. Scale bars: 200 nm. (e) Temperature versus hole diameter for series of samples. (f) Schematic of a possible mechanism for hole formation in graphene mesh. (g) SEM image of amorphous carbonaceous layers around silica spheres after thermal annealing under hydrogen atmosphere. Scale bar: 500 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Pseudo-3D representation of a 600 × 600 nm AFM scan of an individual graphene sheet showing the wrinkled and rough structure of the surface. (b) SEM image of dry, as-produced functionalized single graphene sheets powder. The sheets are highly agglomerated, and the particles have a fluffy morphology. (c) TEM image of functionalized single graphene sheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93 (a) and ref. 94 (b and c).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a and b) SEM images of HCGS samples, (b) enlargement of the dashed frame region in (a). (c and d) TEM images of HCGS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96 (a and b) and ref. 97 (c and d).	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) A SiO2 substrate with graphitic flakes covered with a polymer (cellulose acetate butyrate). (b) and (c) The polymer film is “wedged off” the substrate and floats on water. (d)–(f) Film-strip of a wet transfer process seen through an optical microscope (the time stamps are approximate). The arrow points at a large corrugation that is already present when the flake is floating on water. The scale-bar is 50 μm. The schematics in the insets show the water level. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration for fabricating crumpled nitrogen-doped graphene. (b–d) SEM and TEM images of the crumpled nitrogen-doped graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a–d) SEM images of crumpled graphene. The scale-bar of (a) is 10 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 (a), ref. 82 (b), ref. 106 (c) and ref. 105 (d).	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic drawings illustrating aerosol-assisted capillary assembly of crumpled-graphene-wrapped Si nanoparticles. Bottom panel: aqueous dispersion of GO and Si particles is nebulized to create a mist of aerosol droplets, which are passed through a preheated tube furnace. Top panel: during evaporation, GO sheets first migrate to the surface of the droplets due to their amphiphilicity, and then tightly wrap the Si particles upon complete evaporation. GO can also be reduced upon further heating. Since the lateral dimension of the initial GO sheets is much larger than the Si nanoparticles, the graphene shell would be heavily crumpled due to capillary stress. SEM images of bare CG ball (b), CG–SnO2 nanocrystal hybrids (c), CG–Mn3O4 nanocrystal hybrids (d), CG–Si composite capsules (e), CG–Pt nanocrystal hybrids (f), CG–Ag nanocrystal hybrids (g). Reproduced with permission from ref. 108 (a and e) and ref. 109 (b–d, f and g).	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Photographs of a 2 mg mL−1 homogeneous GO aqueous dispersion before and after a hydrothermal reduction at 180 °C for 12 h; (b) photographs of a strong GF allowing easy handling and supporting weight; (c–e) SEM images with different magnifications of the SGH interior microstructures; (f) room temperature–V curve of the SGH exhibiting Ohmic characteristics, inset shows a two-probe method for conductivity measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic process of the formation of GF through hydrothermal and freeze drying methods. (a) GO dispersed in water with a concentration of 2 mg mL−1. (b) Formation of GF and the forming force including van der Waals force, π–π stacking and hydrogen bonds in GF. (c) Abundant hydrogen bonds lost in GF, and expansion of ice induced the destruction of the porous structure. (d) GF was treated by ammonia solution, C–N formed between graphene sheets besides the van der Waals force, π–π stacking and hydrogen bonds. (e) Ammonia treated GF, porous structure of GF was preserved and there were some covalent bonds formed between the graphene sheets. (f) Photographs show compressibility of ammonia treated GF. (g) SEM image of ammonia treated GF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Photographs of an as-prepared superlight graphene framework with size of 1.8 cm × 1.1 cm × 1.2 cm standing on a dandelion. (b and c) SEM images of the sample in (a). (d) Graphene framework adsorbing gasoline dyed with Sudan III. (e–g) The compression-recovery processes of PPy–G foam. (h–j) SEM images of the inner microstructures of PPy–G foam corresponding to the unloading-loading-unloading status in (e–g). Reproduced with permission from ref. 119 (a–d) and ref. 120 (e–j).	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Fabrication illustration of ASSSs based on BN-GAs that was involved by a combined hydrothermal process and freeze-drying process. The as-fabricated supercapacitors with a diameter of 7 mm indicated by the dotted green ring and a simplified schematic of ASSSs based on aerogels are shown (below left). (b) Digital images of two pairs of GO solutions with different volumes in the vials and N/B co-doped graphene hydrogels before and after hydrothermal self-assembly. Inset: digital images of the BN-GAs obtained after freeze-drying. (e) Low- and (f) high-magnification SEM images of the as-prepared BN-GAs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a–c) Fabrication process for the 3D Fe3O4/N-GAs catalyst. (d) SEM image of Fe3O4/N-GAs revealing a 3D macroporous structure and uniform distribution of Fe3O4 nanoparticles in the GAs. (e) HRTEM image of Fe3O4/N-GAs revealing Fe3O4 nanoparticles wrapped by graphene layers. (f) Optical image of the formation of hGN. (g) SEM images of freeze-dried hGN showing large out-of-plane macropores. (h) Typical SEM images of 3D MoS2–graphene or FeOx–graphene architectures reveal the thin and continuous walls and typical photograph of obtained architecture shows the centimeter scale size (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 (a–e), ref. 15 (f and g) and ref. 126 (h).	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic drawings illustrating the leavening process to prepare rGO foams. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of rGO foams formed after 10 h in an autoclave at 90 °C with 80 L hydrazine monohydrate and freestanding paper-like rGO foam (inset). (c) Schematic diagram of the flexible rGO foam supercapacitor. The distance between two sides of the rGO foam supercapacitor characterizes its bending degree. (d) Optical image of the flexible rGO foam supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) A 100 cm3 UFA cylinder standing on a flower like dog's tail. (b) SEM image and photograph (inset in (b)) of the lightest neat graphene aerogel (ρ = 0.16 mg cm−3, i.e., 1.38 mg in 8.6 cm3). (c and d) A circuit constructed with the UFA as lightweight conductive bulk and filled with n-hexane, respectively. The brightness fluctuates upon compressing and releasing UFA. (e) Absorption process of toluene (stained with Sudan Black B) on water by the UFA within 5 s. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) SEM image of 3D rGO/PF-g-PSBMA composite and its digital photograph (inset). (b) SEM cross-section image of the as-prepared graphene foam via a one-step self-assembly of graphene from in situ reduction of GO aqueous suspension using NaHSO3 (41 mmol L−1) as reducing agent and its digital photograph (inset). (c) SEM image of an aqueous mixture of GO (2 mg mL−1) and sodium ascorbate after chemical reduction at 90 °C for 1.5 h and its digital photograph (inset). (d) SEM image of the reduction of GO (3 mg mL−1) by using HPA-I solution as reducing agent and its digital photograph (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 129 (a), ref. 130 (b), ref. 131 (c) and ref. 132 (d).	 

 	Fig. 31  SEM images of supercritical CO2 dried (a) and freeze dried (b) graphene aerogels and their digital photograph (inset). (c) A 7.1 mg graphene aerogel pillar with the diameter of 0.62 cm and the height of 0.83 cm supporting a 100 g counterpoise, more than 14000 times its own weight. (d) SEM image of the resulting graphene with acid treated MWCNT hybrid aerogel and its digital photograph (inset). Arrows in (d) is the indication of the CNTs. Adsorption of dyes (A: methylene blue, B: fuchsin, C: rhodamine B, D: acid fuchsin) by graphene–CNT hybrid aerogels (e) and binding of heavy metal ions with graphene–CNT hybrid aerogels (f). For comparison, the related data collected with graphene alone aerogel were also shown in (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 137 (a–c) and ref. 138 (d–f).	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of the graphene/iron oxide hydrogels. (b) and (c) Low- and high-magnified SEM images of graphene/FeOOH foam and its digital photograph (inset (b)). (d) TEM image of the microstructures of the freeze-dried graphene/FeOOH hydrogel. (e) Photographs showing the process of the graphene/α-FeOOH aerogel absorbing gasoline. The gasoline was labeled with Sudan III for clear presentation. (f) SEM images of the three-dimensional microstructures of the product α-Fe2O3 by burning the oil-saturated graphene/α-FeOOH aerogel and its digital photograph (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 139.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Illustration of the fabrication process of the ultralight graphene aerogel (ULGA) (functionalized graphene hydrogel (FGH), functionalized graphene aerogel (FGA)). (b) SEM images of wall structure of ULGA. (c) SEM images of cellular structure of ULGA. (d) and (e) The digital images showing compressibility of FGA and ULGA, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a–f) Synthesis of a GF and integration with PDMS. (a and b) CVD growth of graphene films (Ni-G, b) using a nickel foam (Ni foam, a) as a 3D scaffold template. (c) An as-grown graphene film after coating a thin PMMA supporting layer (Ni-G–PMMA). (d) A GF coated with PMMA (GF–PMMA) after etching the nickel foam with hot HCl (or FeCl3/HCl) solution. (e) A free-standing GF after dissolving the PMMA layer with acetone. (f) A GF–PDMS composite after infiltration of PDMS into a GF. All the scale bars are 500 μm. (g) SEM image of a GF and photograph of a 170 × 220 mm2 free-standing GF (inset). (h and i) SEM image of the GF–PDMS composite and photograph of a bent GF–PDMS composite showing its good flexibility (inset). (j) Electrical conductivity of GFs and GF–PDMS composites as a function of the number of graphene layers (corresponding to different weight fractions of GFs in the composites). The average conductivity of GFs and GF–PDMS composites was calculated over five specimens for each sample and error bars for standard deviation are shown. (k) SEM image of Teflon coated graphene foam showing similar pore structure and dimensions to the original graphene foam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113 (a–g, i and j), ref. 142 (g (inset)), ref. 144 (h) and ref. 145 (k).	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) SEM images of bare 3D graphene. (b) SEM image on the surface of graphene skeleton. The inset is a higher magnification display. (c) SEM image of the skeleton of the 3D graphene–CNT hybrid. (d) SEM image of CNT mesh grown on graphene foam. The inset depicts the TEM image of individual CNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) SEM image of 3D graphene foam. (b–d) SEM images of graphene–ZnO hybrids with different magnifications. The inset of (d) shows the morphology of a single ZnO nanorod at a high magnification. (e–g) SEM images of 3D graphene–Co3O4 nanowire composite with different magnifications. Inset panel (g) shows an enlarged view. (h) High- and low-resolution (inset) TEM images of Co3O4 nanowire grown on the surface of 3D graphene foam. (i and j) Low- and high-magnification SEM images of the Mn3O4–GF composite. (k and l) SEM and TEM images of the hierarchically structured Mn3O4 nanomesh grown on the surface of the 3D GF skeleton. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153 (a–d), ref. 154 (e–h) and ref. 155 (i–l).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
