Enzyme nanoarchitectonics: organization and device application  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35475F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35475F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6322-6345Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsEnzyme nanoarchitectonics: organization and device application

        
          
            Katsuhiko 
            Ariga
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Qingmin 
            Ji
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Taizo 
            Mori
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Masanobu 
            Naito
          
          
        
      cde, 
      
        
          
            Yusuke 
            Yamauchi
          
          
        
      adf, 
      
        
          
            Hideki 
            Abe
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Jonathan P. 
            Hill
          
          
        
      ab
aWorld Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: ARIGA.Katsuhiko@nims.go.jp;  Fax: +81-29-860-4832;   Tel: +81-29-860-4597
bJapan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Go-bancho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan
cEnvironmental Remediation Materials Center, National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan
dPrecursory Research for Embryonic Science and Technology (PRESTO) and Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan
eGraduate School of Materials Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NAIST), 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, Japan
fFaculty of Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 3-4-1 Okubo, Shinjuku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan
Received 
      22nd November 2012
    First published on 25th January 2013AbstractFabrication of ultrasmall functional machines and their integration within ultrasmall areas or volumes can be useful for creation of novel technologies. The ultimate goal of the development of ultrasmall machines and device systems is to construct functional structures where independent molecules operate as independent device components. To realize exotic functions, use of enzymes in device structures is an attractive solution because enzymes can be regarded as efficient machines possessing high reaction efficiencies and specificities and can operate even under ambient conditions. In this review, recent developments in enzyme immobilization for advanced functions including device applications are summarized from the viewpoint of micro/nano-level structural control, or nanoarchitectonics. Examples are roughly classified as organic soft matter, inorganic soft materials or integrated/organized media. Soft matter such as polymers and their hybrids provide a medium appropriate for entrapment and encapsulation of enzymes. In addition, self-immobilization based on self-assembly and array formation results in enzyme nanoarchitectures with soft functions. For the confinement of enzymes in nanospaces, hard inorganic mesoporous materials containing well-defined channels play an important role. Enzymes that are confined exhibit improved stability and controllable arrangement, which are useful for formation of functional relays and for their integration into artificial devices. Layer-by-layer assemblies as well as organized lipid assemblies such as Langmuir–Blodgett films are some of the best media for architecting controllable enzyme arrangements. The ultrathin forms of these films facilitate their connection with external devices such as electrodes and transistors. Artificial enzymes and enzyme-mimicking catalysts are finally briefly described as examples of enzyme functions involving non-biological materials. These systems may compensate for the drawbacks of natural enzymes, such as their instabilities under harsh conditions. We believe that enzymes and their mimics will be freely coupled, organized and integrated upon demand in near future technologies.
Qingmin Ji
Qingmin Ji received her PhD (2005) in chemistry from the University of Tsukuba. She started working as a post-doctoral fellow in the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) from 2006 and became a MANA scientist at The World Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA).
Taizo Mori
Dr Taizo Mori received his PhD from the Department of Polymer Chemistry at Kyoto University in 2009. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the Supermolecules Group at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS).
Masanobu Naito
Masanobu Naito completed his PhD studies in biotechnology at the Tokyo Institute of Technology in 2001. Since 2012, he has been a principal researcher at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS). Concurrently, he joined the PRESTO-JST project, as guest associate professor at the Nara Institute of Science and Technology, and guest professor at Tianjin University.
Yusuke Yamauchi
Yusuke Yamauchi received his PhD in 2007 from Waseda University. He is currently an independent scientist, a head of Advanced Inorganic Nanomaterials Laboratory in The World Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS). He concurrently serves as PRESTO Researcher of Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), visiting associate professor at Waseda University in Japan, and visiting professor at Tianjin University in China.
Hideki Abe
Hideki Abe received his PhD degree from Saitama University. He is a principal researcher in the Environmental Remediation Materials Unit at the National Institute of Materials Science (NIMS). He is currently conducting an R&D project of catalysts for environmental remediation and energy generation.
Jonathan P. Hill
Jonathan P. Hill received his PhD degree from Brunel University, UK, in 1995. He is currently the sub-group leader of the Supermolecules Group at the National Institute for Materials Science. His current research interests include synthesis and properties of tetrapyrroles and their supramolecular manifolds as well as unusual methods for preparing organic nanomaterials.
1. Introduction
Improvements in prevailing lifestyles seem to rely largely on device miniaturization. For example, cellular telephones enable worldwide communication from any point on the Earth. Fabrication of ultrasmall machines and their integration at ultrasmall lengthscales can result in portable devices possessing high information densities. Over the past few decades, microfabrication and nanofabrication techniques have realized the manufacture of miniature devices,1–3 although these may encounter technical limits in the near future.4,5 Therefore, machine fabrication based on other concepts such as supramolecular self-assembly6–9 or biomimetic approaches10,11 should be developed for the next generation of microdevices. The ultimate goal of these new concepts is creation of individual molecular machines and devices. However, despite having been extensively researched over the last ten years,12,13 most of the available examples remain at a preliminary stage of development from the viewpoint of practical applications.
An alternative approach might involve the use of biological “machines” whose operation has already been optimized over geological periods of time. Archetypal biological machines are enzymes that are capable of converting substrates to products with very high efficiencies and specificities. Enzymes can be regarded as highly functional machines that can be obtained easily and whose functions may be already known.14–16 A drawback to the use of enzymes as artificial machines is their well studied structural instability although this can often be overcome either through immobilization of enzymes in protective matrices and/or by creation of enzyme-like mimics from more stable materials.
Enzymes exhibit excellent activities under mild physiological conditions, as can be observed in metabolic pathways, digestive systems, or signal transduction and cell regulation. However, once immobilized or solidified within matrices, the enzymes can be used as highly sophisticated nanoreactors for chemical transformations even under harsh conditions.17,18 Since the 1960s when insoluble immobilized amino acylases were initially industrially utilized for continuous and efficient optical resolution of amino acids,19 numerous efforts have been made to develop insoluble immobilized enzymes for various applications. The most significant advantages of immobilized enzymes over their soluble counterparts are as follows: (i) reusability of heterogeneous biocatalysts reduces production costs through efficient recycling and process control, (ii) stability and reusability of analytic devices for chemical, biological, agricultural, and medical applications, (iii) efficient control of enzymatic activity with long-term durability, and (iv) controlled release of protein-based pharmaceuticals with optimal duration.
Apart from their tremendous success in practical industrial applications, electrode-immobilized enzymes were also demonstrated as a biosensor, typically with glucose oxidase (GOD) immobilized in cuprophane membrane20 or acrylamide gel.21 Enzymes immobilized at an electrode can be regarded as an ultimate chemical transducer that functions by combining an electrochemical procedure with the immobilized enzyme's activity. In general, an enzyme-based biosensor is comprised of an immobilized enzyme as a chemically selective layer with an electrode as a transducer that is coupled to an amplifier, processor, and display. These bio-electrochemical reactions take place on the surface of an electrode and can also be utilized to generate current (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Basic elements of an enzymatic biosensor. 
Another promising device application of immobilized enzymes, which is inextricably associated with biosensing, is in biofuel cells.22–25 Although biological fuel cells have a long history,26 the development of biofuel cell devices has not been so far extensive. However, knowledge of immobilization of enzymes gained through development of biosensors has provided a substantial technological underpinning for the current remarkable development of biofuel cells. These two types of devices essentially diverge depending on the direction of energy flow. That is, biosensors generally consume energy for signal detection and amplification whereas biofuel cells produce electrical energy through enzymatic redox reactions.
Recent research examples described below emphasize the crucial role of nanoscale control of enzyme structures after immobilization. For development of enzyme-related functions in materials' design, we may apply the nanoarchitectonics concept,27–33 which has been proposed as a methodology for forming organized structures with nanoscale precision. In this review, recent developments in enzyme immobilization for advanced functions including device applications are summarized under the conceptual umbrella of the nanoarchitectonics. We will pay special attention to the types of matrices used for enzyme immobilization, which are roughly classified into organic soft matter, inorganic soft materials and integrated/organized media. Artificial enzymes and enzyme-mimic catalysts are also briefly described as approaches for enzyme functions with non-biological materials. Some of the examples described in this review are at a highly advanced stage of development including integration into device structures while others are still at the stage of preliminary experiment. However, we believe that all examples are relevant to possible device applications of enzyme functions that should yield results in the near future.
2. Enzyme architectures @organic soft matter
In the initial part of this review, from the viewpoint of nanotechnology, current topics involving enzyme devices immobilized within soft organic materials are comprehensively summarized together with conventional immobilization techniques, including organic polymers, organic–inorganic composites, and hydrogels. Unlike large-scale reactions with the immobilized enzymes, the inherent properties of enzymes as individual molecules become obvious at the nanoscale, especially at the single molecule level. Therefore, we have focused on the prominent aspects regarding the means by which the immobilized enzymes express any novel reactivities/functionalities at the nanometer scale.
The immobilization method of enzymes within organic soft matter is classified into four main categories: (i) entrapment, (ii) encapsulation, (iii) solid supports, and (iv) self-immobilization.
2.1. Enzyme entrapment and encapsulation

2.1.1. Isolation of single enzyme in matrices/capsules. 
Immobilization of enzymes often entails lowering or deactivation of enzymatic activity relative to that of pristine enzymes. This is a result of the denaturation and/or aggregation during the immobilization process. If we are aiming for realistic device applications using immobilized enzymes then there are many approaches available for improving enzyme stability. Indeed, a variety of enzymes have been encapsulated in silica,34 polymers, and organoclay particles.35 However, these matrices or capsules may hinder conformational transitions of enzymes or the transport of substrate and product to and from the active site. One promising strategy to overcome this drawback is to isolate enzyme molecules within thin permeable capsules or matrices. Essentially, in this method reactive anchors are covalently attached at the enzyme surface, followed by their polymerization with appropriate quantities of monomers and cross-linkers. Kim and Grate demonstrated single-enzyme nanoparticles coated with a nanometer-scale organic–inorganic network.36 In that work, surface amine-groups of the enzymes were reacted with acryloyl chloride to provide surface vinyl groups. Subsequently, free-radical polymerization with 3-methacryloxypropyl trimethoxysilane (MAPS) was performed. Pendant trimethoxysilane groups within the acryloyl resins surrounding the enzymes were successively cross-linked. Consequently, the single enzyme armoured with a porous organic–inorganic composite network less than a few nanometers in thickness was obtained. The armour network surrounding the enzyme was sufficiently thin and porous that it did not place a large mass-transfer limitation on the substrate. By a simpler, efficient, and versatile procedure, Liu et al. demonstrated encapsulation of a single enzyme in a nanogel.37 First, the enzyme was modified by acryloylation. In situ polymerization was then carried out in aqueous solution to encapsulate the acryloylated protein (Fig. 2). This process was repeated by adding monomers and cross-linkers to react with the primary nanogel so as to give the final product that contained a single enzyme of the expected dimensions and morphology. Although stripping of the essential water surrounding the enzyme by polar organic solvents leads to denaturation of pristine enzymes, enzymes encapsulated in the polyacrylamide nanogel exhibited a significant increase in stability in organic solvent since the hydrophilic polyacrylamide moiety maintains a hydrophilic environment at the surface of the enzyme.
 Fig. 2  Encapsulation of a single protein within a nanogel.37 


2.1.2. Biomimetic silica coating. 
In addition to organic polymer-based immobilization, sol–gel composites have often been used to encapsulate enzymes. However, conventional sol–gel reactions require harsh conditions, leading to the limitation of their applicability. On the other hand, considering natural systems, exquisitely nanostructured silica, so-called biosilica, exists in abundance, even under mild physiological conditions. In biosilicification, it has been revealed that diatoms produce “Silaffin” phosphorylated polypeptides by post-translational modification, and these catalyse the formation of silica both in vivo and in vitro at neutral pH and at ambient temperature and pressure.38 Taking advantage of its excellent properties for biosilicification under mild conditions, Spain et al. demonstrated immobilization of enzymes in a biomimetic silica support.39 This method is quite simple but effective; the butyrylcholinesterase solution was mixed with silica-condensing synthetic peptide, which is the repeat unit of the silaffin polypeptide identified from the diatom Cylindrotheca fusiformis. After several seconds of adding silicic acid (hydrolyzed tetramethylorthosilicate) into the mixture, fused spherical silica particles were produced with an average diameter of 500 nm. After immobilization of the enzyme in the biosilica sphere, ca. 90% of the initial free enzyme activity remained. In comparison, when the enzyme was immobilized by the conventional sol–gel method, less than 10% of the initial enzyme activity expressed.

2.2. Self-immobilization

2.2.1. Self-assembled enzymes as bulk biocatalysts. 
Carrier-free enzyme immobilization is possible using bifunctional cross-linkers such as glutaraldehyde to interlink enzymes without resorting to a support. Physically consolidated biocatalysts can be produced by cross-linking when the enzymes are in close proximity, such as when contained in protein crystals or aggregates.40 By using these methods, some self-immobilized enzymes have been commercialized as bulk biocatalysts, including CLECs (cross-linked enzyme crystals) or CLEAs (cross-linked enzyme aggregates), respectively.41 In these materials, which can be considered bulk enzyme solids, accessibility of the substrates and products to the active sites located at specific positions of the enzyme molecule affects their activities. With regard to this point, a new type of self-immobilization has been developed utilizing a water-in-oil emulsion. Lipase, a subclass of esterase for lipids, was formed as a water-in-oil emulsion in the presence of a bifunctional cross-linker, resulting in spherical carrier-free enzyme particles, so-called Spherezyme. Here, the lipase tends to migrate to the phase boundary and orients the hydrophobic face associated with the active site towards the oil phase. This method improves enzyme activity of lipases in both aqueous and organic solvents.


2.2.2. Self-assembled enzyme with domain swapping. 
To be aggregated or to be not aggregated is a critical question in current protein science, pathology, biophysics, and cell biology.42,43 This is because aggregation of proteins is closely related to neurodegenerative conditions, such as Alzheimer's or Parkinson's diseases.44 In simulations of polypeptide self-assembly, the polypeptide chains were shown to undergo a hydrophobic collapse into partially ordered or amorphous aggregates followed by a transition to ordered β-sheet aggregates through optimisation of intermolecular interactions.
On the other hand, another type of self-assembly mechanism of proteins “three dimensional (3D) domain swapping” has also been proposed (Fig. 3).45–47 In 3D domain swapping, one domain of a monomeric protein is replaced by the same domain from an identical protein chain. The result is an intertwined dimer or higher oligomer, with one domain of each subunit replaced by the identical domain from another subunit. The term “3D domain swapping” was first used to describe the structure of a diphtheria toxin dimer. However, the concept of 3D domain swapping can be traced back to the 1960s. Unlike conventional aggregation mechanisms of protein, in the case of 3D domain swapping, the monomer and oligomer generally have comparable energies because the swapped domain in monomeric and oligomeric molecules forms similar interfaces. In addition to its relevance to problems involving protein folding, 3D domain swapping can be regarded as a precisely programmed polymerization leading to supramolecular proteins with extreme functions beyond the monomeric protein.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of cyt c polymerization. Left: closed monomers, right: domain-swapped dimer of cyt c.49 
Cytochrome c (cyt c) is a well-known globular haem protein, which transfers electrons from a cytochrome bc1 complex to cytochrome c oxidase in the respiratory chain in mitochondria. It is known that monomeric cyt c can be converted into polymeric forms when incubated with ethanol or trichloroacetic acid.48 Most recently, X-ray crystallography revealed that polymeric cyt c is involved in 3D domain swapping.49 Interestingly, the resulting polymeric cyt c exhibited a significant increase in peroxidase activity compared to that of its monomeric form.50 Although 3D domain swapping has attracted great attention in the field of pathology, it may also become a promising strategy to improve enzymatic activity in combination with protein engineering. This is because 3D domain swapping allows us to immobilize the enzyme by retaining the enzymatic active sites with the exact form as the original monomer (Fig. 3).


2.2.3. Single enzyme nanoarray. 
In 1913 Michaelis and Menten first described the relationship existing between the concentrations of an enzyme and its substrate. Since then, the kinetics of enzyme activities has been used as an essential tool in the characterization of enzyme's properties. The original Michaelis–Menten equation can be used to rationally describe enzyme kinetics for large ensembles of enzyme molecules in which concentration variations over time are measured. However, recent progress in single molecule measurement has elucidated apparent contributions to the enzymatic activity due to distributions and/or fluctuations of molecular properties, which could not be observed from analyses of enzyme ensembles.51–54 Therefore, when the individual enzyme molecules are intended to be utilized as nanodevices, it becomes much more important to fix the individual enzymes with precise orientation and interval on the scaffolds.
To address this issue, a rational strategy for immobilization of enzymes at programmed positions on a substrate has been proposed using DNA nanotechnology, so called “DNA origami”.55,56 The ability of DNA to self-assemble into one-, two-, and three-dimensional nanostructures, combining with the precision that is now possible when positioning nanoparticles or proteins on DNA scaffolds, provides a promising approach for the self-organization of composite nanostructures. To date, various DNA nanostructures have been used as scaffolds for protein nanoarrays. Of these, DNA origami, which involves the folding of long, single-stranded DNA into a designed planar nanostructure with the aid of many short staple strands, is one of the most promising approaches since the number and the position of individual protein molecules in the array can be precisely controlled at the nanometer scale.57 Recently, Kuzuya and Komiyama et al. demonstrated an enzyme nanoarray with regular intervals utilizing DNA origami.58 Combined with affinity purification techniques of proteins, His-tagged DNA origami was prepared. This allowed separation of unbound enzymes on the scaffold. Consequently, enzymatic activity of discrete enzymes immobilized on the DNA origami was demonstrated together with visualization of the isolated enzyme array using atomic force microscopy.

2.3. Application of nanodevices with immobilized enzymes contained in organic soft matter
Since the first demonstration by Clark and Lyons that an enzyme could be integrated into an electrode to form a biosensor, the development of such electrochemical devices has considerably progressed.59 With the increasing degree of miniaturization of biosensors to the nanoscale, the stable immobilization of enzymes at electrode surfaces with complete retention of their enzymatic activities has become a critical problem.
In this section, current topics on organic soft matter for fabrication of nanodevices with enzymes are summarized, with particular reference to the growing interest in nanotechnology associated with energy, environment, and life sciences.

2.3.1. Polymer and polymeric nanocomposites (PNCs). 
Entrapment of enzymes in/on a conjugated or non-conjugated polymer has become a very common method for fabricating biosensors using enzymes.60 In pioneering work, conducting polypyrroles were prepared by electrochemical polymerization for entrapment of glucose oxidase. Although various conjugating polymers including polythiophene, poly(p-phenylene), and polyaniline were demonstrated as effective matrices for enzyme entrapment, polypyrroles and their derivatives prepared through electrochemical polymerization have played a central role in immobilization for the preparation of enzyme-based biosensors. This is because a thin film can be obtained after one reaction step, and precise control of the film thickness can be obtained simply by adjusting the electric charge during polymerization.
Recently, polymeric nanocomposites (PNCs) composed of polymers, nanoparticles, and biomolecules have attracted tremendous attention because they can express integrated properties and synergistic effects rather than just exhibiting properties of each component. For instance, by using the PNC technique, a high performance biosensor was demonstrated using a polymer–enzyme–metallic nanoparticle composite film.61 In this system, the neurotransmitter dopamine (DA) as a reductant and monomer, glucose oxidase (GOD) or galactose oxidase as an enzyme, and HAuCl4 or H2PtCl6 as an oxidant to trigger DA polymerization and as a source of metallic nanoparticles were mixed to yield PNCs. Subsequently, PNCs were anchored at an electrode by electrochemical polymerization of the remaining DA monomers. The advantage of this method is that PNCs can be prepared using a one-pot reaction. Furthermore, the PNC-based biosensor obtained exhibited good biocompatibility, highly uniform dispersion, and high load/activity of the immobilized enzyme (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Schematic depiction of the construction and biosensing mechanism of the PDA–GOD–PtNP PBNCs electrode.61 


2.3.2. Nanocarbons. 
In 1998, Tans et al. demonstrated that single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) can be used as a field-effect transistor. Since that time, SWNTs have been regarded as a prominent one-dimensional nanomaterial for biosensors.62 Dekker et al. demonstrated a biosensor by using glucose oxidase (GOD) to detect redox activity. In that work, a pyrene derivative was used to anchor the enzyme on the SWNT sidewall through π–π interactions (Fig. 5).63
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of two electrodes connecting a semiconducting SWNT with GOD enzymes immobilized on its surface.63 
More recently, graphene has attracted attention as a carbon-based electrode for integration of nanoscale biosensors.64 This is because graphene-based electrodes have shown superior performance in terms of electrical properties when compared with carbon nanotubes. Indeed, graphene has been utilized as an electrode for glucose oxidase with coexistence of polyethyleneimine or biocompatible chitosan.65
Similarly, dodecyl benzene sulphonate (SDBS) functionalized graphene sheets have been utilized in a biosensor containing horseradish peroxidase.66 Graphene oxide may also be an ideal substrate for enzyme immobilization. Graphene oxide is enriched with oxygen-containing groups, making it possible to immobilize enzymes through electrostatic interaction without surface modification or coupling reagents. Zhang and Guo and coworkers demonstrated immobilization of horseradish peroxidase and lysozyme as model enzymes.67


2.3.3. Photocatalysts. 
By converting sunlight into chemical energy, artificial photosynthetic systems could potentially produce renewable, non-polluting fuels and chemicals for a wide variety of uses. In this context, graphene may serve as an efficient photocatalyst for improving the efficiency of an artificial photocatalyst system. The most challenging issue for development of artificial photocatalysts is that they ought to operate using visible light since 46% of the total sunlight energy available at the Earth's surface is the visible wavelength region while only 4% is in the UV wavelength region.
In a recently reported artificial photocatalyst system presented by Baeg et al., chemically converted graphene was used as the photocatalyst, and coupled with a porphyrin-containing enzyme.68 This integrated system could be used to convert carbon dioxide into formic acid under sunlight irradiation (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Graphene-based photocatalyst catalysed artificial photosynthesis of formic acid from CO2 under visible light.68 

3. Enzyme architectures @inorganic hard materials
3.1. Importance of mesoporous supports
The encapsulation of enzymes and other proteins into inorganic host materials has attracted great attention in recent years. Biomolecules immobilized in inorganic matrices can to a large extent retain their inherent functional properties. These new types of composite material are very useful for many applications as biosensors and biocatalysts.69–72 Mesoporous materials synthesized by self-assembly of organic molecules such as surfactants are promising matrices for encapsulation of enzymes. Currently, mesoporous materials with regularly arranged mesopores and very high surface areas have been widely used in various applications.73,74 Mesoscale pores are capable of accommodating bulky molecules (e.g., enzymes) while microporous materials such as zeolites cannot. Over the past 20 years, there have been significant advances in our ability to synthesize new mesoporous materials toward practical applications, the possibilities of which seem to be infinite. Mesoporous materials now include a variety of inorganic-based materials (e.g., transition-metal oxides and carbons), inorganic–organic hybrid materials, polymers, and metals. Precise control of mesopore sizes and mesostructures is very critical for effective immobilization of targeted enzymes with different molecular dimensions and morphologies. Mesoporous silica supports are thermally stable, are of low toxicity and possess high mechanical strengths, all of which are significant advantages as inorganic host matrices.
3.2. Immobilization of enzymes in mesoporous systems
Physisorption is well known as the simplest approach to immobilize enzymes. Organic modifications at the pore surface are not required and mesoporous materials can be immersed directly into the target enzyme solutions. The enzymes spontaneously diffuse to the interior of the mesopores. For example, Sakaguchi et al. introduced a typical oligomeric protein, Haemoglobin (Hb) into a mesoporous silica with pores of diameter 7.5 nm. Soret circular dichroism (CD) spectra of the Hb molecules immobilized inside the mesopores contained a single peak, which was identical to that of free Hb molecules. It should be noted that Hb retained its highly ordered structure when contained within the mesoporous silica. Encapsulation of Hb resulted in retention of activity even in the presence of high concentrations of NaCl or guanidinium hydrochloride. Thus, by using mesoporous supports, oligomeric proteins can operate effectively even under harsh conditions.75 The morphology of mesoporous silica used plays an important role in the bio-immobilization performance of enzymes. Yu and Zhao et al. achieved very rapid and high capacity immobilization of lysozymes (up to 533 mg g−1) by finely tuning the morphologies. Precise morphological controls make mesoporous materials effective supports for bio-immobilization in the future.76 The physisorption approach is easily applicable to a variety of enzymes. However, in most cases, the enzyme molecules are not fixed at the mesopore surface and can be easily leached out of the mesopores due to weak enzyme-support interactions.77–79
The pore surface of mesoporous silica possesses a high density of silanol groups. By utilizing the silanol groups, surface modification with organic functional groups for immobilization of biomolecules can take place through the reaction of organosilanes. This approach is known as the “grafting method”. Functionalization of mesopore surfaces with a variety of organic groups can be achieved in this way. For example, Monduzzi et al. reported the use of organically modified mesoporous silica SBA-15 as a support for immobilization of a commercial lipase obtained from Mucor javanicus.80 Torabi and coworkers also reported co-immobilization of cholesterol oxidase (COD) and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) on the perlite surface. The surface of perlite was activated by applying 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane and covalently bonded with COD and HPR via glutaraldehyde.81
When the functional organic groups are larger than the mesopore diameters, it is difficult to efficiently modify the inner mesopores. Also, when organosilanes react preferentially at the pore openings, further diffusion of molecules to the inner mesopores can be inhibited. Thus, this grafting method often results in the inhomogeneous distribution of functional organic groups within the pores although the starting mesostructural ordering can usually be retained, which is in contrast to the following condensation method.
Another surface modification approach is the “co-condensation method” although the mesopore sizes can be reduced by the presence of the organic group in this method. In the co-condensation method, organically functionalized mesostructured silica can be prepared through co-condensation of tetraalkoxysilanes (Si-(OR)4) with various types of organosilanes ((R′-Si(OR)3). In contrast to the above grafting method, the organic groups (R′) are directly incorporated into a silica framework with good homogeneity of their distribution. As a result, pore blocking does not occur although mesostructure ordering tends to decrease with an increase in the proportion of organosilanes in the precursor solutions. Recently, Wiesner et al. have overcome this problem in the successful synthesis of mesoporous silica nanoparticles possessing cubic Pmn symmetry containing very high molar ratios (>50%) of 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane without loss of the ordered mesostructure.82 This improvement in the synthesis of mesoporous silica will be an important step towards well-defined enzyme supports.
Recently, a “ship-in-a-bottle” approach has become a common method for incorporation of enzymes into the mesopores.83,84 Lee et al. reported an improved “ship-in-a-bottle” approach to realize very high enzyme loadings and prevent leaching. First, enzymes are introduced into the mesopores resulting in a high degree of enzyme loading. Then, glutaraldehyde treatment is carried out for formation of covalent links between the enzyme molecules. Stable crosslinked enzyme aggregates are formed within the mesopores.85 This “ship-in-a-bottle” approach provides a highly stable and active immobilized enzyme system.
3.3. Biosensors
Fabrication of highly sensitive and cost-effective biosensors is much in demand. In particular, enzyme biosensors have attracted great interest in environmental monitoring applications. To date, various porous supports and related materials (e.g., micromachined silicon, microporous Au electrodes) have been utilized as promising immobilization supports and some of them have been applied in biosensors.86,87 Apart from these materials, mesoporous substances are indeed good supports for enzyme immobilization through physical or chemical sorptions, as mentioned above.
Dai et al. fabricated an electrochemical biosensor by entrapping both glucose oxidase (GOD) and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) in the mesopores of SBA-15 (Fig. 7).71,88 Both HRP and GOD retained their catalytic activities after entrapment. The use of a mesoporous structure led to a high catalytic activity of the immobilized enzymes and accelerated the direct electron transfer between the haem in HRP and the electrode surface. In the presence of glucose, the enzymatic reaction of the GOD–glucose-dissolved oxygen system generates hydrogen peroxide in the bienzyme-entrapped mesopores. Hydrogen peroxide is then electrocatalytically reacted with HRP entrapped in the mesopore, exhibiting a highly sensitive and rapid amperometric response. By applying co-immobilization using two enzymes, a biosensor for phenol detection could also be fabricated.89 In this case, both tyrosinase and HRP were immobilized in mesoporous silica (MCM-41). The enhanced sensitivity of the tyrosinase–HRP based biosensor to phenol could be clearly observed in comparison with tyrosinase or HRP monoenzyme modified electrodes. This comparative experiment demonstrates well the significance of the co-immobilization effect. This phenol sensor showed excellent stability and reproducibility and exhibited a very fast response of less than 10 seconds. Sensitivity for phenol is 14 μA μM−1 cm−2 with a linear range from 2 × 10−7 to 2.3 × 10−4 M and a detection limit of 4.1 × 10−9 M.
 Fig. 7  An electrochemical biosensor formed by entrapping both glucose oxidase and horseradish peroxidase in the mesopores of SBA-15.71 
Lei et al. fabricated a rapidly responding and stable biosensor for toxicity monitoring in aquatic environments through immobilization of organophosphorus hydrolase in functionalized mesoporous silica. The resulting enzyme biosensor responded rapidly to low paraoxon concentrations and achieved a steady-state current in less than 10 s with a detection limit of 4.0 × 10−7 M paraoxon. Interestingly, high recovery efficiencies in aqueous solutions (96 to 101%) were confirmed under various conditions, indicating that this system is applicable under different aqueous conditions (e.g., river and lake systems).90
Recently, Shimomura and co-workers proposed the use of hybrid mesoporous membranes in which highly regular mesochannels are formed inside the linear pores (with a diameter generally around 200 nm) of porous anodic alumina membranes (PAAMs). For synthesis, surfactant-based precursor solutions are penetrated into the matrices and dried until the solvents are completely evaporated.91,92 Shimomura et al. fabricated biosensors comprised of an enzyme (formaldehyde dehydrogenase) immobilized in a mesoporous silica material, an electrochemical mediator (i.e., quinone), and an electrochemical cell (Fig. 8).93 Rapid response and high sensitivity were confirmed for detection of formaldehyde in aqueous solution. In addition, high selectivity, reusability, and remarkable storage stability were confirmed, suggesting that formaldehyde dehydrogenase retains its highly ordered structure in these mesoporous silica materials. Thus, hybrid mesoporous membranes are very promising for effective immobilization of enzymes in their applications as electrochemical biosensors.
 Fig. 8  A biosensor comprising an immobilized enzyme (formaldehyde dehydrogenase) in mesoporous silica, an electrochemical mediator, and an electrochemical cell.93 
There are several reports of synthesis of mesoporous materials within the regular, straight channels of PAAMs.94 When cetyltrimethylammonium bromide is used as a structure-directing agent, the long axes of the mesochannels are aligned with the long axes of the PAAM channels (i.e., columnar orientation).95,96 From the standpoint of good diffusion of guest molecules, the mesochannel direction should be parallel to the PAAM channels. However, when nonionic surfactants, such as block copolymers of P123, F127, and Brij 56, are used as large structure-directing agents, in most cases, the mesochannels are oriented perpendicular to the PAAM channels and circularly packed like stacked donuts.97–101 Only a very small fraction of the rods have a columnar orientation. In previous cases, the orientation directions of the mesochannels depended strongly on the synthetic conditions (e.g., the kind of surfactant, surfactant concentration, reaction temperature, and humidity).102 The columnar orientation of large-sized mesochannels inside the PAAM channels is in considerable demand for applications in sensor materials' systems.
Deposition of Au nanoparticles is helpful for improvement of conductivity of the silica matrix. Sun et al. used a Au nanoparticles-mesoporous silica composite as a novel enzyme immobilization matrix. For the deposition of Au nanoparticles, the Au species adsorbed inside the mesopores were reduced using a reducing agent. An amperometric glucose biosensor was constructed by immobilizing IO4−-oxidized-GOD on the Au nanoparticles–mesoporous silica composite. This biosensor exhibited an excellent bioelectrocatalytic response to glucose with a fast response time less than 7 s, a broad linear concentration range of 0.02–14 mM, a high sensitivity of 6.1 μA mM−1 cm−2, as well as good long-term stability and reproducibility.103 Such excellent properties are ascribed to the efficiency of electron transfer between the enzyme and the electrode. In another example, deposition of magnetic nanoparticles was demonstrated. A magnetically separable mesoporous silica sphere was prepared by reducing Fe3+-containing mesoporous spheres. Laccase from Trametes versicolor was immobilized on magnetic mesoporous silica spheres through physical adsorption. Immobilized laccase retained its activity and exhibited higher resistance to pH variation and thermal stability. Laccase immobilized by covalent attachment did not leach out and retained over 70% of its original activity after 10 consecutive operations. The greatest advantage of this system is that the immobilized laccase could be separated quickly by using an external magnetic field, which is important for practical use.104
Wu et al. designed a novel mesocellular silica–carbon nanocomposite foam (MSCF). A glucose sensor based on this MSCF showed good stability and selectivity. The presence of carbon acted to improve the conductivity of the composites for electron transfer. By further controlling the carbon content, it became possible to tune hydrophilicity and biocompatibility. These MSCF-based glucose sensors are able to operate without interference from ascorbic acid and uric acid species that always co-exist with glucose in real systems.105
3.4. Hybrid bioreactor
Due to our current good understanding of enzyme immobilization into mesopores, many applications of enzyme-loaded mesoporous materials are growing rapidly. They can be further used either as a delivery vehicle or a bioreactor. Lin and coworkers reported the use of mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) to deliver cytochrome c into cells.106 These MSNs possessed a relatively large average pore diameter of 5.4 nm which is large enough to permit incorporation of cytochrome c into the mesochannels. In general, cytochrome c is a cell-membrane-impermeable protein but cytochrome c-encapsulated MSNs were internalized by live human cervical cancer cells and the protein was released into the cytoplasm. Thus, MSNs with large pores can be used as a transmembrane delivery vehicle for controlled release of membrane-impermeable proteins at the interiors of live cells. Conceptually, MSNs are very important and we can look forward to their use in many biotechnological applications.
Enzymatic oxidations are useful for production of fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals and for industrial applications biocatalysts are desired due to their ease of handling. Hartmann et al. demonstrated that chloroperoxidase from Caldariomyces fumago could be immobilized on mesoporous silica SBA-15 for the oxidation reaction of indole to 2-oxindole using hydrogen peroxide as an oxidant. The conversion of indole to 2-oxindole was maximal (92%) at pH = 5.5 with a selectivity of >99%. This type of catalyst can be recycled several times without significant loss of activity.107
Recent reports have revealed interesting synergistic effects involving functionalized mesoporous silica and urea to promote favorable conformational changes. The specific activity of glucose isomerase (GI) entrapped within a mesoporous support in the presence of urea was approximately double that of GI in solution in the absence of urea. Thus, the addition of a small amount of urea was critical. Also, confined mesospaces can induce favorable conformational changes which can enhance enzyme activity.108
4. Enzyme architectures @integrated and organized media
When we use enzymes in device-like structures, immobilization of them in an organized fashion is critical for facile connection between enzymes and man-made devices and/or for design of functional relationships between enzymes. Forming integrated and organized structures including enzymes would be important for preparation of advanced functional bio-devices. One of the rational ways to obtain such enzyme organization is to immobilize them into well-defined thin layers, for which several techniques such as self-assembled monolayer methods (SAM), Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) techniques,109–111 and layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly112–116 are often used. Of these methods, the LbL assembly processes are generally amenable to biomaterials because of their simplicity and chemical mildness.117–120 For example, LbL assembly is usually performed in an aqueous medium and does not require harsh conditions. LbL assembly is briefly summarized below.
4.1. Enzymes in layer-by-layer films, the basics
Because LbL assembly is such a simple method with minimum apparatus requirements of several beakers and tweezers, this methodology is available for various materials including polymers, inorganic substances, and supramolecular assemblies, as well as a wide range of biomaterials. In the case of electrostatic LbL assembly, relatively high concentrations of the substances in solution lead to excess adsorption of the substances where charge neutralization and resaturation lead to charge reversal. Alternation of the surface charge results in a continuous assembly between positively and negatively charged materials. In addition to this standard mechanism, various interactions such as metal coordination,121,122 hydrogen bonding,123,124 covalent bonding,125,126 supramolecular inclusion,127 bio-specific recognition,128,129 charge transfer complex formation,130 and stereo-complex formation131 are available in the LbL process. Many kinds of deposition techniques including spin-coating132,133 and spraying134,135 can be used. Since the LbL technique does not require special conditions for biomaterials immobilization, they can be assembled under conditions appropriate to maintain their specific activities. It has also been proved that biomaterials embedded within LbL films show enhanced stabilities and small substance molecules can freely diffuse within the films.136 The latter feature is advantageous for design of devices based on enzyme function relationships of enzymes immobilized within thin films.
In a functional device with functional relays composed of different enzymes, a multi-enzyme reactor has been already demonstrated (Fig. 9).137,138 In this example, two enzymes, glucoamylase (GA) and glucose oxidase (GOD), were assembled in the same film on an ultrafilter substrate, and an aqueous solution of starch was passed from the top of the reactor. Starch was hydrolyzed into glucose through hydrolysis of the glycoside bond by GA, and the glucose produced was converted to gluconolactone by GOD with hydrogen peroxide as a co-product. Unreacted starch was filtered out by the ultrafilter because of its high molecular weight. The great freedom in the film construction allowed us to realize the importance of film construction in enzymatic performance. The highest yield of products was obtained using films with a specific order of enzyme layers where the order of the enzymes corresponded with the order of the enzymatic reaction sequence. In addition, the importance of separation between the two enzyme layers was also indicated in order to avoid any detrimental interference between the enzymes. These results strongly support the superiority of controlled layering over random immobilization.
 Fig. 9  A multi-enzyme reactor containing two enzymes, glucoamylase (GA) and glucose oxidase (GOD), in the same LbL film on an ultrafilter.137 
Various types of bioreactor based on the LbL technique have been fabricated. Serizawa and coworkers prepared reactors for hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl-β-D-galactopyranoside by β-galactosidase assembled within structurally regular poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) such as the stereocomplex, isotactic-PMMA and atactic-PMMA films.139 It was demonstrated that a slight difference of polymer surface structure strongly affects the activities of the immobilized enzymes, indicating that interfaces between enzymes and solid supports become a crucial factor in device performance. As illustrated in Fig. 10, the importance of protective barriers (catalase) against oxidative environments in LbL enzyme reactors was demonstrated by Shutava et al.140 In this example, placing a catalase layer on top of the LbL multilayers resulted in preservation of haemoglobin (Hb) activity for a longer period of time. Hu and coworkers also reported the protective effect of exterior catalase layers to minimize oxidative damage to myoglobin (Mb) or horseradish peroxidase (HRP) by hydrogen peroxide.141 Leblanc and co-workers prepared LbL films with an organophosphorus hydrolase that is capable of hydrolyzing a large variety of organophosphorus compounds thus producing less toxic products.142 A polyelectrolyte cushion composed of a layer each of positively charged chitosan and negatively charged poly(thiophene-3-acetic acid) below the enzyme layer improved performance without bioactivity being sacrificed. These examples again emphasize the importance of layer design in obtaining high performances of enzyme thin film devices.
 Fig. 10  Effect of protective barriers (catalase) on oxidative environments in LbL enzyme reactors where the placement of a catalase layer on top of the LbL multilayers resulted in conservation of hemoglobin (Hb) activity over a longer period of time (left side).140 
4.2. Enzymes in layer-by-layer films for sensor applications
Rusling and co-workers reported a detection system for DNA damage using LbL films containing Mb or cytochrome P450 alternately with DNA on electrodes (Fig. 11).143 Activation by hydrogen peroxide induced formation of metabolite styrene oxide from styrene by the enzyme, resulting in its further reaction with double stranded DNA as a mimic of metabolism and DNA damage in human liver. DNA damage was detected by square wave voltammetry (SWV) by catalytic oxidation with Ru(bpy)32+ (bpy, bipyridine) and by monitoring the binding of Co(bpy)33+. Forster, Rusling, and co-workers also proposed direct electrochemical luminescence measurement for 8-oxoguanine detection based on the mechanism that catalytic oxidation of guanine in DNA with [Os(bpy)2-(PVP)10]2+ (PVP, poly(vinyl pyridine)) could lead to photoexcited osmium sites and provide electrochemical luminescence signals.144
 Fig. 11  Detection system of DNA damage using LbL films (PDDA, poly(diallyldimethyl ammonium chloride).143 
Ram et al. reported electrochemical properties of GOD assembled with a conductive polypyrrole through LbL techniques where the importance of the spatial arrangement of GOD molecules on the polypyrrole surfaces was discussed with respect to the electron transfer processes.145 Wollenberger and coworkers co-immobilized cytochrome c and sulfite oxidase with the aid of sulphonated poly(aniline) LbL films on the surface of a gold electrode.146 This multilayer electrode could be used for the detection of sulfite as a preservative in wine and other foodstuffs. Chen and coworkers fabricated Fe3O4 LbL films with characteristic superparamagnetic properties.147 Catalytic activity of the immobilized haemoglobin was retained and direct electron transfer with the underlying glassy carbon electrode device occurred.
Villalonga and coworkers included cyclodextrin cavities for preparation of an enzyme-immobilized LbL sensor using HRP either modified with 1-adamantane or β-cyclodextrin-branched carboxymethylcellulose residues on Au electrodes coated with polythiolated β-cyclodextrin polymers.148 Fragoso et al. adopted a similar strategy by the immobilization of a first layer of thiolated cyclodextrin polymer on a gold electrode and supramolecular capture of adamantane-modified HRP.149 Such supramolecular immobilizations provide a regenerable surface for the attachment of new enzyme layers over repeated usages. Kim and coworkers developed a reagentless biosensor using LbL films of the surface-functionalized dendrimers partially modified with redox-active ferrocenyl groups.150 This strategy of hierarchic constructions makes it possible to tune electrode sensitivity by taking into consideration the surface concentration of deposited ferrocenyls and active enzyme coverage. Zucolotto et al. assembled LbL films of Cl-catechol 1,2-dioxygenase with dendrimers for detecting catechol in solutions at very low concentrations (10−7 to 10−10 M) by employing optical and electrical measurements.151 They also constructed dendrimer-type LbL films of alcohol dehydrogenase on Au-interdigitated electrodes for ethanol detection using electrical capacitance measurements and were able to detect and distinguish between ethanol solutions with concentrations as low as 1 ppmv (parts per million by volume).
For incorporation of electroactive components, Ferreira et al. prepared LbL films of GOD on an indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate modified with a Prussian Blue layer for glucose biosensing.152 Low operating potentials could be used due to the efficient catalysis of hydrogen peroxide produced in the enzymatic reaction. Lin and coworkers prepared LbL films of HRP with poly(styrene sulfonate) (PSS) in which a low molecular weight dye methylene blue could act as an electron mediator to promote the electrochemical reaction between the enzyme and the electrode surface for the sensing layer of a reagentless hydrogen peroxide biosensor.153 Yan et al. reported fabrication of a transparent and flexible glucose biosensor containing multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) on a polymer substrate.154 The LbL membrane formed exhibited remarkable electrocatalytic activity in the detection of glucose. Schmidtke and coworkers prepared LbL-based biosensors from enzyme-coated single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) and redox polymers.155 The oxidation peak currents of this film during cyclic voltammetry significantly increased compared to films without SWNTs. Calvo et al. demonstrated that only a small fraction of active GOD molecules electrostatically adsorbed onto poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) containing an Os complex on the electrode are actually wired (Fig. 12).156 This electrochemically wired enzyme reacts by a “ping-pong” mechanism of glucose oxidation. The sensor performance can be modified depending on pH conditions.
 Fig. 12  Glucose detection system by LbL films of GOD and PAH with an Os complex as an electrochemical mediator (FAD, flavin adenine dinucleoside).156 
Recent development of LbL techniques and their understanding enables us to modify the multi-layer structures. Lisdat and coworkers reported LbL assembly based on protein–protein interaction and LbL multilayer assembly of the redox protein cyt c and the enzyme sulfite oxidase without use of any additional polymer.157 Efficient protein–electrode communication was also ensured by direct electrostatic adsorption of cyt c onto an OH- and COOH-terminated mixed alkanethiol promoter layer on the electrodes. These arrangements without using function-less polymer components showed a remarkable ability to transport electrons from the substrate in solution to the electrode over longer distances. In addition, these film designs do not require the use of additional redox mediators. Cho and coworkers prepared LbL assemblies of anionic ferritin and cationic PAH on Pt-coated substrates (Fig. 13).158 In dried films, reversible resistance changes based on ferritin nanoparticles were caused by the externally applied voltage as a result of charge trap/release of Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couples. In this example, one ferritin nanoparticle of about 12 nm size can be operated as a nanoscale-memory device. Electrochemical characteristic of proteins can be extended to nonvolatile memory and their films can be designed as a high-performance memory device via LbL assembly manipulation.
 Fig. 13  A nanoscale-memory device involving ferritin nanoparticles of about 12 nm size in LbL assembly.158 
4.3. Enzymes in advanced layer-by-layer architectures
Controlled architectures of enzyme assemblies have become one of the central subjects of LbL-based enzyme device fabrication. Lee and coworkers fabricated a three-dimensional (3D) array of well-defined and controllable LbL nanostructures of recombinant protein nanoparticles, derived from Escherichia coli, Dps and DNA on a patterned array of gold dots (Fig. 14).159 Their strategy was successfully applied in the detection of breast and colorectal cancer markers with enhanced sensitivity. Because any antigenic peptides of interest are immobilized, this system can be applied in general to the detection of other disease markers. Kang and coworkers fabricated selective surface-templated LbL assembly by coupling a bilayer of avidin/biotin–lactate oxidase (biotin–LOD) with a bilayer of avidin/biotin–horseradish peroxidase (biotin–HRP) on a pre-patterned surface (Fig. 15).160 Activities of these two enzymes were well coupled within the well-defined 3D nanostructures with precise control of their position and height on the surface. Such enzyme architectures can be easily miniaturized to the nanoscale using a nanoscale surface template, leading to development of highly miniaturized biosensors, biocatalysts, and biochips.
 Fig. 14  A three-dimensional (3D) array of well-defined and controllable LbL nanostructures of bacterial protein nanoparticles and DNA on a patterned array of gold dots for detection of breast and colorectal cancer markers with enhanced sensitivity.159 
 Fig. 15  Preparation of selective surface-templated LbL assembly by coupling of a bilayer of avidin/biotin–lactate oxidase with a bilayer of avidin/biotin–horseradish peroxidase on a pre-patterned surface (EG6OH, mercaptoundecylhexa(ethylene glycol) alcohol).160 
Xu and coworkers fabricated LbL films of polyelectrolytes and CdS quantum dots with immobilization of the photoactive antibody matrix for subsequent sandwich-type antigen–antibody affinity interactions.161 The sandwich photoelectrochemical horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-linked immunoassay is based on the synergy effect for the ultrasensitive detection of mouse IgG (antigen) as a model protein. This biosensing strategy possesses higher sensitivity by means of multi-amplification via HRP-labeled antibody not only greatly enhancing the effect of steric hindrance but also introducing the HRP competitive absorption and the biocatalytic precipitation amplification route, which modifies the light absorption property of the electrode. Hammond and coworkers prepared LbL assembly designed for programmed protein release.162 Protein-containing LbL assemblies with a hydrolytically degradable cationic poly(β-amino ester) along with positively and negatively functionalized graphene oxide capping layers for degradable protein films. Release of proteins in preprogrammed sequences over long time periods of several weeks using graphene oxide capping layers as barriers was achieved. The proteins included in the LbL films were released in sequence with multi-day gaps between the release of each species by incorporating graphene oxide layers between protein loaded layers.
4.4. Enzymes in other lipid assemblies
Some lipid assemblies such as LB films and lipid bilayer films are useful for immobilizing enzymes in organized environments, which can result in device-like functions. As a well-known example, Okahata et al. used the LB technique for deposition of GOD monolayer on a Pt electrode which acted as a glucose-sensing ultrathin membrane with quick response.163,164 In the procedure reported, the lipid-coated GOD in organic solvents was spread and transferred onto a solid support by a conventional LB technique. Glucose sensing by a Pt electrode modified by the LB films of lipid-coated GOD was realized through monitoring oxidation current of hydrogen peroxide that was produced during glucose oxidation by GOD (Fig. 16). This method has the advantage of economizing the amount of enzyme required since dissolution of the enzyme into the aqueous subphase can be greatly suppressed through lipid-coating. Recently Caseli and Siqueira Jr investigated LB films of dimyristoylphosphatidic acid containing carbon nanotubes to improve performance of immobilized urease.165 This LB environment preserved the enzymatic activity of urease even after 1 month, leading to films with an enhanced performance and a good sensitivity for detection of urea.
 Fig. 16  Glucose sensor by LB films of lipid-coated GOD through monitoring oxidation current of hydrogen peroxide from glucose oxidation.163 
Kikuchi and coworkers developed logic-gate-like functions through functional connections between artificial receptor molecules and effector enzymes.166–169 As illustrated in Fig. 17, an amphiphilic amine as a receptor and an effector [lactate dehydrogenase] is immobilized on a lipid membrane and the enzymatic activity could be regulated by application of external signals. The enzyme activity could be respectively turned off and on by addition of inhibitor Cu2+ and an appropriate signal molecule (1-hydroxy-2-naphthaldehyde). Photo-isomerization of the receptor also altered binding ability toward Cu2+. This system can be regarded as a switching device where a primary switch was activated by a chemical signal, and enzyme activity was reversibly switched on and off by a photosignal. In addition, only appropriate combination of signals can activate the enzymatic reaction (AND-type logic).
 Fig. 17  A lipid bilayer system of an amphiphilic amine as a receptor and an effector [lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)] for AND-type logic gate through activation of the enzymatic reaction.169 
4.5. Enzymes in colloidal layer-by-layer architectures
LbL assembly can be applied at the surfaces of colloidal particle cores with subsequent destruction of the central particle core resulting in hollow shells. These structures are capable of delivering drugs and of interacting with cells, resulting in bio-device systems. As an example, Fig. 18 illustrates an approach for DNA encapsulation inside a biocompatible polyelectrolyte microshell.170–172 Addition of spermidine solution into stirred MnCO3–DNA solution caused precipitation of a water-insoluble DNA–spermidine complex onto the MnCO3 particle. Biocompatible polyarginine and chondroitin sulfate were assembled on the complex core using the LbL technique. Dissolution of the MnCO3 template particles resulted in biocompatible shells containing the DNA–spermidine complex.
 Fig. 18  LbL approach for DNA encapsulation inside a biocompatible polyelectrolyte microshell using a MnCO3 template core.170 
Huge numbers of these particle-type and/or capsule-type LbL assemblies have been reported with biological functions. Schüler and Caruso prepared GOD-containing LbL films on submicrometer-sized polystyrene spheres that can be exploited to minimize substrate diffusion effects.173 They also constructed bicomponent colloidal reactors where the coupling of the enzymatic reaction between GOD and peroxidase was demonstrated.174 Rusling and coworkers used enzyme–DNA biocolloid systems for detection of DNA adducts and reactive metabolites using chromatography-mass spectrometry analyses.175 Viswanathan and Ho reported dual electrochemical determination of glucose and insulin using LbL films on ferrocene microcrystals by anti-insulin antibody sensitization.176 Trau et al. demonstrated an efficient immunoassay using LbL capsules assembled on fluorescent microcrystals.177 Following the immuno-reaction, the fluorescein diacetate core was dissolved by exposure to organic solvent, leading to the release of the fluorescein diacetate molecules into the surrounding medium.
LbL assemblies including lipid vesicles as models of cell membranes have been pioneered by Katagiri et al. using a superstable organic–inorganic vesicle cerasome with a silica network at the surface.178–181 LbL assemblies between cationic polyelectrolyte and anionic cerasome as well as the LbL assemblies between the anionic cerasome and the cationic cerasome were demonstrated without rupture of the vesicular structures. Schaaf and coworkers reported liposome-embedded LbL films, where enzymes included in the vesicles showed reactor activity.182 Katagiri and Caruso applied step-by-step LbL assembly for preparation of lipid bilayer vesicles with asymmetric structures between inner and outer shells.183 Because asymmetry plays a very important role in naturally occurring cell membranes, this method should give new opportunities in model studies on biological membranes. As illustrated in Fig. 19, Li and coworkers immobilized ATP synthase into composite capsules.184,185 Production of ATP from ADP was realized when a proton gradient through the membrane was applied.
 Fig. 19  ATP synthase immobilized at composite capsules for production of ATP from ADP driven by a proton gradient through the membrane.184 
4.6. Integration into device structures
Integration of LbL structures into microdevices such as microchips has been recently investigated. Yang, Liu, and coworkers modified microchip channels with LbL films of positively charged chitosan and negatively charged hyaluronic acid for sensitive detection of protein digestion (Fig. 20).186 The LbL-modified microreactor provides a large surface-area-to-volume ratio and a confined microenvironment resulting in an increased reaction rate. Palmer and coworkers immobilized organophosphorus hydrolase enzyme onto the walls of silicon microchannels manufactured by the LbL technique.187 The microreactors with two channel dimensions were tested, one with 98 parallel channels 60 μm wide and another with 1000 parallel channels 5 μm wide. Xu et al. developed an enzyme field-effect transistor (ENFET) by immobilizing lactate oxidase (LOD) and MnO2 nanoparticles in poly(diallyldimethyl ammonium chloride) (PDDA) films using LbL assembly to construct (PDDA–MnO2–PDDA–LOD)n multilayer films on the surface of ion-sensitive field-effect transistors (ISFET) (Fig. 21).188 MnO2 nanoparticles play the role of an oxidant to react with hydrogen peroxide inducing a pH change in the ISFET with the addition of lactate with high sensitivity even to low lactate concentration. Dong and coworkers reported a one-compartment glucose/O2 biofuel cell based on the LbL technique on 3D ordered macroporous gold electrodes.189 De Smedt and coworkers proposed the barcode concept for LbL drug delivery by using encoded fluorescent polystyrene with captured antibodies.190 Quantification of proteins in serum plasma samples should become possible.
 Fig. 20  A microchip channel modified with LbL films of charged chitosan and negatively charged hyaluronic acid for sensitive detection of protein digestion by trypsin (PET, poly(ethylene terephthalate)).186 
 Fig. 21  An enzyme field-effect transistor (ENFET) with lactate oxidase (LOD) and MnO2 nanoparticles in PDDA films using LbL assembly on the surface of ion-sensitive field-effect transistors.188 
Apart from LbL assemblies, various types of hybrid enzyme assemblies have been used for device applications. Casero, Lorenzo, and coworkers integrated the enzyme LOD and gold nanoparticles into a sol–gel 3D polymeric network derived from (3-mercaptopropyl)-trimethoxysilane onto a gold surface.191 The latter matrix provides a biocompatible environment for high loading of the enzyme molecules while maintaining its catalytic activity. The thus-prepared biosensor device based on the electrochemical response towards L-lactic acid in the presence of a redox mediator was tested in terms of sensitivity, detection limit and linear response range. Pan and coworkers developed an electrolyte-insulator-semiconductor (EIS) device with a novel high-k Tm2Ti2O7 sensing membrane for pH detection.192 For EIS-based biosensing applications, a phase tunable poly-N-isopropylacrylamide (PNIPAAm) was used as an enzyme encapsulating material. The hybrid configuration (Fig. 22) of the EIS device with a GOD-immobilizing PNIPAAm film attached has been proven to be able to detect glucose with good linearity and reasonable sensitivity adequate for general clinical examination of blood glucose.
 Fig. 22  Electrolyte-insulator-semiconductor (EIS)-based biosensor by a GOD-immobilizing poly-N-isopropylacrylamide (PNIPAAm) film with adequate sensitivity for general clinical examination of blood glucose.192 
Hybridization of inorganic nanomaterials sometimes induces improvements of enzyme-containing bio-devices. Parra-Alfambra et al. fabricated a biosensor through immobilization of a polymeric chitosan network previously modified with a redox mediator, an enzyme GOD and carbon nanotubes onto a solid glassy carbon electrode.193 The resulting biosensor exhibited a higher sensitivity and a lower detection limit compared to a similar biosensor lacking carbon nanotubes. It was suggested that the presence of the nanomaterial enhances the performance of the bio-analytical device. Zhang et al. assembled negatively charged complexes of multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) and graphene oxide with positively charged HRP at the surface of a glassy carbon electrode under mild conditions.194 Based on the direct electron transfer of the immobilized HRP, the electrode exhibited excellent electrocatalytic behaviour in the reduction of hydrogen peroxide and NaNO2. Such a hybrid nanomaterial can provide an enhanced electrochemical sensing platform for redox proteins and enzymes. Mousty and coworkers demonstrated glucose/O2 biofuel cell devices through hybridization of layered double hydroxide with two enzymes, laccase and GOD.195 Lac-based cathodic electrode allows the electro-enzymatic reduction of O2, whereas the anodic electrode with GOD was used for the electro-enzymatic oxidation of glucose. Power performance obtained with this biofuel cell was slightly higher than that of a glucose/O2 biofuel cell based on enzymes and redox mediators directly entrapped by the electrogenerated polypyrrole polymer on the porous carbon nanotube electrode.
Roda et al. fabricated a portable device based on lensless chemiluminescence imaging (Fig. 23).196 A transparent microfluidics-based reaction chip was placed in contact with a thermoelectrically cooled CCD sensor through a fiber optic taper, where analytes can be quantitatively detected by means of biospecific reactions and chemiluminescence detection. Use of chemiluminescence detection provided a wide signal dynamic range and high detectability, down to attomole levels of protein and femtomole levels of nucleic acid analytes. An enzyme assay for alkaline phosphatase activity, a nucleic acid hybridization assay for Parvovirus B19 DNA, and an immunoassay for horseradish peroxidase as a model antigen were demonstrated. Arrays of immobilized biomaterials were employed to perform flow-assisted binding assays, while enzyme activities were measured in solution using suitably designed flow cells. Such reaction chips can be used for the simultaneous detection of various biomarkers together with conventional clinical chemistry tests for the monitoring of the health status and the drug efficacy for a specific patient.
 Fig. 23  Portable device based on chemiluminescence lens-less imaging using a biospecific enzyme assay coupled with a nucleic acid hybridization assay for DNA.196 
Ramsey and coworkers demonstrated fabrication of microfluidic devices containing a patterned microwell through a combination of conventional wet-chemical etching for larger microchannel and focused ion beam milling for smaller microwells.197 Such devices can potentially be used for highly parallel multiplexed sandwich immunoassays, DNA–RNA hybridization analyses, and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Koh and coworkers entrapped quantum dot (QD)–enzyme conjugates within the poly(ethyleneglycol) (PEG)-based hydrogel microstructures within the microchannels by a photopatterning process.198 Oxidase enzymes, GOD and alcohol oxidase, were conjugated to carboxyl-terminated CdSe–ZnS QDs as a fluorescent hydrogel microarray for detection of glucose and alcohol. As illustrated in Fig. 24, these enzymes were covalently attached to carboxyl-terminated CdSe–ZnS QDs and a subsequent photo-patterning process produced the hydrogel microstructures entrapped within microchannels. Fluorescence quenching of the conjugated QDs due to hydrogen peroxide produced by oxidase-catalyzed reactions resulted in detection of glucose and alcohol in the microfluidic devices. These detection devices can be extended to any enzyme that generates QD-quenching products.
 Fig. 24  Conjugation of glucose oxidase and alcohol oxidase to carboxyl-terminated CdSe–ZnS QDs as a fluorescent hydrogel microarray for detection of glucose and alcohol.198 
5. Enzyme-mimics: architecting enzyme-like non-enzyme objects
As described above, there exist a great variety of successful examples of enzyme nanoarchitectonics. Many of the examples exhibit useful functions based on specific and efficient molecular transformation capabilities of the enzymes. Some of them are actually integrated into device systems. However, are they enough for utilization of enzyme functions in artificial systems? The simple answer is ‘NO’. Most of the immobilized enzymes cannot be used under harsh conditions even though they gain certain stability improvements upon their immobilization. Therefore, wholly artificial molecules, materials and systems with enzyme-like functions should be developed in parallel with the efforts on enzyme immobilization. In particular, energy issues have become serious matter in materials/energy conversion systems. Although these systems required rather harsh operation conditions, application of enzyme mimicry concepts to these innovative fields is attractive. Non-enzymatic enzyme-mimicking, artificial enzymes and enzyme-like catalysts will be briefly described in the following sections.
5.1. Artificial enzymes
The concept of artificial enzymes is known as an approach to create enzyme mimics from other materials.199–202 Artificial enzymes may make significant contributions to the future development of enzyme devices since artificial materials with enzyme function might be more easily integrated into device structure than actual enzymes. In this section, research work on artificial enzymes is briefly introduced. As a primary example, an enzyme and its mimic will be compared. Ribonuclease A hydrolysis involves two steps. In the first step, the 2-OH group of RNA is activated by the removal of the 2-proton by histidine 12, and a P–O–C linkage is broken due to nucleophilic attack on the phosphorus atom by the activated 2-oxygen, resulting in a cyclic phosphodiester and a ribose terminal. In the second step, water is activated by neutral histidine 119, and the activated water attacks the cyclic phosphodiester. Cleavage of the cyclic ester is assisted by protonation of the other histidine 12. Cooperation between the neutral and protonated histidines is crucial to these reaction steps. The artificial enzyme developed by Anslyn and coworkers has a molecular cleft structure, where guanidinium residues connected to the backbone immobilize the RNA phosphodiester moiety and imidazole in the solution activates the 2-OH followed by nucleophilic attack on the phosphate.203,204 This process mimics step 2 of ribonuclease A. In the latter artificial enzyme, the transition state during the hydrolysis can be stabilized by hydrogen bonding with the guanidinium groups increasing the reaction rate of RNA cleavage.
Various artificial enzymes based on supramolecular complex formation have been reported. Ohshima, Mashima and coworkers used zinc cluster Zn4(OCOCF3)6O for catalysis in direct conversion of esters, lactones, and carboxylic acids to oxazolines in high yield with broad substrate generality.205 Selective acylation of hydroxyl groups was achieved in the presence of primary and secondary amino groups in an enzyme-like highly chemoselective manner. Que Jr et al. investigated catalysts for the cis-dihydroxylation of olefins with Fe2+ complexes of a series of N-acylated dipyridin-2-ylmethylamine ligands as a model of the action of Rieske dioxygenases.206 Camara and Rauchfuss prepared a complete model for the [FeFe]-hydrogenase.207 The function of the ferredoxins was regenerated with the redox-active ligand Cp*Fe(C5Me4CH2PEt2) (FcP*). FcP* oxidizes at low potentials. This research demonstrated that suitably modified ferrocenes can replicate the behaviour of 4Fe–4S clusters.
Nolte, Rowan and coworkers developed a diphenylglycoluril-appended porphyrin catalyst with an open ring structure that is capable of binding to a polymer chain (Fig. 25).208 This catalyst can work like a miniature machine to convert the double bonds of polybutadiene into epoxide functions while gliding along the polymer chain in a pseudorotaxane fashion. This catalyst can be referred to as a processive enzyme mimic. Mirkin and coworkers prepared a complex that behaves as a multieffector enzyme mimic in the context of pseudorotaxane formation.209 The binding of the first small molecule regulates the shape of the complex and the binding of the second one regulates the charge of the complex, which results in the active species and guest sequestration. Yang, Bullock and coworkers reported a new nickel complex for the hydrogen addition product of which is nearly isoenergetic with the starting materials and free H2.210 This catalyst displays reversible electrocatalytic hydrogen oxidation and production activity with high efficiency. It is most commonly observed in the hydrogenase enzymes.
 Fig. 25  A processive enzyme mimic by a diphenylglycoluril-appended porphyrin catalyst with open ring structure which converts the double bonds of polybutadiene into epoxide functions while gliding along the polymer chain in a pseudorotaxane fashion.208 
Cyclodextrin has been widely used for creation of enzyme-like environments. For example, an artificial ribonuclease can be created with a cyclodextrin core as the hydrophobic pocket and two histidine residues as catalytic sites.211 The hydrophobic part of a cyclic phosphodiester was accommodated at the core of the cyclodextrin that was exposed between the two histidines. A water molecule was activated through proton removal, and the activated water underwent a nucleophilic attack on the phosphate atom. Bols and coworkers synthesized cyano-modified cyclodextrin that catalyzed hydrolysis of aryl glycosides into glucose and phenol in a reaction that followed enzyme-like Michaelis–Menten kinetics (Fig. 26).212 Under optimal conditions, this artificial enzyme showed a four-orders of magnitude rate increase. The same research team reported that the bridged ketocyclodextrins catalyze the oxidation of anilines to nitrobenzenes in the presence of hydrogen peroxide in a reaction with enzyme kinetics and with a ratio enhancement up to three orders.213 Calixarene has also been used as an artificial enzyme. Katz and coworkers used calix[4]arene macrocycles bearing phosphines as crude mimics of the rigid backbones of proteins and demonstrated the synthesis of gold clusters and the control of their accessibility through an interplay between the sizes of the calixarene ligands and metal cores.214
 Fig. 26  An artificial enzyme of cyano-modified cyclodextrin to catalyze hydrolysis of aryl glycosides into glucose and phenol.212 
Molecular assemblies such as lipid membranes provide media for artificial enzyme action. Structural and orientational control between the substrate and catalytic site can be achieved more efficiently in a lipid bilayer membrane. Immobilizing catalytic sites with functions such as coenzyme activity in lipid bilayers sometimes leads to enzyme-like functions featuring hydrophobic microenvironments and controlled geometries (Fig. 27).215 Long and coworkers prepared ubiquinone-terminated disulfides with different alkyl spacers to form SAM on gold electrodes on which the lipid bilayer membrane embedded NAD+ and NADH was formed.216 The reversible interconversion between NADH and NAD+ at a low overpotential was observed, which is in part mediated by ubiquinone embedded in a biomimetic membrane, to mimic the initial stages of respiration. König and coworkers reported micellar and vesicular Zn2+-cyclen complexes which considerably promoted the hydrolytic cleavage of native DNA and the activated model substrate bis(4-nitrophenyl)phosphate.217 Combining catalytically active sites with binding sites for sequence recognition at functionalized vesicles was shown useful for handling target specific DNA sequences.
 Fig. 27  Enzyme-like functions featuring hydrophobic microenvironments and controlled geometries at the surface of lipid bilayer.215 
Similar to molecular assembly media, shape-designed polymers can also provide sites for enzyme mimics. Yu et al. synthesized two series of dendrimer encapsulated Pt nanoparticles from sixth generation poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers terminated with different numbers of hydroxyl groups to mimic hydrogenases (Fig. 28).218 The dendrimer structure provides cavities to maintain the integrity of small Pt nanoparticles without agglomeration that act as the active site to generate H2 by reducing H+. These artificial hydrogenases were successfully applied in a hydrogen production system by excitation of a photosensitizer with visible light.
 Fig. 28  Dendrimer encapsulated Pt nanoparticles as a mimic of hydrogenase with triethanolamine (TEOA) as the sacrificial electron donor.218 
5.2. Catalysts and related systems beyond enzyme function
The surprisingly high efficiency of molecular transformations by enzymes should be applied to address emerging demands because their catalytic capabilities often far exceed those of conventional catalysts. In particular, energy management through transformation of small molecules such as H2 and/or H2O is one of the most promising approaches to meet the increasing demand for sustainable energy.219–223 Natural enzymes, which often incorporate transition metal clusters in large superstructures of proteins, catalytically transform small molecules with high efficiency and selectivity under biocompatible conditions. There is growing interest in artificial biomimetic catalysts that mimic the structure and functionalities of natural enzymes to establish sustainable energy systems.224–227
Most state-of-art biomimetic catalysts comprise of coordinated transition metal clusters that are homogeneously dispersed in the media in which targeted reactions proceed.228,229 Although such homogenous biomimetic catalysts can exhibit outstanding performance for various reactions, many of them are still precluded from large-scale applications because they are not protected by encapsulating superstructures and are readily degraded by oxygen and/or light.230 In addition, homogeneous biomimetic catalysts may lead to difficulties in product recovery and catalyst recycling from reaction media.
Heterogeneous catalysts, which usually consist of catalytically active nanoparticles or clusters dispersed over the surface of solid-state supports, are widely used in industry and daily life. Examples are supported precious metal (Pt, Pd and/or Rh) catalysts for vehicle exhaust purification, chalcogenide catalysts for desulfurization of petroleum, and oxide photocatalysts for environmental purification and energy generation.231,232 The well-established durability of heterogeneous catalysts is prompting research and development of advanced biomimetic catalysts that replicate the solid-state frameworks of heterogeneous catalysts. There are two main themes in the research and development of solid-state-inspired biomimetic catalysts. The first approach is solid-state analogues of enzymes that involve transition-metal clusters with similar atomic configurations to those in enzymes. The second is nano-hybrid catalysts that mimic the functionalities of enzymes through the assembly of nano-scaled building blocks.
A key step in photosynthesis, the water-splitting reaction, is promoted by an enzyme called photosystem II (PS II).233–235 The catalytic centre of PS II is a CaMn4Ox cluster that is embedded in a superstructure of proteins. This CaMn4Ox cluster efficiently catalyses the transformation of H2O to molecular oxygen, in cooperation with photon-scavenging molecules.
Kurz and coworkers reported that a calcium-containing manganese mineral (Marokite: CaMn2O4) can efficiently drive the half reaction of water splitting, i.e. water oxidation reactions, under irradiation by visible light.236 The Mn3+ cation of CaMn2O4 is situated in an octahedral atomic environment similar to that in the CaMn4Ox cluster in PS II. The MnO6 octahedra share edges to form dimers and are extended in the (001) plane through vertex sharing (Fig. 29). Very interestingly, it was demonstrated that CaMn2O4 exhibits much superior water oxidation activity to Mn2O3 even though the nearest-neighbour atomic environment of the Mn3+ cation in Mn2O3 is virtually identical to that in CaMn2O4. The authors suggested that the Ca2+ incorporated into the MnO2 solid-state framework of CaMn2O4 may be an efficient adsorption site for H2O to enhance the catalytic activity of the material.
 Fig. 29  Crystal structure of CaMn2O4. The MnO2 framework, depicted as purple polyhedra, incorporates Ca2+ to replicate the catalytic center of PS II.236 
Kanatzidis and coworkers have published a series of papers demonstrating enhanced electrocatalytic CO2 reduction and photocatalytic hydrogen evolution over chalcogenide materials containing a transition metal cluster, [(Fe/Mo)4S4] (Fig. 30).237,238 This transition metal cluster is a cubane-like cluster with the constituent atoms arranged in the same configuration as the carbon atoms in cubane, C8H8. Note that various enzymes including oxidases incorporate catalytic centres comprising the cubane-like [Fe4S4] cluster. The authors successfully connected the cubane-like [(Fe/Mo)4S4] cluster using a linker molecule, [Sn2S6], to yield gel materials named “chalcogels” having large specific surface areas (>100 m2g−1). It was demonstrated that the chalcogel can electrochemically reduce CO2 with high yield. The chalcogel was further combined with a light-harvesting cluster, [Ru(bpy)3], to promote hydrogen generation reactions under visible light illumination, with retention of the composition and structure over several weeks.
 Fig. 30  Atomic arrangement in a cubane-like [Fe4S4] cluster and a linker cluster, [Sn2S6] (left). Different [Fe4S4] clusters are connected with each other by the linker (middle) and further by transition-metal cations (right) to form three-dimensional networks.237 
Apart from novel biomimetic catalysts comprised of new compounds, well-established materials have also been revisited to discover their inherent activity in biochemical reactions. Perrett and coworkers reported that Magnetite (Fe3O4) can act as a high-performance peroxidase.239 Fe3O4 was believed to be chemically/biochemically inert and had widely been used as a ferromagnetic supporting material for metal catalysts, antibodies or enzymes. It was demonstrated that nanoparticles of Fe3O4 are in fact catalytically active in the oxidation of organic molecules in wastewater, in a similar manner to the natural peroxidases. The authors further developed an immunoassay involving Fe3O4 nanoparticles exhibiting three functionalities: capture, separation and detection.
Perez and coworkers recently demonstrated that polymer-coated ceria (cerium oxide) nanoparticles exhibit outstanding activity as an oxidase.240 Ceria is widely used as a support material for precious metal catalysts for exhaust purification because of its property of tuning the oxygen density over the supported metal catalysts.241,242 It was discovered that ceria nanoparticles possess biochemical activity similar to the natural oxidases and that they can be assembled in immunoassays when modified with targeting ligands (Fig. 31; light blue and yellow structures are nanoparticles with attached ligands).
 Fig. 31  Immunoassay involving ceria nanoparticles. Polymer-coated ceria nanoparticles are supported by living cells to exhibit enzyme-mimic catalytic performance (TMB, 3,3,5,5-tetramethylbenzidine).241 
The functionality of enzymes can be mimicked by assembling different nano-sized functional components into nano-hybrid catalysts. Naik and coworkers demonstrated that peptide-coated sulfide nanoparticles (CdS), which are combined with Pt nanoparticles, can operate as an enzyme mimic in the photoactivated reduction of nitrate (Fig. 32).243 This nano-hybrid catalyst is superior to its natural counterpart in terms of the activity and durability at elevated temperatures.
 Fig. 32  Nano-hybrid catalyst comprising Pt- and peptide-coated CdS nanoparticles. Under illumination, nitrate ions are reduced over the Pt nanoparticles by electrons provided by the CdS nanoparticles.243 
Chorkendorff and coworkers reported that a nano-hybrid of transition-metal chalcogenide clusters and Si nanorods can act as an efficient photocatalyst for large-scale production of hydrogen.244 The authors successfully dispersed an incomplete cubane-like cluster, [Mo3S4], over the hydrogen-terminated surface of nanorods of p-type Si to harvest red photons from sunlight (Fig. 33). Surprisingly, this nano-hybrid catalyst achieved a solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency in excess of 10%.
 Fig. 33  Nano-hybrid catalyst for photon-chemical energy conversion; pink and orange balls in the cubane-like cluster correspond to Mo- and S atoms, respectively.243 
Functionalities of enzymes are determined not only by the catalytic centres but also by their sub-micrometer structures. Ariga and coworkers proposed a strategy to improve the performance of catalysts by mimicking the sub-micrometer structure of living systems.245 The authors replicated living cells by preparing open-mouthed, micrometer-sized Pt cells with sufficient accessibility and electroactivity at both interior and exterior surfaces (Fig. 34). The open-mouthed Pt cells exhibited enhanced CO oxidation activity because the catalytic centers at the interior surface are free of unwanted thermal agglomeration.
 Fig. 34  Schematic illustration for the open-mouthed Pt cells. CO- and O2 molecules are absorbed by the cells and catalytically transformed into CO2 over the interior surface.244 
6. Summary and message
Although recent unique and important examples of DNA-assisted enzyme immobilization,246,247 conjugates between enzymes and quantum dots,248,249 device-assisted biomolecule immobilization,250 and bio-device interface for power generation251 are not included, this review overviews past and recent research efforts on enzyme immobilization and their functions including integration into device systems. Examples have been roughly categorized according to immobilization media, (i) organic soft matter, (ii) inorganic hard materials and (iii) integrated and organized media. Most of the examples have come about in attempts to explore novel functionalities and improve performance of enzymes through control of nano- and micro-structures. These developments might be unified under a single concept, i.e. enzyme nanoarchitectonics. However, real-life methods for immobilization and methods for function development are extremely diverse and perhaps should not be unified under a single title. Despite this diversity, there exist some trends including (i) use of specific properties within confined environments, (ii) shifts from single enzyme systems to multiple enzyme systems and/or enzyme-coupled systems, and (iii) integration and interface formation of artificial device structures for facile application especially for use as sensors. Confinement and organization of enzymes for rational relayed functions that are integrated into devices for a detectable output can be regarded as a typical recent trend. In the near future, it might lead to development of biomimetic enzyme (or protein) functional arrays in devices such as electrodes, transistors, and optical probes.
In the final two sections of this review, we have also mentioned examples of non-enzyme materials that exhibit enzyme-like behaviour. This might be considered an unusual subject for a review on enzyme science and technology. However, our take-home message is one of integration of existing well-known biological enzymes with the more physically and chemically robust artificial enzymes. Although research on artificial enzymes and catalysts sounds dated in some aspects, these non-enzyme examples go towards future enzyme device applications. As mentioned above, integration and relation-constructions of multiple enzyme functions could become the main focus in future enzyme technology. By developing these systems, we are sure to encounter difficulties in matching enzymes with conditions such as operation temperature and pH. Not all enzyme operations can be sustained under general conditions so that man-made alternates will become necessary. For such future requirements, artificial enzymes and catalysts with enzyme-like functions should be developed.
Finally, we can say that our imaginations are a crucial factor in the successful development of enzyme devices in addition to existing skills on design, synthesis, organization, and integration. Enzymes are the ultimate tools for materials/energy conversion and should be freely coupled, organized and integrated upon demand in near future technology.
Acknowledgements
This work was also partly supported by World Premier International Research Center Initiative (WPI Initiative), MEXT, Japan and the Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST) program of Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Japan.
Notes and references
S. Wu, T. Tsuruoka, K. Terabe, T. Hasegawa, J. P. Hill, K. Ariga and M. Aono, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 93 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Wallace, M. J. Higgins, S. E. Moulton and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4327 RSC .
D. Xia, J. Yan and S. Hou, Small, 2012, 8, 2787 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Peersy, Nature, 2000, 406, 1023 CrossRef .
M. Smit, J. van der Tol and M. Hill, Laser Photonics Rev., 2012, 6, 1 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, S. Ishihara, H. Izawa, H. Xia and J. P. Hill, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4802 RSC .
K. Ariga, T. Mori and J. P. Hill, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 15 RSC .
K. Ariga, T. Mori and J. P. Hill, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 158 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, Y. Li, H. Liu, L. Chi and Y. Li, Small, 2012, 8, 504 CrossRef CAS .
R. Iino and H. Noji, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2012, 1817, 1732 CrossRef CAS .
T. Muraoka and K. Kinbara, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13, 136 CrossRef CAS .
A. Coskun, M. Banaszak, R. D. Astumian, J. F. Stoddart and B. A. Grzybowski, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 19 RSC .
C. S. Vogelsberg and M. A. Garcia-Garibay, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1892 RSC .
I. Willner, B. Shlyahovsky, M. Zayats and B. Willner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1153 RSC .
M. C. Wahl, C. L. Will and R. Luehrmann, Cell, 2009, 136, 701 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, T. Mizushima and Y. Saeki, Biol. Chem., 2012, 393, 217 CrossRef CAS .
D. Brady and J. Jordaan, Biotechnol. Lett., 2009, 31, 1639 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2005, 9, 217 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tosa, T. Mori, N. Fuse and I. Chibata, Enzymologia, 1966, 31, 214 CAS .
L. C. Clark Jr. and C. Lyons, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1962, 102, 29 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Updike and G. P. Hicks, Nature, 1967, 214, 986 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Shukla, P. Suresh, S. Berchmans and A. Rajendran, Curr. Sci., 2004, 87, 455 CAS .
I. Willner, Y. M. Yan, B. Willner and J. Tel-Vered, Fuel Cells, 2009, 9, 7 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Minteer, B. Y. Liaw and M. J. Cooney, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2007, 18, 228 CrossRef CAS .
S. Calabrese Barton, J. Gallaway and P. Atanassov, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4867 CrossRef .
A. T. Yahiro, S. M. Lee and D.O. Kimble, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1964, 88, 375 CAS .
This terminology was first proposed by Dr Masakazu Aono at 1st international symposium on nanoarchitectonics using suprainteractions (NASI-1) at Tsukuba in 2000.
P. S. A. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2007, 1, 379 CrossRef CAS   (Conversation with Dr Masakazu Aono: leader in atomic-scale control and nanomanipulation).
K. Ariga, M. V. Lee, T. Mori, X.-Y. Yu and J. P. Hill, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 154, 20 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, M. Li, G. J. Richards and J. P. Hill, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aono, Y. Bando and K. Ariga, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 150 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, S. Ishihara, H. Abe, M. Li and J. P. Hill, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2369 RSC .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, M. J. McShane, Y. M. Lvov, A. Vinu and J. P. Hill, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 728 CrossRef CAS .
H. Frenkel-Mullerad and D. Avnir, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8077 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Patil, E. Muthusamy and S. Mann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4928 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim and J. W. Grate, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1219 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yan, J. Ge, Z. Liu and P. Ouyang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11008 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kröger, R. Deutzmann and M. Sumper, Science, 1999, 286, 1129 CrossRef .
H. R. Luckarift, J. C. Spain, R. R. Naik and M. O. Stone, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 211 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. W. Grate and P. Wang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2006, 61, 1017 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Sheldon, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2007, 349, 1289 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Jahn and S. E. Radford, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 2008, 469, 100 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Dobson, Semin. Cell Dev. Biol., 2004, 15, 3 CrossRef CAS .
C. Soto, Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 2003, 4, 49 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and D. Eisenberg, Protein Sci., 2002, 11, 1285 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bennett, M. P. Schlunegger and D. Eisenberg, Protein Sci., 1995, 4, 2455 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Staniforth, S. Giannini, L. D. Higgins, M. J. Conroy, A. M. Hounslow, R. Jerala, C. J. Craven and J. P. Waltho, EMBO J., 2001, 20, 4774 CrossRef CAS .
E. Macgoliash and J. Lustgarten, J. Biol. Chem., 1962, 237, 3397 Search PubMed .
S. Hirota, Y. Hattori, S. Nagao, M. Taketa, H. Komori, H. Kamikubo, Z. Wang, I. Takahashi, S. Negi, Y. Sugiura, M. Kataoka and Y. Higuchi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 12854 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, T. Matsuo, S. Nagao and S. Hirota, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2011, 9, 4766 CAS .
H. P. Lu, L. Xun and X. S. Xie, Science, 1998, 282, 1877 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. English, W. Min, A. M. van Oijen, K. T. Lee, G. Luo, H. Sun, B. J. Cherayil, S. C. Kou and X. S. Xie, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2005, 2, 87 CrossRef .
H. Qian and E. L Elson, Biophys. Chem., 2002, 101, 565 CrossRef .
X. S. Xie and H. P. Lu, J. Biol. Chem., 1999, 274, 15967 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Garibotti, S. M. Knudsen, A. D. Ellington and N. C. Seeman, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1505 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Wilner, Y. Weizmann, R. Gill, O. Lioubashevski, R. Freeman and I. Willner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 249 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Wilner, S. Shimron, Y. Weizmann, Z.-G. Wang and I. Willner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2040 CrossRef CAS .
K. Numajiri, T. Yamazaki, M. Kimura, A. Kuzuya and M. Komiyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9937 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Sarma, P. Vatsyayan, P. Goswami and S. D. Minteer, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 2313 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cosnier, Biosens. Bioelectron., 1999, 14, 443 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, P. Li, Q. Xie, X. Xu, L. Lei, C. Chen, C. Zou, W. Deng and S. Yao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1784 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Allen, P. D. Kichambare and A. Star, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1439 CrossRef CAS .
K. Besteman, J.-O. Lee, F. G. M. Wiertz, H. A. Heering and C. Dekker, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 727 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, J. Wang, H. Wu, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. Lin, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 1027 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kang, J. Wang, H. Wu, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and Y. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 901 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zeng, J. Cheng, L. Tang, X. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Li and J. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3366 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, F. Zhang, H. Yang, X. Huang, H. Liu, J. Zhang and S. Guo, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6083 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Yadav, J.-O. Baeg, G. H. Oh, N.-J. Park, K.-J. Kong, J. Kim, D. W. Hwang and S. K. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11455 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hartmann, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4577 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. W. Grate and P. Wang, Trends Biotechnol., 2008, 26, 639 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lee, T. S. Lin and C. Y. Mou, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 165 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hudson, J. Cooney and E. Magner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8582 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, A. Vinu, Y. Yamauchi, Q. Ji and J. Hill, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2012, 85, 1 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan and D. Zhao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2821 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Urabe, T. Shiomi, T. Itoh, A. Kawai, T. Tsunoda, F. Mizukami and K. Sakaguchi, ChemBioChem, 2007, 8, 668 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, J. Lei, L. Wang, C. Yu, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2140 RSC .
J. M. Kisler, A. Dähler, G. W. Stevens and A. J. O'Connor, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2001, 44–45, 769 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Blanco, P. Terreros, M. Fernández-Pérez, C. Otero and G. Díaz-González, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2004, 30, 83 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Diaz and K. J. Balkus Jr., J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 1996, 2, 115 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salis, D. Meloni, S. Ligas, M. F. Casula, M. Monduzzi, V. Solinas and E. Dumitriu, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5511 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Torabi, K. Khajeh, S. Ghasempura, N. Ghaemia and S. O. R. Siadat, J. Biotechnol., 2007, 131, 111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suteewong, H. Sai, R. Cohen, S. Wang, M. Bradbury, B. Baird, S. M. Gruner and U. Wiesner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 172 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang S. Dai, S. D. Waezsada, A. Y. Tsao and B. H. Davison, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2001, 74, 249 CrossRef .
J. He, X. Li, D. G. Evans, X. Duan and C. Li, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2000, 11, 45 CrossRef .
J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Kim, H. Jia, M. I. Kim, J. H. Kwak, S. Jin, A. Dohnalkova, H. G. Park, H. N. Chang, P. Wang, J. W. Grate and T. Hyeon, Small, 2005, 1, 744 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Zhang, S. S. Cho, S. H. Yang, S. S. Seo, G. S. Cha and H. Nam, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 217 CrossRef CAS .
G. Piechotta, J. Alberts and R. Hintsche, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2005, 21, 802 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai, J. Bao, X. Yang and H. Ju, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 23, 1070 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai X. Xu, L. Wu and H. Ju, Electroanalysis, 2005, 17, 1571 CrossRef .
C. Lei, M. M. Valenta, K. P. Saripalli and E. J. Ackerman, J. Environ. Qual., 2007, 36, 233 CrossRef CAS .
T. Itoh, T. Shimomura, Y. Hasegawa, J. Mizuguchi, T. Hanaoka, A. Hayashi, A. Yamaguchi, N. Teramae, M. Ono and F. Mizukami, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 251 RSC .
T. Shimomura, T. Itoh, T. Sumiya, F. Mizukami and M. Ono, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2009, 45, 443 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimomura, T. Itoh, T. Sumiya, F. Mizukami and M. Ono, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 135, 268 CrossRef .
G. Kickelbick, Small, 2005, 1, 168 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamaguchi, F. Uejo, T. Yoda, T. Uchida, Y. Tanamura, T. Yamashita and N. Teramae, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 337 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, A. Yamaguchi, T. Atou, K. Morita and N. Teramae, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 1352 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, G. S. Cheng, K. Katsov, S. W. Sides, J. F. Wang, J. Tang, G. H. Fredrickson, M. Moskovits and G. D. Stucky, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 816 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, R. Kou, Z. L. Yang, J. B. He, Z. Z. Yang and Y. F. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2005, 166 RSC .
B. Platschek, N. Petkov and T. Bein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1134 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jin, B. Yao and N. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 409, 172 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lai, M. Z. Hu, D. Shi and D. Blom, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1338 RSC .
Q. Lu, F. Gao, S. Komarneni and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8650 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, H. Yang, W. Yang, Y. Li and C. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 124, 179 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, S. Kaskel, J. Shi, T. Wage and K. van Pée, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 6408 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, H. X. Ju and Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 585 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. Slowing, B. G. Trewyn and V. S. Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8845 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jung, C. Streb and M. Hartmann, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 113, 523 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lei, Y. Shin, J. Liu and E. J. Ackerman, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1050 CrossRef CAS .
S. Acharya, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2959 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sakakibara, L. A. Joyce, T. Mori, T. Fujisawa, S. H. Shabbir, J. P. Hill, E. V. Anslyn and K. Ariga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9643 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, H. Ito, J. P. Hill and H. Tsukube, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5800 RSC .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, J. P. Hill and Q. Ji, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2319 RSC .
H. Wang, S. Ishihara, K. Ariga and Y.Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10819 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, J. P. Hill, Y. Bando and M. Aono, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e17 CrossRef .
J.-P. Chapel and J.-F. Berret, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 17, 97 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji and J. P. Hill, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2010, 229, 51 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Y. M. Lvov, K. Kawakami, Q. Ji and J. P. Hill, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2011, 63, 762 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, M. McShane, Y. M. Lvov, Q. Ji and J. P. Hill, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2011, 8, 633 CrossRef CAS .
S. De Koker, R. Hoogenboom and B. G. De Geest, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2867 RSC .
H. Lee, L. J. Kepley, H. G. Hong and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 618 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Jiang, J. Shi, Y. Liang, C. Zhang and H. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3476 CAS .
W. B. Stockton and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 2717 CrossRef CAS .
B.-S. Kim, S. W. Park and P. T. Hammond, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 386 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Such, J. F. Quinn, A. Quinn, E. Tjipto and F. Caruso, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9318 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, S. Ishihara, M. Akada, M. Liao, L. Sang, J. P. Hill, V. Krishnan, Y. Ma and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7348 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ikeda, T. Hatano, S. Shinkai, T. Akiyama and S. Yamada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4855 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lvov, K. Ariga, I. Ichinose and T. Kunitake, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 2313 RSC .
S. Takahashi, K. Sato and J. Anzai, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 402, 1749 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shimazaki, M. Mitsuishi, S. Ito and M. Yamamoto, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 2768 CrossRef CAS .
T. Serizawa, K. Hamada and M. Akashi, Nature, 2004, 429, 52 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Lee, J.-D. Hong, C. H. Kim, K. Kim, J. P. Koo and K.-B. Lee, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 5358 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fadhillah, S. M. J. Zaidi, Z. Khan, M. Khaled, F. Rahman and P. T. Hammond, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 126, 1468 CrossRef CAS .
A. Izquierdo, S. S. Ono, J.-C. Voegel, P. Schaaf and G. Decher, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7558 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schaaf, J.-C. Voegel, L. Jierry and F. Boulmedais, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1001 CrossRef CAS .
M. Onda, K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 1999, 87, 69 CrossRef CAS .
M. Onda, Y. Lvov, K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, J. Ferment. Bioeng., 1996, 82, 502 CrossRef CAS .
M. Onda, Y. Lvov, K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 1996, 51, 163 CrossRef .
H. Matsuno, Y. Nagasaka, K. Kurita and T. Serizawa, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2174 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Shutava, D. S. Kommireddy and Y. M. Lvov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9926 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, J. F. Rusling and N. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 14378 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Constantine, S. V. Mello, A. Dupont, X. Cao, D. Santos Jr., O. N. Oliveira Jr., F. T. Strixino, E. C. Pereira, T.-C. Cheng, J. J. Defrank and R. M. Leblanc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1805 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, J. Yang, C. Estavillo, J. D. Stuart, J. B. Schenkman and J. F. Rusling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1431 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dennany, R. J. Forster, B. White, M. Smyth and J. F. Rusling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8835 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Ram, M. Adami, S. Paddeu and C. Nicolini, Nanotechnology, 2000, 11, 112 CrossRef CAS .
R. Spricigo, R. Dronov, K. V. Rajagopalan, F. Lisdat, S. Leimkühler, F. W. Schellera and U. Wollenberger, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 972 RSC .
G. Zhao, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 148 CrossRef CAS .
C. Camacho, J. C. Matías, R. Cao, M. Matos, B. Chico, J. Hernández, M. A. Longo, M. A. Sanromán and R. Villalonga, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7654 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fragoso, B. Sanromá, M. Ortiz and C. K. O'Sullivan, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 400 RSC .
H. C. Yoon, M.-Y. Hong and H.-S. Kim, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 4420 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zucolotto, A. P. A. Pinto, T. Tumolo, M. L. Moraes, M. S. Baptista, A. Riul Jr., A. P. U. Araújo and Q. N. Oliveira Jr., Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 1320 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ferreira, P. A. Fiorito, O. N. Oliveira Jr. and S. I. Córdoba de Torresi, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2004, 19, 1611 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Chen, X. Jiang and X. Lin, Chem. Lett., 2004, 33, 564 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Yan, X. J. Chen, B. K. Tay and K. A. Khor, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, P. P. Joshi, K. L. Hobbs, M. B. Johnson and D. W. Schmidtke, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 9776 CrossRef CAS .
V. Flexer, E. S. Forzani, E. J. Calvo, S. J. Ludueña and L. I. Pietrasanta, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 399 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dronov, D. G. Kurth, H. Möhwald, R. Spricigo, S. Leimkühler, U. Wollenberger, K. V. Rajagopalan, F. W. Scheller and F. Lisdat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1122 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ko, Y. Kim, H. Baek and J. Cho, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9918 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Seo, S.-E. Kim, J.-S. Park, J.-H. Lee, K.-Y. Yang, H. Lee, K. E. Lee, S.-S. Han and J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4055 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Kim, J. I. Sohn, D. Zhou, T. A. J. Duke and D. J. Kang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1580 CrossRef CAS .
W.-W. Zhao, Z.-Y. Ma, P.-P. Yu, X.-Y. Dong, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 917 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hong, N. J. Shah, A. C. Drake, P. C. DeMuth, J. B. Lee, J. Chen and P. T. Hammond, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Okahata, T. Tsuruta, K. Ijiro and K. Ariga, Langmuir, 1988, 4, 1373 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Okahata, T. Tsuruta, K. Ijiro and K. Ariga, Thin Solid Films, 1989, 180, 65 CrossRef CAS .
L. Caseli and J. R. Siqueira Jr., Langmuir, 2012, 28, 5398 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kikuchi, K. Ariga, T. Miyazaki and K. Ikeda, Chem. Lett., 1999, 253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kikuchi, K. Ariga and K. Ikeda, Chem. Commun., 1999, 547 RSC .
J. Kikuchi, K. Ariga, Y. Sasaki and K. Ikeda, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2001, 11, 977 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fukuda, Y. Sasaki, K. Ariga and J. Kikuchi, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2001, 11, 971 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Shchukin, A. A. Patel, G. B. Sukhorukov and Y. M. Lvov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3374 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ai, S. A. Jones, M. M. de Villiers and Y. M. Lvov, J. Controlled Release, 2003, 86, 59 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ai, S. A. Jones and Y. M. Lvov, Cell Biochem. Biophys., 2003, 39, 23 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schüler and F. Caruso, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2000, 21, 750 CrossRef .
F. Caruso and C. Schüler, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 9595 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bajrami, E. G. Hvastkovs, G. C. Jensen, J. B. Schenkman and J. F. Rusling, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 922 CrossRef CAS .
S. Viswanathan and J. A. A. Ho, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2007, 22, 1147 CrossRef CAS .
D. Trau, W. Yang, M. Seydack, F. Caruso, N.-T. Yu and R. Renneberg, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 5480 CrossRef CAS .
K. Katagiri, K. Ariga and J. Kikuchi, Chem. Lett., 1999, 661 CrossRef CAS .
K. Katagiri, M. Hashizume, K. Ariga, T. Terashima and J. Kikuch, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 5272 CrossRef CAS .
K. Katagiri, R. Hamasaki, K. Ariga and J. Kikuchi, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 6709 CrossRef CAS .
K. Katagiri, R. Hamasaki, K. Ariga and J. Kikuchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 124, 7892 CrossRef .
M. Michel, A. Izquierdo, G. Decher, J.-C. Voegel, P. Schaaf and V. Ball, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7854 CrossRef CAS .
K. Katagiri and F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 738 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, Q. He, K. Wang, X. Yan, Y. Cui, H. Möhwald and J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6996 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qi, L. Duan, K. Wang, X. Yan, Y. Cui, Q. He and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 601 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Lu, W. Zhong, P. Song, J. Kong, P. Yang, H. H. Girault and B. Liu, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 801 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, B. B. Elmore and J. D. Palmer, Catal. Today, 2007, 120, 30 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Xu, W. Zhao, X.-L. Luo and H.-Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2005, 792 RSC .
L. Deng, F. Wang, H. Chen, L. Shang, L. Wang, T. Wang and S. Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 24, 329 CrossRef CAS .
S. Derveaux, B. G. Stubbe, C. Roelant, M. Leblans, B. G. De Geest, J. Demeester and S. C. De Smedt, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 85 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Parra-Alfambra, E. Casero, M. D. Petit-Domínguez, M. Barbadillo, F. Pariente, L. Vázquez and E. Lorenzo, Analyst, 2011, 136, 340 RSC .
M.-H. Wu, Y.-F. Lee, C.-W. Lin, S.-W. Tsai, H.-Y. Wang and T.-M. Pan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 539 RSC .
A. M. Parra-Alfambra, E. Casero, M. A. Ruiz, L. Vázquez, F. Pariente and E. Lorenzo, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 401, 883 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, S. Yang, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, P. Kang, J. Li, J. Xu, H. Zhou and X.-M. Song, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 494010 CrossRef .
A. Zebda, S. Tingry, C. Innocent, S. Cosnier, C. Forano and C. Mousty, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 10378 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roda, M. Mirasoli, L. Stella Dolci, A. Buragina, F. Bonvicini, P. Simoni and M. Guardigli, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 3178 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Henley, P. J. Dennis and J. M. Ramsey, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 1776 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jang, S. Kim and W.-G. Koh, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 31, 529 CrossRef CAS .
T. Darbre and J.-L. Reymond, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 925 CrossRef CAS .
G. Knör, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 568 CrossRef .
X. Huang, X. Liu, Q. Luo, J. Liu and J. Shen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1171 RSC .
W. Zhao and Q. Zhong, J. Inclusion Phenom. Macrocyclic. Chem., 2012, 72, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. Smith, K. Ariga and E. V. Anslyn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 362 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Kneeland, K. Ariga, V. M. Lynch, C. Y. Huang and E. V. Anslyn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 10042 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohshima, T. Iwasaki, Y. Maegawa, A. Yoshiyama and K. Mashima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2944 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Oldenburg, Y. Feng, I. Pryjomska-Ray, D. Ness and L. Que Jr., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17713 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Camara and T. B. Rauchfuss, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 26 CrossRef CAS .
C. Monnereau, P. H. Ramos, A. B. C. Deutman, J. A. A. W. Elemans, R. J. M. Nolte and A. E. Rowan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1529 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kuwabara, C. L. Stern and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10074 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Smith, J. Y. Yang, D. L. DuBois and R. M. Bullock, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3152 CrossRef CAS .
R. Breslow, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 146 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ortega-Caballero, J. Bjerre, L. S. Laustsen and M. Bols, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 7217 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Marinescu and M. Bols, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4590 CrossRef CAS .
N. de Silva, J.-M. Ha, A. Solovyov, M. M. Nigra, I. Ogino, S. W. Yeh, K. A. Durkin and A. Katz, Nat. Chem., 2012, 2, 1062 CrossRef .
Y. Murakami, J. Kikuchi, Y. Hisaeda and O. Hayashida, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 721 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, D.-W. Li, T. C. Sutherland, Y. Li, Y.-T. Long and H.-Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12366 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gruber, E. Kataev, J. Aschenbrenner, S. Stadlbauer and B. König, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20704 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yu, W. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Zeng, Y. Li, G. Yang and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10516 CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Gasteiger and N. M. Marković, Science, 2009, 324, 48 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 40 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Kluwer, R. Kapre, F. Hartl, M. Lutz, A. L. Spek, A. M. Brouwer, P. W. N. M. van Leeuwen and J. N. H. Reek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 10460 CAS .
C. Tard and C. J. Pickett, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 2245 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukhopadhyay, S. K. Mandal, S. Bhaduri and W. H. Armstrong, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3981 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Helm, M. P. Stewart, R. M. Bullock, M. R. DuBois and D. L. DuBois, Science, 2011, 333, 863 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Joo, J. Y. Park, C. K. Tsung, Y. Yamada, P. Yang and G. A. Somorjai, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, C. K. Tsung, W. Huang, Z. Huo, S. E. Habas, T. Soejima, C. E. Aliaga, G. A. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 372 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Cady, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 444 CrossRef CAS .
C. Herrero, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, W. Leibl, A. W. Rutherford and A. Aukauloo, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 456 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Mullins and V. L. Pecoraro, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 416 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Najafpour, T. Ehrenberg, M. Wiechen and P. Kurz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2233 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Yuhas, C. Prasittichai, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15854 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Yuhas, A. L. Smeigh, A. P. Douvalis, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10353 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, J. Zhuang, L. Nie, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, N. Gu, T. Wang, J. Feng, D. Yang, S. Perrett and X. Yan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 577 CrossRef CAS .
A. Asati, S. Santra, C. Kaittanis, S. Nath and J. M. Perez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2308 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, P. Z. Zhang and X. M. Zheng, Catal. Today, 2004, 93–95, 671 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shelef and R. W. McCabe, Catal. Today, 2000, 62, 35 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Slocik, A. O. Govorov and R. R. Naik, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5335 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, B. L. Abrams, P. C. K. Vesborg, M. E. Björketun, K. Herbst, L. Bech, A. M. Setti, C. D. Damsgaard, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, S. Dahl, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 434 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mandal, M. Sathish, G. Saravanan, K. K. R. Datta, Q. Ji, J. P. Hill, H. Abe, I. Honma and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14415 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bano, L. Fruk, B. Sanavio, M. Glettenberg, L. Casalis, C. M. Niemeyer and G. Scoles, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2614 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shtenberg, N. Massad-Ivanir, S. Engin, M. Sharon, L. Fruk and E. Segal, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 443 CrossRef CAS .
B. I. Ipe, A. Shukla, H. Lu, B. Zou, H. Rehage and C. M. Niemeyer, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 1112 CrossRef CAS .
B. I. Ipe and C. M. Niemeyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 504 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Shutava, P. P. Pattekari, K. A. Arapov, V. P. Torchilin and Y. M. Lvov, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 9418 RSC .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 280 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Qingmin Ji
	Qingmin Ji received her PhD (2005) in chemistry from the University of Tsukuba. She started working as a post-doctoral fellow in the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) from 2006 and became a MANA scientist at The World Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA).

Taizo Mori
	Dr Taizo Mori received his PhD from the Department of Polymer Chemistry at Kyoto University in 2009. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the Supermolecules Group at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS).

Masanobu Naito
	Masanobu Naito completed his PhD studies in biotechnology at the Tokyo Institute of Technology in 2001. Since 2012, he has been a principal researcher at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS). Concurrently, he joined the PRESTO-JST project, as guest associate professor at the Nara Institute of Science and Technology, and guest professor at Tianjin University.

Yusuke Yamauchi
	Yusuke Yamauchi received his PhD in 2007 from Waseda University. He is currently an independent scientist, a head of Advanced Inorganic Nanomaterials Laboratory in The World Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS). He concurrently serves as PRESTO Researcher of Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), visiting associate professor at Waseda University in Japan, and visiting professor at Tianjin University in China.

Hideki Abe
	Hideki Abe received his PhD degree from Saitama University. He is a principal researcher in the Environmental Remediation Materials Unit at the National Institute of Materials Science (NIMS). He is currently conducting an R&D project of catalysts for environmental remediation and energy generation.

Jonathan P. Hill
	Jonathan P. Hill received his PhD degree from Brunel University, UK, in 1995. He is currently the sub-group leader of the Supermolecules Group at the National Institute for Materials Science. His current research interests include synthesis and properties of tetrapyrroles and their supramolecular manifolds as well as unusual methods for preparing organic nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  Basic elements of an enzymatic biosensor.	 

 	Fig. 2  Encapsulation of a single protein within a nanogel.37	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of cyt c polymerization. Left: closed monomers, right: domain-swapped dimer of cyt c.49	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic depiction of the construction and biosensing mechanism of the PDA–GOD–PtNP PBNCs electrode.61	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of two electrodes connecting a semiconducting SWNT with GOD enzymes immobilized on its surface.63	 

 	Fig. 6  Graphene-based photocatalyst catalysed artificial photosynthesis of formic acid from CO2 under visible light.68	 

 	Fig. 7  An electrochemical biosensor formed by entrapping both glucose oxidase and horseradish peroxidase in the mesopores of SBA-15.71	 

 	Fig. 8  A biosensor comprising an immobilized enzyme (formaldehyde dehydrogenase) in mesoporous silica, an electrochemical mediator, and an electrochemical cell.93	 

 	Fig. 9  A multi-enzyme reactor containing two enzymes, glucoamylase (GA) and glucose oxidase (GOD), in the same LbL film on an ultrafilter.137	 

 	Fig. 10  Effect of protective barriers (catalase) on oxidative environments in LbL enzyme reactors where the placement of a catalase layer on top of the LbL multilayers resulted in conservation of hemoglobin (Hb) activity over a longer period of time (left side).140	 

 	Fig. 11  Detection system of DNA damage using LbL films (PDDA, poly(diallyldimethyl ammonium chloride).143	 

 	Fig. 12  Glucose detection system by LbL films of GOD and PAH with an Os complex as an electrochemical mediator (FAD, flavin adenine dinucleoside).156	 

 	Fig. 13  A nanoscale-memory device involving ferritin nanoparticles of about 12 nm size in LbL assembly.158	 

 	Fig. 14  A three-dimensional (3D) array of well-defined and controllable LbL nanostructures of bacterial protein nanoparticles and DNA on a patterned array of gold dots for detection of breast and colorectal cancer markers with enhanced sensitivity.159	 

 	Fig. 15  Preparation of selective surface-templated LbL assembly by coupling of a bilayer of avidin/biotin–lactate oxidase with a bilayer of avidin/biotin–horseradish peroxidase on a pre-patterned surface (EG6OH, mercaptoundecylhexa(ethylene glycol) alcohol).160	 

 	Fig. 16  Glucose sensor by LB films of lipid-coated GOD through monitoring oxidation current of hydrogen peroxide from glucose oxidation.163	 

 	Fig. 17  A lipid bilayer system of an amphiphilic amine as a receptor and an effector [lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)] for AND-type logic gate through activation of the enzymatic reaction.169	 

 	Fig. 18  LbL approach for DNA encapsulation inside a biocompatible polyelectrolyte microshell using a MnCO3 template core.170	 

 	Fig. 19  ATP synthase immobilized at composite capsules for production of ATP from ADP driven by a proton gradient through the membrane.184	 

 	Fig. 20  A microchip channel modified with LbL films of charged chitosan and negatively charged hyaluronic acid for sensitive detection of protein digestion by trypsin (PET, poly(ethylene terephthalate)).186	 

 	Fig. 21  An enzyme field-effect transistor (ENFET) with lactate oxidase (LOD) and MnO2 nanoparticles in PDDA films using LbL assembly on the surface of ion-sensitive field-effect transistors.188	 

 	Fig. 22  Electrolyte-insulator-semiconductor (EIS)-based biosensor by a GOD-immobilizing poly-N-isopropylacrylamide (PNIPAAm) film with adequate sensitivity for general clinical examination of blood glucose.192	 

 	Fig. 23  Portable device based on chemiluminescence lens-less imaging using a biospecific enzyme assay coupled with a nucleic acid hybridization assay for DNA.196	 

 	Fig. 24  Conjugation of glucose oxidase and alcohol oxidase to carboxyl-terminated CdSe–ZnS QDs as a fluorescent hydrogel microarray for detection of glucose and alcohol.198	 

 	Fig. 25  A processive enzyme mimic by a diphenylglycoluril-appended porphyrin catalyst with open ring structure which converts the double bonds of polybutadiene into epoxide functions while gliding along the polymer chain in a pseudorotaxane fashion.208	 

 	Fig. 26  An artificial enzyme of cyano-modified cyclodextrin to catalyze hydrolysis of aryl glycosides into glucose and phenol.212	 

 	Fig. 27  Enzyme-like functions featuring hydrophobic microenvironments and controlled geometries at the surface of lipid bilayer.215	 

 	Fig. 28  Dendrimer encapsulated Pt nanoparticles as a mimic of hydrogenase with triethanolamine (TEOA) as the sacrificial electron donor.218	 

 	Fig. 29  Crystal structure of CaMn2O4. The MnO2 framework, depicted as purple polyhedra, incorporates Ca2+ to replicate the catalytic center of PS II.236	 

 	Fig. 30  Atomic arrangement in a cubane-like [Fe4S4] cluster and a linker cluster, [Sn2S6] (left). Different [Fe4S4] clusters are connected with each other by the linker (middle) and further by transition-metal cations (right) to form three-dimensional networks.237	 

 	Fig. 31  Immunoassay involving ceria nanoparticles. Polymer-coated ceria nanoparticles are supported by living cells to exhibit enzyme-mimic catalytic performance (TMB, 3,3,5,5-tetramethylbenzidine).241	 

 	Fig. 32  Nano-hybrid catalyst comprising Pt- and peptide-coated CdS nanoparticles. Under illumination, nitrate ions are reduced over the Pt nanoparticles by electrons provided by the CdS nanoparticles.243	 

 	Fig. 33  Nano-hybrid catalyst for photon-chemical energy conversion; pink and orange balls in the cubane-like cluster correspond to Mo- and S atoms, respectively.243	 

 	Fig. 34  Schematic illustration for the open-mouthed Pt cells. CO- and O2 molecules are absorbed by the cells and catalytically transformed into CO2 over the interior surface.244	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
